[[Quadratic formula]]

CATEGORIES: Elementary algebra, Equations

In basic algebra, the quadratic formula is the solution of the quadratic equation.  There are other ways to solve the quadratic equation instead of using the quadratic formula, such as factoring, completing the square, or graphing.  However, using the quadratic formula is often the most convenient way.
The general quadratic equation is 
Here x represents an unknown, and a, b, and c are constants  with a not equal to 0.  One can easily verify that the quadratic formula satisfies the quadratic equation, by inserting the former into the latter.  Each of the solutions given by the quadratic formula is called a root of the quadratic equation.

Derivation of the formula

Once a student understands how to complete the square, they can then derive the quadratic formula.[ref]
, Chapter 13 §4.4, p. 291[/ref]Li, Xuhui.  An Investigation of Secondary School Algebra Teachers' Mathematical Knowledge for Teaching Algebraic Equation Solving, p. 56 (ProQuest, 2007): "The quadratic formula is the most general method for solving quadratic equations and is derived from another general method: completing the square."  For that reason, the derivation is sometimes left as an exercise for the student, who can thereby experience rediscovery of this important formula.  College algebra and trigonometry and precalculus, p. 178 (Addison Wesley, 2002).  Modern college algebra and trigonometry, p. 81 (Wadsworth Pub. Co., 1986).  The explicit derivation is as follows.
Divide the quadratic equation by a, which is allowed because a is non-zero:
Subtract c/a from both sides of the equation, transforming it into the form
thumb|300px|One way to think of this derivation is in geometric terms.  Lengths are in green, and area is in red. To "complete the square", add a constant to both sides of the equation such that the left hand side becomes a complete square:
which produces
or (after rearranging the terms on the right hand side to have a common denominator)
The square has thus been completed, as shown in the figure.  Taking the square root of both sides yields
Isolating x gives the quadratic formula:
The plus-minus symbol "±" indicates that both

Historical development

The earliest methods for solving quadratic equations were geometric. Babylonian cuneiform tablets contain problems reducible to solving quadratic equations. 
This is equivalent to:
The 9th century Persian mathematician al-Khwārizmī, influenced by earlier Greek and Indian mathematicians, solved quadratic equations algebraically. In 1637 René Descartes published La Géométrie containing the quadratic formula in the form we know today. The first appearance of the general solution in the modern mathematical literature appeared in an 1896 paper by Henry Heaton. (1896) A Method of Solving Quadratic Equations, American Mathematical Monthly 3(10), 236–237.

Importance of this solution

Among the many equations that one encounters while studying algebra, the quadratic formula is one of the most important, and is considered the most useful method of solving quadratic equations.  Barron's How to Prepare for the Tennessee Gateway High School Exit Exam in Algebra, p. 137 (Barron's Educational Series, 2005): "The Quadratic Formula is one of the most important formulas in mathematics because it is a method for solving all quadratic equations."Heywood, Arthur.  Intermediate algebra: lecture-lab, p. 235 (Dickenson Pub. Co., 1975):  "The quadratic formula is one of the most important formulas in mathematics, and we will now spend some time studying many different ways of using it." Unlike some other solution methods such as factoring, the quadratic formula can be used to solve any quadratic equation.  Modern College Algebra, p. 162 (McGraw–Hill, 1967): "The quadratic formula is the most powerful method for solving quadratics since it can be used to solve any quadratic."Smith, R. and Peterson, J. Introductory Technical Mathematics, pp. 408–409 (Cengage Learning 2006): "The factoring method has limited application.  Only certain quadratic equations can be solved by factoring.  Completing the square…can be a rather long and complicated procedure and is seldom used in practical applications.  The quadratic formula…is the most useful method for solving complete quadratic equations." Many equations that do not initially appear to be quadratic can be put into quadratic form, and solved using the quadratic formula.  Elements of Algebra, p. 97 (Allyn and Bacon, 1962):  "The quadratic formula is one of the most useful formulas in elementary mathematics. You should be certain you know what it is and how to use it. Many other equations can be solved by first reducing them to quadratic form." For these reasons, it is often memorized. and Hodgkins A. College Algebra with Applications for Business and Life Sciences, p. 104 (Cengage Learning 2009):  "The Quadratic Formula is one of the most important formulas in algebra, and you should memorize it."McConnell, John.  Algebra, p. 603 (Scott Foresman 1993): "The Quadratic Formula is one of the most famous formulas in all of mathematics. You should memorize it today."
Completing the square also allows for the solution of all quadratics, as it is mathematically equivalent to the quadratic formula, but the quadratic formula gives a result without the need for so much algebraic manipulation. As such it is generally considered more practical to use the formula. Intermediate Algebra, p. 289 (West Publishing 1985): "While the method of completing the square may be used to solve quadratic equations, it is more involved than the quadratic formula, and is seldom used in practical work."Davis, L. Technical Mathematics, p. 174. (Merrill Publishing 1990): "You can use the quadratic formula, as well as completing the square, to solve any quadratic equation. However, you will find that the quadratic formula is easier to use."Dugopolski, Mark.  Algebra for College Students, p. 541 (McGraw Hill 2006): "Any quadratic equation can be solved by completing the square or using the quadratic formula. Because the quadratic formula is usually faster, it is used more often than completing the square." However, completing the square is very useful for other purposes, such as putting the equations for conic sections into standard form.  CliffsStudySolver: Algebra II, p. 60 (Houghton Mifflin Harcourt 2012).

Other derivations

A number of alternative derivations of the quadratic formula can be found in the literature which either (a) are simpler than the standard completing the square method, (b) represent interesting applications of other frequently used techniques in algebra, or (c) offer insight into other areas of mathematics.

Alternate method of completing the square

The great majority of algebra texts published over the last several decades teach completing the square using the sequence presented earlier: (1) divide each side by a, (2) rearrange, (3) then add the square of one-half of b/a.
In other words, the quadratic formula can be derived as follows: 
This actually represents an ancient derivation of the quadratic formula, and was known to the Hindus at least as far back as 1025 A.D. Compared with the derivation in standard usage, this alternate derivation is shorter, involves fewer computations with literal coefficients, avoids fractions until the last step, has simpler expressions, and uses simpler math. As Hoehn states, "it is easier 'to add the square of b' than it is 'to add the square of half the coefficient of the x term'".

By substitution

By using algebraic identities

Taking square root on both sides, we get
Since the coefficient a ≠ 0, we can divide the standard equation by a to obtain a quadratic polynomial having the same roots. Namely,
Hence the identity can be rewritten as:
Now, 

By Lagrange resolvents

An alternative way of deriving the quadratic formula is via the method of Lagrange resolvents, which is an early part of Galois theory.[ref]
, §6.2, p. 134[/ref]
This method can be generalized to give the roots of cubic polynomials and quartic polynomials, and leads to Galois theory, which allows one to understand the solution of algebraic equations of any degree in terms of the symmetry group of their roots, the Galois group.
This approach focuses on the roots more than on rearranging the original equation.
Given a monic quadratic polynomial
assume that it factors as
Expanding yields
These are called the Lagrange resolvents of the polynomial;
notice that one of these depends on the order of the roots, which is the key point.
One can recover the roots from the resolvents by inverting the above equations:
Thus, solving for the resolvents gives the original roots.
yields
and thus
If one takes the positive root, breaking symmetry, one obtains:
and thus
Thus the roots are








