[[Methionine]]

CATEGORIES: Proteinogenic amino acids, Glucogenic amino acids, Sulfur amino acids, Thioethers, Essential amino acids

Methionine ( is an α-amino acid with the chemical formula HO2CCH(NH2)CH2CH2SCH3. This essential amino acid is classified as nonpolar. This amino-acid is coded by the initiation codon AUG which indicates mRNA's coding region where translation into protein begins.

Function

Together with cysteine, methionine is one of two sulfur-containing proteinogenic amino acids. Its derivative S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) serves as a methyl donor.  Methionine is an intermediate in the biosynthesis of cysteine, carnitine, taurine, lecithin, phosphatidylcholine, and other phospholipids. Improper conversion of methionine can lead to atherosclerosis.
thumb|left|The Yang cycleThis amino acid is also used by plants for synthesis of ethylene. The process is known as the Yang Cycle or the methionine cycle.
Methionine is one of only two amino acids encoded by a single codon (AUG) in the standard genetic code (tryptophan, encoded by UGG, is the other). The codon AUG is also the most common eukaryote "Start" message for a ribosome that signals the initiation of protein translation from mRNA when the AUG codon is in a Kozak consensus sequence. As a consequence, methionine is often incorporated into the N-terminal position of proteins in eukaryotes and archaea during translation, although it can be removed by post-translational modification. In bacteria, the derivative N-formylmethionine is used as the initial amino acid.
Loss of methionine has been linked to senile greying of hair. Its lack leads to a buildup of hydrogen peroxide in hair follicles, a reduction in tyrosinase effectiveness and a gradual loss of hair color. Wood, J.M., et al. (2009). Senile hair graying: H2O2-mediated oxidative stress affects human hair color by blunting methionine sulfoxide repair. FASEB J. 2009 Jul;23(7):2065-75. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-125435. Epub 2009 Feb 23.

Zwitterions

Biosynthesis

As an essential amino acid, methionine is not synthesized de novo in humans, who must ingest methionine or methionine-containing proteins.  In plants and microorganisms, methionine is synthesized via a pathway that uses both aspartic acid and cysteine.  First, aspartic acid is converted via β-aspartyl-semialdehyde into homoserine, introducing the pair of contiguous methylene groups. Homoserine converts to O-succinyl homoserine, which then reacts with cysteine to produce cystathionine, which is cleaved to yield homocysteine.  Subsequent methylation of the thiol group by folates affords methionine.  Both cystathionine-γ-synthase and cystathionine-β-lyase require pyridoxyl-5'-phosphate as a cofactor, whereas homocysteine methyltransferase requires vitamin B12 as a cofactor.
Enzymes involved in methionine biosynthesis:

Other biochemical pathways

Although mammals cannot synthesize methionine, they can still use it in a variety of biochemical pathways:

Generation of homocysteine

Methionine is converted to S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) by (1) methionine adenosyltransferase.
SAM serves as a methyl-donor in many (2) methyltransferase reactions, and is converted to S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH).
(3) Adenosylhomocysteinase converts SAH to homocysteine.
There are two fates of homocysteine: it can be used to regenerate methionine, or to form cysteine.

Regeneration of methionine

Methionine can be regenerated from homocysteine via (4) methionine synthase in a reaction that requires Vitamin B12 as a cofactor.
Homocysteine can also be remethylated using glycine betaine (NNN-trimethyl glycine, TMG) to methionine via the enzyme betaine-homocysteine methyltransferase (E.C.2.1.1.5, BHMT).  BHMT makes up to 1.5% of all the soluble protein of the liver, and recent evidence suggests that it may have a greater influence on methionine and homocysteine homeostasis than methionine synthase.

Conversion to cysteine

Homocysteine can be converted to cysteine.

Synthesis

Racemic methionine can be synthesized from diethyl sodium phthalimidomalonate by alkylation with chloroethylmethylsulfide (ClCH2CH2SCH3) followed by hydrolysis and decarboxylation.

Dietary sources

High levels of methionine can be found in eggs, sesame seeds, Brazil nuts, fish, meats and some other plant seeds; methionine is also found in cereal grains.  Most fruits and vegetables contain very little of it. Most legumes are also low in methionine.  Racemic methionine is sometimes added as an ingredient to pet foods.

Methionine restriction

There is scientific evidence that restricting methionine consumption can increase lifespans in some animals.
A 2005 study showed methionine restriction without energy restriction extends mouse lifespan..
A study published in Nature showed adding just the essential amino acid methionine to the diet of fruit flies under dietary restriction, including restriction of essential amino acids (EAAs), restored fertility without reducing the longer lifespans that are typical of dietary restriction, leading the researchers to determine that methionine "acts in combination with one or more other EAAs to shorten lifespan."
Several studies showed that methionine restriction also inhibits aging-related disease processes in mice In humans, methionine restriction through dietary modification could be achieved through a vegan diet. Veganism being a completely plant based diet is typically very low in methionine, however certain nuts and legumes may provide higher levels. Fenech. "A review of methionine dependency and the role of methionine restriction in cancer growth control and life-span extension." Cancer treatment reviews 38.6 (2012): 726-736.
A 2009 study on rats showed "methionine supplementation in the diet specifically increases mitochondrial ROS production and mitochondrial DNA oxidative damage in rat liver mitochondria offering a plausible mechanism for its hepatotoxicity".
However, since methionine is an essential amino acid, it should not be entirely removed from animals' diets without disease or death occurring over time. For example, rats fed a diet without methionine developed steatohepatitis (fatty liver), anemia and lost two thirds of their body weight over 5 weeks. Administration of methionine ameliorated the pathological consequences of methionine deprivation.

Other uses

DL-Methionine is sometimes given as a supplement to dogs; it helps keep dogs from damaging grass by reducing the pH of the urine.
Methionine is allowed as a supplement to organic poultry feed under the US certified organic program..








