[[Michael Wainwright (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Living people, British male singers, English emigrants to Canada, People from Warrington

Wainwright (born 6 March 1973 in Warrington, England) is a singer-songwriter from Canada. He has 2 albums released, The Circus Is Coming To Town and Wainwright. He is the background vocalist and opening act for Tears For Fears.

Biography

Michael Wainwright is a Canadian singer, songwriter and musician.

Albums

Wainwright (EP)

Michael Wainwright released his first 6-song EP in 2002. It was co-produced by Niagara Falls producer and studio owner Dean Malton at Groundloop Productions. The track "Radio on" placed second (out of 5,000 entries) in Toronto's Mix 99.9 13th annual songwriting competition.

Wainwright (album)

Michael Wainwright met producer Charlton Pettus, of Tears for Fears, in 2004 and began recording songs which eventually became the album "Wainwright," released in February 2008 on Town Records. Guest musicians include Russ Irwin (Aerosmith) on keyboards, Curt Smith (Tears for Fears) on vocals, and Fred Eltringham (The Wallflowers, Dixie Chicks) on drums. The album also features guest singer-songwriter Gaby Moreno (a John Lennon Songwriting Contest winner) on two tracks. "Wainwright" was mastered by Ted Jensen (Norah Jones, Metallica) at Sterling Sound. The album artwork was created by artist Alan Aldridge (Beatles, Elton John).

The Circus Is Coming To Town

September 2011 brought the release of Wainwright's 2nd album "The Circus Is Coming To Town". The album was once again produced by Charlton Pettus of Town Record. All songs were written in collaboration between Wainwright and Pettus with one exception of titled, "Heart-Shaped Man" which was penned by Roland Orzabal of Tears For Fears.

Guitar and a Car Tour

In May 2008, Wainwright launched his "Guitar and a Car" tour, which has taken him across Canada, the United States, and (in October 2008) to the United Kingdom. He's documenting the tour online via his YouTube page.

Tears for Fears Tours

Tears for Fears co-founder Curt Smith announced that Wainwright will open for the group on most of its 2009 West Coast tour datesCurt Smith "Twitter". April 4, 2009]. Since then, Wainwright  has been their background vocalist and opened for almost all their shows for the 2010 Asia Tour, 2010 East Coast Tour and 2011 West Coast, Mexico and South American Tour.  and "Bad Man Song" where he replaces the vocals for Oleta Adams.

Contributions

Guest Vocals

Awards and recognition

Discography








