[[Raj Koothrappali]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional characters from California, Fictional immigrants to the United States, Fictional Indian people, Fictional astronomers, Fictional physicists, The Big Bang Theory characters, Fictional characters introduced in 2007

Rajesh Ramayan "Raj" Koothrappali, is a fictional character on the CBS television series The Big Bang Theory, portrayed by British Indian actor Kunal Nayyar.
Rajesh is Howard Wolowitz's (Simon Helberg) best friend, with whom Raj shares what Nayyar calls a "bromance", although the relationship is frequently made awkward by Raj's metrosexuality. Raj works as an astrophysicist in the Physics Department at Caltech. His principal characteristic was selective mutism (social anxiety disorder), which did not allow him to talk to women unless he was under the influence of alcohol. He was cured of this disability in the season 6 finale.

Character biography

Rajesh, who is normally nicknamed Raj, is from New Delhi, India. However, he despises Indian food, and his knowledge of Indian culture and Hinduism are often disputed by Sheldon Cooper. He was born into a wealthy family and has five siblings, one of whom is Priya, a former girlfriend of Leonard. Raj is normally seen wearing a layered combination of a shirt and sweater vest, khakis, and a windbreaker, usually of brightly colored fleece or pastel gabardine. In the pilot, he wears a red cap.
Raj joins in playing Halo online and trading-card games with his friends.
It was revealed in "The Monster Isolation" that Raj did at least part of his higher education at the University of Cambridge, where he discovered his interest in astrophysics.

Personality

Generally, Raj is more patient with Sheldon than Leonard, Howard, or Penny is; however, Sheldon is completely oblivious to this, and in one episode casually cuts him off as a friend.
Another recurring joke is his metrosexuality, which manifests itself in the form of his love of cooking, his appreciation for media generally associated with female patrons, such as the novel Eat, Pray, Love, the TV series Sex and the City and the films of Sandra Bullock. This has led those close to him to opine that he is somewhat feminine (as in  "The Closure Alternative"), and others to mistakenly conclude that he is homosexual (a theory his sister mentioned in "The Herb Garden Germination" had been held by members of their family), though Raj typically denies this, as in the episode "The Transporter Malfunction".
One of Raj's biggest personality quirks is his tendency to speak or act inappropriately, often landing him in trouble or leading to an angry reaction from whomever he has upset. On one occasion, just as Leonard and Penny are about to have sex in their hotel room, Raj enters and obliviously proceeds to climb into Sheldon's recently-vacated bed, completely unaware of what he has interrupted. On another occasion, he openly discussed having had crushes on Penny and Bernadette directly in front of them, which caused both discomfort, and unwittingly hurting Amy's feelings when he admits that he never had a crush on her as well (despite Penny and Bernadette's best efforts to alert him to this fact).
When socializing with his friends, despite his Indian accent, Raj is noted for using slang and using the word "dude", although on some occasions he does not understand American slang. He speaks fluent Hindi.

Selective mutism

Until the season six finale, Raj's principal characteristic was his inability to speak to or around non-related women, a medical condition known as selective mutism. In the show this was alluded to by Dr. Beverly Hofstadter, Leonard's mother. He had no problem speaking to his mother, sisters, or other female relatives.
Until the end of the sixth season, Raj remained silent when Penny was present. Penny occasionally taunted him about this, saying such things as "Yo, Raj, talk to me". Raj sometimes whispered what he wanted to say to Howard or Leonard, who then repeated his words or responded to his question out loud. However, Howard sometimes used the situation to amuse himself—for example, when he "confessed" on Raj's behalf that Raj stalked Penny with binoculars, or when Sheldon called Penny over to their table to silence Raj; Howard then refused to act as a mouthpiece and told Raj, "Suck it up; (Sheldon) won." In "The Bat Jar Conjecture", Raj accidentally utters a few words ("good story"), much to the surprise of his friends, but he immediately realizes Penny is there and covers his mouth with both hands. A recurring gag is for Raj to find himself left alone when his friends, in the company of Penny or another woman, make plans to go somewhere and Raj's mutism prevents him from speaking up to join in.
Alcohol suppressed Raj's social anxiety. Consuming even a tiny amount of it enabled him to have prolonged conversations with women. (In Season 4's "The Apology Insufficiency", a bite of rum cake proved sufficient to overcome his problem.) However, this also tends to make him loud and obnoxious. When the main characters take a train to an academic conference in San Francisco, Raj can talk to series guest Summer Glau (playing herself) while drinking beer. However, when Howard discovers the beer is non-alcoholic and that Raj is under a placebo effect, he uses this to his advantage and Raj returns to his usual mute self. In some episodes, Raj took to carrying a hip-flask with him to remedy his problem.
Raj experimented with medications that suppressed social anxiety, but they tended to have side effects. When Sheldon's sister Missy visited, Raj took medicine that enabled him to speak to her, but it resulted in involuntary repetitive hand motions. He also considered a different drug but worried that it might affect his rationality.  Sheldon encouraged him to take it anyway. It enabled Raj to speak to a woman in a coffee shop, but also caused a complete loss of inhibition, inducing him to remove all of his clothing, in the episode "The Wildebeest Implementation".
In the first season episode "The Dumpling Paradox", Leonard jokingly suggests cutting Raj in half so the group can play video games without Howard while Penny is in the room. Raj turns to Leonard (facing away from Penny) and responds, "Oh, sure, cut the foreigner in half. There's a billion more where he came from."
In episodes that required him to speak with Penny or other women present, he was usually shown doing so with a beer or wine glass near him to indicate he had consumed alcohol (for example, in the Season 6 episode "The Santa Simulation").
At the end of the Season 6 finale "The Bon Voyage Reaction", Raj's friend Lucy breaks up with him. The subsequent trauma apparently cures his mutism, and he finds he can talk to Penny, Amy, and Bernadette while completely sober. However, he talks so much that the women become bored and irritated.

Family

Raj regularly communicates with his parents, Dr. and Mrs. V.M. Koothrappali back in India via webcam. When they become meddling or judgmental, he "brings his parents" into Leonard and Sheldon's apartment via his laptop. In the season 2 finale, Mrs. Koothrappali and Mrs. Wolowitz have an argument because the latter does not believe that there is not a single Outback Steakhouse restaurant in India.
A running gag in the series is Raj portraying himself as having come from humble origins and growing up in poverty in India, only for his friends to remind him that his father is a gynecologist, drives a Bentley (which he protests was a "lease"), and had servants (although he protests on one occasion that there were only four servants, and that two of them were children). In the episode "The Wiggly Finger Catalyst", Sheldon reveals that Raj's family is wealthier than he lets on. He observes that they are "Richie Rich rich", which he explains is "halfway between Bruce Wayne and Scrooge McDuck").
Raj's cousin Sanjay (or, as he says his friends know him, "Dave from AT&T Customer Service") works in a call centre and is mentioned in a number of episodes. In one episode, Raj tries to avoid returning to India for his cousin's wedding, as Raj's parents have arranged a date for him.
Raj has three brothers and two sisters. Raj's sister Priya has a one-night stand with Leonard in Season 4. This leads to a brief argument between Leonard, Raj and Howard for breaking the "pinky swear" they made about never trying to make a move on her. Later in the series, Priya and Leonard start a relationship against Raj's wishes, which is awkward as she is living with Raj at the time. In the Season 4 finale, Raj had to temporarily move into Sheldon's apartment after overhearing Leonard using Star Trek references as sexual metaphors to his sister.
Also, in the season 3 episode "The Precious Fragmentation", Raj tries to negotiate the possession of the One Ring with the help of his cousin Venkatesh Koothrappali, who is an attorney (but agrees with Raj that he is useless in that role).
In the season 7 episode "The Table Polarization", Raj talks about naming his first child Dileep after his grandfather.

Work

Raj is an astrophysicist in the Physics Department at Caltech, best known for a publication on Kuiper belt object size distribution.
For his discovery of a planetary object beyond the Kuiper belt, 
After six months of failed research on the composition of trans-Neptunian objects, Raj feared being deported back to India (at which point, he describes spending his time at work as "mostly checking e-mail, updating my facebook status, and messing up Wikipedia entries"). To stay in the country, he sought out a research position in stellar evolution with Professor Laughlin; the job proposition failed as the research team included an attractive woman, and Raj, who accidentally drank too much, made an inappropriate comment. Raj ended up working alongside Sheldon, (or "for" him as Sheldon insists), "exploring the string theory implications of gamma rays from dark matter annihilations". Ironically, he noted that he once wanted to be the "Indira Gandhi of particle astrophysics (except with a penis)". During season 6, Raj has developed a talent to be a party planner that was demonstrated at the time of Howard and Bernadette's wedding,
and the Halloween,
and Valentine's Day parties,
at the comic book store.

Relationships

Raj has not been involved in any lasting romantic relationship, mostly due to his inability to speak to women. However, he is much more successful in flings than the more sexually aggressive Howard. He once dated Lalita Gupta, a childhood friend, in an arrangement made by his parents. With Raj able to speak to her only under the influence of alcohol, the date went badly, and Lalita left the intoxicated and bothersome Raj to have dinner with Sheldon.
When Raj was invited to People magazine's reception, he became inebriated again and presented Penny to his parents (via webcam) as his girlfriend. Later, he had to apologize to Penny for his behavior. Although he tried apologizing through a written note, Penny forced him to utter a barely audible "sorry".
Raj also sought to date Sheldon's attractive twin sister, Missy. To do so, he took an experimental drug to correct his anxiety disorder. He was the only one, out of himself, Howard and Leonard, that Missy wanted to go out with. However, he was unable to ask her out as the effect of the medication wore off.
When Sheldon, Leonard, Howard, and Raj were on a train to San Francisco, the latter three tried talking to Summer Glau. After drinking what he thought was a beer, Raj talked to Summer. Because he was coy and smooth, she took a liking to him. When Howard pointed out that his beer was non-alcoholic, Raj stopped in the middle of his conversation, and rushed away from Glau without saying any more.
Raj revealed that he once had a girlfriend, after Leonard claimed that the two of them were the only ones without them. She has never appeared in the show, but he claimed that she was deaf, so his inability to speak with women was not an issue.
Despite both being heterosexual, Raj and Howard occasionally appear as if they are in a homosexual relationship. This was described by Leonard's mother, Dr. Beverly Hofstadter, as an "ersatz homosexual marriage". Even Raj's parents are aware of this, as Raj's mother once noted "the closest thing we have to a daughter-in-law is that Jewish boy Howard!", which Raj quickly denied. Despite the denials, Raj often takes up the stereotypically "female" role in arguments with Howard, once expressing his displeasure at Howard constantly ditching him to chase women. Raj recounts a dream where he and Howard both had mansions with a secret tunnel that connected Howard's "front yard" to his "back yard". He uses a female avatar in World of Warcraft. In season four he claims to be a metrosexual.
In the season 4 finale, Penny and Raj get intoxicated and, despite agreeing to remain good friends, end up in bed together. The next morning, both agree to pretend it never happened, but they are caught by Leonard, Sheldon, and Howard as they try to leave,
In season 5, Raj buys a new iPhone and quickly develops feelings for the computerized personal assistant, Siri.
Later in season 5, Penny believed she found the perfect match for Raj by having him meet a woman who was deaf. However, it turns out she only liked Raj for his money and left him when she found out his parents would cut his financial ties if they continued to see each other.
Finally, in despair, Raj asked his parents to find him a potential bride for an arranged marriage.  Raj hit it off with his parents' first selection, but discovered that the woman was only looking for a husband to convince her family that she was not lesbian.  She assumed Raj was gay and that they would have a lavender marriage, an idea Raj considered as a viable option to lifelong bachelorhood, until Howard and Bernadette convince him otherwise.
Out of their concern for his loneliness, Howard and Bernadette give him a pet dog. Happy with his new companion, Cinnamon (a female Yorkshire Terrier), Raj proceeded to see if the pet would fit in his man-purse. This leads Bernadette to question Raj's orientation. Ironically, in the episode "The Thespian Catalyst", Raj fantasizes various scenarios in which he is placed in situations where he must fulfill a promise to Howard to meet Bernadette's needs, including Howard being killed in an accident, he must go to Israel for two years, leaving Bernadette behind, etc. When he finishes the fantasies, he concludes he is "definitely not gay".
At Howard's bachelor party, an inebriated Raj tells all the guests about how Howard lost his virginity to his second cousin, his Las Vegas prostitute experience, and their threesome with an overweight Sailor Moon woman at Comic-Con which Wil Wheaton records and uploads to the Internet. Bernadette is furious after seeing the video.
In the season six episode, "The Tangible Affection Proof", Raj and his friend, comic book store owner Stuart, put together a party at the store for lonely single people on Valentine's Day. After giving a speech about how one cannot define themselves by being in a relationship, he is approached by a woman named Lucy (Kate Micucci). They both leave to get a cup of coffee, with Raj hypocritically declaring "Later losers!", hinting at Raj finally having a relationship. In "The Monster Isolation" Lucy flees during their coffee date sending Raj into depression and isolation in his apartment. Later, Lucy goes to his apartment to apologize and tells him that she has problems around new people. Raj describes his own psychological problem and they agree to a formal date.
In the following episode, "The Contractual Obligation Implementation", he takes Lucy out for a first date to a library where they text message each other instead of speak, helping her deal with her social anxiety and him with his selective mutism. They continue to date and by "The Love Spell Potential" they do kiss, though it is through a chain-link fence.  However, in the season 6 finale "The Bon Voyage Reaction", Lucy feels too pressured by Raj to meet his friends, and a dinner between Lucy, Raj, and Amy does not go well.  Raj apologizes for his behavior and asks Lucy to come to Leonard's goodbye party before his departure for the North Sea on Professor Stephen Hawking's expedition.  However, Lucy text messages him at the party saying she will not be there and does not want to see him again.  The next day, Penny goes to comfort a heartbroken Raj, who thinks he is completely unlovable.  Penny tells him it was just the liquor talking, but Raj had not had a drink since the night before.  He was finally cured of his selective mutism, so much so, he could not stop talking about what went wrong in his relationship with Lucy, which ironically compelled Penny, Bernadette, and Amy to start drinking to tolerate his endless speaking.

Creation and casting

Raj did not appear in the original, unaired series pilot, where only Sheldon, Leonard, and a different version of the Penny character, called Katie, were present. The test audiences reacted negatively to Katie, but they liked Sheldon and Leonard. In the new pilot, Raj and Howard were added. Series co-creator Bill Prady stated: "The idea was, if they like these first two guys, let's give them two more".






