[[New Play Control!]]

CATEGORIES: Wii, New Play Control! games

New Play Control!, known as the 

Background

Nintendo initially announced the Wii de Asobu Selection range of titles in a presentation on October 2, 2008, confirming Pikmin and Donkey Kong Jungle Beat would launch later in the year, Chibi-Robo! was never released outside Japan.

Changes

Pikmin and Pikmin 2 allow players to point and click with the Wii Remote to select and direct units. Mario Power Tennis draws on the swinging motions seen in Wii Sports to perform various swings, while it is also possible to move the character with the control stick if the Nunchuk is attached. Metroid Prime and Metroid Prime 2: Echoes use the same control functions as first seen in Metroid Prime 3: Corruption. An early prototype of the control scheme had already been used with a technical demo version of Metroid Prime 2, first seen when the Wii Remote was initially announced.
Other changes have been made to the games other than the updated controls and improved graphics. Donkey Kong Jungle Beat features new levels and modified level design for existing levels to give the game a more traditional platforming feel.

Release

Four of the games - Donkey Kong Jungle Beat, Mario Power Tennis, Pikmin and Pikmin 2 -  have been universally released as New Play Control! titles. The two Metroid Prime games were bundled with Metroid Prime 3: Corruption and released in the limited edition Metroid Prime: Trilogy compilation, which launched in 2009 and was given only one print run, being discontinued soon after release. Pikmin 2, which was released in Japan, Europe and Australia in 2009, was not released in North America until June 2012, when it and Mario Power Tennis were released as budget titles in the Nintendo Selects range; these versions of the games do not feature reversible cover art or the New Play Control! moniker, instead being marketed as classic Nintendo GameCube titles with enhanced Wii controls.
Each game in the New Play Control! series features a standard cover art, explaining the premise of the series, as well as each game's original Nintendo GameCube cover art. Each game's cover art is reversible; reversing the cover shows the original version of the cover art with no New Play Control! branding, except on the game's logo.

Games

Official series

Other ports

Several other GameCube titles have been partially or completely ported to the Wii:








