[[Dan Grunfeld]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 births, Living people, American people of Romanian-Jewish descent, American emigrants to Romania, Basketball players from New Jersey, Bnei HaSharon players, CB Valladolid players, EWE Baskets Oldenburg players, Hapoel Jerusalem B.C. players, Israeli basketball players, Israeli Basketball Super League players, Jewish American sportspeople, Jewish basketball players, Liga ACB players, Naturalized citizens of Israel, People from Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, Romanian emigrants to Israel, Romanian Jews, Stanford Cardinal men's basketball players

Daniel Leslie Grunfeld  (born February 7, 1984) is an American professional basketball player, who plays small forward for Hapoel Jerusalem in the Israeli Basketball Super League. He played briefly for Hapoel Holon, but left the team due to its financial problems,  and signed a two-year contract with Hapoel Jerusalem starting at the beginning of November 2011. 
He is the son of former New York Knicks guard, and current Washington Wizards executive, Ernie Grunfeld.  In high school, he averaged 23.9 points per game and was the MVP of his conference.  In college, at Stanford University, he was first team All Pacific-10 Conference as a junior.  He has also played professionally for EWE Baskets Oldenburg, Aguas de Valencia Gandía Bàsquet, CB Valladolid, and Bnei Hasharon.

Early life

Grunfeld is Jewish,  His father was also general manager of the Milwaukee Bucks, before becoming President of Basketball Operations for the Washington Wizards.

Basketball career

High school

Grunfeld grew up in Franklin Lakes, New Jersey, while his father was the GM of the New York Knicks.  Due to this, Grunfeld grew up a die-hard Knicks fan, but was still only an average player on his FAMS middle school team in the mid-late 1990s. When his father became the Milwaukee Bucks GM, Grunfeld moved to Wisconsin.  It was there that he developed his game, shot up in height, and became a dominating high school player.
In high school he averaged 23.9 points, 7.1 rebounds and 2.0 assists per game during his senior season at Nicolet High School.gostanford.html  He shot 61% from the floor.gostanford.html   That season, he was conference MVP, all-league first team, first team all-area (Milwaukee Journal-Sentinel), first team all-state (Associated Press), CNI Suburban Player of the Year, and WCBA first team all-state.gostanford.html   He was also named by The Sporting News as the Best Shooter, out of over than 3,000 players.gostanford.html

College

Grunfeld went on to play at Stanford University, where he had a successful college career.  While playing for the Stanford Cardinal and leading the team in scoring (17.0 ppg; # 5 in the Pac-10), in February 2005 he tore his right knee anterior cruciate ligament (ACL), forcing him to sit out the team's final nine games. He took the time on the sidelines to "observe what certain people do to be successful," and improve his basketball awareness.  As a junior in 2004–05, he was named first team All Pacific-10 Conference, to the National Association of Basketball Coaches (NABC) District-14 first team, and to the 2005 ESPN The Magazine Academic All-American University Division Second Team, to the District-8 ESPN The Magazine University Division All-Academic First Team, and to the Pac-10 Academic first team.gostanford.html  In his senior year in 2005–06, he was a first-team Pac-10 All-Academic selection, and a first-team ESPN The Magazine Academic All-American selection.gostanford.html

Professional career

After going undrafted out of Stanford in 2006, he played his first two professional seasons with the EWE Baskets Oldenburg in the German Basketball Bundesliga, then with Aguas de Valencia Gandía in Spain's LEB Oro League. In September 2008, his childhood dream came true when the New York Knicks signed him to the team under undisclosed terms.  On October 23, 2008, Grunfeld was waived by the team.  
In January 2009 he received Romanian citizenship in order to be eligible for playing for the Romania national basketball team.  
He played for Bnei Hasharon in the Israeli Basketball Super League in 2010–11, averaging 14.1 points per game on 56.9% shooting.eurobasket.asp?Cntry=ISR&PlayerID=31079החתמה חדשה!!!   In 2010, he made aliyah, becoming an Israeli citizen.haaretz.309113  In July 2011, he signed a two-year deal with Israel's Hapoel Holon.lostlettermen. Due to the teams financial problems at the beginning of the 2011 season, he was released and signed a two year contract with Hapoel Jerusalem.
He is one of a number of American Jews who played in Israel, including Jon Scheyer, Sylven Landesberg, and David Blu.msnbc.com/id/43940730/ns/sports/

Maccabiah Games

Grunfeld played in the Maccabiah Games for the United States, in 2009.haaretz.309113  He led the U.S. to a gold medal, with 25 points and 12 rebounds in the final overtime game against Israel.haaretz.309113






