[[Francis Tsai]]

CATEGORIES: American cartoonists, American comics artists, American people of Japanese descent, American people of Taiwanese descent, Dungeons & Dragons artists, Fantasy artists, People from Honolulu, Hawaii, Living people, Magic: The Gathering artists

Francis Tsai is an American comic book artist, illustrator, author and conceptual artist. He is of Taiwanese and Japanese ancestry.facebook.com/pages/Francis-Tsai-Illustration-and-Concept-Design/367692304491?v=info

Early life

Tsai was born in Honolulu, Hawaii and raised in Lubbock, Texas. He was initially trained in chemistry, before receiving a graduate degree in architecture.

Career

In 1998, Francis Tsai joined Presto Studios as Conceptual Designer where he provided visual development and game design for the video games Myst 3 In 2003, Tsai joined High Moon Studios where he was principal concept artist for the video games The Bourne Conspiracy and Darkwatch.mobygames.com/developer/sheet/view/developerId,39959/
Tsai has illustrated cards for the Magic: The Gathering collectible card game.
Tsai is currently working on a five-issue graphic novel miniseries called Tracker for Top Cow Productions.comicbookresources.Francis Tsai at the Grand Comics Database
Tsai provided interior artwork for Secret Identities: The Asian American Superhero Anthology
Tsai has also provided interior artwork for a number of Dungeons & Dragons manuals for Wizards of the Coast, including Sharn: City of Towers, Monster Manual III, d20 Future, Races of Eberron, Lost Empires of Faerûn, Explorer's Handbook, Tome of Magic: Pact, Shadow, and Truename Magic, Power of Faerûn, and d20 Future Tech.pen-paper.php?op=showcreator&creatorid=1502  Tsai created the artwork for the Dungeons & Dragons 4th edition Dungeon Masters Screen.rpg.phtml
Tsai has also provide visual development in the TV and film industries contributing concept artwork for Motion Theory's Gatorade "Inside Crosby" and Lenovo Thinkpad "Rollcage" commercials as well as the movies Sucker Punch and TMNT - Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles.
He is also a regular contributor to  ImagineFX magazine, where he has created a series of workshops including topics such as using 3-D in 2-D, effective character design and game concept art.
Francis Tsai wrote and illustrated the book Fantasy Art Academy: 100 Ways to Paint the Coolest Fantasy Figures for F&W Publications and recently released another book Extreme Worlds in November 2009. Tsai worked on Tracker, a miniseries from Top Cow Productions and Heroes and Villains Entertainment about an FBI agent who has contracted a virus that turns him into a werewolf.  Tsai has won numerous professional awards for his work.Published & Gold Award – "The Train Station" by Francis TsaiPublished & Bronze Award – "Devils Alley" by Francis TsaiPublished & Certificate of Merit – "Sunlight" by Francis TsaiPublished & Certificate of Merit - "Bourne Shootout" by Francis Tsai

Health

In 2010, at the age of 42, Tsai was diagnosed with Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), also known as Lou Gehrig's Disease.  The ability to move his arms and hands was lost due to the disease; he hasn't held a pencil since early 2011.  He discovered he could digitally paint on his iPhone with his right big toe while holding the iPhone with his left foot.com/5966448/crippled-by-disease-this-artist-found-a-way-to-keep-drawing/  Once he lost ability to move his feet, Tsai began using the PC Eye from Tobii in conjunction with a Kiosk Tablet to communicate.  By early 2012, Tsai began creating art again using the eye-gaze technology with drawing programs Sketchup and Photoshop.com/5978543/these-pictures-were-drawn-using-a-human-eyeball-incredible His eye-gaze art has been featured in the media including CNN and computer art magazine ImagineFX (August 2013).cnn.com/docs/DOC-1005870

Personal life

He currently lives in Austin, Texas with his wife Linda. The two met as architecture students at the University of Texas.

Comics bibliography

Bibliography of contributions






