[[Gold Coast, Queensland]]

CATEGORIES: Gold Coast, Queensland, Coastal cities in Australia, Seaside resorts in Australia, Entertainment districts in Australia, Populated places established in 1823



The Gold Coast is a coastal city in southeastern Queensland on the east coast of Australia. The city is  south of the state capital Brisbane. It is the second most populous city in the state, the sixth most populous city in the country, and the most populous non-capital city in Australia. The Gold Coast has the largest cross-state metropolitan area population in Australia, due to the inclusion of Tweed Heads, New South Wales in its metropolitan area. The Gold Coast's metropolitan area converges with that of Greater Brisbane, forming part of an urban conurbation of over 3 million people.abs.au/ausstats/abs@.0~2008-09~Main+Features~Queensland?OpenDocument#PARALINK5 Preliminary population estimates for local government areas, 2009. Local government areas included in the calculation of the South East Queensland population are: Shire of Beaudesert, Shire of Boonah, City of Brisbane, Shire of Caboolture, City of Caloundra, Shire of Esk, Shire of Gatton, Gold Coast City, City of Ipswich, Shire of Kilcoy, Shire of Laidley, Logan City, Shire of Maroochy, Shire of Noosa, Shire of Pine Rivers, Redcliffe City, and Redland City.
While the origin of the city's name is debatable, the name "Gold Coast" was bestowed upon the city by real estate investors. The first settlement in what is now South East Queensland was as a penal colony at Redcliffe. The Gold Coast region remained largely uninhabited by Europeans until 1823 when explorer John Oxley landed at Mermaid Beach. The hinterland's red cedar supply attracted people to the area in the mid-19th century. Later in 1875, Southport was surveyed and established and grew a reputation as a secluded holiday destination for upper class Brisbane residents.
The Gold Coast region grew significantly after the establishment of the Surfers Paradise hotel in the late 1920s. The area boomed in the 1980s as a leading tourist destination and in 1994, the Gold Coast City local government area was expanded to encompass the majority of the Gold Coast's metropolitan area, becoming the second most populous local government area in Australia after the City of Brisbane. The Gold Coast is today a major tourist destination with its sunny subtropical climate, surfing beaches, canal and waterway systems, its high-rise dominated skyline, theme parks, nightlife, and rainforest hinterland, making tourism one of its most significant industries. Gold Coast will host the 2018 Commonwealth Games.Gold Coast defeats Hambantota to host 2018 Commonwealth Games

History

Lieutenant James Cook became the first European to note the region when he sailed along the coast on 16 May 1770 in the HM Bark Endeavour. Captain Matthew Flinders, an explorer charting the continent north from the colony of New South Wales, sailed past in 1802. Escaped convicts from the Moreton Bay penal settlement hid in the region. The region remained largely uninhabited by Europeans until 1823 when explorer John Oxley landed at Mermaid Beach, which was named after seeing a cutter named Mermaid. The hinterland's red cedar supply attracted people to the area in the mid-19th century. The western suburb of Nerang was surveyed and established as a base for the industry. Later in 1875, Southport was surveyed and established and quickly grew a reputation as a secluded holiday destination for the upper class Brisbane residents.
In 2007, the Gold Coast overtook the population of Newcastle, New South Wales to become the sixth largest city in Australia and the largest non-capital city.Gold Coast sixth largest city John McCarthy and Greg Stolz From: The Courier-Mail 11 November 2007

Geography

Gold Coast City lies in the southeast corner of Queensland, to the south of Brisbane, the state capital. The Albert River separates Gold Coast from Logan City, a suburban area of Brisbane.
Gold Coast City stretches from Beenleigh and Russell Island to the border with New South Wales (NSW) approximately  south, and extends from the coast west to the foothills of the Great Dividing Range in World Heritage listed Lamington National Park.
The southernmost town of Gold Coast City, Coolangatta, includes Point Danger and its lighthouse. Coolangatta is a twin city with Tweed Heads located directly across the NSW border. At 
[/ref] or over 9 times the length of the canals of Venice, Italy) and artificial islands covered in upmarket homes. The heavily developed coastal strip sits on a narrow barrier sandbar between these waterways and the sea.
To the west, the city borders a part of the Great Dividing Range commonly referred to as the Gold Coast hinterland. A  section of the mountain range is protected by Lamington National Park and has been listed as a World Heritage area in recognition of its "outstanding geological features displayed around shield volcanic craters and the high number of rare and threatened rainforest species".

Urban structure

Gold Coast includes suburbs, localities, towns and rural districts.

Waterways

Waterfront canal living is a feature of the Gold Coast, and most canal frontage homes have pontoons. The Gold Coast Seaway, between The Spit and South Stradbroke Island, allows vessels direct access to the Pacific Ocean from The Broadwater and many of the city's canal estates. Breakwaters on either side of the Seaway prevent longshore drift and the bar from silting up. A sand pumping operation on the Spit pipes sand under the Seaway to continue this natural process.
Residential canals were first built on the Gold Coast in 1950s and construction continues. Most canals are extensions to the Nerang River, but there are more to the south along Tallebudgera Creek and Currumbin Creek and to the north along the Gold Coast Broadwater, South Stradbroke Island, Coomera River and southern Moreton Bay. Early canals included Florida Gardens, Isle of Capri which were under construction at the time of the 1954 flood. Recently constructed canals include Harbour Quays and Riverlinks completed in 2007. There is over  of constructed residential waterfront land within the city that is home to over 80,000 residents.

Beaches

The city consists of  of coastline with some of the most popular surf breaks in Australia and the world including, South Stradbroke Island, The Spit, Main Beach, Surfers Paradise, Broadbeach, Mermaid Beach, Nobby Beach, Miami, Burleigh Beach, Burleigh Heads, Tallebudgera Beach, Palm Beach, Currumbin Beach, Tugun, Bilinga, Kirra, Coolangatta, Greenmount, Rainbow Bay, Snapper Rocks and Froggies Beach. Duranbah Beach is one of the world's best known surfing beaches and is often thought of as being part of Gold Coast City, but is actually just across the New South Wales state border in Tweed Shire.
There are also beaches along many of the Gold Coast's  of navigable tidal waterways. Popular inland beaches include Southport, Budds Beach, Marine Stadium, Currumbin Alley, Tallebudgera Estuary, Jacobs Well, Jabiru Island, Paradise Point, Harley Park Labrador, Santa Barbara, Boykambil and Evandale Lake.

=Beach safety and management=

Gold Coast has Australia's largest professional surf lifesaving service to protect people on the beaches and to promote surf safety throughout the community. The Queensland Department of Primary Industries carries out the Queensland Shark Control Program (SCP) to protect swimmers from sharks. Even with the SCP, sharks do range within sight of the patrolled beaches. Lifeguards will clear swimmers from the water if it is considered that there is a safety risk.
Gold Coast beaches have experienced periods of severe beach erosion. In 1967, a series of 11 cyclones removed most of the sand from Gold Coast beaches. The Government of Queensland engaged engineers from Delft University in the Netherlands to advise what to do about the beach erosion. The Delft Report
By 2005 most of the recommendations of the 1971 Delft Report had been implemented. Gold Coast City commenced implementation of the Palm Beach Protection StrategyPalm Beach Protection Strategy

Climate

Gold Coast experiences a humid subtropical climate (Köppen climate classification Cfa), with mild winters and warm and humid summers. The city experiences substantial summer precipitation mostly concentrated in thunderstorms and heavy showers with rain events occasionally lasting up to a few weeks at time giving residents "the Summer blues", while winter is pleasant and warm with little rain. In fact, it is this pleasant winter weather that both the city and the Sunshine Coast—the coastal region north of Brisbane—are named after and internationally renowned for. Extreme temperatures recorded have ranged from 

Governance

The city is governed at the local level by the Gold Coast City Council, the second largest local government in the country behind Brisbane City. Its origins lie in two local governments established at the 10 June 1949 elections: Town of the South Coast, which merged the Town of Coolangatta, Town of Southport and part of the Shire of Nerang; and the Shire of Albert, which took in a large surrounding region. On 23 October 1959, South Coast was renamed Gold Coast and on 16 May 1959 it was proclaimed as a City. The modern Gold Coast City was created in 1995 when the existing City and the Shire of Albert merged. In 2008, the Gold Coast shrank slightly as part of Queensland government's reorganisation of local government boundaries, losing the Beenleigh and Eagleby areas north of the Albert River to Logan City Council. The Gold Coast City Council has 14 councillors, each representing a division of the City. Businessman Tom Tate was elected Mayor of the Gold Coast in 2012. Former mayors include Ron Clake, Gary Baildon, Lex Bell, Ray Stevens, Ern Harley and Sir Bruce Small, who was responsible for the development of many of the canal estates that are now home to thousands of Gold Coast residents.
The Gold Coast area is represented at the state level by ten members in the Legislative Assembly of Queensland. The seats they hold are: Albert, Broadwater, Burleigh, Coomera, Currumbin, Gaven, Mudgeeraba, Robina, Southport and Surfers Paradise. Federally, the Gold Coast area is represented by three members in the House of Representatives, whose seats are Fadden (northern), Moncrieff (central) and McPherson (southern). Some western areas are part of the Forde, which is centred in the Scenic Rim Region.
Historically, Gold Coast has tilted conservative.  The three Gold Coast federal divisions have returned only Liberal Party representatives since 1986, and Labor has historically only done well around Labrador and Coolangatta.  At the state level, Labor has been fairly competitive in the Gold Coast for most of the early part of the 21st century.  However, as part of its massive landslide in the 2012 state election, the Liberal National Party now holds every seat there.
Southport Courthouse is the city's major courthouse and has jurisdiction to hear petty criminal offences and civil matters up to A$250,000. Indictable offences, criminal sentencing and civil matters above A$250,000 are heard in the higher Supreme Court of Queensland which is located in Brisbane. There are subsidiary Magistrates Courts, also located at the northern and southern suburbs of Beenleigh and Coolangatta.

Economy

In fifty years, Gold Coast City has grown from a small beachside holiday destination to Australia's sixth largest city (and the country's most populous non-capital city). Situated within South East Queensland's growth corridor, the city is now considered Australia's fastest growing large city, with a 5-year annual average population growth rate of 3.4%, compared to 1.2% for Australia. 3218.0 – Population estimates by Statistical Local Area 2001–2008 Gross Regional Product has risen from A$9.7 billion in 2001, to A$15.6 billion in 2008, a rise of 61 percent.Tourism Research Australia Domestic and International Visitor Surveys In the past the economy was driven by the population derived industries of construction, tourism and retail. Some diversification has taken place, with the city now having an industrial base formed of marine, education, information communication and technology, food, tourism, creative, environment and sports industries. These nine industries have been identified as the key industries by the Gold Coast City Council to deliver the city's economic prosperity. Gold Coast City's unemployment rate (5.6 per cent) is below the national level (5.9 per cent).ABS Regional Labour Force Survey February 2009

Tourism

Around 10 million tourists visit the Gold Coast area every year: of 849,114 international visitors, 3,468,000 domestic overnight visitors and 5,366,000 daytrip visitors. Tourism is the region's biggest industry,Gold Coast, Famous for Fun - Official Gold Coast Holidays Guide in Queensland, Australia. Visitgoldcoast. Retrieved on 2013-07-16. directly contributing more than $4.4 billion into the city economy every year and directly accounting for one in four jobs in the city There are approximately 65,000 bed spaces,  of canal, 100,000 hectares of nature reserve, 500 restaurants, 40 golf courses and 5 major theme parks in the city. There have been various prospects and proposals raised for even more theme parks than the current five.
Gold Coast Airport provides connection across Australia with airlines including Jetstar, Virgin Australia and Tiger Airways. International services from Japan, New Zealand, Singapore and Malaysia also land at Gold Coast Airport with airlines including Flyscoot, Jetstar, Qantas, Air New Zealand, Virgin Australia and Airasia X. Brisbane Airport is less than one hour from the centre of Gold Coast, and direct trains operate.

Film production

Gold Coast City is the major film production centre in Queensland and has accounted for 75%GC Film Info of all film production in Queensland since the 1990s, with an expenditure of around $150 million per year. Gold Coast is the third largest film production centre in Australia behind Sydney and Melbourne. Warner Brothers have studios located just outside of the city, at Oxenford which have been the filming locations for films such as the Scooby Doo films and House of Wax (2005). Many Bollywood films also use the Gold Coast environs as a filming location, such as Singh Is King.
The Gold Coast Hinterland was also used for the UK's television series "I'm a celebrity get me out of here."
Village Roadshow Studios are adjacent to the Warner Bros Movie World Theme Park at Oxenford. The Studios consists of eight sound stages, production offices, editing rooms, wardrobe, construction workshops, water tanks and commissary. These sound stages vary in size and have an overall floor area of 10,844 sq metres, making Warner Roadshow Studio one of the largest studio lots in the Southern Hemisphere. Recently shot
The Queensland Government actively supports the film and television production industry in Queensland and provides both non-financial and financial assistance through the Pacific Film and Television Commission.
Gold Coast is also the filming site for the TV series, H2O: Just Add Water. Australia crime series The Strip is set on the Gold Coast. Big Brother Australia was filmed at the Dreamworld Studios. In January 2002, the third season of The Mole was filmed and based mostly on the Gold Coast. Venues and destinations used included the Gold Coast shopping malls, Burleigh Heads, the Hinze Dam, Pacific Fair Shopping Centre, Warner Bros. Movie World and Binna Burra.

Cultural

Music

Music groups in this region include the Northern Rivers Symphony Orchestra and Operator Please. Musicians Casey Barnes, Cody Simpson and Ricki-Lee Coulter are from  Gold Coast. Music events include Big Day Out, Good Vibrations Festival, Summafieldayze, and V Festival (2007–2009).

Arts

The Arts Centre Gold Coast is the Gold Coast's premier cultural facility for visual and performing arts with a performance Theatre, two Cinemas and an underground venue "The Basement'. The Theatre has hosted performance by The Imperial Russian Ballet Company, the Australian Ballet Company and the Queensland Ballet. Musicals, Plays and a variety of performances are regularly scheduled. Film Festivals and the Comedy Club host international Artists.  
A redeveloped Gold Coast Cultural Precinct is in planned to be functioning when the city hosts the 2018 Commonwealth Games.goldcoast.gov.html  

Sport and recreation

Gold Coast is represented in two national competitions by the following teams:
Recreational activities on the Gold Coast include surfing, fishing, cycling, boating and golf. The Gold Coast area has numerous golf links, including Hope Island, Sanctuary Cove and The Glades.
There are a number of libraries located on the Gold Coast. For a full list see Gold Coast libraries.
Sporting facilities include the Carrara Stadium, Carrara Indoor Sport Centre, Nerang Velodrome and the Sports Super Centre. Some of these facilities are being superseded by newer and larger capacity facilities. Two examples of these are the Gold Coast Convention and Exhibition Centre to play host to a Gold Coast Basketball team and Skilled Park to host NRL games.
Former World Wrestling Entertainment performer Nathan Jones comes from  Gold Coast, as do Olympic gold medal winning swimmer Grant Hackett, 2011 US Open tennis champion Samantha Stosur and Sally Pearson (who recently received the keys to the city).

Former teams in national competitions

Events

The Gold Coast 600 (formerly known as Lexmark Indy 300) is a car racing event held annually, usually in October. The course runs through the streets of Surfers Paradise and Main Beach. The GC 600 comprises many other events such as the Indy Undie Ball and the Miss Indy Competition. Formerly an Indy car event, V8 Supercars are now the headline attraction, using a similar track route, as the circuit was cut in half by a hairpin. The Magic Millions carnival is the brainchild of entrepreneurs Gerry Harvey (of Harvey Normans) and John Singleton. There are plans to relocate and build a state-of-the-art new racetrack at Palm Meadows which will incorporate the Magic Million sale with facilities for up to 4000 horses. 
Each June, Coolangatta hosts the Wintersun Festival renamed as Cooly Rocks On for 2011, a two-week 1950s and 1960s nostalgia festival with free entertainment and attractions, including hot rods, restored cars and revival bands playing music of the era. Every July, more than 25,000 congregate on the Gold Coast from around the world to participate in the Gold Coast Marathon. It is also the largest annual community sporting event held on the Gold Coast. In 2012, it will be held on 30 June – 1 July and the 34th Gold Coast Airport Marathon is set to motivate and challenge more than 25,000 people of all ages and abilities. The Gold Coast Airport Marathon will feature an event for all ages and abilities, including the full Gold Coast Airport Marathon, ASICS Half Marathon, Southern Cross University .
Late November to early December sees thousands of school leavers across the country descend on the Gold Coast for Schoolies, a two-week period of celebration and parties throughout Surfers Paradise, hosted by the Gold Coast City . The event is often criticised nationally and locally for its portrayal of drinking and acts of violence, however every effort by the Queensland Police and State Government to ensure all school leavers have a good time are put into place, including locals volunteering by walking the streets and keeping an eye out for those in need of assistance. Early each year the Gold Coast hosts one leg of the ASP World Tour of surfing, where some of the worlds best surfers compete in the Quiksilver Pro at Coolangatta.
The Arts Centre Gold Coast located in Evandale, features a fine art gallery featuring local and international works from painting to sculpture and new media. In addition, there is a theatre for live productions including musicals as well two arts cinemas showing foreign and independent films from Australia and abroad.

Media

The daily, local newspaper is The Gold Coast Bulletin which is published by News Corporation. Newspapers from Brisbane, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Northern NSW towns such as Tweed Heads and Lismore are also available. National surfing magazine Australia's Surfing Life is published in the Gold Coast suburb of Burleigh Heads, by Morrison Media.
The Gold Coast is in the television broadcast licence areas of both Brisbane (metro) and Northern New South Wales (regional). The Brisbane primary channels are Seven, Nine and Ten. The regional affiliates are Prime7 (aligned with Seven), NBN Television (aligned with Nine) and Southern Cross Ten. Both sets of commercial stations are available throughout the Gold Coast, as well as the ABC (ABC1) and SBS (SBS ONE) television services. Digital-only channels available in addition to the ones listed above include One HD, Eleven, ABC2, ABC3, ABC News 24, SBS Two, 7Two, 7mate, GEM and GO!. SBS ONE simulcasts its programming in high definition on SBS HD. Subscription television services Foxtel (via cable) and Austar (via satellite) are also available.
Major FM radio stations include 92.5 Gold FM (part of the Macquarie Regional RadioWorks network – a mix of 1970s, 1980s, 1990s, and current hits), 90.9 Sea FM (callsign 4SEA – Top 40, pop), FM 102.9 Hot Tomato (a mix of 80s 90s and Top 40), 99.4 Rebel FM (Rock), 100.6 Breeze FM (Classic Hits/Easy), 89.3 4CRB-FM (Christian), 91.7 ABC Coast FM (contemporary, ABC local news and information), 93.5 SBS (Brisbane), Jazz Radio 94.1FM (jazz, blues and swing music), 97.7 JJJ Triple J (alternative and chart music), 104 4MBS Classic, 105.7 Radio Metro (dance, pop, R&B, and left field), 106 ABC Classic FM, and Juice107.3. Several Brisbane AM and FM radio stations can also be received. Aiysha SaagarAiysha Saagar brand Ambassador of Gold Coast Times Of Indiaambassador to promote tourism and lure investors Goldcoast.au first Indian to became brand Ambassador of Gold Coast

Tourism and landmarks

Tourism is Gold Coast City's main industry, generating a total of $2.5 billion in revenue per annum. Tourist attractions include surf beaches, and theme parks including, Dreamworld, Sea World, Wet'n'Wild Water World, Warner Bros. Movie World, WhiteWater World, Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary, David Fleay Wildlife Park, Australian Outback Spectacular and Paradise Country. For all the available experiences on the Gold Coast visit 
Since the opening of what was then the world's highest residential tower in 2005 (it is now the fifth highest), the Q1 building has been a destination for tourists and locals alike. It is the second highest public vantage point in the southern hemisphere after the Eureka Tower in Melbourne. The observation deck at level 77 is the highest of its kind in Queensland and offers views in all directions, from Brisbane to Byron Bay. It towers over the Surfers Paradise skyline, with the observation deck 230 metres (755 feet) high, and the spire extending nearly another hundred metres up. In total, the Q1 is 322.5 metres (1058 feet) high.
Another famous tourist attraction are the Surfers Paradise Meter Maids, instituted in 1965 to put a positive spin on new parking regulations. To avoid tickets being issued for expired parking, the Meter Maids dispense coins into the meter and leave a calling card under the windscreen wiper of the vehicle. The Maids are still a part of the Surfers Paradise culture but the scheme is now run by private enterprise.

Education

The Gold Coast's education infrastructure includes:

Infrastructure

Health

The Gold Coast Hospital at Southport was the city's major teaching and referral hospital and the third largest in Queensland, attending to over 58,000 cases a year,  Its current services include rehabilitation, psychiatric and palliative wards and Emergency and Intensive Care Departments.
Private hospitals in the city include Allamanda Private Hospital located at Southport, Pindara Hospital at Benowa and John Flynn Gold Coast Private Hospital at Tugun in the city's south.
Gold Coast University Hospital Project
Work began on the new Gold Coast University Hospital in late 2008. The $1.76 billion, 750-bed facility is more than three times the size of the Southport Hospital. It was constructed on a green field site at Parklands Drive Southport to replace the Southport Hospital at Nerang Street. Practical completion was due for 12 December 2012. 
Gold Coast University Hospital (GCUH) opened to patients at 8 am on Saturday 28 September 2013, receiving the last patient from Gold Coast Hospital just prior to 4.30 pm. A total of 219 patients were transferred from the old Gold Coast Hospital to GCUH over a two day period and the old hospital is now closed.health.gov.asp#moveday2

Transport

Transport modes in the Gold Coast include cars, taxis, buses, ferries, rail, monorail and light rail for commuting to work, visiting attractions, and travelling to other destinations, both domestically and internationally.
The car is the dominant mode of transport in the Gold Coast, with over 70% of people using the car as their sole mode of travelling to work. A number of major roads connect the Gold Coast with Brisbane, New South Wales, and the surrounding areas. The Pacific Motorway (M1) is the main motorway in the area. Beginning at the Logan Motorway (M6) in Brisbane, it travels through the inland Gold Coast region and links with the Pacific Highway at the New South Wales/Queensland border near Tweed Heads. Before the Tugun Bypass was completed in 2008, the motorway ended at Tugun. The Gold Coast Highway services the coastal suburbs of the Gold Coast, including Surfers Paradise, Southport, and Burleigh Heads. Starting at the Pacific Motorway at Tweed Heads, it runs parallel to the coast until it reaches Labrador, where it turns inland to meet the Pacific Motorway again at Helensvale. Other arterial roads include the Smith St Motorway, Reedy Creek Road, Nerang-Broadbeach Road and Bermuda St.
The Gold Coast's main provider of public bus services is Surfside Buslines. The majority of the bus routes that Surfside operates run along the Gold Coast Highway. Services are frequent during the day, with intervals being as little as 5 minutes between Southport and Burleigh Heads. Queensland Rail operates rail services from Brisbane to the Gold Coast along the Gold Coast railway line. The line follows the same route as the Beenleigh railway line, continuing on after reaching Beenleigh. It then follows a route similar to that of the Pacific Motorway, passing stations at Ormeau, Coomera, Helensvale, Nerang and Robina before terminating at Varsity Lakes. An extension to Coolangatta and the Gold Coast Airport is proposed.
Gold Coast Airport is located at Coolangatta, approximately  south of Surfers Paradise. Services are provided to interstate capitals and major cities as well as to major New Zealand cities, Malaysia, Japan and Singapore.
The increasing population has resulted in an increase in traffic congestion.

Utilities

Electricity
Electricity for the Gold Coast is sourced from Powerlink Queensland at bulk supply substations which is provided via the National Electricity Market from an interconnected multi-State power system. The Government-owned electricity corporation Energex distributes and retails electricity, natural gas, liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) and value-added products and services to residential, industrial and commercial customers in South-East Queensland.
Water supply
The Hinze Dam  southwest of Nerang is the population's main water supply. The Little Nerang Dam which feeds into Hinze Dam can supplement part of the city area's water needs, and both are managed by the city council directorate Gold Coast Water. Reforms of the way in which the water industry is structured have been announced by the State Government, with transfer of ownership and management of water services from local government to the state occurring in 2008–09. Gold Coast City also sources water from Wivenhoe Dam, west of Brisbane for northern suburbs when the Hinze Dam, at one-tenth of Wivenhoe's capacity, becomes low.
Water shortage and water restrictions have been current local issues, and a few new Gold Coast residential areas have recently included dual reticulation in their planning and development to supply water from a new water recycling plant being built concurrently. This will make available highly treated recycled water for use around the home in addition to potable water. The Gold Coast has received world recognition for this scheme in its Pimpama-Coomera suburbs.
Gold Coast Water has also been recognised for its world leading HACCP water quality management system by the World Health Organisation which published Gold Coast Water's system as a good model for managing water quality and safety from catchment to tap.

Projects

Sister cities

According to the BusinessGC Council Website, Gold Coast is twinned with:








