[[Hearts of Iron III]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 video games, Computer wargames, Government simulation video games, Grand strategy video games, Lua-scripted video games, OS X games, Paradox Interactive games, Real-time strategy video games, Video game sequels, Video games with expansion packs, Windows games, World War II grand strategy computer games, Video games set in Estonia, Cold War video games

Hearts of Iron III is a grand strategy wargame developed by Paradox Development Studio and published by Paradox Interactive that is the sequel to the previous Hearts of Iron games. It was announced on August 20, 2008 and was released on August 7, 2009.
A Mac OS X version was announced by Virtual Programming on December 7, 2009. The game was available for purchase the same day.

Gameplay

Hearts of Iron III allows the player to take control of almost any nation that existed during the period of 1936–1948, guiding it through World War II. A variety of decisions regarding the armed forces, production, research, diplomacy, politics and espionage is the focus of the game.
The game centers around three factions: the Axis (led by Germany), the Allies (led by Great Britain), and the Comintern (led by the Soviet Union). All other nations can slowly align with one of the factions. Nations are more likely to side with those with similar ideology, threat and proximity
Resources found in the game include: energy, metal, rare materials, and oil. The first three are required for industrial production, while oil is converted to fuel for vehicles, planes and ships.
The scope of military organization ranges from brigades to entire theaters of operation.

Development

The first trailer from the Games Convention in Leipzig showed new features such as 3D graphics.
Paradox released a series of developer diaries
Although happy with the scope of Hearts of Iron II, lead designer Johan Andersson wanted to improve upon every aspect of the game, starting again with a new engine. The AI can also remember and compare strategic possibilities as circumstances change. Changing to 3D graphics helped improve other areas, as Andersson explained:
 
 "Going 3D meant we could do another type of architecture where we could support more screen resolutions, and develop our maps in a quicker way. The biggest advantage from going 3D though was the ability to offload more to the GPU. With the machine advances during the last decade this gives us the biggest benefits in development when it comes to gameplay and AI."

Paradox had a vision for the style of the map, given that the player would spend the majority of their time looking at it: ".....a commander in the War would be looking at himself."

Reception

Hearts of Iron III initially received a mixed reception because the game shipped with a large number of bugs in the initial release.1-1.3 Patch Changelog After several patches eliminated many bugs, reception improved and the game received generally positive reviews. In 2009 December it had a combined average of a 77 on Metacritic"2009 December score and a 79% on Gamerankings."2009 December score
Gamepro wrote "perhaps the worst problem is the interface itself, or more specifically, the amount of feedback it affords the player. In contrast to the old system, there is no instant way to assess how many divisions you have in each province, nor important values like their units' organization or combat values."
On the other hand, the game has been praised as being "tailored for experienced strat heads and wargamers with a lot of patience, but the game is more accessible than either of its predecessors and a great jumping-on point for new players who want to make the leap into a grand strategy epic."

Expansions

On 6 June 2010, an expansion called Hearts of Iron III: Semper Fi was released. It is only available as a download.Semper Fi Announcement, Paradox Plaza
The Mac OS X version of the Semper Fi expansion pack shipped from Virtual Programming on 23 July 2010.
A second expansion named Hearts of Iron III: For the Motherland was announced on 27 January 2011
The Mac OS X version of the Hearts of Iron III: For the Motherland expansion pack shipped from Virtual Programming on 28 September 2011.
On 22 November 2011, Paradox Interactive released the Hearts of Iron III Collection, which include both expansions for Hearts Of Iron III and all previously released sprite packs.
On 6 June 2012, Paradox Interactive announced the third expansion called Hearts of Iron III: Their Finest Hour.
The Mac OS X version of the Hearts of Iron III: Their Finest Hour expansion pack shipped from Virtual Programming on 9 November 2012.

DLC

Along with full expansion packs, there has been several smaller DLC releases.

Sequel

During an Ask Me Anything event on Reddit, Paradox Interactive confirmed that Hearts of Iron IV is planned. Though the team gave no indication as to the game's priority in being developed, or when it would be officially announced, it was revealed that it would be released "before 2020".
The game's page on Paradox Interactive's website, lists the release window as Q1 2015. 






