[[Peter Suber]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, Access to Knowledge activists, American bloggers, American philosophers, American stand-up comedians, Berkman Fellows, Living people, Open access (publishing), Open content activists, People from Highland Park, Illinois, People from Hancock County, Maine, Earlham College alumni, Earlham College faculty, Northwestern University alumni, Northwestern University School of Law alumni, Scholarly communication, Scholars, Wikimedia Foundation Advisory Board members

Peter Dain Suber (born November 8, 1951) is a philosopher specializing in the philosophy of law and open access to knowledge. He is fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet & Society and director of the Harvard Office for Scholarly Communication
and as the creator of the game Nomic.

Education

Suber graduated from Earlham in 1973, received a PhD degree in philosophy in 1978 on Søren Kierkegaard and a Juris Doctor degree in 1982, both from Northwestern University.

Career

Previously, Suber was senior research professor of philosophy at Earlham College, the open access project director at Public Knowledge, a senior researcher at Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition (SPARC),.  He is a member of the Board of Enabling Open Scholarship, the Advisory Boards at the Wikimedia Foundation, the Open Knowledge Foundation, and the advisory boards of other organizations devoted to open access and an information commons.
Suber worked as a stand-up comic from 1976 to 1981, including an appearance on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson in 1976. Suber returned to Earlham College as a professor from 1982 to 2003 where he taught classes on philosophy, law, logic, and Kant's Critique of Pure Reason, among other topics.
Suber participated in the 2001 meeting that led to the world's first major international open access initiative, the Budapest Open Access Initiative.  He wrote Open Access News and the SPARC Open Access Newsletter, considered the most authoritative blog and newsletter on open access.  He is also the founder of the Open Access Tracking Project, and co-founder, with Robin Peek, of the Open Access Directory.
In philosophy, Suber is the author of The Paradox of Self-Amendment,

Honours and awards

Lingua Franca magazine named Suber one of Academia's 20 Most Wired Faculty in 1999.mirror.org/9907/tech20.

Personal life

Suber is married to Liffey Thorpe,






