[[Putrajaya]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places established in 1995, Towns in Kuala Lumpur, Putrajaya, Planned cities, Federal Territories in Malaysia, Planned capitals

Putrajaya is a planned city, located 25 km south of Kuala Lumpur, that serves as the federal administrative centre of Malaysia.  The seat of government was shifted in 1999 from Kuala Lumpur to Putrajaya, due to the overcrowding and congestion in the Kuala Lumpur areas.  Nevertheless, Kuala Lumpur remains Malaysia's national capital, being the seat of the King and Parliament, as well as the country's commercial and financial centre.  Putrajaya was the brainchild of former Prime Minister Tun Dr Mahathir Mohammad.  In 2001, Putrajaya became Malaysia's third Federal Territory after Kuala Lumpur and Labuan.
Named after the first Malaysian Prime Minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman Putra, the city is situated within the Multimedia Super Corridor, beside the recently developed Cyberjaya. In sanskrit, the words "putra" or "putera" means "prince" or "male child," and "jaya" means "success" or "victory." The development of Putrajaya started in early 1990s, and today major landmarks have been completed and the population is expected to grow in the near future.

History and design

Putrajaya, which was originally Prang Besar ڤراڠ بسر, was opened in 1918 as Air Hitam by the British. Its original land space was . Prang Besar later expanded and merged with its surrounding estates such as Estet Raja Alang, Estet Galloway and Estet Bukit Prang. 
The vision to have a new Federal Government Administrative Centre to replace Kuala Lumpur as the administrative capital emerged in the late 1980s, during the tenure of Malaysia's 4th Prime Minister, Dr. Mahathir Bin Mohamad.  The new city was proposed to be located between Kuala Lumpur and the new KL International Airport (KLIA). 
The Federal government negotiated with the state of Selangor on the prospect of another Federal Territory and in the mid-1990s, the Federal government paid a substantial amount of money to Selangor for approximately  of land in Prang Besar, Selangor. As a result of this land purchase, the state of Selangor now completely surrounds two Federal Territories within its borders, namely Kuala Lumpur and Putrajaya.
Planned as a garden and intelligent city, 38% of the area is reserved for green spaces by emphasising the enhancement of natural landscape. A network of open spaces and wide boulevards were incorporated to the plan. Construction began in August 1995 and it was Malaysia's biggest project and one of Southeast Asia's largest with estimated final cost of US$ 8.1 billion. The entire project was designed and constructed by Malaysian companies with only 10% of the materials imported. 
The Asian Financial Crisis of 1997/1998 had somewhat slowed the development of Putrajaya. In 1999, 300 staff members of the Prime Minister's office moved to Putrajaya and the remaining government servants moved in 2005. On 1 February 2001 Tun Dr. Mahathir declared Putrajaya as a Federal Territory with the ceremony of handing over Putrajaya township from the Selangor state authorities.
In 2002, a rail link called KLIA Transit was opened, linking Putrajaya to both Kuala Lumpur and KL International Airport in Sepang. However, construction of the Putrajaya Monorail which was intended to be the city's metro system, was suspended due to costs. One of the monorail suspension bridges in Putrajaya remains unused.
In 2007, the population of Putrajaya was estimated to be over 30,000, which comprised mainly government servants. Government servants have been encouraged to relocate to the city through a variety of government subsidy and loan programs.
In April 2013 the Putrajaya government signed a letter of intent (LOI) with the government of Sejong City in South Korea to mark cooperation between the two cities."Closer ties between Putrajaya and Sejong, Korea." (Archived from the original) The Star (Malaysia). Saturday April 6, 2013. Updated on Friday April 26, 2013.

Government and infrastructure

As of 2012 almost all of Malaysia's governmental ministries had relocated to Putrajaya. The only ministry remaining in Kuala Lumpur are the Ministry of International Trade and Industry, Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Works."Malaysian envoy acclaims Sejong City." (Archive) The Korea Times. 23 September 2012.

Religion

As of 2010 Census the population of Putrajaya is 97.4% Muslim, 1.0% Hindu, 0.9% Christian, 0.4% Buddhist, and 0.3% other or non-religious.

Public buildings and monuments

Open space

Education

Kindergarten and Pre-School  
Primary & Secondary Education in Putrajaya is provided by a few schools such as:
There is also an elite fully residential school in Putrajaya
Perdana University have established an interim campus in Putrajaya which hosts the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine (PUGSOM) and the Perdana University-Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland (PU-RCSI) medical schools.

Transport

Putrajaya is home to the world's largest roundabout, the Persiaran Sultan Salahuddin Abdul Aziz Shah with a diameter of 3.5 km. (2.7 miles)

Bridges

This is a list of bridges in Putrajaya.

Major highways

Image gallery

File:Putrajaya, Malaysia 2013.JPG|Aerial Photograph - Oct 2013
File:Perdana Putra Putrajaya Dec 2006 003.jpg|The Prime Minister's office at Perdana Putra
File:Perbadanan Putrajaya Dec 2006.jpg|Perbadanan government complex
File:MOF Putrajaya closeup.jpg|The Ministry of Finance complex
File:Palace of Justice Putrajaya Dec 2006 003.jpg|Istana Kehakiman
File:Putrajaya Walk tilt shift.jpg| Putrajaya Walk
File:Putrajaya Night Mosque PM Office.JPG| PM Office and Putra Mosque at night
File:Interior Sri Wawasan Bridge.jpg|Interior view of the Seri Wawasan Bridge
File:Masjid Putrajaya.
File:2009-08-18-Putrajaya-Seri-Saujana.jpg|Seri Saujana Bridge at night
File:pullman_putrajaya003.jpg|Pullman Putrajaya Lakeside Hotel
File:Putrajaya-fancy-streetlamp.jpg|Modern architecture includes streetlamps

Sister cities





Further reading




