[[Federico Marchetti]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 births, Living people, Italian footballers, Italy international footballers, Association football goalkeepers, U.C. AlbinoLeffe players, Cagliari Calcio players, F.C. Crotone players, Genoa C.F.C. players, S.S. Lazio players, People from the Province of Vicenza, F.C. Pro Vercelli 1892 players, Torino F.C. players, F.C. Treviso players, Serie A footballers, Serie B footballers, 2010 FIFA World Cup players, 2013 FIFA Confederations Cup players

Federico Marchetti (; born 7 February 1983 in Bassano del Grappa) is an Italian footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for Serie A club Lazio. He has also represented the Italian national team, most notably making three appearances after Gianluigi Buffon's injury at the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.

Club career

Torino

A Torino youth system trainee, Marchetti made his professional debut on loan to Pro Vercelli, being then loaned to a number of other Serie C1 and Serie C2 teams in the following years: he spent the 2003–04 season as second choice keeper with Crotone and later Treviso, without making a single appearance with any of these teams. He started the 2004–05 season as third-choice keeper Torino, making a single appearance in his time with the granata as a substitute; he then asked to be transferred in January 2005, after Torino signed another keeper, Gianluca Berti, and he was subsequently loaned to Pro Vercelli for the remainder of the season.

AlbinoLeffe

In mid-2005, Torino which originally promoted to Serie A, went bankrupt and a new team started again in Serie B as successor, and all of the old Torino player were allowed to leave for free. He was signed by AlbinoLeffe and left for Biellese in co-ownership deal.
On June 2006, he was bought back by Serie B club AlbinoLeffe, initially as reserve to Paolo Acerbis. In his first season with the celeste, he made 13 appearances, being successively promoted as first choice keeper the following season. 
During the 2007–08 season, his performances proved to be instrumental in AlbinoLeffe's historic first qualification to the promotion playoffs, where his club narrowly missed promotion to Lecce. He subsequently won the Serie B best goalkeeper award, thus raising significant interest from top flight teams.

Cagliari

In July 2008, Cagliari agreed a loan bid with AlbinoLeffe for the goalkeeper, with Cagliari having an option to buy 50% of players' rights to an agreed price.
In his first season in the Serie A, Marchetti confirmed his performances, firmly ensuring a place in the starting lineup, his performances being praised by several football pundits, being also defined by Gianluigi Buffon as his favourite Italian young goalkeeper.
However, he was frozen by the club in 2010–11 season, as his transfer request denied He became the third keeper, behind Michael Agazzi and Ivan Pelizzoli. He was unfrozen on 3 April 2011, winning Genoa as unused bench.

Lazio

Following the departure of their Uruguay international Fernando Muslera at the end of the 2010–11 season, Marchetti joined Lazio. President Claudio Lotito activated Marchetti's €5.2 million release clause. Marchetti arrived in Rome on 5 July to undertake a medical and sign a five-year contract. He described his move to Lazio as "the end of a nightmare". È la fine di un incubo»
Marchetti played a terrific season for Lazio and his presence and command over the defence together with his numerous saves helped Lazio achieve two consecutive Europa League qualifications placing Lazio on 5th and 4th spot respectively in 2010–11 and 2011–12 season campaigns.
Federico Marchetti has continued on with his form early in the 2012–13 season and is proving to be one of the protagonists in Lazio once again. Italian national squad selectors have once again focused their attention onto the former Italian International.
On May 26th 2013 he wins the Coppa Italia with Lazio in a historic derby against Roma, the first ever to assign a trophy, entering into the Pantheon of Lazio's players.

International career

In May 2009, following his impressive performances with Cagliari, Marchetti received his first call-up to Marcello Lippi's Italian national team for a friendly game versus Northern Ireland. Marchetti surprisingly made his World Cup debut in South Africa when he replaced the injured Gianluigi Buffon at half time during Italy's Group F clash with Paraguay. Marchetti kept a clean sheet, as Italy were already 1–0 down at the time of his introduction. In Marchetti's next two matches, he allowed in four goals out of five shots on goal.
Marchetti played only one game under new coach Cesare Prandelli, in the national team, during 2010-2012. In 2013 Marchetti was recalled by Prandelli to represent Italy in a friendly match against Netherlands. Marchetti was also selected in Italy squad to Confederations Cup 2013. Confederations Cup 2013 will be Marchetti's second major tournament with Italy, besides of World Cup 2010. He also was called in the second half of the friendly match, in honour of Pope Francis, between Italy and Argentina played in Rome.

Career statistics

Club

International

Honours




