[[IDEF5]]

CATEGORIES: Ontology (information science), Data modeling, Systems analysis

IDEF5 (Integrated Definition for Ontology Description Capture Method) is a software engineering method to develop and maintain usable, accurate, domain ontologies. Benjamin et al. (1994). IDEF5 Method Report. Knowledge Based Systems, Inc. This standard is part of the IDEF family of modeling languages in the field of software engineering.



In the field of computer science ontologies are used to capture the concept and objects in a specific domain, along with associated relationships and meanings. In addition, ontology capture helps coordinate projects by standardizing terminology and creates opportunities for information reuse. The lDEF5 Ontology Capture Method has been developed to reliably construct ontologies in a way that closely reflects human understanding of the specific domain.
In the IDEF5 method, an ontology is constructed by capturing the content of certain assertions about real-world objects, their properties, and their interrelationships and representing that content in an intuitive and natural form. The IDEF5 method has three main components:Varun Grover, William J. Kettinger (2000). ''Process Think: Winning Perspectives for Business Change in the Information Age. p.176-178  

IDEF5 Topics

Ontology

In IDEF5 the meaning of the term "ontology" is characterized to include a catalog of terms used in a domain, the rules governing how those terms can be combined to make valid statements about situations in that domain, and the "sanctioned inferences" that can be made when such statements are used in that domain. In every domain, there are phenomena that the humans in that domain discriminate as (conceptual or physical) objects, associations, and situations. Through various language mechanisms, we associate definite descriptors (e.g., names, noun phrases, etc.) to that phenomena.

Central Concepts of Ontology

The construction of ontologies for human engineered systems is the focus of the IDEF5. In the context of such systems, the nature of ontological knowledge involves several modifications to the more traditional conception. The first of these modifications has to do with the notion of a kind. Historically, a kind is an objective category of objects that are bound together by a common nature, a set of properties shared by all and only the members of the kind.
While there is an attempt to divide the world at its joints in the construction of enterprise ontologies, those divisions are not determined by the natures of things in the enterprise so much as the roles those things are to play in the enterprise from some perspective or other. Because those roles might be filled in any of a number of ways by objects that differ in various ways, and because legitimate perspectives on a domain can vary widely, it is too restrictive to require that the instances of each identifiable kind in an enterprise share a common nature, let alone that the properties constituting that nature be essential to their bearers. Consequently, enterprise ontologies require a more flexible notion of kind.

Ontology development process

Ontology development requires extensive iterations, discussions, reviews, and introspection. Knowledge extraction is
usually a discovery process and requires considerable introspection. It requires a process that incorporates both significant expert involvement as well as the dynamics of a group effort. Given the open-ended nature of ontological analyses, it is not prudent to adopt a "cookbook" approach to ontology development. In brief, the IDEF5 ontology development process consists of the following five activities:
Although the above activities are listed sequentially, there is a significant amount of overlap and iteration between the activities.

Ontological Analysis

Ontological analysis is accomplished by examining the vocabulary that is used to discuss the characteristic objects and processes that compose the domain, developing rigorous definitions of the basic terms in that vocabulary, and characterizing the logical connections among those terms. The product of this analysis, an ontology, is a domain vocabulary complete with a set of precise definitions, or axioms, that constrain the meanings of the terms sufficiently to enable consistent interpretation of the data that use that vocabulary. IDEF5 Overview at idef.com

IDEF5 Building blocks

Definitions

Some of the key terms in IDEF5 and the basic IDEF5 Schematic Language Symbols, see figure.: 

Diagram types

Various diagram types, or schematics, can be constructed in the IDEF5 Schematic Language. The purpose of these schematics, like that of any representation, is to represent information visually. Thus, semantic rules must be provided for interpreting every possible schematic. These rules are provided by outlining the rules for interpreting the most basic constructs of the language, then applying them recursively to more complex constructs. There are four primary schematic types derived from the basic IDEF5 Schematic Language which can be used to capture ontology information directly in a form that is intuitive to the domain expert.

Image:4-27 Classification of Resources.jpg|Classification Schematics
Image:3-20 Composition Schematic.jpg|Composition Schematics
Image:4-21 Partial Relation Taxonomy.jpg|Relation Schematics
Image:4-37 Example Object State Schematic.jpg|Object State Schematics 








