[[Number sign]]

CATEGORIES: Typographical symbols

Number sign is a name for the symbol #, which is used for a variety of purposes, including the designation of a number (for example, "#1" stands for "number one"). 
The term number sign is most commonly used when the symbol is used before a number; in the United States the term pound sign is catching on; the telephone key is called the "pound key"..
The symbol is easily confused with the musical symbol called sharp (

Origin and usage and naming conventions in North America

Mainstream use in the United States is as follows: when it precedes a number, it is read as "number", as in "a #2 pencil" (spoken aloud as: "a number-two pencil"). A theory claims that back in early 1900, the Teletype Corporation was the first to use # to mean "number".
It is often claimed that the pound name derives from a series of abbreviations for pound, the unit of weight. The theory goes that at first "lb." was used; however, printers later designed a font containing a special symbol of an "lb" with a line through the verticals so that the lowercase letter "l" would not be mistaken for the numeral "1". Unicode character   Keith Gordon Irwin, in The Romance of Writing, p. 125, says "The Italian libbra (from the old Latin word libra, 'balance') represented a weight almost exactly equal to the avoirdupois pound of England. The Italian abbreviation of lb with a line drawn across the letters ℔ was used for both weights.
An alternative theory is that the name "pound sign" is a result of the fact that character encodings have historically used the same code for both the hash symbol and the British pound sign "£". It is sometimes supposed that the problem originated in ISO 646-GB, but it seems more likely that it has its origin in Baudot code in the late 19th century.
In Canada the symbol is commonly called the number sign. Major telephone-equipment manufacturers, such as Nortel, have an option in their programming to denote Canadian English, which in turn instructs the system to say "number sign" to callers instead of "pound sign".

Usage in the United Kingdom and Ireland

In the United Kingdom and Ireland, the symbol is most often called the hash (a corruption of "hatch", referring to cross-hatching). It is never used to denote pounds weight (lb is commonly used for this) or pounds sterling (where "£" is used). It is never called the "pound sign", because that term is understood to mean the currency symbol "£", for pound sterling or (formerly) Irish pound.
While the use of "#" as an abbreviation for "number" is widely understood in Britain and Ireland, it is generally not used in writing. Where Americans might write "Symphony #5", the British and Irish are more likely to write "Symphony No. 5", or use the numero sign "Symphony № 5".
To add to the confusion between "£" and "#", in BS 4730 (the UK national variant of the ISO/IEC 646 character set), 0x23 represents "£" whereas in ASCII (the US variant), it represents "#". It was thus common, when systems were incorrectly configured, for "£" to be displayed as "#" and vice versa.

Other names in English

The symbol has many other names (and uses) in English:

In mathematics

In computing

In popular culture

Other uses

Unicode

In Unicode, several # characters are assigned:
In other languages or scripts:
Related characters, the sharp sign in musical notation:

On keyboards

On the standard US keyboard layout, the # symbol is , whereas on European Mac keyboards, the # can be found above the right shift key.




