[[Sean Bennett]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Evansville, Indiana, American football running backs, American players of Canadian football, Canadian football running backs, Illinois Fighting Illini football players, Northwestern Wildcats football players, New York Giants players, Ottawa Renegades players, Evansville BlueCats players, Toronto Argonauts players, University of Evansville alumni

William Sean Bennett (born November 9, 1975) is a former professional American and Canadian football running back. He was drafted by the New York Giants of the National Football League (NFL) in the fourth round of the 1999 NFL Draft. He played college football for the Evansville Purple Aces, Illinois Fighting Illini and Northwestern Wildcats.
Bennett began his collegiate career as a baseball and football player at the University of Illinois, but transferred to the University of Evansville after one year. At Evansville he was an All-American two–times but had to transfer due to the school dropping football as a sport. Bennett then attended Northwestern University where he was a fullback and was mainly a blocker but did get a few rushing attempts.
Since he was a senior after his single season at Northwestern, he elected to enter the 1999 NFL Draft and surprised many by being selected by the New York Giants in the fourth round. He played four seasons in New York but ended up injured each season and was released after 2002. He then joined the New York Jets but was released before the season began. After his failed stints in New York he played for the Canadian Football League's Ottawa Renegades and Toronto Argonauts; and the Evansville BlueCats of the Indoor Football League.

Early career

Sean Bennett was born on November 9, 1975 in Evansville, Indiana. In high school, Bennett played baseball and football and was hoping to become a professional baseball player. and in baseball his batting average was .425 over four years.
Following his senior season in high school, Bennett accepted a baseball and football scholarship at the University of Illinois. However at the end of his freshman year he decided to drop baseball and transfer to the University of Evansville. When asked why he dropped baseball, Bennett responded, "I couldn't hit." At Evansville, his hometown, Bennett converted to running back after mainly playing wide receiver before that. As a sophomore and junior, he was a two-time All-American and set school records in rushing and touchdowns. However, after his junior season the school decided to drop football forcing Bennett to transfer to Northwestern University. At Northwestern, Bennett became the starting fullback. In his only year he had 32 rushes and 160 yards.

Professional career

1999–2003

On March 10, 1999, when some National Football League (NFL) scouts came to work out D'Wayne Bates and Barry Gardner, Bennett decided to join the workout. When he ran the 40 yard dash in 4.45 seconds, scouts were reportedly, "doing double-takes".
Bennett was selected by the New York Giants in the fourth round of the 1999 National Football League Draft. As a rookie in 1999, Bennett missed seven games due to a knee injury.
On April 1, 2003, the New York Jets signed Bennett.

2004–2007

Bennett signed with the Ottawa Renegades on March 3, 2004.
After leaving the game of football in 2007, Bennett became a trainer at Tri-State Athletic Club in Evansville.




