[[Scientific notation]]

CATEGORIES: Numeral systems, Measurement, Notation

Scientific notation (commonly referred to as "standard form" or "standard index form") is a way of writing numbers that are too big or too small to be conveniently written in decimal form.  Scientific notation has a number of useful properties and is commonly used in calculators and by scientists, mathematicians and engineers.
In scientific notation all numbers are written in the form of
(a times ten raised to the power of b), where the exponent b is an integer, and the coefficient a is any real number (however, see normalized notation below), called the significand or mantissa. The term "mantissa" may cause confusion, however, because it can also refer to the fractional part of the common logarithm. If the number is negative then a minus sign precedes a (as in ordinary decimal notation).
Decimal floating point is a computer arithmetic system closely related to scientific notation.

Normalized notation

Any given number can be written in the form .
In normalized scientific notation, the exponent b is chosen so that the absolute value of a remains at least one but less than ten (1 ≤ |a| Normalized scientific form is the typical form of expression of large numbers in many fields, unless an unnormalised form, such as engineering notation, is desired. Normalized scientific notation is often called exponential notation—although the latter term is more general and also applies when a is not restricted to the range 1 to 10 (as in engineering notation for instance) and to bases other than 10 (as in ).

Engineering notation

Engineering notation differs from normalized scientific notation in that the exponent b is restricted to multiples of 3. Consequently, the absolute value of a is in the range 1 ≤ |a| 
Significant figures

A significant figure is a digit in a number that adds to its precision. This includes all nonzero numbers, zeroes between significant digits, and zeroes indicated to be significant.
Leading and trailing zeroes are not significant because they exist only to show the scale of the number. Therefore, 1,230,400 usually has five significant figures—1, 2, 3, 0, and 4; the two zeroes serve only as placeholders and add no precision to the original number.
When a number is converted into normalized scientific notation, it is scaled down to a number between 1 and 10. All of the significant digits remain, but the place holding zeroes are no longer required. Thus 1,230,400 would become 1.2304 x 106. However there is also the possibility that the number may be known to six or more significant figures, in which case the number would be shown as (for instance) 1.23040 x 106. Thus an additional advantage of scientific notation is that the number of significant figures is clearer.

Estimated final digit(s)

It is customary in scientific measurements to record all the definitely known digits from the measurements, and to estimate at least one additional digit if there is any information at all available to enable the observer to make an estimate. The resulting number contains more information than it would without that extra digit(s), and it (or they) may be considered a significant digit because it conveys some information leading to greater precision in measurements and in aggregations of measurements (adding them or multiplying them together).
Additional information about precision can be conveyed through additional notations. It is often useful to know how exact the final digit(s) are. For instance, the accepted value of the unit of elementary charge can properly be expressed as 

E notation

Most calculators and many computer programs present very large and very small results in scientific notation. Because superscripted exponents like 107 cannot always be conveniently displayed, the letter E or e is often used to represent times ten raised to the power of (which would be written as "× 10b") and is followed by the value of the exponent; in other words, for any two real numbers a and b, the usage of "aE+b" would indicate a value of a × 10b. Note that in this usage the character e is not related to the mathematical constant e or the exponential function ex (a confusion that is less likely with capital E); and though it stands for exponent, the notation is usually referred to as (scientific) E notation or (scientific) e notation, rather than (scientific) exponential notation (though the latter also occurs). The use of this notation is not encouraged in publications.

Examples and other notations

Order of magnitude

Scientific notation also enables simpler order-of-magnitude comparisons.  A proton's mass is  times) more massive than the electron.
Scientific notation also avoids misunderstandings due to regional differences in certain quantifiers, such as billion, which might indicate either 109 or 1012.

Use of spaces

In normalized scientific notation, in E notation, and in engineering notation, the space (which in typesetting may be represented by a normal width space or a thin space) that is allowed only before and after "×" or in front of "E" or "e" is sometimes omitted, though it is less common to do so before the alphabetical character.mblwhoilibrary.pdf,   

Further examples of scientific notation

Converting numbers

Converting a number in these cases means to either convert the number into scientific notation  form, convert it back into decimal form or to change the exponent part of the equation. None of these alter the actual number, only how it's expressed.

Decimal to scientific

First, move the decimal separator point the required amount, n, to make the number's value within a desired range, between 1 and 10 for normalized notation. If the decimal was moved to the left, append x 10n; to the right, x 10-n. To represent the number 1,230,400 in normalized scientific notation, the decimal separator would be moved 6 digits to the left and x 106 appended, resulting in  as a result.

Scientific to decimal

Converting a number from scientific notation to decimal notation, first remove the x 10n on the end, then shift the decimal separator n digits to the right (positive n) or left (negative n). The number .

Exponential

Conversion between different scientific notation representations of the same number with different exponential values is achieved by performing opposite operations of multiplication or division by a power of ten on the significand and an subtraction or addition of one on the exponent part. The decimal separator in the significand is shifted x places to the left (or right) and 1x is added to (subtracted from) the exponent, as shown below.

Basic operations

Given two numbers in scientific notation,
and
Multiplication and division are performed using the rules for operation with exponentiation:
and
Some examples are:
and
Next, add or subtract the significands:
An example:

Other bases

While base 10 is normally used for scientific notation, powers of other bases can be used too, base 2 being the next most commonly used one.
For example, in base-2 scientific notation, the number 1001 in binary (=9) is written as:
This is closely related to the base-2 floating-point representation commonly used in computer arithmetic.
Engineering notation can be viewed as base-1000 scientific notation.



Notes and references




