[[Creampie (sexual act)]]

CATEGORIES: Pornography terms, Sexual acts



Use in pornography

Internal ejaculation shots are a comparatively recent development in pornography; they are not found in early pornographic films. 
Internal ejaculations, followed by images of semen dripping from the anus, are sometimes depicted in bareback gay pornography, where they are referred to by the term "breeding" or the "reverse money shot". Breeding is sometimes followed by felching, which involves sucking the semen from the partner's anus.
In straight pornography, intercourse is often followed by a facial, pearl necklace or other visible ejaculation. Creampie scenes depart from heterosexual pornographic convention in favor of a depiction that more closely mimics sexual intercourse as performed in ordinary life; they have been called the "counterimage" of facials. Perhaps following the example set by gay pornography, they have become a popular subgenre within heterosexual pornography since the turn of the century, featuring both vaginal and anal ejaculations. In some creampie films, both gay and straight, intercourse and internal ejaculation are followed by performers licking up the semen that has dripped from their bodies.  Some pornographic films use an artificial semen substitute to simulate or enhance creampie shots. 
Examples of heterosexual pornographic film series featuring creampies include Cream Filled Teens and Internal Cumbustion. In male homosexual pornography, Treasure Island Media is a notable representative, its title Breed Me (1999) having been noted as one of the "earliest and most notorious" in the genre.

Health risks

The production of pornography featuring internal ejaculations involves unprotected sex, increasing the risk of pregnancy in women and sexually transmitted diseases such as HIV. The risk of STD is markedly increased in anal ejaculations.  
In 2004, in a much publicized case, novice pornographic actress Lara Roxx contracted multiple infections, including HIV, from Darren James while filming a scene featuring an anal creampie.Craig Wingate, Anisha Moore-Johnson, Rheena Yangson, and Jason Lim (2006): Lights, Camera, Action: Safety on the Set! Empowerment Training for Adult Film Stars 






