[[Adultery]]

CATEGORIES: Crimes, Family law, Human sexuality, Love, Marriage, Personal life, Sexual fidelity, Sins

Adultery (anglicised from Latin adulterium) is a type of extramarital sex. Interpretations of what constitutes adultery vary widely, as do the religious and legal consequences of the acts in question. The term adultery has an Abrahamic origin, though the concept predates Judaism and is found in many other societies. The definition and consequences vary between religions culture benefits and legal jurisdictions, but the concept is similar in Islam, Christianity and Judaism.
Historically, adultery has been considered to be a very serious offense by many cultures, with the act of a man having sexual relations with another man's wife most often incurring very severe punishment for both the wife and her lover, such as the death penalty, mutilation or torture.google. In most Western countries, adultery is no longer a criminal offense today. Nevertheless, even in jurisdictions where adultery is not a criminal offense, it may still have legal consequences, particularly in divorce cases. For example, where there is fault-based family law, it almost always constitutes grounds for divorce; depending on jurisdiction, it may be a factor to consider in a property settlement, the custody of children, the denial of alimony etc. Moreover, adultery can affect the social status of those involved, and result in social ostracism in some parts of the world.
In countries where adultery is illegal, the punishments range from fines to the death penalty. In the 21st century, criminal laws against adultery have become controversial, with international organizations calling for their abolition, especially in the light of several high profile stoning cases that have occurred in certain countries. The head of the U.N. expert body charged with identifying ways to eliminate laws that discriminate against women or are discriminatory to them in terms of implementation or impact, Kamala Chandrakiran, has stated that: "Adultery must not be classified as a criminal offence at all".
Some ultra-conservative Islamic societies with sharia law may implement stoning as punishment for adultery. Ann Black, Hossein Esmaeili, Nadirsyah Hosen - 2013 Most countries that criminalize adultery are those where the dominant religion is Islam, and several Sub-Saharan African Christian-majority countries, but there are some notable exceptions to this rule, namely Philippines, South Korea, Taiwan, and several US states.



The application of the term to the act appears to arise from the idea that "criminal intercourse with a married woman ... tended to adulterate the issue children of an innocent husband ... and to expose him to support and provide for another man's children". Murff, 135 F. Supp. 907, 911 (1955). Thus, the "purity" of the children of a marriage is corrupted, and the inheritance is altered. The law often uses the word "adulterated" to describe contamination of food and the like.E.g., U.S. Code, Title 21, Chapter 1: Adulterated or Misbranded Foods or Drugs.
Three 1990s studies in the United States, using nationally representative samples, have found that about 10–15% of women and 20–25% of men admitted to having engaged in extramarital sex. (1994, August 7). Sex in America today: A new national survey reveals how our attitudes are changing. Parade Magazine, 4–6. Other studies in the US have higher numbers (see United States below).

Definitions and legal constructs

In the traditional English common law, adultery was a felony. Although the legal definition of adultery differs in nearly every legal system, the common theme is sexual relations outside of marriage, in one form or another.
Adultery involving a married woman and a man other than her husband was considered a very serious crime; in 1707, English Lord Chief Justice John Holt stated that a man having sexual relations with another man's wife was "the highest invasion of property" and claimed, in regard to the aggrieved husband, that "a man cannot receive a higher provocation".
The Encyclopedia of Diderot & d'Alembert, Vol. 1 (1751), also equated adultery to theft writing that "adultery is, after homicide, the most punishable of all crimes, because it is the most cruel of all thefts, and an outrage capable of inciting murders and the most deplorable excesses." 
Legal definitions of adultery vary. For example, New York defines an adulterer as a person who "engages in sexual intercourse with another person at a time when he has a living spouse, or the other person has a living spouse."[ref]
</ref>
North Carolina defines adultery as occurring when any man and woman "lewdly and lasciviously associate, bed, and cohabit together."[ref]
</ref>
Minnesota law provides: "when a married woman has sexual intercourse with a man other than her husband, whether married or not, both are guilty of adultery."[ref]
