[[ARCO]]

CATEGORIES: ARCO, BP subsidiaries, Companies based in Orange County, California, Economy of the Western United States, Oil companies of the United States, Companies established in 1966, Standard Oil, Gas stations of the United States, 1966 establishments in the United States

Atlantic Richfield Company (ARCO) is an American oil company with operations in the United States as well as in Indonesia, the North Sea, and the South China Sea. BP sold ARCO and the Carson Refinery to Tesoro for $2.5 Billion. BP sold its Southern California terminals (Vinvale, Colton, San Diego, Hathaway, and Hynes) to Tesoro Logistics LP, including the Carson Storage Facility. BP will continue to own the ampm brand and give it to Tesoro for Southern California, Arizona, and Nevada. BP exclusively licensed the ARCO rights from Tesoro for Northern California, Oregon, and Washington.
ARCO is known for its low-priced gasoline compared to other national brands, mainly due to an early 1980s decision to emphasize cost cutting (cash/debit-only policy) and alternative sources of income (ampm).  ARCO is headquartered in La Palma, California.

History

In 1978, ARCO opened the first of its AmPm convenience stores in Southern California.

Presence in Southwest US

ARCO once had a presence in the Southwestern U.S.  — a stretch of Texas State Highway 225 east of Loop 610 in Houston, Texas, had an oil tank farm once painted with the ARCO logo. Lyondell-Citgo would rebrand the oil tanks in the 1980s. ARCO's Corporate Headquarters were in the ARCO Center in Los Angeles at the corner of 5th and Flower Streets before they were acquired by BP.  ARCO's Oil & Gas division headquarters were in downtown Dallas, Texas.  The headquarters' building was a 46-story office building designed by architect I.M. Pei, the ARCO Tower. ARCO closed the Dallas office and sold the building in the mid-1980s. Today, ARCO operates about 1,100 stations in five Western states: California, Nevada, Oregon, Washington, and Arizona.arcogas.php 

Merger

ARCO merged with Anaconda Copper Mining Company (ACM) of Montana in 1977. ACM holdings including the Berkeley Pit and the Anaconda, Montana Smelter. ARCO founder stated "he hoped Anaconda's resources and expertise would help him launch a major shale-oil venture, but that the world oil glut and the declining price of petroleum made shale oil moot." The purchase turned out to be a regrettable decision for ARCO. A lack of experience with hard-rock mining and a sudden drop in the price of copper to below seventy cents a pound, the lowest in years, caused ARCO to suspend all operations in Butte, Montana. By 1983, only six years after acquiring rights to the "Richest Hill on Earth", the Berkeley Pit was completely idle. By 1986, some ARCO properties were sold to billionaire industrialist Dennis Washington, whose company, Montana Resources, operates a much smaller open-pit mine east of the defunct Berkeley Pit.

Acquisition

In 1985, the Atlantic brand was spun off for ARCO's East Coast stations as Atlantic Petroleum. Atlantic was acquired by Dutch trader  for the use of debit cards. In most locations, it is co-branded with ampm convenience stores, also a division of BP West Coast (ARCO introduced the AmPm concept in 1979).

1990s

ARCO financed EASTLUND in the beginning of the 1990s for High Auroral Active Research Project (HAARP Project). In March 1997, ARCO also leased almost all the gas stations of the (now) Santa Fe Springs, California based independent Thrifty OilThrifty Oil Co.: gasoline retailer goes pump-to-pump with industry giants - Top 400 Private Awards | Los Angeles Business Journal | Find Articles at BNET.com 

2000s

On April 18, 2000, ARCO was purchased by BP America and completely merged into BP operations.  There were two exceptions due to FTC requirements: ARCO Alaska was sold by BP to Phillips Petroleum, and ARCO Pipe Line Company was acquired by TEPPCO, a subsidiary of Duke Energy.  ARCO as a subsidiary no longer exists.
Over the course of 2004 and 2005, ARCO signs have been replaced. New signs still have the Arco spark, but BP's Helios (BP's new white, yellow, and green "sunburst" mark named after the Greek Sun god, replacing the old British Petroleum shield mark)SignResource Delivers Its 30,000th BP Helios 

Superfund site

ARCO is the responsible party

In Media

The Arco company was immortalized in George Romero's 1978 film Dawn of the Dead, which featured a zombie wearing a red baseball jersey that read "Bach's Arco Pitcairn."

Legal issues

Atlantic Richfield Co and its parent BP America agreed 700 persons lawsuit of the Anaconda mine built in 1941. Company paid in Nevada up to $19.5m for settlement. EPA tested in 2009 wells and found that 79% of the wells north of mine had dangerous levels of uranium and/or arsenic.5m settlement in toxic waste leak lawsuit The Guardian 7 November 2013








