[[New Tactics in Human Rights]]

CATEGORIES: Human rights organizations

New Tactics in Human Rights Project (New Tactics) is an education program providing resources relating strategies and tactics that can be used by people who seek to advance human rights. These resources have been used by activists in panel discussions, by over 60 local groups for both technical and financial help and for training programs.
New Tactics is a project of the Center for Victims of Torture started in 1999. New Tactics identifies it's efforts as focused on three areas: "creating and sharing information and materials", "training and mentoring" and "building an online community".
New Tactics in Human Rights resources are organized around analysis of potential solutions rather than that of specific issues, geographic regions or target groups that allow activists to clearly recognize the unique elements of their situation, and to seek approaches that have worked elsewhere and apply them to new regions or issues. This technique may also improve activists' ability to combine diverse tactics into complex strategies.

Methods

In person training such as regional workshops in which activists train each other in tactics they have used and develop "tactical portfolios" of practical tools for applying new tactics. Seven workshops have been held, the most recent in Liberia in February 2007, focusing on post-conflict tactics for rebuilding civil society.
Publications including the book New Tactics in Human Rights: A Resource for Practitioners, which offers a conceptual framework for thinking strategically and tactically to promote human rights, and gives dozens of examples of innovative tactics, categorized by the strategic situation in which they were used.
New Tactics developed "Tactical Mapping" a methodology to help identify the relationships surrounding a human rights abuse, and the points in which the system can be interrupted or transformed, ranging from highly local, personal relationships (e.g., the perpetrator's professional associations) to international institutions (e.g., the United Nations). It allows a coalition of advocates to see where each is working on the system, and where there are gaps that need to be addressed, either by creating new tactics or finding new allies.
Online presence, the New Tactics website has been recognized as a resource for human rights activists. and "over 190 specific and successfully implemented human rights tactics and peer-to-peer dialogs with human rights practitioners in more than 130 countries." The project's website also includes online discussion courses, tools for sharing and networking and a monthly discussion, named "Tactical Dialog", of a featured tactic (examples include: unarmed accompaniment; engaging the media; or using historical sites to spark discussion of current issues). New Tactics also publishes an e-newsletter highlighting specific tactics and information for inspiring innovation and the blog InterTactica by Philippe Duhamel.




