[[Theophylline]]

CATEGORIES: Adenosine antagonists, Xanthines, Bronchodilators, Beta1-adrenergic agonists, Bitter compounds, Phosphodiesterase inhibitors

Theophylline, also known as 1,3-dimethylxanthine, is a methylxanthine drug used in therapy for respiratory diseases such as COPD and asthma under a variety of brand names. As a member of the xanthine family, it bears structural and pharmacological similarity to caffeine.

Natural occurrences

Theophylline is naturally found in cocoa beans.  Amounts as high as 3.7 mg/g have been reported in Criollo cocoa beans.
Trace amounts of theophylline are also found in brewed tea, although brewed tea provides only about 1 mg/L,MAFF Food Surveillance Information Sheet which is significantly less than a therapeutic dose.

Medical uses

The main actions of theophylline involve:
The main therapeutic uses of theophylline are aimed at:

Uses under investigation

A clinical study reported in 2008 that theophylline was helpful in improving the sense of smell in study subjects with anosmia. Science Daily, American Physiological Society

Adverse effects

The use of theophylline is complicated by its interaction with various drugs, chiefly cimetidine and phenytoin, and that it has a narrow therapeutic index, so, as in the case with many other asthma drugs,  its use must be monitored to avoid toxicity.  It can also cause nausea, diarrhea, increase in heart rate, arrhythmias, and CNS excitation (headaches, insomnia, irritability, dizziness and lightheadedness).

Mechanisms of action

Like other methylated xanthine derivatives, theophylline is both a
Theophylline has been shown to inhibit TGF-beta-mediated conversion of pulmonary fibroblasts into myofibroblasts in COPD and asthma via cAMP-PKA pathway and suppresses COL1 mRNA, which codes for the protein collagen.
It has been shown that theophylline may reverse the clinical observations of steroid insensitivity in patients with COPD and asthmatics that are active smokers (a condition resulting in oxidative stress) via a distinctly separate mechanism. Theophylline in vitro can restore the reduced HDAC (histone deacetylase) activity that is induced by oxidative stress (i.e., in smokers), returning steroid responsiveness toward normal.

Pharmacokinetics

Absorption

When theophylline is administered intravenously, bioavailability is 100%, as with all intravenously administered drugs. However, if taken orally, taking the drug late in the evening may slow the absorption process, without affecting the bioavailability.  

Distribution

Theophylline is distributed in the extracellular fluid, in the placenta, in the mother's milk and in the central nervous system. The volume of distribution is 0.5 L/kg. The protein binding is 40%. The volume of distribution may increase in neonates and those suffering from cirrhosis or malnutrition, whereas the volume of distribution may decrease in those who are obese.

Metabolism

Theophylline is metabolized extensively in the liver (up to 70%). It undergoes N-demethylation via cytochrome P450 1A2. It is metabolized by parallel first order and Michaelis-Menten pathways. Metabolism may become saturated (non-linear), even within the therapeutic range. Small dose increases may result in disproportionately large increases in serum concentration. Methylation to caffeine is also important in the infant population. Smokers and people with hepatic (liver) impairment metabolize it differently. Both THC and nicotine have been shown to increase the rate of theophylline metabolism.

Elimination

Theophylline is excreted unchanged in the urine (up to 10%). Clearance of the drug is increased in these conditions: children 1 to 12, teenagers 12 to 16, adult smokers, elderly smokers, cystic fibrosis, hyperthyroidism. Clearance of the drug is decreased in these conditions: elderly, acute congestive heart failure, cirrhosis, hypothyroidism and febrile viral illness.
The elimination half-life varies: 30 hours for premature neonates, 24 hours for neonates, 3.5 hours for children ages 1 to 9, 8 hours for adult non-smokers, 5 hours for adult smokers, 24 hours for those with hepatic impairment, 12 hours for those with congestive heart failure NYHA class I-II, 24 hours for those with congestive heart failure NYHA class III-IV, 12 hours for the elderly.

History

Theophylline was first extracted from tea leaves and chemically identified around 1888 by the German biologist Albrecht Kossel. The drug was prescribed in a liquid syrup by the 1970s as Theostat 20 and Theostat 80, and by the early 1980s in a tablet form called Quibron.

Synthesis

Theophylline can be prepared synthetically starting from dimethylurea and ethyl 2-cyanoacetate.




