[[Coca-Cola Freestyle]]

CATEGORIES: Coca-Cola, 2009 introductions, Food retailing, Vending machines, Commercial machines

Coca-Cola Freestyle is a touch screen soda fountain introduced by The Coca-Cola Company in 2009. The machine features over 125 The machine allows users to select from mixtures of flavors of Coca-Cola branded products which are then individually dispensed. The machines are currently located in major Coca-Cola partners and retail locations as a part of a gradual and ongoing deployment.  The machines have faced some consumer complaints due to long lines as a result of extra time it takes for consumers to decide on a product to dispense.practicallyefficient.com/home/2011/12/14/freestyle

Design

The cabinetry was designed by the Italian automotive design firm Pininfarina, via their Pininfarina Extra industrial and product design subsidiary. The traditional ice cube dispenser remains.

History

Contractors for its development include:
Testing began in Utah, Southern California, and Georgia in July 2009 with 60+ locations around America planned by the end of that summer. Three machines are available in the Universal Studios Florida and Universal's Islands of Adventure theme parks as well as the AMC movie theater at Downtown Disney  shopping complex in Lake Buena Vista, Florida. One of the largest movie theater chains in the US, Carmike Cinemas, installed the machines in several markets including the Carmike 13 in Champaign, IL.
Coca-Cola deployed the machines to 500 more locations in the United States in June 2010,
Coca-Cola has installed Freestyle machines in Canada in select Wendy's, Burger King, and Hero Certified Burgers restaurants, as well as entertainment venues, such as Cineplex Entertainment cinemas and Canada's Wonderland.
In late June 2012 Coca-Cola started a limited trial in the UK (in association with Burger King UK), with the machine initially deployed in 16 locations around Greater London. They are also now in Five Guys UK branches.fiveguys.co. Schweppes Lemonade and still versions of Fanta are brands that are available.coca-cola.co.uk/freestyle/

Price

The machines are leased for $300 per month ($3,600 per year), approximately 60% more than a standard Coca Cola fountain.

Products

Customers choose a base product,

Flavors

 – Available Option
 – Not an Available Option
Freestyle fountains located in Firehouse Subs locations offer the chain's signature Cherry Lime-Aid.
Freestyle fountains at Sea World Orlando offer an exclusive vanilla-flavored freestyle flavor called 'South Pole Chill.' 






