[[Asure Software]]

CATEGORIES: Patent monetization companies of the United States, Software companies based in Texas, Companies based in Austin, Texas

Asure Software is a software company which has licensing as its primary revenue source. Prior to September 13, 2007, the company was known as Forgent Networks. Critics claim Asure profits primarily as a patent troll. It also has a software division, NetSimplicity, which specializes in room scheduling and fixed assets management software.
Effective September 13, 2007, Forgent acquired iEmployee.

Patents and litigation

JPEG

In 2002, while known as Forgent, the company claimed that through its subsidiary, Compression Labs, it owned the patent rights on the JPEG image compression standard (), which is widely used on the World Wide Web.
Critics claim that the legal principle of laches, hence not asserting one's rights in a timely manner, invalidates Forgent's claims on the patent. Critics also noted the similarity to Unisys' attempts to assert rights over the GIF image compression standard via LZW patent enforcement.
In April 2004, Forgent stated that 30 companies had already paid US$90 million in royalties. On April 23, lawsuits were filed against 31 companies, including Adobe Systems, Apple Computer and IBM, for infringement of their patent. On September 26, 2005, Axis Communications, one of the defendants, announced a settlement with Compression Labs Inc.; the terms were not disclosed. As of late October 2005, six companies were known to have licensed the patent from Forgent including Adobe, Macromedia, Axis, Color Dreams, and Research In Motion.
On May 25, 2006, the United States Patent and Trademark Office rejected the broadest part of Forgent Networks claims, stating prior art submitted by the Public Patent Foundation invalidated those claims.
The company issued a press release on November 1, 2006 stating that they settled their remaining claims against roughly 60 companies. It was reported that the settlement came to $8 million and was paid by, among other companies, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Microsoft, and Sun Microsystems.

Digital video recorders

Forgent Networks has stated it is now shifting its focus to 

Asure Software

After Forgent Networks acquired iEmployee and subsequently changed its name to Asure Software, the website of the combined company no longer listed information related to the two patents - '672 and '746, compared to the old Forgent Networks website.  

Proxy Fight

In 2008, the company was the target of a proxy fight launched by Pinnacle Fund ("Pinnacle") and Red Oak Partners, managed by David Sandberg, who initially proposed a slate of 6 directors to replace the company's board. After a period of negotiations which included the unrelated resignation of one member of the board, a slate of 5 new directors was elected on August 28, 2009 to replace the previous board.








