[[Matthew Lessner]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 births, Living people, American film directors, American music video directors, People from Roseburg, Oregon, Chapman University alumni, People from Brooklyn

Matthew Lessner is an independent award-winning filmmaker.

Biography

Born in Walnut Creek, California, Lessner was raised in Roseburg, Oregon, where he attended Roseburg High School. He graduated in 2005 from Chapman University, where he studied film.Dodge College alumni make Sundance debut

Short Films

Lessner's directorial debut was the 2005 short film Darling Darling starring Michael Cera, which screened at over 30 film festivals worldwide 
Lessner's second short film, By Modern Measure, premiered at South by Southwest In January 2011 the Sundance Institute released "By Modern Measure" on The YouTube Screening room as part of its Sundance Film Festival Classics series.sundance.org/press-center/release/sundance-institute-youtube-and-acura-to-make-12-short-films/
His third short film, Chapel Perilous featuring Sun Araw was an official selection at the 2014 Sundance Film Festival  where it won the Short Film Audience Award.sundance. In March of 2014 Chapel Perilous was selected as a Vimeo Staff Pick.com/89202310

Feature Films

In August 2008, Lessner began work on his first feature film The Woods, which was filmed in the woods around Lookingglass, Oregon. The Woods was invited to world premiere at the 2011 Sundance Film Festival. The Woods premiered in New York at the BAMcinemaFest held at the Brooklyn Academy of Music .bam.aspx?pid=3268 The Woods premiered internationally at the Cologne Conference in Cologne, Germany.cologne-conference.de/en/reception/sections/look/the-woods/
In August 2011, Lessner was awarded a San Francisco Film Society and Kenneth Rainin Foundation Filmmaking Grant for screenwriting in support of feature film tentatively titled Terror Tuesday.org/content.

Music video

Lessner directed the music video for the Dirty Projectors' single "Stillness is the Move" which was ranked one of the best music videos of 2009 by Stereogum.

Web

Lessner directed and produced several videos for BBC Collective with bands including Black Dice and The Fiery Furnaces.bbc.co.youtube.bbc.co.uk/dna/collective/A32131171
In 2011 Lessner created and directed the web series "Make a Friend" for the French website Konbini.konbini.konbini.konbini.com/fr/lifestyle/make-a-friend-vivian/

Music

Lessner and his younger sister Sophia Lessner have collaborated on a musical project called Masons . They released their first tape In the Basement of the Temple through Stunned Records in 2008.blogspot.html
Lessner has collaborated with Cameron Stallones of Sun Araw who contributed to the soundtrack for The Woods.indiewire.

Misc

In the spring of 2008 Lessner worked as an intern for syndicated news program Democracy Now! 

Filmography

Music videos

Other






