[[Draughts]]

CATEGORIES: Abstract strategy games, Draughts, Traditional board games, Individual sports

Draughts (, British English) or checkersWhen this word is used in the UK, it is usually spelt chequers (as in Chinese chequers); see further at American and British spelling differences. (American English) is a group of strategy board games for two players which involve diagonal moves of uniform game pieces and mandatory captures by jumping over opponent pieces. Draughts developed from alquerque.
The most popular forms are international draughts, played on a 10×10 board, and English draughts, also called American checkers, played on an 8×8 checkerboard, but there are many other variants including some played on a 12×12 board.

General rules

Draughts (or checkers) is played by two opponents, on opposite sides of the gameboard. One player has the dark pieces, and the other has the light pieces. The players alternate turns. It is against the rules to move one of the opponent's pieces. The player with the light pieces moves first unless stated otherwise. A move consists of moving a piece diagonally to an adjacent unoccupied square. If the adjacent square contains an opponent piece, it may be captured (and removed from the game) by jumping over it to the unoccupied square immediately beyond it.
Only the dark squares of the checkered board are used. A piece may move only diagonally into an unoccupied square. Capturing is mandatory in most official rules, although some rule variations make capturing optional when presented. In almost all variants, the player without pieces remaining, or who cannot move due to being blocked, loses the game.
Uncrowned pieces (men) move one step diagonally, and (may) capture opponents' pieces by moving two consecutive steps in the same direction, jumping over the opponent's piece on the first step. Multiple opposing pieces may be captured in a single turn provided this is done by successive jumps made by a single piece; these jumps do not need to be in the same direction but may zigzag changing diagonal direction. In English draughts men can capture only forward, but in international draughts they may also capture (diagonally) backwards.
When a man reaches the crownhead or kings row (the farthest row forward), it becomes a king, and is marked by placing an additional piece on top of the first man, and acquires additional powers including the ability to move backwards (and capture backwards, in variants in which they cannot already do so).
In international draughts, kings (sometimes called flying kings) move any distance along unblocked diagonals, and may capture an opposing man any distance away by jumping to any of the unoccupied squares immediately behind it. Since captured pieces remain on the board until the turn is complete, it is possible to reach a position in a multi-capture move by a flying king where the king is blocked from capturing further by a piece already captured.
Flying kings are not used in English draughts, in which a king's only advantage over a man is the ability to move and capture backwards as well as forwards.

Naming

In most non-English languages (except those that acquired the game from English speakers), draughts is called dame, dames, damas, or a similar term that refers to ladies. The pieces are usually called men, stones, or some similar term; men promoted to kings are called dames or ladies instead. In these languages, the queen in chess or in card games is usually called by the same term as the kings in draughts. A case in point includes the Greek terminology, in which draughts is called "ντάμα" (dama), which is also one term for the queen in chess (the men are known as "pawns").

National and regional variants

Long-range kings; men can capture backwards

Long-range kings; men cannot capture backwards

No long-range kings; men cannot capture backwards

Invented variants

Games sometimes confused with draughts variants

History

Ancient games

A similar game has been played for thousands of years.
A board resembling a draughts board was found in Ur dating from 3000 BC.

Alquerque

An Arabic game called Quirkat or al-qirq, with similar play to modern draughts, was played on a 5×5 board. It is mentioned in the 10th century work Kitab al-Aghani. Al qirq was also the name for the game that is now called Nine Men's Morris.
Each piece was called a "fers", the same name as the chess queen, as the move of the two pieces was the same at the time.

Evolution

The rule of crowning was used by the 13th century, as it is mentioned in the Philip Mouskat's Chronique in 1243 when the game was known as Fierges, the name used for the chess queen (derived from the Persian ferz, meaning royal counsellor or vizier). The pieces became known as "dames" when that name was also adopted for the chess queen. The rule forcing players to take whenever possible was introduced in France in around 1535, at which point the game became known as Jeu forcé, identical to modern English draughts. The game without forced capture became known as Le jeu plaisant de dames, the precursor of international draughts.
The 18th-century English author Samuel Johnson wrote a foreword to a 1756 book about draughts by William Payne, the earliest book in English about the game.

Computer draughts

English draughts

English draughts (American 8×8 checkers) has been the arena for several notable advances in game artificial intelligence. In the 1950s, Arthur Samuel created one of the first board game-playing programs of any kind.  More recently, in 2007 scientists at the University of AlbertaChinook - World Man-Machine Checkers Champion developed their "Chinook" program to the point where it is unbeatable. A brute force approach that took hundreds of computers working nearly 2 decades was used to solve the game,Checkers Is Solved - Schaeffer et al. 317 (5844): 1518 - Science showing that a game of draughts will always end in a stalemate if neither player makes a mistake. Solving Checkers, International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), pp. 292-297, 2005. Distinguished Paper PrizeChinook - Solving Checkers Publications The solution is for the draughts variation called go-as-you-please (GAYP) checkers and not for the variation called three-move restriction checkers. As of December 2007, this makes English draughts the most complex game ever solved.

International draughts







Draughts associations and federations
History, articles, variants, rules
Online play

