[[Bilateria]]

CATEGORIES: Animals

The bilateria  are all animals having a bilateral symmetry, i.e. they have a front and a back end, as well as an upside and downside. In contrast,  radially symmetrical animals like jellyfish have a topside and downside, but no front and back. The bilateria are a major group of animals, including the majority of phyla but not sponges, cnidarians, placozoans and ctenophores. For the most part, bilateral embryos are triploblastic having three germ layers  endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm. Nearly all are bilaterally symmetrical, or approximately so; the most notable exception is the echinoderms, which achieve near-radial symmetry as adults, but are bilaterally symmetrical as larvae. Except for a few phyla (i.e. flatworms and gnathostomulids),  bilaterians have complete digestive tracts with a separate mouth and anus. Some bilaterians lack body cavities (acoelomates, i.e. Platyhelminthes, Gastrotricha and Gnathostomulida), while others display primary body cavities (deriving from the blastocoel, as pseudocoel) and/or secondary cavities  (that appear de novo, for example the coelom).

Evolution

The hypothetical last common ancestor of all bilateria is termed the "Urbilaterian". and Sean B. Carroll. (1999) Early Animal Evolution: Emerging Views from Comparative Biology and Geology. Science. 25 June 1999: Vol. 284. no. 5423, pp. 2129–2137. Found at  2003. The segmented Urbilateria: A testable scenario. Integrative & Comparative Biology 43: 137–147. Found at  — URL retrieved November 15, 2006 The nature of the first bilaterian is a matter of debate. One side suggests that acoelomates gave rise to the other groups (planuloid-aceloid hypothesis by von Graff, Metchnikoff, Hyman, or Salvini Plawen), while the other poses that the first bilaterian was a coelomate organism and the main acoelomate phyla (flatworms and gastrotrichs) have lost body cavities secondarily (the Archicoelomata hypothesis and its variations such as the Gastrea by Haeckel or Sedgwick, the Bilaterosgastrea by  Jägersten, or the Trochaea by Nielsen).
The first evidence of bilateria in the fossil record comes from trace fossils in Ediacaran sediments, and the first bona fide bilaterian fossil is Kimberella, dating to 

Phylogeny

There are two or more superphyla (main lineages) of Bilateria. The deuterostomes include the echinoderms, hemichordates, chordates, and possibly a few smaller phyla. The protostomes include most of the rest, such as arthropods, annelids, mollusks, flatworms, and so forth. There are a number of differences, most notably in how the embryo develops. In particular, the first opening of the embryo becomes the mouth in protostomes, and the anus in deuterostomes. Many taxonomists now recognize at least two more superphyla among the protostomes, Ecdysozoa
A phylogeny of the Bilateria after Nielsen (2001) is as follows. 2001. Animal Evolution: Interrelationships of the Living Phyla. Second Edition. Oxford University Press, Oxford..



Notes






