[[Eugénie de Montijo]]

CATEGORIES: 1826 births, 1920 deaths, People from Granada, People from Farnborough, Hampshire, Empresses of the French, French queens consort, House of Bonaparte, Regents of France, Female regents, French socialites, Spanish nobility, French people of the Franco-Prussian War, Burials at St Michael's Abbey, Farnborough, Recipients of the Golden Rose, Dames of the Order of Queen Maria Luisa, Honorary Dames Grand Cross of the Order of the British Empire, Grand Crosses of the Order of Saint Charles (Mexico), World Digital Library related

Doña María Eugenia Ignacia Augustina de Palafox-Portocarrero de Guzmán y Kirkpatrick, 16th Countess of Teba and 15th Marquise of Ardales (5 May 1826 – 11 July 1920), known as Eugénie de Montijo (), was the last Empress consort of the French from 1853 to 1871 as the wife of Napoleon III, Emperor of the French.

Youth

The last Empress of the French was born in Granada, Spain, to Don Cipriano de Palafox y Portocarrero (1785–1839), Grandee, whose titles included  8th Count of Ablitas, 9th Count of Montijo, 15th Count of Teba, 8th Count of Fuentidueña, 14th Marquess of Ardales, 17th Marquess of Moya and 13th Marquess of la Algaba
Eugenia's older sister, María Francisca de Sales de Palafox Portocarrero y Kirkpatrick, nicknamed "Paca" (24 January 1825 – 16 September 1860), who inherited most of the family honours and was 12th Duchess of Peñaranda Grandee of Spain and 9th Countess of Montijo, title later ceded to her sister, married the Duke of Alba in 1849. Until her own marriage in 1853, Eugénie variously used the titles of Countess of Teba or Countess of Montijo, but some family titles were legally inherited by her elder sister, through which they passed to the House of Alba. After the death of her father, Eugenia became the 9th Countess of Teba, and is named as such in the Almanach de Gotha (1901 edition). After Eugenia's demise all titles of the Montijo family came to the Fitz-Jameses (the Dukes of Alba and Berwick).
Eugénie de Montijo, as she became known in France, was formally educated mostly in Paris, beginning at the fashionable, traditionalist Convent of the Sacré Cœur from 1835 to 1836. A more compatible school was the progressive Gymnase Normale, Civile et Orthosomatique, from 1836 to 1837, which appealed to her athletic side (a school report praised her strong liking for athletic exercise, and although an indifferent student, that her character was "good, generous, active and firm"). A short, disastrous stay, in 1837, in a boarding school near Bristol, England, where she was known as "Carrots", for her auburn hair, and from which she tried to run away, to India, completed Eugénie's formal schooling.

Empress

She first met Prince Louis Napoléon after he had become president of the Second Republic, with her mother, at a reception given by the "prince-president" at the Elysée Palace on April 12, 1849.
The marriage had come after considerable activity with regard to who would make a suitable match, often toward titled royals and with an eye to foreign policy. The final choice was opposed in many quarters and Eugénie considered of too-little social standing by some.
Eugénie found childbearing extraordinarily difficult. An initial miscarriage in 1853, after a three month pregnancy, frightened and soured her.
Her husband often consulted her on important questions, and she acted as Regent during his absences in 1859, 1865 and 1870. In 1860, she visited Algiers with Napoleon.
According to events depicted in both the book and film The Song of Bernadette, Eugénie believed that her son had been miraculously cured from a fever after being sprinkled with water from the spring at Massabielle.
In 1868, Empress Eugénie visited the Dolmabahçe Palace in Constantinople, the home to Sultana Pertevniyal Sultan, mother of Abdülaziz, 32nd sultan of the Ottoman Empire. Pertevniyal became outraged by the forwardness of Eugénie taking the arm of one of her sons while he gave a tour of the palace garden, and she gave the Empress a slap on the stomach as a possibly more subtly intended than often represented reminder that they were not in France.

After the Franco-Prussian War

When the Second French Empire was overthrown after France's defeat in the Franco-Prussian War (1870–71), the empress and her husband took refuge in England, and settled at Chislehurst, Kent. After his death in 1873, and that of her son in 1879, she moved in 1885 to Farnborough, Hampshire and to the Villa Cyrnos (named after the ancient Greek for Corsica), which was built for her at Cape Martin, between Menton and Nice, where she lived in retirement, abstaining from politics. Her house in Farnborough is now an independent Roman Catholic girls' school, Farnborough Hill.Farnborough Hill school website
After the deaths of her husband and son, as her health started to deteriorate, she spent some time at Osborne House on the Isle of Wight; her physician recommended she visit Bournemouth which was, in Victorian times, famed as a health spa resort. During her afternoon visit in 1881, she called on the Queen of Sweden, at her residence 'Crag Head'.Log of HMS Thistle 
The former empress died in July 1920, aged 94, during a visit to her relative the Duke of Alba, in Madrid in her native Spain, and she is interred in the Imperial Crypt at St Michael's Abbey, Farnborough, with her husband and her son, who had died in 1879 fighting in the Zulu War in South Africa. She left her possessions to various relatives: her Spanish estates went to the grandsons of her sister, the Fitz-Jameses (Dukes of Berwick and Alba), the house in Farnborough with all collections to the heir of her son, Prince Victor Bonaparte, Villa Cyrnos to his sister, Princess Laetitia of Aosta. Liquid assets were divided into three parts and given to the above relatives, except the sum of 100,000 francs bequeathed to the Committee for Rebuilding the Cathedral of Reims.
Her deposed family's friendly association with the United Kingdom was commemorated in 1887 when she became the godmother of Victoria Eugenie of Battenberg (1887–1969), daughter of Princess Beatrice, who later became Queen consort of Alfonso XIII of Spain. This baptism was an early example of ecumenism as Victoria Eugenie was baptised in the (Protestant) Church of Scotland.

Legacy

The Empress has also been commemorated in space; the asteroid 45 Eugenia was named after her,
She had an extensive and unique jewelry collection, most of them were later owned by the Brazilian socialite Aimée de Heeren. Impressed by the elegance, style and design of the Jewellery of the neo classical era, in 1858 she had a boutique in the Royal Palace under the name 'Royale Collections'.
She was honoured by John Gould who named the White-headed Fruit Dove Ptilinopus eugeniae

In popular culture

Named for the Empress, the Eugénie hat is a style of women's chapeau worn dramatically tilted and drooped over one eye; its brim is folded up sharply at both sides in the style of a riding topper, often with one long ostrich plume streaming behind it. More redolent of the Empress' actual apparel, however, was the late nineteenth-century fashion of the Eugénie paletot, a women's greatcoat with bell sleeves and a single button enclosure at the neck. 93.

Titles from birth to death

Honours

Ancestry

Film portrayals



Citations



External Links

|-
|-

