[[Lincolnshire Co-operative]]

CATEGORIES: Consumer Co-operatives of the United Kingdom, Funeral directors in the United Kingdom, Companies based in Lincolnshire, Companies established in 1861, Department stores of the United Kingdom

Lincolnshire Co-operative Ltd. (known as Lincolnshire Co-op) is an independent consumer co-operative in the United Kingdom and is a registered Industrial and Provident Society. 141R
The Society is owned by members who hold Lincolnshire Co-op dividend cards, around 230,000 people. It trades in Lincolnshire and surrounding counties and has over 200 outlets.
As a co-operative, it shares all its profits with members. Ways of doing this include paying dividend and a dividend bonus at the end of the year, investing in new and improved services and supporting community groups and charities.
In the last full year of trading, 2012/13, Lincolnshire Co-op recorded sales of £288m and profit of £18m. It was able to pay its members a total of £4.2m in dividend and dividend bonus.

About

Community Champions

In 2013, the Society set up the Community Champions scheme which sees every member linked to a good cause near to where they live.lincolnshire.aspx Every time they shop with the Society, a donation goes to that good cause. As of March 2014, the scheme had already given away £192,750 to local causes.
Investors in People

Lincolnshire Co-op was reaccredited as a Gold Standard employer in 2014 by Investors In People – a prestigious title shared by only 1 per cent of employers. This quality standard recognises commitment to developing staff by meeting rigorous requirements.lincolnshire.aspx
Staff Development

The Society runs an apprentice scheme with a number of apprentices working in areas including food retail and pharmacy.lincolnshire.aspx
To help staff develop, employees can undertake a Foundation Degree in Business Management. The two year qualification was designed specifically for Lincolnshire Co-op by the University of Lincoln and is delivered by trainers from the Society and academics from the University.
Environment

To reduce carbon emissions, Lincolnshire Co-op buys all its energy from small scale hydro-electric plants and wind farms as part of a group of co-operative businesses.lincolnshire.aspx As well as using green energy, the Society has taken a number of steps to cut the amount used across its sites including new outlets designed to maximise natural light and the introduction of automatic LED lights and heat reclamation systems.lincolnshire.aspx In 2013/14 solar panels were also being introduced to a number of the Society's outlets.lincolnshire.aspx
Charity Of The Year

Each year the Society raises money for a local charity. 2012/13 saw £113,867.70 raised by customers and staff for When You Wish Upon A Star, which makes dreams come true for children who are suffering from life threatening illnesses.lincolnshire.aspx Its chosen charity for 2013/14 is the Alzheimer's Society which helps to tackle and raise awareness of dementia.lincolnshire.aspx

History

Lincolnshire Co-operative was founded as 'Lincoln Co-operative Society' in 1861, inspired by Gainsborough joiner Thomas Parker.
Trading began at 1 Napoleon Place, Lincoln, in September 1861. By the end of the first quarter, there were 74 members and the dividend was 9d. Now there are around 230,000 members and £4.2m was paid to them in dividend and bonuses in 2012/13.lincolnshire.aspx
When the Society reached its 150th birthday in 2011, it celebrated with a year of special events including a 'Big Birthday Bash' playing host to Lulu and indie rock band Scouting For Girls. It renovated a 1970s 'birthday bus' and an exhibition was held at The Museum of Lincolnshire Life, showcasing the Society's eventful history and a memory book, where members had shared comments about their Co-op from over the years. Over half a million pounds was also donated to local good causes through the 'Big Birthday Awards'.lincolnshire.aspx

Services

The Society operates food stores, All of the stores sell a range of locally sourced produce called 'Love Local' Products include Lincolnshire Poacher cheese made in Alford, and Lincolnshire Farm Eggs
The Love Local range also includes a huge selection of baked goods including bread, cakes and Lincolnshire treats like plum bread made by the Society's own bakery called Gadsby's
Lincolnshire Co-op is proud to include Lincolnshire Quality meat You'll also find the famous Lincolnshire sausage in Lincolnshire Co-op stores, locally sourced and made.
The Society runs pharmacies All of the outlets have consultation rooms where people can have private advice from pharmacists and trained advisors. They offer a range of services including sexual health checks and blood pressure tests.
Several of its pharmacies are being refitted as 'healthy living' hubs The concept not only encourages healthy lifestyles and the prevention of health problems but also aims to reduce expensive waste and relieve some of the burden on GP practices.
Funeral services It has provided the service for over 125 years. It offers a complete funeral arrangement service, funeral bonds, and links clients to a bereavement counselling service.lincolnshire.aspx
The Society has travel branches Many branches also offer specialist extras like cruise, wedding and ski experts.
Lincolnshire Co-op also runs post offices, coffee shops, and a florist.lincolnshire.aspx
In November 2013, Lincolnshire Co-op opened South Lincolnshire Crematorium, It includes a memorial garden, a flower court and a chapel that seats 100 people.lincolnshire.aspx

Subsidiaries

The following trading companies are wholly owned subsidiary undertakings of the parent society:








