[[Diandra Soares]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, Living people, Indian female models, People from Mumbai

Diandra Soares  is an Indian model, anchor and a fashion designer. She is most noted for her bald looks on the ramp.

Modelling Career

At the age of 13, Diandra made up her mind about being a model.Her first assignment was for Tips and Toes and her first show was for McDowell's. In 1995,she was crowned as Miss.She has walked for many international fashion shows in her career which were conducted by Gucci, Leonard Paris, Emanuel Ungaro,Sonia Rykiel, Miami Fashion Show etc. 

Acting Career

Diandra's earlier works mostly comprised  music videos like Jadoo and Bali Bramhabhatt's remix Ila Arun (Kichdi), Jalwa etc. She made her entry to silver screen with the 2001 English movie Everybody Says I'm Fine!, directed by Rahul Bose. The movie received positive reviews and got many accolades.imdb. She left the role, which was later done by Katrina Kaif, because she was selected by a Paris agency for a major fashion week. She was quite a bliss as a televiosn host and received wide acclaim for her show Get Gorgeous which was aired V. from her modelling and acting career, Diandra is a professional makeup artist  also known for designing skills. She designed shoes for Tarun TahilianiShane and Falguni Peacock, posters for the popular Bollywood movie Love Sex aur Dhokhadirected by Dibakar Banerjee and also designed Kingfisher Calendar for 2 years

Recognition as Bald Model

Diandra Soares is most noted in her career for her  bald looks on the ramp. Her first head shave happened in 1999 at Goa in between a fashion show.She was 20 then and later said that she done it because she loved the fun in experimenting. However neither the audience nor the fashion world received bald Diandra with open hands. After the initial media attention she grabbed, she was forced to leave the ramps and to give up her bald look.wordpress.com/2006/08/31/diandra-soares/
Diandra's second head shave happened in 2010 at the age of 30. Diandra explained that she did it  because she felt the need for relive the experience all over again.Designers found her shinning black bald mane interesting and decided to open the close the shows with Diandra in the Lakme Fashion Week. Her career reached to the peak during this time and received wide media attention as never before which includes a special story done by Huffington Post on her   September 7, 2013 she shaved her head again and sporting the bald look for the third time in her career. Diandra commented that it was done for religious reasons and by going bald she felt spiritually empowered.missmalini.com/2013/09/10/bald-beautiful-supermodel-diandra-soares/
Despite the positive responses, there are many who consider Diandra's shining smooth shaved head as a means for publicity stunt and to grab quick media attention since the audience's approach towards bald models have changed drastically over the years especially when models like Flaviana Matata gained popularity in the west with their tonsured head.According to her shaving  one's head is the best way to reach out to one's soul. She believes that when you go bald can people see your true inner beauty, with a childlike quality.

Personal Life

Diandra Soares was born on August 13, 1979 to a middle class catholic family in Bandra, Maharashtra. She is the first child of Benedict Soares and have a brother and sister. After having the schooling at Bombay, she pursued her education from St.[ref]
 It was the former Indian model Madhu Sapre who inspired Diandra in modelling.[ref]


Filmography

Television









