[[Aboriginal Canadian personalities]]

CATEGORIES: Aboriginal peoples in Canada, Lists of Canadian people, Aboriginal peoples in Canada-related lists

Over the course of centuries, many Aboriginal Canadians have played a critical role in shaping the history of Canada.  From art and music, to law and government, to sports and war; Aboriginal customs and culture have had a strong influences on defining  Canadian culture.
1,172,790 million people reported having at least some Aboriginal ancestry in 2006, representing 3.8% of the total Canadian population. From 1981 to 2001, the percentage of Aboriginal people who obtained college diplomas increased from 15.0 per cent to 22.0 per cent, while the percentage that obtained university degrees increased  from 4.0 per cent to 6.0 per cent.  This compares with increases of 20.0 per cent to 25.0 per cent for non-Aboriginal people obtaining college diplomas that is a narrow gap between the Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal population. This is partly due to organizations that focus attention on the achievements and welfare of Aboriginal Canadians like, Congress of Aboriginal Peoples, Native Women's Association of Canada, Aboriginal Curatorial Collective, National Aboriginal Health Organization, Metis Child and Family Services Society and Aboriginal Peoples Television Network.

Notable individuals

First Nations

First Nation people have come from a diverse background of history, economy, culture and government.  First Nations become active politicians in the Canadian government holding a sense of pride and patriotism towards the nation of Canada.  First Nations also become politicians within their own well-defined First Nation government known as the Assembly of First Nations (AFN) which supported by its membership, land base and tribal councils
Shanawdithit, born 1801, was the last recorded surviving member of the Beothuk people. After Shanawdithit's death in 1829, the Beothuk people became officially extinct as a separate ethnic group. Aatsista-Mahkan (Running Rabbit), became chief of the  Siksika First Nation following the death of his father in 1871. Aatsista-Mahkan was a signatory to Treaty 7, but he and his people continued living the plains Indian lifestyle following  the bison until 1881. The Siksika Nation was then forced to settle on a reserve 
The arts and entertainment venue has seen aboriginal peoples stand at the Oscars, an internationally prominent award ceremony such as Chief Dan George. Dan George OC,  was chief of the Tsleil-Waututh (Coast Salish) Nation, Academy Award-nominated actor and  an  author. Adam Beach is an actor of Saulteaux descent from Dog Creek First Nations Reserve at Lake Manitoba. Retrieved 2009-10-03.
Among the Canadian First Nations are accomplished persons known for their singing, songwriting and live performances. Shania Twain is a country pop artist of partial Cree ancestry. Shania Twain along with Alanis Morissette are the only Canadian musicians male or female to have sold over 2 million units in Canada, receiving the double diamond award.  Kashtin was a Canadian folk rock duo composed of Innu Claude McKenzie and Florent Vollant. Robbie Robertson, Mohawk, musician, singer–songwriter, and guitarist is best known for his membership in The Band. Norval Morrisseau, CM, or Copper Thunderbird, was an Anishinaabe artist known as the "Picasso of the North". Bill Reid, OBC, was an artist who renewed interest in his heritage Haida art, with his sculpture and totem poles.
In sports there are number of accomplished  First Nations  peoples such as Tom Longboat an Onondaga distance runner. Longboat was inducted into both Canada's Sports Hall of Fame and the Indian Hall of Fame. George "Chief" Armstrong was  noted as an Irish-Algonquin, professional hockey player. Ted Nolan, Ojibwe, Jack Adams Award winner, is a retired professional hockey left winger of the National Hockey League (NHL). Nolan was the former Head Coach and Vice President of Hockey Operations for an American Hockey League (AHL) team. Jonathan Cheechoo was the first member of the Moose Factory Cree Nation to play hockey for the Ottawa Senators of the NHL. Of Cree heritage, Jon Mirasty, "Nasty Mirasty", is a popular enforcer in the AHL.

Inuit

Inuit serving in political roles have actively advocated in support of the Inuit community.  The Inuit serve within a national political organisation known as the Inuit Tapirisat. Abe Okpik CM, was instrumental in helping Inuit obtain surnames rather than disc numbers. while Simonie Michael, the first Inuk to sit on what is now the Legislative Assembly of the Northwest Territories was among the early Inuit leaders to call for an end to the disc numbers. Kiviaq (David Ward) Inuit politician was the first Inuk to become a lawyer, and is responsible for several important advances in establishing the legal rights of the Inuit people. In 2001, Kiviaq won the legal right to use his single-word Inuktitut name. Peter Irniq a former Commissioner of Nunavut set up the offices of "the Official Languages, Access to Information and Conflict of Interest Commissioners". Irniq also has encouraged the use of the Inuit language and the Inuit culture, referred to as  Qaujimajatuqangit. Sheila Watt-Cloutier, OC, is an Inuit political representative and activist at the regional, national and international levels. Sheila has most recently working as International Chair of the Inuit Circumpolar Council (formerly the Inuit Circumpolar Conference). Nellie Cournoyea, OC, of Inupiat heritage served as the first female Premier of the Northwest Territories and the second female leader of an elected legislature in Canada. Helen Maksagak, CM, a Copper Inuit, was the last Commissioner of the undivided NWT and first Commissioner of Nunavut. Paul Okalik was the first Premier of Nunavut whose "dream was to help his people in their dealings with the Canadian justice system."[ref]
 
[/ref] Ann Meekitjuk Hanson is the Commissioner of Nunavut as well as civil servant, broadcaster, journalist and author.[ref]
</ref>
Historically among the Inuit, Stephen Angulalik was an internationally known Ahiarmiut Inuit from northern Canada.  Angulalik was recognized  as a Kitikmeot fur trader and trading post operator at Kuugjuaq (Perry River), NWT. According to Royal Canadian Mounted Police Sergeant Henry Larsen by 1941, Angulalik and his third wife had raised 11 children.[ref]
