[[SIRUM (organization)]]

CATEGORIES: Non-profit organizations based in California, Recycling in the United States, Social enterprise

Supporting Initiatives to Redistribute Unused Medicine (SIRUM) is a social enterprise started by Stanford University students to decrease the amount of medicine and medical supplies that go to waste by redistributing unused, non-expired drugs to free and low cost medical clinics. The organization is founded on the fact that over $9 billion worth of usable medicine goes to waste each year in the United States, yet many clinics that provide care to underserved communities depend on medical donations.

Opportunity

Every year, 7,000 tons of unused medicine and medical supplies go to waste due to logistical challenges in donations.

Method of operation

SIRUM created an online community of medicine donors and medical clinics that depend on donations. The nonprofit organization has established an online system where donors can input what they have and clinics can input what they need. The system then matches the donors and clinics and provides labels for shipping the medicine.

Results

SIRUM evaluates its performance based on the social return on investment of three quantitative metrics:

Legislation

SIRUM is possible because of two recent legal advancements. One is the enactment of Good Samaritan laws, such as California Senate Bill 798, that have recently passed in 39 states. These laws make it easier for certain types of donors to redistribute unused medicine without liability. 
The second legal advancement is a Food and Drug Administration mandate that requires all manufactured medicine to be labeled with the National Drug Code, a consistent coding system that identifies medicine by type, strength, and amount. SIRUM uses these standardized codes to match clinic requests with donor excess. The online system allows for medicine and medical supplies to be entered and requested using the trade name, active ingredient, NDC labeler code, NDC product code, or manufacturer.

History

Adam Kircher founded SIRUM in 2005. His experience with relief efforts in post-tsunami Batam, Indonesia alerted him to difficulties in redistributing supplies, including medicine. Adam was inspired to use the internet to create a trusted community for redistributing medicine, and he assembled a group of Stanford students to help achieve his aims. In 2009, SIRUM became incorporated and launched its pilot program in the San Francisco Bay Area. With its online network functional, the organization has begun establishing a network of clinics and donors.

Sponsors

Partners






