[[Princess Kaiulani (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 films, British biographical films, Films set in the 1880s, Films set in the 1890s, Films set in Hawaii, Films shot in Honolulu, Hawaii, Interracial romance films

Princess Kaiulani (sometimes titled Barbarian Princess) is a 2009 film based on the life of Princess Kaiulani (1875–1899) of the Kingdom of Hawaii.

Description

The film stars Q'orianka Kilcher in the role of Princess Ka
The movie follows the progression of Kaiulani's short life, beginning with a happy life in Honolulu interrupted by the events surrounding the imposition of the Bayonet Constitution.  The movie follows her through her education in Victorian England, the announcement of the overthrow of the Kingdom of Hawaii, her campaign to attempt to convince the United States to reverse the overthrow, and her return to Hawaii.
The historical events are generally portrayed accurately, though some of the details, for example the reasons for King Kalākaua's signing of the Bayonet Constitution, are not explained in detail.  In contrast, many of the personal details of the princess's life, including particularly the depiction of her love life, are representative of who she was rather than strictly historical.  Her life also included many significant events that are not in this movie.
The movie was written and directed by Marc Forby, and also stars Barry Pepper as Lorrin Thurston, Will Patton as Sanford B. Dole, Julian Glover as Theophilus Harris Davies,  and Shaun Evans as Clive Davies.
The first public performance of the movie was in Honolulu on October 16, 2009, at the historic Hawaii Theatre, as part of the 2009 Hawaii International Film Festival.

Cast

Controversy

The film's working title "Barbarian Princess" provoked controversy in Hawaii, with individuals stating that it brings up painful memories of past discrimination. The film was finally released for wider distribution as Princess Kaiulani.
Many native Hawaiians were disappointed that the film used a non-Hawaiian for the title role.

Critical reception

Princess Kaiulani was almost universally panned by critics. Rotten Tomatoes reported that only 23% of critics gave the film a positive review. Roger Ebert called it an "interesting but creaky biopic."
Hailed by the Hollywood Reporter and panned by the New York press, Princess Kaiulani was either praised or left audiences cold.
The film won the Audience Award for "Best Feature" at the 2009 Honolulu International Film Festival in a tie with Precious: Based on the Novel "Push" by Sapphire.






