[[Francisco Tenamaztle]]

CATEGORIES: Mesoamerican people, Rebellions against the Spanish Empire, History of Mexico, History of Mesoamerica, 16th-century indigenous people of the Americas

Francisco Tenamaztle (fl. 1540s–1550s) (also Tenamaxtlan or Tenamaxtli) was a leader of the Caxcan Indians  in Mexico during the Mixton War of 1540–1542.  With the support of  Bartolomé de las Casas he defended the justice of his cause by appealing to King Carlos I.

Background

The first contact and zero head  of the Caxcan and other indigenous peoples of northwestern Mexico with the Spanish, was in 1529 when Nuño Beltrán de Guzmán set forth from Mexico City with 300–400 Spaniards and 5,000 to 8,000 Aztec and Tlaxcaltec allies on a march through the future states of Nayarit, Jalisco, Durango, Sinaloa, and Zacatecas. Rereading the Conquest: Power, Politics, and the History of Early Colonial Michoacan, Mexico, 1521–1565.  State College: Penn State U Press, 2001, p.56  Over a six-year period Guzman conducted frequent violent slave raids throughout Northern Mexico, enslaving thousands of Indians. Guzmán and his lieutenants founded towns and Spanish settlements in the region, called Nueva Galicia, including Guadalajara, the first temporary site of which was at Tenamaztle's home of Nochistlán, Zacatecas.  The Spaniards encountered increased resistance as they moved further from the complex hierarchical societies of Central Mexico and attempted to force Indians into servitude through the encomienda system.
Tenamaztle was baptized a Catholic sometime after Guzman's expedition and given the Christian name Francisco.  He became "Lord Tlatoani of Nochistlan," an urban center and region in the southern part of Zacatecas.  The Caxcan Indians are often considered part of the Chichimeca, a generic term used by the Spaniards and Aztecs for all the nomadic and semi-nomadic Native Americans living in the deserts of northern Mexico. However, the Caxcanes seem to have been sedentary, depending upon agriculture for their livelihood and living in permanent towns and settlements. They were, perhaps, the most northerly of the agricultural, town-and-city dwelling peoples of interior Mexico.J. Silver Mining and Society in Colonial Mexico: Zacatecas, 1546–1700. Cambridge: Cambridge U Press, 1971, p.5
Presumably at the same time as his baptism, Tenamaztle also swore allegiance to the Spanish crown and was confirmed in his position and any property he owned. Spanish rule, however, was oppressive and in mid-1540 the Caxcanes and their allies, the Zacatecos and possibly other Chichimeca tribes, revolted.  The command structure of the Caxcanes is unknown but the most prominent leader who emerged was Tenamaztle.

The Mixton War

The spark which set off the war was apparently the arrest of 18 rebellious Indian leaders and the hanging of nine of them in mid 1540. Later in the same year the Indians rose up to kill the encomendero Juan de Arze., Matias de la Mota. Historia de la Conquista de la Provincia de la Nueva-Galicia, Mexico.  Imprenta del Gobierno, 1870, p. 115  Spanish authorities also became aware that the Indians were participating in "devilish" dances. After killing two Catholic priests, many Indians fled the encomiendas and took refuge in the mountains, especially on the hill fortress of Mixton. Acting Governor Cristobal de Oñate led a Spanish and Indian force to quell the rebellion. The Caxcanes killed a peace delegation of one priest and ten Spanish soldiers. Oñate attempted to storm Mixtón, but the Indians on the summit repelled his attack. The Last Conquistador: Juan de Onate and the Settling of the Far Southwest. Norman: U of OK Press, p. 23  Oñate then requested reinforcements from the capital, Mexico City. Francisco Tenamaztle. Mexico City:Editorial Diana, 2005, pp.25–29
The Viceroy Antonio de Mendoza called upon the experienced conquistador Pedro de Alvarado to assist in putting down the revolt. Alvarado declined to await reinforcements and attacked Mixton in June 1541 with four hundred Spaniards and an unknown number of Indian allies. "The Indigenous People of Zacatecas."  accessed 24 Dec 2010  He was met there by an Indian army, estimated by the Spanish to number 15,000, under Tenamaztle and Don Diego, a Zacateco.  The first attack of the Spanish was repulsed with ten Spaniards and many Indian allies killed. Subsequent attacks by Alvarado were also unsuccessful and on June 24 he was crushed when a horse fell on him. He subsequently died on July 4.72–74
Emboldened, the Indians led by Tenamaztle attacked Guadalajara in September but were repulsed. The Spanish authorities were now thoroughly alarmed and feared that the revolt would spread. They assembled a force of 450 Spaniards and 30 to 60 thousand Aztec, Tlaxcalan and other Indians and under Viceroy Mendoza invaded the land of the Caxcanes.  24 Dec 2010 With his overwhelming force, Mendoza reduced the Indian strongholds one-by-one in a war of no quarter. On November 9, 1541, he captured the city of Nochistlan and Tenamaztle—but the Indian leader later escaped.  The aftermath of the Caxcan's defeat was that "thousands were dragged off in chains to the mines, and many of the survivors (mostly women and children) were transported from their homelands to work on Spanish farms and haciendas. "Sixteenth Century Indigenous Jalisco."  The reports of the excessive violence against civilian Indians caused the Council of the Indies to undertake a secret investigation into the conduct of the viceroy. Comas, Juan, Historical Reality and the Detractors of Father las Casas.  Bartolome de las Casas in History: Toward an understanding of the Man and his Work. Collecion special. CER. DeKalb: Northern Illinois U Press, p. 493
With the defeat, Tenamaztle and Guaxicar, another leader, and their followers retreated into the mountains of Nayarit where they lived in hiding for nine years. This area, primarily occupied by the Cora people, did not come under the complete control of the Spanish until 1722, the last bastion of Indian opposition to Spanish rule in Nueva Galicia. 46, p. 192  In 1551, Tenamaztle voluntarily surrendered to the Bishop of Nueva Galicia who brought him to Mexico City.  After an investigation, on August 12, 1552 Spanish authorities established his identity as the leader of the Caxcanes in the Mixton War and on November 17 he was ordered to be sent for trial to Spain. 21–22

Trial in Spain

In Spain, Tenamaztle was imprisoned in Valladolid and later took up residence in a Dominican monastery.  Here he met Bartolomé de las Casas who helped him plead his case. 1971. Bartolomé de las Casas: his life and writings. University of New Mexico Press. p. 191-2.  The wheels of justice rolled slowly and it was July 1, 1555 before he had an opportunity to present his case to the King and the Council of the Indies.
Tenamaztle's strategy  was to (1) establish that he was the rightful tlatoani of Nochistlan; (2) demonstrate that the Caxcan had received the Spanish in peace and that he should have all the rights of a vassal of the King of Spain; (3) accuse Nuño de Guzman, Cristobal de Oñate and Miguel de Ibarra of exploiting and murdering Indians;  and, (4) declare that the war of the Caxcanes was "natural justice" because of the abuses of the Spaniards.  He petitioned that his lands, wife, and children be returned to him. Alberto  The Debate about the Chichimeca War, 1531–1585. Zamora, Michoacan: El Colegio de Michoacan, 2000, pp.173–176
Tenamaztle asked the king to consider "the unparalleled wrongs and evils that the Caxcanes had endured at the hands of the Spanish" and said that the objective of the Indians was not to rebel but to "flee the inhuman cruelty to which they were subjected." The trial proceeded without decision for more than one year.  The last known document related to the trial is dated August 7, 1556.  Nothing more is known of the disposition of the case or of Tenamaztle.  He probably died in Spain. 175–176




