[[Trichuriasis]]

CATEGORIES: Helminthiases, Neglected diseases, Parasitic diseases

Trichuriasis also known as whipworm infection is an infection by the parasitic worm Trichuris trichiura (whipworm). Low red blood cell levels may occur due to loss of blood.
The disease is spread by people eating food or water that contains the eggs of these worms. The eggs are in the feces of people infected with the worms and the disease is most common in areas of the world where human feces are used as fertilizer. The worms live in the large bowel and are about four centimetres in length. Whipworm is diagnosed by seeing the eggs when examining the stool with a microscope.
Prevention is by properly cooking food and hand washing before cooking.
Whipworm infections affects about 600 to 800 million people. Work is ongoing to develop a vaccine against the disease.

Signs and symptoms

Mechanical damage to the mucosa may occur as well as toxic or inflammatory damage to the intestines of the host.

Cause

The phylum of Trichuris trichiura is Aschelminthes, its class is Adenophorea, its order is Stichosmida, and its family is Trichocephaloidea.  The genus was formerly known as Trichocephalus, a more accurate name; however the generic name is now Trichuris, which means "hair tail" (impying that the posterior end of the worm is the attenuated section).

Reservoir

Humans are the main, but not the only reservoir for T. trichiura. Recent research verified by the application of molecular techniques (PCR) that dogs are a reservoir forT. trichiura, as well as T. vulpis.

Vector

Non-biting cyclorrhaphan flies (Musca domestica, Chrysomya rufifacies, Musca sorbens, Lucina cuprina, Calliphora vicina, Chrysomya bezziana and Wohlfarthia magnifica) have been found to carry Trichuris trichiura. A study in two localized areas in Ethiopia found cockroaches were carriers for several human intestinal parasites, including Trichuris trichiura.

Transmission

Humans can become infected with the parasite due to ingestion of infective eggs by mouth contact with hands or food contaminated with egg-carrying soil. However, there have also been rare reported cases of transmission of trichuris trichiura by sexual contact. Some major outbreaks have been traced to contaminated vegetables (due to presumed soil contamination).

Life cycle

Unembryonated eggs (unsegmented) are passed in the feces of a previous host to the soil.  In the soil, these eggs develop into a 2-cell stage (segmented egg) and then into an advanced cleavage stage.  Once at this stage, the eggs embryonate and then become infective, a process that occurs in about 15 to 30 days).  Next, the infective eggs are ingested by way of soil-contaminated hands or food and hatch inside the small intestine, releasing larvae into the gastrointestinal tract.  These larvae burrow into a villus and develop into adults (over 2–3 days).  They then migrate into the cecum and ascending colon where they thread their anterior portion (whip-like end) into the tissue mucosa and reside permanently for their year-long life span.  About 60 to 70 days after infection, female adults begin to release unembryonated eggs (oviposit) into the cecum at a rate of 3,000 to 20,000 eggs per day, linking the life cycle to the start.

Incubation period

Morphology

Adult worms are usually 3–5 cm long, with females being larger than males as is typical of nematodes. The thin, clear majority of the body (the anterior, whip-like end) is the esophagus, and it is the end that the worm threads into the mucosa of the colon. The widened, pinkish gray region of the body is the posterior, and it is the end that contains the parasite's intestines and reproductive organs.
Trichuris trichiura eggs are prolate spheroids, the shape of the balls used in Rugby and Gridiron football. They are about 50-54 um long and have polar plugs (also known as refractile prominences) at each end.

Diagnosis

Trichuriasis can be diagnosed when T. trichiura eggs are detected in stool examination.  Eggs will appear barrel-shaped and unembryonated, having bipolar plugs and a smooth shell. Rectal prolapse can be diagnosed easily using defecating proctogram and is one of many methods for imaging the parasitic infection. Sigmoidoscopy show characteristic white bodies of adult hanging from inflamed mucosa (coconut cake rectum).

Prevention

Limited access to essential medicine poses a challenge to the eradication of trichuriasis worldwide.  Also, it is a public health concern that rates of post-treatment re-infection need to be determined and addressed to diminish the incidence of untreated re-infection.  Lastly, with mass drug administration strategies and improved diagnosis and prompt treatment, detection of emergence of antihelmintic drug resistance should be examined.
Improved facilities for feces disposal have decreased the incidence of whipworm. Handwashing before food handling, and avoiding ingestion of soil by thorough washing of food that may have been contaminated with egg-containing soil are other preventive measures. Mass Drug Administration (preventative chemotherapy) has had a positive effect on the disease burden of trichuriasis in East and West Africa, especially among children, who are at highest risk for infection. Improvement of Sewage and Sanitation systems, as well as improved facilities for feces disposal have helped to limit defecation onto soil and contain potentially infectious feces from bodily contact. A study in a Brazil Urban Centre demonstrated a significant reduction in prevalence and incidence of geohelminthinfection, including trichuriasis, following implementation of a city-wide sanitation program.  A 33% reduction in prevalence of trichuriasis and a 26% reduction in incidence of trichuriasis was found in the study performed on 890 children ages 7–14 years old within 24 different sentinel areas chosen to represent the varied environmental conditions throughout the city of Salvador, Bahia, Brazil.  Control of Soil Fertilizers has helped eliminate the potential for contact with human fecal matter in fertilizer in soil.
Infection can be avoided by proper disposal of human feces, avoiding fecal contamination of food, not eating dirt, and avoiding crops fertilized with night soil.  Simple and effective proper hygiene such as washing hands and food is recommended for control.

Management

The highest clearance rates are obtained by combining mebendazole or albendazole with ivermectin. Ivermectin's safety in children under 15 kg and pregnant women has not yet been established.
People with diarrhea may be treated with loperamide to increase the amount of drug contact with the parasites.
Mebendazole is 90% effective in the first dose, and albendazole may also be offered as an anti-parasitic agent. Adding iron to the bloodstream helps solve the iron deficiency and rectal prolapse. Difetarsone is also an effective treatment.

Epidemiology

