[[Hyacinthe Rigaud]]

CATEGORIES: 1659 births, 1743 deaths, 17th-century French painters, 18th-century French painters, French portrait painters, Prix de Rome for painting, French Baroque painters, Knights of the Order of Saint Michael

Hyacinthe Rigaud (18 July 1659 – 29 December 1743) was a French baroque painter of Catalan origin whose career was based in Paris.

Biography

Hyacinthe Rigaud was born in Perpignan (Pyrénées-Orientales), the grandson of painter-gilders from Roussillon and the elder brother of another painter (Gaspard). He was trained in tailoring in his father's workshop and perfected his skills under Antoine Ranc at Montpellier from 1671 onwards, before moving to Lyon four years later. It was in these cities that he became familiar with Flemish, Dutch and Italian painting, particularly that of Rubens, Van Dyck, Rembrandt and Titian, whose works he later collected. Arriving in Paris in 1681, he won the prix de Rome in 1682, but on the advice of Charles Le Brun did not make the trip to Rome to which this entitled him. Received into the Académie royale de peinture et de sculpture in 1700, he rose to the top of this institution before retiring from it in 1735.
Since Rigaud's paintings captured very exact likenesses along with the subject's costumes and background details, his paintings are considered precise records of contemporary fashions. 
Rigaud was born with the Catalan name Jyacintho Rigau or Jacint Rigau i Ros This is variously translated as  Híacint Francesc Honrat Mathias Pere Martyr Andreu Joan Rigauthere are reportedly other names (sources vary):  different last names at birth: Hyacinthe-François-Honoré-Mathias-Pierre Martyr-André Jean Rigau y Ros or François Hyacinthe Rigaud, or Hyacinthe Riguad and Hiacint Rigau, different first names at birth: Jyacintho, Francisco, Honorat, Matias, Pere, Martir, Andreu, and Joan  – in Perpignan, which became part of France by the Treaty of the Pyrenees (7 November 1659) shortly after his birth.
Rigaud was baptised with his Catalan name in the old cathédrale Saint-Jean de Perpignan on 20 July 1659, two days after his birth at rue de la Porte-d'Assaut. He would not have become French had not Roussillon and the Cerdanya been annexed to France the following 7 November thanks to the Treaty of the Pyrenees. That Treaty also put an end to the wars that had taken place between France and Habsburg Spain since 1635 and married King Louis XIV of France to the infanta Maria Theresa of Spain.

Family

Hyacinthe's father, Josep Matias Pere Ramon Rigau, was a tailor (sastre in Catalan) in the parish of Saint-Jean de Perpignan, "as well as a painter", descended from a line of well-established artists in the Perpignanian basin who had been commissioned to decorate several tabernacles and other panels for liturgical use. Few of these have survived to the present (Palau-del-Vidre, Perpignan, Montalba-d'Amélie, Joch...). Hyacinthe's grandfather, Jacinto major,died in 1631. On 25 July 1617, in the église de La Réal in Perpignan, he married Madalena Roat. She was the widow of Pera Roat and on 1 November 1634 remarried in the église Saint-Mathieu in Perpignan, to Antoni Balasco. and even more Jacinto's father, Honorat minor,His year of birth unknown, on 5 July 1617 in the église de La Réal in Perpignan he married Antiga Franch, widow of Antoni Franch were heads of the family and the local art world from 1570 to 1630 ; probably as much as gilders as painters,Julien Lugan, Peintres et doreurs en Roussillon aux XVIIe et XVIIIe siècles, Canet, éditions Trabucaire, 2006. since in their studios were to be found "many prints and books treating on the art of painting, and other things, such as brushes and palettes for painting".
Working for the collège Saint-Éloi in his city since 1560, and acting as representative of its guild of painters and gilders, on 22 November 1630 Jacinto major and other gilders and colleaguesJoan Antoni Marti, Guillem Andreu, Thomas Blat et Jaume Fuster participated in the development of the statutes and minutes of the city's collège Saint-Luc
. cit. p. 248. Honorat minor is generally identified as the painter of The Canonisation of Saint Hyacinthe, formerly in Perpignan's Dominican convent and now at Joch,After Marcel Durliat. Cited by Olivier Poisson, "Les Rigau (d)", in Terres Catalanes, n°10, March 1996, p. 54–55. the tabernacle of the church of Palau-del-Vidre (28 March 1609)25 ducats were paid to the painter for painting the tabernacle "inside and outside with ... good and living and fine colours". and the retable at Montalba near Amélie-les-Bains. The father of Honorat minor is generally identified as the painter of the retable at Saint-Ferréol (1623) in the église Saint-Jacques de Perpignan and formerly in the couvent des Minimes, whilst Honorat major is usually identified as the painter of the paintings of the retable of the église Saint-Jean-l'Évangéliste at Peyrestortes.O. Poisson, op. cit., p. 54.
On 13 March 1647 Hyacinthe's father Matias Rigau, married Thérèse Faget (1634–1655), daughter of a carpenter. The marriage contract was witnessed before Honoré Sunyer in Perpignan. Widowed shortly after, he decided to speedily remarry, to Maria Serra, daughter of a Perpignan textile merchant (pentiner in Catalan), on 20 December 1655. In 1665, he acquired a house "en lo carrer de las casas cremades" (now rue de l'Incendie, near the cathedral) and received the income from a parcel of vineyards in the Bompas territory. By his second marriage, he also acquired a house on place de l'Huile, but he soon sold it.

Journey to Lyon

Unfortunately, little is known about Rigaud's activities in Lyon, due to the lack of surviving documents. However, as per tradition, artists from Montpellier had strong ties with this city, as had, for example, Samuel Boissière who was trained in there, in Lyon.
Even if they had only been registered from 1681 onwards, the date when he moved to Paris, his "youthful" portraits were probably pre-dated, like those of Antoine Domergue, the king's councillor and provincial governor of Lyon, in 1686,
In her thesis on the engravers from the Drevet family, Catalogue de l'exposition Visages du Grand Siècle, le portrait français sous le règne de Louis XIV, Nantes-Toulouse, 1997, 1998, p. 42-43
In 1681, when Hyacinthe Rigaud decided to move to Paris, inspired by Drevet who was also attracted to the capital, he had already established a good reputation amongst the local clientele, from Switzerland to Aix-en-Provence. Ariane James-Sarazin, « Hyacinthe Rigaud et ces messieurs d'Aix-en-Provence », dans Bibliothèque de l'École des chartes, 2003, t. 161, p. 67-113.
Going back to the artist's biographie, Dezallier d'Argenville states that one of Rigaud's main reasons for his 1695 voyage was to paint his mother's portrait: "He painted her from many angles, and had her marble bust made by the notable Coysevox, which was his cabinet's ornament for the rest of his life". In his first will, dated 30 May 1707, the artist left the bust to the Grand Dauphin, Louis XIV's son, though the sculpture would then be left to the Academy which explains its presence in the Louvre. Also in the document, Rigaud bequeathed the portrait containing the two profiles of Maria Serra to the elder son of his brother Gaspard, named Hyacinthe.
In reality, Rigaud painted a second painting, bearing the three stances presented to Coysevox: an oval painting kept in a private collection, copied by Géricault, in Dijon, and the subject of one of Drevet's engravings. He also applied sketches of his sister Claire, accompanied by her husband and their first daughter, to the canvas.
The year 1695 also saw the production of two versions of Christ expiant sur la Croix, with a distinct Flemish influence, proof of Rigaud's rare incursion into the domain of historical depictions or the "great genre". He bequeathed his mother the first version which would then, at her death, be left to the Grands Augustins convent in Perpignan, and gave the second, in 1722, to the Dominican convent of his city of birth.
In spring 1696, Hyacinthe Rigaud returned to Paris, where he painted one of his most important portraits of the year. This was in fact sollicited by the duke of Saint-Simon, to depict Armand Jean le Bouthillier de Rancé, an abbot, using a skillful subterfuge that remains notable in the history of painting.
In 1709 he was made a noble by his hometown of Perpignan. In 1727 he was made a knight of the Order of Saint Michael.
Rigaud died in Paris in 1743 at the age of 84. 

Clientele

thumb|250px|Louis XIV King of France and Navarre by Hyacinthe Rigaud (1701), his most famous work. He was one of the most important portrait painter during the reign of King Louis XIV. His instinct for impressive poses and grand presentations precisely suited the tastes of the royal personages, ambassadors, clerics, courtiers, and financiers who sat for him. Rigaud owes his celebrity to the faithful support he received from the four generations of Bourbons whose portraits he painted. He garnered the core of his clientele among the richest circles as well as among the bourgeois, financiers, nobles, industrialists and government ministers, also courting all the major ambassadors of his time and several European monarchs. His œuvre reads as a near-complete portrait gallery of the chief movers in France from 1680 to 1740. Some of that œuvre (albeit a minority) also includes those of more humble origins - Rigaud's friends, fellow artists or simple businessmen.
Rigaud is inseparable from his best-known work, a 1701 painting of Louis XIV in his coronation costume which today hangs in the Louvre in Paris,Paris, musée du Louvre, Inv.7492) as well as the second copy also requested by Louis XIV that now hangs at the Palace of Versailles.Découverte du Château de Versailles: offre culturelle du Château de Versailles
He is renowned for his portrait paintings of Louis XIV, the royalty and nobility of Europe, and members of their courts and considered one of the most notable French portraitists of the classical period. For Jacques Thuillier, professor at the Collège de France: 
According to the French art historian Louis Hourticq, 
True "photographs",Antoine-Joseph Dezallier d'Argenville 1745, p. 318 faces that Diderot called "letters of recommendation written in the common language of all men",Jacques Proust, « Diderot et la Physiognomonie », CAIEF, 13, 1961, p.317–319. Rigaud's works today populate the world's major museums.

Legacy

Rigaud's works today populate the world's major museums. The exact number of paintings he produced remains in dispute, since he left a highly detailed catalogue but also more than a thousand different models which specialists agree he used. Hyacinthe Rigaud - Portrait d'une clientèle To these may be added the large number of copies in Rigaud's book of accounts, without even mentioning the hundreds of other paintings rediscovered since the accounts' publication in 1919. He also painted portraits of poets such as La Fontaine or Boileau, as well as religious figures such as the cardinal de Fleury and Bossuet; many influential archbishops and bishops paid large sums of money for a portrait.
In 1820, the Musée des beaux-arts Hyacinthe Rigaud in Perpignan, France, was dedicated to him. It is still open to the public and shows some of his work.

Selected works

Paintings

File:1713 - Robert de Cotte (Louvre).jpg
File:Régent Rigaud.jpg
File:Hyacinthe Rigaud - Louis de France, Dauphin (1661-1711), dit le Grand Dauphin - Google Art Project.jpg
File:Hyacinthe Rigaud - Gio. Francesco II Brignole-Sale - Google Art Project.jpg|Gian Francesco II Brignole Sale, Doge of Genoa
File:Le Brun par Rigaud.jpg|Portrait of Charles Le Brun
File:Duc de bourgogne.
File:Hyacinthe Rigaud (d'après) Louis XV.jpg|Portrait de Louis XV, (1727-1729), Versailles
File:1715 - Auguste III de Pologne.jpg|Augustus III of Poland
File:La Menasseuse 1709.jpg|La Menasseuse
Suzanne de Boubers de Bernâtre.JPG|Portrait of Suzanne de Bourbers de Bernâtre
File:Hyacinthe Rigaud (French - Charles de Saint-Albin, Archbishop of Cambrai - Google Art Project.jpg|Charles de Saint-Albin, Archbishop of Cambrai
File:François-Marie de Broglie.jpg|Portrait of the Duc de Broglie (1671-1745), half-length, in armor with a velvet-lined, leopard skin mantle and the Sash of the Order of Saint Esprit, the baton of a Marshal of France in his left hand




