[[Leslie Knope]]

CATEGORIES: Parks and Recreation characters, Fictional government officials, Fictional American people of German descent, Fictional characters introduced in 2009

Leslie Barbara Knope (; born January 18, 1975) is the central character in the NBC comedy Parks and Recreation. She is portrayed by Amy Poehler. 

Background

Leslie Knope was born on January 18, 1975 in Eagleton, Indiana and has lived in Pawnee, Indiana since infancy.  She was inspired to pursue a life of public service by the community programs she enjoyed as a child. While attending Pawnee North High School she served as Co-Vice President of the student body and participated in several student organizations including the Model United Nations, Debate Club, Mock Trial, Young Republicans, Young Democrats and Young Independents, which she founded. She graduated in the top five percent of her class and went to college at Indiana University's School of Public and Environmental Affairs (SPEA) and graduated summa cum laude.  
Currently Leslie is the Deputy Parks Director of Pawnee's parks and recreation department, a mid-level bureaucratic position, as well as being a member of the city council. In her role as Deputy Director she serves on several committees, including the Equal Opportunity Committee, the Fun in the Sun Committee, the Clean Restroom Task Force, the Handicapped Restroom Task Force and the Task Force to Reduce the Number of Public Restrooms. She hopes to improve her town and to advance her career (possibly aiming to become the City Manager).  She has also stated her ultimate goal of becoming the first female President of the United States.  Knope proudly displays in her office images of Hillary Rodham Clinton, Madeleine Albright, Condoleezza Rice, Janet Reno, Nancy Pelosi, and Larry Bird. Leslie also has a love for sweets, especially whipped cream, as she usually adds excessively large amounts to coffee, waffles and other food.

Personality

Leslie Knope is extremely cheerful, ambitious, hard-working and optimistic. She is firmly committed to the belief that government should provide a service for its people, and regularly goes above and beyond for the benefits of Pawnee's residents - a belief that regularly clashes with her superior Ron Swanson, a staunch libertarian who feels all government should be privatized. but is not always successful in executing her goals. She repeatedly tries to put a positive spin on failure, even to the point that she will occasionally distort the truth in her own view. For example, she does not get discouraged by angry residents who complain or yell during her public forums, but instead prefers to think of them as "people caring loudly at me". Many of her co-workers do not share her enthusiasm, but Leslie seems to command their respect. Her ambition occasionally annoys her colleagues and leads to ribbing against her, especially from her subordinate Tom Haverford. Leslie views herself as a budding political star in the style of Hillary Rodham Clinton, Nancy Pelosi, and Condoleezza Rice. She has an outsized love for the waffles at a local diner and an untempered hatred for public libraries, salads, and the wealthy neighboring town of Eagleton -— which Leslie found out, to her sheer horror, was actually her birthplace instead of Pawnee.

Storyline

Season One

Initially she is shown to carry romantic feelings for her co-worker Mark, likely stemming from a romantic liaison with him several years before. She is also desperate to impress her mother Marlene who is a well-known politician in the Pawnee government. At a public forum she meets Ann Perkins, who informs her about a gaping hole near her house that her boyfriend, Andy Dwyer fell into. Leslie takes on the project and quickly becomes friends with Ann. She is sometimes pushed around by her mom, a tough and tactless woman who has had a long and successful career in local government and who doesn't think much of her daughter's professional or personal choices.

Season Two

Knope seems to move on from her romantic interest in Mark and begins dating police officer Dave Sanderson (Louis C.K.). She also begins taking charge and gains a lot of confidence. Also more of her relationships with her coworkers are shown. Towards the end of the season Dave, who was enlisted in the US Army Reserve, was called into active duty in San Diego, where he will be doing custodial work. Dave asked Leslie to move with him to San Diego, and although she was considering it, she ultimately declined because she loved her work and Pawnee too much to leave, and they parted ways amicably. She then dated an old lawyer friend of Ann's named Justin.  Although Justin seemed to be a perfect guy and had many interesting stories, Leslie soon realized that stories were all Justin cared about.  After he reunited Leslie's mother with an old flame despite Leslie's constant protests, she broke up with him, as Justin cared more about the reunion story that he could potentially tell than Leslie.

Season Three

In this season Leslie works on the Harvest Festival in hopes of bringing money to Pawnee. She and Ben are no longer at odds and develop a friendly working relationship. After hearing a flu-ridden Leslie give an amazing speech, Ben begins to develop a crush on Leslie and as the season progresses, they grow to genuinely enjoy each other's company. However, their budding relationship is threatened by Chris's interoffice dating rules, and they attempt to keep their romance under wraps, despite telling Ann, Ron, Leslie's mother, and a maintenance worker at the Lil' Sebastian memorial service. In the season finale, Leslie is approached by a group of people who look for talent in government with the potential for political careers. They tell Leslie that they believe she has the potential to become a member of city council, or even the mayor. They ask Leslie if there is any potential for scandal in her background to which Leslie replies (having decided to continue her secret romance with Ben   while not at work) "Nope."

Season Four

Leslie comes to realize that while she is running for city council, her relationship with Ben cannot continue, and they regretfully break up. Leslie then announces her city council candidacy. Leslie writes a book called Pawnee: The Greatest Town in America. She also finds out that she was actually born in Eagleton because her mother said the Pawnee hospital had been overrun by raccoons. Leslie and Ben struggle with being broken up; Leslie wants to remain friends with Ben, but he tells her it's just too hard for him. Leslie finally decides she wants to be with Ben, no matter the consequences, and they get back together. Ben resigns from his position in order to save Leslie from getting fired. Her campaign managers inform her that they can no longer run her campaign because her approval ratings are dismally low after the news of her relationship with Ben was revealed. The rest of the Parks employees (and Ann), on a mission to return the love Leslie's shown in giving the perfect gifts she has gotten them all year after year, tell Leslie that they will run her campaign for her, allowing her to continue going after her dream. After several tumultuous months, Leslie wins her election by 21 votes.

Season Five

In the beginning of the season, she and Ben get engaged and move into a house together. She and Ben get married in the middle of the season, months earlier than the couple had originally planned. A main plot point of the season is the campaign to recall Leslie from her position of the city council; it is revealed that the campaign is successful, and Leslie will be removed from her position.

Season Six

Leslie is a key member in the absorbing of Eagleton into Pawnee because of a debt problem in Eagleton. After a heroic filibuster which wins the citizens of former Eagleton voting rights, Leslie is recalled and replaced with her Eagletonian counterpart, Ingrid de Forest (Kristen Bell). Leslie gets the lot and park for the Pawnee Commons after a heated debate between her and Councilman Jamm, in return for five worthless IOU's from Chris (who was soon leaving his post as City Manager). In Flu Season 2, Leslie discovers that she is pregnant. In One in 8,000 after a visit to a doctor Ben and Leslie find out that they are going to have triplets. Soon after, the Unity Concert is nearing, and Leslie is offered a position in the National Parks Service, in Chicago. Leslie eventually accepts, but then declines in favor of heading the Midwest Parks Service in Pawnee. Three years from the end of season six, Leslie and Ben have three children, and Leslie is the head of the Parks Service.

Development

The concept for Parks and Recreation did not start to form until series creators Greg Daniels and Michael Schur learned Poehler would be available to play the lead character. Once that casting was determined, the general concept for both the series and the Leslie Knope character were established. Schur said that the show considered a backstory element for Leslie where she had been elected mayor while a teenager; this story was later used for the Ben Wyatt character.
Amy Poehler said by the third season, after the Parks Department has been shut down for three months due to a budget crisis, Leslie has started to face reality more clearly and realize the department is a low priority.

Critical reception

She was listed in AfterEllen.
Poehler has garnered four Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series, three Golden Globe Award nominations and a 2013 Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for her role. In 2014 she won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a TV Series - Comedy or Musical for her portrayal of Leslie Knope.

Season one

Despite poor reviews of the show one fairly consistent source of praise went to Amy Poehler for her performance as Leslie Knope. Tom Shales of the Washington Post writes that "Poehler's show unfortunately isn't worthy of her".com. Retrieved December 14, 2009.  Daniel Carlson of the Hollywood Reporter also had praise for Poehler claiming that she "has the comic intelligence to carry a series like this one"  and delivers a performance that is "awkward but not alienating" and "eager without being repelling".hollywoodreporter.story However, several commentators said the naive and well-meaning Leslie Knope character too closely resembled The Office protagonist Michael Scott, a well-intentioned but dimwitted protagonist manager of a paper company sales office.

Season two

James Poniewozik of Time magazine praised the development of the characters. He thought that the show has a "handle now" on the main character Leslie Knope, and does an "excellent job of finding things for its supporting characters". He also opined that the series is "living up to its potential now".

Season three

By season three, Paste magazine writer Garrett Martin called Leslie "one of the most relatable and admirable women on television".




