[[Gas van]]

CATEGORIES: Infrastructure of the Holocaust, Execution equipment, Einsatzgruppen, NKVD, Vans

The gas van or gas wagon ( It was later widely implemented as an extermination method in Nazi Germany to kill enemies of the regime, mostly Jews."Gas Wagons: The Holocaust's mobile gas chambers", an article of Nizkor Project

Invention and use in Soviet Union

The gas van was invented in the Soviet UnionЕ. Жирнов. «По пути следования к месту исполнения приговоров отравлялись газом». Коммерсантъ Власть, № 44, 2007. Н. Петров. «Человек в кожаном фартуке». Новая газета, спецвыпуск «Правда ГУЛАГа» от 02.08.2010 № 10 (31). in 1936, presumably by Isay Berg, the head of the administrative and economic department of the NKVD of Moscow Oblast which suffocated batches of prisoners with engine fumes in a camouflaged bread van while on the drive out to the mass graves at Butovo, where the prisoners were subsequently buried. According to Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn:
However, according to historian Lydia Golovkova, Berg denied that he was inventor of the gas van, and his authorship has never been proven. А.Ватлин "Террор районного масштаба: "массовые операции" НКВД в Кунцевском районе Московской области в 1937 - 1938 гг.", 2004.

Use in Nazi Germany

During trips to Russia in 1941, Heinrich Himmler learned the psychological impact on the Einsatzgruppen killers posed by the shooting of women and children. Hence, he commissioned Arthur Nebe to explore ways of killing that were less stressful for the killers. Nebe's experiments eventually led to the utilization of the gas van. Browning This vehicle had already been used in 1940 for the gassing of East Prussian and Pomeranian mental patients in Soldau, a camp located in the former Polish corridor.Saul Friedländer.  The Years of Extermination: Nazi Germany and the Jews, 1939-1945, HarperCollins, 2007, p. 234 ISBN 978-0-06-019043-9
One application of the Nazis' gas van became known in 1943 after the trial of members of crimes against humanity committed in the territory of the Krasnodar Territory of the USSR, where about 7,000 civilians were killed by gas poisoning.
It was a vehicle with an airtight compartment for victims, into which exhaust gas was piped while the engine was running. As a result, the victims were gassed with carbon monoxide, resulting in death by the combined effects of carbon monoxide poisoning and suffocation. The suffocations usually occurred as the gas van was carrying the victims to a freshly dug pit or ravine for mass burial.
Gas vans were used, particularly at Chełmno extermination camp, until gas chambers were developed as a more efficient method for killing large numbers of people. There were two types of gas vans in operation, used by the Einsatzgruppen in the East. The Opel-Blitz, weighting 3.5 tons, and the larger Saurerwagen, weighing 7 tonnes. In Belgrade, the gas van was known as "Dušegupka"  and in the occupied parts of the USSR similarly as "душегубка" (dushegubka, literally (feminine) soul killer/exterminator).
The use of gas vans had two disadvantages:
By June 1942 the main producer of gas vans, Gaubschat Fahrzeugwerke GmbH, had delivered 20 gas vans in two models (for 30–50 and 70–100 individuals) to Einsatzgruppen, out of 30 ordered. Not one gas van was extant at the end of the war. The existence of gas vans first came to light in 1943 during the trial of Nazi collaborators involved in the gassing of 6,700 civilians in Krasnodar. The total number of gas van gassings is unknown.
The gas vans are extensively discussed in some of the interviews in Claude Lanzmann's film, Shoah.








