[[Clipping the church]]

CATEGORIES: Christianity in England, Easter traditions

Clipping the church is an ancient custom that is traditionally held on Easter Monday or Shrove Tuesday in the United Kingdom. The word "clipping" is Anglo-Saxon in origin, and is derived from the word "clyppan", meaning "embrace" or "clasp".

History

Little is known about the history of clipping. It was rumored to have origins in some type of Pagan custom, but nothing has been substantiated. Even allowing for adaptation, what is known is clearly a Christian tradition. The earliest known written mention of it dates from 1825 in a description of the ceremony given by "L.S."
in The Every-day Book, a recounted memory of his childhood.
At St Peter's Church in Tankersley, Barnsley in the diocese of Sheffield the service of Cyppings is held annually on the second Sunday following St Peter's day (29 June).  Yeclepping is an ancient term meaning 'embracing'.  Christians adopted this tradition to show their love for their church and the surrounding people. There are not many parishes that honour this ancient custom and all of them appear to honour it on a different day. It would appear that that some parishes observe this tradition on around the time of their Patronal festival and at St Peter's; in Tankersley the Rector revived the tradition.  The feast is celebrated on the 2nd Sunday following St Peter's day (29 June).  The reason for this is not far to seek. When the new 'Kalendar' was changed, by omitting 11 days, the good people of Tankersley neglected (or did they refuse) to change the time-honoured day of their festival.  Another important fact was that in the year of 1800, it was not considered a leap year and this interjected another day.
At Tankersley, there is a service held in the parish church followed by the congregation trouping out to form a ring around the church,  They sing a Hymn played by a Trumpeter and in the case of St Peters' of Tankersley it is the hymn 'We Love thy place o God'.  A prayer is then said with the congregation facing the church and then the congregation all face outwards to the world where they pray for the wider community and the world.
Tankersley Church is built on foundations of an earlier place of worship which goes back to Saxon times.  (indeed the battle of Tankersley Moor (in Oliver Cromwell's days) was fought in this area and a cannonball from this battle is on show in the church. There is also a mention of a Rector of Tankersley in the Domesday Book.
St Andrew's Church, Wissett have revived the tradition of Clipping since about 1995. When the church is fully embraced, people from Wissett and the wider benefice sing Lord of the Dance. The church is clipped annually on Shrove Tuesday and this is followed by a serving of cordon bleu pancakes in the village hall.org.
At the Church of St Lawrence at Rode, Somerset the circle face inwards dancing left and right before rushing towards the church with a cheer.




