[[Goddess of the Market]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 books, American biographies, Books about Ayn Rand, English-language books, History of libertarianism, Oxford University Press books, Works about Objectivism (Ayn Rand)

Goddess of the Market is a biography of Ayn Rand by historian Jennifer Burns. Subtitled "Ayn Rand and the American Right", it explores Rand's intellectual development and her relationship to the conservative and libertarian movements. The writing of her books and the development of her philosophy of Objectivism are also covered.

Background and publication history

Burns spent eight years working on the book, which began as a dissertation for her doctoral degree from the University of California at Berkeley. In the process of writing the book, Burns became the first independent historian given access to the Ayn Rand Archives, a collection of Rand's personal papers hosted by the Ayn Rand Institute.

Contents

The book is divided into four main sections. The first, titled "The Education of Ayn Rand, 1905–1943", covers Rand's life and intellectual development from birth until the publication of her novel The Fountainhead. The second, "From Novelist to Philosopher, 1944–1957" covers the period in which she wrote her last novel, Atlas Shrugged. The third section, "Who Is John Galt? 1957–1968", discusses the growth of the Objectivist movement based on Rand's philosophy, and her relationship and eventual break with her protégé Nathaniel Branden. The final section, "Legacies", covers the final years of Rand's life and the continuing reaction to her after her death. Burns also includes an "Essay on Sources" describing the scholarship about Rand and her own use of the Ayn Rand Archives.

Reception

The book has received generally positive reviews. Booklist described it as a "thoroughly engaging biography" and "eminently readable".
Several of the reviews compared the book with another biography of Rand, Ayn Rand and the World She Made by Anne Heller, which focuses on the details of Rand's life, in contrast to the intellectual history focused on by Burns. In a review for The New York Times, Janet Maslin said the two books "make many of the same points and touch on many of the same biographical details", although Maslin prefers Heller's book for its greater detail.
On October 15, 2009, Burns was interviewed about the book on The Daily Show. Host Jon Stewart said it was "incredible timing" for the book to be released at a time when Rand was experiencing a "resurgence ... in the culture", a reference to the popularity of Rand's writing among contemporary conservatives, including the Tea Party movement.



Notes






