[[Paulie Gilmore]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, American male professional wrestlers, People from Boston, Massachusetts

James E. Allen is an American professional wrestler and promoter, best known by his ringname "Big" Paulie Gilmore or Gilmorea, who wrestled on the New England independent circuit for the Century Wrestling Alliance, the National Wrestling Alliance, the Millennium Wrestling Federation and the World Wrestling Alliance during the 1990s and early 2000s. He is also the owner of New World Wrestling, a small promotion based in southeastern Massachusetts, which was formerly associated with NWA New England from 2004 to 2005.
He is best remembered as Trooper Gilmore, a popular super heavyweight "fan favorite", in both the original Century Wrestling Alliance and NWA New England where he was a main rival of "heel" wrestler Tony Rumble. He also won the NWA New England Tag Team Championship with The Outpatient as Criminally Insane and Corporal Robinson as 5-0. He was an ally of MWF Tag Team Champions Todd Hanson & Beau Douglas during their feud with Ox Baker's MWF stable Ox's Army and, in NWW, twice won the promotion's tag team titles with Jimmy "Jact" Cash and Brutus "the Barber" Beefcake. He has also been a frequent opponent of King Kong Bundy and Abdullah the Butcher when touring the Northeastern United States.

Career

Century Wrestling Alliance (1996-1998)

James E. Allen made his debut in 1994 and spent a brief time on the local independent circuit prior to joining the Century Wrestling Alliance in 1996. It was in the CWA that he would become a mainstay as Trooper Gilmore for over a decade.

NWA New England (1998-2001)

Allen remained with the promotion as it joined the National Wrestling Alliance as NWA New England in 1998. He would, however, make appearances for the Universal Wrestling Alliance and Unified Championship Wrestling during the late-1990s. On June 7, 1998, he and Joel Davis lost to "Big" Val Puccio in a handicap match at the Devine Ice Arena in Dorchester, Massachusetts. He also wrestled Joe Gulla, one half of the House of Pain with Frank Gulli, later that night.
On February 12, 1999, Allen won his first major title when he defeated Curtis Slamdawg for the NWA New England Heavyweight Championship in Mansfield, Massachusetts,
On June 22, 2000, Allen lost to Mike Johnson in a match to determine the first NWA New England Brass Knuckles Champion in Somerville,
In early-2001, Allen was awarded NWA New England Television Championship by his then manager and former champion Bull Montana on NWA New England Spotlight. He lost the title to Beau Douglas who beat him in a televised match in May 2001. Allen then formed a tag team with former rival The Outpatient, calling themselves Criminally Insane, and defeated Zak Mason & Chris Charisma for the vacant NWA New England Tag Team Championship at the Knights of Columbus Hall in Wakefield, Massachusetts on July 21, 2001. This was during the promotion's Summer Sizzler Tour. He also appeared at a weekend event at Killer Kowalski's Institute of Professional Wrestling on August 10. Among those present included Frankie Kazarian, Jason Rumble, Vinnie Capelli, John Rodeo and The Ark Angels (Damon D'Arcangelo and Phoenix King). He and The Outpatient would hold the titles for over three months before dropping the belts to Trailer Park Trash ("Dirty" Deuce Malone and "The Scrub" Steve Sabo) in Woburn, Massachusetts on October 27, 2001.

Independent circuit and New World Wrestling (2002-2004)

Allen branched out to other parts of the country during the first half of 2002, mostly in other National Wrestling Alliance-affiliated promotions in the Eastern United States and in Florida. In February 2002, he entered the Best of the Best Tournament, co-promoted by NWA East and NWA Tri-State, but was eliminated by Nikita Allanov in the opening rounds in Titusville, Pennsylvania.
In the spring of 2003, he made several appearances for Ultimate Championship Wrestling. On March 2, he was pinned by UCW Television Champion "Nature Boy" Gary Gold in a triple threat match with "Iceberg" Sonny D. at Club Escapades in Raynham, Massachusetts. Three weeks later at a local high school in Canton, Massachusetts, Allen joined La Familia members Tony Cianci and Vinny Giuliani in a 6-man tag team match against Paco Rivera, D.C. Dillon and "Diehard" Eddie Edwards which ended in a double-disqualification. One of his last appearance was at the Family Center in Braintree, Massachusetts in which he and Apocalypse lost to UCW Tag Team Champions Beau Douglas & Todd Hansen.
In late-2003, Allen formed his own promotion, New World Wrestling, and appeared at its first show held on December 6, 2003. Shortly afterwards, Allen dropped his former in-ring persona of Trooper Gilmore to return "to his Italian roots" and began wrestling under the name "Big" Paulie Gilmore (or Gilmorea). He soon formed a tag team with Jimmy "Jact" Cash known as Men of Business and, on July 25, 2004, lost to The Millennium Killaz (Gino Martino and Ali Mohammed) in a match to crown the first NWW Tag Team Champions. The titles were vacated later that year when Ali Mohammed suffered a near-career ending injury, a cracked tibiae and torn ligaments, during a match with Allen for Ultimate Championship Wrestling in Attleboro, Massachusetts.
Returning to NWA New England for the 2004 Tony Rumble Memorial Show in Sanford, Maine, he and Mark Moment lost to The Rough Ryders (Nixx and Raines) in a triple threat match with The Elite (Sonny Roselli and Larry Huntley) for the NWA New England Tag Team titles. The following night in Bellingham, Massachusetts, Allen won the vacant NWW Tag Team Championship in a match against The Widowmaker & "Dangerous" Donny Rotten. Anthony "Spaz" Parziale, an on-air radio personality for WAAF, was the cornerman for Men of Business. They lost the titles to Southern Extreme (Widowmaker and The Texas Outlaw) in Attleboro on August 20, 2005. That same night, Allen became the first NWW SuperCrush Battle Royal Champion and held the title until it was won by Pierre Vachon almost two years later.

Millennium Wrestling Federation and NWA New England (2005-2006)

In 2005, Allen debuted in the Millennium Wrestling Federation with manager Bull Montana and allied himself with MWF Tag Team Champions Todd Hanson & Beau Douglas in their feud with Ox Baker's stable Ox Baker's Army (The Outpatient, Pierre "The Beast" Vachon & The Islanders). He also soon found himself subject to a kayfabe vendetta by MWF Commissioner Dr. Von Johnson who would force him to wrestle increasing difficult opponents and stipulations. At the Road to the Gold supercard, Allen lost to The Outpatient and, the following month at Halloween Horror, had to wrestle The Islanders in handicap match.
He also began teaming with Apocalypse, then under the name Corporal Robinson,

New World Wrestling (2007-)

After nearly two years, the NWW SuperCrush Battle Royal Championship was won by Pierre Vachon in Sandwich, Massachusetts on March 31, 2007. On March 11, 2008, he was interviewed on the internet radio show In Your Head in which he discussed his career and promoted New World Wrestling's upcoming tour of Cape Cod. On March 29, Allen defeated Brickhouse Baker at the Plymouth Community Intermediate School in Plymouth, Massachusetts. Allen and Beefcake were stripped of the titles following the event. Since neither team had a tag team partner "authorized by NWW Board of Directors", according to NWW Commissioner Steve Burgundy, the titles were declared vacant and would be filled at a later date.
On January 17, 2009, Allen wrestled APCW Heavyweight Champion "Bionic" Dan Bidondi in an event for Action Packed Championship Wrestling at the American Legion Hall in Seekonk, Massachusetts. This was Bidondi's first title defense since winning the title from "Nature Boy" Gary Gold who had also been suspended from the promotion with his manager Johnny Fabulous.

Championships and accomplishments






