[[Ununoctium]]

CATEGORIES: Chemical elements, Noble gases, Synthetic elements, Ununoctium

Ununoctium is the temporary IUPAC name for the transactinide element with the atomic number 118 and temporary element symbol Uuo. It is also known as eka-radon or element 118, and on the periodic table of the elements it is a p-block element and the last one of the 7th period. Ununoctium is currently the only synthetic member of group 18. It has the highest atomic number and highest atomic mass of all the elements discovered so far.
The radioactive ununoctium atom is very unstable, due to its high mass, and since 2005, only three or possibly four atoms of the isotope 294Uuo have been detected. While this allowed for very little experimental characterization of its properties and possible compounds, theoretical calculations have resulted in many predictions, including some unexpected ones. For example, although ununoctium is a member of Group 18, it may possibly not be a noble gas, unlike all the other Group 18 elements. It was formerly thought to be a gas but is now predicted to be a solid under normal conditions due to relativistic effects.

History

Unsuccessful synthesis attempts

In late 1998, Polish physicist Robert Smolańczuk published calculations on the fusion of atomic nuclei towards the synthesis of superheavy atoms, including ununoctium. His calculations suggested that it might be possible to make ununoctium by fusing lead with krypton under carefully controlled conditions.
In 1999, researchers at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory made use of these predictions and announced the discovery of livermorium and ununoctium, in a paper published in Physical Review Letters, The researchers reported to have performed the reaction
The following year, they published a retraction after researchers at other laboratories were unable to duplicate the results and the Berkeley lab itself was unable to duplicate them as well. Physicsworld. Retrieved on 2012-04-02.

Discovery reports

The first decay of atoms of ununoctium was observed at the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research (JINR) by Yuri Oganessian and his group in Dubna, Russia, in 2002.
In 2011, IUPAC evaluated the 2006 results of the Dubna-Livermore collaboration and concluded: "The three events reported for the Z = 118 isotope have very good internal
redundancy but with no anchor to known nuclei do not satisfy the criteria for discovery".
Because of the very small fusion reaction probability (the fusion cross section is 
In the experiments, the alpha-decay of three atoms of ununoctium was observed. A fourth decay by direct spontaneous fission was also proposed. A half-life of 0.89 ms was calculated: .
The identification of the  ions,
and checking that the 
In a quantum-tunneling model, the alpha decay half-life of 

Naming

Until the 1960s ununoctium was known as eka-emanation (emanation is the old name for radon). In 1979 the IUPAC published recommendations according to which the element was to be called ununoctium, a systematic element name, as a placeholder until the discovery of the element is confirmed and the IUPAC decides on a name.
Before the retraction in 2002, the researchers from Berkeley had intended to name the element ghiorsium (Gh), after Albert Ghiorso (a leading member of the research team).
The Russian discoverers reported their synthesis in 2006. In 2007, the head of the Russian institute stated the team were considering two names for the new element: flyorium, in honor of Georgy Flyorov, the founder of the research laboratory in Dubna; and moskovium, in recognition of the Moscow Oblast where Dubna is located.
No name has yet been officially suggested for the element as no claims for discovery have yet been accepted by the IUPAC. According to current guidelines from IUPAC, the ultimate name for all new elements should end in "-ium", which means the name for ununoctium will almost certainly end in "-ium", not "-on", even if ununoctium turns out to be a noble gas, which traditionally have names ending in "-on" (with the exception of helium, which was not known to be a noble gas when it was discovered).

Characteristics

Nucleus stability and isotopes

The stability of nuclei decreases greatly with the increase in atomic number after plutonium, the heaviest primordial element, so that all isotopes with an atomic number above 101 decay radioactively with a half-life under a day, with an exception of dubnium-268. No elements with atomic numbers above 82 (after lead) have stable isotopes.
Calculations using a quantum-tunneling model predict the existence of several neutron-rich isotopes of ununoctium with alpha-decay half-lives close to 1 ms.
Theoretical calculations done on the synthetic pathways for, and the half-life of, other isotopes have shown that some could be slightly more stable than the synthesized isotope 294Uuo, most likely 293Uuo, 295Uuo, 296Uuo, 297Uuo, 298Uuo, 300Uuo and 302Uuo.

Calculated atomic and physical properties

Ununoctium is a member of group 18, the zero-valence elements. The members of this group are usually inert to most common chemical reactions (for example, combustion) because the outer valence shell is completely filled with eight electrons. This produces a stable, minimum energy configuration in which the outer electrons are tightly bound. It is thought that similarly, ununoctium has a closed outer valence shell in which its valence electrons are arranged in a 7s27p6 configuration.
Consequently, some expect ununoctium to have similar physical and chemical properties to other members of its group, most closely resembling the noble gas above it in the periodic table, radon.
Following the periodic trend, ununoctium would be expected to be slightly more reactive than radon. However, theoretical calculations have shown that it could be quite reactive, so that it probably cannot be considered a noble gas.
Ununoctium is expected to have by far the broadest polarizability of all elements before it in the periodic table, and almost twofold of radon. By extrapolating from the other noble gases, it is expected that ununoctium has a boiling point between 320 and 380 K. This is very different from the previously estimated values of 263 K and as the liquid range of the other gases is very narrow, between 2 and 9 kelvins, this element should be solid at standard conditions. If ununoctium forms a gas under standard conditions nevertheless, it would be one of the densest gaseous substances at standard conditions (even if it is monatomic like the other noble gases).
Because of its tremendous polarizability, ununoctium is expected to have an anomalously low ionization energy (similar to that of lead which is 70% of that of radon and significantly smaller than that of flerovium) and a standard state condensed phase.

Predicted compounds

No compounds of ununoctium have been synthesized yet, but calculations on theoretical compounds have been performed since 1964. nevertheless, this appears not to be the case.
Calculations on the diatomic molecule  by 0.16 Å, which would be indicative of a significant bonding interaction. On the other hand, the compound UuoH+ exhibits a dissociation energy (in other words proton affinity of Uuo) that is smaller than that of RnH+.
The bonding between ununoctium and hydrogen in UuoH is predicted to be very limp and can be regarded as a pure van der Waals interaction rather than a true chemical bond. On the other hand, with highly electronegative elements, ununoctium seems to form more stable compounds than for example copernicium or flerovium. The stable oxidation states +2 and +4 have been predicted to exist in the fluorides  ununoctium was predicted to be sufficiently electropositive to form a Uuo–Cl bond with chlorine.



Notes



Further reading




