[[Eureka (Eureka Seven)]]

CATEGORIES: Eureka Seven, Eureka Seven characters, Fictional aviators, Fictional avatars, Fictional mass murderers, Fictional child soldiers, Fictional women soldiers and warriors, Female characters in anime and manga

 is a central character in the Eureka Seven series, being the female protagonist in the first series and the mother of the male protagonist in its sequel. She is referred to in the first series episode previews simply as "the girl".

Character outline

Eureka is a girl created by the Scub Coral also called a coralian. She has pale skin, medium-length turquoise hair, and lavender eyes, and wears a blue and white one-piece dress. Eureka is a member of Gekkostate and the pilot of the Nirvash typeZERO, which she treats as an intelligent being and companion rather than a machine. She suffers from frequent headaches, which stop after Renton arrives, but later restart as her connection with the typeZERO becomes strained.
Eureka goes through a physical and emotional change after she comes in contact with the Scub Coral at the LFO dig site. 
Later in the series it is revealed that she was sent by the Scub Coral in human form to gather information about the human race. A clean slate to experience everything in 'similar' human life, information that can be passed to the Scub Coral to learn from humanity. The reason why the Scub Coral did this was because the humans (from 10,000 years ago) were scared about the contact with the Scub Coral (since they didn't know that it was a sentient life form) and left the planet. That's why she doesn't have any prior knowledge of humans or her own identity before the time of her discovery.
The contanct with the Scub Coral is a turning point in her relationship with Renton, because Renton feels responsible for the event to happen in the first place. During the time he left the Gekko, she begins to think about the feelings she has for him and realizes she wants to be with him forever. Upon his return, they enter in a relationship and are always seen together. Although she tends to be naïve over how Renton tries to bond with her, their relationship is able to make seemingly miraculous events occur, such as going to Earth and saving the world from the Limit of Questions.
In Eureka Seven: AO (about seven to ten years later after the ending of the first series), she has two children with Renton: An unnamed daughter who died shortly after she was born, and a boy they named Ao. During both pregnancies, Eureka was transported into the past; after Ao's birth, she was forced to leave her son behind in order to save the "past" world from a great calamity. In AO, she had become human-like and is always seen smiling, and is a loving wife and mother.

Relationships

Renton Thurston

Renton is Eureka's co-pilot and soul mate. Renton and Eureka's relationship goes through many changes throughout the story. It begins with Renton having a crush on Eureka, who crashes into Axel Thurston's garage, and Eureka, who didn't understand human nature and emotions at the time, didn't reciprocate his feelings. She is one of the main reasons that Renton joins Gekkostate. Over time, Renton starts to understand how his role affects Eureka and the typeZERO, and he vows to protect her. As she comes to realize how much Renton means to her, she begins to fall in love with him and discovers a desire to make him happy with her. After knowing the truth about her origins, she's scared that Renton will leave her because of that but this doesn't matter for Renton because he simply doesn't care about her origins and it is his acceptance of everything about her that leads to a strong bond of trust between them. Eureka never formally marries Renton, but the family record book that Axel carries around lists her as "Eureka Thurston". In Eureka Seven: AO, Eureka and Renton finally married and had two biological children: a daughter, who died shortly after birth, and a son named Ao.

Maurice, Maeter, and Linck

Maurice, Maeter, and Linck are children rescued from Ciudades del Cielo while Eureka and Holland were still in the Special Forces. As she killed their families prior to realizing what she done, Eureka took them and became a foster mother to them. Before Renton serves as a male role model for the kids and shows Eureka how to discipline them, they are often unruly and disobedient. They love Eureka very much, and tease Renton and sometimes cause trouble for Gekkostate. In the end, Eureka, Renton and the kids consider themselves a real family.

Holland Novak

Eureka joined Holland's Special Forces squad when she was found next to the typeZERO and proved to be the perfect pilot for it. Holland thought of himself as Eureka's partner, but Norb stated that Eureka will have a partner other than Holland and Dewey. He said that her true partner will be the boy that can make her smile from her heart. Still, Holland protects Eureka from harm and does not accept Renton as her partner until the end of season two. Because of his treatment towards Renton, their relationship is sometimes a little strained.

Ao Fukai

Ao is the son of Eureka and Renton. While pregnant with her son, Eureka was forced into the past by Renton in order to save her, and she fell from the sky on the Okinawa island, and gave birth to Ao soon afterwards. Eureka and Renton decided to name their son Ao Thurston before his birth. She raised Ao for the first two years of his life, but she was later taken away by the American Forces, never to be seen again. It is later revealed that she is in limbo between worlds due to merging with the Quartz in order to protect Ao. Ao then decides to save her by going back in time to reunite her with his father, and return them to their world. From Ao's memories and in later episodes, Eureka loved her son dearly and was saddened to leave him.

The Thurston family

After Eureka was found, Axel Thurston took part in building new technologies for the typeZERO. Adroc Thurston assists Eureka until his mysterious disappearance (he is later revealed to have been with the Scub Corals). Renton also introduces Eureka to his sister, Diane Thurston, later in the series. Eureka is listed as "Eureka Thurston" in the family record book that Axel is reading at the end of episode 50, implying she took Renton's last name.[ref]
| relatives    = Renton Thurston (Partner/Husband) Maurice (Adoptive son) Maeter (Adoptive daughter) Linck (Adoptive son)
[/ref]In Eureka Seven: AO, she and Renton are officially married and become parents to two biological children: an unnamed daughter and a son, Ao.

Gekkostate

Eureka has special status in Gekkostate as a skilled pilot and one of the organization's original members. She is respected in Gekkostate for her partnership with Holland and later Renton, and for her role as adoptive mother to Maurice, Maeter, and Linck.

Manga

Eureka's manga incarnation is not terribly similar to her anime incarnation. In the manga version the story ends with Eureka being in the Zone and Anemone using Nirvash "typeTHEEND" to implement a virus program into the Coralians. Dominic also helps Renton in efforts to stop the virus and saving the ones they care the most. Like in the anime, Renton was able to profess his love toward Eureka; however, Eureka vanished with the Coralians. Renton lives with Eureka's adopted children Maurice, Maeter, and Linck and his grandfather Axel Thurston in Bellforest. Renton works on the windmill and anticipates on Eureka's return, denying any possibility that Eureka is dead.

Movie

Renton and Eureka meet as young children and become fast friends. She can't go outside in the daytime because the sun's light burns her skin, which reveals a green underlayer. They went with Professor Dominic to see a rainbow flower one evening, but their happiness is temporary, for the military arrives soon after and abducts Eureka, leaving Renton distraught. Eight years later, Renton, now a child soldier and KLF pilot, finds Eureka and saves her. Holland then reveals that Eureka is the military's top secret project, and she further elaborates to Renton that she is a spy robot that the Image created to spy on humankind, and that she would likely die young (her remaining life was denoted by the red ring in her eyes, which by then resembled a crescent and would shrink as her life faded). After Renton sustains a gunshot to the abdomen, Eureka vows to have a future with Renton, which angered the Gekkostate to kill an elder Anemone to stop their plans. Then an EIZO hand attacks her and Anemone only for Renton and an evolved Nirvash - the pure one - to rescue her. They escape only for Holland to follow and attack them. They manage to escape Holland, but Renton succumbs to his injuries. Eureka confesses her love to the unconscious Renton and bids him farewell, believing they will meet again as long as he survives. Then Nirvash pierced the command cluster just seconds before "The Hammer of God" strikes it. The planet is then flooded when "Image" turns into water. When Renton wakes up on the coastal area of his homeland Warsaw, he sees a naked Eureka with long hair and she is incapable of speech due to a complete loss of memory, but is no longer affected by the Sun. His wound is completely gone, and a large Larva Nirvash appears before them. Before Nirvash disappears into light fragments, he told Renton that he and Eureka can fly now even without wings and that their own two feet will carry themselves to the future. Renton clothed Eureka with his jacket and she points out a rainbow and an incoming space shuttle. Eureka then kisses Renton on the left side of his face and hold his hands dearly, implying their happiness ever after. 
Note that this is the only version of the story that Eureka has turned into an ordinary human being, noted by the absence of the red ring on her eyes, as well as her continued existence despite the vanishing of her creator "Image" which caused Anemone and Nirvash to follow suit (contrary to the manga ending).

Reception

Eureka was ranked 18th in the female character category of the Anime Grand Prix in 2005.
In his review of the series' first DVD, Theron Martin of Anime News Network described Eureka as "calm, sensible, and soft-spoken but not necessarily shy..."




