[[Defense Media Activity]]

CATEGORIES: United States Department of Defense agencies, American media

The Defense Media Activity (DMA) is a United States Department of Defense (DoD) field activity. It provides a broad range of high quality multimedia products and services to inform, educate, and entertain Department of Defense audiences around the world."Our Mission",  retrieved 2013-07-24. The Defense Media Activity is located on Fort George G. Meade, Maryland. DoD field activities are established as DoD components by law, by the President, or by the Defense Secretary to provide for the performance, on a DoD-wide basis, of a supply or service activity that is common to more than one Military Department when it is determined to be more effective, economical, or efficient to do so.01, Functions of the Department of Defense and Its Major Components, dated December 21, 2010. 

History

As an organization, DMA can trace its organizational lineage to the first publication of the Stars and Stripes newspaper produced by Union soldiers during the Civil War, in 1861.  The DMA is one in a long line of media related organizations established, consolidated or subsumed within the military departments and defense department.  DMA was established as a result of the BRAC 2005 decisions.

BRAC 2005

In 2005, as part of the Base Closure and Realignment 2005 analysis, the Defense Department recommended consolidating the media-related organizations of the Military Departments into a single organization and co-locating it with the American Forces Information Service (an existing DoD field activity).defense.pdf. Retrieved 2013-07-24. The Defense Base Closure and Realignment (BRAC) Commission accepted the DoD recommendation and included the recommendation in its report to the President on September 8, 2005.[ref]2005 Defense Base Closure and Realignment Commission Report, page 212,
 Retrieved 2013-07-24.[/ref] On September 8, 2005 the President approved the BRAC Commission recommendations and forwarded them to the United States Congress.  On September 20, 2005 vote, the US Congress failed to disapproved the BRAC Commission's recommendations.  Under the provisions of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-510) the recommendations were effectively 'approved'.
The approved BRAC actions were to:

Establishment

In September 2007, the deputy defense secretary recognized that the BRAC 2005 decision would result in two field activities co-located at Fort Meade – the American Forces Information Service and DMA – and directed several actions. 
DMA's chartering directive, DoD Directive 5105.74, Defense Media Activity, was published on December 18, 2007.74, "Defense Media Activity", dated December 18, 2007, 
DMA was formally established on January 1, 2008, and the people and funding from the predecessor organizations was transferred to DMA on October 1, 2008.  The elements required to move to Fort Meade by the BRAC 2005 decision remained in their facilities as their facility at Fort Meade was designed and constructed.  The building design was completed in September 2008.
On March 13, 2009, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Baltimore District, awarded a $56,195,000 contract to Hensel Phelps Construction Co. of Chantilly, Virginia, to construct DMA's headquarters and media production center Fort Meade, Maryland.U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Baltimore District News Release, dated March 13, 2009,  The building was completed in May 2011 and organizations began moving into the facility in June 2011.  The move was completed in August 2011. DMA elements located in the Pentagon, Washington, D.C., Tobyhanna Army Depot, Riverside, California and all overseas locations remained in place.

Organization and Functions

Organization and FunctionsDefense Media Activity Strategic Plan, Fiscal Years 2014-2017, August 2013, 
DMA is composed of a headquarters and seven operating components.
The American Forces Radio and Television Service (AFRTS) component delivers, via the American Forces Network (AFN), U.S. radio and television news, information, and entertainment programming to active, guard, and reserve military service members, DoD civilians and contract employees, and their families overseas, on board Navy and Coast Guard ships, and to other authorized users.  Includes radio and television stations in military communities in Europe, Pacific and the Middle East; and include its central broadcasting hub, the AFN Broadcast Center in Riverside, California, USA.
The Defense Information School provides joint-service training to Defense military and civilian personnel in the career fields of Public Affairs and Visual Information.  The school is located at Fort Meade, Maryland.
The Defense Visual Information component manages the Defense Department's visual information records, provides visual information services to other DoD components and manages the Joint Combat Camera program.  It operates the operates the Defense Imagery Management Operations Center (DIMOC)"About Us",  centered at Fort Meade, Maryland with elements in Riverside, California and Tobyhanna Army Depot in Pennsylvania.
The Production component produces media and visual information products to the internal DoD family (active, guard, and reserve military service members, dependents, retirees, DoD civilians, and contract employees) and external audiences through all available media, including: motion and still imagery; print; radio; television; web and related emerging internet, mobile, and other communication technologies. Also includes communication of messages and themes from senior DoD leaders in order to support and improve quality of life and morale, promote situational awareness, provide timely and immediate force protection information, and sustain readiness.  Services include American Forces Press Service, Pentagon Channel, the Joint Hometown News Service, and providing internal news and information products for Defense.mil, Navy.mil, and AF.
The Stars and Stripes produces and delivers a newspaper distributed overseas (and on-line products) for the U.S. military community. Editorially independent of interference from outside its own editorial chain-of-command, it provides commercially available U.S. and world news and objective staff-produced stories relevant to the military community.
The Support Services component provides activity-wide administrative, facility management, transportation and logistics services.
The Technical Services component provides technology services to the other DMA components, hosts hundreds of DoD web sites through the DoD Public Web program"About DMA" and "DoD Public Web",  and the Television-Audio Support Activity (T-ASA)."Television-Audio Support Activity", 

Leadership

DMA is led by a director appointed by the ASD (PA) and may be a military flag or general officer, or a civilian appointed as a career member of the Senior Executive Service.  The following is a list of DMA's directors.






