[[Janet Jackson]]

CATEGORIES: Janet Jackson, Living people, 1966 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, 20th-century American singers, 21st-century American singers, A&M Records artists, Activists from California, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, Actresses from Indiana, African-American actresses, African-American choreographers, African-American dancers, African-American fashion designers, African-American female models, African-American female singers, African-American female singer-songwriters, African-American film producers, African-American models, African-American musicians, African-American record producers, African-American rock musicians, African-American rock singers, African-American singers, African-American singer-songwriters, African-American women writers, American actresses, American child actresses, American child singers, American choreographers, American dancers, American dance musicians, American electronic musicians, American fashion businesspeople, American fashion designers, American female dancers, American female models, American female musicians, American female pop singers, American female pop singer-songwriters, American female rock singers, American female singers, American female singer-songwriters, American feminist writers, American film actresses, American funk singers, American hip hop singers, American house musicians, American industrial musicians, American keyboardists, American mezzo-sopranos, American models, American musicians, American philanthropists, American pop rock musicians, American pop rock singers, American pop musicians, American pop singers, American pop singer-songwriters, American rock singers, American rock songwriters, American singer-songwriters, American songwriters, American television actresses, American record producers, American rhythm and blues singers, American rhythm and blues singer-songwriters, American soul singers, American stage actresses, American synthpop musicians, American women activists, American women in business, American women writers, Emmy Award winners, Feminist musicians, Former Jehovah's Witnesses, Grammy Award-winning artists, HIV/AIDS activists, Island Records artists, Jackson musical family, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Musicians from California, Musicians from Indiana, Musicians from Los Angeles, California, People from Gary, Indiana, Sex-positive feminists, Singers from California, Singers from Los Angeles, California, Songwriters from California, Spokespersons, Universal Music Group artists, Virgin Records artists, World Music Awards winners, Writers from California, Writers from Indiana, Writers from Los Angeles, California



Janet Damita Jo Jackson (born May 16, 1966) is an American recording artist and actress. Known for a series of sonically innovative, socially conscious and sexually provocative records, as well as elaborate stage shows, television appearances, and film roles, she is a prominent figure in popular culture.
After signing a recording contract with A&M, she came to prominence following the release of her third studio album, Control (1986). Her collaborations with record producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis incorporated pop with elements of rhythm and blues, dance, funk, rock, and industrial overtones, leading to appeal in popular music. Her fourth album, Rhythm Nation 1814 (1989), focused on socially conscious themes and various musical styles, and made Jackson the only artist in history to garner seven top five singles from the same album. In addition to receiving recognition for the innovation of her records, choreography, music videos, and prominence on radio and music channels, she was acknowledged as a role model for her lyrical substance.
Jackson signed the first of two record-breaking, multimillion dollar contracts with Virgin Records, establishing her as one of the industry's highest paid artists. Her debut album under the label, janet. (1993), saw her develop a public image as a sex symbol as she began to explore carnality in her work. Upon its release, she played the starring role in the film Poetic Justice; and has continued to act in feature films, including The Nutty Professor II: The Klumps and the Why Did I Get Married? franchise. Her following album, The Velvet Rope (1997), discussed themes of depression and sadomasochism, spawning the biggest hit of her career, "Together Again". By the end of the nineties, Billboard named her the second most successful recording artist of the decade, following Mariah Carey. Jackson's seventh album, All for You (2001), returned to an upbeat, optimistic sound. It was succeeded by Damita Jo (2004), 20 Y.O. (2006), and Discipline (2008).
Having sold over 140 million records, she is ranked as one of the best-selling artists in the history of contemporary music. She has amassed an extensive catalog of hits, with singles such as "Nasty", "Rhythm Nation", "That's the Way Love Goes", "Together Again", and "All for You" her most iconic.
One of the world's most awarded artists, her longevity, records and achievements reflect her influence in shaping and redefining the scope of popular music. Her influence is thought to rival that of Madonna and Michael Jackson. 
Jackson's accolades include six Grammy Awards, an Emmy Award, MTV's Video Vanguard Award, and Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations. She has been awarded the Radio Music Award's "Legend Award", Recording Academy's "Governor's Award",

Life and career

1966–82: Early life and career beginnings

Janet Jackson was born in Gary, Indiana, the youngest of ten children, to Katherine Esther (née Scruse) and Joseph Walter Jackson.

1982–92: Early recordings, Control, and Rhythm Nation 1814

When Jackson was sixteen, she was arranged a contract with A&M Records. Her debut album, Janet Jackson, was released in 1982. It was produced by Angela Winbush, René Moore and Leon F. Sylvers III, and overseen by her father Joseph. It peaked at number sixty-three on Billboard, and number six on the publication's R&B albums chart, receiving little promotion.
After her second album, Jackson terminated business affairs with her family, commenting "I just wanted to get out of the house, get out from under my father, which was one of the most difficult things that I had to do." Attempting a third album, Jackson recruited producers Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis to collaborate. Jackson set to achieve crossover pop appeal, while also creating a strong foundation within the urban market.
It received six Billboard Awards, including "Top Pop Singles Artist", and three Grammy nominations, most notably "Album of the Year". The album's music videos became infamous on MTV, also obtaining a then-unknown Paula Adbul a recording contract for her choreography work with Jackson. Billboard stated "Jackson's accessible sound and spectacularly choreographed videos were irresistible to MTV, and helped the channel evolve from rock programming to a broader, beat-driven musical mix."
Jackson released her fourth album, Rhythm Nation 1814, in September 1989. Although her record label desired a direct sequel to Control, Jackson chose to include a socially conscious theme among various musical styles.
Peaking at number one on the Billboard 200, the album was certified sixfold platinum and sold over fourteen million copies internationally."Janet Jackson's Greatest Hits Celebrated on Number Ones", Universal Music Enterprises: PR Newswire, 2009-10-14, retrieved 2009-10-14. The release became the only album in history to produce number one hits in three separate calendar years, as well as the only album to achieve seven top five singles.
Jackson's premiere tour, the Rhythm Nation World Tour, became the most successful debut tour in history, and set a record for the fastest sell-out of Japan's Tokyo Dome.

1993–96: janet., Poetic Justice, and Design of a Decade

Jackson fulfilled her contract with A&M Records, signing a multi-million dollar contract with Virgin Records estimated between thirty-two to fifty million dollars, making her the highest paid recording artist at the time. Prior to starting work on her fifth album, Jackson filmed Poetic Justice with director John Singleton, opposite Tupac Shakur.
Jackson's fifth studio album janet., read "Janet, period", was released in May 1993. The record opened at number one on the Billboard 200, making Jackson the first female artist in the Soundscan era to do so.
The album spawned five singles and four promotional singles, receiving various certifications worldwide. Lead single "That's the Way Love Goes" won a Grammy Award and topped the Billboard Hot 100 for eight consecutive weeks, longer than any singles by Madonna or Michael Jackson. "Because of Love" and "You Want This" charted within the top ten. Rolling Stone wrote, "everything Janet Jackson does is important. ... she's influential. And when she announces her sexual maturity, as she does on her new album, Janet., it's a cultural moment."
In July 1993, Jackson made her film debut in Poetic Justice. Her performance was described as "beguiling" and "believably eccentric", receiving positive acclaim.
During this time, her brother Michael was immersed in a child sex abuse scandal, of which he denied any wrongdoing. It debuted at number five on the Hot 100 singles chart, becoming the first song ever to debut within the top five. "Scream" is listed in Guinness World Records as the "Most Expensive Music Video Ever Made", costing $7 million. The clip won the 1995 Grammy Award for Best Short Form Music Video.
Jackson's first compilation album, Design of a Decade 1986/1996, was released in 1995. It peaked at number three on the Billboard 200. The lead single, "Runaway", became the first song by a female artist to debut within the top ten of the Hot 100, reaching number three.

1997–03: The Velvet Rope, Nutty Professor II: The Klumps and All for You

Jackson began suffering from severe depression and anxiety, leading her to chronicle the experience in her sixth album, The Velvet Rope, released October 1997. The album also encompassed themes of sadomasochism and same-sex relationships, as well as addressing social issues such as homophobia and domestic violence. Jackson returned with a dramatic change in image, boasting vibrant red hair, nasal piercings, and tattoos. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 and was certified triple platinum, selling over ten million worldwide.
Lead single "Got 'til It's Gone" was released in August 1997, featuring guest vocals from folk singer Joni Mitchell and rapper Q-Tip. The song was considered a stark contrast from Jackson's prior upbeat dance pop style,
The album fully established Jackson as a gay icon for its themes regarding homosexuality and protesting homophobia. "Together Again", a "post-Aids pop song", and "Free Xone", considered "a paean to homosexuality" and an "anti-homophobia track", were praised for their lyrical context, in addition to Jackson's lesbian reinterpretation of Rod Stewart's "Tonight's the Night". A portion of the proceeds from "Together Again" were donated to the American Foundation for AIDS Research.
Jackson embarked on The Velvet Rope World Tour, traveling to Europe, North America, Asia, Africa, New Zealand, and Australia. The tour received praise for its theatrics, choreography, and Jackson's vocal performance. It was likened to "the ambition and glamour of a Broadway musical", and exclaimed as "only fitting that the concert program credits her as the show's 'creator and director'."
As the tour concluded, Jackson lent guest vocals to several collaborations, including Shaggy's "Luv Me, Luv Me", used for the film How Stella Got Her Groove Back, as well as "Girlfriend/Boyfriend" with Teddy Riley's group Blackstreet, and "What's It Gonna Be?!" with Busta Rhymes. The latter two music videos are both among the most expensive music videos ever produced, with "What's It Gonna Be?!" becoming a number one hit on the Billboard Hip-Hop Singles and Hot Rap Tracks charts, reaching the top three of the Hot 100. Jackson also contributed the ballad "God's Stepchild" to the Down in the Delta soundtrack. Jackson recorded a duet with Elton John titled "I Know the Truth", included on the soundtrack to Elton John and Tim Rice's Aida. At the 1999 World Music Awards, Jackson received the Legend Award for "outstanding contribution to the pop industry".
In July 2000, Jackson appeared in her second film, The Nutty Professor II: The Klumps, as the role of Professor Denise Gaines, opposite Eddie Murphy. Director Peter Segal stated "Janet Jackson was a natural fit, and an obvious choice."
Preceding the release of her seventh album, MTV honored Jackson with the network's inaugural "MTV Icon" ceremony, in recognition of Jackson's "significant contributions to music, music video and pop culture while tremendously impacting the MTV generation." The event paid tribute to Jackson's career and influence, including commentary from Britney Spears, Jennifer Lopez, Aaliyah, and Jessica Simpson, and performances by 'N Sync, Pink, Destiny's Child, Usher, Buckcherry, and Outkast.
The album's lead single, "All for You", debuted on the Hot 100 at number fourteen, setting a record for the highest debut by a single that was not commercially available.
In July 2001, Jackson embarked on the "All for You Tour", which was also broadcast on a concert special for HBO watched by twelve million viewers.
The following year, Jackson began receiving media attention for her rumored relationships with Justin Timberlake, actor Matthew McConaughey, and record producer Jermaine Dupri. Upon the release of Timberlake's debut solo album Justified, Jackson provided vocals on "(And She Said) Take Me Now" per Timberlake's request, with the song initially planned as a single. Jackson collaborated with reggae artist Beenie Man for the song "Feel It Boy", produced by The Neptunes.

2004–05: Super Bowl XXXVIII controversy and Damita Jo

Jackson was chosen by the National Football League and MTV to perform at the Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show in February 2004. Jackson performed a medley of "All for You", "Rhythm Nation", and an excerpt of "The Knowledge" before performing "Rock Your Body" alongside surprise guest Justin Timberlake. As Timberlake sang the lyric "I'm gonna have you naked by the end of this song", he tore open her costume, exposing her right breast to 140 million viewers. Jackson issued an apology after the performance, saying the incident was accidental and unintended, explaining that Timberlake was only meant to pull away a bustier and leave the red-lace bra intact.
Following the incident, CBS permitted Timberlake to appear at the 46th Grammy Awards ceremony but did not allow Jackson to attend, forcing her to withdraw after being scheduled as a presenter. Andy Beta of The Wall Street Journal referred to Jackson's career run until the incident as "indomitable".
Following the incident, Jackson's singles and music videos were blacklisted on many radio formats and music channels worldwide, enforced by conglomerates involved with producing the Halftime show who were heavily fined by the FCC and taken to Supreme Court. Conglomerates involved in the boycott include Viacom and CBS, and subsidiaries MTV, Clear Channel Communications, and Infinity Broadcasting, the latter two among the largest radio broadcasters.
Jackson's eighth studio album Damita Jo, titled after Jackson's middle name, was released in March 2004. It debuted at number two on the Billboard 200.
For the album's promotion, Jackson appeared as a host on Saturday Night Live, performing two songs, and was also a guest star on sitcom Will & Grace, portraying herself.

2006–10: 20 Y.O., Why Did I Get Married?, Discipline, and Number Ones

Jackson began recording her ninth studio album, 20 Y.O., in 2005. Jackson initially worked with various producers, including The Neptunes, Dr. Dre,
Jackson's airplay and music channel blacklist remained persistent, massively affecting her chart performance and exposure.
Jackson was ranked the seventh richest woman in the entertainment industry by Forbes, having amassed a fortune of over $150 million.
Jackson signed with Island Records after her contract with Virgin was fulfilled. She interrupted plans for touring and began recording with various producers, including Rodney "Darkchild" Jerkins, Tricky Stewart, and Stargate. The second single, "Rock With U", peaked at number four in the United Kingdom. Jackson was awarded the Vanguard Award at the 19th annual GLAAD Media Awards, honoring her contributions in promoting equal rights among the gay community. The organization's president commented, "Ms. Jackson has a tremendous following inside the LGBT community and out, and having her stand with us against the defamation that LGBT people still face in our country is extremely significant."
Jackson's fifth concert tour, the Rock Witchu Tour, began in September 2008.
In June 2009, Jackson's brother Michael passed away at age fifty. She spoke publicly concerning his death at the 2009 BET Awards, stating "I'd just like to say, to you, Michael is an icon, to us, Michael is family. And he will forever live in all of our hearts. On behalf of my family and myself, thank you for all of your love, thank you for all of your support. We miss him so much."
Jackson's second hits compilation, Number Ones, was released in November 2009. For promotion, she performed a medley of hits at the American Music Awards, Capital FM's Jingle Bell Ball at London's O2 arena, and The X-Factor. The event raised a total of $1.1 million for the nonprofit organization.

2010–present: Film projects and philanthropy

In April 2010, Jackson reprised her role in the sequel to Why Did I Get Married? titled Why Did I Get Married Too?. The film opened at number two, grossing sixty million in total. The company described Jackson as "an icon in the world of music and entertainment, a true legend. She represents everything that this storied campaign embodies. Janet is to entertainment what Blackglama is to luxury." Jackson launched a line of clothing and accessories under Blackglama's Janet Jackson Blackglama Collection. Jackson was personally involved in the design process, with the line retailed at select Saks Fifth Avenue and Bloomingdales stores."Blackglama Announces Debut of Janet Jackson Blackglama Collection", PR Newswire, 11/21/2011. Universal Music released the hits compilation Icon: Number Ones as the debut of the Icon compilation series."Icon Series Launched by Universal Music Enterprises" PR Newswire, 2010-08-09, retrieved 2010-08-09.
In November 2010, Jackson starred as Joanna in the drama For Colored Girls, the film adaptation of Ntozake Shange's 1975 play For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide When the Rainbow Is Enuf. The Wall Street Journal stated Jackson "recites verses written by Ntozake Shange, the author of the play that inspired the film ... But instead of offering up a mannered coffeehouse reading of the lines, Jackson makes the words sound like ordinary—though very eloquent—speech."
Jackson announced plans to embark on her largest world tour in support of her second hits collection, Number Ones.
Jackson released the self-help book True You: A Journey to Finding and Loving Yourself in February 2011, co-written with David Ritz. It chronicled Jackson's struggle with weight and confidence, also publishing letters from fans. It topped The New York Times
Jackson confirmed she is recording a new album and "creating the concept and initial thoughts on the music".

Artistry

Music and voice

Jackson has a mezzo-soprano vocal range.
Jackson's music has encompassed a broad range of genres with contemporary pop, including R&B, dance, rock, hip-hop, soul, house, and industrial music. The diversity within Jackson's discography has influenced subsequent stylistic albums in contemporary pop. Selected material from the following decade has been viewed less favorably, as Sal Cinquemani comments "except for maybe R.E.M., no other former superstar act has been as prolific with such diminishing commercial and creative returns."
Jackson has changed her lyrical focus over the years, becoming the subject of analysis in musicology, African American studies, and gender studies.

Videos and stage

Jackson drew inspiration for her music videos and performances from musicals she watched in her youth, and was heavily influenced by the choreography of Fred Astaire and Michael Kidd, among others.
Beretta E. Smith-Shomade, author of Shaded Lives: African-American Women and Television (2002), wrote that "Jackson's impact on the music video sphere came largely through music sales successes, which afforded her more visual liberties and control. This assuming of control directly impacted the look and content of her music videos, giving Jackson an agency not assumed by many other artists—male or female, Black or White."
Her music videos have contributed to a higher degree of sexual freedom among young women, as Jean M. Twenge, author of Generation Me: Why Today's Young Americans are More Confident, Assertive, Entitled—and More Miserable Than Ever Before (2007), wrote "In Alfred Kinsey's studies in the 1950s, only 3% of the young women had received oral sex from a man. By the mid-1990s, however, 75% of women aged 18-24 had experienced cunnilingus. Music videos by female artists have contributed to the trend," with Jackson "heavily implying male-on-female oral sex in music videos by pushing down on a man's head until he's in exactly the right position." However, accusations of cosmetic surgery, skin lightening, and increasingly hypersexual imagery have led to her being viewed as conforming to a white, male-dominated view of sexuality, rather than liberating herself or others.
The Independent writer Nicholas Barber stated "Janet's concerts are the pop equivalent of a summer blockbuster movie, with all the explosions, special effects, ersatz sentimentality, gratuitous cleavage and emphasis on spectacle over coherence that the term implies."
Jet magazine reported "Janet's innovative stage performances during her world tours have won her a reputation as a world-class performer."
Thor Christensen of The Dallas Morning News considered Jackson to lip sync in concerts; writing "Janet Jackson—one of pop's most notorious onstage lip-syncers—conceded ... she uses 'some' taped vocals to augment her live vocals. But she refused to say what percentage of her concert 'voice' is taped and how much is live." He complemented her physically strenuous performance, stating "go on, Janet. Let 'em see you sweat. Because in a 21st-century popscape where concerts are driven by spectacle, we need to know that beneath all of the sci-fi costumes, strobe lights and Auto-Tune, we're still witnessing a performance by the living, breathing, profusely sweating human being whose name is stamped on the tickets we just emptied our wallets for."

Influences

Jackson describes Lena Horne as a profound inspiration, for entertainers of several generations as well as herself. Upon Horne's death, she stated "Horne brought much joy into everyone's lives—even the younger generations, younger than myself. She was such a great talent. She opened up such doors for artists like myself."

Legacy

Jackson has striven to distance her professional career from that of her older brother Michael and her family, standing on her own as an individual artist. Steve Dollar of Newsday stated "she projects that home girl-next-door quality that belies her place as the youngest sibling in a family whose inner and outer lives have been as poked at, gossiped about, docudramatized and hard-copied as the Kennedys." Klein argued that "stardom was not too hard to predict, but few could have foreseen that Janet—Miss Jackson, if you're nasty—would one day replace Michael as true heir to the Jackson family legacy."
Her business savvy has been thought to rival Madonna's, gaining a level of autonomy which enables "creative latitude and access to financial resources and mass-market distribution."
In Popular Culture in American History (2001), Jim Cullen observed that although Michael Jackson's Thriller originally synchronized music video with album sales, Janet Jackson was also among the first generation of artists that saw the visualization of their music elevate them to the status of a pop culture icon.

Influence and recognition

MTV News asserted Jackson has "inspired a slew of singers in her career with her dance moves, seductive songs and turns at acting on the big screen." Life believes Jackson to be an essential candidate for induction into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame; considering her present omission "shocking."
Britney Spears cites Jackson as her biggest influence, saying "I've always been majorly inspired by Janet and everything that she does," desiring to be "a legend like Janet". Rihanna regards Jackson as her "heroine" and relateable to herself, saying "Janet was one of the first female pop icons that I could relate to ... She was so vibrant, she had so much energy. She still has power... You have to love Janet." also cite Jackson as a main inspiration.
Numerous British singers cite Jackson as a primary influence; including Jessie Ware, and classical composer Louis Andriessen have also commended Jackson's artistry, showmanship, and influence.
Jackson notably pioneered the teen pop evolution; taking authority of her career, transitioning from a celibate image into an edgier, sensual persona in the public eye.
Jackson served as the inspiration for YouTube, and is the most-searched person in internet history. Considered a figure of allure, Jackson is recognized for her appearance and sex appeal, named the "Hottest Woman of the '90s" by Complex, eleventh sexiest female singer of all time in 2012, and among Elle's "Most Beautiful People" list in 2011.
Elysa Gardner of USA Today wrote: "Jackson claims not to be bothered by the brigade of barely post-adolescent baby divas who have been inspired by—and, in some cases, have flagrantly aped—the sharp, animated choreography and girlish but decidedly post-feminist feistiness that have long been hallmarks of her performance style."

Discography

Tours

Filmography

Books





Bibliography

Further reading




