[[Joseph Bonaparte]]

CATEGORIES: 1768 births, 1844 deaths, People from Bordentown, New Jersey, People from Corte, Spanish monarchs, Monarchs of Naples, House of Bonaparte, French people of Italian descent, Knights of Santiago, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Council of Five Hundred members, Members of the Sénat conservateur, Members of the Chamber of Peers of the Hundred Days, French Roman Catholics, Grand Croix of the Légion d'honneur, Grand Masters of the Order of the Golden Fleece, Monarchs who abdicated, Grand Crosses of the Royal Order of Spain, Heirs presumptive to the French throne, People of the Peninsular War, 19th-century monarchs in Europe

Joseph-Napoleon Bonaparte (7 January 1768 – 28 July 1844) was the elder brother of Napoleon Bonaparte, who made him King of Naples and Sicily (1806–1808), and later King of Spain (1808–1813, as José I). After the fall of Napoleon, Joseph styled himself Comte de Survilliers.

Early years and personal life

Joseph was born Giuseppe Buonaparte in 1768 to Carlo Buonaparte and Maria Letizia Ramolino at Corte, the capital of the Corsican Republic. In the year of his birth, Corsica was invaded by France and conquered the following year. His father was originally a follower of the Corsican Patriot leader, Pasquale Paoli, but later became a supporter of French rule.
As a lawyer, politician, and diplomat, Joseph served in the Cinq-Cents and was the French ambassador to Rome. On 30 September 1800, as Minister Plenipotentiary, he signed a treaty of friendship and commerce between France and the United States at Morfontaine, alongside Charles Pierre Claret de Fleurieu, and Pierre Louis Roederer.
He married Marie Julie Clary on 1 August 1794 in Cuges-les-Pins, France. They had three daughters:
He claimed the two surviving daughters as his heirs. He also sired two children with Maria Giulia, the Countess of Atri:
Joseph had two American daughters born at Point Breeze, his estate in Bordentown, New Jersey, by his mistress, Annette Savage ("Madame de la Folie"):
In 1795 Joseph was a member of the Council of Ancients, where he used his position to help his brother overthrow the Directory four years later.
The Château de Villandry had been seized by the French Revolutionary government; and, in the early 19th century, Joseph's brother, Emperor Napoleon, acquired the château for him. In 1806, Joseph was given military command of Naples, and shortly afterward was made king by Napoleon, to be replaced two years later by his sister's husband, Joachim Murat. Joseph was then made King of Spain in August 1808, soon after the French invasion.

Spain

Joseph somewhat reluctantly left Naples, where he was popular, and arrived in Spain where he was very unpopular indeed. Joseph came under heavy fire from his opponents in Spain, who tried to smear his reputation by calling him Pepe Botella for his alleged heavy drinking, an accusation echoed by later Spanish historiography, despite the fact that Joseph was abstemious. His arrival sparked the Spanish revolt against French rule, and the beginning of the Peninsular War.  Thompson says the Spanish revolt was, "a reaction against new institutions and ideas, a movement for loyalty to the old order: to the hereditary crown of the Most Catholic kings, which Napoleon, an excommunicated enemy of the Pope, had put on the head of a Frenchman; to the Catholic Church persecuted by republicans who had desecrated churches, murdered priests, and enforced a "loi des cultes"; and to local and provincial rights and privileges threatened by an efficiently centralized government.J.  M. Thompson, Napoleon Bonaparte: His Rise and Fall (1951) 244-45  
Joseph temporarily retreated with much of the French Army to northern Spain. Feeling himself in an ignominious position, Joseph then proposed his own abdication from the Spanish throne, hoping that Napoleon would sanction his return to the Neapolitan Throne he had formerly occupied. Napoleon dismissed Joseph's misgivings out of hand; and, to back up the raw and ill-trained levies he had initially allocated to Spain—the Emperor sent heavy French reinforcements to assist Joseph in maintaining his position as King of Spain. Despite the easy recapture of Madrid, and nominal control by Joseph's government over many cities and provinces, Joseph's reign over Spain was always tenuous at best, and constantly resisted by pro-Bourbon guerrillas. Joseph and his supporters never established complete control over the country.
King Joseph's Spanish supporters were called josefinos or afrancesados (frenchified). During his reign, he ended the Spanish Inquisition, partly because Napoleon was at odds with Pope Pius VII at the time. Despite such efforts to win popularity, Joseph's foreign birth and support, plus his membership in a Masonic lodge,Ross, Michael The Reluctant King, 1977, pp. 34–35 virtually guaranteed he would never be accepted as legitimate by the bulk of the Spanish people. During Joseph's rule of Spain, Venezuela declared independence (1810) from Spain, the first nation to do so. The king had virtually no influence over the course of the ongoing Peninsular War: Joseph's nominal command of French forces in Spain was mostly illusory, as the French commanders theoretically subordinate to King Joseph insisted on checking with Napoleon before carrying out Joseph's instructions.
King Joseph abdicated and returned to France after defeat of the main French forces to the British at the Battle of Vitoria in 1813. He was seen by Bonapartists as the rightful Emperor of the French after the death of Napoleon's own son Napoleon II in 1832, although he did little to advance his claim.

United States of America

Joseph lived primarily in the United States (where he sold the jewels of the Spanish crown he had stolen when he left Spain) in the period 1817–1832, initially in
New York City and Philadelphia, where his house became the centre of activity for French expatriates, but later moved to an estate, formerly owned by Stephen Sayre, called Point Breeze in Bordentown, New Jersey. Joseph's home was located near the confluence of Crosswicks Creek and the Delaware River.  He considerably expanded Sayre's home and created extensive gardens in the picturesque style.  When his first home was destroyed by fire in January 1820 he converted his stables into a second grand house.  At Point Breeze, Joseph entertained many of the leading intellectuals and politicians of his day.
He was also reputed to have encountered the Jersey Devil while hunting there.
Reputedly some Mexican revolutionaries offered to crown him Emperor of Mexico in 1820, but he refused.
Joseph Bonaparte returned to Europe, where he died in Florence, Italy, and was buried in the Les Invalides building complex in Paris.

Gallery

File:Joseph Bonaparte (by Wicar).jpg|Portrait by Jean-Baptiste Wicar, 1808
File:Grandes armes du Royaume de Naples2.svg|Coat of arms as King of Naples
File:Grand Coat of Arms of Joseph Bonaparte as King of Spain.svg|Coat of arms as King of Spain
File:Royal Monogram of Joseph I of Spain.svg|Royal Monogram as King of Spain
File:80 Reales en or à l'effigie de Joseph Napoléon.jpg|Spanish gold coin from 1811

Titles and styles

Legacy

Ancestry





Further reading

See also the University of Pennsylvania Press biography: The Man who had been King: The American Exile of Napoleon's Brother Joseph, by Patricia Tyson Stroud.  This book received the New Jersey Council for the Humanities first place book award in 2006.




