[[Leah Marville]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, Miss World 2009 delegates, Barbadian television personalities, People from Saint James, Barbados, University of the West Indies academics, Barbadian beauty pageant winners

Leah Janine Marville (born 13 November 1985) is a model, TV host and former Miss Barbados World.
Born and raised in Barbados, Marville started her international career after being spotted at Barbados Fashion Week (2006) by Dwight Peters.
 Leah is signed to RED model management in New York.
Dubbed the ""Sexiest Woman Alive"" in 2009 by Global Beauties, Leah is a former host on Splash, a Caribbean lifestyle series on Black Entertainment Television (BET) sister network Centric.

Biography

Childhood and education

Leah lost her father, Don Marville, at age eleven to brain cancer and was subsequently raised by her mother, Heather Gibson. She had an active childhood and was part of the Dancing Africa dance troupe.
Marville attended Erdiston Primary school and Queen's College. She went on to study law at the University of the West Indies, Cave Hill campus, Barbados. She received her Bachelor of Laws with honours in 2007. She completed her Legal Education Certificate at the Hugh Wooding Law School in Trinidad in August 2012. She has interned at a prominent entertainment law firm, Gordon-McGrath in Jamaica, and had oversight responsibilities for high profile clients such as Beenie Man and family members of the late Reggae icon Bob Marley. Marville was also employed at the Jamaica Human Rights Council, where she was responsible for overseeing the human rights of death row inmates throughout prisons in Kingston, Jamaica.
While at Queens college she briefly served on her school's Cadet programme where her cousin Shontelle, who is signed to Street Records Corporation/Universal Motown Records

Career

Marville started modeling professionally in 2008 in Cape Town, South Africa for Base Model Management. She has appeared in several magazine publications such as Cosmopolitan Elle and Marie Claire and in 2009, after being titled the Sexiest Woman Alive, shot her first cover for SHE Caribbean
Her clients have included: Dunhill Cigarettes, American Swiss, and Nivea-Visage. Marville has participated in several Caribbean fashion weeks: Barbados Fashion Week, Style Week Jamaica, Saint Kitts fashion weekend, Guyana Fashion week, Dominicana Moda, and Fashion Week Trinidad and Tobago. On 24 October 2010, Marville was given the award for Top Caribbean Female model, at the Caribbean fashion awards. Her tenth anniversary She magazine cover, was also awarded best Caribbean magazine cover for 2010.
In 2011, Marville signed on as the face and spokesmodel for the inaugural staging of Caribbean International Fashion Week.

Television

In 2006, Marville attended the BET Awards where she met with executive producers for the BET J Caribbean music show Wicked Style. assumes the Donald Trump role.
In 2009, Marville produced her own lifestyle reality show, Passport 246

Journalism

Leah Marville is a freelance journalist for The Daily Nation newspaper, and on CBC TV 8 Barbados.
Marville later conducted entertainment related interviews with stars such as Wyclef, Beenie Man, Marlon Wayans, Shontelle, Eve, Kelly Rowland, Rick Ross, Trey Songz, Etana, the Pussycat Dolls, Vybz Cartel, Lisa Leslie, Joe Jackson, Usain Bolt, Shaggy and Toure.

Miss Barbados World

After attending  Miss World in 2008, and watching fellow country-woman Natalie Griffith and represented her country at the 59th staging of the Miss World pageant, hosted in Johannesburg South Africa where Miss World Kaiane Aldorino was the winner. At the Miss Barbados pageant Marville won two fast track events: "Most Photogenic" and "Beauty With A Purpose".
At Miss World 2009 Marville won the "Continental Queen of Beauty" Award for being the highest placed Caribbean delegate. Her Love Campaign won second place for the Miss World Beauty with a Purpose fast track category The Love Campaign was entered as Leah's "Beauty With A Purpose" project for the Miss Barbados World competition and received an award from the HIV Commission of Barbados and the HIV Food Bank.
In April 2011, Stephanie Chase-Yates, former Miss Barbados World 2001 and CEO of SFC International,  handed over the Miss Barbados World franchise to  Marville Management, which is owned and operated by Leah Marville.

Philanthropy

Marville's humanitarian efforts began in 2007, when she hosted a charity walkathon dubbed "Fashion with a Mission".
Founded in March 2009, The Love Campaign, as conceived by Marville, aimed to regenerate a culture of giving and awareness in Barbados and to encourage people to abandon the HIV social stigma. The campaign slogan is: "Don't judge, just love: Abandon the stigma".
The campaign promotion included several multi-media adverts,
The Love Campaign partnered with Barbadian designer Toni Thorne in 2009, to launch the "Martha's Smile" campaign in Jamaica. Donations from the partnership went towards the rebuilding fund for Martha's Home, a hospice for abandoned children living with HIV/AIDS, after it had been destroyed by an electrical fire By October 2010, the campaign has raised more than US$70,000.
In 2010, Marville launched The Love Campaign School Tour, which delivered the message of healthy lifestyles to children at several secondary schools under the banner "respect yaself".entertainment.com/index. The campaign has earned Marville several local awards, including two national youth awards: the Bayan Award and the Humanitarian Award; and the Phenomenal Woman award presented by the Girlfriends Foundation in the category of philanthropy.






