[[Mission Santa Cruz]]

CATEGORIES: Spanish missions in California, History of Santa Cruz County, California, 1790s in California, California State Historic Parks, California Historical Landmarks, Historic districts in California, 1791 establishments, Properties of religious function on the National Register of Historic Places in California, Roman Catholic Diocese of Monterey in California, Buildings and structures in Santa Cruz County, California, Queen Anne architecture in California, Victorian architecture in California, Parks in Santa Cruz County, California, Museums in Santa Cruz County, California, History museums in California, Religious museums in California, Santa Cruz, California

Mission Santa Cruz was a Spanish mission founded by the Franciscan order in present-day Santa Cruz, California. The mission was founded in 1791 and named for the feast of the Exultation of the Cross, the name that the explorer Gaspar de Portolà gave to the area when he camped on the banks of the San Lorenzo River on October 17, 1769, and erected a wooden cross. 112 As with the other California missions, Mission Santa Cruz served as a site for ecclesiastical conversion of natives, first the Ohlone, the original inhabitants of the region, and later the Yokuts from the east. The settlement was the site of the first autopsy in Alta California. 196
The current Holy Cross Church was built on the site of the original mission church in 1889, and it remains an active parish of the Diocese of Monterey. A half-size replica of the original mission church was built near the mission site in the 1930s and functions as a chapel of Holy Cross Church. Today's Plaza Park occupies the same location as the original plaza, at the center of the former Mission complex. The complex at one time included as many as 32 buildings. The only surviving mission building, a dormitory for native acolytes, has been restored to its original appearance and functions as a museum of the Santa Cruz Mission State Historic Park.

History

The Santa Cruz mission was originally consecrated by Padre Fermin Lasuen on August 28, 1791, on the San Lorenzo river's flood plain. It was one of the smaller missions, in the fourth military district under protection of the Presidio of San Francisco.
The mission was flooded as the San Lorenzo swelled with the rains that winter. Over the next two years, the padres set out to rebuild the mission on the hill overlooking the river. The night of December 14, 1793, Mission Santa Cruz was attacked and partially burned by members of the Quiroste tribe who inhabited the mountains to the east of Point Año Nuevo. The attack was purportedly motivated by the forced relocation of Indians to the Mission. On October 12, 1812, Father Andrés Quintana was beaten to death and his body disfigured by natives angry over his use of a metal-tipped whip in the punishment of mission laborers.
In 1797, the secular pueblo (town) of Branciforte was founded across the San Lorenzo River to the east of Mission Santa Cruz. The mission padres did not welcome the location of the pueblo so close to the mission, and accused the Branciforte settlers of gambling, smuggling and tempting the native acolytes to desert the mission. In 1818, the Mission received advance warning of an attack by the Argentine corsair (simply a pirate, from the Spanish point-of-view) Hipólito Bouchard and was evacuated. In Buenos Aires, Bouchard is honored as a brave patriot, while in California he is most often remembered as a pirate, rather than a privateer. See Hippolyte de Bouchard. The citizens of Branciforte, several of whom were retired soldiers, were asked to protect the Mission's valuables; instead, they were later accused of stealing.

Decline and preservation

The front wall of the adobe mission, built in 1794, was destroyed by the 1857 Fort Tejon earthquake. A wooden facade was added and the structure converted to other uses. A new wooden church was built next door in 1858.santacruzpl. "Construction Chronology of the Site of Holy Cross Church". Santa Cruz Public Library In 1889, the current Gothic Revival-style Holy Cross Church was built on the original quadrangle site. 
The only original Mission building left is a long multi-room building which at one time housed local Yokut and Ohlone Indian families. The original building is located at 144 School Street and can be toured during operating hours.thatsmypark. The parish address is 126 High Street. The road leading to the mission from the west is called Mission Street, which is also part of California State Route 1.
In 1931, Gladys Sullivan Doyle proposed to construct a half-size replica of the original Mission. She contributed all of the construction costs, on the condition that she be allowed to be buried inside. Her grave can be viewed in a small side room. The small replica chapel is mainly used for private services. An adjoining room functions as a gift shop. A stone fountain from the original mission complex stands in the garden behind the gift shop.

Santa Cruz Mission Historic Park and District

The only surviving original adobe mission building, a dormitory for Indian residents, has been restored as part of the  Santa Cruz Mission State Historic Park as the Neary-Rodriguez Adobe.
The Neary-Rodriguez Adobe  was added to the National Register of Historic Places listings in Santa Cruz County, California as site number 75000484  on February 24, 1975,
and the Mission Hill Area as a United States Historic District as site number 76000530 on May 17, 1976.



Notes



 | author    = Forbes, Alexander
 | year      = 1839
 | title     = California: A History of Upper and Lower California
 | location  = Cornhill, London
