[[Islam4UK]]

CATEGORIES: Islamic organisations based in the United Kingdom, Islamist terrorism in the United Kingdom, United Kingdom Home Office designated terrorist groups, Islam-related controversies in Europe, Sharia in Europe, 2008 establishments in the United Kingdom, 2010 disestablishments in the United Kingdom

Islam4UK were a radical Islamist group that operated in the United Kingdom. The group was proscribed under the UK's counter terrorism laws on 14 January 2010. Opsi.uk (2010-07-15). Retrieved on 2011-04-24.
On its website, Islam4UK described itself as having "been established by sincere Muslims as a platform to propagate the supreme Islamic ideology within the United Kingdom as a divine alternative to man-made law" to "convince the British public about the superiority of Islam, thereby changing public opinion in favour of Islam in order to transfer the authority and power to the Muslims in order to implement the Sharia (in Britain)".Islam4UK, "About Us"

Activities

On 16 October 2009, members of the organisation protested against the visit to Britain by Dutch MP Geert Wilders. They carried banners with slogans such as "Shariah is the solution, freedom go to hell" and "Geert Wilders deserves Islamic punishment".co.uk, "Protesters greet Dutch far-right MP"
In January 2010 the group gained widespread media attention by announcing plans to hold a protest march through Wootton Bassett; an English town where unofficial public mourning takes place for corteges of armed forces personnel killed on active service, as they make their way from RAF Lyneham to Oxford.  Reports that the group planned to carry empty coffins to "represent the thousands of Muslims who have died" were denied by the group,
Choudary said he chose Wootton Bassett to attract maximum attention and, he asserted, 500 members of Islam4UK would carry 'symbolic coffins' in memory of the Muslim civilians 'murdered by merciless' coalition forces. By 5 January 2010, over 
400,000 people had joined a Facebook group opposing the march.
The Muslim Council of Britain stated that it "condemns the call by..."
On 10 January 2010 Islam4UK said it was cancelling its planned march in Wootton Bassett; however, the police had not actually received a request for permission for the march.

The proscription and responses to it

Islam4UK was proscribed under the UK's Counter terrorism laws on 14 January 2010. In announcing the proscription, the then British Home Secretary Alan Johnson said: "It is already proscribed under two other names – Al Ghurabaa and The Saved Sect".
Islam4UK issued a statement saying, "Today's ban is another nail in the coffin of capitalism and another sign of the revival of Islam and Muslims." They restated their goal: "Therefore, we will one day liberate our land from occupation and implement the Shariah not just in Muslim countries but also right here in Great Britain. This is something that we believe in, live by and hope that in our lifetime we will witness". In a further statement, issued on the same day via their website, they stated that "Islam4UK has been contacted by authorities to (force) shut down its operations, we stress this domain name will no longer be used by us, but the struggle for Khilafah (aka "the Caliphate") will continue regardless of what the disbelievers plot against the Muslims. It is the duty of all Muslims to rise up and call for the Khilafah wherever they may be".
The ban has led some ("the left", according to Sunny Hundal writing in the Guardian) to criticise it as a "blow to free expression",Blog Archive » Islam4UK ban a blow to free expression. Index on Censorship (2010-01-12). Retrieved on 2011-04-24. which will "serve to undermine the government's effort to prevent violent extremism". openDemocracy (2010-01-13). Retrieved on 2011-04-24. Deborah Orr has commented in the Guardian that the ban "erodes democratic rights with the intention of defending them".






