[[Julie Anne Robinson]]

CATEGORIES: Australian expatriates in the United States, Australian television directors, British theatre directors, English-language film directors, Australian women film directors, British women film directors, Women television directors, Living people, Place of birth missing (living people), Year of birth missing (living people)



Julie Anne Robinson is a British theatre, television, and film director perhaps best known for her work on British television. She earned BAFTA and Golden Globe nominations for directing the first half of the BBC miniseries Blackpool. In 2009, Robinson completed work on her first feature film, the American Touchstone Pictures film The Last Song.

Directing career

1998-2008: Theater and television

Robinson's career began with theater. In 1998, she directed the play Terms of Abuse; The New York Times Sheridan Morley wrote that "Julie-Anne Robinson's production never quite manages to hold it all together ... what might have made for a highly dramatic 50 minutes on television seems sprawling even as a short evening in the theater."
Robinson began directing television episodes in 2000, when she helmed an episode of the British soap opera Doctors.
From 2005 to 2006, Robinson directed two more episodes for Holby City and the first three episodes of Goldplated.

2009-2010: ABC contract and films

In 2009, episodes Robinson had directed for Big Love and Pushing Daisies aired. In addition, Robinson entered a blind directing contract with ABC Studios, which broadcasts Grey's Anatomy.webcitation.org/5mIIT1GgM) She directed the pilot episode for the ABC series The Middle;
Notably in 2009, Robinson accepted her first feature films. She was signed on in May to make her motion picture debut directing Disney's The Last Song, a coming of age drama starring Miley Cyrus and Greg Kinnear based on a novel by Nicholas Sparks. The movie was filmed throughout the summer of 2009 Robinson's second feature film, One for the Money, based on a novel by Janet Evanovich and starring Katherine Heigl and Jason O'Mara, was released on January 27, 2012.

Personal life

Robinson is the mother of two children (2010).christianitytoday.html?start=2

Awards and nominations






