[[Motorola Droid]]

CATEGORIES: QWERTY mobile phones, Android (operating system) devices, Motorola mobile phones, Verizon Communications, Products introduced in 2009, GPS navigation devices, Capacitive touchscreen mobile phones

The Motorola Droid (GSM/UMTS version: Motorola Milestone) is an Internet and multimedia enabled smartphone designed by Motorola, which runs Google's Android operating system. The Droid had been publicized under the codenames Sholes and Tao
Features of the phone include Wi-Fi networking, a 5-megapixel low light capable digital camera, a standard 3.5 mm headphone jack, interchangeable battery, 3.7-inch 854×480 touchscreen display. It also includes microSDHC support with bundled 16 GB card,
The phone does not, however, run the re-branded Motoblur interface for Android, instead providing the Google Experience skin and application stack.
The Droid has a hearing aid compatibility (hac) rating of M3/T3.

Launch

United States

Verizon explicitly promoted the Droid as an Apple iPhone alternative. Launched on October 17, 2009, TV spots and an associated website made "entertainingly combative" claims
The marketing for the American launch included "Droid Does Times Square."
The November 6, 2009, release date of the Droid came just under a month after Verizon and Google announced that they had entered into an agreement
American exclusive software for the Droid includes Google Maps Navigation, an Amazon MP3 Store applet, and Verizon Wireless Visual Voice Mail management.
Analytics firm Flurry estimated that 250,000 Motorola Droid phones were sold in the United States during the phone's first week in stores.

Software

This section applies to the Verizon-branded Motorola device in the US. Droid versions in foreign markets (Milestone) may be crippled or have some features disabled due to restrictions enforced by retailer agreements, carrier agreements, manufacturer agreements, or local laws and should be addressed in the appropriate section above.
The Linux kernel used in the 2.0.1 OTA release is 2.6.29, Android build.

=Android 2.1 update=

On February 8, 2010, Motorola announced via Facebook that the Droid update would begin rolling out later that same week. As an attempt to clear confusion, Motorola released a chart of dates stating when each of their Android devices would be updated to Android 2.1, but this only added to the issues because they said the update would happen "soon", rather than offering a concrete time frame.
However, on March 17, 2010, Verizon Wireless announced that they would issue the Android 2.1 "ESE53" update over-the-air, beginning March 18 to a small test group, and more users would see the update later, into the following week. But screenshots from Verizon Wireless documents showed that a last minute software bug was found, and the update was delayed once again, with no new roll out date determined.
The new news from Verizon Wireless provided official information about the update and what it entailed, including "Pinch-to-zoom..... However, the update did not include the addition of two more home screens currently available on the Nexus One, another Android 2.1 device.
The 2.1 update roll out began on March 30, 2010.

=Android 2.2 update=

After some apparent discussion by Motorola over whether they would provide an Android 2.2 Froyo upgrade for the Droid and Milestone, it was confirmed that the Droid would get the upgrade, and a staggered roll out began."Motorola Droid getting Android 2.2 next week" This roll out began on August 3, 2010 and updates the phone to Android 2.2 build number FRG01B. Another update for the Droid began on August 24, 2010, and it included some minor bug fixes. This update's build number is FRG22D.droid-life.com/2010/08/23/breaking-verizon-releasing-update-to-allow-flash-10-1-installation-starting-tomorrow/
A third update was released on December 6, 2010, with a version number of 2.2.1 and a build of FRG83D. A fourth update was released on March 9, 2011, with a version number of 2.2.2 and a build of  FRG83G.
The Motorola support page reported the Milestone version would get an update to Android 2.2 in the Q1 2011, and indeed on March 15 an update was made available.motorola.com/community/manager/softwareupgrades

Root access and unsupported Android releases

The Motorola Droid was successfully "rooted" (manipulated to provide superuser access) on December 8, 2009. This allowed removing sponsored/pay-to-use applets (Amazon, Verizon Visual Voice Mail, etc.), installing and launching custom software, and root access on the phone using a terminal emulator.
On June 5, 2010, a leaked Android 2.2 ROM was given to the public for those with superuser access. It includes a new home launcher, Flash 10.1 support, new homescreen widgets, an updated Market, a JIT compiler for a faster system, as well as new aesthetic changes.
As of July 13, 2011, the DROID is able to be updated to the Android 2.3.4 ROM, but with many small updates and edits to the base code in order to properly run.
On July 26, 2011, an Android 2.3.5 ROM was made available for the DROID that, like the Android 2.3.4 ROM, has been modified to improve performance on the smart phone.
Work is currently underway at xda-developers to bring Android 4.0, Ice Cream Sandwich, to the Motorola Droid/Milestone,Droid A855 ICS Build Attempt although CyanogenMod has stated it will drop support for the Droid/Milestone in ICS-based CyanogenMod 9.CM9 Progress Update
As of July 17, 2012, the DROID is able to be updated to the Android 4.0.4 ROM.  Similar to previous Gingerbread ROMs, this ROM has been tweaked to properly run.
As of August 27, 2012, the Droid is able to be updated to the Android 4.1.1 Rom. This rom is currently being worked on and tweaked to properly run.xda-developers.php?t=1852131

Motorola Milestone

The quad-band

Geographic launch information

The launch countries for the Motorola Milestone included Germany, Italy and Argentina on November 9, 2009. Other European countries soon followed.
Joining this trend, a new, North American, version of the Motorola Milestone was released in Canada in February 2010. This new version supports 3G bands II and V instead of bands I and VIII so it is compatible with Rogers, Bell, and Telus in Canada, and with AT&T and T-Mobile (2G Only) in the US.  At this time, Motorola Milestone is only available from Telus.  The Milestone is also available in the U.S. from several regional GSM carriers, like Cincinnati Bell.

=United Kingdom=

The phone was launched in the United Kingdom on Thursday December 10, 2009, as the Motorola Milestone. The exclusive sales outlet for the phone, eXpansys, reported that all stocks of the phone had completely sold out within 3 hours of its debut. The sell-out was considered a major victory for Motorola, which has had little success with its prior Windows Mobile-based phones, and had been counting on Android-based phones for future growth.

=Middle East=

The phone was launched in the Middle East in 2010, however it included a serious limitation as Google prohibited access to its Android Market application for most of Middle Eastern countries. No reasonable alternative was provided by Google.

=Asia, India=

The Milestone was launched in Hong Kong on December 21, 2009, as the sixth Android device in the region for HKD 4,680 with an 8 GB microSDHC card included. This version is in English but supports Chinese hand writing that originated from the Motorola MING and pinyin input method. While MOTONAV is included, it does not work and is not officially supported. The phone can be updated to Android 2.1 since Q1 2010, the update features a Chinese user interface and more Chinese input methods such as Changjie. The Milestone launched in India on 30 March 2010, priced at 32,000 INR, approximately US$680.

Locked bootloader

Unlike the DROID, the Milestone has a bootloader that only allows signed firmware to load. This creates difficulties for users who wish to boot custom ROM images not signed by Motorola that have become popular in the Droid modding community. This has caused discontent in the Droid community in markets foreign to the US, with numerous petitions being created.  Whether the disabling of custom boot loaders is due to retailer, carrier, manufacturer, or legal restrictions is unknown.
Early in 2011 the community around Milestone ROM-Development and the Polish National BOINC Team initiated AndrOINCAndrOINC to decipher the RSA 1024-bit signature and make customizing possible. The project has been down since April 2011 because the German police confiscated the server on suspicion it was involved with an illegal P2P service.
In June 2011, Motorola committed to delivering an unlockable/relockable bootloader solution for phones receiving updates later that year. This will likely not include the Milestone as Motorola has not indicated it will update the Milestone past Android 2.2/Froyo.

=Root access=

Despite the locked bootloader, the Motorola Milestone has been successfully rooted. Several step-by-step guides are available on the web.

Software releases

=2.0.1 update=

Two months after Motorola Droid received the update, the 2.0.1 update was released to fix a bug with the camera autofocus.

=2.1 update=

The Motorola Milestone update rolled out in the beginning of May 2010, five months after the introduction of Android 2.1.android.1.motorola.1 update 1 has been released, Although Motorola claimed, It is worth noting that these problems affect only some users.

=2.2 update=

The official Android 2.2 Froyo update was released on March 16, 2011, for UK users with a slow roll out to the rest of Europe. As of March 20, the update was still being rolled out was not available in all countries. Community created ROMs of Android 2.2 (Froyo), Android 2.3 (Gingerbread) and Android 4 (Ice Cream Sandwich) have existed for some time, typically based on kernels from leaked updates.
The continued postponing of Milestone updates has become known under the term "Motofail" in Central and South America.

Motorola Motoroi

In July 2010, Motorola launched the phone for Mexico as the Motorola A854 (MOTOROI) and became exclusive to CDMA network carrier Iusacell. Its history is similar to the Motorola Droid and Motorola Milestone. 








