[[Charles Bonaparte (Attorney General)]]

CATEGORIES: 1851 births, 1921 deaths, American Roman Catholics, Harvard Law School alumni, House of Bonaparte, People from Baltimore, Maryland, Princes of France (Bonaparte), The Catholic University of America trustees, Theodore Roosevelt administration cabinet members, United States Attorneys General, United States Secretaries of the Navy, American people of Corsican descent, Maryland Republicans

Charles Joseph Bonaparte (June 9, 1851June 28, 1921) was an American lawyer and political activist for progressive and liberal causes. Originally from Baltimore, Maryland. he served  in the cabinet of the 26th U.S. President, Theodore Roosevelt.
Bonaparte was the U.S. Secretary of the Navy and later the U.S. Attorney General. During his tenure as the attorney general, he created the Bureau of Investigation which later grew and expanded by the 1920s under the director J. Edgar Hoover, (1895-1972), as the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), of which it was renamed as such in 1935. He was of Corsican ancestry, and a great-nephew of Emperor Napoleon (Italian: Napoleone Buonaparte, of Genoese ancestry). 

Bonaparte was one of the founders, and for a time the president, of the National Municipal League. He was also a long time activist for the rights of the Negro ("Colored") people of his city and quite progressive and liberal.

Early life and education

Bonaparte was born in Baltimore, Maryland on June 9, 1851, the son of Jerome ("Bo") Napoleon Bonaparte, (1805–1870) and Susan May Williams (1812–1881), from whom the American line of the Bonaparte family descended, and a grandson of Jérôme Bonaparte, the youngest brother of French Emperor Napoleon I and King of Westphalia, 1807-1813. However, the American Bonapartes were not considered part of the dynasty and never used any titles.
He graduated from Harvard College in Harvard University and the Harvard Law School in Cambridge, Massachusetts, across from Boston, where he later served as a university overseer. He practiced law in Baltimore and became prominent in municipal and national reform movements.

Career

In 1899, Bonaparte was the keynote speaker for the first graduating class of the Roman Catholic women's institution run by the Order of the School Sisters of Notre Dame,  the  College of Notre Dame of Maryland, (today renamed the Notre Dame of Maryland University). He spoke on "The Significance of the Bachelor's Degree":
 Today, and here for the first time in America, a Catholic college for the education of young ladies bestows the bachelor's degree...

 The Style of Scholarship... It implies in the first place a broad, generous sympathy with every form of honest, rational and disinterested study or research.

A Scholar who is also, and first of all, a gentleman may be... He knows how to value every successful effort to master truth; how to look beyond the little things of science...

Young ladies, of this degree has such meaning for your brothers, what meaning has it for you. "The Past and the Promised" p. 58
Bonaparte lived in a townhouse in the north Baltimore neighborhood of Mount Vernon-Belvedere and had a country estate in suburban Baltimore County, Maryland, which surrounds the city on the west, north and east. His home, Bella Vista, was designed by the architects James Bosley Noel Wyatt, (1847-XXXX) and William G. Nolting, (1866-1940), in the prominent local architectural partnership firm of Wyatt & Nolting in 1896.

Politics

A founder of the Reform League of Baltimore, organized in 1885, which eventually led to a certain amount of efficient municipal government with a clean sweep of an election by 1895 in which long-time minority progressive liberal Republicans ousted the long-time Democratic machine politicians in heavily Democratic wards of Baltimore City and ruled with a clean hand for a brief time. He was a member of the Board of Indian Commissioners from 1902 to 1904, chairman of the National Civil Service Reform League in 1904 and appointed a trustee of The Catholic University of America in northeast Washington, D.C..
In 1905, President Theodore Roosevelt appointed Bonaparte Secretary of the Navy. In 1906 Bonaparte moved to the office of Attorney General, which he held until the end of Roosevelt's term. He was active in suits brought against the trusts and was largely responsible for breaking up the tobacco monopoly. He became known as "Charlie, the Crook Chaser".  In 1908, Bonaparte established a Bureau of Investigation (BOI) within the Department of Justice which had been earlier established in 1870 under the direction of the Attorney General himself. By the 1920s, under its long-time director, J. Edgar Hoover, the Bureau had again been cleaned up and streamlined and in 1935 was renamed the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).

Death

Bonaparte died in Bella Vista, and is interred at southwest Baltimore's landmark Loudon Park Cemetery, near Irvington,  off Frederick Road (eastern extension old National Pike - Maryland Route 144) and north of Wilkens Avenue. He died of "Saint Vitus Dance" (today called chorea). A nearby street in Baltimore County bears the name of Bonaparte Avenue
After Bonaparte's death the house was later owned by bootleggers Peter and Michael Kelly. After they left, it was destroyed in a fire caused by faulty wiring on January 20, 1933. The site was replaced by a poured concrete mansion, but a large carriage house dating back to 1896 is still on the estate.

Personal life

On September 1, 1875, Bonaparte married the former Ellen Channing Day (1852–1924), daughter of attorney Thomas Mills Day and Anna Jones Dunn. They had no children.



Bibliography






