[[Jodie Evans]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, American anti-war activists, American documentary filmmakers, American women's rights activists, Living people, People from the Las Vegas Valley

Jodie Evans (born September 22, 1954) is a political activist, author, and documentary film producer.  She characterizes her activism as working for peace and justice, environmental causes and women's rights. She has traveled extensively promoting what she terms the conflict resolution by peaceful means—including leading "citizen diplomacy" delegations to Iran, the Gaza Strip, and Afghanistan. She also became a co-founder of the women's activist organization, CODEPINK. Evans currently serves as the chairperson of the board of the Women's Media Center, an organization that describes its goals as working to amplify the voices of women in the media through advocacy, media and leadership training, and creation of original content.
She was married to Max Palevsky until his death and currently lives in Venice, California.

Early life

Evans was born and raised in Las Vegas, Nevada. She first became interested in what she terms social justice activism when she worked as a maid in a major Las Vegas hotel as a teenager—as her coworkers organized, she marched in favor of what she termed a living wage.

Controversies

Her Code Pink protest actions include disrupting Sarah Palin's speech at the Republican National Convention in 2008,
In the summer of 2010, controversy arose over Evans' alleged 2008 remark to Debbie Lee, the mother of an American soldier killed in Iraq that "Your son deserved to die in Iraq if he was stupid enough to go over there." 
On January 30, 2011, Evans was arrested for disruptive behavior at a Rancho Mirage hotel where she was leading a protest against David H. Koch and Charles G. Koch over their financial support of part of the Tea Party Movement.

Films

Organizations and boards

Evans is a member of a number of organizations and boards including:

Interviews

Interview with The Progressive Magazine 

Awards






