[[Adobe Creek (near Los Altos, California)]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Santa Clara County, California, Santa Cruz Mountains, Rivers of California

Adobe Creek is a U.S. Geological Survey. National Hydrography Dataset high-resolution flowline data. The National Map, accessed March 15, 2011 northward-flowing stream originating on Black Mountain in Santa Clara County, California, United States. It courses through the cities of Los Altos Hills, Los Altos, and Palo Alto. Historically, Adobe Creek was perennial and hosted runs of Steelhead trout entering from southwestern San Francisco Bay.

History

The Ohlone people were the original inhabitants of Adobe Creek. A large shell mound which once had a group of Indian huts was found near Adobe Creek in Palo Alto. Evidence of a smaller settlement within Los Altos was uncovered in 1971, when an Ohlone burial ground with skeletons—one with ceremonial beads—was uncovered by new construction along Adobe Creek near O'Keefe Lane. The site had other artifacts, and an archeological dig was mounted by Foothill College. Around this same time, an Ohlone basket was discovered buried in the Creek bank further north. The O'Keefe site has a historical plaque marking the historic site.
On the 1862 Allardt Map the upper creek is called Arroyo San Antonio (San Antonio Creek) and the lower creek is called Arroyo de las Yeguas (Yeguas Creek). The Adobe Creek name appears as early as 1855 on an official surveyor's map, which lists both the Adobe and San Antonio names for the creek.
During the secularization of the missions in the 1830s, Alvarado parceled out much of their land to prominent Californios via land grants. Mesa was a soldier stationed at the Presidio of San Francisco who had become alfarez (officer in command) in 1837. He built a large square adobe, which lasted well into the twentieth century as a crumbling ruin long thought of as a fortification. The site today is on a hill on the southeast side of El Monte Avenue near Summerhill Avenue in Los Altos, California, most of which is located on the territory of the Rancho.
The upper creek originates in the historic Rancho La Purisima Concepcion, which was granted by Governor Alvarado in 1840 to Jose Gorgonio, an Indian living at Mission Santa Clara. Gorgonio moved to the west bank of Adobe Creek near Fremont Avenue in Los Altos Hills. Much of the town of Los Altos Hills, California was located on this Rancho. In 1844 Rancho La Purisima Concepcion was sold to Juana Briones de Miranda, whose family members had accompanied both the Gaspar de Portolà and the Juan Bautista de Anza Expeditions.
After 1831, Mexican rancho owners would logically erect their dwellings on or very near creeks. Locally, Juan Prado's adobe was near Adobe Creek & Juanita Briones' adobe was near Barron Creek. Because they were permanent features of the landscape, creeks were often used as Rancho boundaries. This was true locally, where the Mexican diseño show Adobe Creek as the boundary between Rancho San Antonio and Rancho La Purisima Concepcion. When Americans took over in 1850, speculators bought much of this land. Much of it initially became large self-contained ranches---typically running cattle & growing crops like wheat, barley & oats that required little or no irrigation. That changed in a few decades when it was discovered that orchards and vineyards could thrive here. Such agriculture of course used more water. Local land was cut progressively  into smaller holdings, until most of it  was subdivided as the population increased. This meant more and more wells, including large ones dug along Adobe Creek by early water companies to serve the little town of Los Altos. The water table inevitably shrank as a result, and alarms about this development appeared, at least as early as the 1920s. In the early 1930s, the Los Altos News reported that the water table, which stood at 120 feet in 1898, was now down to 335 feet.
The Trust for Hidden Villa, is a nonprofit educational organization founded by Frank and Josephine Duveneck, who purchased most of the land comprising the upper Adobe Creek watershed in 1924. They opened Hidden Villa as a gathering place for discussion, reflection, and incubation of social reform. Over the following decades, the Duvenecks also established the first Hostel on the Pacific Coast (1937), the first multiracial summer camp (1945), and Hidden Villa's Environmental Education Program (1970), all on the creek's upper reaches.
The Juan Prado Mesa Preserve in Los Altos Hills between Dawson Drive and Stonebrook Road, and Hale Creek and Neary Quarry was created in 1970 and named for the original holder of the land grant.
Adobe Creek Lodge, an English country-style mansion, was built by Consolidated Chemicals vice-president Milton Haas in 1935. It was a destination resort in the 1940s. Bandleaders Jimmy Dorsey and Harry James played there.
The founders of Adobe Systems, a software company, lived next to Adobe Creek in Los Altos, and named their company after the creek.
The founder of Los Altos, Paul Shoup from the ranch lands he helped purchase from Sarah Winchester that later became the community of Los Altos.  The Paul Shoup House on Adobe Creek is the first property in Los Altos to be listed on the National Register of Historic Places. (2011-10-04) Shoup House First Los Altos Property on National Register of Historic Places - Around Town - Los Altos, CA Patch. Losaltos.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-21.

Watershed and course

Adobe Creek drains about 
Adobe Creek's upper tributaries are, in order, the Middle Fork Adobe Creek, then immediately the West Fork Adobe Creek (the West Fork is known locally as Letcher Creek). The upper watershed of Adobe Creek is completely protected by Hidden Villa and the Mid-Peninsula Regional Open Space District.
Below the confluences of the "three forks", Adobe Creek is joined by three seasonal creeks in Los Altos Hills. The first is .
From 2003 to 2009, Upper Reach 5 of Adobe Creek (between Foothill Expressway and West Edith Avenue) was restored in an innovative partnership called the Adobe Creek Watershed Group with representatives from the Santa Clara Valley Water District, local residents and representatives of the City of Los Altos and the Town of Los Altos Hills. of bank using mostly shrubs and trees native to the Adobe Creek watershed, as well as non-native California Redwoods.

Further downstream, the Palo Alto/Los Altos bike path traverses the creek, running along the Hetch Hetchy Aqueduct right of way.
Several sections of Adobe Creek have been re-aligned, including the trapezoidal concrete drainage channel between El Camino Real and U.S. Highway 101 (the portion between Alma Street and El Camino Real was constructed by the SCVWD in 1959). Roscoe installed a flood gate at 12243 Tepa Way which can redirect the flows into the old Adobe Creek channel. In 1975, an 8-foot pipe bypass intended to prevent flooding of properties along Adobe Creek was constructed starting near the intersection of Moody and El Monte Roads (on the Foothill College Campus) going upstream approximately 2,200 feet, ending just upstream of Tepa Way. The original creek channel is now a secondary water "bypass channel" that bears high winter water flows from Adobe Creek and meanders through several properties in the Adobe Lane subdivision before passing under Moody Road and returning to the mainstem at the southeast corner of Foothill College.
Before passing under Highway 101, Adobe Creek is joined by Barron Creek just upstream of Highway 101. Barron Creek was alternatively known as Dry Creek, Barron Creek has been greatly modified for flood control purposes; the creek bed downstream from El Camino Real is a concrete trapezoidal channel.
After passing under Highway 101, Adobe Creek enters the Palo Alto Flood Basin just west of a levee at the end of San Antonio Road. This levee separates Charleston Slough on the east from Mayfield Slough on the west and is also the eastern border of the Palo Alto Baylands. The Flood Basin is maintained a couple feet below sea level in order to absorb floodwaters from Adobe Creek and Matadero Creek. By lowering the basin, what was once tidal saltwater marsh is now predominantly freshwater marsh. Adobe Creek is joined by Matadero Creek at the north end of Mayfield Slough, where it historically joined with San Francisquito Creek before the latter was diverted north. Mayfield Slough has a tidal gate through which fresh water passes to San Francisco Bay, and some salt water is permitted to return to Mayfield Slough when the tides are higher.
In the 1800s the Baylands marshes ended between Alma and El Camino Real in Palo Alto, which explains why historical maps show area creeks appearing to terminate before they reach the Bay. Duck-hunting blinds were common in the nineteenth century along what is now Middlefield Road. The 1862 Allardt map shows Adobe Creek, then Yeguas Creek, having dual termini - one in the Baylands Marsh and the other to San Francisquito Creek just before entering San Francisco Bay.

Habitat and wildlife

The creek also flows through Redwood Grove, a 
Existing native riparian trees include Willow ssp. (Salix ssp.), California sycamore (Platanus racemosa) in Redwood Grove and near the ranch manager's house at Hidden Villa, White Alder (Alnus rhombifolia) (one large specimen in Redwood Grove - see photo), Cottonwood (Populus) at the top of the Moody Creek tributary, Bigleaf maple (Acer macrophyllum), California buckeye (Aesculus californica), California Bay Laurel (Umbellularia californica) and California walnut (Juglans californica).
Steelhead trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) occurred historically in Adobe Creek based on a report touting the trout in the Sportsman Gazetteer in 1877. Finally, the trash rack at the tidal gate at the mouth of Mayfield Slough is an intermittent complete barrier to fish passage when it is closed.
Adobe Creek was once a perennial stream, as steelhead trout young spend their first year in fresh water and obviously cannot survive in streams that run dry seasonally. Historically, lawsuits were filed to prevent diversion of creek water for irrigation because they caused the creek to run "dry certain seasons of the year". A 1919 lawsuit against upstream creek diversion for "alfalfa fields" and "hog wallows" reads: "From time immemorial....... Field mourns the loss of the song of the brook that made his garden with its rockery an enchanted spot; Shoup's children can no longer wade in the stream, because there is no stream to wade in; acres and acres of McCutchen's rhododendrons are now languishing and dying with unsatisfied thirst."
Four species of native fishes have been collected from Adobe Creek recently:  California roach, Sacramento sucker, three-spined stickleback, and prickly sculpin.

The Palo Alto Flood Basin

The Palo Alto Flood Basin was constructed in 1956 in order to prevent a repeat of the floods of 1955, when a high tide prevented the escape of heavy runoff from Matadero, Adobe, and Barron Creeks into the San Francisco Bay. The trapped runoff waters overflowed upstream creek banks and caused severe flooding in Palo Alto. In order to control the flow of water into the flood basin, a tidegate was placed at the confluence of Adobe Creek, Matadero Creek, and the San Francisco Bay, so that the flood basin could be maintained at approximately 2 feet below sea level, creating room to absorb floodwaters. The tidegate consists of several weirs and one operator-controlled sluice gate that enables tidal flows into the basin in order to improve water quality and for mosquito control. Three agencies oversee the tidegates: Santa Clara Valley Water District, City of Palo Alto, and Santa Clara County Vector Control. Because the trash grate and weirs separate the mouth of the flood basin from the San Francisco Bay estuary, large fish cannot swim freely between the Bay and the basin, unless the sluice gate is open. In addition, the tidegates are set to reduce tidal inflows into the basin, so that the basin is mostly freshwater. After a rainstorm the tidegate is kept closed, however this is precisely when steelhead trout in-migrations should occur. In 2002 a small opening was cut in the trash grate on the tidal gate to permit fish passage but local fisherman in the Flood Basin no longer report catching steelhead trout in recent years.
From November 16 to 20, 2002, approximately 100 Striped bass (Morone saxatilis), 5 Bat rays (Myliobatis californica) and 2 Leopard sharks (Triakis semifasciata) were found dead in the Flood Control Basin in both Adobe and Matadero Creeks within one mile of the tidegate. The fishkill was attributed to the first large rainstorm washing a large amount of leaf litter into the basin, leading to eutrophication and low dissolved oxygen. This is supported by the fact that the dead fish were all large (requiring more oxygen) at 2 to 4 feet long and the mouths and gills of the bass were fully extended open.

Trails and Recreation

The Adobe Creek Loop Trail

The San Francisco Bay Trail, which passes in a loop around both sides of the Palo Alto Flood Basin is known as the Adobe Creek Loop Trail and is easily accessed from a parking lot at the northern terminus of San Antonio Road, just north of U.S. Highway 101. A scenic, easy walking or mountain biking trail, it also provides outstanding birdwatching and in winter is known for its flock of American White Pelicans (Pelecanus erythrorhynchos). The Adobe Creek Loop Trail begins by heading north along the levee between Adobe Creek and the Charleston Slough out to the confluence of Adobe Creek and Matadero Creek.  As one heads north on the levee, Charleston Slough is on the right and Adobe Creek is on the left. The Charleston Slough is a rich salt marsh and littoral zone, providing feeding areas for a variety of shorebirds and other estuarine wildlife. Heading east along East Bayshore Road, turn immediately left after crossing over Adobe Creek to return on the Bay Trail to the San Antonio Road parking lot.

Other Adobe Creek Trails

Many locals enjoy the natural setting of a short walk through Redwood Grove, of which portions are on an elevated wooden boardwalk. In 1986 the city of Los Altos was granted an open space easement on the south bank of Adobe Creek and developed a trail from the south end of Redwood Grove to the Manresa Lane Bridge.
Hidden Villa is the starting point for the relatively gentle Adobe Creek Trail, an easy two mile hike upstream along a cool, wooded canyon where the creek still flows year-round. Two routes connect Hidden Villa to the Black Mountain Trail at Ewing Hill at  summit of Black Mountain.
Another "Adobe Creek Trail" is found in the Monte Bello Open Space Preserve, which is an easy to moderate 1.4 mile hike that begins on Montebello Road about 0.1 miles east of Page Mill Road and rejoins Montebello Road after traversing the headwaters of the West Fork Adobe Creek as well as a large meadow with spectacular view of the South Bay.








