[[Nelson's Band of Brothers]]

CATEGORIES: Horatio Nelson, Royal Navy personnel of the Napoleonic Wars

Band of Brothers was a phrase used by Rear-Admiral Horatio Nelson to refer to the captains under his command just prior to and at the Battle of the Nile in 1798. The phrase, taken from Shakespeare's Henry V, later came to be more generally applied to his relationship with the captains and men under his command, such as at the Battle of Trafalgar.  The usage helped to popularise the phrase in reference to a close-knit group of fighting men.

The original Band of Brothers

One of Nelson's earliest uses of the phrase is in a letter written shortly after the Spanish entry into the war. Nelson, eager for action, had hoped to be given command of a squadron cruising off the Spanish coast, but was passed over.  Dismayed he wrote of his indignation and disappointment, but added Yet, if I know my own thoughts, it is not for myself, or on my own account chiefly, that I feel the sting and the disappointment! No! it is for my brave officers; for my noble-minded friends and comrades. Such a gallant set of fellows! Such a band of brothers! My heart swells at the thought of them! 
Shortly afterwards, the French fleet sailed from Toulon under the command of Vice-Admiral Brueys, carrying Napoleon and a French invasion force bound for Malta and Egypt.  The British commander-in-chief of the Mediterranean Fleet, Admiral Sir John Jervis reinforced Nelson with several ships of the line and sent him in search of the French.  Nelson was initially unsuccessful, missing the French when they passed by, and invaded, Malta in June. They then sailed on to Egypt, and carried out a successful landing at Alexandria in early July. Nelson finally caught up with the French fleet on 1 August, anchored in Aboukir Bay. Nelson immediately prepared an attack, taking the French by surprise, and won a decisive victory, capturing or burning most of the fleet.

The Nile captains

Under Nelson's command at this time were:
Of the brothers, Nelson had already served alongside several. Miller (HMS Captain) had been his flag captain at Cape St Vincent, where Troubridge had also commanded HMS Culloden. The Battle of Santa Cruz de Tenerife some months later reunited Miller and Troubridge, whilst Captains Hood and Thompson were also present.  Fremantle of HMS Seahorse, like Nelson wounded at Tenerife, took Nelson home after the battle, nursed on board by his young wife, Betsy.
After the battle Nelson wrote a number of letters and dispatches, often using the term 'band of brothers' to refer to those who had fought alongside him. To his commanding officer, Lord St Vincent, he wrote, referring to Alexander Ball,  His activity and zeal are eminently conspicuous even amongst the Band of Brothers - each, as I may have occasion to mention them, must call forth my gratitude and admiration.

Tactics and later brothers

Nelson's ability to inspire his captains, and to leave them free to fight their ships as they believed best in the heat of the battle was linked to his description of the captains as his 'band of brothers', and later came to be referred in a general manner to those under his command later in his career. His close consultation with them prior to actions was considered an important factor.  When describing the preparations for Trafalgar, the Cambridge History of Warfare remarked '.....'. at Trafalgar, where Berry also commanded a ship.

Legacy

Nelson's inspirational and motivational abilities became the subject of later study. The phrase 'band of brothers' has continued to be popular as a reference to a close-knit community, usually of military figures.

Notes











