[[Interstate Aviation Committee]]

CATEGORIES: Commonwealth of Independent States, Civil aviation authorities, Organizations investigating aviation accidents and incidents, Aviation in Russia, 2010 Polish Air Force Tu-154 crash

The Interstate Aviation Committee (IAC; ) is a supervising body overseeing the use and management of civil aviation in the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS). The IAC is the official civil aviation authority in Russia while some other countries recognize it as a certification and expert body to a varying extent.
The Interstate Aviation Committee was formed in 1991"Main." (Archive) Interstate Aviation Committee. Retrieved on 24 June 2010. Member list: "By present time the participants of the Agreement are republics Azerbaijan, Armenia, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russian Federation, Tadjikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Ukraine." Address: "119017, Moscow, Russia Bolshaya Ordynka str. 22/2/1" Russian home page (Archive): Address: "119017, Москва, Россия ул.Большая Ордынка, 22/2/1" Member list: "Участниками Соглашения к настоящему времени являются Азербайджанская Республика, Республика Армения, Республика Беларусь, Грузия, Республика Казахстан, Кыргызская Республика, Республика Молдова, Российская Федерация, Республика Таджикистан, Туркменистан, Республика Узбекистан и Украина." according to the Civil Aviation and Airspace Use Treaty, signed on December 25, 1991.Соглашение о гражданской авиации и об использовании воздушного пространства 
The "Air Accident Investigation Commission" of the IAC regularly investigates aviation accidents and incidents.
The committee is headquartered in Yakimanka District, Central Administrative Okrug, Moscow, Russia.
Since 1991, Tatiana Anodina has been the director of the Committee.

Governance

Since 1991, Tatiana Anodina has been the director of the Committee. Her son's family owns and controls Transaero, one of Russia's largest airlines. ""Аэрофлот" не прошел регистрацию на рейс 

Countries participating in the Treaty

Current

As of November 2013, the following countries are named by the IAC"Main." (Archive) Interstate Aviation Committee. as the Treaty participants:

Former

Ошибки нет. Прозвучало слово "Грузия". Михаил Саакашвили мог выйти из СНГ, но грузинские авиаторы продолжают контактировать с МАК. Он - вне политики."[/ref]
The following countries of the former Soviet Union formerly possessed observer status:

History

In the Soviet Union, the State Supervisory Commission for Flight Safety (Gosavianadzor), under the Council of Ministers, in Minsk on 25 December 1991.
The most public and controversial of the IAC's recent activieties was the investigation of the 2010 plane crash that killed Polish president Lech Kaczyński,.]








