[[Medicago]]

CATEGORIES: Medicago, Model organisms

Medicago is a genus of flowering plants commonly known as medick or burclover, and is in the legume family. It contains at least 87 species and is distributed mainly around the Mediterranean basin.
The species Medicago truncatula is a model legume due to its relatively small stature, small genome (450–500 Mb), short generation time (~3 months), and ability to reproduce both by outcrossing and selfing.
Comprehensive descriptions of the genus are Lesinš and Lesinš 1979

Evolution

It is estimated that Medicago diverged from Glycine (soybean) 53–55 million years ago (in the early Eocene),

Ecological Interactions with Other Organisms

Symbiosis With Nitrogen-fixing Rhizobia

Béna et al. (2005) constructed a molecular phylogeny of 23 Sinorhizobium strains and tested the symbiotic ability of 6 strains with 35 Medicago species. Comparison of these phylogenies indicates many transitions in the compatibility of the association over evolutionary time. Furthermore, they propose that the geographical distribution of strains limits the distribution of particular Medicago species.

Agricultural Uses

Other than alfalfa, several of the creeping members of the family (such as Medicago lupulina and Medicago truncatula) have been used as forage crops.

Insect Herbivores

Medicago species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species including Common Swift, Flame, Latticed Heath, Lime-speck Pug, Nutmeg, Setaceous Hebrew Character, Turnip Moth and case-bearers of the genus Coleophora including C. frischella (recorded on M. sativa) and C. fuscociliella (feeds exclusively on Medicago spp.).

List of Species

This list is compiled from:eFlorasThe Biota of North America ProgramThe Plant List

Section Buceras

=Subsection Deflexae=

=Subsection Erectae=

=Subsection Isthmocarpae=

=Subsection Reflexae=

Section Carstiensae

Section Dendrotelis

Section Geocarpa

Section Heynianae

Section Hymenocarpos

Section Lunatae

Section Lupularia

Section Medicago

Section Orbiculares

Section Platycarpae

=Subsection Rotatae=

Section Spirocarpos

=Subsection Intertextae=

=Subsection Leptospireae=

=Subsection Pachyspireae=

Species names with uncertain taxonomic status

The status of the following species is unresolved:
Recent molecular phylogenic analyses of Medicago indicate that the sections and subsections defined by Small & Jomphe, as outlined above, are generally polyphyletic. However, with minor revisions sections and subsections could be rendered monophyletic.

Notes




