[[Von G. Keetch]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, American leaders of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Area seventies of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, J. Reuben Clark Law School alumni, Brigham Young University faculty, Law clerks of the Supreme Court of the United States, Living people, Stake presidents of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Utah lawyers

Von G. Keetch (born March 17, 1960) is a Utah based lawyer. He is a shareholder in the law firm of Kirton & McConkie and a member of the firm's Constitutional, Religious and Appellate Practice section.  He has defended land use rights of religious groups against state regulations, and has argued against liability of religious groups for crimes committed by their members.
Keetch has served as a member of Utah's Appellate Court Nominating Commission, a position to which he was appointed by former Governor Jon Huntsman, Jr..
Keetch, along with Matthew K. Richards, co-wrote "The Need for Legislation to enshrine religious liberty in the Land Use Context".  This is one of the leading works cited by religious freedom advocacy groups such as the Becket Fund.Becket Fund page listing key resources on the RLUIPA
Keetch along with Alexander Dushku, also of Kirton & McConkie, have filed many cases related to the Religious Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act.  

Education and training

Keetch holds a bachelors degree from Brigham Young University (BYU) and a law degree from the university's J. Reuben Clark Law School.  He was the managing editor of the BYU Law Review from 1986-1987 and has been an adjunct professor at BYU.  Keetch served as a clerk to Chief Justice Warren Burger and Associate Justice Antonin Scalia of the Supreme Court of the United States.

Representing the LDS Church

Keetch has represented The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) in cases involving suits over sexual molestation of one member towards another.  He has also been involved in several other lawsuits along these lines related to questions of clerical reporting and responsibility.  In another case in Washington, Keetch was the church's lawyer in a case where the church was sued because a bishop had failed to report accusations of sexual abuse by a girl in his ward, yet Washington law does not require clergy to report such allegations.  Keetch pointed out the help-line to aid bishops in dealing with abuse, and various other polices and actions the Church took on the matter.Find Law article by Keetch
Keetch has also made statements for the church in regard to the Boy Scouts of America.religioustolerance.htm  Keetch was one of the lawyers involved in the LDS Church's attempts to overcome the overbearing zoning restrictions in West Linn, Oregon.publications.state.or.htm  Keetch filed the amicus briefs in early 2013 for the church in favor of both California Proposition 8 and the Defense of Marriage Act being upheld by the United States Supreme Court as constitutional.
Keetch also served as the LDS Church's lawyer in litigation related to the Main Street Plaza case.
As a member of the LDS Church, Keetch has served in positions of lay leadership in the church, including serving as president of the BYU 14th Stake (from 2002-2009)






