[[Jessica Watson]]

CATEGORIES: 1993 births, Australian people of New Zealand descent, New Zealand people of Australian descent, Australian autobiographers, Australian bloggers, Australian sailors, Australian sportswomen, Australian women writers, New Zealand autobiographers, New Zealand bloggers, New Zealand sailors, New Zealand sportspeople, New Zealand sportswomen, New Zealand women writers, People from the Gold Coast, Queensland, Recipients of the Medal of the Order of Australia, Single-handed circumnavigating sailors, Single-handed sailors, Sport Australia Hall of Fame inductees, Teenage single-handed circumnavigating sailors, Writers from Queensland, Young Australian of the Year Award winners, Australian explorers, Female explorers, Dancing with the Stars (Australian TV series) participants, Living people

Jessica Watson, OAM (born 18 May 1993) is an Australian sailor. In May 2010, she unofficially became the youngest person to sail non-stop and unassisted around the world, although her route did not meet World Sailing Speed Record Council (WSSRC) criteria for circumnavigation of the globe.
Watson departed from Sydney on 18 October 2009, heading eastbound over the Pacific Ocean, Atlantic Ocean and the Indian Ocean. She returned to Sydney on 15 May 2010, three days before her 17th birthday.
On 25 January 2011 she was named the 2011 Young Australian of the Year. She currently resides in Buderim, Queensland.

Early life

Watson was born on the Gold Coast in Queensland, Australia."About Jessica and her mission", Jessica Watson. Retrieved 22 June 2010. The second of four children of New Zealand couple Roger and Julie Watson, who moved to Australia in 1987, she has dual Australian and New Zealand nationality. She has an older sister (Emily) and younger brother and sister (Tom and Hannah). All four took sailing lessons as children, and the family went on to live on board a 16 metre cabin cruiser for five years, the children being home schooled via distance learning. Later they lived on a purpose-built double decker bus for some time. When Watson was eleven and they were still living on the boat, her mother read Jesse Martin's book Lionheart: A Journey of the Human Spirit to the children as a bedtime story. This led to Watson forming the ambition, at age twelve, to sail around the world too.

Circumnavigation and publicity

Watson had been planning to complete a solo non-stop and unassisted circumnavigation of the globe since at least early 2008. Officially announced in May 2009, the journey was expected to take eight months with an estimated distance of 23,000 nautical miles. To fulfill the plan of sailing non-stop and unassisted, during the journey no other person would be allowed to give her anything and she must not moor to any port or other boat, although advice over radio communication was permitted.
Watson's planned circumnavigation route was to start and end at Sydney, and to pass near New Zealand, Fiji, Kiribati, Cape Horn, Cape of Good Hope, Cape Leeuwin and South East Cape. In accordance with the definitions for circumnavigations set out by the International Sailing Federation's WSSRC, the equator must be crossed; this crossing was carried out near Kiritimati. However, the journey eventually did not meet the WSSRC requirement of an orthodromic distance of 21,600 nmi (refer below for the reason).
Watson arrived back in Sydney Harbour at 1:53 pm, Saturday 15 May 2010.
The Los Angeles Times reported Watson's reason for her journey: "I wanted to challenge myself and achieve something to be proud of. And yes, I wanted to inspire people. I hated being judged by my appearance and other people's expectations of what a 'little girl' was capable of. It's no longer just my dream or voyage. Every milestone out here isn't just my achievement, but an achievement for everyone who has put so much time and effort into helping getting me here."
After the journey she continued a relationship with Michael Perham, the previous youngest circumnavigator. They met during a stop he made in Australia during his circumnavigation, and they had several phone conversations during her journey. More recently, however, Watson has also been seen spending time with Australia's youngest ever federal politician, Wyatt Roy. Jessica's mother insists they are just friends, and that Jessica's schedule—which takes her around the country and world—is currently preventing her from "dating boys.""Smooth sailing for Jessica and Wyatt." Herald Sun, 8 January 2011. Retrieved 31 January 2011.
Watson has written a book about her experience, True Spirit published by Hachette Australia.[ref]
[/ref] The book was released 29 July 2010.
Watson has also filmed a documentary about her solo trip before, during and after completing her journey. It was narrated by Sir Richard Branson and premiered on ONEHD on 16 August 2010, before being released on DVD along with a CD album on 20 August 2010.

Preparation

As training for her voyage, Watson crewed on a number of vessels, including OceansWatch's Magic Roundabout on which she acted as skipper during a crossing of the Tasman Sea.

Boat

The boat is a  Watson was also deeply involved in the preparation of the boat, which she named Ella's Pink Lady. Most of the time the boat is steered by a self-steering windvane system. She has named the system Parker after the chauffeur of the pink Rolls-Royce in the Thunderbirds television series.

Test run and collision

During a test run sailing from Brisbane to Sydney, on her first night after leaving Brisbane, Ella's Pink Lady collided with the Silver Yang, a 63,000-tonne bulk carrier at about 02.00 am on 9 September 2009 near Point Lookout.
The Australian Transport Safety Bureau's preliminary report on the collision found that Watson had been taking a five minute nap during the event, (thus she was asleep at the time of the collision), and that while she had checked her radar prior to lying down, she had failed to spot the Silver Yang. This led to the accident four minutes later. The report also found that the Silver Yang had been aware of her presence and had attempted to change course, but that this had been insufficient to avoid Watson's boat.
The final report was released in June 2010. The report stated that both Watson and the Silver Yang's watchkeepers had failed to maintain an adequate lookout and that both had failed to properly employ the navigational aids. In addition, the report found that the watchkeeper on the Silver Yang had failed to offer assistance to Watson after the two vessels had collided.

Journey

Watson sailed out of Sydney Harbour on 18 October 2009 in her pink-hulled Ella Baché-sponsored Ella's Pink Lady. 18 days later, on 5 November, she passed Tonga, sailing clear of both New Zealand and Fiji.
As required for a full circumnavigation, she crossed the equator on 19 November 2009 (Australian date), near Jarvis Island at about 161°40'W longitude, and rounded Kiritimati on 22 November 2009 (Australian date) after 36 days. Then she crossed the equator again at 156°20'W longitude, and continued south-easterly towards Cape Horn. The sailed distance from Sydney to Kiritimati was about 3,900 nmi. At Christmas she was near Point Nemo, the place located furthest from land.
On 13 January 2010 (9:40 UTC) she passed Cape Horn, having sailed around 9,800 nmi in 87 days. This was 11 days ahead of the planned 
The halfway point on the voyage was passed on 25 January 2010, her 100th day at sea, 
On 15 February 2010, she crossed the Prime Meridian, crossing from the Western Hemisphere to the Eastern Hemisphere. towards Western Australia.
Watson arrived in the Australian economic zone on 10 April 2010, celebrating with crackers and Vegemite. There her parents and media flew over her in a small plane in order to welcome her.
When south of Australia, Watson suffered a lot of inclement weather. In this part of the journey, she had at least three knockdowns (where the mast hit the water), one of them with the mast deep into the sea, luckily without any real damage or injury. The swells she experienced in the Great Australian Bight were up to 12 metres in height, higher than anytime before.
On 3 May, Watson rounded the South East Cape of Tasmania and began heading north to Sydney, her final destination.
Watson completed her journey on day 210 of her voyage at 1:53 pm on 15 May 2010 when she arrived in Sydney Harbour. Her 17th birthday was 3 days later.
During the journey Watson had to do repairs herself to the boat and the equipment. Several of the repairs were reported on the blog: the battery monitor (18 December), the stove, toilet and mainsail (24 January), the toilet again (11 March), replacement of wind generator blades (30 March), the kettle (10 April), the mainsail again (18 April), replacement of the wind generator with a spare (21 April), and finally the fuel pump of the engine (10 May).

Ella's Pink Lady stays in Queensland

In the months following the completion of Jessica's journey, there were questions about what would become of her boat, Ella's Pink Lady.

Criticism

Watson's journey has been criticised, particularly after the collision with the freighter. Barry Tyler of Pacific Motor Yacht magazine wrote, "like the majority of the seafaring world I consider it irresponsible, cavalier and indeed ignorant to attempt such a feat, at such a tender age and with so little trans-ocean experience."

Circumnavigation scrutiny

Sailing website Sail-World. CNN World, 14 May 2010. Retrieved 9 December 2010. The rule is based on the older rule, followed by current record-holder Jesse Martin,"Historic precedent of true circumnavigations by sail." What is a circumnavigation? Retrieved 12 April 2011. Note: The original link is dead, but this is the Internet Archive version at the Internet Archive. Retrieved 12 April 2011. "The Azores, that was my antipodal point, I had to sail up there and back to make it a proper circumnavigation..." that during a circumnavigation the sailor must pass two points on opposite sides of the earth (antipodes). For example, if starting in southern England, a place near the start will be opposite to the track near New Zealand. It was replaced by the rule that for world records the shortest orthodromic track must be at least as long as the circumference of the earth (hence 21,600 nautical miles).
Watson responded "If I haven't been sailing around the world, then it beats me what I've been doing out here all this time!  Yes it's a shame that my voyage won't be recognized by a few organizations because I'm under 18, but it really doesn't worry me."
Watson's manager, Andrew Fraser, dismissed the claim, noting that the WSSRC does not recognise records by sailors under eighteen.
British sailing journalist and author Bob Fisher published an article on Sail-World. He said "True, Jessica has sailed alone and unassisted, passed under the four required capes, but the orthodromic route she has taken does not total the necessary 21,600 miles that is equivalent of the girth of the Earth at the equator. And that, Andrew Fraser, is a requirement for the world record you were claiming for Jessica, and which would put her in line to beat Jesse Martin's record."
Watson commented on this matter in her book True Spirit. She states that she wrote a number of letters to the WSSRC asking what she had to do to claim the record. Their answer was that she could not claim the record since age records were no longer recognized. She got the impression it was (according to WSSRC) not necessary to follow the route Jesse Martin followed (which went far north of the equator in the Atlantic), a route Watson knew well from reading Martin's book more than once. Watson decided to follow a route commonly accepted as round the world. A number of sailors, like Kay Cottee, followed a similar route which has been accepted.
In the book she also criticised those who criticised her management. Sail-World. People think we're criticising Jessica. We're not. We're criticising her management". She felt hurt by that, since it hinted that "He was suggesting that I was just a puppet, that I had no voice and no will of my own."

Praise

Despite criticism, Watson has had her supporters, not only after, but before the departure. In particular, adventurer Don McIntyre strongly supported her attempt, providing her with a boat and speaking in support of her attempt.
During her journey others expressed their support for her attempt. Australian Prime Minister Kevin Rudd said in a public speech on 26 January that "Jessica Watson ... is an extraordinary young Australian."
At the arrival in Sydney, she was met by approximately 75,000 spectators including then Australian Prime Minister, Kevin Rudd. He said "Jess welcome back to dry land. Welcome back home to Australia. You know something, you may feel a little wobbly on your feet just now, but in the eyes of all Australians you now stand tall as our newest Australian hero." The crowd then sang a special rendition of Australia's national Anthem Advance Australia Fair as a salute to Watson.

Awards

Since completing her circumnavigation, Watson has been recognised with a number of awards. These include the "Spirit of Sport" award from the Sport Australia Hall of Fame, and "Young Performer of the Year" for 2010, an award voted by the Australian public and presented at the annual Sports Performer Awards in Melbourne.
Watson was named the Young Australian of the Year on 25 January 2011.
She was selected as one of the entrants to the Who's Who in Australia 2012 edition.
Watson was the first female skipper to cross the line in the 2011 Sydney to Hobart and as a result earned the Jane Tate trophy.heraldsun.au/sport/more-sports/sydney-to-hobart-success-special-for-jessica-watson/story-e6frfglf-1226233523064

Further projects

Watson took part in the Mini Fastnet sailing race, in Europe, in June 2011, sailing a two person mini sailboat with Scott Cavanough as skipper.
After that, she sailed in the Sydney to Hobart Yacht Race in December 2011, skippering Another Challenge with the youngest crew to ever compete in the race, consisting of ten people aged under 22, with Jessica aged 18. The boat got the second place in its class, Sydney 38 One Design, with equal standard boats. This was considered a success, since all the other boats in the class had considerably older male skippers.









