[[Paraíso Express]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 albums, Alejandro Sanz albums, Warner Music Latina albums, Latin Grammy Award for Best Male Pop Vocal Album

Paraíso Express is the eighth studio album recorded by Spanish singer-songwriter Alejandro Sanz. It was produced by Tommy Torres, mixed by Bob Clearmountain, and was released worldwide in late November 2009. This album is the follow-up to the Grammy Award winning album El Tren de los Momentos. All the tracks included were written by Sanz, along with several writers, a first for the singer, and also the first album without help by Emmanuele Rufinengo and Lulo Pérez, his longtime producing team. Paraíso Express received a nomination for an Album of the Year and won Best Male Pop Vocal Album at the Latin Grammy Awards of 2010. It is also won a Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album in 2011.

Background information

In July 2009, Alejandro Sanz confirmed through his official website that he was finalizing the details of his long-awaited new album, the first since 2006, El Tren de los Momentos, which was awarded with the Grammy Award for Best Latin Pop Album and sold 120,000 units in United States. The song "Looking for Paradise" was premiered on a fan club members-only section of Sanz's official site on September 18, 2009. In the track both singers performs lyrics in English and Spanish.

Singles

The first single yielded from the album, "Looking for Paradise", was preceded by a viral campaign in which fans and friends of the artist were asked to send him ideas of paradise. The song, a collaboration with American singer Alicia Keys, became another number-one hit for Sanz in the Billboard Hot Latin Tracks chart, and the first for Keys in this chart. The album debuted at the top of the charts in Spain and the Latin charts in United States, and eventually peaked at number-one in México. "Desde Cuándo" was released as the second single of the album in 2010.

Style

This album marks Sanz' return to the light-hearted and melancholical song styles he had in his 2000 album El Alma Al Aire, after going through more experimental or alternative stages in his two previous albums. According to Sanz, the songs included on Paraíso Express are the happiest of his career as a songwriter, but they are not "autobiographical" or "have a lot of his life", they are "common themes and attitudes of people." "Mi Peter Punk", deals with the issue of "those people who does not enjoy the stages of life"; "Hice Llorar Hasta los Angeles", refers to the author religious beliefs; "Lola Soledad" is a tribute to a very special woman in his life; and "Looking for Paradise" is about the search for a paradise for everyone of us. With Paraíso Express traded his trademark flamenco arrangements and Latin percussion beats, in order to get closer to a pop and British rock style. Sanz said that this was something different, "it could be a step forward or backward." On his work relationship with Torres, Sanz told: "Tommy did a perfect interpretation in that sense. Everything flowed in a very natural way." 
The songs were recorded in Barcelona, Spain, and "Looking for Paradise" in New York City on Alicia Keys recording places and studio. When Sanz revealed the track listing and the official cover for the album, he said that the album was almost soft rock, and the music is more happy and calmed that the past albums.

Track listing

Charts and sales

Charts

Sales and certifications

|-
|-




