[[Parma F.C.]]

CATEGORIES: Parma F.C., Football clubs in Italy, Football clubs in Emilia-Romagna, Association football clubs established in 1913, Italian football First Division clubs, Serie A clubs, Coppa Italia winners, 1913 establishments in Italy

Parma Football Club (formerly Parma Associazione Calcio), commonly referred to as just Parma, is an Italian professional football club based in Parma, Emilia–Romagna that will compete in Serie A in the 2013-14 season, having finished in tenth position last season. Founded as Verdi Foot Ball Club in December 1913, the club has played its home matches in the 27,906-seat Stadio Ennio Tardini, often referred to as simply Il Tardini, since 1923.
Although Parma has never won a domestic league title and never competed for major trophies until the 1990s, it has won three Italian Cups, one Supercoppa Italiana, two UEFA Cups, one European Super Cup and one UEFA Cup Winners' Cup. Bankrolled by Calisto Tanzi, the club won these eight trophies between 1992 and 2002, a period in which it achieved its best ever league finish – as runners-up in the 1996–97 season – and threatened the dominance of the league's established powers: Juventus, Milan and Internazionale, the only Italian sides to have had more success in European competition than Parma. 793
More recently, Parma's financial troubles have limited the club's ambitions. Despite the recent downturn in success, the club is an associated member and one of nine Italian clubs that are part of the European Club Association, a representative collection of Europe's most elite clubs, formed after the dissolution of the G-14.

History

Early years (1913–1968)

A club was founded in July 1913 as Verdi Foot Ball Club in honour of the centenary of famous opera composer Giuseppe Verdi, who was born in the province of Parma. It adopted yellow and blue as its colours. 986 Parma became a founder member of Serie B after finishing as runners-up in the Prima Divisione in the 1928–29 season. The club would remain in Serie B for three years before being relegated and changing its name to Associazione Sportiva Parma in 1931. In the 1935–36 season, Parma became a founding member of Serie C, where the club stayed until winning promotion back to Serie B in 1943. Italian football was then brought to a halt as the Second World War intensified, although the team did make an appearance in the Campianto Alta Italia in 1944.
Following the restart of organised football, Parma spent three years in Serie B, then split into two regional divisions, before again being relegated in 1948–49 to Serie C. The side would spend another five seasons in Serie C before an eleven-year spell in Serie B that included the achievement of ninth position in 1954–55, a club record at that time. This was an era in which the club's players generally held down other jobs or were still in education and where the town's amateur rugby union and volleyball sides, Rugby Parma F.C. 1931 and Ferrovieri Parma, proved more popular among the more privileged. 739–740 Parma made its debut in European competition during the 1960–61 season, defeating Swiss side AC Bellinzona in the Coppa delle Alpi, but relegation to Serie C followed in 1964–65 season. Parma spent just one season in Serie C before a second successive relegation, this time to Serie D, in 1966.

Re-birth and improvement (1968–1989)

The club was in turmoil and was ordered into liquidation by the Court of Parma in 1968, changing its name to Parma Football Club that year. In 1969, another local team, Associazione Calcio Parmense, won promotion to Serie D. On 1 January 1970, A.C. Parmense adopted the sporting licence of the liquidated club which had been formed in 1913. This meant that it had the right to use the crociato shirts, the badge and the city's name. This brought about a change of luck in both financial and sporting terms, as the side was crowned Serie D champions and spent three years in Serie C before promotion to Serie B; however, it was a short stay. The team was relegated back to Serie C in their second season in the division. A return to Serie B did not materialise until the end of the 1970s and the club again lasted only one season in the second division of Italian football.
Under the management of Cesare Maldini, Parma once again returned to Serie B after winning their division in 1984 with victory on the final day over Sanremo; Juventus-bound Stefano Pioli scored the only goal of the game. The Ducali again only spent a year in Serie B, finishing third from bottom and succumbing to relegation as a consequence. Arrigo Sacchi did, however, manage to return the club to Serie B in 1986 after a single season in the third tier. The side enjoyed good success that season in missing out on promotion to Italy's top tier by just three points and eliminating A.C. Milan from the Coppa Italia, a result that convinced owner Silvio Berlusconi to hire Sacchi as the new manager of the Rossoneri. Sacchi's replacement, Zdeněk Zeman, was fired after just seven matches and replaced by Giampieri Vitali, who secured two consecutive mid-table finishes.

Success and insolvency (1989–2004)

Nevio Scala was appointed as head coach in 1989. Scala's Parma secured a historic promotion in 1990 to Serie A with a 2–0 Derby del Grana win over A.C. Reggiana 1919. Later that year, the side was successful in the UEFA Super Cup, overcoming Milan 2–1 on aggregate, but lost the UEFA Cup Winners' Cup final 1–0 against Arsenal. Scala's final success with Parma was in another two-legged final against Juventus: Dino Baggio scored twice to give Parma a 2–1 aggregate win, but Juventus exacted revenge in the Coppa Italia final. Replaced by Carlo Ancelotti, Scala departed in 1996 and was a popular coach for the trophies he won and because the team played attractive football in the tradition of the club.
Ancelotti overhauled the team and guided it to a record second place in 1997.

Second re-birth (2004–present)

The club re-formed as Parma Football Club in June 2004 and the 2004–05 season saw Parma plummet to their lowest finish in Serie A – despite a second consecutive 23-goal haul from Gilardino, who was then sold for €24m – as managers came and went. Parma ended the following season, their first without European competition since 1991, in tenth, but returned in 2006 after the Calciopoli scandal. On 24 January 2007, Tommaso Ghirardi bought the club out of administration and became the owner and president of Parma F.C.
Francesco Guidolin won promotion back to Serie A at the first attempt with a second-place finish and led the side to eighth on its return to Serie A in 2009–10, narrowly missing out on qualification for the Europa League before leaving for Udinese. In May 2010, Guidolin swapped jobs with Pasquale Marino, who was sacked by Ghirardi in April 2011 when Parma was caught in another relegation dogfight.

Colours and badge

The team is characterised by having used two different colour schemes in recent memory and at its inception. Originally, the club wore yellow and blue chequered shirts in honour of the city's traditional colours, which date back to 1545 when the Duchy of Parma was established, but white shirts with a black cross on the chest were introduced after the First World War, drawing inspiration from Juventus' colours, following a name change. White continued to be worn as the main colour of the home kits for much of the remainder of the century, although often complemented with yellow, blue or both, rather than black. The club did, however, experiment in the 1950s with blue shirts and blue and yellow striped shirts. The cross shirts were restored and worn until bankruptcy in 1968, when white shirts with off-centre blue and yellow vertical bands were worn, but the cross returned from 1970 until 1983 when a yellow and blue-sleeved white shirt was introduced and used for 8 years.
After decades in the lower divisions, Parma was promoted to Serie A in 1990, where the side immediately became a major force in the battle for major trophies, on many notable occasions in direct opposition to Juventus, who would become fierce rivals of Parma's. This rivalry and the influence of Parmalat led to the demotion of the white shirts to the away kit, so the side wore yellow and blue hooped shirts at home for six seasons between 1998 and 2004, and navy blue shirts often worn as third choice in this period. This was a time of great success for the club, thus the shirts have become synonymous with Parma, often still called the Gialloblu (Yellow and Blues) today, despite a recent reversion to the traditional white shirts emblazoned with a cross caused by parent company Parmalat's collapse and the clubs subsequent re-foundation as Parma Football Club. Yellow and blue are normally Parma's away kit colours, used in various combinations since 2004, such as vertical stripes, hoops, crosses or as solid colour designs.
Parma's logo changed in 2005 to reflect the name change from Parma A.C. to Parma F.C., but the logo otherwise remains the same, encompassing the city colours of yellow and blue and the club's traditional black cross set on a white background, and has not changed much in years, although it was dramatically overhauled to feature a prancing bull for one season in 2000–01 before it was criticised and discontinued in favour of the old badge.

Grounds

Parma initially had no permanent home and used the Piazza d'Armi, where two wooden posts constituted the frame of each goal. In December 1914, the club began to use land between the Via Emilia, the Eridania refinery and the Ferraguti factory, but it was sold, so the club returned to the Piazza d'Armi before transferring to the Tre Pioppi, the first fenced-off pitch in the city. Much of the renovation took place after the club's first promotion to Serie A at the start of the 1990s. The stadium's usable capacity stands at 27,906, but only 23,045 are authorised to enter at once following the 2009 death of Vicenza fan Eugene Bortolon in the Curva Sud.
Expansion or renovation plans are often discussed at the highest level of the club's hierarchy and the Comune di Parma, but no project has received unanimous support. This is partly because the football club rent the stadium and often have interests which conflict with those of the municipal authority. The tenancy expires in 2031. One project which both club and council had agreed on was the potential redevelopment for Italy's potential hosting of Euro 2016. The bid was eventually unsuccessful, but included plans for an improved 31,397 all-seater stadium.
The first team trains and plays most of its home friendly matches at the Centro Sportivo di Collecchio in Collecchio, which is located 15.4 kilometres to the south-west of the stadium. Three of Parma's youth teams – the under-20s, the under-17s and the under-16s – play their home matches in the same complex.

Support

The supporters of Parma are seen as placid fans, something for which they are derided. 88 Traditionally, they have been seen as fans who enjoy the spectacle of football and are less partisan, although they have been more characterised by impatience of late. In Northeast Italy, the team is the fifth best supported, behind Internazionale, Juventus, A.C. Milan and Bologna, the first three of which are not based in that region.

Rivalries

Parma maintains rivalries with regional and national clubs; some of these are keenly fought local derbies. Historically, Derby del Grana (or, less commonly, Derby dell'Enza) which is played against Piacenza. Despite their relative obscurity, Lombardian side Cremonese and Tuscan outfit Carrarese, to Parma's north and south, respectively, are both seen as rivals too. Of these local derbies, only the Derby d'Emilia is played regularly because only Bologna play in Serie A alongside Parma.
Juventus is considered a great rival of Parma largely due to their recent duels, which include Parma's 1995 UEFA Cup victory, its first and third Coppa Italia triumphs, Supercoppa Italiana defeats in 1995 and 2002, and its 1995 domestic cup final defeat to The Old Lady. These six matches comprise nearly half of the fourteen major finals Parma has participated in. Ironically, Parma's colours have their origins in those Juventus wears, and the switch from white and black to a yellow and blue home kit in the late 1990s took place in order to distance and distinguish Parma from Juventus. Parma maintain keenly fought rivalries with Vicenza and Genoa.
In Italy, it is common for clubs to be twinned in an arrangement called gemellaggi. This is a practice uncommon elsewhere.

Ownership and finances

Since January 2007, the club has been majority-owned by Tommaso Ghirardi, owner of mechanics firm La Leonessa S.p.A.. Enrico Bondi had previously been put in charge of selling the club after parent company Parmalat's financial crisis and sold it to Ghirardi for less than €3M. The club is a limited liability company that is wholly owned by parent company Eventi Sportivi S.p.A.. Ghirardi owns roughly 70% of Eventi Sportivi; Alberto Rossi and Alberto Volpi each bought 5% of Eventi Sportivi on 21 July 2011 for a combined €7.5M to reduce Ghirardi's ownership to that approximate figure.
To improve the financial standing of the club, Parma hopes to eventually buy the Stadio Ennio Tardini from the relevant municipal authority.

Players

First-team squad



Out on loan


















=Gubbio=

= Gorica=

Players with contracts

=Co-owned at other clubs=











Retired numbers

12 – Since the 2002–03 season, Curva Nord of the Stadio Ennio Tardini, as a sign of recognition towards the fans who sit in the Curva Nord, considered the 12th man in the pitch.

Academy

For information on Parma's youth teams, see Parma F.C. Academy.

Former players

For details of former players, see List of Parma F.C. players and :Category:Parma F.C. players.

Club captains

For a list of club captains, see List of Parma F.C. players#Club captains.

Player records

''For player records, including player awards, see Parma F.C. statistics and records.

Club officials

Presidential history

Parma has had numerous presidents over the course of its history; here is a complete list of them:
 
 |width="30"| 
|valign="top"|
|}

Managerial history

Below is a list of Parma managers since the end of the First World War until the present day.
 
 |width="30"| 
|valign="top"|
|width="30"| 
|valign="top"|
|}

Honours

Parma has won eight major titles in their history, all coming in a period of ten years between 1992 and 2002. These honours make it the tenth most successful team in Italian football history in terms of the number of major trophies won, the fourth most successful team in European competition, after Milan, Juventus and Inter, and, along with Milan, the only club in Italy to have won more international than domestic honours.

National

European

Minor

Notes

Footnotes

Bibliography




