[[Alexander N. Rossolimo]]

CATEGORIES: People from Paris, French emigrants to the United States, American people of Russian descent, American people of Greek descent, French people of Russian descent, Eastern Orthodox Christians from the United States, Stuyvesant High School alumni, Lycée Français de New York alumni, City College of New York alumni, Harvard University alumni, Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni, Harvard Fellows, MIT Sloan School of Management alumni, American management consultants, Boston Consulting Group people, Year of birth missing (living people), Living people

Alexander N. Rossolimo is an American think tank executive, entrepreneur, and corporate director. 64th edition. Marquis Who's Who, New Providence, NJ. 41st edition. Editions Jacques Lafitte, Lavallois-Perret, France 

Early life and education

Rossolimo was born in Paris. His parents were Nicolas Rossolimo, an International Grandmaster of chess, and Véra (née Boudakovitch). His maternal grandfather, Anatole Pavlovich Boudakovitch, was a Russian-Polish count and colonel in the Imperial Russian Army, who died in battle near Warsaw during World War I. He was awarded the Cross of St. George posthumously in 1917 for his bravery. Кавалеры ордена Святого Георгия ("Holders of the Cross of St. George")  At age twelve, Rossolimo emigrated with his parents to the United States, settling in New York, where he attended Stuyvesant High School and the Lycée Français de New York.
Rossolimo graduated with a Bachelor of Electrical Engineering degree from the City College of New York, where he was awarded the Belden gold medal in mathematics and the Blonder Tongue Award in electronics, and was elected to the national engineering honor societies Tau Beta Pi and Eta Kappa Nu. He attended graduate school at Harvard University, where he had a National Science Foundation Graduate Fellowship, and received an M.A. in applied mathematics and in 1973 a Ph.D. in applied physics "Doctors of Philosophy", Harvard University, Graduate School of Arts and Sciences, 1974 transport and phase changes in the lead-gold system", Ph.D. thesis by Alexander N. Rossolimo, Harvard University, 1973, Cambridge, Massachusetts. under the supervision of Professor David Turnbull. Rossolimo and David Turnbull, "Kinetics and morphology of precipitation of AuPb3 from Pb(Au) solid solution," Acta Metallurgica 21:21-34 (1973). 
[/ref] That same year, he received a Master's degree in Management (M.B.A.) from the MIT Sloan School of Management. "The relationship between the price differentials between national and private brands of supermarket products and the advertising-to-sales ratios of the national brands", S.M. thesis supervised by Gordon F. Bloom, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 1973, Cambridge, Massachusetts.  Alumni Directory 2000, p. 1999, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Career

Rossolimo started his business career as a financial analyst at Pechiney SA in Paris. He then worked in brand management at the Clorox Company in Oakland, as a management consultant and project leader with the Boston Consulting Group (BCG), and as director of planning and financial analysis at United Brands Company in Boston, New York and Chicago. In 1980, he joined Digital Equipment Corporation in Maynard, MA, where he conducted projects in the Office of the President – who was then the legendary computer pioneer Ken Olsen – in the areas of management research, business strategy, corporate venturing and security."Homeland Security and Digital Equipment Corporation," The Digital Alumni Newsletter, Spring 2003, Volume 10 Number 1. In 1999, he cofounded a high-tech startup in knowledge management, where he served as acting Chief Executive Officer. In 2006, he became regional director of a strategic consulting firm conducting due diligence for private equity and venture capital firms.
Fluent in several languages, Rossolimo has spoken at conferences in the US and abroad, and at international meetings in London, Paris, Moscow,"Rose-Roth Initiative Seminar on Nuclear Security in the CIS," North Atlantic Assembly, Moscow 1992. and Casablanca"The Economic Summit of the Middle East and North Africa," World Economic Forum and Council on Foreign Relations, Casablanca 1994. He is former president and chairman of the Boston Chapter of the Association for Corporate Growth (ACG), the national organization of professionals in corporate growth and M&A. In 1995, he won first prize in the ACG Dealmaker Challenge. He has served on the Board of Directors of ACG Global, and on the Board of Advisors of Radia Technologies Corporation. He is a member of the Boston Security Analysts Society (BSAS), the System Dynamics Society, and the National Association of Corporate Directors (NACD), New England Chapter. A physical fitness enthusiast, he is a member of the L Street Brownies Swim Club. He is also a member of the Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies (RUSI).
Rossolimo is the founding chairman of the Center for Security and Social Progress Inc. (CSSP), a think tank focused on environmental policy, global security, sustainable economic growth and overall social progress. CSSP has done trailblazing work in national and international security, notably on the security of "loose nukes" and nuclear materials."The Post-Soviet Nuclear Threats Are Even Bigger," The International Herald Tribune, 15 May 1993.   "Les Nouvelles Menaces Nucléaires," Libération, Paris, 2 October 1993. Its Advisory Board has included former US Secretary of State Alexander Haig, the best-seller writer Robin Moore, the technology leader David Packard, cofounder of the Hewlett-Packard Company, the actor and diplomat Douglas Fairbanks Jr., and the businessman and philanthropist Albert Hamilton Gordon.




