[[Paul Budnitz]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, Living people, American designers, Yale University alumni

Paul Budnitz (born September 14, 1967) is the founder of Kidrobot, a retailer of art toys, apparel and accessories. He also owns and runs Budnitz Bicycles, is an author of several books, exhibits as a photographer

Biography

Early life and education

The son of a nuclear physicist and a social worker, Budnitz was born and raised in Berkeley, California. From young, Budnitz displayed a mixed aptitude for computer programming and art. By the time he had reached high school, he was professionally coding safety analysis software for nuclear power plants and creating video games for the Commodore 64 home computer. Budnitz studied photography, sculpture and film at Yale University.

Early career

During his undergraduate degree Budnitz started his first business, M.O.B., selling clothing he created to museum stores worldwide.
Budnitz used Adobe Premiere to edit a full-length film on a Macintosh computer. Accessed 21 July 2013.
In 1997, Budnitz started recording the sound for a 16mm film on MiniDisc, a new audio format that he encountered while on a trip to Tokyo. He hacked and customized the MiniDisc players to accommodate time-code, specifically for film and sound recording. This soon led him to found his third company, minidisco. By 2001 minidisco.

Kidrobot

In 2002 Budnitz discovered images of limited edition vinyl toys from Japan and China based on cereal box characters and modified GI-Joes turned into stylized B-boys wearing streetwear. He recognized the toys as collectible art pieces that fused a variety of artistic disciplines: graffiti, graphic design, pop-art, and animation. He also recognized the absence of innovative art toys in North America, as well as a potential fanbase for this hybrid art form in the United States.
In 2002 Budnitz sold Minidisco and sunk the proceeds into founding Kidrobot in a California garage, using the technology he'd developed for his older businesses. He moved the new company to New York City in 2003.
Budnitz collaborated with friend Tristan Eaton, an illustrator he'd worked with on previous animated films, to create DUNNY, a vinyl figure designed to be customized by commissioned artists and MUNNY, a Do-it-Yourself (DIY) toy figure that Kidrobot customers could customize themselves.
In 2006, Budnitz added a complete apparel collection, co-designing the entire line. Like Kidrobot's toys, most of the apparel draws on the creative input of the artists of recently released toys.
In late 2006, Budnitz wrote the picture book I am Plastic: The Designer Toy Explosion, published by Harry Abrams. This shows the most popular and innovative toys in the designer art toy movement with chapters on Japan, China, Europe and the United States.
In 2007, the Museum of Modern Art (MoMA) in New York acquired 13 of Kidrobot's toys for its permanent collection. These include "Hello My Name is Dunny", "Bad Dunny" and "MUNNY 3″.
Budnitz maintains an online diary at paulbudnitz. His regular posts include artist interviews, coverage of Kidrobot events, rare toy releases and photographs of urban street art.
Budnitz has designed or art directed virtually every product created by Kidrobot since the company's inception. He has also co-designed all of Kidrobot's retail stores and the Kidrobot Room in Peter Gatien's CiRCA nightclub in Toronto.
In 2006, Kidrobot partnered with W!LDBRAIN, Inc. to begin working on animated films for theater and the web. In 2008, Paramount Pictures announced they had signed an agreement with Kidrobot to produce an animated feature film based on the Kidrobot aesthetic.
Budnitz has worked with many artists, designers, and fashion brands. A short list includes artists and illustrators Frank Kozik, Dalek, Doze Green, Tara McPherson, Huck Gee, Gary Baseman, Shepard Fairey, eBoy, Tilt, Mist, Joe Ledbetter, Tristan Eaton, Jeremeyville, To Die For, Junko Mizuno, Mori Chax, Touma, Mike and Katie Tado, Paul Pope, David Horvath; designers including Heatherette, Lemar and Dauley, Jil Sander, Dries Van Noten, Marc Jacobs, Visionaire, and Paul Smith; Musicians including Swizz Beatz, DJ QBert, and Gorillaz; and brands like Nike, Barney's NYC, LaCoste, Burton Snowboards, The Standard Hotels, Siemens, Swatch, and Volkswagen.

Budnitz Bicycles

In 2010 Budnitz created Budnitz Bicycles, following his lifelong passion for bicycling. Often called the Aston Martin of bicycles, Budnitz uses titanium and cro-moly steel to create the fastest, lightest, and among the most beautiful urban bicycles in the world. His bicycles have been featured in Vogue, V Magazine, Forbes, Uncrate, Coolhunting, and many other online and offline publications. In 2012 Phaidon called Budnitz, "The man who made bicycles beautiful again".






