[[Weev]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Internet trolling, Living people, People associated with computer security, American white-collar criminals, American people convicted of fraud

Andrew Alan Escher Auernheimer

Hacking

Auernheimer claimed responsibility for the disruption to Amazon's services in April 2009 when many books on gay issues were reclassified as pornography.

AT&T data breach

Auernheimer is a member of the group of computer experts known as "Goatse Security" that exposed a flaw in AT&T security which allowed the e-mail addresses of iPad users to be revealed. Auernheimer maintains that Goatse Security used common industry standard practices and has said that "we tried to be the good guys". Jennifer Granick of the Electronic Frontier Foundation has also defended the tactics used by Goatse Security.

=Investigation=

The FBI then opened an investigation into the incident., which led to a criminal complaint in January 2011. Filed with the court January 13, 2011
Shortly after the investigation was opened, Auernheimer's home in Arkansas was raided by the FBI and local police. The FBI search was related to its investigation of the AT&T security breach, but Auernheimer was subsequently detained on state drug charges.
In January 2011, all drug-related charges were dropped immediately following Auernheimer's arrest by federal authorities. The U.S. Justice Department announced that he would be charged with one count of conspiracy to access a computer without authorization and one count of fraud.

=Indictment=

On November 20, 2012, Auernheimer was found guilty of one count of identity fraud and one count of conspiracy to access a computer without authorization. Alex Pilosov, a friend who was also present for the ruling, tweeted that Auernheimer would remain free on bail until sentencing, "which will be at least 90 days out."[ref]
</ref>
On November 29, 2012, Auernheimer authored an article in Wired entitled "Forget Disclosure – Hackers Should Keep Security Holes to Themselves," advocating the disclosure of any zero-day exploit only to individuals who will "use it in the interests of social justice."
In a January 2013 Tech Crunch article, he likened his prosecution to that of Aaron Swartz, writing
On March 18, 2013, after being found guilty of identity fraud and conspiracy to access a computer without authorization, Auernheimer was sentenced to 41 months in federal prison and ordered to pay $73,000 in restitution.
Later in March 2013, civil rights lawyer and George Washington University Law School faculty Orin Kerr joined Auernheimer's legal team, free of charge.
Auernheimer was serving his sentence at the Federal Correctional Institution, Allenwood Low, a low-security federal prison in Pennsylvania, and was scheduled for release in January 2016.

=Conviction vacated=

On April 11, 2014, the Third Circuit issued an opinion vacating Auernheimer's conviction, on the basis that venue in New Jersey was improper.Case: 13-1816 Document: 003111586090

Political views and critical reception

Auernheimer has published a number of podcasts and keeps a LiveJournal blog in which he offers commentary on racial and cultural issues. His views have proved controversial, causing Philip Elmer-DeWitt to dub him "the ugliest computer hacker".
Auernheimer is an advocate for free speech. He defended the satirical wiki Encyclopedia Dramatica in a Ninemsn interview
His actions have sometimes been described as hacktivism. Australian media commentator Emma Jane has characterized him as a "celebrity hacktivist".
Auernheimer has shown support for the Occupy Wall Street protest movement, stating that he "had a strong decade of infuriating rich people."

Trolling

Auernheimer is the former president of the Gay Nigger Association of America, an anti-blogging trolling group who take their name from the 1992 Danish movie Gayniggers from Outer Space. Members of Goatse Security involved with the iPad hack are also members of GNAA. Auernheimer also claimed responsibility for posting a false account of Kathy Sierra's career in 2007 including claims that she was a former prostitute, along with her actual address and Social Security number. This led to her receiving death threats and threats of sexual violence Auernheimer later reversed himself and denied responsibility for posting Sierra's information.com/DUWEZfTy
A song from Childish Gambino's album Because the Internet, entitled Life: The Biggest Troll is named after Auernheimer.
Auernheimer is planning to open a hedge fund, TRO LLC.





Further reading




