[[Geoffrey Ma]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Hong Kong judges, Hong Kong Senior Counsel

Geoffrey Ma Tao-li GBM QC SC (; born 11 January 1956) is the incumbent Chief Justice of the Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal. Between 2001 and 2010, he has held various positions in the High Court of Hong Kong, including Chief Judge, Justice of Appeal, and Judge of the Court of First Instance. Before his judicial career, he was a barrister-at-law in private practice, and was qualified to practise in England and Wales, Hong Kong, Australia and Singapore.

Early life and education

Born in Hong Kong, Geoffrey Ma received his education near Manchester, England.  In 1974, he started his studies at the University of Birmingham and graduated with an LLB in 1977.
He is an Honorary Fellow of Harris Manchester College, Oxford.

Legal career

Ma was called to Bar in Hong Kong, State of Victoria, Australia and Singapore in 1980, 1983 and 1990 respectively. He was appointed Queen's Counsel in 1993. He was the Head of Chambers of Temple Chambers in Hong Kong prior to his judicial appointment. 
He was appointed by the Hong Kong Judiciary as Recorder of the Court of First Instance of the High Court in December 2000. In December 2001, Ma became a Judge of the Court of First Instance of the High Court. In July 2003, he was appointed as Chief Judge of the High Court in Hong Kong.
Ma was also a member of the Working Party on Civil Justice Reform, which came into effect in April 2009 and is aimed at lowering legal costs and improving assess to justice. Addressing almost 200 legal professionals at a forum in April 2010, Ma criticised judges for being too lenient in civil proceedings with time-wasting parties
On 8 April 2010, it was announced that Chief Executive of Hong Kong Donald Tsang has accepted the recommendation of the Judicial Officers Recommendation Commission to appoint Ma as the successor to the current Chief Justice of the Court of Final Appeal Andrew Li.
Ma had a number of public appointments, which include serving as an Associate Member of the London Maritime Arbitrators Association, an Honorary lecturer of the Department of Professional Legal Education of the University of Hong Kong, a Member of the Criminal and Law Enforcement Injuries Compensation Board, a Member of the High Court Civil Court Users Committee, a Member of the Hong Kong Futures Exchange Disciplinary Appeal Tribunal, Chairman of the Appeal Tribunal Panel (Buildings), Deputy Chairman of the SFC Appeals Panel, and Deputy Chairman of the SFC Takeovers Appeals Committee.
He was elected an Honorary Bencher of Gray's Inn in 2004, making him the third person in Hong Kong conferred with such honour.

Reception

Legislator and Senior Counsel Audrey Eu  and Ronny Tong believed Ma will continue to defend the independence of the Hong Kong judiciary, but described him as sometimes a little too "conservative." Tong cited an appeal from September 2009 when Ma and fellow judges criticized the government for not disclosing information but eventually ruled in favor of an Immigration Department decision to deny entry to Falun Gong practitioners on "security grounds." Also, in December 2008, he was part of a Court of Appeal panel that overturned a lower court ruling that acquitted the operators of Citizens' Radio of unlicensed broadcasting. 
On the other hand, the Hong Kong Bar Association said in a statement Ma commands "deep respect" and is "eminently qualified". Similarly, Hong Kong Human Rights Monitor Director Law Yuk-kai said he was pleased to see Ma's rich experience in public law. "He is strong in public law. He has the competence to protect constitutional rights," Law said. "Of course we were disappointed about some cases, but I don't think he is going out of the way to side with the government. I hope he understands that his role is very important. Hong Kong doesn't have democracy. We expect there is at least one branch of government that serves as the last protector of our rights and interests."

Family

Geoffrey Ma is married to Maria Yuen Ka-ning, who is a Justice of Appeal of the Court of Appeal of the High Court. They have one daughter. To avoid any possible conflict of interest, Ma would not hear appeals from cases in which Yuen has sat. Nor would he deal with any administrative matter concerning her. 







