[[Fantasy flight]]

CATEGORIES: Civil aviation, Children's charities, Non-governmental organizations, International non-profit organizations

Fantasy flights are charity flights operated by a host airline for locally disadvantaged and terminally ill children to fly to a fictitious destination.
The destination is often the North Pole, the home of Santa Claus' workshop. Employees and locals often including firemen, police officers, and local church groups generally donate their own time and labor to decorate either a gate area or a dedicated terminal area. Employees often don costumes including magicians and Santa's helpers known as elves to entertain the children. Various gifts and take-away bags often accompany the Christmas and holiday seasons' theme. Often, local companies and charitable organizations are sponsors. Host airlines donate venues (gate areas), aircraft, fuel, and fellow sponsors. The cost is virtually always free.
Fantasy flights differ from angel flights in that fantasy flights

Examples

Commercial aviation

The following commercial aviation operators are sorted by airlines' names' alphabetical order.
Aerolineas Argentinas conducts fantasy flights between Buenos Aires' two main airports, Ministro Pistarini International Airport and Jorge Newberry Airport. These flights typically last around one hour, and are flown on jet aircraft. The children enjoy a view of the city of Buenos Aires on these flights .
Air Labrador operated a fantasy flight with a Santa visit on board to the plane on the tarmac while taxiing.

Alaska Airlines is the official airline of the non-profit charity Spokane Fantasy Flight
American Airlines is a primary sponsor and official airline of Snowball Express,
British Airways operates a special day return trip for kids with life-threatening illnesses from Glasgow Prestwick Airport to Rovaniemi Airport, Finland, located near the Arctic Circle, to ride snowmobiles, take husky dog sled rides and meet Santa and his reindeer.
Continental Airlines operated Operation Santa Claus to airlift children's toys to those in need
the New England Air Museum in Windsor Locks, Connecticut
JetBlue Airways held its 3rd annual "Wings for Autism" with staff from United Airlines, Delta Airlines, Massachusetts State Police, The Charles River Center, and Massport in support and an on-board experience also with United Airlines.
Southwest Airlines operated its fantasy flights at Baltimore Thurgood Marshall Airport with the Johns Hopkins Children's Center for years.
Sun Country Airlines operated fantasy flights at Minneapolis-St Paul International Airport.
United Airlines operated fantasy flights at Washington Dulles Airport on 2002-12-07,
US Airways operated its fantasy flights at LaGuardia Airport
Winnipeg International Airport, Skyservice Airlines, and sponsors This event won the Airports Council International 2009 award for special events.
Helicopter operators such as the San Jose Police Department Air Support Unit  also operate fantasy flights, namely by landing with Santa on board.

Railway

Railways including the Valley Railroad Company, operate fantasy rides.




