[[Asian Boyz]]

CATEGORIES: Asian-American gangs, Modern street gangs, Gangs in Los Angeles, California, Gangs in New York, Crips sets, Gangs in Massachusetts

The Asian Boyz, or ABZ, are an Asian American street gang founded by Filipino American Marvin "Shy Boy" Mercado in the 1990s in Southern California. The Asian Boyz gang members are mainly males of Vietnamese, Cambodian or Laotian descent,.
The gang are allied with the Crips. They are active in 14 states, in 28 different cities in the U.S.

History

The Asian Boyz was formed in Long Beach due to Asian immigrants being harassed by the East Side Longos, a Mexican American gang that originated from Anaheim Street.
On the East Coast, their gang colors are forest green, black and yellow. Asian Boyz also have a tattoo of a dragon head with crystal globes.
The Asian Boyz gang was established in Long Beach. There are additional factions in states on the east coast. However, the ABZ are spread across the United States, mainly on the east coast of the U.S.

Notable crimes

In August 1997, the leader of the Asian Boyz Van Nuys set, Sothi Menh, was arrested in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, and brought back to the United States after fleeing the country in January that year. He was wanted for committing five gang-related murders in the San Fernando Valley in 1995.
On August 12, 2006, a fight broke out between Bloods and Asian Boyz gang members at a house in Lowell, Massachusetts, where a birthday party was being held. Asian Boyz members left the party and allegedly started throwing bottles and other objects. Billeoum Phan, 14, began firing at the Asian Boyz members. One of the shots hit Asian Boyz member Samnang Oth, killing him. Phan was convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to incarceration until he turns 21. He is required to serve a 5-years probation after his release.
Three members of the gang were charged with beating a 15-year-old boy named Sang Vu to death during a gang initiation in Utica, New York, in January 2007. Richie Nguyen was sentenced to 5 to 15 years of prison for manslaughter.
In March 2008, four men abducted 24-year-old Vutha Au from Santa Rosa and drove him to a beach near Jenner, California where they fatally shot him. Quentin Russell, who was 24 years old at the time of the shooting, was the shooter, and brothers Sarith Prak and David Prak, and Preston Khaoone, were charged in connection with the murder and abduction of Au. All four defendants were convicted and sentenced to life without parole on July 27, 2012."Asian Boyz Gang Members Sentenced to Life without the Possibility of Parole Plus 25 Years to Life for Blind Beach Murder", Press release, 27 July 2012, by the Office of the District Attorney, Sonoma County. Retrieved August 13, 2013
In the 1990s, Pierre Mercado, the brother of Marvin Mercado, was responsible for four murders in an attempt to intimidate other gangs. He fled to the Philippines and remained there for 11 years until he was brought back to the United States in 2012. In 2013, Mercado was sentenced to 218 years to life in prison.




