[[Solyndra]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Fremont, California, Defunct companies based in the San Francisco Bay Area, Companies that have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, Companies established in 2005, 2005 establishments in California, Companies disestablished in 2011, 2011 disestablishments in California, Obama administration controversies, Technology companies based in the San Francisco Bay Area, Thin-film cell manufacturers

Solyndra was a manufacturer of cylindrical panels of copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) thin-film solar cells based in Fremont, California. Although the company was once touted for its unusual technology, plummeting silicon prices led to the company's being unable to compete with more conventional solar panels.

Technology

Solyndra designed, manufactured, and sold solar photovoltaic (PV) systems composed of panels and mounting hardware for large, low-slope commercial rooftops. The panels perform optimally when mounted horizontally and packed closely together, the company claimed, covering significantly more of the typically available roof area and producing more electricity per rooftop on an annual basis than a conventional panel installation.
The solar panels developed by the company were claimed to be unlike any other product ever tried in the industry. The panels were made of racks of cylindrical tubes (also called tubular solar panels), as opposed to traditional flat panels. Solyndra rolled its CIGS thin films into a cylindrical shape and placed 40 of them in each 1-meter-by-2-meter panel. Solyndra designers thought the cylindrical solar panels absorbed energy from any direction (direct, indirect, and reflected light).
Each Solyndra cylinder, one inch in diameter, is made up of two tubes. The company used equipment it had developed to deposit CIGS on the outside of the inner tube, which includes up to 200 CIGS cells. On top of the CIGS material, it added an "optical coupling agent", which concentrates the sunlight that shines through the outer tube. After inserting the inner tube into the outer tube, each cylinder is filled with a silicone oil,
When combined with a white roof (the fastest growing segment of the commercial roof industry with over 1 billion square feet installed in 2008 and required for any new commercial construction in California), the company claimed that systems that employ the panels on a given rooftop could produce significantly more electricity in a given year. It was thought that on a white roof, the panels can capture up to 20% more light than a black roof. (Note: it is difficult to cite a specific reference for this because the exact gain depends on the latitude of the installation (i.e. sun angle). Solyndra's on-line energy modeling tool allowed designers to specify the roof albedo, and energy output varied as a function of albedo. Twenty percent is cited as typical figure and was validated by careful testing and modeling by the Fraunhofer Institute, among others. However, this report is not available on-line.)
The other advantage claimed by the company was that the panels did not have to move to track the Sun. The panels are always presenting some of their face directly perpendicular to the Sun.  The daily production of flat solar panels has an output curve that has a clear peak while Solyndra claimed their system produced more power throughout the day.
The Solyndra panels allow wind to blow through them. According to the company, these factors enable the installation of PV on a broader range of rooftops without anchoring or ballast, which are inherently problematic.  Solyndra claimed that wind and snow loads are negligible and that its panels are lighter in weight per area.
The company claimed the cells themselves convert 12 to 14 percent of sunlight into electricity, an efficiency better than competing CIGS thin-film technologies. However, these efficiencies are for the cells laid flat.
In 2006, Solyndra began deploying demonstration systems globally. The company stated the total count was 14 systems and that these systems were each instrumented with sensitive radiation, wind speed, temperature, and humidity measurement devices to aid in the development of energy yield forecasting software tools. The company's website claimed there were more than 1,000 Solyndra systems installed around the world, representing 100 megawatts of power.

Management and investors

Solyndra was led by Brian Harrison, a veteran of Intel Corporation.  He took the reins on 27 July 2010 when founder Chris Gronet was replaced as CEO.
Major investors included George Kaiser Family Foundation, U.S. Venture Partners, CMEA Ventures, Redpoint Ventures, Virgin Green Fund, Madrone Capital Partners, RockPort Capital Partners, Argonaut Private Equity, Masdar and Artis Capital Management.
In 2009, the company posted $100 million in revenue. It was estimated that its production and sales growth could lead to a market cap between $1.76 - 2 billion.
Other company executives were Bill Stover, CFO; Karen Alter, SVP of Marketing; Corby Whitaker, VP, Sales United States; John Gaffney, Corporate Counsel; and Ben Bierman, EVP Operations and Engineering.

Government support and politics

Solyndra received a $536 million U.S. Energy Department loan guarantee before going bankrupt.  Under the Solyndra restructuring plan, the government is projected to recoup 19 percent on $142.8 million of the loan and nothing on the remaining $385 million.1 million tax break from California's Alternative Energy and Advanced Transportation Financing Authority.James Nash, Solyndra Case May Cause Scrutiny of Companies Seeking Tax Break Bloomberg Businessweek 7 October 2011
The majority of Solyndra funding was provided by the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act.

Production

The company manufactured its products in its second fabrication plant, Fab 2, a new $733 million state-of-the-art robotic facility in Fremont, California, which opened in September 2010. Fab 2 was built with the support of a $535 million federal loan guarantee along with at least $198 million from private investors. According to an initial public offering by the company, the combined annual production capacity of the plants was projected to be 610 megawatts by 2013. After expanding production in 2008,
On 20 March 2009, Solyndra estimated that:
On 3 November 2010, Solyndra said it would lay off around 40 employees and not renew contracts for about 150 temporary workers as a result of the consolidation.

Shutdown and investigation

On 31 August 2011, Solyndra announced it was filing for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection, laying off 1,100 employees, and shutting down all operations and manufacturing. In Solyndra's quarterly employee meetings, employees were told that the company was losing money, and that production costs, while declining, were still higher than the also-declining market prices for solar panels. The decision to lay off employees and cease operations came about as the result of a board meeting on 30 August in which terms for the injection of additional capital could not be agreed upon. This left Solyndra with virtually no cash.
On 8 September 2011, Solyndra was raided by the FBI investigating the company.
In September 2011, federal agents visited the homes of Brian Harrison, the company's CEO, and Chris Gronet, the company's founder, to examine computer files and documents.Solyndra Loan: Now Treasury Dept. Is Launching Investigation, ABC News, 8 September 2011
On 29 September 2011, a US Department of the Treasury official confirmed that the criminal probe of Solyndra is focused on whether the company and its officers misrepresented the firm's finances to the government in seeking the loan or engaged in accounting fraud.Chu takes responsibility for a loan deal that put more taxpayer money at risk in Solyndra, Washington Post, 29 September 2011
On 7 October 2011, newly revealed emails showed that the Obama administration had concerns about the legality of the Department of Energy's loan restructuring plan and warned OMB director Jeffrey D. Zients that the plan should be cleared with the Department of Justice first, which the Department of Energy had not done. The emails also revealed that as early as August 2009, an aide to then-White House Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel had asked a Department of Energy official if he could discuss any concerns among the investment community about Solyndra but that the official dismissed the idea that Solyndra had financial problems.Solyndra loan deal: Warning about legality came from within Obama administration, Washington Post, 7 October 2011
On 13 October 2011, the bankruptcy court approved the hiring of the chief restructuring officer Todd Neilson.
On 20 October 2011, Rocket Renewables (rocketrenewables.com) incorporated in Delaware
On 10 October 2012, the US Department of Justice objected to the bankruptcy plan amidst allegations that "the plan's primary purpose is tax avoidance through the preservation of hundreds of millions of dollars of net operating losses after reorganization".2012 TNT 198-2 SOLYNDRA BANKRUPTCY PLAN SERVES TO AVOID TAX, DOJ INSISTS. (Section 172 -- Net Operating Loss) (Release Date: 11 October 2012) (Doc 2012-21090) AUTHOR: Trivedi, Shamik2012 TNT 198-11 BANKRUPTCY TRUSTEE OBJECTS TO CONFIRMATION OF SOLYNDRA BANKRUPTCY PLAN. (In re: Solyndra LLC et al.) (No. 11-12799) (United States Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware) (Section 382 -- NOL Carryovers) (Release Date: 10 October 2012) (Doc 2012-21130) Also, the successor company is named 360 Degree Solar Holdings, Inc., which would have control over "approximately US$ 350 million in tax attributes", such as NOL carryovers.
On 22 October 2012, in the case In re Solyndra LLC et al., No. 11-12799 (Bankr. D. Del.), Judge Mary F. Walrath of the U.S. Bankruptcy Court for the District of Delaware ruled "that the evidence does not support a finding that the principal purpose of the plan was tax avoidance."
On 12 July 2013, the Contra Costa Times reported that Gronet was unlikely to face criminal charges in connection with Solyndra.








