[[Jonathan Olley]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, British photographers, Living people, Movie stills photographers

Jonathan Olley (born London 1967) is a British photographer. His art photography focuses on landscapes marked by signs of human folly, but he has also worked as a war reporter and stills photographer for the motion picture industry.

Early career

After being ejected from the Chelsea School of Art, Olley attended the post-graduate course at the University of Wales Newport School of Documentary Photography.
In 1989, he began work as a freelance press photographer. In 1990, he won the Nikon Press Award for a photo essay in the Independent newspaper.

The Siege of Sarajevo

In 1994, he traveled to Bosnia to live under siege in Sarajevo, taking news photographs for the Boston Globe, Paris Match, L'Express and The Guardian newspaper.

Photo Essays and Personal Projects

Upon receiving a bursary to complete his Atom Bomb project, Olley travelled to Japan to complete the project in Hiroshima & Nagasaki.  The A-bomb exhibition opened at The Photographers Gallery, London.
In 1996, he began another personal project on the 'Newbury Bypass' road protests in the forests of Berkshire for inclusion in a group work for the Millennium.
In 1997 and 1998 he won two first prizes at the World Press Photo Awards. Awarded 'first prize stories: Nature & Environment', for the essay on the Newbury Bypass road protest and 'first prize stories: Arts', for his essay on the Burning Man Festival in Nevada.worldpressphoto.
At this point, Olley began work on a 5x4 landscape project on barracks and police stations in Northern Ireland.

Modern Castles of Northern Ireland

Completed in 1989, Olley's 'Modern Castles of Northern Ireland' captures the architecture of 'the troubles' of Northern Ireland; fortified police stations, watchtowers and army barracks.coldtype.HR.pdf
Originally published in Source Magazine, this work became widely published around the world and was first exhibited at Festival International Du Reportage, Perpignan, France.

Kosovo

In 1999, Olley  traveled to Macedonia during the refugee crisis and continued work in Kosovo after the liberation. The resultant book, 'Kosovo' was published by Network Photographers and the 'Partners'.

Later Work

During the 2000s Olley worked on a variety of projects.  These included the colour large format landscape project 'Between Home & Heaven' on the uninhabited volcanic Island of Surtsey, Iceland, 'Fairy Stones', an examination of myth and superstition and its effects upon modern Icelandic society and 'Engineering Nature', about humankind's desire to create an 'Edenic' landscape, taking into account land use management, reclamation, leisure use of the landscape and car culture.
In 2004, he traveled to Iraq, to continue a project seeking to create visual art that conceptualises the relationships between the human and natural worlds.
Now based in London, he teaches part-time on the Documentary Photography course at the University of Wales, Newport, but remains a freelance photographer, undertaking various assignments around the world.

The Forbidden Forest

'The Forbidden Forest' looks at the peripheral effects of warfare on the landscape.

Movie stills photography

He worked as stills photographer on the films Green Zone, United 93, The Hurt Locker and Zero Dark Thirty.






