[[Hayley Okines]]

CATEGORIES: 1997 births, English activists, Living people, People with progeria, English children, People from Bexhill-on-Sea

Hayley Okines is a girl with the extremely rare aging disease known as progeria. She is known for spreading awareness of the condition. Although the average life expectancy for sufferers is 13 years, Hayley is part of a drug trial that has seen her beat the doctors' predictions, and she is still alive and well.
Diagnosed in 1999, at 2 years old,  In 2012, an autobiography of Hayley Okines was published titled Old Before My Time ISBN 9781908192554.go.
Hayley lives in Bexhill-on-Sea, East Sussex, with her mother Kerry, her father Mark, and younger siblings Louis and Ruby (neither of whom has progeria).

Television appearances

Okines has been the subject of television specials both in Europe and in the United States. Discovery Health aired a special titled Extreme Aging: Hayley's Story, which focused on the balance of the disease being currently terminal but with a possible cure on the horizon.
When she was 13 years old, she was also featured on a French television show in 2012 20/01/2012 called 'Tous Différents' (NT1) (translation: All Different). At that time she already had a physical age of 102 years.
When she was ten years old, Okines was featured in "Hope for Hayley", an episode that was part of the British series Extraordinary People. The episode concerned Okines' trips to Boston for treatment.
She was featured in the second part of a three-part documentary series called Make Me Live Forever, in which presenter Michael Mosley investigated a number of proposed treatments to enable humans to extend their lifespan. Okines was discussed in relation to telomeres (short telomeres are a characteristic of Progeria) and their apparent role in the aging process.
She has also been featured in a report by Tara Brown on the Australian version of 60 Minutes.ninemsn.au/article.aspx?id=7962926

Fundraisers

Although the United States' Progeria Research funds Okines's treatment, airfare for the family is left to them. Some athletes were inspired by Okines to raise money for progeria research. London's Chelsea Football Club raised thousands of pounds through a charity raffle in Okines's honor. Additionally, after Steve Keens saw Okines on a television special, he bicycled 
Brian Bartlett, SRC Roadworks and Cultural Outreach Representative at Glasgow University is notable for his work with Hayley.
 This was thanks to a group of people on Twitter making Justin aware of Hayley.

"Voices of Tomorrow"

When Jane Winiberg saw a progeria television special, she and Mark Street wrote a song about Okines and other children. "Life Will Find a Way" is another similar track on the album, and the profits are being donated to The Progeria Research Foundation.








