[[United States Department of Energy]]

CATEGORIES: Nuclear weapons infrastructure of the United States, Energy in the United States, United States Department of Energy, Government agencies established in 1977, 1977 establishments in Washington, D.C., United States federal executive departments

The United States Department of Energy (DOE) is a Cabinet-level department of the United States government concerned with the United States' policies regarding energy and safety in handling nuclear material. Its responsibilities include the nation's nuclear weapons program, nuclear reactor production for the United States Navy, energy conservation, energy-related research, radioactive waste disposal, and domestic energy production. It also directs research in genomics; the Human Genome Project originated in a DOE initiative.
The agency is administered by the United States Secretary of Energy, and its headquarters are located in southwest Washington, D.C., on Independence Avenue in the James V. Forrestal Building, named for James Forrestal, as well as in Germantown, Maryland.

History

In 1942, during World War II, the United States started the Manhattan Project, a project to develop the atomic bomb, under the eye of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. After the war, the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) was created to control the future of the project.
The AEC was reinstated and gave way to Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which was tasked with regulating the nuclear power industry, and the Energy Research and Development Administration, which was tasked to manage the nuclear weapon, naval reactor, and energy development programs.
The 1973 oil crisis called attention to the need to consolidate energy policy. On August 4, 1977, President Jimmy Carter signed into law The Department of Energy Organization Act of 1977 ( The new agency, which began operations on October 1, 1977, consolidated the Federal Energy Administration, the Energy Research and Development Administration, the Federal Power Commission, and programs of various other agencies.

Weapon plans stolen

In December 1999, The FBI was investigating how China obtained plans for a specific nuclear device. Wen Ho Lee was accused of stealing nuclear secrets from Los Alamos National Laboratory for the People's Republic of China. Federal officials, including then-Energy Secretary Bill Richardson, publicly named Lee as a suspect before he was charged with a crime. The U.S. Congress held hearings to investigate the Department of Energy's mishandling of his case. Republican senators thought that an independent agency should be in charge of nuclear weapons and security issues, not the Department of Energy.

Organization

thumb|260px|Sign in front of the United States Department of Energy Forrestal Building on Independence Avenue in Washington D.C. The Energy Secretary is assisted in managing the Department by a United States Deputy Secretary of Energy, also appointed by the President, who assumes the duties of the Secretary in his absence. The Department also has three Under Secretaries, each appointed by the President, who oversee the major areas of the Department's work. The President also appoints eight officials with the rank of Assistant Secretary of Energy who have line management responsibility for major organizational elements of the Department. The Energy Secretary assigns their functions and duties.

Facilities

As a leading federal research and development agency in the United States, the Department of Energy operates a system of national laboratories and technical facilities.
The DOE National Laboratories are as follows:
Other major DOE facilities include:

Other

Responsibility for nuclear weapons

The DOE/NNSA has federal responsibility for the design, testing and production of all nuclear weapons. NNSA in turn uses contractors to carry out its responsibilities at the following government owned sites:

Related legislation

Budget

President Barack Obama unveiled on May 7, 2009, a $26.4 billion budget request for DOE for fiscal year (FY) 2010, including $2.3 billion for the DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE). The budget aims to substantially expand the use of renewable energy sources while improving energy transmission infrastructure. It also makes significant investments in hybrids and plug-in hybrids, in smart grid technologies, and in scientific research and innovation.
As part of the $789 billion economic stimulus package in the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, Congress provided Energy with an additional $38.3 billion for fiscal years 2009 and 2010, adding about 75 percent to Energy's annual budgets. Most of the stimulus spending was in the form of grants and contracts.
For fiscal year 2011, each of the operating units of the Department of Energy operate with the following budgets:Department of Energy FY2012 Budget Request, Department of Energy – Office of the Chief Financial Officer, February 2012

Energy Savings Performance Contract

Energy Savings Performance Contracts (ESPCs) are contracts under which a contractor designs, constructs, and obtains the necessary financing for an energy savings project, and the federal agency makes payments over time to the contractor from the savings in the agency's utility bills. The contractor guarantees the energy improvements will generate savings, and after the contract ends, all continuing cost savings accrue to the federal agency.

Loan Guarantee Program

Title XVII of Energy Policy Act of 2005 authorizes the DOE to issue loan guarantees to eligible projects that "avoid, reduce, or sequester air pollutants or anthropogenic emissions of greenhouse gases" and "employ new or significantly improved technologies as compared to technologies in service in the United States at the time the guarantee is issued".
In loan guarantees, a conditional commitment requires to meet an equity commitment, as well as other conditions, before the loan guarantee is closed.

Energy Innovation Hubs

Energy Innovation Hubs are multi-disciplinary meant to advance highly promising areas of energy science and technology from their early stages of research to the point that the risk level will be low enough for industry to commercialize the technologies.
The DOE budget includes $280 million to fund eight Energy Innovation Hubs, each of which is focused on a particular energy challenge. Two of the eight hubs are included in the EERE budget and will focus on integrating smart materials, designs, and systems into buildings to better conserve energy and on designing and discovering new concepts and materials needed to convert solar energy into electricity. Another two hubs, included in the DOE Office of Science budget, will tackle the challenges of devising advanced methods of energy storage and creating fuels directly from sunlight without the use of plants or microbes. Yet another hub will develop "smart" materials that will allow the electrical grid to adapt and respond to changing conditions.
In 2012, The DOE awarded $120 million to the Ames Laboratory to start a new EIH, the Critical Materials Institute, which will focus on improving the supply of rare earth elements, which is  controlled by China.

Polygraphs

In 1998 the Director of Counterintelligence of the DOE announced that he believed that China had received information about the W-88. As a result from this event,McCarthy, Susan. "The truth about the polygraph." Salon. March 2, 2000. in 1999 U.S. Congress placed a clause in the National Defense Authorization Act that required DOE employees and contractors who had access to specific high risk programs to take counterintelligence polygraph examinations. "Polygraph Testing and the DOE National Laboratories." (Essays on Science and Society) Science. 3 November 2000: Vol. 290 no. 5493 pp. 939–40 DOI: 10.1126/science.290.5493.939. The DOE planned to require up to 13,000 DOE employees to take polygraph tests. Many DOE employees were unhappy with the proposal and referred to polygraphs as a tool which a police state would use and a witch hunt. Steven Aftergood of Science said that "As soon as the DOE announced its plans to comply with the new requirement, the response from the weapons labs was vocal and hostile." DOE employees unhappy with the polygraph plans attended hearings against polygraphs, issued reviews of scientific literature which opposed polygraphs, wrote letters protesting against plans, and created critical websites. A Congressional panel chaired by Paul Redmond, a former counterintelligence chief of the Central Intelligence Agency, concluded that "The Department of Energy has failed to gain even a modicum of acceptance of the polygraph program in the laboratories. The attitude toward polygraphs at the laboratories runs the gamut from cautiously and rationally negative to emotionally and irrationally negative." By 2000 the DOE announced that only around 800 employees, instead of 13,000, would be required to take polygraphs, and those 800 were in jobs that are in some highly sensitive categories.
Aftergood wrote that the polygraph issue involved a conflict between most scientists, who are "deeply skeptical of polygraph's usefulness in screening employees as a way to enhance security" and between security professionals who "have an equally profound commitment to the polygraph and view it as an indispensable counterintelligence tool."

List of Secretaries of Energy

Symbolism in the seal

Exert from the code of federal regulations, Title 10: Energy
The official seal of the Department of energy "includes a green shield bisected by a gold-colored lightning bolt, on which is emblazoned a gold-colored symbolic sun, atom, oil derrick, windmill, and dynamo. It is crested by the white head of an eagle, atop a white rope. Both appear on a blue field surrounded by concentric circles in which the name of the agency, in gold, appears on a green background." 
"The eagle represents the care in planning and the purposefulness of efforts required to respond to the Nation's increasing demands for energy. The sun, atom, oil derrick, windmill, and dynamo serve as representative technologies whose enhanced development can help meet these demands. The rope represents the cohesiveness in the development of the technologies and their link to our future capabilities. The lightning bolt represents the power of the natural forces from which energy is derived and the Nation's challenge in harnessing the forces."
"The color scheme is derived from nature, symbolizing both the source of energy and the support of man's existence. The blue field represents air and water, green represents mineral resources and the earth itself, and gold represents the creation of energy in the release of natural forces. By invoking this symbolism, the color scheme represents the Nation's commitment to meet its energy needs in a manner consistent with the preservation of the natural environment."



Notes and references

Further reading




