[[Janet Montgomery]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, English child actresses, English film actresses, English television actresses, English expatriates in the United States, Living people, People from Bournemouth, Alumni of the Stella Mann College of Performing Arts, English female dancers, Actors from Dorset, 21st-century English actresses

Janet Ruth Montgomery (born 29 October 1985) is an English film and TV actress. She is perhaps best known for her starring role as Ames in the second season of Fox's Human Target,Exclusive First Stills: The Devil's Playground and also for her appearances in The Hills Run Red and Wrong Turn 3: Left for Dead, as well as her role as Eric Murphy's assistant Jennie in HBO's Entourage. She recently played protagonist Martina Garretti in the short-lived Made in Jersey. In 2014, she stars as the lead character in the WGN America series, Salem.

Career

Although trained as a dancer at the Stella Mann College of Performing Arts, Bedford, Montgomery chose to pursue acting rather than dance professionally. Her lack of drama school training made it difficult to obtain acting representation initially. She achieved her breakthrough after producing a play alongside friend Gethin Anthony.BBC – Media Centre – Janet Montgomery plays Anna Skarbek
In 2008, Montgomery was cast as the love interest of Nicholas Hoult in an episode of the teenage drama Skins. She also appeared in both the TV movie Dis/Connected and the short film Flushed.
The following year, Montgomery appeared in two straight-to-DVD horror-genre releases filmed in Sofia, Bulgaria – The Hills Run Red and the finale of the Wrong Turn trilogy, Wrong Turn 3: Left for Dead and played the role of Fallyn Werner, a teenage killer in the Lifetime film Accused at 17.
In 2010, Montgomery appeared in her first theatrically released films, playing Ruth in the mystery The Rapture, Giselle in the independent horror film Dead Cert and the supporting role of Madeline in the Academy Award nominated psychological thriller Black Swan – playing a Little Swan to Natalie Portman's Oscar-winning portrayal of the Black Swan.
That same year Montgomery also signed on to play Paul Rudd's love interest in Our Idiot Brother. After seeing her audition tape in Los Angeles, producers worked around her schedule on Entourage and flew her to New York to begin shooting. This was her first comedy movie and one in which she received rave reviews.
In December 2011, Montgomery starred as Princess Mithian, a love interest of King Arthur, in Series 4 Episode 11 of Merlin,BBC – Merlin – Princess Mithian played by Janet Montgomery later returning in Series 5 Episode 4 (alongside James Fox).'Merlin': 'Game of Thrones' Liam Cunningham confirmed for series five – Merlin News – Cult – Digital Spy
In 2012, Montgomery played the lead role in the CBS television series Made in Jersey.  The series was cancelled after two episodes aired. Despite the early cancellation, Montgomery received huge compliments and a career boost from the short lived series. Two new episodes aired on 22 December 2012.
Montgomery attracted the attention of Stephen Poliakoff via an audition tape she sent to casting director Andy Pryor for the role of Sarah in Dancing on the Edge. Poliakoff was impressed and offered her the job via Skype. The five-part mini series aired 4 February 2013 on BBC Two.
She also played opposite David Tennant in BBC Four's Spies of Warsaw. The drama received mixed reviews. Actor Chris Egan plays her love interest, the character Dorian Gray.

Personal life

Montgomery was born in Bournemouth, England. Her uncle was bass player Mike "Monty" Montgomery of Zoot Money's Big Roll Band.

Filmography

Film

Television







