[[Leap Year (2010 film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2010 films, 2010s romantic comedy films, American films, American romantic comedy films, English-language films, Films set in Ireland, Films set in Boston, Massachusetts, StudioCanal films, Spyglass Entertainment films, Universal Pictures films

Leap Year is a 2010 American romantic comedy film directed by Anand Tucker starring Amy Adams and Matthew Goode. The film is about a woman who heads to Ireland to ask her boyfriend to accept her wedding proposal on leap day, when Irish tradition holds that men cannot refuse a woman's proposal for marriage. Her plans are interrupted by a series of increasingly unlikely events and are further complicated when she hires a handsome innkeeper to take her to her boyfriend in Dublin. The film premiered in New York City on January 6, 2010.

Plot

Frustrated that her boyfriend of many years still has not proposed to her, Anna Brady travels to Dublin, Ireland to propose to her boyfriend Jeremy on February 29, leap day. According to Irish tradition, a man who is proposed to on leap day must accept the proposal. During the flight, a storm diverts the plane to Cardiff, Wales. Anna hires a boat to take her to Cork, but the severity of the storm forces her to be put ashore on the Dingle Peninsula. She enlists the help of a surly Irish innkeeper, Declan O'Callaghan, to taxi her across the country to Dublin to pull off the proposal in time.
Declan refuses to drive Anna to Dublin, but after his pub is threatened with foreclosure the next morning, he agrees to drive her for €500. Before they leave, Declan gets frustrated at Anna's luggage and she snaps at him telling him to be careful, as her expensive Louis Vuitton luggage was a gift from her boyfriend. The two set out in Declan's old car, but they quickly run into a herd of cows blocking the road. Anna shoos them away but steps in cow dung, causing her to lean against the car, which rolls down hill into a lake. The two argue, and, angry at Declan, Anna walks away from him. She stops another car for a lift, but after offering to help her, three ne'er-do-wells take just her bags and drive away, to the delight of Declan.
Anna and Declan eventually reach a pub where they discover the three thieves going through Anna's luggage. Declan punches them, and they are both kicked out by the landlord. Anna and Declan eventually reach a railway station on foot. The train arrives early, and Anna misses it. The two go to a bed and breakfast, where they are forced to pretend that they are married so that their conservative hosts will allow them to stay. Asked their married name, they simultaneously answer 'Brady' and 'O'Callaghan', quickly amending that to 'O'Brady-Callaghan'. During dinner, Anna and Declan are then 'forced' to kiss, which causes some confusion for them. That night, they hesitantly (just) sleep in the same bed. The next day, they take shelter from a hail storm in a church where a wedding is taking place, where, after a series of events, Anna gets drunk. At this point, Anna begins to question her intentions with Jeremy when she realizes she has an attraction for Declan.
The following day they arrive by bus in Dublin. On the way to the hotel, they stop by a park and Declan reveals that he was once engaged but that his ex-fiancée ran off with his best friend and his family ring to Dublin; Anna encourages him to get his ring back. When they arrive at Jeremy's hotel, Jeremy surprises her and proposes to her, and she accepts after a hesitation—as Declan, dispirited, walks away.
Later, back in the USA at their engagement party, Anna learns that Jeremy decided to commit to her in an effort to impress the manager of the expensive condominium the two were attempting to buy. Dismayed, Anna pulls the fire alarm and leaves after watching Jeremy grab all the electronics.
Anna goes back to the Dingle Peninsula in County Kerry, where Declan is successfully running his inn/ restaurant. She proposes that they get together and 'not make plans', and Declan leaves the room. Anna interprets this as a rejection, so she rushes outside and ends up on a cliff overlooking the sea. Declan follows her and asks, 'Mrs. O'Brady-Callaghan, where the hell are you going?' and proposes to her with the family ring he retrieved from his ex-fiancée while in Dublin. Some time later, the two are shown driving in Declan's car with a 'Just Married' sign in the back window, while they playfully bicker about the expensive luggage, nicknamed 'Louis'.

Cast

Production

On October 17, 2008, it was announced that Amy Adams was to star in the film as Anna.
The film was shot in County Wicklow, Dublin, County Mayo and County Galway, with filming taking place in and around the Aran Islands, Connemara, Temple Bar, Georgian Dublin, Wicklow National Park and Olaf Street, Waterford.

Reception

Upon its release, the film received mostly negative reviews from critics. Review aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 21% based on reviews from 127 critics have given the film a positive review, with an average audience rating of 48%. The site's general consensus is that 'Amy Adams is as appealing as ever, but her charms aren't enough to keep Leap Year from succumbing to an overabundance of clichés and an unfunny script'.
Metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean score out of 0–100 reviews from critics, has given the film a rating score of 33 based on 29 reviews.
Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times described Leap Year as a 'full-bore, PG-rated, sweet rom-com'. 'It sticks to the track, makes all the scheduled stops, and bears us triumphantly to the station'.
A. O. Scott of The New York Times saw it as 'so witless, charmless, and unimaginative, that it can be described as a movie only in a strictly technical sense'.
Donald Clarke of The Irish Times gave the film one star out of five, and in a scathing review, described it as 'offensive, reactionary, patronising filth' and cited the film as evidence that 'Hollywood is incapable of seeing the Irish as anything but IRA men or twinkly rural imbeciles'.

Box office

The film opened at the American box office at number 6, with a modest $9,202,815, behind blockbusters Avatar, Sherlock Holmes, Alvin and the Chipmunks: The Squeakquel, as well as Daybreakers and It's Complicated. The film's final gross of $25,918,920 in the United States against a production budget of $19,000,000. In addition to this, the film made $6,688,396 in international markets, for a final worldwide gross of $32,607,316.

Soundtrack

An audio CD soundtrack for Leap Year was released on the Varèse Sarabande record label on January 12, 2010. However that soundtrack contains only the original score, composed and conducted by Randy Edelman. The musical selections that were used, and credited at the end of the film are not, as yet, available on CD. Those include:

Home media

Leap Year was released on DVD in the United States on May 4, 2010.com Movie Review. Retrieved 2010-11-05. It debuted at number 4 on the American DVD rentals chart, with a first week rental index of 56.63. IMDb. Retrieved 2010-11-05. It placed 5th on the DVD sales chart, selling an estimated 159,843 units, and has sold almost 800,000 units in total to April 2013. ''The Numbers. Retrieved 2013-04-07.






