[[Marie Louise, Duchess of Parma]]

CATEGORIES: 1791 births, 1847 deaths, People from Vienna, House of Habsburg-Lorraine, Empresses of the French, French queens consort, Italian queens consort, Regents of France, Archduchesses of Austria, Dukes of Parma, Dukes of Piacenza, Princes of Parma and Piacenza, Female regents, Roman Catholic monarchs, Bohemian princesses, Dames of the Order of the Starry Cross

Marie Louise of Austria (Maria Ludovica Leopoldina Franziska Therese Josepha Lucia von Habsburg-Lothringen; 12 December 1791 – 17 December 1847) was the second wife of Napoleon I, Emperor of the French and later Duchess of Parma. As such, she was Empress of the French from 1810 to 1814, and subsequently ruler of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla from 1814 until her death.
As the eldest child of Habsburg Emperor Francis II of Austria and his second wife, Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily, Marie Louise grew up during a period of continuous conflict between Austria and revolutionary France. A series of military defeats at the hands of Napoleon Bonaparte had inflicted a heavy human toll on Austria and led Francis to dissolve the Holy Roman Empire. The end of the War of the Fifth Coalition resulted in the marriage of Napoleon and Marie Louise in 1810, which ushered in a brief period of peace and friendship between Austria and the French Empire. Marie Louise dutifully agreed to the marriage despite being raised to despise France. She was an obedient wife and was adored by Napoleon, who had been eager to marry a member of one of Europe's leading royal houses to cement his relatively young Empire. With Napoleon, she bore a son, styled the King of Rome at birth, later Duke of Reichstaedt, who briefly succeeded him as Napoleon II.
Napoleon's fortunes began to change dramatically in 1812 after his failed invasion of Russia. The European powers, including Austria, resumed hostilities towards France in the War of the Sixth Coalition, which ended with the abdication of Napoleon and his exile to Elba. The 1814 Treaty of Fontainebleau handed over the Duchies of Parma, Piacenza and Guastalla to Empress Marie Louise. She ruled the duchies until her death.
Marie Louise married morganatically twice after Napoleon's death in 1821. Her second husband was Count Adam Albert von Neipperg (married 1821), an equerry she met in 1814. She and Neipperg had three children. After Neipperg's death, she married Count Charles René de Bombelles, her chamberlain, in 1834. Marie Louise died in Parma in 1847.

Early life

Archduchess Marie Louise of Austria (who was given the Latin baptismal name of Maria Ludovica Leopoldina Francisca Theresa Josepha Lucia) was born at the Hofburg Palace in Vienna on 12 December 1791 to Archduke Francis of Austria and his second wife, Maria Theresa of Naples and Sicily. 1 Her father became Holy Roman Emperor a year later as Francis II. Marie Louise was a great granddaughter of Empress Maria Theresa through her father, and thus a great niece of Marie Antoinette. She was also a maternal granddaughter of Queen Maria Carolina of Naples, Marie Antoinette's favourite sister.
Marie Louise's formative years was during a period of conflict between France and her family. She was brought up to detest France and French ideas. 2 Marie Louise was influenced by her grandmother Maria Carolina, who despised the French Revolution which ultimately caused the death of her sister, Marie Antoinette. Maria Carolina's Kingdom of Naples had also come into direct conflict with French forces led by Napoleon Bonaparte. The War of the Third Coalition brought Austria to the brink of ruin, which increased Marie Louise's resentment towards Napoleon. 3 The Imperial family was forced to flee Vienna in 1805. Marie Louise took refuge in Hungary and later Galicia before returning to Vienna in 1806. 4 Her father relinquished the title of Holy Roman Emperor but remained Emperor of Austria.
To make her more marriageable, her parents had her tutored in many languages. In addition to her native German, she became fluent in English, French, Italian, Latin, and Spanish. Napoleon Bonaparte. p. 548
In 1807, when Marie Louise was 15, her mother died after suffering a miscarriage. Less than a year later, Emperor Francis married his first cousin Maria Ludovika Beatrix of Austria-Este, who was four years older than Marie Louise. Nonetheless, Maria Ludovika Beatrix took on a maternal role towards her stepdaughter. 5 She was also bitter towards the French, who had deprived her father of the Duchy of Modena. 6
Another war broke out between France and Austria in 1809, which resulted in defeat for the Austrians again. The Imperial family had to flee Vienna again before the city surrendered on May 12. 8 Their journey was hampered by bad weather, and they arrived in Buda "wet through, and nearly worn out with fatigue."

Marriage proposal

After escaping an assassination attempt in Vienna while negotiating the Treaty of Schönbrunn on 12 October 1809, Emperor Napoleon decided that he needed an heir to cement his relatively young Empire. 10 He also sought the validation and legitimation of his Empire by marrying a member of one of the leading royal families of Europe. He began proceedings to divorce Joséphine de Beauharnais, who did not bear him a son, and began searching for a new empress. His wish to marry Tsar Alexander I of Russia's sister, Grand Duchess Anna, caused alarm in Austria, who were afraid of being sandwiched between two great powers allied with each other. 12 At the persuasion of Count Metternich, a marriage between Napoleon and Marie Louise was suggested by Emperor Francis to the Count of NarbonneBertier de Sauvigny, p. 116de Saint-Amand, p. 15 but no official overture was made by the Austrians. 18 Though officials in Paris and Austria were beginning to accept the possibility of the union, Marie Louise was kept uninformed of developments. 20
Frustrated by the Russians delaying the marriage negotiations, Napoleon rescinded his proposal in late January 1810 and began negotiations to marry Marie Louise with the Austrian ambassador, the Prince of Schwarzenberg. 21 Schwarzenberg signed the marriage contract on 7 February. 22 Marie Louise was informed of the marriage by Metternich. 24 When asked for consent, she replied: "I wish only what my duty commands me to wish."

Wedding

Marie Louise was married by proxy to Napoleon on 11 March 1810 at the Augustinian Church, Vienna. 40 Napoleon was represented by Archduke Charles, the bride's uncle. 38 According to the French ambassador, the marriage "was celebrated with a magnificence that it would be hard to surpass, by the side of which even the brilliant festivities that have preceded it are not to be mentioned."de Saint-Amand, p. 42 She became Empress of the French and Queen of Italy.
Marie Louise departed Vienna on March 13,de Saint-Amand, p. 44 probably expecting never to return. 47 She met Napoleon for the first time on March 27 in Compiègne,de Saint-Amand, p. 60 remarking to him: "You are much better-looking than your portrait."
The civil wedding was held at the Château de Saint-Cloud on 1 April 1810. 63 The next day, Napoleon and Marie Louise made the journey to Paris in the coronation coach. 68 The Imperial Guard cavalry led the procession, followed by the herald-at-arms and then the carriages. The Marshals of France rode on each side, near the doors of the carriages. The procession arrived at the Tuileries Palace,de Saint-Amand, p. 70 and the Imperial couple made their way to the Salon Carré chapel (in the Louvre) for the religious wedding ceremony. The ceremony was conducted by the Cardinal Grand Almoner of France. 71 A Bridal March was composed for the occasion by Ferdinando Paer. 487, PAER, Ferdinando

Marriage with Napoleon

Life as Empress

Marie Louise was an obedient wife and settled in quickly in the French court. 76 She developed a close friendship with her maid-of-honour, the Duchess of Montebello. Napoleon "spared no pains" to please her and claimed at one point to prefer Marie Louise to his first wife Joséphine;de Saint-Amand, p. 80 while he had loved Joséphine, he claimed, he had not respected her, whereas with Marie Louise, there was "Never a lie, never a debt" — presumably a reference to Joséphine's rumoured extramarital affairs and reputation as a spendthrift.245 Marie Louise wrote to her father: "I assure you, dear papa, that people have done great injustice to the Emperor. The better one knows him, the better one appreciates and loves him."de Saint-Amand, p. 94
The excitement surrounding the wedding ushered in a period of peace and friendship between France and Austria, who had been largely at war for the last two decades. The people of Vienna, who hated Napoleon only months before, were suddenly in full praise of the French Emperor. 39 Flattering letters were sent between Napoleon and Emperor Francis, Empress Maria Ludovika Beatrix and Archduke Charles during the wedding festivities. 44de Saint-Amand, p. 61
During public occasions, Marie Louise spoke little due to reserve and timidity, which some observers mistook for haughtiness. 128 She was regarded as a virtuous woman and never interfered in politics. 130de Saint-Amand, p. 129 Privately, she was polite and gentle. 140

Birth of first child

Marie Louise became pregnant by July 1810 and gave birth to a son on 20 March 1811. 95de Saint-Amand, p. 98 The boy, Napoléon François Joseph Charles Bonaparte, was given the title King of Rome, in accordance with the practice where the heir apparent to the Holy Roman Empire was called the King of the Romans. Napoleon was delighted that his wife survived the ordeal and said: "I had rather never have any more children than see her suffer so much again."
Marie Louise was devoted to her son; she had him brought to her every morning and visited him in his apartment in the course of the day. 141

Resumption of war

In May 1812, a month before the French invasion of Russia, Marie Louise accompanied Napoleon to Dresden, where she met her father and stepmother. 145 Emperor Francis told Napoleon he could count on Austria for the "triumph of the common cause," a reference to the impending war. A minor rivalry began to develop between Marie Louise and the Empress of Austria, who was jealous at being upstaged in appearance by her stepdaughter. 148 It was also in Dresden where she met Count Adam Albert von Neipperg for the first time. 154 Napoleon left Dresden on May 29 to take charge of his army. 155
Marie Louise then travelled to Prague, where she spent a few weeks with the Austrian Imperial family, before returning to Saint Cloud on July 18. 159 She kept in touch with Napoleon throughout the war. 202–214 The invasion of Russia ended disastrously for France. More than half of the Grande Armée was destroyed by the Russian Winter and guerrilla attacks. After the failed Malet coup of October 1812, Napoleon hastened his return to France and reunited with his wife on the night of December 18. 235

Collapse of the Empire

The weakened French position triggered the Sixth Coalition. Prussia and the United Kingdom joined Russia in declaring war on France, but Austria stayed out due to relations between the Imperial families. 154 On March 30, Marie Louise was appointed Regent as Napoleon set off for battle in Germany. 243 The regency was only de jure, as all decisions were still taken by Napoleon and implemented by his most senior officials, including Lebrun, Joseph Bonaparte, Talleyrand and Savary. 159 Marie Louise tried unsuccessfully to get her father to ally with France. 249 Austria too joined the opposition to France. She maintained a correspondence with Napoleon, informing him of increasing demands for peace in Paris and the provinces. 121 Napoleon was decisively defeated in Leipzig on October 19 and returned to Saint Cloud on November 9.org
On 23 January 1814, Marie Louise was appointed Regent for the second time. 124 On January 25, at 03:00 in the morning, Napoleon embraced Marie Louise and his son for the last time. He left to lead a hastily formed army to stave off the Allied invasion from the north. 125
As the Allies neared Paris, Marie Louise was reluctant to leave. She felt that as the daughter of the sovereign of Austria, one of the allied members, she would be treated with respect by Allied forces, with the possibility of her son succeeding the throne should Napoleon be deposed. 128 She was also afraid that her departure would strengthen the royalist supporters of the Bourbons. Marie Louise was finally persuaded to leave by Henri Clarke, who received the order from Napoleon: "I would prefer to know that they Empress and the King of Rome are both at the bottom of the Seine rather than in the hands of the foreigners."Durand, p. 129 On March 29, the court left Paris. The Allies entered the city the following day.
Marie Louise and the court moved to Blois, which was safe from the Allies. 135 She did not expect her father to dethrone Napoleon and deprive her son of the crown of France. 136 On April 3, the Senate, at the instigation of Talleyrand, announced the deposition of the Emperor.net Marie Louise was unaware of this until April 7, and was astonished to discover the turn of events. 138 She wanted to return to Paris, but was dissuaded from doing so by physician Jean-Nicolas Corvisart and the Duchess of Montebello.

Exile of Napoleon

Napoleon abdicated the throne on 11 April 1814 in Fontainebleau. 143 The Treaty of Fontainebleau exiled him to Elba, allowed Marie Louise to retain her imperial rank and style and made her ruler of the duchies of Parma, Piacenza, and Guastalla, with her son as heir.de Saint-Amand, p. x
Marie Louise was strongly dissuaded by her advisors from rejoining her husband. 153 On April 16, her father arrived at Blois to meet her. vi At the advice of Emperor Francis, Marie Louise departed Rambouillet with her son for Vienna on April 23. vii At Vienna, she stayed at Schönbrunn, where she received frequent visits from her sisters, but rarely from her father and stepmother. 164 She met her grandmother, Maria Carolina, who disapproved of her deserting her husband. 165de Saint-Amand, p. i Distressed at being seen as a heartless wife and indifferent mother, she wrote on 9 August 1814: "I am in a very unhappy and critical position; I must be very prudent in my conduct. There are moments when that thought so distracts me that I think that the best thing I could do would be to die."de Saint-Amand, p. viii

Congress of Vienna and relationship with Neipperg

In the summer of 1814, Emperor Francis sent Count Adam Albert von Neipperg to accompany Marie Louise to the spa town of Aix-les-Bains to prevent her from joining Napoleon on Elba. 236 Neipperg was a confidant of Metternich and an enemy of Napoleon. Marie Louise fell in love with Neipperg. He became her chamberlain and her advocate at the Congress of Vienna. News of the relationship was not received well by the French and the Austrian public. 219
When Napoleon escaped in March 1815 and reinstated his rule, the Allies once again declared war. Marie Louise was asked by her stepmother to join in the processions to pray for the success of the Austrian armies but rejected the insulting invitation. ix She passed a message to Napoleon's private secretary, Claude François de Méneval, who was about to return to France: "I hope he will understand the misery of my position ... I shall never assent to a divorce, but I flatter myself that he will not oppose an amicable separation, and that he will not bear any ill feeling towards me ... This separation has become imperative; it will in no way affect the feelings of esteem and gratitude that I preserve." Napoleon was defeated for the last time at the Battle of Waterloo and was exiled to Saint Helena from October 1815.
The Congress of Vienna recognised Marie Louise as ruler of Parma, Piacenza, and Guastalla, but prevented her from bringing her son to Italy. 236 It also made her Duchess of Parma for her life only, as the Allies did not want a descendant of Napoleon to have a hereditary claim over Parma.

Duchess of Parma

Marie Louise departed for Parma on 7 March 1816, accompanied by Neipperg. 201 She entered the duchy on April 18. She wrote to her father: "People welcomed me with such enthusiasm that I had tears in my eyes."Herre, p. 233–234 She largely left the running of day-to-day affairs to Neipperg, who received instructions from Metternich. In December 1816, Marie Louise removed the incumbent prime minister and installed Neipperg.
She and Neipperg had three children:
Napoleon died on 5 May 1821. On August 8, Marie Louise married Neipperg morganatically. Neipperg died of heart problems on 22 February 1829, devastating Marie Louise. 260–263 She was banned by Austria from mourning in public.
Her first son, then known as "Franz," was given the title Duke of Reichstadt in 1818. 404 Franz lived at the Austrian court, where he was shown great affection by his grandfather. xii He died at the age of 21 in Vienna in 1832 after suffering from tuberculosis.
1831 saw the outbreak of the Carbonari-led uprisings in Italy. In Parma, protestors gathered in the streets to denounce the Austrian-appointed prime minister Josef von Werklein. She managed to leave Parma between 14 and 15 February, and a provisional government led by Count Filippo Luigi Linati was formed. Francis sent in Austrian troops which crushed the rebellion.Schiel, p. 333
Metternich sent Charles-René de Bombelles to Marie Louise's household in 1833. Six months after his arrival, on 17 February 1834, she married him, again morganatically. 345–347

Death

Marie Louise fell ill on 9 December 1847. Her condition worsened for the next few days.
On December 17, she passed out after vomiting and never woke up again. She died in the evening. 354–355 The cause of death was determined to be pleurisy.
Her body was transferred back to Vienna and buried at the Imperial Crypt. 445

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Marie Louise retained her imperial rank due to the 1814 Treaty of Paris as well as her titles Princess Imperial and Archduchess of Austria, Princess Royal of Hungary and Bohemia.

Arms

Gallery

File:Crown of Empress Marie Louise 299 9964. Set in silver, the 950 diamonds weigh 700 carats. The 79 original emeralds have been replaced with Persian turquoise cabochons.
File:Clock Thomire Louvre OA9511.1810.
File:Maria Luigia 10 soldi 768767.
File:Sarcophage Impératrice Marie-Louise Kapuzinergruft Vienne.



Ancestors

Notes





|-
|-


