[[Taras Voznyak]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, People from Lviv, Translators to Ukrainian, Ukrainian democracy activists, Ukrainian writers, Lviv Polytechnic alumni

Taras Voznyak (born May 11, 1957 in the village of Svarychiv, Rozhnyativ rayon, Stanislav (currently Ivano-Frankivsk) oblast) – Ukrainian culture expert, political scientist, editor-in-chief and founder of Independent Cultural Journal "Ї".

Biography

Taras Voznyak was born after his father returned from exile in Magadan (exile lasted from 1945 to 1956). The family settled in the town of Broshniv-Osada.
Taras Voznyak was close to an informal group of intellectuals united under the name "Lvivska Shkola" (Lviv School). Ihor Klekh, Hryhoriy Komskyi, Mykola Yakovyna and others were part of this group, which was operating in Lviv in the 1980s. He organised the printing of samizdat culturology literature. He translated a large number of texts and also published within samizdat, in particularly the books of Polish-Jewish writer Bruno Schulz.

Editor - Independent Cultural Journal "Ї"

In 1987 Taras Voznyak together with Mykola Yakovyna initiated the creation of the Independent Cultural Journal. The name of the Journal – "Ї" – was thought up by Ukrainian translator Hryhoriy Kochur and linguist Yuriy Shevelyov during the meeting in Lviv.
The first issue of the Independent Cultural Journal "Ї" was published in 1989. Since then Taras Voznyak remains the Journal's editor-in-chief and publisher. With the support from Reform Movement of Lithuania "Sajudis", the first five Journal issues were manufactured as photocopies in Vilnius. The photocopies would be brought to Lviv, and then they were stitched and distributed nationally in Ukraine. This is when Oleksandr Kryvenko, the editor of samvydav Lviv newspaper "Postup", joined the Journal team. In 1995 the Journal was officially registered – Taras Voznyak, Mykhaylo Moskal and Oleksandr Pohranychnyi became the Journal founders.
Independent Cultural Journal "Ї" is published in paper and electronic form. The Journal has long ago transformed into an influential NGO and a think tank. The main issues, which the NGO Independent Cultural Journal "Ї" is working upon, are the issues of civil society, human rights, interethnic relations, cross-border cooperation, multiculturalism, European integration, regionalism, globalisation and anti-globalist movements, ecumenical dialogue, political changes in the region.
As a leader of NGO Independent Cultural Journal "Ї" Taras Voznyak organises and holds numerous international, national and local conferences, meetings, round table discussion, and other events. He is the initiator and organiser of community campaigns on the promotion of cultural heritage of Halychyna – in particular the sculptor of 18th century Johann-Georg Pinzel, writer and painter Bruno Schulz, writer Zygmunt Haupt.
Journal "Ї" has become a cult publication in Lviv. Journal's series have been reconstructing local identities of Halychyna, Volyn, Zakarpattya, Bukovyna for many years. Several Journal issues have been promoting the almost non-existent Polish, Jewish and Armenian cultural landscapes of the region – Polish, Jewish and Armenian "uni-verse" of Halychyna. A range of Journal issues is dedicated to phenomena of the cities – Lviv, Chernivtsi, Ivano-Frankivsk, Ternopil, Kolomyja, Zhovkva.
In 2001, an honorary distinction "Order for Intellectual Bravery" was established (initiated by Taras Voznyak and Oleksandr Pohranychnyi), which since then has been accepted by Borys Tarasyuk, Nataliya Yakovenko, Myroslav Popovych, Emma Andijevska, Roman Viktyuk, Vyacheslav Bryukhovetskyi, Valentyn Sylvestrov, Myroslav Marynovych, Hryhoriy Hrabovych, Andrzej Nikodemowicz, Borys Hudzyak, Pavlo Chuchka, Yevhen Zakharov, Roman Petruk, Bohdan Osadchuk, Leonid Finberg, Mustafa Jemilev, Anatoliy Hrytsenko, Ihor Isichenko, Oksana Pakhlyovska, Andriy Sodomora, Igor Shevchenko, Yaroslav Grytsak, Aleksandra Gnatyuk, Moses Fishbein.

Public Life and Opinion Journalism

During the 1990s Taras Voznyak has started to actively publish his culturology essays in Ukraine as well as abroad. He is the author of more than 400 publications in Ukrainian and foreign media; he also writes for the following magazines: "Ї", "Suchasnist" (Contemporary Times), "Kyiv", "Philosophical and Sociological Thought", "Krytyka" (Criticism), "Geneza" (Genesis), "Universum" (Universe), "Glavred" (Chief Editor); newspapers: "Den" (Day), "Dzerkalo Tyzhnya" (Mirror Weekly), "Gazeta Po-Ukrainsky", "Ukraina Moloda" (Young Ukraine), "Ukrainskyi Tyzhden" (Ukrainian Week); blogs.pravda.ua/authors/voznyak/
From the time Ukraine won its independence, Taras Voznyak has continuously been involved in establishing cross-border cooperation and maintaining international relations, while holding various official posts.
Taras Voznyak was awarded with an honorary distinction "Knight of Halychyna" in the nomination "Public Figure" (2001), a distinction "20 Years of the First Democratic Convocation of Lviv Regional Council" (2010), a distinction by Lviv Mayor "Saint George Distinction of Honour" (2011).

Published works

Footnotes

Additional sources of information




