[[Skiing in Victoria, Australia]]

CATEGORIES: Ski areas and resorts in Australia, Skiing in Australia, Sport in Victoria (Australia) by sport, Ski areas and resorts in Victoria (Australia)

Skiing in Victoria, Australia takes place in the Australian Alps located in the State of Victoria during the southern hemisphere winter. Victoria is the State with the greatest number of ski resorts in Australia. The highest peak in Victoria is Mount Bogong at 1986m.ga.au/education/geoscience-basics/landforms/highest-mountains. Victoria has a number of well developed ski resorts including Mount Hotham, Falls Creek and Mount Buller. Cross country skiing is popular in such national parks as Mount Buffalo National Park and Alpine National Park.



A hospice was built at Mount Saint Bernard (Elevation 1540) around 1863 along a track developed to link the Victorian gold fields. Snowshoes were developed locally to assist winter travellers and a larger hospice built around 1884. Recreational and practical skiing was being practised in the area by the 1880s and 90s with skis made from local timbers, and making use of single steering poles. The first winter traverse of the Victorian Alps was made in 1900, via the Hospice and Mount Hotham. The Hospice operated as a recreational ski location into the 1930s, but was destroyed by bushfire in 1939.australianalpineclub.htm Australian Alpine Club Heritage
Skiing began at Mount Buffalo in the 1890s and the Mount Buffalo Chalet in Victoria was constructed in 1910. Australia's first ski tow was constructed near Mount Buffalo in 1936.australianalps.gov.html Buffalo's first ski lodge was built at Dingo Dell in 1954. A bushfire in 2006 forced the temporary closure of the resort and negotiations are continuing over a new lease on the property.mtbuffaloresort.au/environment_chalet_history_time.php
The Mount Buller Interschools Event claims to be the largest interdisciplinary snow-sports event on earth. In 2008 it attracted 3500 participants.
Snow play is also available at Mount Donna Buang.

Cross Country & Back Country Skiing

Dedicated Cross Country ski resorts are located at Lake Mountain, Mount Stirling and Mount St Gwinear in Victoria and popular areas for back country skiing and ski touring in the Alpine National Park, Yarra Ranges National Park and the Baw Baw National Park include: Mount Bogong, Mount Feathertop, Bogong High Plains, Mount Howitt, Mount Reynard and Snowy Plains. The Kangaroo Hoppet is a leg of the Worldloppet cross-country race series which is conducted  on the last Saturday of August each year, hosted by Falls Creek in Victoria. The showpiece 42-kilometre race attracts thousands of spectators and competitors.
The Australian High Country is populated by unique flora and fauna including wombats, wallabies, echidnas, and the Snow Gum. The Alpine regions are subject to environmental protection, which has limited the scope of commercial development of skiiable terrain,See "Kosciuszko National Park: Contemporary Management". New South Wales Department of Education and Training, Riverina Environmental Education Centre. however Australia has extensive cross country skiing terrain.hoppet.au/xc/

Ski areas

Downhill ski resorts

Cross country resorts

Resorts proposed for development that never occurred

Back country ski areas

Popular areas for back country skiing and ski touring in the Alpine National Park, Mount Buffalo National Park, Yarra Ranges National Park and the Baw Baw National Park include:

Gallery

File:Mt-Hotham-Village-2008.jpg|Mount Hotham Village
File:Falls-creek-ruined-castle-and-terrain-park.jpg|The Ruined Castle chairlift and terrain park, Falls Creek, Victoria
File:Baw-baw-view-gippsland.jpg|The view across Gippsland from Mount Baw Baw, Victoria
File:Mt Buller village Stevage.
File:Mt Buller Bourke St Stevage-2008-28-11.jpg|Bourke Street, Mount Buller 
File:Mount-feathertop-from-summit-track.jpg|Mount Feathertop
File:Mt bogong 01.JPG|Mount Bogong
File:MountBogong.JPG|Mount Bogong
File:Mount Buffalo Chalet.jpg|Mount Buffalo Chalet
File:Mt Buffalo, Victoria, Australia.jpg|Mount Buffalo








