[[A Rugrats Passover]]

CATEGORIES: Rugrats and All Grown Up! episodes, 1990s American television specials, 1995 television episodes, Depictions of Moses, Holiday fiction, Jewish-related television episodes, Passover

"A Rugrats Passover" is the 26th and the final episode of the third season of the American animated television series Rugrats, and its 65th episode overall. It was broadcast originally on April 13, 1995, on the cable network Nickelodeon. The plot follows series regulars Grandpa Boris and the babies as they become trapped in the attic on Passover; to pass the time, Boris tells the Jewish story of the Exodus. During the episode the babies themselves reenact the story, with young Tommy portraying Moses, while his cousin Angelica represents the Pharaoh of Egypt.
"A Rugrats Passover" was directed by Jim Duffy, Steve Socki, and Jeff McGrath from the script by Peter Gaffney, Paul Germain, Rachel Lipman, and Jonathon Greenberg. The episode was conceived in 1992 when Germain responded to a Nickelodeon request for a Rugrats Hannukah special by creating a Passover episode instead. The episode scored a 3.1 Nielsen Rating, making it "the highest-rated show in Nickelodeon's history", and received overwhelmingly positive reviews, including from Jewish community publications. It was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award, an Annie Award, and a CableACE Award. The episode also, however, attracted controversy, when the Anti-Defamation League compared the artistic design of the older characters to anti-Semitic drawings from a 1930s Nazi newspaper.
The episode made Rugrats one of the first animated series to focus on a Jewish holiday; its success precipitated the creation of another special, "A Rugrats Chanukah", which also attracted critical acclaim. A novelization of the episode was in 2007 exhibited at the Sherwin Miller Museum of Jewish Art in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

Plot

As the episode opens, the Pickles family is gathering to celebrate the Passover Seder at the home of Boris and Minka Kropotkin, the parents of Didi Pickles. Following an argument with Minka about what type of wine glasses they should use (either the glasses that belonged to Minka's mother or the ones that belonged Boris's father), Boris storms out of the room; Didi arrives with her husband, Stu (who's a Christian), and their son, Tommy, and tries to comfort her mom, who believed Boris had run away. Boris hasn't reappeared by the time Tommy's best friend, Chuckie Finster, and his dad, Chas, arrive to join the celebration; when the Seder begins the children set off to search for Boris, eventually finding him in the attic. Boris explains that he felt bad about yelling at Minka, and had gone to look for her mother's wine glasses, but had become locked inside when the door closed behind him (it can't open from the inside). Angelica, Tommy's older cousin, tests the door, and inadvertently locks them all in again.
Angelica tells Boris that he's not really missing anything and admits that she thinks that Passover's a dumb holiday. Boris tries convincing her otherwise by telling her and the boys the story of the Exodus, hoping to improve their understanding of Passover. As he talks, Angelica imagines herself as the Pharaoh of Egypt, who commands the Hebrew slaves (imagined as the other Rugrats and numerous other babies) to throw their newborn sons into the Nile River. One Hebrew slave defies the order, putting her infant son, Moses (imagined as Tommy), into a basket and setting it afloat on the river. The basket and baby are discovered by Pharaoh Angelica, who shows Moses around her palace and makes him her partner. As Boris explains that the Pharaoh was unaware that Moses himself was actually a Hebrew, Chas enters the attic, looking for the children, and becomes locked in with the rest of them. He sits down and listens as Boris continues: years later, Boris says, Moses stood up for an abused Hebrew slave (imagined as Chuckie), and was outed as a Hebrew. The episode then pictures Tommy as Moses fleeing to the desert, where he becomes a shepherd and forgets about Egypt and the Pharaoh, until the voice of God calls to him from a burning bush, telling him that he must free the Hebrews from slavery.
Moses confronts the Pharaoh and demands that she free the Hebrews. She refuses and calls her guards (one of which was a kid named Justin, voiced by Dana Hill) to drag Moses away; he curses her kingdom with terrible plagues until she relents and allows Moses to leave with the enslaved Hebrews. As Boris is explaining how the Pharaoh deceives the Hebrews and prevents them from leaving, Angelica's parents, Drew and Charlotte, arrive and become locked in with the others. Boris resumes the story: the Pharaoh's treachery causes Moses to curse her once more, this time with a plague on the first-born children of Egypt. The Pharaoh, after realizing that she herself is a first-born child, bargains with Moses: he can leave if he calls off this final plague. Moses complies and leads the Hebrews out of Egypt, but the Pharaoh reneges on her promise (after realizing that she set all of the Hebrews free) and leads out her remaining army to pursue them.
Minka, Didi, and Stu arrive in the attic to find the group enthralled by the end of Boris's story: Moses, cornered, calls down the power of God to part the Red Sea, which the Hebrews are approaching. They pass through the parted waters, which then crash back together behind them, engulfing the Pharaoh and her army. With the story over, the family gets up to finish the Seder: only to see the wind blow the door shut, locking them all in. Boris decides to tell them another story, this time about how his aunt and uncle met at a Passover Seder back in Russia.

Production

The episode's inception in 1992 followed a call by Nickelodeon to the Rugrats production staff, pitching the concept of a special episode concerning Hanukkah.
Germain wrote the episode's teleplay along with regular Rugrats writers Peter Gaffney, Rachel Lipman, and Jonathon Greenberg; animators Jim Duffy, Steve Socki, and Jeff McGrath directed.
The episode was released in several formats, including DVD and VHS. It appears on the video release A Rugrats Passover

Themes

"A Rugrats Passover" was unusual among contemporary animations in its attention to Jewish ritual and tradition. Its portrayal of a Seder dinner received press attention as a rare occurrence in children's programming.
As with other Rugrats episodes, "A Rugrats Passover" depicts "the innocence of a baby's perception of the world," emphasizing the young characters' intense, childlike reactions to their environment.

Reception

Ratings and accolades

"A Rugrats Passover" was broadcast originally on April 13, 1995, on the Nickelodeon television network. Repeats of the episode began that Saturday at 7:30 p.m. The episode received a Nielsen Rating of 3.1, with a 4.8% share of American audiences, making it the sixth most-watched American telecast of the week.
The episode was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award in the category "Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Animated Program (for Programming Less Than One Hour),"

Critical response

"A Rugrats Passover" received overwhelmingly positive reviews and became one of the series' all-time most popular episodes. Among many positive reviews of the episode in Jewish community publications, Gila Wertheimer of the Chicago Jewish Star said that the episode "will entertain children of all ages – and their parents."
Joel Keller of AOL's TV Squad, on the other hand, noted in 2006 that he "always hated" the episode, and resented that it was one of only two Passover-themed television episodes he could find via a Google search.

Anti-Defamation League controversy

"A Rugrats Passover," along with other Rugrats episodes featuring Boris and Minka, attracted controversy when the Anti-Defamation League (ADL) claimed that the two characters resembled anti-Semitic drawings that had appeared in a 1930s Nazi newspaper. Nickelodeon's then-president Albie Hecht, himself Jewish, professed himself dumbfounded by the criticism, calling it absurd.

Legacy

"A Rugrats Passover" has been Nickelodeon's first programming about Passover; Like "A Rugrats Passover," it was critically acclaimed and became among the most popular episodes in the series.
In 2007 the Sherwin Miller Museum of Jewish Art in Tulsa, Oklahoma opened an exhibition of Biblical images in art and pop culture, including a poster for Let My Babies Go! A Passover Story, the picture book based on "A Rugrats Passover". Other items highlighted in the gallery included a promotional poster for The Simpsons episode "Simpsons Bible Stories" and a vintage Superman comic book entitled "The Red-Headed Beatle of 1000 B.C.," featuring the character Jimmy Olsen's time-traveling adventures in the Biblical age.








