[[Susan Jeske]]

CATEGORIES: 1960s births, Living people, People from Littleton, Colorado, Models from California, Humanitarian and service awards, People from Denver, Colorado, American female singers, People from Orange County, California, Excelsior College alumni

Susan Jeske (born c. 1965) is the first Ms. America and is President of Ms. America Pageant.  She has been involved in pageantry for over 35 years as a competitor, judge, and pageant director at over 200 local, state, national and international pageant competitions.  In 2007, Susan Jeske was honored with the Lifetime Presidential Award from the President of the United States for her lifetime contributions to charity and volunteerism. America Pageant. FEBZ Magazine, December 2007, Page 18.

Pageant titles

Jeske has held many pageant titles national and internationally.  In 1997 at the Luxor Las Vegas Hotel, she represented Colorado and was crowned Ms. America winning $75,000 in cash and prizes. . . the first Ms. America. Her platform  
She has also won the title of Miss USA 1988 All Nations. Jeske – of USA. Daily News, Monday, October 25, 1993.

Professional singing career and Guinness World Record

A professional singer, Jeske has performed at more than 1,500 events. Her audiences have included 7 United States Presidents, including President Bill Clinton and the Presidential Inauguration of George W. Bush.  Foreign dignitary audiences include Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and the Queen of Thailand's 60th birthday celebration.  Jeske also performed at the opening of the Ronald Reagan Presidential Library and the STS-102 Space Shuttle Discovery launch of March 2001. 
On July 4, 1992, Jeske established a world record which is published in the Guinness World Records.  She sang the Star-Spangled Banner live at 17 official events, attended by approximately 60,000 people in California within a 24 hour period from July 3 to the 4th.  She traveled a total of 373 miles to the functions via automobile, helicopter, and boat.  Her accomplishment is recognized in the 1993 Guinness Book of Records.
While establishing her record, Jeske raised over $90,000.  She donated the full amount to a crippled children hospital near Bangkok, Thailand.  As a result of her donation, she traveled to 42 scheduled appearances within a two-week period and was featured in over 50 newspapers, 5 national television shows, and the cover of 3 magazines.  She also received private audiences with the Governor of Bangkok, Prime Minister of Thailand, and the Royal Family.  
Jeske's record in the Guinness World Record book still stands.youtube.com/watch?v=7pEG6k5JDG8

Television appearances

Jeske has been the guest in several news broadcast shows and appeared in several shows such as Live with Regis and Kathie Lee, Good Morning America, The Montel Williams Show and To Tell The Truth. She has also been featured in soap opera daytime dramas such as Days of Our Lives, The Young and the Restless, as well as The Bold and the Beautiful.  She has also been the spokeswoman for Fortune 500 companies such as Hyundai, Casio, Procter & Gamble, Panasonic, and Xerox.  She has made over 2,000 presentations at trade shows and conventions throughout the United States.  Currently, Jeske is an advocate of safe cosmetics.

Owner and President

Jeske is the owner and President of the Ms. America, Ms. America International, Teen Ms. America, Ms. America Beauty Teen and Ms. America Fitness Pageants.

Other professions

Jeske has performed as an image and protocol consultant for television, radio and magazines, and gives image advice to corporate executives, politicians and debutant. She has also served as a professional speaker and instructor and has taught hundreds of women the art of advanced Glamour makeup techniques.
She has also earned the title of "The Queen Maker" for being one of the most sought after pageant coaches in the world. She has directly assisted many contestants who have gone on to win state, national, and international beauty titles.
. America Pageant. FEBZ Magazine, December 2007, Page 19.

Awards

During her reign as Ms. America, Jeske created the "Students Against Violence" assembly program where she received 15 keys to the city and more than 30 proclamations and commendations.  For these actions, Jeske received the President's Call to Service Award from President George W. Bush.  The President's Call to Service Award is awarded by the President of the United States to people who have completed more than 4,000 hours of community service.  It is the highest level of the President's Volunteer Service Award.
Jeske's platform includes challenging students to face uncomfortable realities that result from guns in schools.  She also brings awareness to Women's Issues. Littleton Independent, Volume 113, Issue 28, July 12, 2001.

Personal life

Susan Jeske was born and raised in Littleton, Colorado. Her family includes three brothers, one sister, and parents who are still married. She currently resides in Orange County, California. She attained a Bachelor of Arts degree in Liberal Arts from the University of the State of New York, Regents College, in 1999.






