[[Challenger Deep]]

CATEGORIES: Geology of the Pacific Ocean, Landforms of Oceania, Extreme points of Earth

The Challenger Deep is the deepest known point in the Earth's seabed hydrosphere, with a depth of  from its border with ocean territory associated with Guam.The Colbert Report, airdate: 2012 April 12, interview with James Cameron
The depression is named after the British Royal Navy survey ship HMS Challenger, whose expedition of 1872–1876 made the first recordings of its depth. According to the August 2011 version of the GEBCO Gazetteer of Undersea Feature Names, the location and depth of the Challenger Deep are 
June 2009 sonar mapping of the Challenger Deep by the Simrad EM120 (sonar multibeam bathymetry system for 300–11,000 m deep water mapping) aboard the RV Kilo Moana indicated a depth of 
Only four descents have ever been achieved. The first descent by any vehicle was by the manned bathyscaphe Trieste in 1960. This was followed by the unmanned ROVs Kaikō in 1995 and Nereus in 2009. In March 2012 a manned solo descent was made by the deep-submergence vehicle Deepsea Challenger.
These expeditions measured very similar depths of .

History of depth mapping from the surface

Over the years the search for the point of maximum depth has involved many vessels.
The 2009 and 2010 maximal depths were not confirmed by the series of dives Nereus made to the bottom during an expedition in May–June 2009. The direct descent measurements by the four expeditions which have reported from the bottom, have fixed depths in a narrow range from 10,916 m (Trieste) to 10,911 m (Kaikō), to 10,902 m (Nereus) to 10,898 m (Deepsea Challenger) Although an attempt was made to correlate locations, it could not be absolutely certain that Nereus (or the other descents) reached exactly the same points found to be maximally deep by the sonar/echo sounders of previous mapping expeditions, even though one of these echo soundings was made by Nereus mothership.

Descents

Manned descents

=Trieste=

On 23 January 1960, the Swiss-designed bathyscaphe Trieste, originally built in Italy and acquired by the U.S. Navy, descended to the ocean floor in the trench manned by Jacques Piccard (who co-designed the submersible along with his father, Auguste Piccard) and USN Lieutenant Don Walsh. Their crew compartment was inside a spherical pressure vessel, which was a heavy-duty replacement (of the Italian original) built by Krupp Steel Works of Essen, Germany. Their descent took almost five hours and the two men spent barely twenty minutes on the ocean floor before undertaking the three-hour-and-fifteen-minute ascent. Their early departure from the ocean floor was due to their concern over a crack in the outer window caused by the temperature differences during their descent.com/the-expedition/1960-dive/ The measured depth at the bottom was measured with a manometer at .

=Deepsea Challenger=

On 26 March 2012 (local time), Canadian film director James Cameron made a solo manned descent in the DSV Deepsea Challenger to the bottom of the Challenger Deep.
At approximately 05:15 ChST on 26 March (19:15 UTC on 25 March), the descent began.
At 07:52 ChST (21:52 UTC), Deepsea Challenger arrived at the bottom. The descent lasted 2 hours and 36 minutes and the recorded depth was 
Cameron planned to spend about six hours near the ocean floor exploring but, due to a hydraulic fluid leak in the lines controlling the manipulator arm which obscured the visibility out the only viewing port in the DSV and caused the loss of the submersible's starboard thrusters,
At around 12:00 ChST (02:00 UTC on 26 March), the Deepsea Challenge website says the sub resurfaced after a 90-minute ascent,
During a post-dive press conference Cameron said: "I landed on a very soft, almost gelatinous flat plain. Once I got my bearings, I drove across it for quite a distance ... and finally worked my way up the slope." The whole time, Cameron said, he didn't see any fish, or any living creatures more than an inch (2.5 cm) long: "The only free swimmers I saw were small amphipods"—shrimplike bottom-feeders.

=Planned manned descents=

Several other manned expeditions are planned. These include:

Unmanned descents

=Kaikō=

On 24 March 1995, the Japanese robotic deep-sea probe Kaikō broke the depth record for unmanned probes when it reached close to the surveyed bottom of the Challenger Deep. Created by the Japan Marine Science and Technology Center (JAMSTEC), it was one of the few unmanned deep-sea probes in operation that could dive deeper than .

=Nereus=

On 31 May 2009 the United States sent the Nereus hybrid remotely operated vehicle (HROV) to the Challenger Deep.
Nereus spent over 10 hours at the bottom of the Challenger Deep and measured a depth of 
The Nereus is operated by the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution.

Lifeforms

The Summary Report of the HMS Challenger expedition lists radiolaria from the two dredged samples taken when the Challenger Deep was first discovered.19thcenturyscience.html,  entry on 23 March 1875. These (Nassellaria and Spumellaria) were reported in the Report on Radiolaria (1887)[ref] Report on the Radiolaria collected by H.M.S. Challenger
by Ernst Haeckel.[/ref] written by Ernst Haeckel.
On their 1960 descent, the crew of the Trieste noted that the floor consisted of diatomaceous ooze and reported observing "some type of flatfish" lying on the seabed."To the bottom of the sea", T. A. Heppenheimer, AmericanHeritage.com
Many marine biologists are now skeptical of this supposed sighting, and it is suggested that the creature may instead have been a sea cucumber."James Cameron dives deep for Avatar", Guardian, 18 January 2011"James Cameron heads into the abyss", Nature, 19 March 2012 The video camera on board the Kaiko probe spotted a sea cucumber, a scale worm and a shrimp at the bottom."Mission to Marianas", New Scientist, 2 November 1996"The last frontier", Time, 14 August 1995 At the bottom of the Challenger deep, the Nereus probe spotted one polychaete worm (a multi-legged predator) about an inch long.
An analysis of the sediment samples collected by Kaiko found large numbers of simple organisms at  While similar lifeforms have been known to exist in shallower ocean trenches (> 7,000 m) and on the abyssal plain, the lifeforms discovered in the Challenger Deep possibly represent taxa distinct from those in shallower ecosystems.
Most of the organisms collected were simple, soft-shelled foraminifera (432 species according to National Geographic
On 17 March 2013, researchers reported data that suggested microbial life forms thrive in the Mariana Trench, the deepest spot on the Earth. According to one of the researchers, "You can find microbes everywhere — they're extremely adaptable to conditions, and survive wherever they are."



Notes




