[[Ninotchka]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 films, 1930s romantic comedy films, American romantic comedy films, American political satire films, Black-and-white films, Defection in fiction, English-language films, Films directed by Ernst Lubitsch, Films set in Paris, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films, United States National Film Registry films, Films about the Soviet Union in the Stalin era

Ninotchka is a 1939 American film made for Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer by producer and director Ernst Lubitsch which stars Greta Garbo and Melvyn Douglas. It was written by Billy Wilder, Charles Brackett and Walter Reisch, based on a screen story by Melchior Lengyel. Ninotchka is Greta Garbo's first full comedy, and her penultimate film. It is one of the first American movies which, under the cover of a satirical, light romance, depicted the Soviet Union under Joseph Stalin as being rigid and gray when compared to the free and sunny Parisian society of prewar years.

Plot

Three Russians, Iranov (Sig Ruman), Buljanov (Felix Bressart), and Kopalsky (Alexander Granach), are in Paris to sell jewelry confiscated from the aristocracy during the Russian Revolution of 1917. Upon arrival, they meet Count Leon d'Algout (Melvyn Douglas), on a mission from the Russian Grand Duchess Swana (Ina Claire), who wants to retrieve her jewelry before it is sold. He corrupts them and talks them into staying in Paris.  The Soviet Union then sends Nina Ivanovna "Ninotchka" Yakushova (Greta Garbo), a special envoy whose goal is to go through with the jewelry sale and bring back the three men. Rigid and stern at first, she slowly becomes seduced by the West and the Count, who falls in love with her.
The three Russians also accommodate themselves to capitalism, but the last joke of the film is that one of them carries a sign protesting that the other two are unfair to him.

Cast

Production

Released in 1939 in the United States, the movie was released during World War II in Europe, where it became a great success.  It was, however, banned in the Soviet Union and its satellites. Despite that, it went on to make $2,279,000 worldwide.
The film was marketed with the catchphrase, "Garbo Laughs!", commenting on Garbo's serious and melancholy image and implying she had not laughed or played comedy before. However her canon reveals this not to be the case. Although all her films were dramatic to this point, Garbo laughs heartily and often. In the most famous example, Queen Christina (1933), she disguises herself as a man and jokes with her co-star John Gilbert and others throughout the first half of the picture.

Reception

Critical response

When the film was first released, The New York Times film critic Frank S. Nugent praised it, writing, "The comedy, through Mr. Douglas's debonair performance and those of Ina Claire as the duchess and Sig Rumann, Felix Bressart and Alexander Grannach as the unholy three emissaries; through Mr. Lubitsch's facile direction; and through the cleverly written script of Walter Reisch, Charles Brackett and Billy Wilder, has come off brilliantly. Stalin, we repeat, won't like it; but, unless your tastes hew too closely to the party line, we think you will, immensely."Nugent, Frank S. The New York Times, film review, November 10, 1939.  Last accessed: December 24, 2013.
More recently, film critic Dennis Schwartz discussed the humor of Ninotchka, writing, "The sly political jokes include Garbo saying: "The last mass trials were a great success. There are going to be fewer but better Russians" and there are a few well-placed jokes mocking the failed Soviet Five-Year-Plan. The most noteworthy Lubitsch touch scene revolves around a stag feast in a luxury hotel ordered by capitalist Douglas for the three grateful comrade emissaries, who can't believe their good fortune."Schwartz, Dennis. Ozus' World Movie Reviews, film review, February 20, 2008.  Last accessed: December 24, 2013.

Revival

An attempt to revive the film later during World War II was suppressed on the grounds that the Soviets were now allies of the West. . . : The United States Goes To War p 164 ISBN 0-684-18239-4

Legacy

The Broadway musical Silk Stockings was written with this film as the source of its script. It also provided the basis of a 1957 film directed by Rouben Mamoulian and starring Fred Astaire and Cyd Charisse. Actor George Tobias, who played the commissar in Silk Stockings, also had a small role in Ninotchka as the man who gets punched by Leon for refusing him a visa. The film The Iron Petticoat (1956), starring Bob Hope and Katharine Hepburn, borrows heavily from Ninotchka.
In 1990, Ninotchka was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". It was also included on two American Film Institute lists: #40 on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Passions and #52 on AFI's 100 Years... 100 Laughs. It was also included on Time Magazine's All-Time 100 Movies.All-Time 100 movies
American Film Institute recognition

Awards

Ninotchka received four Academy Award nominations, those for Best Picture, Best Actress in a Leading Role, Best Original Story, and Best Screenplay. The story is based on the book of the same title by Melchior Lengyel.






