[[Academy Award for Best Costume Design]]

CATEGORIES: Academy Awards, Costume design, Awards for film costume design

The Academy Award for Best Costume Design is one of the Academy Awards of Merit presented annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences (AMPAS) for achievement in film costume design.
The award was first given for films made in 1948.  Initially, separate award categories were established for black-and-white films and color films.  Since the merger of the two categories in 1967, the Academy has traditionally avoided giving out the award to contemporary films.

Award

The Academy Award for Best Costume Design is given out annually by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts & Sciences for the best achievement of film costume design of the previous year. Films that are eligible for the award must meet a series of criteria, including the requirement that the costumes must have been "conceived" by a costume designer. For this particular criteria, each submission is reviewed by the costume designer members of the Art Directors Branch prior to the ballot process. Further rules include that the nominee(s) be only the principal costume designer(s), that the five films that receive the highest amount of votes will become the ceremony's nominations for final voting, and that the final voting will only be undertaken by active and life members of the Academy.

History

The Academy Award for Best Costume Design was first given out at the 21st Academy Awards,
From 1949 to 1966, most Academy Awards for Best Costume Design in Black and White were given to a contemporary movie. On the other hand, epics, fantasies, and musicals dominated the color category. Since the merger into one singular category for color films in 1967, films set in modern times have won only twice, despite the majority of those nominated being contemporary.
Which the 2 modern time winners were Travels with My Aunt and The Adventures of Priscilla, Queen of the Desert.

Superlatives

Jean Louis received fifteen nominations.

Multiple nominations

The following 83 designers have received multiple nominations for the Academy Award for Best Costume Design.  This list is sorted by the number of total awards (with the number of total nominations listed in parentheses).

Winners and nominees

1940s

1950s

From 1957 onwards, the award merged into one category.
For 1959 the Award was again divided into two awards.

1960s

From 1967 the category was merged permanently.

1970s

1980s

1990s

2000s

2010s








