[[Juliet Thompson]]

CATEGORIES: American Bahá'ís, American portrait painters, Converts to the Bahá'í Faith, 1873 births, 1956 deaths, 20th-century Bahá'ís, People from Washington, D.C.

Juliet Thompson (1873–1956) was an American Bahá'í, painter, and disciple of `Abdu'l-Bahá. She is perhaps best remembered for her book The Diary of Juliet Thompson though she also painted a life-sized portrait of `Abdu'l-Bahá.thumb|From the Library of Congress Photo Collection,Juliet Thompson with her portrait of First Lady Grace Coolidge

Early life and education

Thompson was born in Washington, D.C.,

Bahá'í Faith

After learning of the Bahá'í Faith in Washington DC near 1898 she traveled to Paris at the invitation of Laura Dreyfus-Barney's mother. Later in 1901 in Paris she met Thomas Breakwell, (see Bahá'í Faith in the United Kingdom), who gave her Arthur de Gobineau's description in French of the Execution of the Báb which confirmed her faith. Paris is where Charles Mason Remey first met Thompson when she was taking classes on the religion from Mírzá Abu'l-Fadl.
Among many talks `Abdu'l-Bahá gave in the United States he gave one at her residence on 15 November 1912 at 48 West Tenth Street, New York. At this meeting he described distinctive qualities of the religion.
During World War I she offered talks on a Bahá'í topic of the Most Great Peace.[ref] 
[/ref]  In the 1940s Thompson made several extended trips to Mexico to promulgate the religion. (See Bahá'í Faith in Mexico.)

Contact with artists

Thompson recalled Khalil Gibran, a neighbor and acquaintance of hers, and reports several anecdotes relating to Gibran: She recalls Gibran met `Abdu'l-Bahá a couple times circa 1911
In 1918 Mark Tobey came in contact with Thompson and posed for her. During the session Tobey read some Bahá'í literature and accepted an invitation to Green Acre where he converted.
O.Z. Whitehead attended an informational meeting of the religion in Thompson's home in 1950.

Portrait of `Abdu'l-Bahá

And during `Abdu'l-Bahá's first trip to the west in the fall of 1911 she met him at Thonon-les-Bains, France. During the second trip he reached New York - over several days he sat for a life-sized portrait starting June 1st.  The original of this life sized portrait has been lost, but there are original photographs of the portrait. A reproduction was on display at the Second World Congress, and one is housed in the Seat of the Universal House of Justice just outside its meeting room for the members.

Pilgrimages

Over her life she made two Bahá'í pilgrimages. Her first was in July, 1909 when she began her diary which was eventually published. Her work is a main source on `Abdu'l-Bahá's journeys to the West when he was in Europe in 1911 as well as some of his travels in the United States in 1912.
Thompson's second pilgrimage was in 1926.

Death

Thompson died on December 9, 1956 at home. At the memorial service held for her at the Bahá'í House of Worship in Wilmette, several notable people spoke or sent messages - several Hands of the Cause and Paul E. Haney, Charles Mason Remey, Horace Holley, and Amelia Engelder Collins, and later Universal House of Justice member Charles Wolcott, as well as many notable Bahá'ís.

Painting

Thompson's first show as a portrait painter was at the Knoedler's galleries. 
 
 
Photography: [/ref]
Circa 1898 to 1900 she undertook studies while in France and showed her work while there.[ref]  
  

She also donated of her art for support of various causes - an early free clinic,[ref]  
 
