[[Oakland Police Department]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations based in Oakland, California, Municipal police departments of California, Law enforcement agencies of California, Law enforcement in the San Francisco Bay Area, Government of Oakland, California

The Oakland Police Department (OPD) is a civilian law enforcement agency responsible for policing the city of Oakland, California. Since a 2003 incident involving alleged police misconduct, the Oakland Police Department has been under federal oversight.  Ever since, the department has struggled with a potential federal takeover.

History

The Oakland Police Department was formed in 1853. It succeeded law enforcement duties for Oakland, California from the Alameda County Sheriff's Office.  Beginning with World War II thousands of poor rural Southern African Americans migrated into Oakland to work in the shipyards., and Komozi Woodard, eds. Groundwork: Local Black Freedom Movements in America. NYU Press, 2005, pg. 303.  Power structure and urban policy: who rules in Oakland?. McGraw-Hill, 1971, pg. 46.  In the years that followed incidents of police brutality increased., and Komozi Woodard, eds. Groundwork: Local Black Freedom Movements in America. NYU Press, 2005, pg. 303.
In the mid-1960s the Black Panther Party for Self-Defense was formed in Oakland largely to organize armed violent resistance to police brutality.pbs.html  During their "Patrolling the Pigs" operation Black Panthers wearing a uniform of black clothes, black leather jackets, and black berets would follow Oakland police patrols while openly carrying statute books and firearms.   In October 1967 Black Panther founder Huey Newton shot and killed an Oakland police officer during a traffic stop. Newton, 8 Cal. App. 3d 359, 87 Cal. Rptr. 394 (Ct. App. 1970).   David Ray. "The Black Panther Party's Narratives of Resistance." 18 Vermont Law Review 645 (1994). 
Oakland encountered major funding challenges in the years following and the police department became understaffed.  Additionally, community activists say too many OPD officers live outside the city and commute, thus separating themselves from Oakland's daily life. By 2012 over 90% of Oakland police officers resided outside of Oakland.  In an attempt to increase community involvement and address police officer understaffing the people of Oakland in 2004 passed a major tax increase known as Measure Y.oaklandnet.
In July 2000 evidence emerged that the respected veteran police officers known as the "Rough Riders" had over the past four years made false arrests, planted evidence, used excessive force, and falsified police reports.oaklandnet.  The alleged leader of the Riders, Frank Vazquez, fled to Mexico shortly after his criminal indictment and remains a fugitive from justice.
The Riders actions resulted in Oakland settling a federal civil rights case, Allen v. City of Oakland,  for nearly $11 million.oaklandcityattorney.pdf  As part of the Negotiated Settlement Agreement the Oakland Police Department is required to make major reforms to ensure constitutional policing.oaklandnet.pdf  The court appointed an independent monitor to oversee implementation of these reforms.
The 2009 Oakland police shootings killed four officers and marked the deadliest day for Californian law enforcement in 40 years.oaklandnet.pdf
Nine years after the Riders case Negotiated Settlement Agreement the federal court found the Oakland Police Department had failed to fully implement required reforms.oaklandcityattorney.pdf  To guarantee compliance with the settlement the U.S. District Judge Thelton Henderson appointed former Baltimore Police Department Commissioner Tomas Frazier as Compliance Director in March 2013.justia.

Uniform & Equipment

The uniform of the OPD consists of a dark navy blue shirt. On the left side of the chest, the badge is pinned. The type of badge differs upon rank. Higher ranks tend to have nicer more detailed badges compared to lower ranking officers. Officers are also issued a standard police hat. Navy blue pants are worn with a blue stripe going down them. They also have belts holding their equipment. For crowd control, OPD officers normally have helmets and more protective gear. Most SWAT uniforms are standard.

Weapons

Oakland officers are allowed to carry .40 caliber firearms. They are given a list of certain firearms that they may or may not carry during the academy. The department also issues Glock 19 chambered in 9mm.ktvu. Officers also carry pepper spray and batons as do most other officers. Cruisers may be armed with Remington 870 shotguns. SWAT Teams often have Colt AR-15 style weapons and H&K UMP.

Vehicles and Air Support

Police cruisers normally consist of Ford Crown Victoria Police Interceptors. Most vehicles are standard. The helicopter for the Oakland Police is named ARGUS after a character in Greek mythology.oaklandmofo.com/blog/oakland-police-helicopter-to-fly-again/

Salary

The salary of Oakland officers is another controversial issue. Police Officer Entry Level current annual salary is $69,912 to $98,088, the second highest in the country.  Three patrol officers, a sergeant, and a captain each took home over $300,000.  In 2011 the Police Department's costs make up 44% of the city's $400 million general budget.
Unfunded police pension liabilities are a separate high cost to the city.  In 2010 the Oakland Police and Fire Retirement system granted $70 million in benefits to 1,086 pensioners.   In 2012 the city successfully sued the city's pension system to end an estimated $11.5 million in unlawful overpayment to retired police and fire fighters.oaklandcityattorney.html

Ranking structure

All new officers begin at the rank of police officer.  There are civil service promotional opportunities all the way up to captain, then all remaining positions are appointed. The department is headed by a chief. The current interim Chief of the Oakland Police Department Sean Whent, who replaced interim chief Anthony Toribio after only two days, Howard had served since 2011, succeeding Anthony Batts. Typically, each division is headed by a captain. A lieutenant will head a division if a captain is not present or non-existent. Lieutenant's duties consist of normal patrol and leadership of lower ranks and sometimes (as specified above) entire divisions. Sergeants, normally don't have any positions in leadership, considering the rank is mainly a promotional opportunity.

Number of police officers

On Friday, August 15, 2007, Oakland swore in 22 new graduates from the department's 161st Basic Police Academy, increasing the ranks of the department to 741 filled positions, the most since 1999. At least five veteran officers were expected to be granted disability retirements by the end of the month and up to 20 more were expected to leave by the end of the year. Forty-one potential Oakland officers were in Oakland Police Academy training academy that graduated in January 2008, and another academy was scheduled to start in October. Even with that graduation, there were still more than 60 vacancies in the department where the authorized strength increased by 63 to 802 officers after the passage of Measure Y in November 2004.insidebayarea.com/search/ci_6657477?source=email
On July 14, 2010, Oakland laid off 80 police officers reducing the total officers from 776 to 695. 24 of those sworn officers worked in a patrol capacity or responded to 911 calls. The rest of the officers performed other duties, including community policing activities.go.com/blogs/2010/07/ignacio-de-la-fuente-police-layoffs-budget-cuts-how-we-got-here
As of January 11, 2011, the City Council had authorized 637 police positions.oaklandnet.pdf
As of February 2011, Oakland Police Department has 663 filled police positions, six less than the current authorized strength.
As of July 2011, the number of sworn officers is 637. The city is currently hiring officers, recently graduating an academy class and having plans to graduate more classes in the future.opdjobs.com/
Oakland has eight detectives assigned to investigate robberies.  There are six Special Victims Unit investigators. 34  Police Department Bureau of Field Operations Support Operations Division, Annual Report 2012, pg. 8 

Controversies

In 1991 the Oakland Police Department paid a $42,000 settlement to rapper Tupac Shakur after allegedly brutally beating him for jaywalking.
In 2003, the city paid $10.9 million to 119 plaintiffs who reportedly had been victimized by members of Oakland Police.   However, after the officers were fired from the OPD, a jury that had no black members on it ended up clearing the four Rough Riders on eight of the counts against them, and were unable to reach a decision on 27 others.   As a result of the Negotiated Settlement Agreement stemming from Allen v. City of Oakland (AKA the Riders Case), an Independent Monitoring Team was appointed by the Federal District court.[ref]Wall Street Journal - Oakland Police Get a Federal Monitor JANUARY 26, 2012
[/ref]   Plaintiffs in the case have requested OPD be placed under the control of a federal receivership.Huffington Post - Oakland Police Department Only Weeks Away From Being Placed Into Federal Control January 27, 2012
In 2003, two undercover members of the Oakland Police Department were assigned to participate in the anti-Iraq War movement.  They stood for and were elected to leadership roles before their true affiliations were uncovered.Police spies chosen to lead war protest
In 2008, Oakland agreed to pay $2 million to 16 women, all Asian, who alleged being groped, harassed, or victimized by a member of the Oakland Police Department. CITY OF OAKLAND C 06-07171 MJJ (2007)  After a criminal trial, former Officer Richard Valerga was sentenced to six months in jail.Ex-officer sentenced to jail in gropings
In 2010, Oakland agreed to pay $6.5 million to individuals alleging that the Oakland police for years illegally obtained search warrants based on false or misleading information.5 Million to Settle Claims Police Lied in Seeking WarrantsOakland settles warrant suits for $6.5 million
In 2011, Oakland Police came under further criticism for its handling of Occupy Oakland.msnbc.com/_news/2012/05/01/11482075-overwhelming-military-type-response-report-criticizes-oakland-police-handling-of-occupy-protests Federal district judge Thelton Henderson threatened sanctioning the Oakland PD if it does not submit a plan to address the immense number, over a thousand, of complaints over the department's violent handling of Occupy Oakland.care2.html
Oakland has paid a total of $57 million during the 2001-2011 timeframe to alleged victims of police abuse—the largest sum of any city in California.KTVU - Investigation reveals East Bay city paying out extraordinary police abuse settlements Nov 14, 2011
In 2012, the City of Oakland authorized an $800,000 settlement stemming from a case in which two citizens were unlawfully strip-searched on a public street by Oakland Police. Lee, SFChronicle Oakland to pay $832,000 in legal fees March 21, 2012

Officers killed in the line of duty

As of 2009, the department has lost 51 officers in the line of duty, 32 officers died as a result of gunfire.
The 2009 shooting of Oakland police officers took place on Saturday, March 21, 2009, when four Oakland, California, police officers were killed by a felon wanted on a no-bail warrant for a parole violation. The felon, Lovelle Mixon, shot and killed four Oakland police officers, two during a routine traffic stop and two when SWAT team officers attempted to apprehend him two hours later. Mixon staged an ambush of the police from his hiding place and was killed in a barrage of gunfire as officers returned fire in self-defense.Doomed SWAT sergeants didn't expect the rifle, San Francisco Chronicle, March 23, 2009
The 2009 killings made it one of the worst days for law enforcement in California's history. It was the single deadliest attack on California's police officers since the Newhall massacre in 1970, when four California Highway Patrol officers were shot and killed by two men in the Santa Clarita Valley. It was also the deadliest attack on U.S. law enforcement since the 9/11 terrorist attacks in 2001.








