[[Mikey Coppola]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Fugitives wanted on organised crime charges, Genovese crime family, American mobsters of Italian descent, Living people, People convicted of racketeering, People from Newark, New Jersey



Michael J. Coppola (born in May 18, 1946), It is unknown if he is related to Michael "Trigger Mike" Coppola, who was also a member of the Genovese family. He has been a key figure in the Genovese crime family New Jersey faction. He made national headlines when he went on the lam for 11 years to avoid a possible murder conviction.

Early criminal career

Michael Coppola has been working for the Genovese family since the 1960s. He became a made man in the late 1970s and was part of a notorious Genovese  hit team known as "The Fist", according to government documents.com/genovese-family/trial-for-accused-mafia-hit-man/ This team performed murders ordered by the Genovese administration in the late 1970s and 1980s. Coppola was involved in labor racketeering in the trucking industry and New Jersey docks. Coppola became an acting caporegime (captain) while Tino Fiumara was in prison in the 1980s and 1990s,The Changing Face of Organized Crime in New Jersey A Status Report. May 2004. (pg 105-114)  running the day-to-day activities of the New Jersey faction Fiurama had orders relayed to him.

Alleged murder

In 1996 Coppola was charged in the 1977 killing of John "Johnny Cokes" Lardiere. Coppola was standing in front of him with a .22 automatic pistol, complete with a silencer. When Coppola squeezed the trigger, the gun jammed. Lardiere was both amused and annoyed by the man and allegedly said "What're you gonna do now, tough guy?". Coppola responded by pulling up his pant leg, and removing a .38 revolver from an ankle holster and shooting Lardiere four times. When police arrived at the crime scene, they knew immediately it was a mob hit. The shooter had left behind his weapons and a hat. In 1996 Lucchese crime family mobster Thomas "Tommy" Ricciardi who had been arrested on murder and extortion charges, decided to cooperate with authorities. He told the FBI that Lardiere's killer was Michael Coppola. Ricciardi told police that he heard the entire story of Lardiere's murder from Coppola while talking about mob murders with Michael Taccetta at a party in 1983.

Fugitive and arrest

Coppola left his gun and hat at the murder scene. Since the advancement of forensics since 1977, a judge ordered Coppola to submit a DNA test. When the FBI requested a DNA sample on August 8, 1996 which could have proved he was at the murder scene, Coppola left his Spring Lake, New Jersey home and went on the lam with his wife. During his time on the run, he was featured on America's Most Wanted. Although on the run, authorities believed he was still holding power over organized crime in New Jersey as a fugitive. A fellow New Jersey mobster for the Genovese family and a Furmara/Coppola associate, was charged by the FBI with illegally harboring Coppola during the months before he was caught and arrested. The Huffington Post In April 2002, the U.S. Attorney's Office for the District of New Jersey obtained an indictment against Fiumara for conspiring to assist Coppola in Coppola's flight. In March 2003, he pled guilty to conspiring to conceal and failing to report that he had been in contact with Coppola. In November, a federal judge ordered Fiumara back to prison for eight months for concealing Coppola's whereabouts.
While on the run investigators were searching for him in Nevada, Pennsylvania, Florida, Canada, Italy, and Costa Rica. On March 9, 2007, after 11 years on the run Coppola and his wife Linda were found and arrested. While conducting a search of their Upper West Side home they found a book entitled "The Methods of Attacking Scientific Evidence". Coppola pleaded guilty to fugitive charges and was given a 42 month (3 and a half years) sentence. His wife Linda also pleaded guilty to harboring a fugitive and received probation. Louis James Rizzo Jr., Coppola's step son, was also convicted for conspiracy to harbor a fugitive and sentenced to 3 years in prison.nj.ssf/2008/05/longtime_fugitive_michael_copp.

Trial

In 2009 the FBI believed that Coppola was going to turn state's evidence against the Genovese family and cooperate with the FBI. The FBI was willing to give him immunity from prosecution and enter him in the Witness Protection Program if he cooperated. The FBI believed he was involved in the killing of Lawrence Ricci (along with his son and stepson) on orders of Tino Fiumara, one of the men the FBI was hoping to prosecute with Coppola's cooperation. Coppola waived a speedy arraignment and spent the next two nights sleeping at FBI headquarters in lower Manhattan at an undisclosed hotel. He also met with a government arranged lawyer known as a shadow counsel. On the third day however, Coppola refused to cooperate. His defense lawyer Henry Mazurek said that Coppola only dragged out the process in concern for his wife, who he feared would also be arrested and charged.
In July 2009, Coppola was put on trial for racketeering charges in the murder of John "Johnny Cokes" Lardiere and for extorting the Local 1235 of the International Longshoremen's Association for over 30 years. 
A witness to the murder, Raymond Zychlinski, was called on as a defense witness in the case. 
Coppola was then taken into custody already serving time for his original fugitive sentence in the Metropolitan Detention Center, Brooklyn.nj.ssf/2009/12/murder_charge_dismissed_agains. He is currently serving his time at the United States Penitentiary, Atlanta and his projected release date is March 4, 2024.Michael Coppola Inmate Locator at the Federal Bureau of Prisons



Notes




