[[Georg Johannes von Trapp]]

CATEGORIES: 1880 births, 1947 deaths, Austrian emigrants to the United States, Austrian knights, Austrian musicians, Austro-Hungarian military personnel of World War I, Austro-Hungarian Navy officers, Cancer deaths in Vermont, Deaths from lung cancer, Knights of the Military Order of Maria Theresa, Musical theatre characters, People who emigrated to escape Nazism, People from Zadar, Trapp family, U-boat commanders (Imperial Navy)

Incorporates information from the article in the German Wikipedia

Korvettenkapitän Georg Johannes, Ritter His naval exploits during World War I earned him numerous decorations, including the prestigious Military Order of Maria Theresa. The story of his family served as the inspiration for the musical The Sound of Music.

Birth and naval career

Georg Johannes Ritter von Trapp (4 April 1880 – 30 May 1947) was born in Zara, Kingdom of Dalmatia, then a Crown Land of the Austro-Hungarian Empire (present-day Zadar, Croatia). His father, Fregattenkapitän August Trapp, was a naval officer who had been elevated to the Austrian nobility in 1876 which entitled him and his descendants to the style of Ritter (Knight) von in the case of male and von in the case of female offspring.
August Ritter von Trapp died in 1884, when Georg was four. His mother was Hedwig Wepler. His older sister was the Austrian artist Hede von Trapp, and his brother, Werner, died in 1915 in World War I. 
In 1894, aged 14, he followed in his father's footsteps and entered the K.u.K. (imperial and royal) Austro-Hungarian Navy, entering the naval academy at Fiume (Rijeka). He graduated four years later and completed two years of follow-on training voyages including a trip to Australia. In 1900 he was assigned to the armored cruiser SMS Kaiserin und Königin Maria Theresia and was decorated for his performance during the Boxer Rebellion. In 1902 he passed the officer's examination. He was fascinated by submarines, and in 1908 he seized the opportunity to be transferred to the newly formed U-boot-Waffe. In 1910 he was given command of the newly constructed SM U-6, which was christened by his wife, Agatha (née Whitehead). He commanded U-6 until 1913. 
On 17 April 1915, he took command of SM U-5 and conducted nine combat patrols. While in command of the U-5 he sank the following:
He captured:
Georg Johannes von Trapp has sometimes incorrectly been credited with sinking the Italian troop transport Principe Umberto. In reality, this was sunk by U-5 under von Trapp's successor Friedrich Schlosser (1885–1959) on 8 June 1916, after von Trapp was transferred to the SM U-14. On 14 October 1915, he was transferred to the captured French submarine Curie, which the Austrian Navy redesignated SM U-14. 
Von Trapp conducted ten more war patrols, until, in May 1918, he was promoted to Korvettenkapitän (equal to Lieutenant commander) and given command of the submarine base in the Gulf of Kotor. At the end of World War I, von Trapp's wartime record stood at 19 war patrols; 11 cargo vessels totalling 45,669 tons sunk, plus the Léon Gambetta and Nereide and 1 cargo vessel captured. Among other honors, he received the Knight's Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa. The end of the First World War saw the defeat and collapse of the Austro-Hungarian Empire. In the process, Austria was reduced in size to its German-speaking core – losing its seacoast – and had no further need for a navy, leaving von Trapp without a vocation or employment. 

First marriage

Von Trapp was first married to Agatha Whitehead, a niece of St John Brodrick, 1st Earl of Midleton and a granddaughter of Robert Whitehead, who invented the modern torpedo. After the English government rejected his invention, Austrian Emperor Franz Josef invited Whitehead to open a torpedo factory in Fiume (present-day Rijeka, Croatia). Agatha christened his first command, the U-boat U-6.
Agatha's inherited wealth sustained the couple and permitted them to start a family. Their first child, Rupert,Social Security Death Index as "Rupert Vontrapp" 1 November 1911 – 22 February 1992; 05672 (Stowe, Lamoille, VT); 127-14-1082; Social Security issued in New York was born on November 1, 1911, at Pola, Istria. The family lived at Pina Budicina 11.The Villa Trapp is at Pina Budicina 11 at 
On 3 September 1922, Agatha, Baroness von Trapp died of scarlet fever contracted from her daughter Agathe. The family purchased a villa in Aigen, a suburb of Salzburg, and moved in 1924.The family villa in Aigen is at 
About 1926, Maria Franziska was recovering from an illness and was unable to attend school, so von Trapp hired Maria Augusta Kutschera, from the nearby Nonnberg Abbey, as a tutor. 

Second marriage

Von Trapp, 47, married Maria Augusta Kutschera (aged 22) on 26 November 1927.

Later life

In 1935, von Trapp's money, inherited from his first wife, was invested in a bank in England. Austria was under economic pressure from a hostile Germany, and Austrian banks were in a precarious position. Von Trapp sought to help a friend in the banking business, Frau (Auguste Caroline) Lammer (1885–1937), so he withdrew most of his money from London and deposited it in an Austrian bank. The bank failed, wiping out most of the family's fortune.
Faced with an impossible situation of little or no money and a husband incapable of providing for her or for the family, Maria took charge and began to make arrangements for the family to sing at various events as a way of earning a livelihood. At about that time, a Catholic priest, Franz Wasner, around Maria's age, came to live with them and became the group's musical director. In 1947, Maria also entrusted the priest with management of the family's finances as treasurer of the Trapp Family Austrian Relief fund. Around 1936, Lotte Lehmann heard the family sing, and she suggested they perform paid concerts. When the Austrian Chancellor Kurt von Schuschnigg heard them on the radio, he invited them to perform in Vienna.
According to Maria von Trapp's memoirs, Captain von Trapp found himself in a strange situation after the Anschluss in 1938. He was offered a commission to the German Navy, a tempting proposition for a Captain without a navy, but decided he would have to decline, being opposed to Nazi ideology. Knowing that he could not decline the offer without threat of arrest, possibly for his entire family, he decided to leave Austria. Some details of the von Trapps' escape from Austria were changed in The Sound of Music. In the film it was stated that he was threatened with death if he did not capitulate to the Nazis. In fact the Captain had been born into what later became the Italian territory of Zara, so the family members were all Italian citizens, and were able to leave Austria for Italy by train in broad daylight, rather than by hiking over the mountains from Austria to Switzerland in the middle of the night. The family then sailed to the United States for their first concert tour, then went back to Europe to tour Scandinavia in 1939 hoping to continue their concerts in the non-Nazi cities. During this time, they went back to Salzburg for a few months before returning to Sweden to finish the tour. From there, they traveled to Norway to begin the trip back to the United States in September 1939.
After living for a short time in Merion, Pennsylvania, where they welcomed their youngest child, Johannes, the family settled in Stowe, Vermont, in 1941. They purchased a  In January 1947, Major General Harry J. Collins turned to the von Trapp family in the USA pleading for help for the Austrian people, having seen firsthand the residents of Salzburg suffer when he had arrived there with the famed 42nd Rainbow Division after World War II. The Trapp Family founded the Trapp Family Austrian Relief, Inc.

Death

Georg Johannes von Trapp died of lung cancer on 30 May 1947, in Stowe, Vermont. Maria also acknowledges in her book, published in 1949, that, like most men of the period, the Captain was a heavy smoker.

Children



Map locations


