[[Mika Häkkinen]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, Living people, People from Vantaa, Finnish racing drivers, Formula Ford drivers, British Formula Three Championship drivers, Italian Formula Three Championship drivers, German Formula Three Championship drivers, Finnish Formula One drivers, Team Lotus Formula One drivers, McLaren Formula One drivers, Formula One World Drivers' Champions, Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters drivers, FIA GT Championship drivers, Finnish expatriates in Monaco, Finnish expatriates in the United Kingdom, Porsche Supercup drivers

Mika Pauli Häkkinen () (born 28 September 1968 in Vantaa in the Helsinki metropolitan area) is a Finnish former racing driver and two-time Formula One World Champion.
Häkkinen debuted in F1 with Lotus in 1991 after a successful career in karting and different junior formula categories. After two years with Lotus, he joined McLaren as a test driver in 1993 initially as a backup for Ayrton Senna, but took over the responsibility of race driver after Michael Andretti was dismissed by the team after that year's Italian Grand Prix. In 1994, he became the lead driver of the team after Senna left to join Williams. Following a life-threatening injury during a practice session for the 1995 Australian Grand Prix and a remarkable comeback to professional racing, Häkkinen and McLaren made considerable improvements in 1996 and 1997 with Häkkinen taking his first victory at the 1997 European Grand Prix. Häkkinen won back to back titles in 1998–99 against the Ferrari drivers Michael Schumacher and Eddie Irvine respectively. In 2000, Häkkinen won four races but the title was won  by Schumacher. This was followed by two more victories in 2001, and the announcement of a sabbatical the same year that later turned into retirement.
After retiring from Formula One, Häkkinen drove in the DTM series, in which he won three races with Mercedes before announcing his retirement from competitive motorsports in 2007.

Early life

Häkkinen was born in Helsingin maalaiskunta (now Vantaa), Finland on 28 September 1968 to Harri, a shortwave radio operator and a part-time taxi driver, and Aila Häkkinen, who worked as a secretary. Häkkinen grew up with one sister, Nina, who ran a fan site for her brother until its closure in 1998. As a child, Häkkinen lived in the same street as Mika Salo with the two later becoming friends.

Racing career

Pre-Formula One (until 1990)

When Häkkinen was five years old, his parents hired a go-kart for him to take to a track near their home. On his first lap, Häkkinen was involved in an accident but he escaped unhurt. Despite this crash, Häkkinen wished to continue racing and after persistently annoying his parents, the young Finn got his wish fulfilled. His father bought Häkkinen his first go-kart, one that Henri Toivonen had previously competed with.
By 1986, Häkkinen had won five karting championships.  Häkkinen was close to winning the 1990 Macau Grand Prix but missed out due to a controversial accident with Michael Schumacher, which resulted in his promotion to Formula One with Team Lotus.

Formula One (1991–2001)

=Lotus (1991–1992)=

==1991==

Häkkinen joined Lotus in . He qualified 13th for his Grand Prix debut at Phoenix, and would also have finished the race in the same position had his car not experienced an engine failure on lap 60. Häkkinen scored his first Grand Prix points two rounds later in Imola, where he finished fifth from 25th on the grid, three laps behind the race winner, Ayrton Senna. Häkkinen finished the season at joint 15th position alongside Satoru Nakajima and Martin Brundle.

==1992==

Johnny Herbert joined Häkkinen for  season. The Finn continued his form from 1991, with point-scoring finishes in six Grands Prix, his best finishes being fourth places in France and Hungary. Häkkinen finished the season at eighth place in the Drivers' Championship, with almost six times as many points as during the previous season.

=McLaren (1993–2001)=

==1993==

In  In Monaco he returned to racing with a guest drive in the Porsche Supercup race, an event he dominated. His hopes of stepping up to the race team were realised after Monza, when Michael Andretti left F1 after disappointing results. Häkkinen's McLaren race debut in Portugal was impressive. In his first outing for the team, he outqualified their star driver Ayrton Senna. Unfortunately, when pushing too hard through the final corner of the track during the race, he ran wide onto the dirty side of the kerb, launching the car towards the pit wall. At the time he was running in a point-scoring position. He went on to score a podium finish fifteen seconds behind his triple world champion team-mate during the next weekend at Suzuka, his first career podium.
During 1993, Häkkinen, along with Ayrton Senna, tested the Lamborghini V12 engine in a modified version of the McLaren MP4/8 race car dubbed the "MP4/8B" at both Estoril and Silverstone. Both drivers were impressed with the engine, with Häkkinen reportedly lapping Silverstone some 1.4 seconds faster in the MP4/8B with its V12 engine than he had with the team's race car fitted with the Ford V8.

==1994==

With Senna departing for Williams for the  season, Häkkinen became the leading driver for McLaren with Martin Brundle as his teammate. McLaren had also switched from the V8 Ford engines to Peugeot V10s (a handshake deal was reportedly done for McLaren to use the Lamborghini V12 the team had tested in 1993, but team boss Ron Dennis decided on Peugeot instead). During the season, Häkkinen took six more podium finishes to add to his sole podium of 1993, including a second place in Belgium. He finished the year at fourth place in the Drivers' Championship with a tally of 26 points. McLaren's season was hampered by the Peugeot V10's which had a nasty habit of blowing up during both qualifying and races.

==1995==


A further two second places in Italy and Japan put Häkkinen's tally of podiums up to nine. He missed the Pacific Grand Prix at Aida due to an appendix operation.
At Adelaide, he suffered a tyre failure at the early part of the first qualifying session, which resulted in him crashing heavily into the wall. He was critically injured in the crash, sustaining a skull fracture, internal bleeding and swallowing of his tongue which caused a blocking of his airway, and was saved only due to an emergency cricothyroidotomy that was performed by the side of the track by Sid Watkins.

==1996==

The 1996 season saw McLaren improve; Mercedes-Benz were in their second season of supplying engines to the team and Häkkinen managed to return to the podium, although his first win still eluded him. That season saw David Coulthard join the team from Williams.
Häkkinen finished 4th at Brazil.

==1997==

For 1997 season, Häkkinen was linked to Benetton and Williams.
But he decided to continue at McLaren. McLaren were confident of success in . With the distinctive red and white colours of Marlboro replaced by the silver and black colours of West, the team returned to their winning ways. His teammate David Coulthard took the first win for McLaren in over three seasons at the Australian Grand Prix. Through the year the McLarens began to regularly challenge the frontrunners, but it was Coulthard who finished higher in the championship. Häkkinen came close to an elusive breakthrough victory a number of times in 1997, not least at Silverstone, A1-Ring and Nürburgring. At the seasong ending race in Jerez, Häkkinen finally won his first race, after a crash between frontrunners Michael Schumacher and Jacques Villeneuve, which caused Schumacher to retire from the race and led to him being disqualified from the Drivers' Championship. Villeneuve was able to finish the race with a damaged car, but his delay from the accident allowed Häkkinen and Coulthard to pass on the last lap for a McLaren double podium.

==1998==

The 1998 season began with Häkkinen winning four of the first six rounds. However, Schumacher won the next three races, allowing him to close the gap to Häkkinen in the Drivers' Championship standings. Then Häkkinen won back to back races in Austria and Germany.
Both contenders arrived to the finale at Suzuka with the title still up for grabs. Häkkinen was clearly favored due to the superiority of the McLaren, though the Ferrari had developed during the course of the Championship. Schumacher took pole at the qualifying, with Häkkinen just beside him. At the warm-up lap however, the clutch of Schumacher's car got stuck and he was forced to start from the back of the grid, elevating Häkkinen to the front of the grid. Schumacher made a good recovery during the race, but was eventually forced to retire. Häkkinen went on to lead the race from start to finish and claim his first World Drivers' Champion title. Overall, Häkkinen managed to win eight races and 13 points placings in 16 races, and claimed the World Championship at 100 points, ahead of Schumacher at 86 points. In addition, Häkkinen started from the pole position nine times out of 16.

==1999==

The 1999 Championship proved to be a more difficult season for Häkkinen and McLaren. The MP4/14, again designed by Newey, was shown to be a competitive car capable of fighting for the World Championship, though was less mechanically reliable than its 1998 predecessor. As well as reliability issues, Häkkinen made several errors throughout the season which cost him likely victories on two occasions. The Ferrari team produced a competitive car in the form of the F399, though their title hopes diminished after lead driver Michael Schumacher broke his leg at the British Grand Prix and was forced to miss six races. Eddie Irvine took up the Championship challenge for Ferrari, claiming four victories for the Italian team during the season and taking the title to the wire. Ultimately Häkkinen was able to celebrate a second consecutive world title after taking victory in the final round of the Championship at Suzuka.
Häkkinen's season began with pole position at Melbourne ahead of teammate David Coulthard. The mechanical problems that were to hamper the MP4/14 on further occasions during the season struck both McLaren cars during the race. First Coulthard, then Häkkinen dropped out of the running with gearbox failure, handing Ferrari's Eddie Irvine his maiden Grand Prix victory. Häkkinen fought back at the next round of the Championship in Brazil, scoring a pole position, fastest lap and a win. A third pole position of the season followed in Imola, but an error on lap 18 saw Häkkinen crash out of the lead. Häkkinen again took pole in Monaco but come race day finished third behind the Ferrari pair of Schumacher and Irvine. Back-to-back wins in Barcelona and in Canada (the first Formula One Grand Prix to be finished under Safety Car conditions) boosted the Finn's title hopes, moving him 4 points ahead of Michael Schumacher at the top of the World Drivers' Championship. Häkkinen extended his Championship lead by a further 4 points with a second place finish in France behind the Jordan of Heinz-Harald Frentzen. A retirement due to a loose wheel at Silverstone followed, while closest rival Schumacher suffered a serious accident at Stowe corner which put the German out of the next six rounds of the Championship with a broken leg.
Häkkinen started from pole position once more in Austria. The Finn was forced to fight his way through the field after contact at the beginning of the race with his teammate Coulthard, which left him in last position at the end of the first lap. Häkkinen set the fastest lap of the race and eventually finished third. The next round, the German Grand Prix at Hockenheim saw Häkkinen crash out at high speed following a rear tyre failure on lap 26. Irvine, now leading Ferrari's title challenge, proceeded to take victory in the Grand Prix with the assistance of teammate Mika Salo and moved 8 points clear of Häkkinen at the top of the World Championship. Häkkinen responded with a dominant win from pole in Hungary, then second place in Belgium behind teammate Coulthard, moving the Finn ahead of Irvine by a point in the Drivers' Championship. At the next round in Italy Häkkinen made an unforced error, spinning out of the race at Monza's first chicane on lap 30 while leading comfortably. Häkkinen proceeded to break down in tears in full view of the television cameras after throwing his steering wheel and gloves to the ground while walking away from his stalled McLaren.

==2000==

As a double World Champion, he had joined an elite group of drivers. For the 2000 season, he was eager to score a hat-trick of crowns, but after a season-long contest, finished 19 points behind Ferrari's Schumacher. Häkkinen took victory in Spain, At the next Grand Prix Schumacher took over the Championship lead, and went on to confirm his third world championship at the Japanese Grand Prix, the penultimate race of the season.

==2001==

In , he took part in what would prove to be his last season of Formula One, before being replaced by his young compatriot and protégé Kimi Räikkönen. The MP4-16 was not as competitive and it was Coulthard who carried the threat to Schumacher for much of the season.
Häkkinen suffered a sizeable crash due to a front suspension failure at the opening race in Australia at Melbourne, while running second. The accident seemed to have hindered his motivation considerably. In Brazil, Häkkinen stalled on the grid which almost forced Olivier Panis to collide with the stalled car. Häkkinen received a $5,000 fine for his actions.
By mid-2002, Häkkinen decided to take full-time retirement. He cited the reason for spending more time with his family and not to risk any injuries.

DTM (2005–2007)

During 2004 Häkkinen announced plans for a Grand Prix comeback and held talks with Williams for 2005. A deal was not reached and he  made a race comeback in the Deutsche Tourenwagen Masters (DTM), with Mercedes-Benz instead. It was a successful season, including one win at Spa.
During 2006 he again competed in the DTM championships with Mercedes. It was a more difficult season having a couple of second places as his best results. Autosport magazine had speculated that Häkkinen's style of driving is not especially suited to a DTM car.
At the 2006 Goodwood Festival Of Speed, Häkkinen drove the 2005 McLaren-Mercedes MP4-20. Many said that it was great once again to see Häkkinen in a McLaren, as he was the last driver (at that time) to win the World Championship in a McLaren.
Häkkinen would stay on at Mercedes for a third season and although this was tainted by some bad luck in places, 2007 was to be his most competitive. Regularly qualifying on the front row, he took two wins at Lausitz and Mugello on his way to 8th position in the championship.

Possible returns to F1

After Häkkinen's sabbatical year and subsequent retirement, rumours of his return were reported on several occasions. Häkkinen was linked to Williams during the 2004 season because of Montoya going to McLaren-Mercedes the following year.
At the end of the 2006 season there were further rumours regarding Häkkinen returning to the wheel of a McLaren-Mercedes for the 2007 season. Autosport magazine reported that Häkkinen had tested a McLaren simulator twice during November and discussed a possible comeback with the team. On November 24 McLaren announced that Lewis Hamilton would take the team's second seat in 2007, On Thursday, November 30, Häkkinen tested the 2006 McLaren-Mercedes MP4-21 for a full day at the Circuit de Catalunya, in Barcelona, Spain. He completed 79 laps of the circuit, but his fastest lap was three seconds off the pace of regular race drivers. McLaren said they were using his expertise to see how Formula One had evolved over the years since his retirement.
Häkkinen had also been named as the Responsible Drinking Ambassador for McLaren sponsor Johnnie Walker.

2011 Intercontinental Le Mans Cup

Team AMG China had entered a Mercedes-Benz SLS AMG in the Intercontinental Le Mans Cup – 6 Hours of Zhuhai race, which saw Häkkinen make his ILMC debut in the GT3-based machine.com. John Dagys. Posted October 18, 2011. San Francisco, CA

Retirement

Häkkinen announced his retirement from competitive motorsport on Sunday, 4 November 2007.
In November 2008, Häkkinen announced that he will begin a new career in driver management.

Helmet

Häkkinen's helmet was white with a dark blue stripe, a royal blue stripe and a sky blue stripe in the middle, a blue circle on the top and his name written in the chin area of his helmet. Colours were based on his early sponsor Oy G.W. Sohlberg Ab's brand in 1980's.

Personal life

Since 1991, Häkkinen has resided in Monte Carlo although he also owns houses in France and Finland. On 18 May 2008, his newly completed mansion in France was burned down after a light in one of his trophy cabinets short circuited. No one was injured but his collection of F1 trophies was destroyed.
Häkkinen married Erja Honkanen in 1998. The couple have one son, Hugo Ronan (born 11 December 2000) and one daughter, Aina Julia (born 12 May 2005). The couple applied for divorce in 2008.
Häkkinen can ride a unicycle and has performed on stage riding one.
In February 2010, Häkkinen offered driving lessons at Mercedes-Benz World to raise money for children's charity, Great Ormond Street Hospital. The event was sponsored by myHermes, for which Häkkinen is the brand ambassador.
Häkkinen also featured on BBC Two's Top Gear, teaching presenter James May the basics of rally driving in preparation for his first supercar test with the Pagani Zonda.

Legacy

Häkkinen is known as a "taciturn" character who would give virtually nothing away to the media and would take lengthy pauses before answering questions put before him. Häkkinen has a street named after him in the Australian city of Adelaide in which he suffered a near fatal accident.

Racing record

Career summary

Complete Formula One results

(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position, races in italics indicate fastest lap)

Complete DTM results

(key)
 Half points were awarded in the race due to several errors made by the race officials.








