[[List of unreleased Michael Jackson songs]]

CATEGORIES: Michael Jackson songs, Unreleased songs

Michael Jackson was an American musician and entertainer. He is known to have written, recorded and filmed material that has never been officially released. Many of the pop singer's unreleased songs have been registered—usually by his company Mijac Music—with professional bodies such as the United States Copyright Office, the Songwriters Hall of Fame, Broadcast Music Incorporated (BMI), American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), the Canadian Musical Reproduction Rights Agency (CMRRA) and EMI Music Publishing. 1 This list, however, only documents the songs explicitly cited as being unreleased and, therefore, does not contain every unreleased Jackson song registered with such bodies.
Jackson — along with Lionel Richie, Quincy Jones, Rod Temperton and Joseph Jackson — faced a copyright infringement suit in 1993. The lawsuit came after three songwriters alleged that the pop star and his fellow defendants had plagiarized the hits "The Girl Is Mine", "Thriller" and "We Are the World". 89Grant, p. 168 During a seven-hour deposition, Jackson named numerous unreleased songs that he had written or co-written.
Many officially unreleased Jackson songs had been scheduled, at one point, for release on records by the singer, including his six solo studio albums with music label Epic Records: Off the Wall (1979), Thriller (1982), Bad (1987), Dangerous (1991), HIStory: Past, Present and Future, Book I (1995) and Invincible (2001). For varying reasons, the tracks were ultimately rejected and, as of 2014, remain unreleased. The pop singer's unreleased material includes songs recorded by Jackson as a solo artist (including covers of songs released by other artists and The Jackson 5 songs) and demo versions, some featuring established artists such as Freddie Mercury and Barry Gibb.
Several of Jackson's songs have been leaked onto the Internet without gaining an official release. One example involved the song "A Place with No Name", a 24-second snippet of which was leaked by website TMZ.

Key

Songs

Posthumous albums

Following the surge in sales of Jackson's catalogue following his death, Sony Music Entertainment, lead by its Columbia/Epic Label Group division, signed a new deal with the Jackson estate to extend distribution rights to his back catalogue until 2015, which was later extended to 2017, as well as permission to release ten new albums with previously unreleased material and new collections of released work. The deal is the most expensive music contract to a single artist in history, with Sony Music reportedly paying $250 million for the deal, and the Jackson estate getting the full sum, as well as a share of royalties for all works released. Here are the albums that have been released as part of the deal:






