[[Malaysia–Sweden relations]]

CATEGORIES: Bilateral relations of Malaysia, Bilateral relations of Sweden

Diplomatic relations between Sweden and Malaysia were established in 1958. Sweden has an embassy in Kuala Lumpur, and Malaysia has an embassy in Stockholm. As of 2009, 90 Swedish companies are present in Malaysia and about 450 Swedish citizens live in Malaysia. In 2011, 44,138 Swedish nationals visited Malaysia. As of September 2012, there are no direct flights to Stockholm from Kuala Lumpur.

Bilateral agreements

Malaysia and Sweden have in place a bilateral agreement concerning the mutual protection of investments signed at Kuala Lumpur on 3 March 1979.Agreement between the European Community and the Government of Malaysia on certain aspects of air services The countries also have in place a bilateral agreement for the avoidance of double taxation and prevention of fiscal evasion with respect to taxes on income.

Kidnapping

In 1975 members of the Japanese Red Army kidnapped Swedish Chargé d'Affaires Fredrik Bergenstråhle and his secretary Ulla Ödqvist in Kuala Lumpur.

Economic ties

Between January and July 2012, bilateral trade stood at 2 billion MYR, increased from the trade at 1.9 billion MYR between January and June 2011 In September 2012, Malaysian Ambassador to Sweden, Datuk Badruddin Ab Rahman, said about 120 Swedish companies operate in Malaysia, with an investment of more than 10 million MYR, however there are no Malaysian companies operating in Sweden. The Malaysian embassy in Sweden makes programmes to attract Swedish businesses to Malaysia such as a briefing on investment opportunities in Malaysia. 
In 2006, Swedish exports to Malaysia totaled approximately 1.6 billion MYR and the imports from Malaysia approximately 0.7 billion MYR. Swedish exports to Malaysia consist of telecommunication equipment, motor vehicles, chemical products, power generating machinery and equipment, machines, paper, as well as iron ore and steel. Swedish imports from Malaysia electronics and electrical components, machinery and apparatus, textiles, palm oil and raw rubber.
Volvo operates a wholly owned subsidiary in Malaysia that manufactures trucks.btimes.my/Current_News/BTIMES/articles/20090828000416/Article/index_html

Military

In 2000 the Swedish Navy agreed to loan four assault boats to Defense Minister Najib Tun Razak to "beef up security" in waters off Malaysia's state of Sabah.

State visits

In 2005 the Yang di-Pertuan Agong (King) Sirajuddin of Perlis of Malaysia and Raja Permaisuri Agong (Queen) Tengku Fauziah of Perlis visited Sweden.




