[[Stuart Kauffman]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 births, American biophysicists, Complex systems scientists, Dartmouth College alumni, Living people, MacArthur Fellows, Systems scientists, Theoretical biologists

Stuart Alan Kauffman (born September 28, 1939) is an American  theoretical biologist and complex systems researcher who studies the origin of life on Earth.
In 1971, Kauffman proposed the self-organized emergence of collectively autocatalytic sets of polymers, specifically peptides, for the origin of molecular reproduction. A. (1971) Cellular Homeostasis, Epigenesis, and Replication in Randomly Aggregated Macromolecular Systems. Journal of Cybernetics 1, 71- 96Kauffman, SA (2011) Approaches to the Origin of Life on Earth. Life. 1(1), 34-48;  Reproducing peptide, DNA, and RNA collectively autocatalytic sets have now been made experimentally. Chem. Int. 47, 6128. (2012) Reaction Networks. In: Ed. Gale PA and Steed JW. Supramolecular Chemistry: From Molecules to Nanomaterials.  John Wiley and Sons, Ltd. ISBN 978-0-470-74640-0. He is best known for arguing that the complexity of biological systems and organisms might result as much from self-organization and far-from-equilibrium dynamics as from Darwinian natural selection, as well as for applying models of Boolean networks to simplified genetic circuits. His hypotheses stating that cell types are attractors of such networks, and that genetic regulatory networks are "critical", have found experimental support. and Kauffman, S. A. (2009) Complex Gene Regulatory Networks - from Structure to Biological Observables: Cell Fate Determination. Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science, Editor : R. A. Meyers, Book Title: Encyclopedia of Complexity and Systems Science,Publisher: Springer,ISBN: ISBN 978-0-387-75888-6Nykter, M., Price, N. D., Aldana, M., Ramsey, S. A., Kauffman, S. A., Hood, L., Yli-Harja, O. and Shmulevich, I. (2008) Gene Expression Dynamics in the Macrophage Exhibit Criticality. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 105(6): 1897-1900

Biography

Kauffman graduated from Dartmouth in 1960, was awarded the BA (Hons) by Oxford University (where he was a Marshall Scholar) in 1963, and completed a medical degree (M.D.) at the University of California, San Francisco in 1968. After completing his residency in Emergency Medicine, he moved into developmental genetics of the fruitfly, holding appointments first at the University of Chicago, then at the University of Pennsylvania from 1975 to 1995, where he rose to Professor of Biochemistry and Biophysics. Kauffman held a MacArthur Fellowship, 1987–1992.
Kauffman rose to prominence through his association with the Santa Fe Institute (a non-profit research institute dedicated to the study of complex systems), where he was faculty in residence from 1986 to 1997, and through his work on models in various areas of biology. These included autocatalytic sets in origin of life research, gene regulatory networks in developmental biology, and fitness landscapes in evolutionary biology. Kauffman holds the founding broad biotechnology patents in combinatorial chemistry and applied molecular evolution.US 5,723,323," Method of identifying a stochastically-generated peptide, polypeptide, or protein having ligand binding property and compositions thereof"
In 1996, Kauffman started BiosGroup, a Santa Fe, New Mexico-based for-profit company that applied complex systems methodology to business problems. BiosGroup was acquired by NuTech SolutionsLetterhead in early 2003. NuTech was bought by Netezza in 2008.
From 2004 to 2009 Kauffman held a joint appointment at the University of Calgary in Biological Sciences and Physics and Astronomy. He is also an Adjunct Professor in the Department of Philosophy at the University of Calgary. He is an iCORE (Informatics Research Circle of Excellence) iCORE Home chair and the director of the Institute for Biocomplexity and Informatics.
In January 2009 Kauffman became a Finland Distinguished Professor (FiDiPro) at Tampere University of Technology, Department of Signal Processing. The appointment is until the end of 2012. The subject of the FiDiPro research project is the development of delayed stochastic models of genetic regulatory networks based on gene expression data at the single molecule level.
In January 2010 Kauffman joined the University of Vermont faculty where he will continue his work with UVM's Complex Systems Center. He is also an adviser to the Microbes Mind Forum.

Work

Kauffman is best known for arguing that the complexity of biological systems and organisms might result as much from self-organization and far-from-equilibrium dynamics as from Darwinian natural selection.
Some biologists and physicists working in Kauffman's area reserve judgment on Kauffman's claims about self-organization and evolution. A case in point is the introduction to the 2002 book "Self Organization in Biological Systems". Kauffman's recent work translates his biological findings to the mind body problem and issues in neuroscience, proposing attributes of a new "poised realm" that hovers indefinitely between quantum coherence and classicality. Kauffman published on this topic in Answering Descartes: Beyond Turing. (2012). "Answering Descartes: Beyond Turing" in The Once and Future Turing Eds. Barry Cooper and Andrew Hodges, Cambridge University Press. With colleagues Giuseppe Longo and Maël Montévil, Stuart Kauffman wrote (January 2012) "No entailing laws, but enablement in the evolution of the biosphere,"Longo G, Montévil M, and Kauffman S (2012) No entailing laws, but enablement in the evolution of ..., which aims to show that evolution is not law entailed, as is physics, and that, without selection, evolution enables its own future possibilities. This topic is also discussed in Stuart Kauffman's recent contribution "Statable and non–prestatable fitness
landscapes", which is published as the foreword to the book "Recent Advances in the Theory and Application of Fitness Landscapes". [ref] Kauffman, S. (2014) "Foreword: Statable and non–prestatable fitness
landscapes" in Recent Advances in the Theory and Application of Fitness Landscapes Eds. Hendrik Richter and Andries P. Engelbrecht, Springer-Verlag. [/ref]

Publications

Select bibliography
Selected articles
About Stuart Kauffman






