[[Dawn Breakers International Film Festival]]

CATEGORIES: International film festivals, Bahá'í Faith, Film festivals in Switzerland, Film festivals in the United States, Short film festivals, Animation film festivals, Documentary film festivals, Experimental film festivals

Dawn Breakers International Film Festival (DBIFF) is an international travelling film festival held in various cities throughout the world. The festival originated in 2007 and debuted in Phoenix, Arizona and has since been held in San Diego, Houston and Zurich, Switzerland. DBIFF was recognized as an important festival and nominated at the 2014 annual list of MovieMaker's "Top 25 Film Festivals of the World" in the Social Cause category.moviemaker.com/festivals/the-coolest-film-festivals-in-the-world-2013-top-25-general-film-festival-winners/

Background

The Festival is a non-profit organization focused on showcasing films and filmmakers who produce positive films. It has shown both independent and commercial films in the past few years. The filmmakers submit from around the world and there are no restrictions on what is accepted as long as it meets the theme of the festival. DBIFF is one of the few festivals in the world that also accepts Television, Music Videos and Websidoes in their selection. Several publications have covered the festival and the films including the Indian Express, the official Baha'i news service, and the Samoan news.samoanews.php?storyid=11604&edition=1261648800
The festival is also a Bahá'í-inspired organization and is considered as one of the major developments in the changing culture of the Bahá'í Faith in the past fifteen years.com/price_culture_learning_paradigm The name of the festival, though spelled differently, is inspired by The Dawn-breakers.
Since it is a traveling festival and may take place more than once within a year, it is also named by "Takes" alongside the year.

2007 / Take 1

The festival took place in San Diego with a circle of invited guests and audiences only. A number of films were screened through the two-day festival, however no public announcement of the official selections were made as there were no selection process that year and all films were invites only.dbiff.com Official website

2008 / Take 2

In 2008, it attracted some 500 attendees each day and a total of 1000 for both days from around the world. Films shown in the festival were selected from around the globe, some countries included India, Australia, United States, Spain, United Kingdom, Cambodia, France, Malaysia, Hungary, Pakistan, Canada and Ethiopia.

Films

2009 / Take 3

The 2009, also known as Take 3 Dawn Breakers International Film Festival took place in Zurich Switzerland from December 26, 2009 to December 31, 2009.bahai.html This year's line-up included twice as many films as last year and took place over five days.

Films

2010 / Take 4

The 2010 film festival took place in the United States in the city of San Diego.fest21. On November 13, 2010 a press release announced the festival's official selection which included 44 films in all categories.com/index.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=5&Itemid=10
William Sears (Bahá'í) a popular TV host from the 50s was honored during the festival.dbiff.

Films

Below is a particle list of the selected films with notes about each film.

2011 / Take 5

A two-day festival was held in Houston, Texas. This festival marked DBIFF's premier in the South and the first major event to be held in the Houston Baha'i Center.com/blog/dbiff-take-5/
A Media Boot Camp in association with the Baha'i Media Services is scheduled to be held during the Association for Baha'i Studies conference in San Francisco in August, 2011.dbiff.com/bootcamp/about/

2012 / Take 6

Take 6 / 2012 festival takes place in Switzerland.

Take 6 Films

Hueman Photography Contest

The festival announced a photography contest that would showcase the works of its finalists during the film festival.dbiff.com/hueman/

2013 / Take 7

The festival was held in Scottsdale, Arizona over two days and was the first time to be coordinated locally. It was the second time DBIFF proceeds went to charity, the first being Houston.

2014 / Take 8

Submission period for the 2014 film festival took place over three months and ended in December 2013.com/blog/






