[[Mohammad Irfan]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 births, Pakistani cricketers, Pakistan One Day International cricketers, People from Vehari District, Pakistan Twenty20 International cricketers, Pakistan Test cricketers, Khan Research Labs cricketers, Baluchistan cricketers, Baluchistan Bears cricketers, Baloch people, Living people

Mohammad Irfan (born 6 June 1982) is a Pakistani left arm fast bowler, hailing from a Jat family from Gaggu Mandi Punjab. In an interview with Pakpassion, Irfan has confirmed his height is indeed 7'1" (216 cm), after speculations.youtube. This makes him the tallest player to play first class and International cricket. Irfan took the title as the tallest Cricketer ever from former West Indian fast bowler Joel Garner and Australian pace bowler Bruce Reid, both of whom are 6'8" (203 cm) tall.

First Class contract

After impressing coaches at the NCA Irfan got several offers from First Class teams including Habib Bank and ZTBL. However it was KRL opener, Azhar Ali, who convinced KRL coach Rashid Iqbal to give Irfan a trial with Khan Research Laboratories (KRL). Azhar had seen Irfan take 4 wickets against Pakistan A and had immediately called KRL telling them that Irfan would be a good fit for their team. Irfan went for the trial and got selected, the first part of his dream was complete.
He made his first class debut in the QEA Trophy in October 2009 playing for Khan Research Laboratories. He bowled economically but was unable to take any wickets in a high scoring game. His first wicket in professional cricket was of young Pakistani international batsmen Ahmed Shehzad. He also took the wicket of Imran Farhat and injured Hasan Raza with a bouncer before taking his wicket.Dawn article on Irfan
Irfan continued to impress early on in his first class career. In his third match he grabbed 1 wickets to help his side to the first win of the championship. He recorded 5/27 in the first innings and 6/96 in the second innings.Irfan 11 wicket haul
Before he was offered a lucrative break in cricket, Irfan contemplated giving up the game and was working for a plastic pipe company. He confirmed his height as 7'1" which makes him the tallest first-class cricketer of all time above county players Anthony Allom, Paul Dunkels and Will Jefferson, each individually measured at 6'10".
Irfan has an official 'fan page' on the popular social networking site Facebook, and also a fan blog on Cricistan.Irfan's Facebook Fan Page

IPL – Kolkata Knight Riders (2011–)

Irfan announced that he had signed a memorandum of understanding with Kolkata Knight Riders (KKR) to represent them in the 2011 IPL Season. This deal is only valid as long as the PCB and the BCCI give their approval. The main reason for Irfan being given a trial with KKR was because former Pakistani pace-bowler Wasim Akram recommended Irfan to the KKR management. Irfan's contract will earn him $75,000 plus another $2,000 dollars for every game he plays in. However the contract needs to be approved by the Board of Control for Cricket in India

International debut (2010)

At 28 years of age Mohammad Irfan made his debut for the Pakistan national cricket team.
Irfan made his Twenty20 International debut against India in the first Twenty20 International match on 25 December 2012 when the Pakistani team was touring India. Irfan was seen as a prominent figure in the series win against India as he emerged as the wild card that propelled Pakistan to victory. In this series he displayed marked improvement as his bowling speeds reached 145kph, rising from the 135 kph he had over two years ago. At 7`1 and bowling at brisk pace, Irfan brings a new dimension to the Pakistan bowling attack.

South Africa (2013): The Emergence

Irfan's improvement did not go unnoticed, as the Pakistan selectors touted him "the surprise package" in South Africa in March 2013. Irfan did not disappoint as he consistently troubled the South African batsmen with his pace and height. Irfan finished the first innings with 3 wickets in 21 overs, while only allowing 86 runs with an economy rate of 4.09 including a maiden in his superb spell. Irfan in the second innings showed that not only is he a threat to gather up wickets, but he can also throw batsmen off their rhythm. Once again Irfan had a low economy rate of 3.50 in 10 overs, while collecting another maiden. Impressing both Pakistan and South African spectators, Irfan has a bright future ahead of him as one of the leaders in a talented Pakistan bowling unit.

Personal Life

Irfan comes from a traditional farming Jatt family in Gaggu Mandi, Punjab, Pakistan . At one occasion he gave up cricket to start work in a PVC pipe factory.






