[[Dinoflagellate]]

CATEGORIES: Protista, Flagellates, Dinoflagellates, Bioluminescent organisms, Endosymbiotic events

The dinoflagellates (Greek δῖνος dinos "whirling" and Latin flagellum "whip, scourge") are a large group of flagellate protists that constitute the phylum Dinoflagellata. Most are marine plankton, but they are common in fresh water habitats as well. Their populations are distributed depending on temperature, salinity, or depth.  Many dinoflagellates are known to be photosynthetic, but a large fraction of these are in fact mixotrophic, combining photosynthesis with ingestion of prey, (phagotrophy). In terms of number of species, dinoflagellates form one of the largest groups of marine eukaryotes, although this group is substantially smaller than the diatoms. 2012. How many species of algae are there? J. Phycol. 48, 1057–1063.  Some species are endosymbionts of marine animals and play an important part in the biology of coral reefs.  Other dinoflagellates are colorless predators on other protozoa, and a few forms are parasitic (see for example Oodinium, Pfiesteria). Some dinoflagellates produce resting stages, called dinoflagellate cysts or dinocysts, as part of their life cycles.
Dinoflagellates are considered to be protists, with their own division, Dinoflagellata. A., F. J. R. Taylor, G. Norris, W. A. S. Sarjeant, D. I. Wharton, and G. L. Williams. 1993. A classification of living and fossil dinoflagellates. Micropaleontology Special Publication 7, Sheridan Press, Hanover, Pennsylvania, USA.
About 1,555 species of free-living marine dinoflagellates are currently described.
An algal bloom of dinoflagellates can result in a visible coloration of the water colloquially known as red tide.

History

In 1753, the first modern dinoflagellates were described by Henry Baker as "Animalcules which cause the Sparkling Light in Sea Water",Baker, M., 1753. Employment for the microscope. Dodsley, London, 403 pp. and named by Otto Friedrich Müller in 1773.Müller, O.F. 1773. Vermium terrestrium et fluviatilium, seu Animalium Infusoriorum, Helmithicorum et Testaceorum, non marinorum, succincta historia, vol. 1. Pars prima. p. 34, 135. Faber, Havniae, et Lipsiae 1773. The term derives from the Greek word δῖνος (dinos), meaning 'whirling,' and Latin flagellum, a diminutive term for a whip or scourge.
In the 1830s, the German microscopist Christian Gottfried Ehrenberg examined many water and plankton samples and proposed several dinoflagellate genera that are still used today including Peridinium, Prorocentrum and Dinophysis.G. (1832) Beiträge zur Kenntnis der Organisation der Infusorien und ihrer geographischer Verbreitung, besonders in Sibirien. - Abhandlungen der Königlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften zu Berlin. Aus dem Jahre 1830. Physikalische Abhandlungen 1830: 1-88, Pls 1-8.
These same dinoflagellates were first defined by Otto Bütschli in 1885 as the flagellate order Dinoflagellida.Bütschli O. (1885) 3. Unterabtheilung (Ordnung) Dinoflagellata. – In: Dr. H.G. Bronn's Klassen und Ordnungen des Thier-Reichs, wissenschaftlich dargestellt in Wort und Bild. Erster Band Protozoa. – C.F. Winter'sche Verlagshandlung, Leipzig und Heidelberg. Pp. 906-1029; Pl.  Botanists treated them as a division of algae, named Pyrrophyta or Pyrrhophyta ("fire algae"; Greek pyrr(h)os, fire) after the bioluminescent forms, or Dinophyta.  At various times, the cryptomonads, ebriids, and ellobiopsids have been included here, but only the last are now considered close relatives. Dinoflagellates have a known ability to transform from noncyst to cyst-forming strategies, which makes recreating their evolutionary history extremely difficult.

Classification

Dinoflagellates are protists which have been classified using both the International Code of Botanical Nomenclature (ICBN, now renamed as ICN) and the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature (ICZN). Approximately half of living dinoflagellate species are autotrophs possessing chloroplasts and half are non-photosynthesising heterotrophs. It is now widely accepted that the ICN should be used for their classification.
Most (but not all) dinoflagellates have a dinokaryon, described below (see: Life-cycle, below). Dinoflagellates with a dinokaryon are classified under Dinokaryota, while dinoflagellates without a dinokaryon are classified under Syndiniales.
Although classified as eukaryotes, the dinoflagellate nuclei are not characteristically eukaryotic, as they lack histones, nucleosomes and maintain continually condensed chromosomes during mitosis. The dinoflagellate nucleus was termed 'mesokaryotic' by Dodge (1966),Dodge (1966). Cited but unreferenced in Steidinger, K.A. and Jangen, K. (1996). Dinoflagellates, p.387-584. In: Tomas, C.R. (1997). Identifying Marine Diatoms and Dinoflagellates.  Academic Press. due to its possession of intermediate characteristics between the coiled DNA areas of prokaryotic bacteria and the well-defined eukaryotic nucleus.  This group, however, does contain typically eukaryotic organelles, such as Golgi bodies, mitochondria and chloroplasts.A. and Tangen, K. (1996). Dinoflagellates, p.387-584. In: Tomas, C.R. (1997). Identifying Marine Diatoms and Dinoflagellates.  Academic Press.
Jakob Schiller (1931–1937) provided a description of all the species, both marine and freshwater, known at that time., 1931–1937: Dinoflagellatae (Peridinineae) in monographischer Behandlung. In: RABENHORST, L. (ed.), Kryptogamen-Flora von Deutschland, Österreichs und der Schweiz. Akad. Verlag., Leipzig. Vol. 10 (3): Teil 1 (1–3) (1931–1933): Teil 2 (1–4)(1935–1937). Later Alain Sournia (1973, 1978, 1982, 1990, 1993) listed the new taxonomic entries published after Schiller (1931–1937)., 1973: Catalogue des espèces et taxons infraspécifiques de dinoflagellés marins actuels publiés depuis la révision de J. Schiller. I. Dinoflagellés libres. Beih. Nova Hedwigia 48, 1–92., 1978: Catalogue des espèces et taxons infraspécifiques de dinoflagellésmarins actuels publiés depuis la révision de J. Schiller. III (Complément). Rev. Algol.,n.s. 13, 3–40 +erratum 13, 186., 1982: Catalogue des espèces et taxons infraspécifiques de dinoflagellésmarins actuels publiés depuis la révision de J. Schiller. IV. (Complément). Arch. Protist.126, 151–168., 1990: Catalogue des espèces et taxons infraspécifiques de dinoflagellésmarins actuels publiés depuis la révision de J. Schiller. V. (Complément). Acta Protozool.29, 321–346., 1993: Catalogue des espèces et taxons infraspécifiques de dinoflagellésmarins actuels publiés depuis la révision de J. Schiller. VI. (Complément). Cryptog. 14, 133–144. Sournia (1986) gave descriptions and illustrations of the marine genera of dinoflagellates, excluding information at the species level., 1986: Atlas du Phytoplancton Marin. Vol. I: Introduction, Cyanophycées,Dictyochophycées, Dinophycées et Raphidophycées. Editions du CNRS, Paris. The latest index is written by Gomez.

Identification

English-language taxonomic monographs covering large numbers of species are published for the Gulf of Mexico,Steidinger, K. A., and J. Williams. 1970. Memoirs of the Hourglass Cruises. Vol. II, Marine Res. Lab., Florida. the Indian Ocean,Taylor, F. J. R. 1976. Dinoflagellates from the International Indian Ocean Expedition. Biblioteca Botanica 132:1-234, pls. 1-46. the British Isles,Dodge, J. D. 1982. Marine Dinoflagellates of the British Isles. Her Majesty's Stationary Office, London. the MediterraneanGómez, F. 2003. Checklist of Mediterranean free-living dinoflagellates. Bot. Mar. 46:215-242. and the North Sea.; Elbrächter, M.; Drebes, G. (2009). Marine phytoplankton: selected microphytoplankton species from the North Sea around Helgoland and Sylt. E. Schweizerbart'sche Verlagsbuchhandlung (Nägele und Obermiller): Stuttgart. ISBN 978-3-510-61392-2. 264 pp.
The main source for identification of freshwater dinoflagellates is the Süsswasser Flora. & PFIESTER L.A. 1990. Dinophyceae (Dinoflagellida). In: Süßwasserflora von Mitteleuropa. Begründet von A. Pascher. Band 6 (Ed. by H. Ettl,J. Gerloff,H. Heynig. & D. Mollenhauer). Gustav Fischer Verlag, Jena, 272 pp.
Calcofluor-white can be used to stain thecal plates in armoured dinoflagellates. and Triemer, R. 1985. A rapid simple technique utilizing calcofluor white M2R for the visualization of dinoflagellate thecal plates. Journal of Phycology, 21: 662-664.

Morphology

Dinoflagellates are unicellular and possess two dissimilar flagellae arising from the ventral cell side (dinokont flagellation). They have a ribbon-like transverse flagellum with multiple waves that beats to the cell's left, and a more conventional one, the longitudinal flagellum, that beats posteriorly,. J. R. 1975. Non-helical transverse flagella in dinoflagellates. Phycologia 14:45-47. H., and F. J. R. Taylor. 1976. The propulsive mechanism of the dinoflagellate transverse flagellum reconsidered. BioSystems 8:33-39., F. J. R. Taylor. 1985. Form and function of the dinoflagellate transverse flagellum. J. Protozool. 32:290–296. The transverse flagellum is a wavy ribbon in which only the outer edge undulates from base to tip, due to the action of the axoneme which runs along it. The axonemal edge has simple hairs that can be of varying length. The flagellar movement produces forward propulsion and also a turning force. The longitudinal flagellum is relatively conventional in appearance, with few or no hairs. It beats with only one or two periods to its wave. The flagella lie in surface grooves: the transverse one in the cingulum and the longitudinal one in the sulcus, although its distal portion projects freely behind the cell. In dinoflagellate species with desmokont flagellation (e.g., Prorocentrum) the two flagella are differentiated as in dinokonts, but they are not associated with grooves.
Dinoflagellates have a complex cell covering called an amphiesma or cortex, composed of a series of membrances, flattened vesicles called alveolae (=amphiesmal vesicles) and related structures. C., and A. R. Loeblich III. 1983. Ultrastructure of the dinoflagellate amphiesma" Int. Rev. Cytol 82:151–181., and G. Dürr. 1984. Dinoflagellate cell cortex. In Spector, D. L., ed. Dinoflagellates. Chapt. 3. New York: Academic Press. In armoured dinoflagellates, these support overlapping cellulose plates to create a sort of armor called the theca, as opposed to athecate dinoflagellates. These come in various shapes and arrangements, depending on the species and sometimes on the stage of the dinoflagellate. Conventionally, the term tabulation has been used to refer to this arrangement of thecal plates. The plate configuration can be denoted with the plate formula or tabulation formula. Fibrous extrusomes are also found in many forms. Together with various other structural and genetic details, this organization indicates a close relationship between the dinoflagellates, Apicomplexa, and ciliates, collectively referred to as the alveolates. 1991. Cell diversification in heterotrophic flagellates. In D. J. Patterson and J. Larsen eds., The biology of free-living heterotrophic flagellates, 113–131. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK.
Dinoflagellate tabulations can be grouped into six "tabulation types": gymnodinoid, suessoid, gonyaulacoid-peridinioid, nannoceratopsioid, dinophysioid and prorocentroid.
The chloroplasts in most photosynthetic dinoflagellates are bound by three membranes, suggesting they were probably derived from some ingested algae. Most photosynthetic species contain chlorophylls a and c2, the carotenoid beta-carotene, and a group of xanthophylls that appears to be unique to dinoflagellates, typically peridinin, dinoxanthin, and diadinoxanthin. These pigments give many dinoflagellates their typical goldenbrown color. However, the dinoflagellates Karenia brevis, Karenia mikimotoi and Karlodinium micrum have acquired other pigments through endosymbiosis, including fucoxanthin. 
This suggests their chloroplasts were incorporated by several endosymbiotic events involving already colored or secondarily colorless forms. The discovery of plastids in Apicomplexa has led some to suggest they were inherited from an ancestor common to the two groups, but none of the more basal lines have them. 
All the same, the dinoflagellate cell consists of the more common organelles such as rough and smooth endoplasmic reticulum, Golgi apparatus, mitochondria, lipid and starch grains, and food vacuoles. Some have even been found with a light-sensitive organelle, the eyespot or stigma, or a larger nucleus containing a prominent nucleolus. The dinoflagellate Erythropsidium has the smallest known eye.
Some athecate species have an internal skeleton consisting of two star-like siliceous elements that has an unknown function, and can be found as microfossils. TappanTappan, H. 1980. The Paleobiology of Plant Protists. Freeman and Company, San Francisco, 1028 pp. gave a survey of dinoflagellates with internal skeletons. This included the first detailed description of the pentasters in Actiniscus pentasterias, based on scanning electron microscopy. They are placed within the order Gymnodiniales, suborder Actiniscineae.

Endosymbionts

Most zooxanthellae are dinoflagellates. The association between dinoflagellates and reef-building corals is widely known, but dinoflagellate endosymbionts inhabit a great number of other invertebrates and protists, for example many sea anemones, jellyfish, nudibranchs, the giant clam Tridacna, as well as several species of radiolarians and foraminiferans. K. 1997. Diversity of symbiotic dinoflagellates and the evolution of microalgal-invertebrate symbioses. In Lessios, H. A., and I. G. MacIntyre eds. Proceedings of the eighth international coral reef symposium 2:1275-1286. Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Balboa, Panama. Many extant dinoflagellates are parasites (here defined as organisms that eat their prey from the inside, i.e. endoparasites, or that remain attached to their prey for longer periods of time, i.e. ectoparasites). They can parasitize animal or protist hosts. Protoodinium, Crepidoodinium, Piscinoodinium and Blastodinium retain their plastids while feeding on their zooplanktonic or fish hosts. In most parasitic dinoflagellates the infective stage resembles a typical motile dinoflagellate cell.

Theca structure and formation

The formation of thecal plates has been studied in detail through ultrastructural studies.

Habitats

Dinoflagellates can occur in all aquatic environments: marine, brackish, and fresh water, including in snow or ice. They are also common in benthic environments and in sea ice.

Nutritional strategies

There are several nutritional strategies in dinoflagellates: phototrophy, mixotrophy and heterotrophy. Phototrophs can be photoautotrophs or auxotrophs. Mixotrophic dinoflagellates are photosynthetically active, but are also heterotrophic. Facultative mixotrophs, in which autotrophy or heterotrophy is sufficient for nutrition, are classified as amphitrophic. If both forms are required the organisms are mixotrophic sensu stricto. Some free-living dinoflagellates do not have chloroplasts but host a phototrophic endosymbiont. A few dinoflagellates may utilize alien chloroplasts (cleptochloroplasts), obtained from food (kleptoplasty). Some dinoflagellates may feed on other organisms as predators or parasites., and M. Elbrächter. 1992. Nutritional strategies in dinoflagellates: a review with emphasis on cell biological aspects. Eur. J. Protistol. 28:3-24.
Food inclusions contain bacteria, bluegreen algae, small dinoflagellates, diatoms, ciliates and other dinoflagellates. A. and O. Swezy: The free-living unarmoured dinoflagellata. Mere. Univ. Calif. 5, 1-538Barker, H. A.: The culture and physiology of the marine dinoflagellates. Arch. Mikrobiol. 6, 157-181.: Recherches sur les Peridiniens, Bull. biol. Fr. Belg.
36 (Suppl.), 1-149[/ref]Bursa, A_ S.: The annual oceanographic cycle at Igloolik in the Canadian Arctic. II. The phytoplankton. J. Fish. Res. Bd Can. 18, 563-615Norris, D. R.: Possible phagotrophic feeding in Ceratium lunula Schimper. Limnol. Oceanogr. 14, 448-449Dodge, J. D. and R. M. Crawford: The morphology and fine structure of Ceratium hirundinella (Dinophyceae). J. Phycol. 6, 137-149Elbrachter, M.: On the taxonomy of unarmored dinophytes (Dinophyta) from the Northwest African upwelling region. "Meteor" ForschErgebn. (Ser. D) 30, 1-22
Mechanisms of capture and ingestion in dinoflagellates are quite diverse. Several dinoflagellates, both thecate (e.g. Ceratium hirundinella,; Peridinium globulus,) and nonthecate (e.g. Oxyrrhis marina, Gymnodinium sp. C. and E. F. Stoermer: Dinoflagellate phagotrophy in the upper Great Lakes. Trans. Am. microsc. Soc. 99, 439-444. and Kofoidinium spp. J. et M. Cachon: Le systeme stomatopharyngien de Kofoidinium Pavillard. Comparisons avec celui divers Peridiniens fibres et parasites. Protistologica 10, 217-222), draw prey to the sulcal region of the cell (either via water currents set up by the flagella or via pseudopodial extensions) and ingest the prey through the sulcus. In several Protoperidinium spp., e.g. Protoperidinium conicum, a large feeding veil - a pseudopod called the pallium - is extruded to capture prey which is subsequently digested extracellularly (=pallium-feeding). and F. J. R. Taylor 1984. Extracellular digestion in marine dinoflagellates. J. Plankton Res. 6, 1057-1061Jacobson, D. M. and Anderson, D. M. 1986. Thecate heterotrophic dinoflagellates: feeding behavior and mechanisms. Journal of Phycology, 22: 249-258. Oblea, Zygabikodinium and Diplopsalis are the only other dinoflagellate genera known to use this particular feeding mechanism Strom SL, Buskey EJ (1993) Feeding, growth, and behavior of the thecate heterotrophic dinoflagellate Oblea rotunda. Limnol Oceanogr 38:965–977Naustvoll LJ (1998) Growth and grazing by the thecate heterotrophic dinoflagellates Diplopsalis lenticula (Diplopsalidaceae, Dinophyceae). Phycologia 37:1–9).
Katodinium (Gymnodinium) fungiforme, commonly found as a contaminant in algal or ciliate cultures, feeds by attaching to its prey and ingesting prey cytoplasm through an extensible peduncle. J.: Phagotrophy in Gymnodinium fungiforme (Pyrrophyta): the peduncle as an organelle of ingestion. L Phycol. 18, 356-360 The feeding mechanisms of the oceanic dinoflagellates remain unknown, although pseudopodial extensions were observed in Podolampas bipes.: Die Peridineen der Plankton-Expedition. 2. Teil, Studien iiber die Zellen der Peridineen, Ergebn. Atlant. Ozean Planktonexped. Humboldt-StiR. 4, 1-170.

The dinoflagellate nucleus: Dinokaryon

Most dinoflagellates have a peculiar form of nucleus, called a dinokaryon, in which the chromosomes are attached to the nuclear membrane.  These lack histones and remain condensed throughout interphase rather than just during mitosis, which is closed and involves a uniquely extranuclear mitotic spindle. L. 1984. Dinoflagellate nuclei. In D. L. Spector ed., Dinoflagellates,
107–147. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando, Florida, USA.[/ref]  This sort of nucleus was once considered to be an intermediate between the nucleoid region of prokaryotes and the true nuclei of eukaryotes, so were termed mesokaryotic, but now are considered advanced rather than primitive traits.

Life cycle

Dinoflagellates have a haplontic life cycle - with the possible exception of Noctiluca and its relatives. 
The life-cycle usually involves asexual reproduction by means of binary fission, either through desmoschisis or eleuteroschisis. More complex life cycles occur, more particularly with parasitic dinofagellates. Sexual reproduction also occurs (e.g.A. von, 1973. Observations on vegetative reproduction and sexual life cycles of two freshwater dinoflagellates, Gymnodinium pseudopalustre Schiller and Woloszynskia apiculata sp. nov. British Phycological Journal 8, 105–34.) and is only known in a small percentage of dinoflagellates. In Taylor (ed.) The Biology of dinoflagellates This takes place by fusion of two individuals to form a zygote, which may remain mobile in typical dinoflagellate fashion and is then called a planozygote.  This zygote may later form a resting stage or hypnozygote, which are called dinoflagellate cyst or dinocyst. After (or before) germination of the cyst, the hatchling undergoes meiosis to produce new haploid cells.

Harmful algal blooms

Dinoflagellates sometimes bloom in concentrations of more than a million cells per millilitre.  Under such circumstances they can produce toxins (generally called dinotoxins) in quantities capable of killing fish and accumulating in filter feeders such as shellfish, which in turn may be passed on to people who eat them.  This phenomenon is called a red tide, from the color the bloom imparts to the water.  Some colorless dinoflagellates may also form toxic blooms, such as Pfiesteria.  Some dinoflagellate blooms are not dangerous.  Bluish flickers visible in ocean water at night often come from blooms of bioluminescent dinoflagellates, which emit short flashes of light when disturbed.
The same red tide mentioned above is more specifically produced when dinoflagellates are able to reproduce rapidly and copiously on account of the abundant nutrients in the water. Although the resulting red waves are an unusual sight, they contain toxins that not only affect all marine life in the ocean, but the people who consume them, as well. A specific carrier is shellfish. This can introduce both nonfatal and fatal illnesses. One such poison is saxitoxin, a powerful paralytic neurotoxin. Human inputs of phosphate further encourage these red tides, so there is a strong interest in learning more about dinoflagellates, from both medical and economic perspectives.
The ecology of harmful algal blooms is extensively studied., and J. T. Turner. eds. 2006. Ecology of harmful algae. Ecological Studies, Vol. 189. Berlin Heidelberg, Springer Verlag.

Bioluminescence

At night, water can have an appearance of sparkling light due to the bioluminescence of dinoflagellates.
More than 18 genera of dinoflagellates are bioluminescent,Poupin, J., A.-S. Cussatlegras, and P. Geistdoerfer. 1999. Plancton marin bioluminescent. Rapport scientifique du Laboratoire d'Océanographie de l'École Navale LOEN, Brest, France, 83 pp. and the majority of them  emit a blue-green light. 1987. Bioluminescence and circadian rhythms. In: Taylor (Ed.). The biology of dinoflagellates. Blackwell, Oxford, England. pp. 269-281.
These species contain scintillons, individual cytoplasmic bodies (ca. 0.5 µm in diameter) distributed mainly in the cortical region of the cell, outpockets of the main cell vacuole. They contain dinoflagellate luciferase, the main enzyme involved in dinoflagellate bioluminescence, and luciferin, a chlorophyll-derived tetrapyrrole ring that acts as the substrate to the light-producing reaction. The luminescence occurs as a brief (0.1 sec) blue flash (max 476 nm) when stimulated, usually by mechanical disturbance. Therefore, when mechanically stimulated—by boat, swimming or waves, for example—a blue sparkling light can be seen emanating from the sea surface.
Dinoflagellate bioluminescence is controlled by circadian rhythms and only occurs at night (e.g.,Knaust, R., T. Urbig, L. Li, W. Taylor, and J. W. Hastings. 1998. The circadian rhythm of bioluminescence in Pyrocystis is not due to differences in the amount of luciferase: a comparative study of three bioluminescent marine dinoflagellates. J. Phycol. 34:167-172.). Luminescent and nonluminescent strains can occur in the same species. The number of scintillans is higher during night than during day, and breaks down during the end of the night, at the time of maximal bioluminescense., Morse, D., Hastings, J.W., 1990. The circadian bioluminescence rhythm of Gonyaulax is related to daily
variations in the number of light-emitting organelles" Journal of Cell Science 95, 321-328.[/ref]
The luciferin-luciferase reaction responsible for the bioluminescence is pH sensitive.  When the pH drops, luciferase changes its shape, allowing luciferin, more specifically tetrapyrrole, to bind.  Dinoflagellates can use bioluminescence as a defense mechanism.  They can startle their predators by their flashing light or they can ward off potential predators by an indirect effect such as the burglar alarm. The  bioluminescence attracts attention to the dinoflagellate, and hence to the predator which this makes more vulnerable to predation from higher trophic levels.
Bioluminescent dinoflagellate ecosystem bays are among the rarest and most fragile,Bright Microbes; Scientists uncover new clues to bioluminescence April 24, 2012 with the most famous ones being the Bioluminescent Bay in La Parguera, Lajas, Puerto Rico and Mosquito Bay in Vieques, Puerto Rico, Las cabezas de San Juan Reserva Natural Fajardo, Puerto Rico.  There is a bioluminescent lagoon near Montego Bay, Jamaica.

Lipid and sterol production

Dinoflagellates produce characteristic lipids and sterols. 1987. Dinoflagellate sterols. In F. J. R. Taylor ed., The biology
of dinoflagellates, 316–359. Blackwell, Oxford, UK.[/ref] One of these sterols is typical of dinoflagellates and is called dinosterol.

Transport

Dinoflagellate theca can sink rapidly to the seafloor in marine snow., 1998
A.L. Alldredge, U. Passow, S.H.D. Haddock
The characteristics and transparent exopolymer particle (TEP) content of marine snow formed from thecate dinoflagellates
J. Plankton Res., 20 (1998), pp. 393–406.[/ref]

Genomics

One of the most striking features is the large amount of cellular DNA that dinoflagellates contain. Most eukaryotic algae contain on average about 0.54 pg DNA/cell, whereas estimates of dinoflagellate DNA content range from 3–250 pg/cell, corresponding to approximately 3000–215 000 Mb (in comparison, the haploid human genome is 3180 Mb and hexaploid Triticum wheat is 16 000 Mb). It has been suggested that polyploidy or polyteny may account for this large cellular DNA content,[ref]BEAM, J., AND M. HIMES. 1984. Dinoflagellate genetics. In D. L. Spector
ed., Dinoflagellates, 263–298. Academic Press, Inc., Orlando, Florida, USA.[/ref] but studies of DNA reassociation kinetics do not support this hypothesis.
In addition to their disproportionately large genomes, dinoflagellate nuclei are unique in their morphology, regulation, and composition.
The dinoflagellates share an unusual mitochondrial genome organisation with their relatives, the Apicomplexa.: character evolution within the highly derived mitochondrial genomes of dinoflagellates. Genome Biol Evol Both groups have very reduced mitochondrial genomes (~6 kilobases in the Apicomplexa). The genes on the dinoflagellate genomes have undergone a number of reorganisations, including massive genome amplification and recombination which have resulted in multiple copies of each gene and gene fragments linked in numerous combinations. Loss of the standard stop codons, trans-splicing of mRNAs for the mRNA of cox3 and extensive RNA editing recoding of most genes has occurred.   The reasons for this transformation are unknown.
The DNA of the plastid in the peridinin-containing dinoflagellates is contained in a series of mini circles.
Plastid-derived single gene minicircles of the dinoflagellate Ceratium horridum are localized in the nucleus" Mol Biol Evol 21(7) 1218-1222[/ref] Each mini circle contains one or two polypeptide genes. The genes for these polypeptides are chloroplast specific because their homologs from other photosynthetic eukaryotes are exclusively encoded in the chloroplast genome. Within each mini circle there is a distinguishable 'core' region. Genes are always in the same orientation with respect to this core region.
In terms of DNA barcoding, ITS sequences can be used to identify species,Stern RF, Andersen RA, Jameson I, Küpper FC, Coffroth M-A, et al. (2012) Evaluating the Ribosomal Internal Transcribed Spacer (ITS) as a Candidate Dinoflagellate Barcode Marker" PLoS ONE 7(8)  e42780.  where a genetic distance of genetic distance of p≥0.04 can be used to delimit species. W., M. W. Vandersea, S. R. Kibler, K. S. Reece, N. A. Stokes, F. M. Lutzoni, B. A. Yonish, M. A. West, M. N. D. Black, and P. A. Tester. 2007. Recognizing dinoflagellate species using ITS rDNA sequences. J. Phycol. 43:344-355.

Evolutionary history

Dinoflagellates are mainly represented as fossils by fossil dinocysts, which have a long geological record with lowest occurrences during the mid-Triassic.,MacRae,  R.A., Fensome,  R.A.  and  Williams,  G.L.,  1996.  Fossil  dinoflagellate  diversity,  originations,  and  extinctions  and their  significance.  Can.  J.  Bot. 74,  1687-1694. whilst geochemical markers suggest a presence to the Early Cambrian.M. and Talyzina, N.M., "Biogeochemical evidence for dinoflagellate ancestors in the Early Cambrian" Science 281, 1168-1170.
There is some evidence that dinosteroids in many Paleozoic and Precambrian rocks might be the product of ancestral dinoflagellates (protodinoflagellates). M., Dahl J. E. P., Jacobson S. R., Huizinga B. J., Fago F. J., Shetty R., Watt D. S., and Peters K. E. (1996) Chemostratigraphic reconstruction of biofacies: molecular evidence linking cyst-forming dinoflagellates with Pre-Triassic ancestors. Geology 24, 159–162. M., Moldowan J. M., Johannisson A., and Fago F. J. (2000) Affinities of early Cambrian acritarchs studied by using microscopy, fluorescence flow cytometry and biomarkers. Rev. Palaeobot. Palynol. 108(1–2), 37–53.
Molecular phylogenetics shows that dinoflagellates are grouped with ciliates and apicomplexans (=Sporozoa) in a well-supported clade, the alveolates. The closest relatives to dinokaryotic dinoflagellates appear to be apicomplexans, Perkinsus, Parvilucifera, syndinians and Oxyrrhis. Eur J Protistol 40: 85–111. Molecular phylogenies are similar to phylogenies based on morphology., Saldarriaga, Juan F. and Taylor, "Max" F. J. R. (1999) 'Dinoflagellate phylogeny revisited: reconciling morphological and molecular based phylogenies', Grana, 38: 2, 66 — 80
The earliest stages of dinoflagellate evolution appear to be dominated by parasitic lineages, such as perkinsids and syndinians (e.g. Amoebophrya and Hematodinium). H., Goss, S. H. & Coats, D. W. 1999. The phylogenetic position of Amoebophrya sp. infecting Gymnodinium sanguineum" J. Eukaryot. Microbiol 46:194–7. Gunderson, J. H., Shinu, J. A., Bowman II, W. C. & Coats, D. W. 2002. Multiple strains of the parasitic dinoflagellate Amoebophrya exist in Chesapeake Bay" J. Eukaryot. Microbiol 49: 469–74., Rodriguez-Valera, F., Pedros-Alio, C. & Moreira, D. 2001. Unexpected diversity of small eukaryotes in deep-sea antarctic plankton" Nature 409:603–7. Y., De Wachter, R. & Vaulot, D. 2001. Oceanic 18S rDNA sequences from picoplankton reveal unsuspected eukaryotic diversity" Nature 409:607–10. F., Taylor, F. J. R., Keeling, P. J. & Cavalier-Smith, T. 2001. Dinoflagellate nuclear SSU rDNA phylogeny suggests multiple plastid losses and replacements" J. Mol. Evol 53:204–13.
Dinoflagellate evolution has been summarized into five principal organizational types: prorocentroid, dinophysoid, gonyaulacoid, peridinioid and gymnodinoid.J.R., 1980. On dinoflagellate evolution. Biosystems 13, 65-108.
The transitions of marine species into freshwater have been infrequent events during the diversification of dinoflagellates and in most cases have not occurred recently, possibly as late as the Cretaceous.   Mol Phylogenet Evol 45: 3.
Recently, the "living fossil" Dapsilidinium pastielsii was found inhabiting the Indo-Pacific Warm Pool, which served as a refuge for thermophilic dinoflagellates.N., Takano, Y., Head, M.J., Matsuoka, K., 2014. Living fossils in the Indo-Pacific warm pool: A refuge for thermophilic dinoflagellates during glaciations. Geology, 

Examples








