[[Model United Nations]]

CATEGORIES: Model United Nations, Educational programs, Youth model governments

Model United Nations (also Model UN or MUN) is a conference similar to the United Nations in which students participate as delegates to various UN Committees. Participants research and formulate political positions based on the actual policies of the countries they represent.
The committees usually consist of the six committees of the General Assembly (or some subset of them), but may also include the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) and the Economic and Financial Committee. As of 2012, there are about 400 MUN conferences worldwide.

History

The first instances of Model United Nations was the Model League of Nations Assembly. The first recorded meeting of a simulation of a Model League of Nations was run by Harvard University in 1927. In 1947, the Model League of Nations changed into the Model United Nations Assembly. In the 1980s, the United Nations Association of the United States of America(UNA-USA) was established to coordinate and track the development of MUNs on a global level.
The oldest MUN in the world is a disputed issue. The MUN Project (LfhED) states that the oldest MUN in the world is the Harvard Model United Nations (1951)
As of 2012, there are about 400 MUN conferences worldwide.

Conference

Procedures

In order to maintain decorum, MUN committees have rules of procedure to guide the procedures of the committee. Since there is no governing body for MUNs, each conference differs in the rules of procedure. Some conferences may directly adapt the UN rules of procedure while others adapt the Robert's Rules of Order. The following rules of procedure apply to general MUNs but may not apply to every MUN:
MUNs are run by a group of administrators known as the dais. A dais is headed by a Secretary-General. Each committee usually has a chair (also known as moderator), a member of the dais that enforces the rules of procedure. A delegate may request the committee as a whole to perform a particular action; this is known as a motion. Documents aiming to address the issue of the committee are known as resolutions and are voted for ratification.
MUN committees can be divided into three general sessions: formal debate, moderated caucus, and unmoderated caucus. In a formal debate, the staff maintains a list of speakers and the delegates follow the order written on the 'speaker list'. Speakers may be added to the speaker list by raising their placards or sending a note to the chair. During this time, delegates talk to the entire committee. They make speeches, answer questions, and debate on resolutions and amendments. If there are no other motions, the committee goes back to formal debate by default. There is usually a time limit. In a moderated caucus, the committee goes into a recess and the rules of procedure are suspended. Anyone may speak if recognized by the chair. A vote on a motion is necessary to go into a moderated caucus. There is a comparatively shorter time limit per speech. In an unmoderated caucus, the delegates informally meet with other delegates and the staff for discussions
Resolutions are the basis of all debate.

=Languages=

Model United Nation conferences are always held in the English language.

Committees

The committees are usually of the six committees of the General Assembly, but may also include the Economic and Social Council(ECOSOC) and the Economic and Financial Committee. Other committees include:
Many conferences simulate other IGOs including:
A special committee that does not have a parallel in the actual United Nations which deals with a crisis is known as a 'Crisis Committee.' In this committee, a crisis is given to a team of students and the teams must come up with solutions. The Crisis Committee focuses on a single historical event. The event may be fictional or non-fictional.

Organization

MUNs are usually organized by high school clubs or college clubs. Organizations that coordinate MUNs such as the United Nations Association of the United States of America (UNA-USA) are considered important organizing forces.
The United Nations hosts a site called the UN Cyberschoolbus which contains general information about MUNs such as: advice for researching papers for MUNs, starting MUN conferences, and methods to help finding MUNs. The program also has an international Internet forum in which participants can share information. have aided in the creation of MUNs.

List of Model UN Conferences

Model United Nations conferences are not limited to one country or even one continent, but are spread worldwide. MUN locations include: North America, Europe, Asia-Pacific, Latin America, the Middle East, and Africa. The level ranges from elementary school to colleges.





Further reading




