[[John Grisham]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, American thriller writers, American male novelists, Mississippi State University alumni, University of Mississippi alumni, Baptists from the United States, Living people, Members of the Mississippi House of Representatives, Mississippi Democrats, Mississippi lawyers, University of Mississippi School of Law alumni, Writers from Mississippi, Writers from Arkansas, Writers from Virginia, People from Jonesboro, Arkansas, People from DeSoto County, Mississippi, People from Oxford, Mississippi, People from Charlottesville, Virginia, American lawyers, Bancarella Prize winners, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists

John Ray Grisham, Jr. (born February 8, 1955)John Grisham's Biography. Achievement. Retrieved on 2011-12-09. is an American lawyer, politician, and author, best known for his popular legal thrillers.
John Grisham graduated from Mississippi State University before attending the University of Mississippi School of Law in 1981 and practiced criminal law for about a decade. He also served in the House of Representatives in Mississippi from January 1984 to September 1990. Encyclopediaofarkansas. Retrieved on 2011-12-09.
He began writing his first novel, A Time to Kill, in 1984, and it was published in June 1989.
As of 2012, his books had sold over 275 million copies worldwide. A Galaxy British Book Awards winner, Grisham is one of only three authors to sell 2 million copies on a first printing, the others being Tom Clancy and J.K. Rowling. Writerswrite. Retrieved on 2011-12-09.
Grisham's first bestseller was The Firm. Released in 1991, it sold more than seven million copies. The book was later adapted into a feature film, of the same name starring Tom Cruise in 1993, and a TV series in 2012 which "continues the story of attorney Mitchell McDeere and his family 10 years after the events of the film and novel." Eight of his other novels have also been adapted into films: The Chamber, The Client, A Painted House, The Pelican Brief, Skipping Christmas, The Rainmaker, The Runaway Jury, and A Time to Kill. His books have been translated into 29 languages and published worldwide. Contemporarylit.com (1955-02-08). Retrieved on 2011-12-09.

Early life and education

John Grisham, the second oldest of five siblings, was born in Jonesboro, Arkansas, to Wanda Skidmore Grisham and John Grisham. His father worked as a construction worker and a cotton farmer, while his mother was a homemaker. When Grisham was four years old, his family started traveling around the South, until they finally settled in Southaven in DeSoto County, Mississippi. As a child, Grisham wanted to be a baseball player.
Despite the fact that Grisham's parents lacked formal education, his mother encouraged her son to read and prepare for college.
He went to the Northwest Mississippi Community College in Senatobia, Mississippi and later attended Delta State University in Cleveland. Grisham drifted so much that he changed colleges three times before completing a degree.
He graduated from Mississippi State University in 1977, receiving a BS degree in accounting. He later enrolled in the University of Mississippi School of Law to become a tax lawyer, but his interest shifted to general civil litigation. He graduated in 1983 with a JD degree.

Marriage and family

Grisham married Renee Jones on May 8, 1981, and the couple have two children together: Shea and Ty. The "family splits their time between their Victorian home on a farm outside Oxford, Mississippi, and a home near Charlottesville, Virginia.
In 2008, he and his wife bought a condominium at McCorkle Place in Chapel Hill, North Carolina.

Career

Before and during college

Grisham started working for a nursery as a teenager, watering bushes for US$1.00 an hour. He was soon promoted to a fence crew for US$1.50 an hour. He wrote about the job: "there was no future in it."Grisham, John. "Boxers, Briefs and Books", The New York Times, 6 September 2010. At 16, Grisham took a job with a plumbing contractor, but says he "never drew inspiration from that miserable work."
Through a contact of his father, he managed to find work on a highway asphalt crew in Mississippi at the age of seventeen. It was during this time that an unfortunate incident got him "serious" about college. A fight had broken out among the crew on a Friday, with gunfire from which Grisham ran to the restroom to escape. He did not come out until after the police had "hauled away rednecks". He hitchhiked home and started thinking about college.
His next work was in retail, as a salesclerk in a department store men's underwear section, which he described as "humiliating". He decided to quit, but stayed when he was offered a raise. He was given another raise after asking to be transferred to toys and then to appliances. A confrontation with a company spy posing as a customer convinced him to leave the store. By this time, Grisham was halfway through college. Planning to become a tax lawyer, he was soon overcome by "the complexity and lunacy" of it. He decided to return to his hometown as a trial lawyer.

Law and politics

Grisham practiced law for about a decade and also won election as a Democrat in the Mississippi House of Representatives from 1983 to 1990 at an annual salary of US$8,000. Bestsellers.com (1955-02-08). Retrieved on 2011-12-09. Grisham represented the seventh district, which included DeSoto County. p. 162. By his second term at the Mississippi state legislature, he was the vice-chairman of the Apportionment and Elections Committee and a member of several other committees.
Grisham's writing career blossomed with the success of his second book, The Firm, and he gave up practicing law, except for returning briefly in 1996 to fight for the family of a railroad worker who was killed on the job. His official site states that "He was honoring a commitment made before he had retired from the law to become a full-time writer. Grisham successfully argued his clients' case, earning them a jury award of US$683,500 — the biggest verdict of his career."

Writing career

Grisham said the big case came in 1984, but it was not his case. As he was hanging around the court, he overheard a 10-year-old girl telling the jury what had happened to her. Her story intrigued Grisham and he began watching the trial. He saw how the members of the jury cried as she told them about having been raped and beaten. It was then, Grisham later wrote in The New York Times, that a story was born. Musing over "what would have happened if the girl's father had murdered her assailants",John Grisham's Biography. Jgrisham. Retrieved on 2011-12-09. Grisham took three years to complete his first book, A Time to Kill.
Finding a publisher was not easy. The book was rejected by 28 publishers before Wynwood Press, an unknown publisher, agreed to give it a modest 5,000-copy printing. It was published in June 1989. Encyclopediaofarkansas. Retrieved on 2011-12-09. The day after Grisham completed A Time to Kill, he began work on his second novel, the story of an ambitious young attorney "lured to an apparently perfect law firm that was not what it appeared." The Firm remained on the The New York Times' bestseller list for 47 weeks, and became the bestselling novel of 1991.
Beginning with A Painted House in 2001, the author broadened his focus from law to the more general rural South, but continued to write legal thrillers. He has also written sports fiction and comedy fiction.
In 2005, Grisham received the Peggy V. Helmerich Distinguished Author Award.  The award is presented annually by the Tulsa Library Trust.
In 2010, Grisham started writing a series of legal thrillers for children between 9 and 12 years old. It featured Theodore Boone, a 13-year-old kid who gives his classmates legal advice from rescuing impounded dogs to helping their parents prevent their house from being repossessed. He said, "I'm hoping primarily to entertain and interest kids, but at the same time I'm quietly hoping that the books will inform them, in a subtle way, about law."

Political activism with The Innocence Project

Grisham is a member of the Board of Directors of the Innocence Project, which campaigns to free unjustly convicted people on the basis of DNA evidence.innocenceproject.php  The Innocence Project argues that wrongful convictions are not isolated or rare events but instead arise from systemic defects.  Grisham has testified before Congress on behalf of the Innocence Project Bill Moyers Journal on PBS,
  He also wrote for the New York Times in 2013 about an unjustly held prisoner at Guantanamo. John Grisham also has weighed in on the death penalty: in an article written by Melanie L. Crawford,Crawford, Melanie L. "A Losing Battle With The 'Machinery Of Death': The Flaws Of Virginia's Death Penalty Laws And Clemency Process Highlighted By The Fate Of Teresa Lewis." Widener Law Review 18.1 (2012): 71–98. Academic Search Complete. Web. as well as in an op-ed written by himself for the Washington Post.John Grisham, Op-Ed, "Why is Teresa Lewis on Death Row?", Washington Post, Sept 12, 2010 at B5

John Grisham Room

The Mississippi State University Libraries, Manuscript Division, maintains the John Grisham Room, an archive containing materials generated during the author's tenure as Mississippi State Representative and relating to his writings.
Grisham has a lifelong passion for baseball demonstrated partly by his support of Little League activities in both Oxford, Mississippi, and Charlottesville, Virginia. He wrote the original screenplay for and produced the 2004 baseball movie Mickey, starring Harry Connick, Jr.com He remains a fan of Mississippi State University's baseball team and wrote about his ties to the university and the Left Field Lounge in the introduction for the book Dudy Noble Field: A Celebration of MSU Baseball.
In an October 2006 interview on the Charlie Rose Show, Grisham stated that he usually takes only six months to write a book and that his favorite author is John le Carré.

Bibliography

Novels

† Denotes books not in the legal genre.

=Clanton, Mississippi=

Several of Grisham's legal thrillers are set in the fictional town of Clanton, in the equally fictional Ford County, a town still deeply divided by racism. The town and county are, according to a description given in Sycamore Row, located in the northwest of the state of Mississippi. The first of his novels to be set in the town was A Time to Kill. Other stories to be set in and around the town include The Last Juror, The Summons, The Chamber, and Sycamore Row. The stories in the collection Ford County are also set in and around Clanton. It has been suggested that the name "Clanton" may be deliberately suggestive of Klan town",Anderson, P. "'Sycamore Row,' by John Grisham" (book review), The Washington Post, 21 October 2013. Retrieved 14 April 2014. though the name is, according to the author, coincidental. Retrieved 14 April 2014.

Theodore Boone series

Short stories

Non-fiction

Adaptations










