[[Sadao Munemori]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 1945 deaths, United States Army Medal of Honor recipients, United States Army soldiers, American military personnel killed in World War II, American military personnel of Japanese descent, American people of Japanese descent, People from Los Angeles, California, World War II recipients of the Medal of Honor, Burials at Evergreen Cemetery, Los Angeles

Sadao Munemori (August 17, 1922 – April 5, 1945) was a United States Army soldier.
Munemori was a private first class in the United States Army, in Company A, 100th Infantry Battalion, 442nd Regimental Combat Team.

Early life

Munemori was born in Los Angeles, California to Japanese immigrant parents. He was a Nisei, which means that he is a second generation Japanese American.
During World War II, Munemori's parents and siblings were incarcerated at the Manzanar concentration camp.

Soldier

Two months after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor, he joined the US Army.
Munemori volunteered to be part of the all-Nisei 100th Infantry Battalion.

Medal of Honor citation

Rank and organization: Private First Class, U.S. Army, Company A, 100th Infantry Battalion, 442d Combat Team. Place and date: Near Seravezza, Italy, 5 April 1945. Entered service at: Los Angeles, Calif Birth: Los Angeles, Calif. G.O. No.. 24, 7 March 1946.  "He fought with great gallantry and intrepidity near Seravezza, Italy. When his unit was pinned down by grazing fire from the enemy's strong mountain defense and command of the squad devolved on him with the wounding of its regular leader, he made frontal, one-man attacks through direct fire and knocked out two machine guns with grenades. Withdrawing under murderous fire and showers of grenades from other enemy emplacements, he had nearly reached a shell crater occupied by two of his men when an unexploded grenade bounced on his helmet and rolled toward his helpless comrades. He arose into the withering fire, dived for the missile and smothered its blast with his body. By his swift, supremely heroic action Pfc. Munemori saved two of his men at the cost of his own life and did much to clear the path for his company's victorious advance." 

Namesakes








