[[The Philadelphia Story (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 films, American films, English-language films, 1940s romantic comedy films, American romantic comedy films, American screwball comedy films, Black-and-white films, Comedy of remarriage films, Films about tabloid journalism, Films based on plays, Films directed by George Cukor, Films featuring a Best Actor Academy Award winning performance, Films set in Pennsylvania, Films set in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Films whose writer won the Best Adapted Screenplay Academy Award, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films, United States National Film Registry films, Films set in country houses

The Philadelphia Story is a 1940 American romantic comedy filmVariety film review; November 27, 1940, page 16. directed by George Cukor, starring Cary Grant, Katharine Hepburn, and James Stewart and featuring Ruth Hussey. Based on the Broadway play of the same name by Philip Barry, the film is about a socialite (Hepburn) whose wedding plans are complicated by the simultaneous arrival of her ex-husband (Grant) and a tabloid magazine journalist (Stewart). Written for the screen by Donald Ogden Stewart and an uncredited Waldo Salt, it is considered one of the best examples of a comedy of remarriage, a genre popular in the 1930s and 1940s, in which a couple divorce, flirt with outsiders and then remarry – a useful story-telling ploy at a time when the depiction of extramarital affairs was blocked by the Production Code. 
The film was Hepburn's first big hit following several flops, which had led to her being included on a 1938 list that Manhattan movie theater owner Harry Brandt compiled of actors he considered to be "box office poison." in order to control it as a vehicle for her movie comeback.
The film was nominated for six Academy Awards, winning two: Stewart for Best Actor and Donald Ogden Stewart for Best Adapted Screenplay. It was remade in 1956 as the musical High Society, starring Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly, Frank Sinatra and Louis Armstrong.
The film was produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry in 1995.

Plot

Tracy Samantha Lord Haven (Katharine Hepburn) is a wealthy Main Line Philadelphia socialite who had divorced C. K. Dexter Haven (Cary Grant), a member of her social set, because he did not measure up to her exacting standards. (He was an alcoholic, and her lack of faith in him exacerbated his condition.) She is about to marry nouveau riche "man of the people" George Kittredge (John Howard). 
Spy magazine publisher Sidney Kidd (Henry Daniell) is eager to cover the wedding, and he enlists Dexter, one of his former employees, to introduce reporter Macaulay "Mike" Connor (James Stewart) and photographer Liz Imbrie (Ruth Hussey) as friends of the family so they can report on the wedding. Tracy is not fooled but reluctantly agrees to let them stay—after Dexter explains that Kidd has an innuendo-laden article about Tracy's father, Seth (John Halliday), who, Tracy believes, is having an affair with a dancer. Though Seth is separated from Tracy's mother Margaret (Mary Nash) and Tracy harbors great resentment against him, she wants to protect her family's reputation. 
Dexter is welcomed back with open arms by Margaret and Dinah (Virginia Weidler), Tracy's teenage sister—much to Tracy's annoyance. In addition, Tracy gradually discovers that Mike has admirable qualities, and she even takes the trouble to find his published stories in the library. Thus, as the wedding nears, Tracy finds herself torn between her fiancé, her ex-husband, and the reporter.
The night before the wedding, Tracy gets drunk for only the second time in her life and takes an innocent swim with Mike.  When George sees Mike carrying an intoxicated Tracy into the house afterward, he thinks the worst. The next day, he tells her that he was shocked and feels entitled to an explanation before going ahead with the wedding. Tracy takes exception to his lack of faith in her and breaks off the engagement. Then she realizes that all the guests have arrived and are waiting for the ceremony to begin. Mike volunteers to marry her (much to Liz's distress), but Tracy graciously declines. At this point, Dexter makes his  bid for her hand, which she accepts.

Cast

Production

Broadway playwright Philip Barry wrote The Philadelphia Story specifically for Katharine Hepburn, who ended up backing the play, and forgoing a salary in return for a percentage of the play's profits.  Co-starring with Hepburn on Broadway were Joseph Cotten as "C. K. Dexter Haven", Van Heflin as "Macauley Connor", with Shirley Booth as "Liz Imbrie".
Hoping to create a film vehicle for herself which would erase the label of "box office poison" that the Independent Theatre Owners of America had put on her after a number of commercial failures (including the classic Bringing Up Baby), Hepburn happily accepted the film rights to the play from Howard Hughes who had bought them for her. She then convinced MGM's Louis B. Mayer to buy them from her for only $250,000 in return for Hepburn having veto over producer, director, screenwriter and cast.All Movie Overview
Hepburn selected director George Cukor, in whose films A Bill of Divorcement (1932) and Little Women (1933) she had acted, and Donald Ogden Stewart, a friend of Barry's and a specialist at adapting plays to the big screen, as writer.
Hepburn wanted Clark Gable for the Dexter Haven role and Spencer Tracy as Macauley Connor, but both had other commitments.  Grant agreed to play the part on condition that he be given top billing and that his salary would be $137,000, which he donated to the British War Relief Society.
The Philadelphia Story was in production from 5 July to 14 August 1940IMDB Business data at MGM's studios in Culver City.TCM Notes At one point, James Stewart slipped in his hiccuping during the drunk scene. Grant turned to him, surprised, and said "Excuse me," then appears to stifle a laugh.  The scene was kept and was not reshot.Osborne, Robert, Turner Classic Movies broadcast
Stewart had been extremely nervous about the scene in which Connor recites poetry to Tracy and believed that he would perform badly. Noël Coward was visiting the set that day and was asked by Cukor to say something to encourage him. Stewart was also quite uncomfortable with some of the dialogue, especially in the swimming pool scene.
Hepburn performed the dive into the swimming pool entirely by herself without the help from doubles. Forty years later, during the filming of On Golden Pond, Jane Fonda was frightened to do her own dive, to which the annoyed Hepburn responded, "I did my own dive in The Philadelphia Story."
The Philadelphia Story premiered in New York City in the week of 27 December 1940 and it was shown in select theatres in December, but MGM had agreed to hold the film's general release until January 1941 in order not to compete with the stage play, which was no longer playing on Broadway, but was touring the country. The film went into general American release on 17 January 1941.

Reception

Box office

The film was the 5th most popular movie at the US box office in 1941.[ref]FILM MONEY-MAKERS SELECTED BY VARIETY: ' Sergeant York' Top Picture, Gary Cooper Leading Star
New York Times (1923-Current file) York, N.Y 31 Dec 1941: 21.[/ref] According to MGM records it earned $2,374,000 in the US and Canada and $885,000 elsewhere resulting in a profit of $1,272,000.

Critical

According to Bosley Crowther, the film "has just about everything that a blue-chip comedy should have—a witty, romantic script derived by Donald Ogden Stewart out of Philip Barry's successful play; the flavor of high-society elegance, in which the patrons invariably luxuriate, and a splendid cast of performers headed by Katharine Hepburn, James Stewart and Cary Grant. If it doesn't play out this year and well along into next they should turn the Music Hall into a shooting gallery....' And so, in this instance, will you, too."
The Philadelphia Story was the last of four films starring Grant and Hepburn, the others being Sylvia Scarlett (1935), Bringing Up Baby (1938), and Holiday (1938). All but Sylvia Scarlett belong to a sub-genre of screwball comedy called the comedy of remarriage described by the philosopher Stanley Cavell as Hollywood's crowning achievement.

Awards and honors

At the 1940 Academy Awards The Philadelphia Story received 6 nominations:
James Stewart and Donald Ogden Stewart won Academy Awards.
James Stewart was not expecting to win and was not planning to attend the awards ceremony. He was called and "advised" to show up in a dinner jacket. Stewart himself said he had voted for Henry Fonda for his performance in The Grapes of Wrath, and always felt the award had been given to him as compensation for not winning the Academy Award for his portrayal of Jeff Smith in Mr. Smith Goes to Washington.  Donald Ogden Stewart, on the other hand, declared upon winning his Oscar: "I have no one to thank but myself!"
Hepburn won a 1940 New York Film Critics Circle Award for her performance,IMDB Awards and the film was named one of the ten best of the year by Film Daily.All Movie Awards
In 1995, The Philadelphia Story film was deemed "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant" by the Library of Congress and was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry.

Adaptations

The stars of the film appeared on Lux Radio Theaters radio adaptation of Barry's play in 1942. Lux presented it again in 1943 with Robert Taylor, Loretta Young and Robert Young. It was also adapted on two episodes of The Screen Guild Theater, first with Greer Garson, Henry Fonda and Fred MacMurray (April 5, 1942), then with Hepburn, Grant and Stewart reprising their film roles (March 17, 1947). 
The film was adapted in 1956 as the MGM musical High Society, starring Bing Crosby, Grace Kelly, Frank Sinatra, Celeste Holm, and Louis Armstrong, directed by Charles Walters.

Gallery

File:Philadelphia Story 20.jpg|
File:Snapshot20071107102421.jpg|
File:Philadelphia Story 3.jpg|
File:PhiladelphiaStory trailer Stewart.png|
File:Philadelphia Story 5.jpg|
File:Philadelphia Story 14.jpg|
File:Philadelphia Story 7.jpg|
File:Philadelphia Story 16.jpg|
File:Philadelphia Story 17.jpg|
File:Katharine Hepburn in The Philadelphia Story trailer.jpg
File:Philadelphia Story 9.jpg|
File:Philadelphia Story 15.jpg|





Streaming audio

