[[William Luther Pierce]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, 2002 deaths, American anti-communists, American atheists, American dissidents, American neo-Nazis, White nationalists, American people of English descent, American people of Scotch-Irish descent, American physicists, American white nationalists, American writers, Cancer deaths in West Virginia, John Birch Society members, Oregon State University faculty, People from Atlanta, Georgia, Rice University alumni, University of Colorado Boulder alumni

William Luther Pierce III (September 11, 1933 – July 23, 2002) was a prominent American white nationalist and political activist. He was one of the most influential ideologues of the white nationalist movement for some 30 years before his death. A physicist by profession, he was also an author under the pseudonym Andrew Macdonald of the novels The Turner Diaries and Hunter. Pierce founded the National Alliance, a major White nationalist organization, which he led for almost thirty years. 
Born in Atlanta, Georgia, to a Presbyterian family of Scots-Irish and English descent, Pierce was descended from the aristocracy of the Old South, descendant of Thomas H. Watts, the Governor of Alabama and Attorney General of the Confederate States of America during the American Civil War. As a child, Pierce did well academically, graduating from high school in 1952. He received a baccalaureate in physics from Rice University in 1955, earned a doctorate from University of Colorado at Boulder in 1962, and became an assistant professor of physics at the Oregon State University in 1962, where he joined the anti-communist John Birch Society. In 1965, in order to finance his political ambitions, he left his tenure at Oregon State University and became a senior researcher for the aerospace manufacturer Pratt & Whitney in New Haven, Connecticut. In 1966 Pierce moved to the Washington D.C. area and became an associate of George Lincoln Rockwell, who was assassinated in 1967, after which Pierce became co-leader of the National Youth Alliance, which split in 1974, with Pierce founding the National Alliance.
Pierce intended the National Alliance to be a political vanguard that would ultimately bring about a white nationalist revolution in the United States. In 1978, Pierce wrote, under the pseudonym "Andrew Macdonald", the novel The Turner Diaries, which depicts a violent revolution in the United States which leads to the overthrow of the United States federal government. In 1984, he wrote another novel, Hunter which portrays the actions of a Vietnam veteran F-4 Phantom pilot and Washington, D.C.-area Defense Department consultant who embarks on a plan to assassinate interracial couples and liberal journalists, politicians and bureaucrats in the D.C. area. In 1985, Pierce relocated the headquarters of the National Alliance to Hillsboro, West Virginia, where he founded the Cosmotheist Community Church to receive tax exemption for his organization. Pierce spent the rest of his life in West Virginia hosting a weekly radio show, American Dissident Voices, publishing the internal newsletter National Alliance Bulletin (formerly called Action), and overseeing his publications, National Vanguard Magazine (originally titled Attack!), Free Speech and Resistance, as well as books published by his publishing firm National Vanguard Books, Inc. and music produced by his record company, Resistance Records.
In 2002, Pierce suddenly died of cancer. At the time, the National Alliance was bringing in more than $1 million a year, with more than 1,500 members and a paid national staff of 17 full-time officials, and was better known than at any time in its history, after which it entered a period of internal conflict and decline. His works however continue to enjoy a notable audience.

Biography

Early life and education

William Luther Pierce III was born on September 11, 1933, to a Presbyterian
Pierce performed well academically in school, skipping one grade. His last two years in high school were spent in a military academy.
After finishing military school in 1951, Pierce worked briefly in an oil field as a roustabout.  He was injured when a four-inch (10 cm) pipe fell on his hand, and he spent the rest of that summer working as a shoe salesman.

Early political activities

His tenure as assistant professor at Oregon State University (1962–1965) coincided with the rise of two social movements, the civil rights and the Anti-Vietnam War movement, which he regarded as Jewish-led, communist-inspired, and a threat to European Americans. He was briefly a member of the anti-communist John Birch Society in 1962,

National Alliance

The National Alliance was organized in 1974. Pierce intended the organization to be a political vanguard that would ultimately bring about a White nationalist overthrow of the United States Federal Government. Pierce spent the rest of his life living in West Virginia, where he hosted a weekly radio show, American Dissident Voices, the internal newsletter National Alliance Bulletin (formerly called Action), and oversaw his publications, National Vanguard Magazine (originally titled Attack!), Free Speech and Resistance, as well as books published by his publishing firm National Vanguard Books, Inc. (many of which promoted Holocaust denial) and his record company, Resistance Records.
In 1978, claiming that the National Alliance was an educational organization, Pierce applied for, and was denied, tax exemption by the Internal Revenue Service. Pierce appealed, but an appellate court upheld the I.R.S. decision. Around the same time, he was interviewed by Herbert Poinsett on Race and Reason, a public-access television cable TV talk show. Accessed on YouTube.
An anti-Zionist, he attempted during the Yom Kippur War to force McDonnell-Douglas into canceling military contracts that sent armaments to Israel, by buying shares of the company's stock and putting forward the motion at the national shareholder's meeting. The company rejected the motion and continued supplying Israel with weapons. Some of Pierce's later speeches on American Dissident Voices concerning the Arab-Israeli conflict were reprinted in Muslim publications and on web sites, including the Web site of the Lebanese Shia Islamist group Hezbollah.
In 1985, Pierce moved his operations from Arlington, Virginia, to a  were used for both the National Alliance headquarters and the National Vanguard Books business and warehouse, and were denied tax exemption.
In 1990, the documentary series Different Drummer produced a portrait of Pierce, which was aired on PBS. Accessed on Vimeo. and forming an anti-globalization group - the Anti-Globalization Action Network - to protest at the G8 summit in Canada in June 2002.
In 2002, Pierce suddenly died of cancer. At the time, the National Alliance was bringing in more than $1 million a year, with more than 1,500 members, a paid national staff of 17 full-time officials, and was better known than at any time in its history, after which it entered a period of internal conflict and decline. His works however continue to enjoy a notable audience. Accessed on YouTube.
After his death, the British National Party contributed an article in remembrance of him.
Before Pierce died, he allowed Robert S. Griffin, a tenured professor of education at the University of Vermont, to live with him for a month, with the result being the self-published work The Fame of a Dead Man's Deeds (2001).

Novels

The Turner Diaries

Pierce gained national public attention following the Oklahoma City bombing, as Timothy McVeigh was alleged to have been influenced by The Turner Diaries (1978), the novel written by Pierce under the pseudonym Andrew Macdonald. The book is a graphically violent depiction of a future race war in the United States, which includes a detailed description of the mass hangings- "the Day of the Rope"- of many "race traitors" (especially Jews, gay people, and those in interracial marriages or relationships) in the public streets of Los Angeles, followed by the systematic ethnic cleansing of the entire city. This violence and killing is called "Terrible yet Absolutely Necessary". The story is told through the perspective of Earl Turner, an active member of the white revolutionary underground The Organization.
The part most relevant to the McVeigh case is in an early chapter, when the book's main character is placed in charge of bombing the FBI headquarters. Some have pointed out similarities between the bombing in the book and the actual bombing in Oklahoma City that damaged the Alfred P. Murrah Federal Building and killed 168 people on April 19, 1995.  McVeigh personally stated that his attack was in response to the Waco massacre and the Ruby Ridge tragedy.
The Turner Diaries also inspired a group of white revolutionary nationalists in the early 1980s who called themselves the Silent Brotherhood, or sometimes simply The Order. The Order were an off shoot of the Aryan Nations. They were tired of being merely "armchair revolutionaries". The Order was connected to numerous crimes, including counterfeiting and bank robbery, and supposedly gave money to the Alliance. The Order's leader, Robert Jay Mathews, died in a stand-off with police and federal agents on Whidbey Island, Washington, when police fired flares into his hideout, igniting a fire. Other Order members, most notably the late David Lane, were all captured and sent to federal prisons, where they still continue to voice their support for white nationalist ideals.
In 1996 Pierce sold the rights to The Turner Diaries to the Jewish publisher Lyle Stuart.Lyle Stuart, Publisher of Renegade Titles, Dies at 83

Hunter

In 1989, again under the Andrew Macdonald pen name, William Pierce published another novel, Hunter, which tells the story of a man named Oscar Yeager, a veteran of the Vietnam War and F-4 Phantom pilot who assassinate interracial couples and liberal journalists, politicians and bureaucrats in the D.C. area.
In interviews, Pierce called Hunter more realistic, and described his rationale for writing it as taking the reader through "...
This book was dedicated to serial killer Joseph Paul Franklin, a longtime member of various white nationalist groups who, like Hunters protagonist, preyed on interracial couples. Joseph Paul Franklin was executed on November 20, 2013.

Religion

Although raised a Presbyterian, Pierce became an Atheist as a teenager In the 1970s however, Pierce created the religion Cosmotheism, which the Anti-Defamation League suggests was an attempt at avoiding taxes after he failed to obtain tax-exempt status for the National Alliance. The Southern Poverty Law Center refers to it as a "bogus religion".
In effect, Cosmotheism it is a form of panentheism, asserting that "all is within God and God is within all." It considers the nature of reality and of existence to be mutable and destined to co-evolve towards a complete "universal consciousness," or godhood. Cosmos means an orderly and harmonious universe and thus the divine is tantamount to reality and consciousness, an inseparable part of an orderly, harmonious, and whole universal system.
In his speech "Our Cause", Pierce said:
Pierce described his form of panentheism as being based on "the idea of an evolutionary universe ... with an evolution toward ever higher and higher states of self-consciousness," and his political ideas were centered on racial purity and eugenics as the means of advancing the white race first towards a super race and then towards personal godhood. In his view, the white race represented the pinnacle of human evolution thus far and therefore it should be kept genetically separate from all other races.
Pierce believed in a hierarchical society governed by what he saw as the essential principles of nature, the survival of the fittest. In his view, White people should remain separated from other races and establish a ruled by the most qualified. He thought that extensive programs of "racial cleansing" (mass expulsion) and of eugenics, both in Europe and in North America, would be necessary to achieve this socio-political program.

Family

Pierce married five times. His first marriage was to Patricia Jones, a mathematician whom he met while attending California Institute of Technology. They were married in 1957, and had twin sons, Kelvin and Erik, born in 1960. Kelvin is an aerospace engineer, while Erik is a computer scientist. The marriage ended in divorce in 1982. In 1986, Pierce married Hungarian Olga Skerlecz, a relative of Iván Skerlecz, Governor of Croatia-Slavonia, in a marriage that lasted until 1990. Olga left "for greener pastures in California" after their divorce in 1990. Pierce then married another Hungarian woman named Zsuzsannah in early 1991. They met through an advertisement that Pierce placed in a Hungarian women's magazine aimed at arranging international marriages. Zsuzsannah moved to Florida after their divorce in the summer of 1996. His final marriage, which lasted until his death, was with another Hungarian woman, Irena, whom he married in 1997.

Bibliography

The following works were published under the pseudonym "Andrew MacDonald".
Written as William Pierce

Unpublished

Other works

Notes

Sources

Further reading




