[[Inflorescence]]

CATEGORIES: Plant morphology, Flowers

An inflorescence is a group or cluster of flowers arranged on a stem that is composed of a main branch or a complicated arrangement of branches. Morphologically, it is the part of the shoot of seed plants where flowers are formed and which is accordingly modified. The modifications can involve the length and the nature of the internodes and the phyllotaxis, as well as variations in the proportions, compressions, swellings, adnations, connations and reduction of main and secondary axes.
Inflorescence can also be defined as the reproductive portion of a plant that bears a cluster of flowers in a specific pattern.
The stem holding the whole inflorescence is called a peduncle and the main stem holding the flowers or more branches within the inflorescence is called the rachis.  The stalk of each single flower is called a pedicel. 
The fruiting stage of an inflorescence is known as an infructescence.
A flower that is not part of an inflorescence is called a solitary flower and its stalk is also referred to as a peduncle.
Any flower in an inflorescence may be referred to as a floret, especially when the individual flowers are particularly small and borne in a tight cluster, such as in a pseudanthium.

General characteristics

Inflorescences are described by many different characteristics including how the flowers are arranged on the peduncle, the blooming order of the flowers and how different clusters of flowers are grouped within it. These terms are general representations as plants in nature can have a combination of types.

Bracts

Inflorescences usually have modified foliage different from the vegetative part of the plant. Considering the broadest meaning of the term, any leaf associated with an inflorescence is called a bract. A bract is usually located at the node where the main stem of the inflorescence forms, joined to the main stem of the plant, but other bracts can exist within the inflorescence itself. They serve a variety of functions which include attracting pollinators and protecting young flowers. According to the presence or absence of bracts and their characteristics we can distinguish:
If many bracts are present and they are strictly connected to the stem, like in the family Asteraceae, the bracts might collectively be called an involucre. If the inflorescence has a second unit of bracts further up the stem, they might be called an involucel. 

Image:Brakteose beblätterung (inflorescence).
Image:Wisteria sinensisPNPG.jpg|Ebracteate of Wisteria sinensis
Image:Brakteose_beblätterung_2_(inflorescence).
Image:Pedicularis verticillata a3.
Image:Frondobrakteose Beblätterung (inflorescence).
Image:Rhinanthus angustifolius.
Image:Frondose beblätterung (inflorescence).
Image:Unknown plant 01 bgiu.

Terminal flower

Plant organs can grow according to two different schemes, namely monopodial or racemose and sympodial or cymose. In inflorescences these two different growth patterns are called indeterminate and determinate respectively, and indicate whether a terminal flower is formed and where flowering starts within the inflorescence. 
Indeterminate and determinate inflorescences are sometimes referred to as open and closed inflorescences respectively.
In indeterminate inflorescence there is no true terminal flower and the stem usually has a rudimentary end. In many cases the last true flower formed by the terminal bud (subterminal flower) straightens up, appearing to be a terminal flower. Often a vestige of the terminal bud may be noticed higher on the stem.

Image:Offener_Blütenstand_(inflorescence).
Image:Offener_Blütenstand_(inflorescence)_m_K.
Image:Pseudoterminalbluete (inflorescence).svg|Indeterminate inflorescence with the subterminal flower to simulate the terminal one (vestige present)

In determinate inflorescences the terminal flower is usually the first to mature (precursive development), while the others tend to mature starting from the bottom of the stem. This pattern is called acropetal maturation. When flowers start to mature from the top of the stem, maturation is basipetal, while when the central mature first, divergent.

Image:Akropetale Effloration (inflorescence).svg|Determinate inflorescence with acropetal maturation
Image:Basipetale effloration (inflorescence).svg|Determinate inflorescence with basipetal maturation
Image:Divergente effloration (inflorescence).svg|Determinate inflorescence with divergent maturation

Phyllotaxis

As with leaves, flowers can be arranged on the stem according to many different patterns. See 'Phyllotaxis' for in-depth descriptions.

Image:Inflorescences Raceme Kwiatostan Grono.svg|Alternate flowers
Image:Traube dekussiert (inflorescence).svg|Opposite flowers

Metatopy

Metatopy is the placement of organs out of their normally expected position: typically metatopy occurs in inflorescences when unequal growth rates alter different areas of the axis and the organs attached to the axis.
When a single or a cluster of flower(s) is located at the axil of a bract, the location of the bract in relation to the stem holding the flower(s) is indicated by the use of different terms and may be a useful diagnostic indicator.
Typical placement of bracts include:
Metatopic placement of bracts include:

Image:Bluete und Tragblatt (inflorescence).svg|Flower and subtending bract
Image:Türkenbund dunkel.jpg|Lilium martagon (flower and subtending bract)
Image:Konkauleszenz (inflorescence).svg|Concaulescence
Image:Tomato scanned.jpg|Solanum lycopersicum (concaulescence)
Image:Rekauleszenz (inflorescence).svg|Recaulescence
Image:Tilia cordata Owoce lipy 656.jpg|Tilia cordata (recaulescence)

Organization

There is no general consensus in defining the different inflorescences. The following is based on Focko Weberling's Morphologie der Blüten und der Blütenstände (Stuttgart, 1981). The main groups of inflorescences are distinguished by branching. Within these groups, the most important characteristics are the intersection of the axes and different variations of the model. They may contain many flowers (pluriflor) or a few (pauciflor). Inflorescences can be simple or compound.

Simple inflorescences

=Indeterminate or Racemose=

Indeterminate simple inflorescences are generally called racemose , from classical Latin racemus, cluster of grapes). Raceme 2. Bot. A type of inflorescence in which the flowers are arranged on short, nearly equal, lateral pedicels, at equal distances along a single elongated axis The other kind of racemose inflorescences can all be derived from this one by dilation, compression, swelling or reduction of the different axes. Some passage forms between the obvious ones are commonly admitted. 

Image:Traube (inflorescence).svg|Raceme
Image:Epilobe feuilles etroites 01.jpg|Epilobium angustifolium
Image:Inflorescences Spike Kwiatostan Kłos.svg|Spike
Image:Plantagomedia.JPG|Plantago media (spike)
Image:Schirmtraube (inflorescence).svg| Racemose corymb
Image:Schleifenblume06.jpg|Iberis umbellata (racemose corymb)
Image:Inflorescences Umbel Kwiatostan Baldach.svg|Umbel
Image:Astrantia minor.jpg|Astrantia minor (umbel)
Image:Kolben (inflorescence).svg|Spadix
Image:Arum maculatum.jpeg|Arum maculatum (spadix)
Image:Koepfchen (inflorescence).svg|Head (round)
Image:Fleur 9 - VTdJ.JPG|Dipsacus fullonum (head)
Image:Kaetzchen (inflorescence).svg|Catkin (racemose or spicate)
Image:Alnus incana rugosa catkin.jpg|Alnus incana (ament)

=Determinate or Cymose=

Determinate simple inflorescences are generally called cymose. The main kind of cymose inflorescence is the cyme   (pronounced 'saim', from the French cime in the sense 'top, summit'). Cyme(1) Bot. A species of inflorescence wherein the primary axis bears a single terminal flower which develops first, the system being continued by axes of secondary and higher orders which develop successively in like manner; a centrifugal or definite 
inflorescence: opposed to Raceme. Applied esp. to compound inflorescences of this type forming a more or less flat head.[/ref] Cymes are further divided according to this scheme:

Image:Doppelwickel (inflorescence).svg|Double cyme
Image:Doppelschraubel (inflorescence).svg|Double cyme
Image:Schroef (bloeiwijze).jpg|Bostryx (lateral and top view)
Image:Saint johns wart flowers.jpg|Hypericum perforatum (bostryx)
Image:Sikkel (bloeiwijze).jpg|Drepanium (lateral and top view)
Image:Gladiolus imbricatus a1.jpg|Gladiolus imbricatus (drepanium)
Image:Schicht.jpg|Cincinnus (lateral and top view)
Image:Symphytum officinale 02.jpg|Symphytum officinale (cincinnus)
Image:Waaier (bloeiwijze).jpg|Rhipidium (lateral and top view)
Image:Canna Endeavour 01. (rhipidium)
Image:Dichasium (inflorescence).svg|Dichasium
Image:Dichasium (top view) (inflorescence).svg|Dichasium, top view
Image:2006-10-22Silene dioica07.jpg|Silene dioica (dichasium)

A cyme can also be so compressed that it looks like an umbel. Strictly speaking this kind of inflorescence could be called umbelliform cyme, although it is normally called simply 'umbel'.
Another kind of definite simple inflorescence is the raceme-like cyme or botryoid; that is as a raceme with a terminal flower and is usually improperly called 'raceme'.

Image:Inflorescences Umbel Kwiatostan Baldach.svg|Umbelliform cyme
Image:Fiore di geranio.JPG|Pelargonium zonale (umbelliform cyme)
Image:Botryoid (inflorescence).svg|Botryoid
Image:Berberis vernae MS 4426.jpg|Berberis vernae (botryoid)

A reduced raceme or cyme that grows in the axil of a bract is called a fascicle. A verticillaster is a fascicle with the structure of a dichasium; it is common among the Lamiaceae. Many verticillasters with reduced bracts can form a spicate (spike-like) inflorescence that is commonly called a spike.

Image:Gentiana lutea1.JPG|Gentiana lutea (fascicles)
Image:Lamium orvala3.jpg|Lamium orvala (verticillaster)
Image:Mentha longifolia 2005.08.02 09.53.56.jpg|Mentha longifolia ('spike')

Compound inflorescences

Simple inflorescences are the basis for compound inflorescences or synflorescences. The single flowers are there replaced by a simple inflorescence, which can be both a racemose or a cymose one. Compound inflorescences are composed of branched stems and can involve complicated arrangements that are difficult to trace back to the main branch. 
A kind of compound inflorescence is the double inflorescence, in which the basic structure is repeated in the place of single florets. For example a double raceme is a raceme in which the single flowers are replaced by other simple racemes; the same structure can be repeated to form triple or more complex structures.
Compound raceme inflorescences can either end with a final raceme (homoeothetic), or not (heterothetic). A compound raceme is often called a panicle. Note that this definition is very different from that given by Weberling.
Compound umbels are umbels in which the single flowers are replaced by many smaller umbels called umbellets. The stem attaching the side umbellets to the main stem is called a ray.

Image:Doppeltraube_(inflorescence).svg|Homeothetic compound raceme
Image:Melilotus officinalis01.jpg|Melilotus officinalis (homoeothetic compound raceme)
Image:Doppeltraube_2_(inflorescence).svg|Heterothetic compound raceme
Image:Hebe albicans.jpg|Hebe albicans (heterothetic compound raceme)
Image:Inflorescences Muktispike Kwiatostan KłosZłożony.svg|Compound spike
Image:Lolium multiflorum detail.jpeg|Lolium temulentum (compound spike)
Image:Doppelkoepfchen_(inflorescence).svg|Compound capitulum
Image:Echinops Ain France.jpg|Echinops ritro (compound capitulum)
Image:Inflorescences Umbel Kwiatostan BaldachZłożony.svg|Compound (double) umbel
Image:Laserpitium latifolium2.jpg|Laserpicium latifolium (double umbel)
Image:Dreifachdolde_(inflorescence).svg|Compound (triple) umbel

The most common kind of definite compound inflorescence is the panicle (of Webeling, or 'panicle-like cyme'). A panicle is a definite inflorescence that is increasingly more strongly and irregularly branched from the top to the bottom and where each branching has a terminal flower. 
The so-called cymose corymb is similar to a racemose corymb but has a panicle-like structure. Another type of panicle is the anthela. An anthela is a cymose corymb with the lateral flowers higher than the central ones.

Image:Inflorescences Panicle Kwiatostan Wiecha.svg|Panicle
Image:Vigne inflorescence 2.jpg|Vitis vinifera'' (panicle)
Image:Schirmrispe (inflorescence).svg|Cymose corymb
Image:Sambucus nigra 003.jpg|Sambucus nigra (cymose corymb)
Image:Spirre (inflorescence).svg|Anthela
Image:Juncus inflexus.jpeg|Juncus inflexus (anthela)

A raceme in which the single flowers are replaced by cymes is called a (indefinite) thyrse. The secondary cymes can of course be of any of the different types of dichasia and monochasia. A botryoid in which the single flowers are replaced by cymes is a definite thyrse or thyrsoid. Thyrses are often confusingly called panicles.

Image:Homöokladische Thyrse (inflorescence).svg|Thyrse
Image:Aesculus hippocastanum flori.jpg|Aesculus hippocastanum
Image:Dichasialer zymus (inflorescence).svg|Thyrsoid
Image:Syringa11.jpg|Syringa vulgaris

Other combinations are, of course, possible. For example, heads or umbels may be arranged in a corymb or a panicle.

Image:Achillea (yarrow) - 16. (heads in a corymb)
Image:Starr_010419-0021_Hedera_helix.jpg|Hedera helix (umbels in a panicle)

Other

The family Asteraceae is characterised by a highly specialised head technically called a calathid (but usually referred to as 'capitulum' or 'head'). The family Poaceae has a peculiar inflorescence of small spikes (spikelets) organised in panicles or spikes that are usually simply and improperly referred to as spike and panicle. The genus Ficus (Moraceae) has an inflorescence called syconium and the genus Euphorbia has cyathia (sing. cyathium), usually organised in umbels. For detailed descriptions, see the respective articles.

Image:Chamomile@original size.jpg|Matricaria chamomilla (calathid)
Image:Wheat close-up.JPG|Triticum aestivum (compound spikes, "spikes")
Image:Lemont rice.jpg|Oryza sativa (spikes in a panicle, "panicle")
Image:Some figs.jpg|Ficus carica (syconium)
Image:Euphorbia tridentata ies.jpg|Euphorbia tridentata (cyathium)
Image:Euphorbia cyparissias 02 bgiu.jpg|Euphorbia cyparissias (cyathia in an umbel)
Image:Coleus inflorescence.JPG|(Coleus-false spike)

References and external links


