[[Greg Selkoe]]

CATEGORIES: John F. Kennedy School of Government alumni, Rollins College alumni, Living people, 1975 births, The Huffington Post writers and columnists

Greg Selkoe (born June 4, 1975) is an American entrepreneur, personality and the CEO and founder of Karmaloop.
Since January 2010 he has been a contributing blogger at The Huffington Post.

Biography

Greg Selkoe was born in Boston, Massachusetts and raised in the Jamaica Plain neighborhood.vaporsmagazine.com/2007/11/greg-karamaloop/
Selkoe began Karmaloop from his parents' basement in 2000.
He went to the The Winchendon School, a boarding school in Winchendon, Massachusetts. Selkoe received his undergraduate degree from Rollins College
Greg Selkoe currently lives in Boston, Massachusetts with his wife and Creative Director at Karmaloop, Dina Selkoe.

About Karmaloop.com

Karmaloop. It is one of the world's largest online retailers of streetwear (including footwear, apparel, accessories, housewares and more).internetretailer.com/top500/list/?page=2
The company is anchored by its retail website and lifestyle network – www.com – which attracts millions of unique monthly visitors and includes both e-commerce and original content through internet television and blogs. Karmaloop.
The Karmaloop family also includes Karmaloop TV, a multi-platform broadband programming network which was launched in 2008. Planning to expand and launch as a 24-hour cable television channel in 2012, Karmaloop TV is helmed by President Katie McEnroe (formerly President of Television & Digital Networks at Lionsgate Entertainment and President of AMC (TV channel)) and has an executive roster which includes Grammy-winning musician and entrepreneur, Pharrell Williams, who serves as Creative Director.

Press and Media

Greg Selkoe was interviewed and featured in articles regarding Karmaloop and Karmaloop TV in USA Today, Business Week, Entrepreneur  and The Boston Globe amongst many other media outlets.
Selkoe has been interviewed on TV networks including Fox Business,
Selkoe made a cameo as himself on the HBO scripted drama "How to Make it in America" in the first episode of Season 2.
Selkoe was a contributor to the 2010 book "Black Sheep: An unconventional look at good ol' family values" by Karyn A. Gray 
Selkoe was featured in a chapter of the 2007 book Outside Innovation by Patty Seabold.
Selkoe was featured in a chapter in the 2011 book 10 Who Mentor by Denise Korn.
Selkoe sits on the board of the Kanye West Foundation, contributes to and works with the Boston Public Health Commission on its youth anti-violence programs, and was a spokesperson for the Vote for Change campaign during the 2008 presidential election.youtube.
Selkoe founded the Future Boston Alliance in 2011 – a group dedicated to improving cultural life in Boston and retaining local creative talent – is involved with Pharrell Williams' Kidult Youth Conference, has contributed a significant portion of the money toward the restoration of the Brewer Fountain on the Boston Common,
Selkoe is also actively involved with the Institute of Contemporary Art, and UNICEF.unicefusa.org/about/special-events/childrens-champion/
In 2009 Selkoe was selected as one of the top 25 most influential entrepreneurs under 35 in the United States
In 2010 Greg Selkoe signed on to be a blogger  with popular liberal news site, The Huffington Post, where he comments on current events.
Selkoe received the Ernst & Young Entrepreneur Of The Year 2012 Award in the e-commerce category in New England.transworld.net/101684/news/greg-selkoe-named-ernst-young-entrepreneur-of-the-year-2012/




