[[Tomsk]]

CATEGORIES: Tomsk, Tomsk Governorate, Populated places established in 1604

Tomsk (

History

Tomsk was established under a decree from Tsar Boris Godunov in 1604 after Toyan, the Tatar duke of Eushta, asked for the Tsar's protection against Kirghiz bandits. The Tsar sent 200 Cossacks under the command of Vasily Tyrkov and Gavriil Pisemsky to construct a fortress on the bank of the Tom River, overlooking what would become the city of Tomsk. Toyan ceded the land for the fortress to the Tsar.General Information about Tomsk, Kommersant Daily
In 1804, the government selected Tomsk to become the seat of the new Tomsk Governorate, which would include the modern cities of Novosibirsk, Kemerovo, and Krasnoyarsk, as well as the territories which are now in Eastern Kazakhstan. The new status brought development and the city grew quickly.
The discovery of gold in 1830 brought further development to Tomsk in the 19th century.  However, when the Trans-Siberian Railway bypassed the city in favor of the village of Novonikolayevsk (now Novosibirsk), development began to move south to connect with the railway. In time, Novosibirsk would surpass Tomsk in importance.
In the mid-19th century, one fifth of the city's residents were exiles. However, within a few years, the city would be reinvented as the educational center of Siberia with the establishment of Tomsk State University and Tomsk Polytechnic University. By World War II, every twelfth resident of the city was a student, giving rise to the city's informal name - Siberian Athens.
After the October Revolution of 1917, the city was a notable center of the White movement, led by Anatoly Pepelyayev and Maria Bochkareva, among others. After the victory of the Red Army, Tomsk was incorporated into West Siberian Krai and later into Novosibirsk Oblast.
As in many Siberian cities, Tomsk became the new home for many factories relocated out of the warzone at the beginning of the World War II. The resulting growth of the city led the Soviet government to establish the new Tomsk Oblast, with Tomsk serving as the administrative center.
During the Cold war Tomsk was one of many places to be designated a closed city, to which outsiders and, in particular, foreigners, were denied access.   In 1949 matters were taken a stage further when a secret city, known as "Tomsk-7" (or sometimes simply as "Postbox 5") was founded  from Tomsk, and the new settlement became the home of the Tomsk Nuclear Plant (subsequently renamed Sibirskaya Nuclear Power Plant), the country's first industrial scale nuclear power station.   Tomsk-7 received municipal status in 1956 and was renamed Seversk in 1992.

Administrative and municipal status

Tomsk serves as the administrative center of the oblast and, within the framework of administrative divisions, it also serves as the administrative center of Tomsky District, even though it is not  a part of it. As a municipal division, Tomsk City Under Oblast Jurisdiction is incorporated as Tomsk Urban Okrug.Law #238-OZ

City divisions

Tomsk is divided into four city districts: Kirovsky, Leninsky, Oktyabrsky, and Sovetsky.

Climate

Tomsk has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb) barely escaping a subarctic classification. The annual average temperature is . In 2006, Tomsk experienced what might have been its first recorded winds of hurricane force, which toppled trees and damaged houses.Погода и климат - Климат Томска (Weather and climate - Climate of Tomsk)

Politics

Tomsk is governed by a mayor and a 33-member Duma. The current mayor, appointed in 2009, is Nikolay Nikolaychuk,Газета «Континент Сибирь» Пересадка в ТомскеОфициальный интернет-сайт муниципалитета г.Томска: Николайчук Николай АлексеевичИсполняющий обязанности мэра города Томска Николайчук Николай Алексеевич a member of The United Russia party, held the office of Mayor since 2007,Николайчук Николай Алексеевич - Первый заместитель Мэра г. Томска // Кто есть кто :: Деловой мир Сибири replacing Mayor Alexander Makarov, who was suspended from his post pending the outcome of criminal proceedings against him. in russian
Of the 33 members, 16 are elected from the eight double mandate districts while 17 are chosen from party lists.
In the October 2005 local elections, United Russia was expected to cruise to a solid victory; however, the Pensioners Party put up a strong showing. The final count was (proportional representation):

Economy

Energy generation

Tomsk has the oldest electrical grid in Siberia. There are three powerstations in the city:
Tomsk consumes more electric energy than it produces. The bulk of the city's electric and thermal energy is produced by the GRES-2 (281 MWt) and TEC-3 (140 MWt) powerplants, belonging to Tomskenergo Inc. Tomsk supplements its energy needs with electricity generated at Seversk.

Transportation

Road network:
There is a commercial and passenger port on the Tom River.
The city is served by the Bogashevo Airport.

=Railways=

Tomsk is a small railway center that is situated on the Tayga—Bely Yar line (Tomsk branch) of the Trans-Siberian Railway
The main line of the Trans-Siberian railway, built in 1896, passes  south of Tomsk and bypasses Tomsk. Access from Tomsk to the Trans-Siberian railway is available via the town of Tayga. A regional rail line links Tomsk with Tayga.
The Tomsk Railway existed as an independent entity until 1961. At the present time, the Tomsk line belongs to the West-Siberian Railway, branch of Russian Railways Corp.. Trains link Tomsk to Anapa, Asino, Barnaul, Bely Yar, Moscow, Novokuznetsk, Novosibirsk, Sochi, and Tayga.

=Public transportation=

The main part of inner-city and suburban transportation is provided  by marshrutkas (routed taxis), mainly PAZ) minibuses, which serve about forty routes.
Additionally, the city has eleven proper bus routes, eight trolleybus lines (built in 1967), and five tram lines (constructed in 1949). Private taxis are also readily available.

File:Asia AM928 AC225 20070910.JPG|Asia AM928
File:Mudan MD6106 BC997 20080122.jpg|Mudan MD6106
File:LiAZ 5256 45 BC965 20080404.jpg|LiAZ-5256
File:PAZ buses in Tomsk, 2009.jpg|PAZ-3205
File:Tomsk tram 324 20070522.jpg|Tram KTM-19 (71-619KT)
File:Tomsk tram 305 20070514.jpg|Tram KTM-5M3 (71-605)
File:Tomsk trolley 338.jpg|Tomsk trolley 
File:Trolza trolleybuses in Tomsk.jpg|Trolleybuses Trolza

=Air transportation=

Tomsk Bogashevo Airport is served by the following airlines:

The airport is also served by charter flights operated by UTair and Alrosa Mirny Air Enterprise

Education

Tomsk has a number of prominent institutions of higher education, including:
A large number of educational institutions in the city have contributed to making Tomsk a major center for Russia's IT industry. Tomsk was one of the first cities in Russia to gain access to the Internet, which became available in the early 1990s owing to grants received by universities and scientific cooperation.

Culture

Tomsk has many local cultural institutions including several drama theaters as well as a children's theater and a puppet theater.  Major concert venues in the city include the Conservatory Concert hall and the Tomsk Palace of Sport.  The city also has cultural centers dedicated to German, Polish and Tatar languages and culture.
One of the city's prominent theaters was destroyed in an act of terrorism in 1905.  The Korolevsky Theater (built in 1884–85) was being used by a group of communist revolutionaries when the theater was attacked and set on fire by members of the Black Hundred, a hard-line nationalist organization. Those who escaped the flames were gunned down by Black Hundred members waiting outside the theater. Estimates put the number of casualties between 200 and 1000.
There are a number of museums in Tomsk devoted to various subjects, most notably art, local history and wood carving. There is also a Museum of Oppression, housed in a former KGB dungeon.  Tomsk State University has a number of small museums with exhibits on archaeology, paleontology, zoology, as well as a herbarium and a botanical garden
As in many other cities in the former Soviet Union, the revolutionary government destroyed a number of old churches in the city including two that had existed since the 17th century.  However, Tomsk managed to save some of its churches by transforming them into machine shops, warehouses, archives, and even residential buildings.  Since the end of the communist era some of the churches have been renovated and returned to their congregations.
Tomsk is well known for its intricate "gingerbread" decoration of traditional wooden houses in the area. However, the number of old homes in this style is decreasing due to redevelopment or some of them catching fire, as the structures have little to no fire protection.
Trud (Labor) Stadium, in central Tomsk is the base for matches with the FC Tom Tomsk, the city's professional soccer club.  The team's 2004 promotion to the Russian Premier League gave local fans a chance to see some of the nation's best teams play at the city's own stadium.
Tomsk has many local media outlets including the TV2 television station, the radio stations Radio Siberia and Echo of Moscow in Tomsk along with several newspapers (Tomskii Vestnik, Tomskaya Nedelya, Krasnoye Znamya and Vechernii Tomsk).
In April 2006 Tomsk received international media attention as the venue of a major summit on economic cooperation, held in the city between Russian President Vladimir Putin and German Chancellor Angela Merkel.
Tomsk was the name given by children's author Elizabeth Beresford to one of her fictional characters The Wombles, all of whom are named after places.

Notable people

International relations

Tomsk is the only non-capital member of the Asian Network of Major Cities 21.

Twin towns and sister cities

Tomsk is twinned with:





Notes

Sources




