[[Beast (South Korean band)]]

CATEGORIES: Cube Entertainment artists, K-pop music groups, Musical groups established in 2009, South Korean boy bands, South Korean dance music groups, Musical sextets, Beast (South Korean band)

Beast (; stylized as BEAST or B2ST) is a six-member boy band from South Korea, formed in 2009 by Cube Entertainment. The band's members are Yoon Doo-joon, Jang Hyun-seung, Yong Jun-hyung, Yang Yo-seob, Lee Gi-kwang, and Son Dong-woon.
Beast has released two Korean full-length album, six Korean mini-albums, one Japanese full-length and various singles. The group's debut release was in October, 2009, when their first mini-album, Beast Is the B2ST, was made available. They then released their first full-length album, Fiction and Fact, in 2011, receiving their first triple crown on M. In the same year, Beast made their Japanese debut with the release of the single, Shock (Japanese Version).
The group gained attention for the lack of industry success previously experienced by its members, with media outlets referring to them as "a group of recycled material".

History

2009–2010: Debut and Shock of the New Era

Prior to their debut, Korean news outlets reported that Cube Entertainment would be releasing a new boy group known as "B2ST", pronounced "Beast". Beast's fanclub name became "B2uty" and "B2sties", in reference to the fairy tale of Beauty and the Beast.
In October 2009, Beast held their debut showcase at the MTV GongGae Hall and made their live performance debut on KBS Music Bank with their debut single, "Bad Girl".
In early 2010, Beast promoted their second single, "Mystery", from the mini-album, with live performances on the weekly music shows. The members created their own humorous amateur music video for the song, featuring fellow Korean pop singers including members of Girls' Generation and Kara. The mini-album went on to sell 40,000 copies,
In January 2010, Beast and their labelmates, girl group 4minute, signed with world-wide album company Universal Music Group for their international promotions and album launches,

Beast released their second mini-album Shock of the New Era in March 2010 with the lead single "Shock". The mini album's release took place a day earlier than scheduled after it was leaked on YouTube.
During the promotion period for "Shock", the group performed an orchestra version of Korean group Noel's ballad "Despite Holding On" (
In August 2010, Beast received the Golden Disk Award from Singapore, Malaysia, and Thailand at the '2010 Summer CUBE Stars Party' in Seoul.

2010: Mastermind, Lights Go On Again, and My Story

On September 17, 2010, Beast released the song "Jumeogeul Kkwak Jwigo" (주먹을 꽉 쥐고, lit. Clenching a Tight Fist) as a single from their 3rd mini-album, Mastermind. The song gained anticipation and attention from the public for the excellent vocal ability they displayed.
On November 3, 2010, Beast opened up the preorder sales for their 4th mini-album named Lights Go On Again.
Beast discography entered  Japan with the release of their first Japanese album, called Beast – Japan Premium Edition, on November 24, 2010. It debuted at 13th place on the Oricon weekly album charts. On November 27, 2010, Beast held their first Japanese showcase called the 'The Legend of Beast, Vol.1' at Tokyo Big Site in Ohdaiba, Tokyo. The members were transported to the site of the showcase by helicopter, where they were able to see a human formation of the group's name made up of fans as a welcome greeting. The group performed 9 hit tracks, including "Bad Girl," "Shock," and "Soom". They also announced plans to officially debut in Japan in February 2011.
On December 1, 2010, Beast won an award for being one of 2010's most photogenic figures by the 11th Korean Visual Arts Festival, hosted and organized by the Korea Broadcast Camera Directors Association.
On December 23, plans for the release of self-composed duets by the members of the group were announced. The tracks released were "Thanks To", a hiphop track from Yoseob and Junhyung,

2011: Japanese debut-first studio album, world tour

The group was awarded with the Bonsang Award at the 20th Seoul Music Awards on January 20, 2011 where they performed their hit songs "Shock" and "Soom".
Beast released their first full length Korean album on May 17, 2011 titled Fiction and Fact. Their 2nd Japanese single, "Bad Girl", was released on June 15, 2011.
Beast performed as Korea's representative artists at MTV's "MTV World Stage Live in Malaysia 2011" on July 24, 2011 at Malaysia's Shah Alam. Beast is the only Korean artist to be invited this year, and is the second Korean artist, following the Wonder Girls, to ever perform on MTV's "World Stage".

2012: International Tour, Beautiful Show, "Midnight Sun"

In 2012, Beast went on an international tour, "Beautiful Show", which visited 17 cities in 12 different countries from Asia, Europe, North America, and South America.  They were also featured in the soundtrack for Korean drama, "Big," with a song titled "Hateful Person".
On July 11 at midnight KST, B2ST held a 'Hang Out On Live Air' event on their Google+ page to commemorate their 1000 days as a group together since their debut in 2009. They spoke with fans from 50 countries and revealed information on their comeback. Despite it being a late live-streaming session, many fans tuned in to show their support for B2ST.
They are planning to have their comeback with a new mini-album called Midnight Sun on 22.07.12. They also plan to release a new song titled Midnight ahead of their album on 15.07.2012 at midnight KST. Midnight has been said to be a song that will grab attention with its piano and guitar sound and the dramatic vocals of the members of B2ST.
Hours after the release of their song, Midnight, it has reached an 'all-kill'. They achieved #1 spots in all of Korea's real time music charts such as  Bugs, Melon, Soribada, Daum, Mnet, Cyworld, Olleh, and Naver. B2St released a theme music video for their latest single, "Midnight". It shows the members walking through a quiet neighbourhood and shows solo shots of each member.
On July 21, B2ST released their 5th mini-album Midnight Sun. It gained the #1 spot on music charts with the title track "Beautiful Night" being promoted. It rose to the top of Melon, Mnet, Soribada, Naver Music, and other music sites. Many could tell that B2ST's comeback was successful because all their other songs on the new album took up high places on the charts.  Nearly an hour after their mini-album was released, the music video for "Beautiful Night" was released on B2ST's official YouTube channel. On 26 July 2012 at 23:00, they held a guerilla concert at the Gwanghwamun Plaza, in front of an audience of 4,000 people, to promote their fifth mini album Midnight Sun, and the performance was broadcast on SBS's music show Inkigayo. On August 16, B2ST won a triple crown on M! Countdown for "Beautiful Night" which achieved top spot on the charts for three consecutive weeks.

2013: Concert, Will You Be Okay, B2UTY More & "Hard to Love, How to Love"

On May 27, Cube Entertainment CEO Hong Seung Seong opened up on the whereabouts of his agency′s singers in a long letter sent to media outlets. In the text, there was mention of B2ST′s upcoming comeback. He said, "It′s now time for me to show you the three big pictures we′ve drawn regarding B2ST′s comeback. Thanks to the B2ST members and their efforts to put together a puzzle that will make everyone supporting them happy, B2ST has confirmed a comeback date in July." It was also stated in the text that before the release of their album and their performance at their concert in July, there will be two projects. Which is the release of a digital single titled Will You Be Okay? in May, and the start of a B2UTY More project in June.
Hong Seung Seong finished, "B2ST′s upcoming album, to be released in July, will be performed for the first time onstage at B2ST′s exclusive concert to be held in the same month. Their music, which shines more brilliantly onstage, will kick off with a concert so that B2UTYs will be the ones to see it first. Many passionate debates, designs and fun ideas have been thrown out regarding the comeback and are still going on, so make sure you don′t let go of your anticipation."
On May 29, 2013, Beast released their promised digital single called "Will You Be Okay?", a mature and dramatic ballad written by member, Yong Junhyung. In a matter of hours, they pushed back fierce competition and achieved an "all-kill", topping all major music charts in South Korea.
On July 11, Cube Entertainment revealed the album's name, titled "Hard to Love, How to Love", and the release date of the album, July 19, through their Twitter account. and on the following day, July 16, music video teaser for "Shadow" was released on the group's official YouTube account followed by the release of the full length music video for Shadow on July 19.

Image and artistry

On December 3, 2010, Beast attended the Patricia Field Collection fashion show located in Seoul Chungnamdong MCM Haus and was praised by Patricia Field herself for their "distinctive and modern look". For this collection, MCM's Heritage and Patricia Field worked together to show off a modern New Yorker style with a trendy shopper bag, backpack, clutch, and more items and any money earned from it will be donated to the 'Korea Disaster Relief' to benefit the civilians left homeless from the Yeonpyeong incident.
On April 18, 2012, Beast has collaborated with Jim Rickey to make their own sneakers brand, Beast X Jim Rickey. Beast members directly involved at the design of these shoes and will be available in 6 different colours.

Other activities

Television appearances

Beast was the topic of a short-lived reality show, MTV B2ST, which was hosted by MTV. The show ran on a weekly basis from August 23 – October 9, 2009, with a total of ten episodes. The program showcased their journey leading up to their debut. It was announced in March 2010 that Beast will be hosting a second season of MTV B2ST entitled MTV Beast Almighty. After last year's broadcast debut, season 2 had fans and viewers' wishes as the concept of the program where the members will have to pick out one wish to grant for every episode. The show ran on a weekly basis from April 10 – May 29, 2010.
Beast became the protagonists of the variety show Idol Maid running on a weekly basis from July 21 – October 13, 2010.
Beast was selected as a PR envoy to promote the audition program Global Super Idol, which aired in November, 2011. They also attended the preliminaries in Korea, Thailand, and China to encourage the contestants and give advice. Global Super Idol is a global audition program that pits finalists from Thailand and China against finalists in Korea. All the finalists will attend the main show in Korea. Since Beast is very popular in Asian countries, including Thailand, Japan, and China, their popularity helped the show become popular too by performing their songs for fans and contestants from all over the world.

Comic Book

Beast has an animated-novel based on the six members by Jena and Planis Entertainment (being the production team). The action fantasy series, which took three years of preparation, will focus on the boys discovering new supernatural powers and their adventures on saving the world as new superheros. The producer of the comics stated, "'The Beast' has an interesting story that combines action, comedy, and romance.
The first book of the series was released in August, and sold all 13,000 copies issued after only about one week. The 2nd book of the series will be released soon, and the book will be released not only in Korea, but also in Hong Kong, Macao, Singapore, and Malaysia. The producers added, "Talks about releasing the series to Brazil, Japan, and China are also sounding optimistic."
The 2nd book of the series, titled 'The Beast – Another Beast', will be released in South Korea on January, 16th and in other countries on the 30th (January).
A collaboration song has been made with label-mate A Pink named "5! My Baby" featuring the characters of their comic-book.
A figurine set based on the comic books has been made as well.

Members

Awards

Golden Disk Awards

Mnet Asian Music Awards

MelOn Music Awards

Music awards

M! Countdown

Music Bank

Show Champion

Show! Music Core

Inkigayo






