[[The Drums]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 2006, Musical groups from New York City, Indie pop groups from New York, NME Awards winners

The Drums are an American indie pop band from Brooklyn, New York. The band is currently on the Moshi Moshi/Island (UK), Universal (AU) and Frenchkiss (US) labels.

Formation

Founding members Jonathan (Jonny) Pierce and Jacob Graham became friends as children, having met at Bible camp at age 11 or 12.youtube.
In 2008 Jonny and Jacob came up with the concept for The Drums, and Pierce moving to Kissimee, Florida, where Graham resided at the time, so that they could more readily collaborate. They then moved to Brooklyn, New York, in the spring of 2009, where drummer Connor Hanwick and guitarist Adam Kessler joined the band to complete their live sound. The band had their first gig within a week of arriving in Brooklyn at Cake Shop NYC as part of the NYC Pop Fest.nycpopfest.htm In October 2009, the band released their first album, Summertime!, with 6 songs.

Career

In December 2009 the band was shortlisted as one of the 15 music acts for the BBC Sound of 2010. Subsequently, they placed at No. 5 in this list on 4 January 2010.  In NMEs first issue of 2010 they were named number 1 in the magazine's top tips for the year as well as in Clash Magazine's Tips for 2010. The Drums were also voted "Best Hope for 2010" in Pitchfork Media's 2009 Readers' Poll.
In February 2010, the band played venues around the UK on the 2010 NME Awards Tour alongside The Maccabees, Bombay Bicycle Club and The Big Pink, going on to play support band for Florence and the Machine's 2010 Cosmic Love tour. In June 2010 they played as one of the support bands for Kings of Leon in Hyde Park, London.
On May 7, 2010, they appeared on Friday Night with Jonathan Ross where they performed "Best Friend". Their debut album was officially released on June 7, 2010, on Moshi Moshi and Island Records. The album contained the singles "Let's Go Surfing," "Best Friend," "Me and the Moon" and "Forever and Ever, Amen" as well as "Down By The Water," which had previously been released as part of the band's Summertime! EP. On September 16, 2010, it was announced on the band's Facebook page and website that guitarist Adam Kessler had left the band.
The Drums released the single "The New World" on April 11, 2011 with proceeds going to Japan disaster relief efforts.
For their sophomore LP, the band recorded it quickly, again self producing, often laying down tracks spontaneously in singer Jonny Pierce's kitchen. They released Portamento, on September 5, 2011.  The album title has a deeper meaning for Pierce, as he describes, "Jacob and I meeting as young boys with a shared love for Kraftwerk and Anything Box and Wendy Carlos, and these were all synth pioneers, and a common feature on old analogue systems was 'Portamento'. The band has also revealed that they almost split at the end of June due to stylistic disagreements. Jacob explained, "I think our band is kind of fragile and probably on the verge of breaking up pretty constantly and I say that seriously and jokingly at the same time."
In 2011, Jonny Pierce co-wrote "In The Middle (I Met You There) with Brooklyn artist Matthew Dear for his EP "Headcage". His writing credits also include "You Gave Me Nothing" and "Lose It (In the End)" which are included in Mark Ronson's album "Record Collection."
The Drums made their American television debut on Late Night With Jimmy Fallon on February 15, 2012. MTV gave the band a celebrity chart special on MTV HD channel in May, 2012, where Pierce and Graham introduced their favourite videos and bands as well as some of their own videos.
On the 16th of February, 2014, The Drums posted, "celebrating the only way we know how. Album 3 is finished." on their official Facebook page.

Influences

The band cite their major influences as The Wake, The Smiths, Joy Division/New Order,  The Tough Alliance, The Legends, The Shangri-las, The Embassy and Orange Juice.
Graham also mentions that reverb in general has played a major role in their sound: "..."

Solo projects

Both members of The Drums have announced solo records in the works for release in 2013. Jonathan under the name Jonny Pierce and Jacob as Cascading Slopes. In December Pierce said in an interview with NME "I wanted to be as self-indulgent as possible with this album. This is pop done the way I think it should be done."

Touring members

Discography

Studio albums

Extended plays

Singles

Guest appearances

Notes:

Music videos






