[[Astro Plan]]

CATEGORIES: 2010 Chinese television series debuts, 2010 Chinese television series endings, Chinese animated television series, Real Robots, Chinese science fiction television series, Animated science fiction television series, Anime-influenced animation

Astro Plan, known in China as Space Adventures (,Nifty News is a science fiction mecha animated series created by Guangzhou-based toy firm Xing Yuan. Hailed as "China's first sci-fi animation",Astro Plan Official Blog the series premiered on Chinese television on January 16, 2010 through Hunan TV's Golden Eagle Channel and ended in mid-February with a total of 26 episodes. It has received mixed reviews and is often criticized by anime fans for being derivative of anime titles such as Macross Frontier and Mobile Suit Gundam 00.

Plot

In the year 2735, mankind has begun to venture into space to find a new home after Earth's environment succumbs to global warming and the bombardment of asteroids into the atmosphere. During their voyage, the Space Migration Fleet encounters an alien race from the planet Iccus. As raiders of natural resources, the aliens are bent on galactic domination. To combat the threat, six young fighters are recruited into the Sky Arrow Flight Team and are equipped with transformable Type Yi fighter planes.fm - Astro Plan

Characters

Mecha

The Sky Arrow Flight Team is equipped with three YF-10 and three YF-11 Type Yi transformable fighters. Each fighter is capable of transforming into robot mode, as well as the hybrid "Falcon" mode (similar to the GERWALK mode of the VF-1 Valkyrie from Macross). All fighters are equipped with Gun Pods and an array of missiles, but each unit has a weapon and livery unique to its pilot and their "Ultimate Skill" (similar to the Trans-Am System used in Mobile Suit Gundam 00):
The Space Migration Fleet also has other squadrons of Type Yi fighters flown by regular pilots, though they are rarely featured throughout the series.

Production

According to the series' official blog website, Astro Plan was created to educate children ages 6–14 of justice and peace, as well as promote the cultural aspect of Chinese animation. The YF-10 and YF-11 Type Yi fighters are closely patterned after the People's Liberation Army Air Force main fighter aircraft - the Chengdu J-10 and Shenyang J-11, respectively.Astro Plan - The Origin of Creativity
In addressing the issue of plagiarism, the blog states that animation originated in Europe, but was copied and popularized by the United States before Japan and South Korea followed suit, and that the Chinese animation industry is simply following the pattern of its Asian neighbors.Astro Plan - Our "Space Adventure"

Merchandising

The series' episodes serve as commercials to promote a line of transformable toys manufactured for the Chinese market by Xing Yuan under the HyperWiz label. A distinguishing feature of the toys is the Macross UN Spacy kite insignia imprinted on their back panels.ToyArk - Astro Plan DX Squadron Leader YF-10 Type Yi Fighter
Transformable model kits of the fighter planes have also been released by HyperWiz as well.
Knockoffs of the toys exist in Mainland ChinaAction Figure Checklist - Astro Plan KO and parts of Asia. In addition, bootlegs of a VF-1J Valkyrie toy from the Macross series,KO Toys - Astro Plan Knockoffs as well as the jets from the Transformers: Machine Wars series,Action Figure Checklist - Astro Plan/Machine Wars KO are also widely sold as Astro Plan toys. HyperWiz has addressed the counterfeiting issue by posting a notice telling consumers how to differentiate the authentic toys from bootlegs.HyperWiz - Astro Plan Identifies Genuine Piracy

Reception and criticism

Anime fans critically panned the series for plagiarizing the mecha, ship designs and story concepts from various Macross and Gundam titles. Some of the enemy units resemble the GNZ-004 Gaga from Mobile Suit Gundam 00 while the Shenzou, the show's main ship, is a cross between the Archangel-class assault ship of Mobile Suit Gundam SEED and the Ptolemaios II of Gundam 00. The scene of asteroids falling through Earth's atmosphere in the first episode is a copy of the "Break the World" incident from Gundam SEED Destiny (though the incident can also be compared to the Gamilas' bombardment of meteorites in Space Battleship Yamato). Another criticism involves one of the characters of the series, whose design and pose resembles Lockon Stratos from Gundam 00 and the Type Yi Fighters' special attacks are a direct copy of the Trans-Am System from that series. The symbol of the Sky Arrow Flight Team is loosely derived from the U.N. Spacy insignia of Macross.
At present, Shōji Kawamori (the creator of Macross), Studio Nue and Big West (owners of the Macross franchise), Yoshiyuki Tomino (creator of the Gundam franchise), Sunrise (owners of the Gundam franchise) and Bandai have not commented nor filed a cease and desist letter against Xing Yuan or the stations broadcasting the series.
According to PCgames China, 149 out of 169 people voted "Not interested" in the series and there are plenty of negative comments posted on the quality of the series - most notably the 2D and 3D animations and the voice acting.CollectionDX - YF-11 Unit 4 Zi Jing "Purple"








