[[Iris Robinson scandal]]

CATEGORIES: 2010 in Northern Ireland, Financial scandals, Political sex scandals in Northern Ireland

The Iris Robinson scandal, also known as Irisgate, was a political scandal in Northern Ireland involving Iris Robinson, the wife of Northern Ireland's First Minister Peter Robinson, who was a serving MP and MLA for the Democratic Unionist Party, representing Strangford in both assemblies.
In January 2010, a BBC Northern Ireland documentary revealed that Iris Robinson had an affair in 2008 and had procured £50,000 in loans for her lover to finance a start-up restaurant. She had failed to declare her monetary interest in the restaurant, despite serving on the council which gave it permission to open.
As a result, Iris Robinson was expelled from the DUP and she resigned her seats in both Westminster and the Northern Ireland Assembly, retiring from politics. Peter Robinson also unexpectedly lost his own Westminster seat (Belfast East) in the 2010 general election, a result which was attributed in part to the scandal.

BBC Spotlight

Following the airing of an episode of BBC Northern Ireland's Spotlight programme on 8 January, the First Minister faced demands to explain his role in his wife's financial dealings, including from within his own party. In the interview with Spotlight, McCambley alleged that Iris requested the money rather than it being a spontaneous gift. The restaurant in question, the Lock Keeper's Inn in South Belfast, is owned by Castlereagh Borough Council. McCambley was awarded the tender to operate the restaurant in 2008. Despite being a Castlereagh Borough councillor, Iris Robinson failed to declare her financial interest in the award of the tender. Selwyn Black, Iris Robinson's former adviser, has alleged that she encouraged McCambley to bid for the tender.
The Canadian crime writer Peter Robinson was notably mistaken for the other Peter Robinson during this scandal. He received angry e-mails, saying his wife was "homophobic", and he quipped on his website under the title "I'm Not That Peter Robinson", "I guess people who send rude and insulting emails or push religion at the vulnerable were not, alas, at the front of the queue when the brains were handed out".Read more: Crime writer Peter Robinson not amused by scandal, Thursday, 14 January 2010

First Minister steps down

On 11 January 2010, Peter Robinson announced that he was stepping down from the position of First Minister for a period of six weeks to fight claims over his wife's financial dealings.  Arlene Foster was nominated as his replacement.
Peter Robinson is facing a claim that he knew his wife obtained £50,000 from two developers for her teenage lover but did not tell the proper authorities. He returned to his position after three weeks.

Inquiries

Peter Robinson said that he would contest the allegations that he failed to properly report these transactions. He claimed to have no knowledge of them "I had no information," he said. "Absolutely no information about that, nor of any of the other financial arrangements, which is hardly surprising – if somebody is hiding an affair from you, it's probably not a surprise they are hiding the other arrangements relating to that affair."
On 11 January 2010 Peter Robinson confirmed that he had asked both the House of Commons and the Northern Ireland Assembly to carry out an inquiry into his conduct. Several other inquiries are or will be carried out. Castlereagh (borough) have launched an inquiry, while the Castlereagh Alliance Party has written to the Northern Ireland Comptroller and Auditor General calling for an inquiry.
The Police Service of Northern Ireland announced on 21 January 2010 that it was conducting an investigation into Iris Robinson's financial affairs.
On 25 June 2010, it became public that Robinson had been interviewed as part of a police investigation over money she obtained from two developers.Iris Robinson questioned over developers' money, BBC, 25 June 2010
On 26 May 2011, the DUP announced the findings of an independent investigation that had been commissioned by the Castlereagh council using Deloitte. This report cleared Iris Robinson of any wrongdoing in connection with the awarding of a contract by the council to her former teenage lover.
While the police investigation into the conduct of the Peter and Iris Robinson concluded in a recommendation not to prosecute in 2011, the Standards and Privileges enquiry mentioned by Peter Robinson on 11 January 2010 has still not been completed some three years after it was ordered by the Assembly, and remains ongoing. September 2012

Timeline




