[[Drew Barrymore]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Activists from California, Actresses from Los Angeles County, California, American autobiographers, American child actresses, American documentary filmmakers, American women film directors, American film actresses, American film directors of Hungarian descent, American film producers, American music video directors, American people of English descent, American people of Irish descent, American television actresses, American television directors, American television hosts, American television producers, American voice actresses, American women activists, American women business executives, American women writers, Artists from California, Barrymore family, Best Miniseries or Television Movie Actress Golden Globe winners, Bisexual actors, Bisexual women, Bisexual writers, Businesspeople from California, Documentary film directors, Documentary film producers, Female music video directors, Women television directors, Film directors from California, Film producers from California, LGBT artists from the United States, LGBT broadcasters, LGBT businesspeople from the United States, LGBT directors, LGBT entertainers from the United States, LGBT models, LGBT producers, LGBT rights activists from the United States, LGBT writers from the United States, Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie Screen Actors Guild Award winners, People from Culver City, California, Television producers from California, Television personalities from California, United Nations specialized agencies people, Women company founders, Writers from California, American company founders, LGBT people from California, Women film producers

Drew Blythe Barrymore (born February 22, 1975) is an American actress, screenwriter, film director, producer, model and author who is a descendant of the Barrymore family of well-known American stage and cinema actors, and is the granddaughter of film legend John Barrymore. Barrymore first appeared in an advertisement when she was eleven months old, a 1978 episodic television debut The Waltons as Melissa in season 7: episode 4 and her film debut in Altered States in 1980. In 1982 she starred in her breakout role as Gertie in Steven Spielberg's E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial and quickly became one of Hollywood's most recognized child actresses, going on to establish herself in mainly comic roles.
Following a turbulent childhood which was marked by recurring drug and alcohol abuse and two stints in rehab, Barrymore wrote the 1990 autobiography, Little Girl Lost. She successfully made the transition from child star to adult actress with a number of films including Poison Ivy, Bad Girls, Boys on the Side, and Everyone Says I Love You. Subsequently, she established herself in romantic comedies such as The Wedding Singer and later, 50 First Dates.
In 1997, she and her business partner Nancy Juvonen formed the production company Flower Films, with its first production the 1999 Barrymore film Never Been Kissed. Flower Films has gone on to produce the Barrymore vehicle films Charlie's Angels, 50 First Dates, and Music and Lyrics, as well as the cult film Donnie Darko. Barrymore's more recent projects include He's Just Not That Into You, Beverly Hills Chihuahua, Everybody's Fine and Going the Distance. A recipient of a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, Barrymore appeared on the cover of the 2007 People magazine's 100 Most Beautiful issue.
Barrymore was named an Ambassador Against Hunger for the UN World Food Programme (WFP). Since then, she has donated over US$1 million to the program. In 2007, she became both CoverGirl's newest model and spokeswoman for the cosmetic and the face for Gucci's newest jewelry line. In 2010, she was awarded the Screen Actors Guild Award and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress in a Miniseries or Television Film for her portrayal of Little Edie in Grey Gardens.

Early life and family

Barrymore was born in Culver City, California, to American actor John Drew Barrymore and Jaid Barrymore ( who is also an actor, and two half-sisters, Blyth Dolores Barrymore and Jessica Blyth Barrymore (Brahma).
Barrymore was born into acting: her great-grandparents Maurice Barrymore and Georgie Drew Barrymore, Maurice Costello and Mae Costello (
Her first name, Drew, was the maiden name of her paternal great-grandmother, Georgie Drew Barrymore and her middle name, Blyth was the original surname of the dynasty founded by her great-grandfather, Maurice Barrymore.

Career

Early career

Barrymore's career began when she was auditioned for a dog food commercial when she was eleven months old. When she was bitten by her canine co-star, the producers were afraid she would cry, but she merely laughed, and was hired for the job. She made her feature film debut in Altered States (1980), in which she had a small part. A year later, she landed the role of Gertie, the younger sister of Elliott, in E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial, which made her one of the most famous child stars of the time and earned her the Young Artist Award as Best Young Supporting Actress in a Motion Picture in 1982.

Rebellious era

In the wake of this sudden stardom, Barrymore endured a notoriously troubled childhood. She was already a regular at the famed Studio 54 when she was a little girl, smoking cigarettes at the age of nine, drinking alcohol by the time she was eleven, smoking marijuana at the age of twelve, and snorting cocaine at the age of thirteen. Her nightlife and constant partying became a popular subject with the media. She was in rehab at the age of fourteen. A suicide attempt, also at the age of fourteen, put her back in rehab, followed by a three-month stay with singer David Crosby and his wife. The stay was precipitated, Crosby said, because she "needed to be around some people that were committed to sobriety." Barrymore later described this period of her life in her autobiography, Little Girl Lost. The following year, following a successful juvenile court petition for emancipation, she moved into her own apartment.
In her late teens, her rebelliousness played itself out on screen and in print. Barrymore forged an image as a manipulative teenage seductress, beginning with the film Poison Ivy (1992), which was a box office failure, but was popular on video and cable. She also underwent breast reduction surgery in 1992, and has said on the subject:

In 1993, Barrymore earned a second Golden Globe nomination, this time for the film Guncrazy. Barrymore posed nude at the age of nineteen for the January 1995 issue of Playboy.

Return to prominence

In 1995, Barrymore starred in Boys on the Side opposite Whoopi Goldberg and Mary-Louise Parker, Barrymore's role in the costume drama Ever After (1998) offered a modern take on the classic fairy tale of Cinderella and served as a reminder, according to Roger Ebert, of how well Drew Barrymore "can hold the screen and involve us in her characters." Chicago Sun-Times.
Besides a number of appearances in films produced by her company, Flower Films, including Charlie's Angels, Barrymore had a dramatic role in the comedy-drama Riding in Cars with Boys (2001), playing a teenage mother in a failed marriage with the drug-addicted father (based on the real-life story of Beverly Donofrio). In 2002, Barrymore appeared in Confessions of a Dangerous Mind, alongside Sam Rockwell and Julia Roberts.

Flower Films and later work

In 1995, Barrymore formed Flower Films, a production company, with business partner Nancy Juvonen. Although the film was less than successful at the box office in the wake of 9/11, it reached cult film status after the DVD release, inspiring numerous websites devoted to unraveling the plot twists and meanings.
In 2003, she reprised her role as Dylan Sanders in Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle, was nominated for an Emmy Award
In 2010, Barrymore reunited with former partner Justin Long on the set of Going the Distance, directed by Nanette Burstein. An R-rated romantic comedy about a couple dealing the ups and downs of a long-distance relationship while commuting between New York City and San Francisco, the largely improvised film garnered generally mixed reviews by critics,
In 2011, it was announced that Barrymore starred with John Krasinski in Ken Kwapis's Big Miracle (2012), a romantic drama based on the 1989 book Freeing the Whales, which covers Operation Breakthrough, the 1988 international effort to rescue gray whales from being trapped in ice near Point Barrow, Alaska.

Other career highlights

In 1999, Barrymore was honored by the Young Artist Foundation with its Former Child Star "Lifetime Achievement" Award commemorating her outstanding achievements within the film industry as a child actress.
Barrymore's films have a worldwide box office gross that stands at over US$2.3 billion. According to The Hollywood Reporters annual Star Salary Top 10, she was tied for eighth place on the top ten list of actresses' salaries, commanding 10 to 12 million dollars per movie for 2006. She will be hosting alongside TCM regular, Robert Osborne.
Barrymore became a CoverGirl Cosmetics' model and spokeswoman in 2007. Barrymore is signed to IMG Models New York City.
In May 2007, Barrymore was named Ambassador Against Hunger for the United Nations World Food Programme


Personal life

Barrymore stated during an appearance talk show The View that she enjoys practicing Judaism and is thinking of converting. "It's a beautiful faith and I'm so honored to be around it. It's so family-oriented and the stories are so beautiful and it's incredibly enlightening. I'm really happy."
Concerning her sexuality, in an interview with Contact Music in 2003, Barrymore said "Do I like women sexually? Yeah, I do. Totally. I have always considered myself bisexual."
Barrymore is the godmother of Kurt Cobain and Courtney Love's daughter, Frances Bean Cobain.

Relationships, marriages and family life

In 1991, at the age of 16, Barrymore became engaged to Leland Hayward, grandson and namesake of Hollywood producer Leland Hayward.
Barrymore married her first husband, Welsh bartender turned Los Angeles bar owner Jeremy Thomas, at the age of nineteen on March 20, 1994. She filed for divorce from him less than two months later.
Barrymore began dating MTV host and comedian Tom Green in 1999. Barrymore and Green lived together for a year before getting engaged in July 2000. They wed in July 2001. Green filed for divorce in December 2001. The divorce was finalized on October 15, 2002. Before their divorce, they starred together in Charlie's Angels and Green's first directorial movie Freddy Got Fingered.
In 2002, Barrymore began dating The Strokes' drummer Fabrizio Moretti, soon after they met at a concert. Their five-year relationship ended in January 2007.
In early 2011, Barrymore began dating art consultant Will Kopelman, the son of former Chanel CEO Arie Kopelman.

Filmography

Actress

Director

Producer



Further reading




