[[List of designated terrorist organizations]]

CATEGORIES: Irregular military, Lists of organizations, Organized crime-related lists, Organizations designated as terrorist, Insurgents, Rebels, Terrorism-related lists

This is a list of designated terrorist organizations by national governments, former governments and inter-governmental organizations, where the proscription has a significant impact on the group's activities. Many organizations that are accused of being a terrorist organization deny using terrorism as a military tactic to achieve their goals, and there is no international consensus on the legal definition of terrorism.
This listing does not include unaffiliated individuals accused of terrorism, which are considered under lone wolf terrorism. This list also excludes groups that might be widely considered terrorist, but who are not officially so designated according to the criteria specified above, or government organizations.
This list is not all inclusive.  For more inclusive lists, including people, entities (corporations), and specific vehicles, refer to lists under Process of designation''.

Organizations currently officially designated as terrorist by various governments

Organizations officially designated as terrorist in the past

Below is the list of organizations that have officially been designated as terrorist in the past, by the respective parties, but have since been delisted.

Process of designation

Australia

Since 2002, the Australian Government maintains a Listing of terrorist organizations as per the Security Legislation Amendment (Terrorism) Act 2002. Listing, de-listing and re-listing follows a protocol that mainly involves the Australian Security Intelligence Organisation and the Attorney-General's Department.Protocol Listing terrorist organisations under the Criminal Code

Canada

Since December 18, 2001, article 83.05 of the Canadian Criminal Code allows the Governor in Council to maintain a list of entities that are engaged in terrorism, facilitating it, or acting on behalf of such an entity.
Entities are reviewed by the Minister and the Chief Justice of the Federal Court, and finally published in the Canada Gazette. The list is also published on the website of Public Safety Canada.publicsafety.gc.aspx 

European Union

The European Union has two lists of designated terrorist organisations that provide for different sanctions for the two groups.Kristina Thorne Terrorist designation in the European Union Background paper June 2006

=UN 1267 regime list=

Al-Qaeda, the Taliban and their associates.
The EU provides exceptions to the implementation of relevant asset-freezing sanctions per UN resolution 1452 (2002). Upon request, a competent national authority may determine to release funds on the following grounds if, within the time limit provided for, there has been no objection made, or a release has been explicitly approved, by the UN Sanctions Committee.

=Autonomous list=

All other designated organizations.
It is important to note that sanctions are only applicable to EU-external groups regardless of designation. For example, 47 groups are listed as terrorist organizations in the EU but sanctions are only applied to 27 of these. Member States do have an obligation to assist each other in preventing and combating terrorist acts but this is the only action that follows from the designation of an EU-internal organization. 

United Kingdom

| url = 
| title = Proscribed terrorist groups
| accessdate = 2013-03-31
| author = United Kingdom Government}}

United States

| url = 
| title = Individuals and Entities Designated by the State Department Under E.O. 13224
| accessdate = 2011-07-17
| author = United States Department of State}}

India

Under the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, the Ministry of Home Affairs maintains a list of banned organizations.

Russia

Single federal list of organizations recognized as terrorist by the Supreme Court of the Russian Federation.






