[[Jesse Lee (politician)]]

CATEGORIES: American bloggers, American Internet celebrities, Living people, Trinity College (Connecticut) alumni, Obama Administration personnel, 1979 births



Jesse Lee (born 1979) was named the White House  Director of Progressive Media & Online Response on May 23, 2011.  This is a newly created position to help maintain the President's online presence as he prepares for his 2012 Presidential reelection bid.  The duties of this position, dealing with negative or factually incorrect stories about the President, was formerly handled by the Democratic National Committee's rapid response team.
Lee was formerly the Online Programs Director under the Barack Obama Administration. Lee spent his early life in Takoma Park, Maryland, and graduated with a degree in philosophy from Trinity College in Hartford, Connecticut in 2002. He was hired to do Internet work for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC) in 2003, and worked in their online division from 2004 to 2006. 
Lee served as Senior New Media Advisor to Speaker of the United States House of Representatives Nancy Pelosi during the 110th United States Congress. During the 2008 United States presidential election, Lee performed online response for the Democratic National Committee. He worked in online outreach during the Presidential transition of Barack Obama, in the New Media department. On February 23, 2009, President Barack Obama announced Lee was hired as Online Programs Director for his administration.

Early life and education

Lee was raised in Takoma Park, Maryland. In 2002, Lee graduated from Trinity College in Hartford, Connecticut. After college, Lee did temporary work as a paralegal.

Political career

Lee was hired in 2003 to do Internet-related work for the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee (DCCC). From 2004 to 2006, Lee worked for the online division of the DCCC. Rahm Emanuel became DCCC chair in 2005, and allowed Lee discretion in his online postings. 
On February 23, 2004, President Barack Obama announced Lee was hired as Online Programs Director for his administration, in a release from the White House Press Secretary of "key White House staff". Part of Lee's duties as White House Online Programs Director include running Whitehouse. Lee came up with a program called "Open for Ideas", and this led to a town hall meeting in March 2009 where President Obama answered questions that had been submitted online. "I think the online town hall is the coolest thing I've seen come to fruition. I'd like to get to the point where that kind of stuff replaces the comment forums you typically find on government websites," said Lee to the National Journal. In September 2009, Lee posted to the White House blog defending the Obama Administration against criticism from conservative political commentator, Glenn Beck.








