[[World Doctors Orchestra]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 2007, Orchestras, Music in Berlin, Medical and health organizations

The World Doctors Orchestra (WDO) is an orchestra made up entirely of physicians. It was established as a non-profit organization in 2007 by Prof. Stefan Willich at the Charité University Medical Center in Berlin, Germany with the purpose of combining music with global medical responsibility. The members are physicians representing over 40 countries worldwide, many of them with a professional musical background. The WDO performs usually twice a year in various venues and countries around the world donating the concert proceeds to medical aid organizations.

Orchestra

TheWorld Doctors Orchestra combines the pleasure of fine music with charity. Twice a year, some hundred physicians from all over the world exchange their white coats with evening attire and perform benefit concerts for people in need of healthcare. Although all of the physicians share a passion for music, this is not an end in itself. Indeed, the driving force behind the WDO is the conviction that neither national borders nor political or economic interests should limit access to adequate healthcare. With its series of benefit concerts, the WDO wants to raise global awareness that healthcare is a basic human right and a precondition for human development. The WDO is an independent non-profit organization driven by the spirit and dedication of its members and supported by private and institutional sponsors. Since 2013, music manager and singer Alexandra Gruber is the orchestra's Executive Director.

Conductor

Founder and conductor of the World Doctors Orchestra is Stefan Willich, president of the Berlin Academy of Music "Hanns Eisler" and former director of the Institute for Social Medicine, Epidemiology and Health Economics at the Charité University Medical Center in Berlin. Willich, who studied violin, chamber music, and conducting in Stuttgart, Berlin, Boston/Tanglewood and Paris, chooses his fellow musicians for the different concert sessions from the rich pool of members.

Members

The WDO currently includes a pool of 700 physicians (45% women and 55% men) from 44 countries. They all work in the medical profession and, at the same time, are enthusiastic and active musicians, many of them with professional musical background. Around 100 members participate in each concert, depending on their availability and the instrumentation requirements of the program. All major instruments are represented. About one third of the members are professional musicians, the others are excellent non-professional musicians with regular musical activity in addition to their medical work. About 15 % of the members play in professional orchestras in their free time, whereas others play regularly in non-professional orchestras and chamber music ensembles. There is great variety of medical specializations among the members with pediatricians, internists and general practitioners taking the lead.

Concerts and charity

Before each concert, the WDO comes together for intensive rehearsals lasting several days, usually followed by a pre-concert for patients and co-workers in hospitals or similar institutions and the benefit concert for the public. To date, twelve concert sessions have been held or are scheduled, further concerts are planned in Japan, Chile, Seattle/Vancouver, New York, London and Australia.
The inaugural concert took place on May 4, 2008 in the Philharmonie Berlin, Germany with Boston based violinist Peter Zazofsky as soloist. The proceeds from this concert were donated to the Hugo Tempelman Foundation and Hilfswerk Indien e.V. 2nd concert on February 8, 2009 in Severance Hall, Cleveland, USA with soloists Annie Fullard, violin, Saeunn Thorsteinsdottir, cello, and Sergei Barbayan, piano. The proceeds went to the Hugo Tempelman Foundation and the Free Medical Clinic of Greater Cleveland. 3rd concert on July 4, 2009 in the Philharmonie Berlin, Germany, with soloists Tanja Becker-Bender, violin, and Aida-Carmen Soanea, viola. The proceeds went to the Hugo Tempelman Foundation and the Berlin Center for the Treatment of Torture Victims. 4th concert on January 17, 2010 in the Aram Khachaturian Hall, Yerevan, Armenia. Soloist was Sergej Khachatryan. The proceeds were donated to Prkutyun, the Centre of Disabled Children and Young People in Yerevan . 5th concert on October 11, 2010 in the Konzerthaus am Gendarmenmarkt, Berlin, Germany as gala evening of the 2nd World Health Summit. The orchestra was joined by the Philharmonischer Chor Berlin with Artistic Director Jörg-Peter Weigle and soloists Anja Kampe, Soprano, Julia Rutigliano, Alto, Endrick Wottrich, Tenor, and Falk Struckmann, Bass. 6th concert on November 14, 2010 in the National Concert Hall, Taipeh, Taiwan. The concert was supporting the Formosa Cancer Foundation. 7th concert on September 11, 2011 at The Music Center at Strathmore, Bethesda, USA, with soloists Tamaki Kawakubo, Violin; Jeanine De Bique, soprano; Jennifer Johnson Cano, mezzo-soprano  and the National Philharmonic Chorale with  Artistic Director Stan Engebretson. The proceeds went to Whitman Walker Health in Washington.
8th concert on December 4, 2011 at Beijing National Grand Theater, China and on December 5, 2011 at Concert Hall of Shanghai Oriental Arts Theater, China with soloist Xiang Zou, piano.
The 9th concert session led the World Doctors Orchestra to South Africa. The concerts were on February 9, 2012 at Baxter Theatre Centre, Cape Town, on February 11, 2012 at the The Miracle, Elandsdoorn and February 12, 2012 at the Linder Auditorium, Johannesburg in co-operation with the Johannesburg International Mozart Festival with soloist Maria du Toit, clarinet, and the Ndlovu Youth Choir (director Ralf Schmitt). 10th concert on October 14, 2012 at the Philharmonie Berlin and on October 15, 2012, at the Philharmonie Essen with soloist Wenzel Fuchs, clarinet. The concert session was supporting the Hugo Tempelman Foundation, Medica Mondiale e.V. and An Ambulance Boat For Bolenge.
In June 2013, the orchestra will have its Austria premiere with a concert at the Stephansdom together with the Vienna Boys Choir. Further concerts in 2013 will be on September 17 in the Beethovenhalle, Bonn, Germany, on invitation of the Beethovenfest Bonn and on September 18 in the Philharmonie Berlin, Germany, with countertenor Jochen Kowalski and jazz singer Donna Brown. The proceedings of this 12th concert session will be donated to Dentists for Africa e. V. and to the Förderkreises für krebskranke Kinder und Jugendliche Bonn e. V.



Video


