[[Church of the Nativity]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Bethlehem, Churches in the West Bank, Basilica churches in Asia, Eastern Orthodox church buildings, Eastern Orthodoxy in the Palestinian territories, Roman Catholic churches in Asia, Armenian Apostolic churches, Christmas events and celebrations, Visitor attractions in the Palestinian territories, Ancient churches in the Holy Land, World Heritage Sites in Palestine, 4th-century church buildings

The Church of the Nativity is a basilica located in Bethlehem, Palestinian territories. The church was originally commissioned in 327 AD by Constantine and his mother Helena over the site that is still traditionally considered to be located over the cave that marks the birthplace of Jesus of Nazareth.  The Church of the Nativity site's original basilica was completed in 339 AD and destroyed by fire during the Samaritan Revolts in the sixth century AD. A new  basilica was built 565 AD by Justinian, the Byzantine Emperor, restoring the architectural tone of the original.  "Conflict and Neglect: Between Ruin and Preservation at the Church of the Nativity."  The site of the Church of the Nativity has had numerous additions since this second construction, including its prominent bell towers.  Due to its cultural and geographical history, the site holds a prominent religious significance to those of both the Christian and Muslim faiths.
The site of the Church of the Nativity is a World Heritage Site, and was the first to be listed under Palestine by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).

History

First century holy site (circa 4-6 AD - 327 AD)

The holy site, known as the Grotto, that the Church of the Nativity sits atop, is today associated with the cave in which the birth of Jesus of Nazareth occurred.  In 135 AD, Hadrian is said to have had the Christian site above the Grotto converted into a worship place for Adonis, the Greek god of beauty and desire. 276 n.  "The First Christmas:  The True and Unfamiliar Story."  2001  A father with the Church of the Nativity, Jerome, noted before his death in 420 AD that the holy cave was at one point consecrated by the heathen to the worship of Adonis, and that a pleasant sacred grove was planted there in order to wipe out the memory of Jesus.  Although some modern scholars dispute this argument and insist that the cult of Adonis-Tammuz originated the shrine and that it was the Christians who took it over, substituting the worship of Jesus,Marcello Craveri, The Life of Jesus, Grove Press (1967) pp. 35–36 the antiquity of the association of the site with the birth of Jesus is attested by the Christian apologist Justin Martyr (c. 100 – 165 AD), who noted in his Dialogue with Trypho that the Holy Family had taken refuge in a cave outside of town:
 Joseph took up his quarters in a certain cave near the village; and while they were there Mary brought forth the Christ and placed Him in a manger, and here the Magi who came from Arabia found Him.(chapter LXXVIII). 
Additionally, Origen of Alexandria (185 AD - circa. 254 AD) wrote:
 In Bethlehem the cave is pointed out where He was born, and the manger in the cave where He was wrapped in swaddling clothes. And the rumor is in those places, and among foreigners of the Faith, that indeed Jesus was born in this cave who is worshipped and reverenced by the Christians. (Contra Celsum, book I, chapter LI). 

Fourth century basilica, (327 - est. 529/556 AD)

The first basilica on this site was begun by Saint Helena, the mother of Emperor Constantine I. Under the supervision of Bishop Makarios of Jerusalem, the construction started in 327 AD and was completed in 333..  "A World History of Architecture." 2003. The structure was burnt down and destroyed in a revolt between the Jews and the Samaritans in 529 or 556 AD.. "A Comparison to Samaritan Studies." P.55 1993.  "Church of the Nativity:  History and Structure."

Sixth century basilica, (565 AD)

The current basilica was rebuilt in its present form in 565 AD by Emperor Justinian I. When the Persians under Chosroes II invaded in 614, they did not destroy the structure. According to legend, their commander Shahrbaraz was moved by the depiction inside the church of the Three Magi wearing Persian clothing, and commanded that the building be spared. The Crusaders made further repairs and additions to the building during the Latin Kingdom of Jerusalem, with permission and help given by the Byzantine Emperor, and the first King of Jerusalem was crowned in the church. Over the years, the compound has been expanded, and today it covers approximately 12,000 square meters.  The church was one of the direct causes for French involvement in the Crimean War against Russia.

Eleventh and twelfth century additions and restoration, (circa 1050 AD-1169 AD)

Until 1131 AD, the Church of the Nativity was used as the primary coronation church for crusader kings.  "A History of the Crusades:  Volume IV," 1977.  During this time, extensive decoration by the crusaders and various restorations of the basilica and grounds took place.  This decoration and restoration process took place until 1169 AD. "Church of the Nativity: History and Structure."

Fourteenth century roof restoration, (1448-1480 AD)

The roof of the Church of the Nativity lay in poor condition after the destruction that occurred in April 1244 by the Turks.Pringle, Denys.  "The Churches of the Crusader Kingdom of Jerusalem."  Vol. I.  1993.  In August 1448 AD, the Kingdom of Burgundy committed resources to the project, but it was not until 1480 that they were able to get the project underway in Bethlehem. Due to this worsening condition of the wooden Church roof, in 1480 an extensive roof reconstruction and renovation project took place on the Church of the Nativity.  Multiple regions contributed supplies to have the Church roof repaired, with England supplying the lead, the Second Kingdom of Burgundy supplying the wood, and the Republic of Venice providing the labor.

Nineteenth century damage, conflict, and administration (1834 AD-1869 AD)

Between 1834 and 1837, earthquakes and aftershocks in Bethlehem inflicted significant damage to the Church of the Nativity.  "A Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature:  Volume I." 1851.  The initial earthquake, the 1834 Palestinian Earthquake, damaged the church's bell tower, the furnishings of the cave on which the church is built, and other parts of its structure."The Holy Land." Oxford University Press. 2008. Minor damages were further inflicted with a series of strong aftershocks in 1836 and with the Galilee earthquake of 1837 shortly thereafter.  "A Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature:  Volumne I." 1851.  "Jerusalem: the topography, economics and history from the earliest times to A.D. 70, Volume 1."  1907
By 1846, the Church of the Nativity and its surrounding site lay in disrepair. The Church's state had left the site vulnerable to looting.  Much of the marble floors of the interior of the Church were looted in the early half of the 19th century, and many were transferred to use in other buildings around the region, including to the Temple Mount in Jerusalem.  In that same year, the religiously significant silver star was stolen that had been displayed above the Grotto of the Nativity.  "Jerusalem: problems and prospects."  1980.  In 1851, the Church of the Nativity was under the control of the Ottoman Empire. But near Christmas of 1852, Napoleon III sent his ambassador to the Ottoman Empire and forced the Ottomans to recognise France as the "sovereign authority" in the Holy Land, which the Latins had lost in the eighteenth century. Pg 19 The Sultan of Turkey replaced the silver star over the Grotto with a Latin inscription, but the Russian Empire disputed the change in "authority," citing two treaties—one from 1757 and the other from 1774 (the Treaty of Küçük Kaynarca)-- and deployed armies to the Danube area.  As a result, the Ottomans issued firmans essentially reversing their earlier decision, renouncing the French treaty, and restoring the Greeks to the sovereign authority over the Churches of the Holy Land for the time being.  Since individual churches did not have a say in firmans, tensions arose at the local level.  These, along with the theft of the silver star, helped to further fuel the debate between the Russian Empire and the Ottoman Empire over the occupation of holy sites around the region.  This theft is often cited by scholars as one of the catalysts of the Crimean War.

Twentieth century repair and restoration, (1930s AD)

Twenty-first century siege of the church, (2002 AD)

In April 2002, during the second Intifada, some 50 armed Palestinians wanted by the Israel Defense Forces (IDF) locked themselves in the church, along with some 200 monks and other Palestinians who arrived at the site for different reasons, and were held as hostages by the gunmen. Because of the sensitivity of the building the IDF did not break into the building, but prevented the entry of food. The siege lasted 39 days and some of the gunmen were shot by IDF snipers. After lengthy negotiations it was agreed that the gunmen would be evacuated to Gaza, Spain and Italy.

Current administration

The church is administered jointly by Roman Catholic, Greek Orthodox and Armenian Apostolic authorities. All three traditions maintain monastic communities on the site. As a result, however, there have been repeated brawls among monk trainees over quiet respect for others' prayers, hymns and even the division of floorspace for cleaning duties.

Site architecture and layout

The structure of the site of the Church of the Nativity is a combination of two churches and a crypt beneath—the Grotto of the Nativity where tradition states that Jesus of Nazareth was born.

Basilica architecture

=Original basilica design=

=Rebuilt basilica design=

Site layout and architectural expansion

Preservation and related concerns

The basilica was placed on the 2008 Watch List of the 100 Most Endangered Sites by the World Monuments Fund:
 The present state of the church is worrying.  Many roof timbers are rotting, and have not been replaced since the 19th century.  The rainwater that seeps into the building not only accelerates the rotting of the wood and damages the structural integrity of the building, but also damages the 12th-century wall mosaics and paintings.  The influx of water also means that there is an ever-present chance of an electrical fire.  If another earthquake were to occur on the scale of the one of 1834, the result would most likely be catastrophic.  ... It is hoped that the listing will encourage its preservation, including getting the three custodians of the church – the Greek Orthodox Church, the Armenian Orthodox Church, and the Franciscan order – to work together, which has not happened for hundreds of years.  The Israeli government and the Palestinian Authority would also have to work together to protect it. 
In 2010, the Palestinian Authority announced that a multi-million dollar restoration programme was imminent.

World Heritage Site

In 2012, the church complex became the first Palestinian site to be listed as a World Heritage Site by the World Heritage Committee at its 36th session on 29 June. It has also been placed on the List of World Heritage in Danger as it is suffering from damages due to water leaks.

Burials

Gallery

File:Bethlehem-27-Basilica of the Nativity.jpg|Icon of Mary and Jesus inside the church
File:Bethlehem-08-Church of the Nativity.jpg|Constantine's 4th century mosaic floor rediscovered in 1934
File:Bethlehem-04-Church_of_the_Nativity.jpg|The Door of Humility, main entrance into the Church
File:Nativity Grotto Star.
File:Birthplace of Jesus.
File:P1030271.
File:Grotto of the Nativity Orthodox Altar.






