[[Campylobacter]]

CATEGORIES: Proteobacteria

Campylobacter (meaning "twisted bacteria") is a genus of microaerophilic Gram-negative bacteria.  Motile, with either unipolar or bipolar flagella, the organisms have a characteristic spiral/corkscrew appearance (see photo) and are oxidase-positive.

History

The symptoms of Campylobacter infections were described in 1886 in infants by Theodor Escherich.

Genome and proteome

The genomes of several Campylobacter species have been sequenced.
Campylobacter species contain two flagellin genes in tandem for motility, flaA and flaB.  These genes undergo intergenic recombination, further contributing to their virulence.
Sequence features. Comparative genomic analysis has led to the identification of 15 proteins which are uniquely found in members of the genus Campylobacter and serve as molecular markers for the genus. Eighteen other proteins were also found which were present in all species except Campylobacter fetus, which is the deepest branching Campylobacter species. A conserved insertion has also been identified which is present in all Campylobacter species except C. fetus. Additionally, 28 proteins have been identified present only in Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli, indicating a close relationship between these two species. Five other proteins have also been identified which are only found in C. jejuni and serve as molecular markers for the species.

Bacteriophage

The confusing taxonomy of Campylobacter over the past decades make it difficult to identify the earliest reports of Campylobacter bacteriophages. Bacteriophages specific to the species we now know as C. coli and C. fetus (previously Vibrio coli and Vibrio fetus), were isolated from cattle and pigs during the 1960s.D. and Border, M. (1968) Isolation of temper- ate bacteriophages from Vibrio fetus. Am J Vet Res 29, 2229–2235Fletcher, R.D. (1968) Activity and morphology of Vibrio coli phage. Am J Vet Res 26, 361–364Fletcher, R. and Bertschinger, H. (1964) A method of isolation of Vibrio coli from swine faecal material by selective filtration. Zentralbl Veterinaeromed B 11, 169–174.

Pathogenesis

Campylobacteriosis is an infection by Campylobacter.
The sites of tissue injury include the jejunum, the ileum, and the colon.  Most strains of C jejuni produce a toxin (cytolethal distending toxin) that hinders the cells from dividing and activating the immune system.  This helps the bacteria to evade the immune system and survive for a limited time in the cells.  A cholera-like enterotoxin was once thought to be also made, but this appears not to be the case.  The organism produces diffuse, bloody, edematous, and exudative enteritis.  Although rarely has the infection been considered a cause of hemolytic uremic syndrome and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, no unequivocal case reports exist. In some cases, a Campylobacter infection can be the underlying cause of Guillain–Barré syndrome. Gastrointestinal perforation is a rare complication of ileal infection.

Treatment

Diagnosis of the illness is made by testing a specimen of faeces (bowel motion).

Known risks

In January 2013, the UK's Food Standards Agency warned that two-thirds of all raw chicken bought from UK shops was contaminated with campylobacter, affecting an estimated half a million people annually and killing approximately 100.telegraph.co.html








