[[Bacon]]

CATEGORIES: Bacon, American cuisine, British cuisine, Canadian cuisine, Cuisine of Northern Ireland, Garde manger, Charcuterie, Umami enhancers, Smoked meat

Bacon is a meat product prepared from a pig and usually cured. Fresh bacon may then be further dried for weeks or months in cold air, or it may be boiled or smoked. Fresh and dried bacon is typically cooked before eating. Boiled bacon is ready to eat, as is some smoked bacon, but may be cooked further before eating.
Bacon is prepared from several different cuts of meat. It is usually made from side and back cuts of pork, except in the United States, where it is almost always prepared from pork belly (typically referred to as "streaky", "fatty", or "American style" outside of the US and Canada). The side cut has more meat and less fat than the belly. Bacon may be prepared from either of two distinct back cuts: fatback, which is almost pure fat, and pork loin, which is very lean. Bacon-cured pork loin is known as back bacon.
Bacon may be eaten smoked, boiled, fried, baked, or grilled, or used as a minor ingredient to flavour dishes. Bacon is also used for barding and larding roasts, especially game, including venison and pheasant. The word is derived from the Old High German bacho, meaning "buttock", "ham" or "side of bacon", and cognate with the Old French bacon.
In continental Europe, part of the pig is not usually smoked like bacon is in the United States; it is used primarily in cubes (lardons) as a cooking ingredient, valued both as a source of fat and for its flavour. In Italy, this is called pancetta and is usually cooked in small cubes or served uncooked and thinly sliced as part of an antipasto.
Meat from other animals, such as beef, lamb, chicken, goat, or turkey, may also be cut, cured, or otherwise prepared to resemble bacon, and may even be referred to as "bacon".
Bacon is distinguished from salt pork and ham by differences in the brine (or dry packing). Bacon brine has added curing ingredients, most notably sodium nitrite, and occasionally potassium nitrate (saltpeter); sodium ascorbate or erythorbate are added to accelerate curing and stabilise colour. Flavourings such as brown sugar or maple are used for some products. Sodium polyphosphates, such as sodium triphosphate, may be added to make the produce easier to slice and to reduce spattering when the bacon is pan-fried. Today, a brine for ham, but not bacon, includes a large amount of sugar. Historically, "ham" and "bacon" referred to different cuts of meat that were brined or packed identically, often together in the same barrel.

Curing and smoking bacon

Bacon is cured through either a process of injecting with or soaking in brine or using plain salt (dry curing).
In America, bacon is usually cured and smoked, and different flavours can be achieved by using various types of wood, or rarely corn cobs; peat is sometimes used in the United Kingdom. This process can take up to eighteen hours, depending on the intensity of the flavour desired. The Virginia Housewife (1824), thought to be one of the earliest American cookbooks, gives no indication that bacon is ever not smoked, though it gives no advice on flavouring, noting only that care should be taken lest the fire get too hot. In early American history, the preparation and smoking of bacon (like the making of sausage) seems to have been a gender-neutral process, one of the few food-preparation processes not divided by gender. McMahon, "Gender, Dietary Decisions, and Food Technology," in 
 Esp. pp. 186–89.</ref>
In the United Kingdom and Ireland, smoked and unsmoked varieties are equally common, unsmoked being referred to as green bacon. The term streaky bacon refers to belly bacon, due to the prominence of the bands of fat.

Cuts of bacon

Rashers differ depending on the primal cut from which they are prepared:
|publisher=Danish Bacon Company
|url=
|archiveurl=
|title=Information and Statistics 2005
|date=30 March 2005
|accessdate=6 May 2009
|archivedate=30 January 2006
|postscript=
}}[/ref]
Bacon joints include the following:

Process

First, pork bellies are sorted by size and fat percentage. This softens the bellies, which makes it easier to remove the rinds. The bellies are then cut, either manually or mechanically, to remove the skin from the meat. The skins may be used to be processed into pork rinds. The bacon is then treated by a brine solution. The brine solution may contain the flavorings, or the flavorings may be added later. After being brined, the bacon is smoked. Depending on where the bacon is made, the smoking process is different. The bacon is then cooked in an oven and soon after chilled for a few days. The cooling makes the meat firm which makes it easier to slice. After being cooled, the bacon is sliced into strips. The bacon is then cooked. The fat that cooks off the bacon is sometimes collected to be used for things like gravy and pet foods. The bacon strips are then ready for consumption. If the bacon is made for commercial use then the strips are packaged.

Concerns

A major concern with pig farms is the large amount of manure that is produced each day. One pig produces about 6 pounds (2.7 kg) of manure every day. The manure is drained by large cesspools called lagoons.  The toxic fumes released by the manure can produce health problems.

Industry

Almost half of the world's pigs are raised in China; almost all of the pigs raised are for consumption. The Chinese government subsidizes pig farmers. China's food industry is known for its problems with sanitation; as such, many pig farms have been shut down.
Pigs marketed in the United States eat six to eight pounds of food per day. Most farm-raised pigs eat mainly corn and soybean products along with a mineral pack. The mineral pack helps the pig's bones so that the pig can support its own muscle weight.

Smithfield Foods

Smithfield Foods is the world's largest producer of pork. Smithfield is run in Smithfield, Virginia but has farms and processing plants in 26 states and several countries, including China, Mexico, and the United Kingdom.

Around the world

Traditionally, the skin is left on the cut and is known as 'bacon rind',

United States

A side of unsliced bacon was once known as a 'flitch'; it is now known as a 'slab'. An individual rasher of bacon is known as a 'slice' or 'strip'. The term 'rasher of bacon' is occasionally encountered (e.g., on restaurant menus) to mean a serving of bacon (typically several slices).
American bacons include varieties smoked with hickory or corncobs and flavourings such as red pepper, maple, brown sugar, honey, molasses, and occasionally cinnamon. They vary in sweetness and saltiness and come from the Ozarks, New England, and the upper South (mainly Kentucky, North Carolina, Tennessee and Virginia).R. W. Apple Jr. The Smoky Trail To a Great Bacon 16 February 2000 New York Times
  | last = Weinzweig
  | first = Ari
  | authorlink =
  | title = Canadian Peameal Bacon
  | work =
  | publisher = Zingerman's Roadhouse
  | date = 24 July 2008
  | url = 
  | accessdate = 15 March 2009
| archiveurl=  archivedate= 25 February 2009 | deadurl= no}}[/ref] usually the lean ovoid portion (longissimus muscle or loineye). It also can be made from the sirloin portion of the loin (gluteal muscles), but must be labelled appropriately. Similar products are used as less expensive substitutes.

Canada

An individual piece of bacon is a 'slice' or 'strip'. In Canada:

United Kingdom and Ireland

Grilled or fried bacon are included in the traditional full breakfast.
An individual slice of bacon is a 'rasher', or occasionally a 'collop'. Bacon is made in a wide variety of cuts and flavours:

Australia and New Zealand

Middle bacon is the most common variety and is sold in 'rashers'. Middle bacon includes the streaky, fatty section along with the loin at one end. In response to increasing consumer diet-consciousness, some supermarkets also offer the loin section only. This is sold as 'short cut bacon' and is usually priced slightly higher than middle bacon.  Both varieties are usually available with the rind removed.

Japan

In Japan, bacon (ベーコン) Uncured belly rashers, known as bara (バラ), are very popular in Japan and are used in a variety of dishes (e.g. yakitori and yakiniku).

Addictive taste

Arun Gupta of The Indypendent has pointed out how bacon possesses six ingredient types of umami, which elicits an addictive neurochemical response."Bacon as a Weapon of Mass Destruction" – video report with Arun Gupta by Democracy Now!, 3 August 2009 According to Gupta, "the chain lards on bacon", which give foods a "high flavor profile" creating a "one-of-a-kind product that has no taste substitute."Gonzo Gastronomy: How the Food Industry Has Made Bacon a Weapon of Mass Destruction by Arun Gupta, AlterNet, 9 October 2010 This led Dr. David Kessler, author of The End of Overeating, to note how the standard joke in the restaurant chain industry goes, "When in doubt, throw cheese and bacon on it."

Bacon mania

The United States and Canada have seen an increase in the popularity of bacon and bacon related recipes, dubbed "bacon mania".  The sale of bacon in the U.S. has increased significantly since 2011. Sales climbed 9.5% in 2013, making it an all-time high of nearly $4 billion in U.S. In a survey conducted by Smithfield, 65% of Americans would support bacon as their "national food."  Dishes such as bacon explosion, chicken fried bacon, and chocolate-covered bacon have been popularised over the internet, as has using candied bacon. Recipes spread quickly through both countries' national media, culinary blogs, and YouTube.[ref]
</ref><ref>
