[[Burmese general election, 1960]]

CATEGORIES: Elections in Burma, 1960 in Burma, 1960 elections in Asia

Burma held its third general election on 6 February 1960 to decide which faction of the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League (AFPFL) should take over from General Ne Win's interim administration, established in October 1958. The military-led administration was credited for bringing stability and improving infrastructure in the country, though it suppressed some civil liberties.
The election was seen as not so much a contest between former Premier U Nu and associates against former colleagues U Kyaw Nyein and U Ba Swe, but a referendum on the policies of the interim military government between 1958 and 1960. The "Clean AFPFL" faction led by former Premier U Nu won the election with a majority of seats. The communist-orientated National United Front (NUF) won no seats, compared to the 1956 election.
The election set a precedent to other Middle Eastern and South Asian leaders, where the military voluntary handed over to a civilian government and held free elections. However, two years after his election victory, Nu was overthrown by a coup d'état led by General Ne Win on 2 March 1962.

Political parties

The "Clean AFPFL", led by U Nu, and "Stable AFPFL", led by U Kyaw Nyein and U Ba Swe, formed after a split in the main AFPFL party in April 1958.
Despite the formation of the two parties, there were no major ideological differences between them and their policies were similar, especially with regards to non-alignment, although the "Stable" faction favoured industrialisation and the "Clean" faction spoke more of agricultural development. The "Stable" faction had given the impression it was favoured by the army, but, after realising the army was not as favoured as first thought, distanced itself. It had also argued it represented stability.
The Clean AFPFL chose yellow to campaign, as it was the colour worn by monks, while the Stable AFPFL chose red and the National Union Front chose blue.

Polling day

An estimated 10,000,000 Burmese were eligible to vote.
Media coverage of the event was restricted to print media only and vigorously covered, but was largely ignored by the state-run Burma Broadcasting Service which had not aired opposition coverage since before the AFPFL split.

Results

House of Representatives

Chamber of Nationalities

Turnout was 66%, then the highest in a Burmese election.




