[[Soldiersocks]]

CATEGORIES: Organizations based in Stamford, Connecticut, Non-profit organizations based in Connecticut, United States military support organizations, Organizations based in the United States, Organizations established in 2009

SoldierSocks is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization that provides basic essentials to the men and the women of the United States Armed Forces fighting abroad to keep America and the world safe.stamfordplus.shtml.  Founded in 2009 by Financial Services Executive Chris Meek, the non-profit organization has grown since its inception to also include its partner organization, SoldierSanta.  SoldierSanta.

History

SoldierSocks got its start in Stamford, Connecticut in 2009.connecticutplus.shtml.  The organization was founded by Financial Services Executive Chris Meek in response to a July 2009 letter from Sergeant Major Luke Converse who requested help in obtaining socks and baby wipes for his Marines serving in Afghanistan.soldiersocks.php?option=com_content&view=article&id=105&Itemid=96.  Upon receipt of this letter, Chris soon formed a 501(c)(3) to help raise funds and gather basic supplies for the troops.
In its first six weeks, Soldier Socks shipped over 1,100 pounds of supplies to Sgt Major Converse and his US Marine Corps unit fighting in Afghanistan.  SoldierSocks has shipped over 20 tons of personal hygiene supplies to US Armed Forces serving in Iraq and Afghanistan, and to date, the organization has supplied over 55,000 pounds of supplies to American troops fighting overseas.thedailystamford.

Partnerships

Since its inception, SoldierSocks has partnered with a host of local organizations in its drive to supply troops with basic necessities.  In addition to local businesses and organizations, elected officials and community leaders have also assisted in this initiative.stamfordplus.shtml.    
Connecticut's Hope Street Pharmacy was the first local organization who offered to partner with SoldierSocks. After Hope Street Pharmacy, Soldier Socks attracted numerous other partners from the local community including The New Balance store in New Canaan, CT, Reveal Hair Salon in Stamford, CT, the Stamford Public Elementary Schools, the Stamford Fire and Police Departments, and Vineyard Vines to name a few. SoldierSocks works with the Marine Aviation Logistics Squadron 49 and Air National Guard out of Stewart Air National Guard Base in Newburgh, New York.  
In November 2009, The Elvis Duran and the Morning Show teamed up with SoldierSocks and pushed the organization onto the national scene via their network of syndicated radio stations in over 30 markets across the country. WWE and Elvis Duran and the Morning Show helped to collect more than 12,000 pair of socks and 2,500 pounds of supplies.allaccess.com/net-news/archive/story/68078/elvis-duran-delivers-for-soldier-socks
The Connecticut General Assembly partnered with SoldierSocks in December 2009 for a drive at the Connecticut State Capitol building in Hartford, Connecticut.housedems.ct.asp.  They were able to collect more than 500 pounds of tube socks.wtnh.  Former Lieutenant Governor Michael Fedele along with US Senators Joe Lieberman and Scott Brown Scott Brown have lauded the program along with several other elected and business leaders.
SoldierSocks expanded its reach in the fall of 2010 to include a new initiative with a similar objective.  The group created SoldierSanta in an effort to send gifts to the troops for them to open during the holiday season.stamfordplus.shtml.  In June 2012, SoldierSocks launched a scholarship initiative partnering with the Maxwell School at Syracuse University and the Walsh School of Foreign Service at Georgetown University.  In July, SoldierSocks expanded its efforts launching the new Soldier Socks Veterans Grant Foundation to help those returning from the frontlines of battle.greenwich-post. 
SoldierSocks has expanded its original Northeast focus and has held drives countrywide from Boston, Massachusetts to Alamo, Texas to Hollywood, California.  Fundraising efforts have been made by Elementary and High Schools, Colleges and Universities, Cub Scout groups, Boy Scouts of America, Girl Scouts of the USA, nursing homes, Police and Fire Departments and Fortune 500 companies.ctpost.php.
In July 2013, SoliderSocks again set its focus on returning veterans and further expanded the scope of the not-for-profit's efforts.thehour.html Partnering with Ekso Bionics, In October 2013, Soldier Socks launched a fundraising campaign to raise funds to provide these mechanized suits to veterans.greenwichtime.php  In December 2013, SoldierSocks partnered with a wounded veteran and delivered its first suit. Their initial goal is to deliver 10 of these suits to wounded and paralyzed veterans.    
In the spring of 2014, the Milwaukee VA Medical Center (Wisconsin) hosted Ekso Bionics to demo the mechanized suit.foxnews.  SoliderSocks plans to deliver its next suit to the VA Boston Healthcare System.  On April 2, 2014, SoldierSocks Chairman Chris Meek was presented with the Orange Circle Award for the groups' philanthropic work.      






