[[Brian Kibler]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 births, Living people, American Magic: The Gathering players, People from San Diego, California, Phillips Academy alumni

Brian M. Kibler (born 7 September 1980) is an American game designer currently working with Gamer Entertainment, a gaming consultancy. In 2010 Kibler designed Ascension: Chronicle of the Godslayer with Justin Gary, Rob Dougherty, and John Fiorillo. He is currently the senior game designer of Solforge, a digital CCG.
Kibler is also a professional card player and has had great success at Magic: The Gathering with five Pro Tour Top 8s, winning Pro Tour Austin in 2009

Magic: The Gathering

Kibler began his Magic: The Gathering career at the age of fifteen, placing 30th in the Junior Division of the first-ever Pro Tour, Pro Tour New York 1996.  Kibler would not qualify for the senior Pro Tour until Pro Tour Chicago 1998, which he qualified for by winning Grand Prix Toronto 1997.  Kibler notes that all his opponents in the Top 8 of Grand Prix Toronto went on to work at Wizards of the Coast, including Mike Turian, Matt Place and Erik Lauer.  Kibler would also attend Pro Tour Los Angeles in the 1997-1998 season, placing within the Top 64, however he would not return to the Pro Tour until the 1999-2000 season.
Kibler made his first Pro Tour Top 8 at Pro Tour Chicago 2000.  This was also the tournament where Kibler would earn the nickname of The Dragonmaster, after beating Jon Finkel in the Swiss rounds and Zvi Mowshowitz in the quarterfinals with a combination of 
After taking several years away from Magic (while working at Wizards direct competitor Upper Deck) he returned in 2009.  Kibler claims that a major motivating factor for his return was his desire to enter the Pro Tour Hall of Fame, which was created the year following his retirement.  Kibler would make consecutive Pro Tour Top 8s upon his return, making Top 8 at Pro Tour Honolulu before going on to win his first Pro Tour at Pro Tour Austin, defeating Tsuyoshi Ikeda in the tournament finals.
In 2012, Brian made his fifth career Pro Tour Top 8 at Pro Tour Dark Ascension in Honolulu.  The Top 8 would also feature two other Hall of Fame members in Jon Finkel and Jelger Wiegersma. Brian Kibler defeated Finkel in the semi-finals in a match considered by commentators to be among the best matches in Magic history.  This led to Kibler playing against teammate Paulo Vitor Damo da Rosa in the finals. Brian then defeated Paulo 3–2 to win his second Pro Tour title. By winning the Pro Tour, Kibler secured his place in the first Magic Players Championship.  Kibler also became the United States National Champion by being the American player with the highest number of Pro Points after Pro Tour Avacyn Restored, leading the United States National Team to 12th place at the inaugural World Magic Cup. 

Achievements

Other accomplishments

Personal Life

Kibler grew up in Hampstead, New Hampshire and attended boarding school at Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts.  Kibler would later attend Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia, majoring in Philosophy and Religion.




