[[West Somerset Coast Path]]

CATEGORIES: Long-distance footpaths in England, Footpaths in Somerset, Coastal paths in England

The West Somerset Coast Path is a long-distance footpath that links the northern end of the South West Coast Path to the River Parrett Trail in Somerset, England, UK.
It runs from the hamlet of Steart on the Steart Peninsula, and passes through the villages of Kilve, West Quantoxhead, Williton, Watchet, Blue Anchor, and Dunster beach to Minehead.
The beach at Kilve was described by William Wordsworth, the Romantic poet, as "Kilve's delightful shore". It is just possible to make out the remains of a stone jetty and the ruins of a lime kiln nearby. Here the limestone was burnt to provide farmers with the lime to spread on their fields. The limestone carrier Laurina was wrecked at Kilve in 1876.
From Williton to Minehead the route is close to the track of the West Somerset Railway which opened in 1862 and was extended from Watchet to  by the Minehead Railway in 1874. Although just a single track, improvements were needed in the first half of the twentieth century to accommodate the significant number of tourists that wished to travel to the Somerset coast. Despite this traffic it was closed in 1971 but was then reopened in 1976 as a heritage railway.
Watchet is a harbour town, which, according to the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle, was plundered by Danes led by Ohtor and Rhoald Harbour trade was aided by the coming of the railway. In the mid-1860s two independent railways terminated at Watchet. The West Somerset Mineral Railway ran down from the iron mines on the Brendon Hills, and the West Somerset Railway came up from the Bristol & Exeter Railway at Norton Fitzwarren. Both lines made extensive use of the harbour at Watchet from where iron ore was shipped across the Bristol Channel for smelting at Ebbw Vale in South Wales. 
The foreshore at Watchet is rocky, with a high 
The Blue Anchor to Lilstock Coast SSSI is a 742.8 hectare geological Site of Special Scientific Interest. It provides an outstanding series of sections through the Early Jurassic Lower Lias, spanning the Hettangian and Pliensbachian Stages and named the "Lilstock Formation". This sequence and the good Rhaetian succession beneath are repeatedly affected by faulting,
Dunster Beach, which includes the mouth of the River Avill, is located half a mile from the village, and used to have a significant harbour, known as Dunster Haven, which was used for the export of wool from Saxon times;, can be let out for holidays; some owners live in them all the year round.The history of Dunster Beach" by Bernard Concannon,Monkspath Books, 1995 (ISBN 0-9526884-0-9)

Route and points of interest






