[[Russian Roulette (song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 singles, Rihanna songs, Songs written by Ne-Yo, Music videos directed by Anthony Mandler, Number-one singles in Norway, Number-one singles in Switzerland, UK R&B Singles Chart number-one singles, Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs number-one singles, Singles certified gold by the Australian Recording Industry Association, Singles certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry of Denmark, Singles certified platinum by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry, Singles certified gold by Recorded Music NZ, Singles certified gold by the Productores de Música de España, Singles certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry of Switzerland, Singles certified silver by the British Phonographic Industry, Songs about suicide, Songs with feminist themes, Pop ballads, Rhythm and blues ballads, Songs written by Chuck Harmony

{{Infobox single
| Name           = Russian Roulette
| Cover          = Russian Roulette_-_Rihanna.png
| Border         = yes
| Artist         = Rihanna
| Album          = Rated R
| Released       = 
| Format         = {{Flat list|
| Recorded       = 2009; Roc the Mic Studios; (New York City)
| Genre          = Pop
| Length         = 
| Label          = {{Flat list|
| Writer         = {{Flat list|
| Producer       = 

"Russian Roulette" is a song recorded by Barbadian singer Rihanna, for her fourth studio album Rated R (2009). It premiered on radio stations worldwide on October 20, 2009 and was released as the album's lead single on October 27, 2009 through Def Jam Recordings. Written and produced by Ne-Yo and Chuck Harmony, "Russian Roulette" is a pop beat-driven ballad that contains dark, haunting, morbid, and tense atmospheric elements. Lyrically, the single is about an abusive romantic relationship that ended abruptly. Critics noted the lyrical theme as a response to the domestic violence case between Rihanna and her boyfriend, fellow R&B singer Chris Brown.
"Russian Roulette" received generally positive reviews from music critics, with many praising Rihanna's vocal performance and the song's lyrics. The song received commercial success, reaching number one in Israel, Norway, Slovakia and Switzerland. It also charted within the top ten of eighteen other countries worldwide, including Australia, Canada, France, Germany, Italy, New Zealand, Spain and Sweden. The song reached number two on the UK Singles Chart and number nine on the US Billboard Hot 100. It also topped the UK R&B  and US Hot Dance Club Songs charts.
The song's accompanying music video, directed by Rihanna's regular collaborator Anthony Mandler, includes dark imagery depicting Rihanna playing a game of the titular Russian roulette with the character of actor Jesse Williams, with a revolver. Other scenes include Rihanna in the woods where she is run over by a car, in a gas chamber, in a padded cell, and shots being fired at her underwater. "Russian Roulette" has been performed on both sides of the Atlantic, including on the sixth series of The X Factor in the United Kingdom, and on the Late Show with David Letterman in the United States. The song was included on Rihanna's Last Girl on Earth Tour (2010–11).

Writing and production

Following a domestic violence case between Rihanna and her boyfriend American entertainer Chris Brown, media speculated as to whether any song featured on her fourth upcoming album would be about him.
In 2009, Harmony and Ne-Yo convened together for to conceptualize a song for Rihanna, that would take her music to a further level. According to Harmony, they didn't wanted to re-work the previous efforts by Rihanna—something that according to him the fans expected The producer told MTV News that they wanted to give Rihanna a film, not just a song with a length of three minutes, "I felt musically like everybody was gonna give like that 'Disturbia,' 'SOS,' kind of pop, uptempo stuff, and I really wanted the song that me and Ne-Yo did to stand out."
In an interview with the same publication, Ne-Yo explained how he wrote the lyrics, "I'm listening to the track, and all I can see is Rihanna and some random person sitting across from each other at the table with a gun sitting in the middle of the table and playing Russian roulette." Ne-Yo further stated that Rihanna is not afraid to trying new things and from the first moment she heard the song he knew she would like it, "I trust Rihanna to be Rihanna, and she trusts me to be me. That's the coolest thing about our relationship. I must say this song is a step in somewhat of a different direction for both of us." When Harmony heard the song, both him and Ne-Yo were aware that they should change some elements and that it has to be darker and edgier.
"Russian Roulette" was recorded during the summer 2009, at the Roc the Mic Studios in New York City by Marcos Tovar. Mykael Alexander was the assistant recorder while Makeba Riddick made the vocal production of the song. Mike "TrakGuru" Johnson recorded the music and Kevin Hanson served as an assistant. "Russian Roulette" was mixed by Kevin "KD" Davis together with Jared Newcomb who served as an assistant. Jessie Bonds played the guitars in the song. Harmony explained that after the song was done, Rihanna called Ne-Yo and told him that "Russian Roulette" is one of her favorites, "I think overall she was comfortable with the vibe of the song and comfortable with the lyrical content of the song. She loves the song."

Release and artwork

On October 14, 2009, a black metal "R" along with a message saying "The Wait is Ova" was placed on Rihanna's official website.
Def Jam Recordings serviced the song to contemporary, rhythmic and urban radio in the United States on October 27, 2009 as the lead single from Rated R. In an interview with NME, Rihanna explained that she and her management didn't have doubts if "Russian Roulette" should be the lead single as it was very personal and emotional track to her. On November 3, the single was released for a digital download via iTunes Store worldwide. The album version of "Russian Roulette" together with its instrumental were released as a CD single in Germany on November 13. On December 11, seven remixes of the song were digitally released in some countries.

Composition and lyrical interpretation

"Russian Roulette" is a mid-tempo pop, beat-driven ballad Chicago Tribune's Greg Kot called the singer's voice a "delicate instrument" that is often the least element in her song's production, however, he noted that on the song "she's squarely in the center of the action".
Lyrically, "Russian Roulette" is about an abusive romantic relationship that ends abruptly, with some critics comparing them to the relationship that Rihanna had with Brown. Sasha Resende of The Michigan Daily wrote "the ballad, which employs reckless gunplay as a not-so-subtle metaphor for a troubled relationship, achieves its seemingly morbid intent."
"Russian Roulette" begins with a "searing" guitar solo that later transitions into a "pulsing" beat which stays constant until the end of the song. The single opens with the lyrics, "Take a breath/ Take it deep/ Calm yourself/ He says to me/ If you play/ You play for keeps/ Take the gun/ And count to three." The metaphor about the game of Russian roulette is also present in the chorus in which Rihanna sings, "And you can see my heart beating/ You can see it through my chest/ I said I'm terrified, but I'm not leaving/ I know that I must pass this test/ So just pull the trigger." In the upcoming verse, the character that the singer portrays in the song it's scared that the man talking to her will always have a power over, "Say a prayer to yourself/ He says close your eyes/ Sometimes it helps/ And then I get a scary thought/ That he's here means he's never lost." "Russian Roulette" ends with a sound of a gun shot, which according to Michaelangelo Matos of The A.V. Club extends the drama accompanied by "harrowing scenarios and tremulous vocals".

Critical response

Nick Levine of Digital Spy praised "Russian Roulette" and called it a "masterful return effort". He additionally wrote that the single is "brave, brilliantly-realized and bizarre enough to distance" the singer from the other pop or R&B performers like Lady Gaga. According to Levine, the song is her best vocal performances and shows Rihanna growing in front of the audience's eyes. Will Hines of Consequence of Sound called the song a worth centerpiece and further wrote that it stands out from other tracks on the album which proves that Rated R "was a cathartic process for the singer". Todd Martens of Los Angeles Times wrote that although is hard to imagine the song to be played in a car or a club, it's "attention-grabbing stuff, standing in stark—emphasis on stark—contrast to much of the current pop landscape." Alibhe Malone of NME wrote that Rated R is an album about power and control in which "Russian Roulette" sets the agenda.
The Boston Globe's Sarah Rodman wrote that the song is moody but far too deliberate and "has a grab bag of evocative images but never quite jells".
Andy Kellman of AllMusic stated that in the song Rihanna had a sudden desire to provoke even if that is in metaphorical context.

Chart performance

"Russian Roulette" debuted at number 100 on the US Billboard Hot 100 in the issue dated November 7, 2009.
"Russian Roulette" entered the New Zealand Singles Chart at number 19 on November 9, 2009, climbing into the top ten the following week at number nine. After fluctuating around the top ten mark over the following three weeks, it regained its peak position on December 14, 2009. It remained on the chart for 12 weeks, earning a Gold certification from the Recording Industry Association of New Zealand.
"Russian Roulette" entered the UK Singles Chart at number six on November 29, 2009. and Sweden. It also reached the top ten in Denmark, Italy and Spain.

Music video

Background and development

The music video for "Russian Roulette" was directed by Rihanna's frequent collaborator Anthony Mandler, who directed Rihanna's previous videos for "Take a Bow", "Disturbia", "Rehab" and "Wait Your Turn".
The music video opens with shots of Rihanna hooded, lying on the floor of a gas chamber. Three men, dressed in black uniforms and wearing dark round glasses circulate around the singer, attempting to extort information from her. The scene then moves to a dimly lit room in which Rihanna sits at a table with her love interest (played by American actor Jesse Williams) opposite. On the table between them lies a silver revolver in which, throughout the video, they take it turns holding to their heads. Other scenes include Rihanna in a woodland at night standing in the middle of a highway before a car speeds towards her, quickly cutting to another scene, giving the impression she is run over. Elements of blood and tears and vehicular assault dominate the video. In the final scenes, Rihanna is shown underwater, floating whilst being fired at; one bullet is visually seen cutting her throat. The video ends with her lover apparently committing suicide with the revolver placed between them.

Reception

The reception of the music video was mixed, with many critics noting its dark theme. James Montgomery of MTV reviewed the video stating:,"There's seemingly no bottom to the inky depths Rihanna plumbs in her brand-new 'Russian Roulette' video, a dark, claustrophobic descent that's creepier than anything she's ever done before (including the 'Disturbia' video)". Katy Hall from The Huffington Post commented that the video comes from a pretty dark place and tells more depressing story than Lady Gaga's "Bad Romance". According to Daniel Kreps from Rolling Stone, there is a lot of imagery that is influenced by the altercation of Rihanna and Chris Brown from February 2009, including a speeding car that approaches Rihanna while she stands alone at night – "a moment that seems to mirror the events immediately following the assault".

Live performances

Following the release of Rated R in the United Kingdom, Rihanna performed the song for the first time at the Nokia promotional concert at Brixton Academy in London. Rihanna performed the song as part of a set list, which included "Wait Your Turn" and "Hard", the latter of which Rihanna was joined on stage by Young Jeezy, to perform the song together. During the set, Rihanna also performed songs from her third studio album Good Girl Gone Bad, including "Disturbia", "Don't Stop the Music" and "Take a Bow". "Run This Town" and "Umbrella" were performed with assistance of Jay-Z, whose vocals are featured on the songs She performed "Russian Roulette" while particularly sitting on a throne chair. A reviewer from MTV UK stated that "The Barbadian beauty then sat seductively on stage in a throne that even the Beckhams would be proud of to belt out the ballad".
After the release of the album in the United States, she embarked on some promotional performances. Rihanna performed "Russian Roulette", together with "Wait Your Turn", "Hard" and "Umbrella" on Good Morning America as part of the fall concert series in New York City.
"Russian Roulette" was the opening song on Rihanna's setlist for her Last Girl on Earth Tour, after the presentation "Mad House". She performed the song on a movable platform while wearing a floor-length gown covered with red LED lights. Neil McCormick of The Telegraph, in a review of one of the tour's concerts, said: "She kicked off with the homicidal pop-rock ballad Russian Roulette to screen imagery of burning naked mannequins and had shed most of her clothes by her second song...".

Formats and track listing

Personnel

Credits adapted from the liner notes of Rated R, Def Jam Recordings, SRP.

Charts

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Certifications







Radio and release history








