[[Like a Storm]]

CATEGORIES: New Zealand rock music groups, Post-grunge groups, Musical groups established in 2005

Like A Storm is a hard rock band from Auckland, New Zealand. Formed by brothers Chris, Matt & Kent Brooks and Paul Sievers, Like A Storm have shared American stages with Alter Bridge, Shinedown, Korn, Creed, Puddle of Mudd, Staind, Drowning Pool, Sick Puppies and many others, as well touring North America as a headline act. To date, Like A Storm have five releases, including two studio albums and a DVD.
Like A Storm's 2014 single "Love the Way You Hate Me" has spent 3 weeks at #1 on Sirius XM Octane, and received radio airplay on stations all over the US and New Zealand. "Love the Way You Hate Me" features singer Chris Brooks playing the didgeridoo, combining the ancient instrument with progressive metal and hard rock influences. Like A Storm's latest album, "Chaos Theory: Part 1", is available worldwide on iTunes and in stores in New Zealand. "Chaos Theory: Part 1", which was produced by the Brooks brothers, features the New Zealand and American rock radio singles "Love the Way You Hate Me", "Never Surrender", and Like A Storm's hard rock cover of "Gangster's Paradise" by Coolio.
In 2013, Like A Storm released the live double-album "Worlds Collide: Live from the Ends of the Earth". The album includes two live discs, recorded on opposite sides of the world. The first CD features Like A Storm's high energy rock show, recorded during an American arena tour - while the second disc showcases the band's unplugged side, and was recorded in their native New Zealand. The album features a range of instruments in addition to the traditional hard rock sound - including didgeridoo, djembe, piano, synthesizers, choirs and programming.

History

Like A Storm first began touring the US in 2009, when they were invited to join Creed on their nationwide "Full Circle" Reunion tour. The "Full Circle" tour took Like A Storm all over the country, playing arenas and amphitheaters in a wide range of American cities. Overwhelming fan response to the band's live show saw their first album, The End of the Beginning, enter Billboard's New Artist Charts at No. 61 from tour sales alone. The End of the Beginning continues to be available through iTunes. 
The band continued extensive American touring into 2010, in support of their first single "Chemical Infatuation" - sharing stages with artists such as Shinedown, Skillet, Puddle of Mudd and Drowning Pool, as well as playing major festivals including Rock On The Range. "Chemical Infatuation" reached No. 43 in the U.S Active Rock Top 100.
2011 saw Like A Storm complete two tours of the US with Alter Bridge. In between tours, the band entered the studio to record "Like A Storm Unplugged", an unplugged album featuring acoustic and piano driven interpretations of some of their most popular songs. Like A Storm Unplugged, produced and mixed by the Brooks brothers, showcases the Brooks brothers playing a wider range of instruments - including didgeridoo, piano, church organ and djembe. In the words of singer/guitarist Matt Brooks, We all grew up playing any instrument we could get our hands on, and it's awesome to be able to explore these different ideas within the music of Like A Storm. We see it more as re-building the soundscape with different instruments and textures than stripping the songs down. 
Also in 2011, Like A Storm played main stage slots at 3 summer festivals - Boonstock in Gibbons, Alberta, Canada; "Pain in the Grass" for KISW Seattle; and the PDX "RockFest" in Portland. In December 2011, the band was voted Tunelab's "Most Fan Friendly Band." 
As of February 2012, the band have been on an acoustic tour of the United States with more than 50 shows booked promoting the Limited Edition Acoustic EP and their Southern Skies DVD.
Shortly after their acoustic tour, Like a Storm confirmed that drummer Thomas, would no longer be playing in the band. However, the Brooks brothers went back to tour alongside Creed in May 2012 with new drummer Roye Robley. Like a Storm also played several festivals in Summer 2012. Shows include: Summerfest in Milwaukee, Wisconsin and Common Ground Music Festival in Lansing, Michigan, Jinxfest and Cornfest in Illinois; among others. The day after headlining Jinxfest, Like a Storm headed off to tour with Creed for several more dates. Details can be found on the band's Facebook page or website.com
13 October 2012 marked Like a Storm's first show of their US headlining tour, titled "Unleash the Chaos" in support of their sophomore album, "Chaos Theory." The first single from the record, "Never Surrender," has a music video that came out 21 November 2012. The seven-track "Chaos Theory Part 1," followed shortly after, being released just two days later. Among the new songs, contains a cover of Coolio's "Gangsta's Paradise."

Bio

Like A Storm began in 2005 when brothers Chris, Kent and Matt Brooks first played together in their native New Zealand. They decided to move to North America to pursue a career in music. According to lead singer Chris, New Zealand is such an amazing place to grow up, so beautiful and isolated. But the first time we jammed together, we had this amazing chemistry, and we knew we had to take our sound to North America. We left our family and friends and set up in Canada. There are so many different experiences from that time, and the songs on the record are about them.myspace. After their first show, Kai Marcus from Methods of Mayhem and Econoline Crush befriended them and introduced them to producer Mike Plotnikoff. In 2006, Like A Storm began working on the record, and officially began recording with Plotnikoff and producer/composer Igor Khoroshev in 2007 in Los Angeles, California. After sixteen months of writing and recording, The End of the Beginning was complete.

Discography

Albums

Singles

Band members

Notes






