[[Rounds (website)]]

CATEGORIES: Chat websites, VoIP software, Entertainment websites, Video on demand services, Internet properties established in 2009, Social networking services

Rounds (formally known as 6rounds) is a video-enabled real-time social network with collaborative browsing, chat, multi-player gaming and built-in social recommendation features that can be expanded through an open API. The company is based in Tel Aviv, Israel.
Rounds is the first product released using the GixOO software platform, which was created in April 2008.

History

Rounds launched in July 2009.
Rounders released an API for game, entertainment and collaboration-based applications in April 2010. The company changed its name from 6rounders to Rounders in August 2010. Rounders also released its application that allows users to video chat, exchange pictures, surf the internet and play games via Facebook in August.
Rounders released Android and iOS applications in December 2012.
The company discontinued the "Meet New People" feature of its platform in February 2013.

Features and uses

Rounds users create their own (embeddable) personal slide show to inform other users about themselves. Users connect through messaging and video chats (referred to as rounds). They initiate rounds either by inviting a specific person or by joining a specified room based on activity, game or topic. Once users join a specified round they are systematically matched with another user interested in the same type of round.
As of 2013, Rounds requires a pre-existing Facebook friendship before users can begin video chatting one another.
While chatting, users can share in various activities, including watching videos on YouTube, co-browsing on Facebook, and playing games such as chess, backgammon, checkers, and truth or dare.

External features

The Rounds platform offers an open API which allows third party integrations, from small scaled modifications to white-label solutions. Rounds was one of the first Google Wave extensions to be featured and the only video chat to be launched at the Google Wave beta launch.




