[[Christian right]]

CATEGORIES: Evangelicalism, Christian politics, Right-wing politics, New Right (United States), Republican Party (United States), Christian terms

Christian right or Religious Right is a term used in the United States to describe right-wing Christian political factions that are characterized by their strong support of socially conservative policies. Christian conservatives principally seek to apply their understanding of the teachings of Christianity to politics and public policy by proclaiming the value of those teachings and/or by seeking to use those teachings to influence law and public policy. Andersen, Howard Francis Taylor , Cengage Learning, 2005 ISBN 978-0-534-61716-5, ISBN 978-0-534-61716-5
In the U.S., the Christian right is an informal coalition formed around a core of evangelical Protestants and Catholics. The movement has its roots in American politics going back as far the 1940s and has been especially influential since the 1970s. Their influence draws, in part, from grassroots activism as well as their focus on social issues and ability to motivate the electorate around those issues.
The Christian right is notable today for advancing socially conservative positions on issues including school prayer, stem cell research, homosexuality, contraception, abortion, and pornography.
Although the Christian right is usually associated with the U.S., similar movements have been a key factor in the politics of Canada, the Netherlands, Northern Ireland and Australia, among others.

Terminology

The Christian right is also "also known as the New Christian Right (NCR) or the Religious Right", although some consider the religious right to be "a slightly broader category than Christian Right".Encyclopedia of Religion and SocietyGrant Wacker
John C. Green of the Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life states that Jerry Falwell used the label religious right to describe himself. Gary Schneeberger, vice president of media and public relations for Focus on the Family, states that "terms like 'religious right' have been traditionally used in a pejorative way to suggest extremism. The phrase 'socially conservative evangelicals' is not very exciting, but that's certainly the way to do it."Sarah Pulliam: Phrase 'Religious Right' Misused, Conservatives Say Christianity Today (Web-only), February 12, 2009.
Evangelical leaders like Tony Perkins of the Family Research Council have called attention to the problem of equating the term "Christian right" with evangelicals. Although evangelicals constitute the core constituency of the Christian right, not all evangelicals fit the description. The problem of description is further complicated by the fact that religious conservative may refer to other groups. Mennonites and the Amish, for example, are theologically conservative, however there are no overtly political organizations associated with these denominations.

History

The Christian right has been a notable force in both the Republican party and American politics since the late 1970s, when Baptist pastor Jerry Falwell and other Christian leaders began to urge conservative Christians to involve themselves in the political process. In response to the rise of the Christian right, the 1980 Republican Party platform assumed a number of its positions, including dropping support for the Equal Rights Amendment and adding support for a restoration of school prayer. While the platform also opposed abortionRepublican Party Platform of 1980 and leaned towards restricting taxpayer funding for abortions and passing a constitutional amendment which would restore protection of the right to life for unborn children, it also accepted that many Americans, including fellow Republicans, were divided on the issue. Since about 1980, the Christian right has been associated with several institutions including the Moral Majority, the Christian Coalition, Focus on the Family and the Family Research Council.
While the influence of the Christian right is typically traced to the 1980 Presidential election, Daniel K. Williams argues in God's Own Party that it had actually been involved in politics for most of the twentieth century. He also notes that the Christian right had previously been in alliance with the Republican Party in the 1940s through 1960s on matters such as opposition to communism and defending "a Protestant-based moral order."
Into the 1960 election, Catholics and evangelicals worked against each other, as evangelicals mobilized their forces to defeat Catholics Al Smith in 1928 and John F. Kennedy in 1960. Nixon 1960 (2009) pp. 3-11, 107-18 Secularization came to be seen by Protestants as the biggest threat to Christian values, however,
The alienation of Southern Democrats from the Democratic Party contributed to the rise of the right, as the counterculture of the 1960s provoked fear of social disintegration. In addition, as the Democratic Party became identified with a pro-choice position on abortion and with nontraditional societal values, social conservatives joined the Republican Party in increasing numbers.
In  1976, U.S. President Jimmy Carter received the support of the Christian right largely because of his much-acclaimed religious conversion. However, Carter's spiritual transformation did not compensate for his liberal policies in the minds of Christian conservatives, as reflected in Jerry Falwell's criticism that "Americans have literally stood by and watched as godless, spineless leaders have brought our nation floundering to the brink of death."

Ability to organize

The contemporary Christian right became increasingly vocal and organized in reaction to a series of United States Supreme Court decisions, most notably Bob Jones University v. Simon and Bob Jones University v. United States. It has also engaged in battles over pornography, obscenity, abortion, state sanctioned prayer in public schools, textbook contents (concerning creationism), homosexuality, and sexual education. It was long believed that the Supreme Court's decision to make abortion a Constitution-protected right in the 1973 Roe v Wade ruling was the driving force behind the New Christian Right Movement's rise in the 1970s.  Despite the large grassroots campaigns that were organized by the movement to protest the Roe decision, comments made by senior figures, including the movement's chief architect Paul Weyrich, have suggested that the New Christian Right Movement's rise was not centered around the issue of abortion, but rather Bob Jones University's refusal to comply with the Supreme Court's 1971 Green v. Connally ruling that permitted the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to collect penalty taxes from private religious schools that violated federal laws.  Biblical scholar and Religious Right critic Randall Balmer alleged that discussions he had with various New Christian Right Movement activists in the years following Roe v. Wade showed that there was widespread reluctance within the movement to push for new laws which would outlaw all forms of abortion.
In Thy Kingdom Come, Balmer recounted comments that Weyrich made at a conference sponsored by a Religious Right organization, that they both attended in Washington in 1990:Evangelical: Religious Right Has Distorted the Faith, Linda Wertheimer, National Public Radio
Bob Jones University, a private, non-denominational Protestant university located in Greenville, South Carolina, had policies that refused black students enrollment until 1971, admitted only married blacks from 1971 to 1975, and prohibited interracial dating and marriage between 1975 and 2000.  In the 1974 Bob Jones University v. Simon case, the US Supreme Court further enforced the Green decision and ruled that the IRS could penalize the University for enforcing segregation policies. The following year, the IRS sought to penalize Bob Jones University for refusing to allow interracial dating.  During this time, Weyrich organized a campaign to defend the University and alleged that various social issues that were deemed immoral by various religious conservatives justified the need to end federal intervention in religious schools.  As Balmer recalled: 

=Grassroots activism=

Much of the Christian right's power within the American political system is attributed to their extraordinary turnout rate at the polls. The voters that coexist in the Christian right are also highly motivated and driven to get out a viewpoint on issues they care about. As well as high voter turnout, they can be counted on to attend political events, knock on doors and distribute literature. Members of the Christian right are willing to do the electoral work needed to see their candidate elected. Because of their high level of devotion, the Christian right does not need to monetarily compensate these people for their work. Green and Mark Silk, "Why Moral Values Did Count," Religion in the News, Spring 2005,  Layman, and John C. Green. 2006. "Wars and Rumors of Wars: The Contexts of Cultural Conflict in American Political Behavior." British Journal of Political Science, Volume 36, Issue 1, January 2006, pp 61–89.

=Political leaders and institutions=

Led by Robert Grant advocacy group Christian Voice, Jerry Falwell's Moral Majority, Ed McAteer's Religious Roundtable Council, James Dobson's Focus on the Family, Paul Weyrich's Free Congress Foundation and Pat Robertson's Christian Broadcasting Network, the new Religious Right combined conservative politics with evangelical and fundamentalist teachings. 97; Spiritual Warfare: The Politics of the Religious Right, p.49–50, Sara Diamond, South End Press, Boston, MA The birth of the New Christian right, however, is usually traced to a 1979 meeting where televangelist Jerry Falwell was urged to create a "Moral Majority" organization.
Soon, Moral Majority became a general term for the conservative political activism of evangelists and fundamentalists such as  Pat Robertson, James Robinson, and  Jerry Falwell. Howard Schweber, Professor at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, writes that "in the past two decades", "Catholic politicians have emerged as leading figures in the religious conservative movement."

Institutions in the United States

Political

=National organizations=

One early effort to institutionalize the Christian right as a politically active social movement began in 1974 when Dr. Robert Grant, an early movement leader, founded American Christian Cause to advocate Christian moral teachings in Southern California. Concerned that Christians overwhelmingly voted in favor of President Jimmy Carter in 1976, Grant expanded his movement and founded Christian Voice to mobilize Christian voters in favor of candidates who share their socially conservative values.
In the late 1980s Pat Robertson founded the Christian Coalition, building from his 1988 presidential run, with Republican activist Ralph Reed, who became the spokesman for the Coalition. In 1992, the national Christian Coalition, Inc., headquartered in Virginia Beach, Virginia, began producing voter guides, which it distributed to conservative Christian churches. Under the leadership of Reed and Robertson, the Coalition quickly became the most prominent voice in the conservative Christian movement, its influence culminating with an effort to support the election of a conservative Christian to the presidency in 1996. In addition, they have talked about attempting to intersperse the traditional moral issues associated with the Christian right into a broader message that emphasizes other political issues, such as healthcare, the economy, education and crime.Micklethwait and Wooldridge, The Right Nation, 2005, 111
Political activists worked within the Republican party locally and nationally to influence party platforms and nominations. James Dobson's group Focus on the Family, based in Colorado Springs, and the Family Research Council in Washington D.C. have gained enormous clout among Republican lawmakers. While strongly advocating for these moral issues, Dobson himself is more wary of the political spectrum and much of the resources of his group are devoted to other aims such as media.
In an essay written in 1996, Ralph Reed argued against the moral absolutist tone of Christian right leaders, arguing for the Republican Party Platform to stress the moral dimension of abortion rather than placing emphasis on overturning Roe v. Wade. Reed believes that pragmatism is the best way to advocate for the Christian right. Moen, PS: Political Science and Politics, Vol. 29, No. 3 (Sep., 1996), pp. 461–464

=Partisan activity of churches=

Overtly partisan actions by churches could threaten their 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status due to the Johnson Amendment of the Internal Revenue Code. In one notable example, the former pastor of the East Waynesville Baptist Church in Waynesville, North Carolina "told the congregation that anyone who planned to vote for Democratic Sen. John Kerry should either leave the church or repent". The pastor resigned and the ousted church members were allowed to return.Political Split Leaves a Church Sadder and Grayer, New York Times, May 15, 2005
The Alliance Defense Fund started the Pulpit Freedom Initiative

=Electoral activity=

Christian right organizations sometimes conduct polls to determine which presidential candidates will receive the support of Christian right constituents. One such poll is taken at the Family Research Council's Values Voter Summit.christianpost.htm George W. Bush's electoral success owed much to his overwhelming support from white evangelical voters, who comprise 23% of the vote. In 2000 he received 68% of the white evangelical vote; in 2004 that percentage rose to 78%.Religion and the Presidential Vote, Pew Research Center for the People and the Press, December 6, 2004

Education

The Home School Legal Defense Association was co-founded in 1983 by Michael Farris, who would later establish Patrick Henry College, and Michael Smith. This organization attempts to challenge laws that serve as obstacles to allowing parents to home-school their children and to organize the disparate group of homeschooling families into a cohesive bloc. The number of homeschooling families has increased in the last twenty years, and around 80 percent of these families identify themselves as evangelicals.Rosin, God's Harvard, 2007, 61–62
The main universities associated with the Christian right are:

Media

The media has played a major role in the rise of the Christian right since the 1920s and has continued to be a powerful force for the movement today. The role of the media for the Religious right has been influential in its ability to connect Christian audiences to the larger American culture while at the same time bringing together religion, politics, and culture that was personal and practical. The political agenda of the Christian right has been disseminated to the public through a variety of media outlets including radio broadcasting, television, and books.
Religious broadcasting began in the 1920s through the radio. (2000) Not by Politics Alone: The Enduring Influence of the Christian right. New York: Guildford Press. Between the 1950s and 1980s, TV became a powerful way for the Christian right to influence the public through shows such as Pat Robertson's The 700 Club and The Family Channel. The Internet has also helped the Christian right reach a much larger audience. Organization's websites contain easily accessible and detailed information on the issues that the organizations are involved in and the positions they take, along with ways the site viewer can get involved. The Christian Coalition, for example, has used the Internet to inform the public, as well as to sell merchandise and gather members."The Christian Coalition of America: America's Leading Grassroots Organization Defending Our Godly Heritage." The Christian Coalition of America. 2006. .

Views

Education

The Christian right has worked to modify the public school curriculum in a number of ways. It has made inroads by having its followers win school board elections. Research suggests that these candidates run solely to propagate their religious or moral beliefs as school policy.[ref]Melissa Deckman, "Religion Makes the Difference, "Why Christian Right Candidates run for School Board," Review of Religious Research
42, no. 4 (June 2001).[/ref] The smaller the jurisdiction, the greater the tendency for the Christian right pragmatically to support favorable candidates who can win, regardless of political-party affiliation.
The Christian right has strong opinions on how American children should be educated, speaking out in support for activities like state-sanctioned prayer in public schools.

=Educational choice=

The Christian right strongly advocates for a system of educational choice, using a system of school vouchers, instead of public education. Vouchers would be government funded and could be redeemed for "a specified maximum sum per child per years if spent on approved educational services". Political Agendas for Education: From the Religious Right to the Green Party. Second Edition. (Mahwah, New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2002)  This method would allow parents to determine which school their child attends while relieving the economic burden associated with private schools. The concept is popular among constituents of church-related schools, including those affiliated with Roman Catholicism.

=Evolution=

The Christian right has promoted the teaching of creationism and intelligent design as opposed to the teaching of evolution. Town of Disaster, CBSNews. Voters Rejected God, CBSNews.
The Discovery Institute, through their Intelligent design initiative called the Center for Science and Culture, has tried to encourage schools to utilize the teach the controversy approach. Such an approach would ensure that both the strengths and weaknesses of evolutionary theory were discussed in the curriculum. The Battle Over the Meaning of Everything. (San Francisco: John Wiley and Sons, 2007), 67. This tactic was criticized by Judge John E. Jones III in Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District, describing it as "at best disingenuous, and at worst a canard."Kitzmiller v. Dover Area School District: Memorandum Opinion by Judge John E. Jones III, page 89
Many scientists, including evolutionary biologists do not believe there are weaknesses in evolutionary theory, and the theory of evolution is overwhelmingly supported by biologists and those in related fields in America.

=Sexual education=

On the issue of sexual education in public schools, a spectrum of views exist within the Christian right. Some advocate removing sexual education from public schools, others support teaching abstinence until marriage, and still others advocate encouraging modesty and chastity.
The Christian right has been successful in promoting abstinence-only curricula.  30 percent of America's sexual-education programs are abstinence based. Letter to a Christian Nation 2006  These programs promote abstinence until marriage as the only way to prevent pregnancy, sexually transmitted diseases and the emotional issues that could arise from sexual activity.A brief history of Abstinence-only until Marriage Funding, Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States Numerous scientific, peer-reviewed studies show that such programs  do not limit teen pregnancy over the long run. Washingtonpost. Retrieved on 2013-08-24. Blogs.com (2011-11-30). Retrieved on 2013-08-24. Sciencedaily. Retrieved on 2013-08-24.

=Homeschooling=

The Christian right sees homeschooling and private schooling as a viable alternative to secular education. In recent years, the percentage of children being homeschooled has risen from 1.7% of the student population in 1999 to 2.2% in 2003.

Politics

As a right-wing political movement, the Christian right is strongly opposed to left-wing ideologies such as socialism and the welfare state. Communism is sometimes seen as a threat to the Western Christian tradition. The Right Nation: Conservative Power in America. Penguin Books. Most of them support the Republican Party.

=Role of government=

The Christian right sees the government's proper role in society as cultivating virtue, not to interfere with the natural operations of the marketplace or the workplace.  It promotes conservative or literal interpretations of the Bible as the basis for moral values, and enforcing such values by legislation.

=Separation of Church and State=

The Christian right believes that separation of church and state is not explicit in the American Constitution, believing instead that such separation is a creation of what it claims are activist judges in the judicial system.Pat Robertson The First Amendment
Thus, Christian right leaders have argued that the Establishment Clause does not prohibit the display of religion in the public sphere. Leaders therefore believe that public institutions should be allowed to display the Ten Commandments. This interpretation has been repeatedly rejected by the courts, which have found that such displays violate the Establishment Clause.
Generally, the Christian right supports the presence of religious institutions within government and  the public sphere, and advocates for fewer restrictions on government funding for religious charities and schools.

=Economics=

Early American fundamentalists, such as John R. Rice[ref]"Rice melded politics and religion in a way that made it very clear what side of any political 
issue he believed God was on.God had been very clearly opposed to the New Deal "socialism" of Franklin Roosevelt,
and God was equally opposed to the Great Society "socialism" of Lyndon Baines Johnson". Andrew Himes,
The Sword of the Lord: The Roots of Fundamentalism in an American Family Chiara Press, 2011
ISBN 1453843752, (p.271).[/ref][ref]Nathan Andrew Finn, 
The Development of Baptist Fundamentalism in the South, 1940-1980 ProQuest, 2007
ISBN 0549371435 (p.204).[/ref] often favoured
Laissez-faire economics and were outspoken critics of the New Deal and later the Great Society.
The contemporary Christian right supports economic conservative policies such as tax cuts and social conservative policies such as child tax credits.Our Legislative Agenda, Christian Coalition of America

=The Middle East=

The Religious Right has given very strong support to the state of Israel in recent decades, encouraging support for Israel in the United States government."Jan G. Linn, What's Wrong With The Christian Right (2004) p 27

Bioethics

The Christian right opposes abortion, believing that life begins at conception and that abortion is murder. Therefore, those in the movement have worked toward the overturning of Roe v. Wade, and have also supported incremental steps to make abortion less available. Such efforts include bans on late-term abortion (including intact dilation and extraction),Partial Birth Abortion Act of 2003 108th United States Congress (1st session) prohibitions against Medicaid funding and other public funding for elective abortions, removal of taxpayer funding for Planned Parenthood and other organizations that provide abortion services, legislation requiring parental consent and/or notification for abortions performed on minors,Allen Wants Parents Notified - Daily Press. Articles.com (1994-04-09). Retrieved on 2013-08-24. legal protections for unborn victims of violence, legal protections for infants born alive following failed abortions, and bans on abortifacient medications.
The Christian right contends that morning-after pills such as Plan B and Ella are possible abortifacients, able to interfere with a fertilized egg's implantation in the uterine wall. The labeling mandated by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for Plan B and Ella state that
they may interfere with implantation, but according to a June, 2012, New York Times article, many scientists believe that they work only by interfering with ovulation and are arguing to have the implantation language removed from product labels. The Christian right maintains that the chemical properties of morning-after pills make them abortifacients and that the politics of abortion is influencing scientific judgments. Jonathan Imbody of the Christian Medical Association says he questions "whether ideological considerations are driving these decisions."
Because the Christian right believes life begins at the moment of conception, it has worked for the regulation and restriction of certain applications of biotechnology. In particular, the Christian right opposes therapeutic and reproductive human cloning, championing a 2005 United Nations ban on the practice, The Christian right supports research with adult stem cells, amniotic stem cells, and induced pluripotent stem cells which don't destroy a human embryo.
The Christian right also opposes euthanasia, and, in one highly publicized case, took an active role in seeking governmental intervention to prevent Terri Schiavo from being deprived of nutrition and hydration.

Sex and sexuality

The modern roots of the Christian right's views on sexual mores were evident in the 1950s, a period in which many Christian conservatives viewed sexual depravity as not only excessive, but in fact a danger that would result in the impending destruction of the country.
Beginning in the 1970s, conservative Christian protests against sexual immorality began to surface, largely as a reaction to the "permissive sixties" and an emerging prominence of sexual liberties arising from Roe v Wade and the gay rights movement. Christians began to "wake up" and make sexuality issues a priority political cause.
The Christian right has managed to gain a foothold as the "self-appointed conscience of American society". During the 1980s, the movement was largely dismissed by political pundits and mainstream religious leaders as "a collection of buffoonish has-beens". Later, it re-emerged, better organized and more focused, taking firm positions against abortion, pornography, homosexuality and feminism.
Influential Christian right organizations  at the forefront of anti-gay activism in the US include Focus on the Family, Family Research Council and the Family Research Institute.
The central tenets of Focus on the Family and similar organizations, such as the Family Research Council, highlight that issues such as abortion and the man of the house's central role in the family are of key importance. A number of organizations, including the New Christian Right, "have in various ways rejected liberal America in favor of the regulation of pornography, anti-abortion legislation, the criminalization of homosexuality, and the virtues of faithfulness and loyalty in sexual partnerships", according to sociologist Bryan Turner.
A large number of the Christian right view same-sex marriage as a central issue in the culture wars, more so than other gay rights issues and even more urgently important than abortion.

Criticism

Criticisms of the Christian right come from many people who call for a caring and connected society focused on social responsibility and social justice. Theologian Michael Lerner has summarized:

Interpretation of Christianity

It is argued by some on the left that Jesus Christ would be considered liberal within modern politics. They describe Jesus' concern with the poor and feeding the hungry, among other things, as attributes of modern-day liberalism, or criticize what they see as a politicization of Christianity because they say Jesus transcends our political concepts.theblaze. Nichols: Jesus Made in America: A Cultural History from the Puritans to "The Passion of the Christ" pp. 204-209. Westmont, IL, 2008. The Christian right considers these subjects equally important but have different opinions as to the propriety of government involvement in such things as caring for the poor. Washington D.C. 1992.

Race and diversity

The conclusions of a review of 112 studies on Christian faith and ethnic prejudice were summarized  by a study in 1980 as being that "white Protestants associated with groups possessing fundamentalist belief systems are generally more prejudiced than members of non-fundamentalist groups, with unchurched whites exhibiting least prejudice."Sex Prejudice among White Protestants: Like or Unlike Ethnic Prejudice?, Charles W. Peek, Sharon Brown Social Forces, Vol. 59, No. 1 (Sep., 1980), pp. 169–185 The original review found that its conclusions held "regardless of when the studies were conducted, from whom the data came, the region where the data were collected, or the type of prejudice studied."Christian Faith and Ethnic Prejudice: A Review and Interpretation of Research, Richard L. Gorsuch, Daniel Aleshire, Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion, Vol. 13, No. 3 (Sep., 1974), pp. 281–307 More recently in 2003, eight studies have found a positive correlation between fundamentalism and prejudice, using different measures of fundamentalism., (2001); Altemeyer, (2003)), cited in The Psychology of Religion, Third Edition: An Empirical Approach (2003), Spilka et al., p466
A number of prominent members of the Christian right, including Jerry Falwell and Rousas John Rushdoony, have in the past supported segregation, with Falwell arguing in a 1958 sermon that integration will lead to the destruction of the white race.salon.comAvenging angel of the religious right, Max Blumenthal, Salon.com
In Thy Kingdom Come, Randall Balmer recounts comments that Paul M. Weyrich, who he describes as "one of the architects of the Religious Right in the late 1970s", made at a conference, sponsored by a Religious Right organization, that they both attended in Washington in 1990:Evangelical: Religious Right Has Distorted the Faith, Linda Wertheimer, National Public Radio
Bob Jones University had policies that refused black students enrollment until 1971, and admitted only married blacks from 1971 to 1975. The university continued to forbid interracial dating until 2000." Newsweek Web Exclusive link expired, January 29, 2005, hard copy at Fundamentalism File, Mack Library, BJU.
In an interview with The Politico, University of Virginia theologian Charles Marsh, author of Wayward Christian Soldiers and the son of a Southern Baptist minister, stated:Religion and politics don't mix, Robin T. Reid, The Politico

Use of Dominionism Labeling

Some social scientists have used the word "dominionism" to refer to adherence to Dominion TheologyBarron, Bruce. 1992. Heaven on Earth? The Social & Political Agendas of Dominion Theology. Grand Rapids, Mich.: Zondervan. ISBN 0-310-53611-1. and Hankins, Barry, 2003. New Religious Movements and Religious Liberty in America, Baylor University Press. and others who have stressed the influence of Dominionist ideas on the Christian right. Kingdom Coming: The Rise of Christian Nationalism. New York: W. W. Norton. ISBN 0-393-06094-2 (10). ISBN 978-0-393-06094-2 (13). American Theocracy: The Peril and Politics of Radical Religion, Oil, and Borrowed Money in the 21st century ISBN 0-670-03486-XMcCarraher, Eugene 2006. "Empire Falls", Commonweal 133(9), May 5, 2006. "The Despoiling of America" published February 11, 2004. Retrieved October 3, 2007. And also published in Toward a New Political Humanism, Edited by Barry F. Seidman and Neil J. Murphy, Prometheus Books, New York, 2004. Blood Guilty Churches, January 19, 2005. Retrieved October 6, 2007. Yurica Responds to Stanley Kurtz Attack, May 23, 2005. Retrieved October 6, 2007. God under Howard: The Rise of the Religious Right in Australian Politics, Allen & Unwin. The Baptizing of America: The Religious Right's Plans for the Rest of Us, New York: Thunder's Mouth Press. "God's dupes", Los Angeles Times, March 15, 2007. Retrieved October 8, 2007."The Rise of the Religious Right in the Republican Party", TheocracyWatch, Last updated: December 2005; URL accessed May 8, 2006.
The terms "dominionist" and "dominionism" are rarely used for self-description, and their usage has been attacked from several quarters. Journalist Anthony Williams charged that its purpose is "to smear the Republican Party as the party of domestic Theocracy, facts be damned."  Kurtz also complained about a perceived link between average Christian evangelicals and extremism such as Christian Reconstructionism:
 The notion that conservative Christians want to reinstitute slavery and rule by genocide is not just crazy, it's downright dangerous. The most disturbing part of the Harper's cover story (the one by Chris Hedges) was the attempt to link Christian conservatives with Hitler and fascism. Once we acknowledge the similarity between conservative Christians and fascists, Hedges appears to suggest, we can confront Christian evil by setting aside 'the old polite rules of democracy.' So wild conspiracy theories and visions of genocide are really excuses for the Left to disregard the rules of democracy and defeat conservative Christians — by any means necessary. 
Lisa Miller of Newsweek said that many warnings about "dominionism" are "paranoid" and that "the word creates a siege mentality in which 'we' need to guard against 'them.'"Miller, Lisa, 2011. 'Dominionism' beliefs among conservative Christians overblown. Newsweek. Published 18 August 2011. Retrieved 8 September 2011.  Ross Douthat of the New York Times noted that "many of the people that writers like Diamond and others describe as 'dominionists' would disavow the label, many definitions of dominionism conflate several very different Christian political theologies, and there's a lively debate about whether the term is even useful at all."Douthat, Ross 2011. The New Yorker and Francis Schaeffer. New York Times. Published 29 August 2011. Retrieved 11 September 2011. According to Joe Carter of First Things, "the term was coined in the 1980s by Diamond and is never used outside liberal blogs and websites. No reputable scholars use the term for it is a meaningless neologism that Diamond concocted for her dissertation,"Carter, Joe, 2011. A Journalism Lesson for the New Yorker. First Things. Published 10 August 2011. Retrieved 19 August 2011. while Jeremy Pierce of First Things coined the word "dominionismist" to describe those who promote the idea that there is a dominionist conspiracy. Dominionismists. First Things. Published 14 August 2011. Retrieved 8 September 2011.
Other criticism has focused on the proper use of the term. Berlet wrote that "some critics of the Christian Right have stretched the term dominionism past its breaking point,"Berlet, Chip, 2005. The Christian Right, Dominionism, and Theocracy. Retrieved September 25, 2007. and argued that, rather than labeling conservatives as extremists, it would be better to "talk to these people" and "engage them."Ellis Henican, "A spiritual olive branch for the far-right faithful," Newsday, May 1, 2005. Reposted at YuricaReport. Retrieved September 23, 2006  Sara Diamond wrote that "liberals' writing about the Christian Right's take-over plans has generally taken the form of conspiracy theory", and argued that instead one should "analyze the subtle ways" that ideas like Dominionism "take hold within movements and why."Diamond, Sara. 1995. "Dominion Theology." Z Magazine, February 1995
Dan Olinger, a professor at the fundamentalist Bob Jones University in Greenville said, "We want to be good citizens and participants, but we're not really interested in using the iron fist of the law to compel people to everything Christians should do."  Bob Marcaurelle, interim pastor at Mountain Springs Baptist Church in Piedmont, said the Middle Ages were proof enough that Christian ruling groups are almost always corrupted by power. "When Christianity becomes the government, the question is whose Christianity?" Marcaurelle asked.February 12, 2007, The State, Columbia, SC "Pastors don't embrace movement"

Movements outside the United States

While the Christian Right is a strong movement in the United States, it has a presence as well in Canada. There is nothing quite like it in Europe."Curtis, Patriotism, Democracy, and Common Sense (2005) p  126

Canada

Religion has been a key factor in Canadian politics since well before Canadian Confederation in 1867, when the Conservatives were the party of traditionalist Catholics and Anglicans and the Liberals were the party of Protestant dissenters and anti-clerical Catholics. This pattern largely remained until the mid-twentieth century when a new division emerged between the Christian left (represented by the Social Gospel philosophy and ecumenicism) and the Christian right (represented by fundamentalism and biblical literalism). The Christian left (along with the secular and anti-religious left) became supporters of the New Democratic Party while the right moved to the Social Credit Party, especially in Western Canada, and to a lesser extent the Progressive Conservatives.
The Social Credit Party, founded in 1935 represented a major change in Canadian religious politics. Until that time, fundamentalists had shunned politics as "worldly", and a distraction from the proper practice of religion. However, the new party was founded by fundamentalist radio preacher and Bible school teacher William Aberhart or "Bible Bill". Aberhart mixed his own interpretation of scripture and prophecy with the monetary reform theories of social credit to create a movement that swept across Alberta, winning the provincial election of 1935 in a landslide. Aberhart and his disciple Ernest Manning then governed the province for the next forty years, several times trying to expand into the rest of Canada. In 1987 Manning's son, Preston Manning, founded the new Reform Party of Canada, which soon became the main party of the religious right. It won majorities of the seats in Western Canada in repeated elections, but was unable to break through in Eastern Canada, though it became the official opposition from 1997 to 2003 (Reform was renamed the Canadian Alliance in 2000). In 2003 the Canadian Alliance and the Progressive Conservatives merged to create the Conservative Party of Canada, led by Stephen Harper, a member of the Alliance Church, who went on to become prime minister in 2006.
Canada has had a Charter of Rights and Freedoms since the Canadian Constitution was patriated in 1982. As a result, there have been major changes in the law's application to issues that bear on individual and minority group rights. Abortions were completely decriminalized after two R. v. Morgentaler cases (in 1988 and in 1993). A series of provincial superior court decisions allowing same-sex marriage led the federal government to introduce legislation that introduced same sex marriage in all of Canada. The current prime minister, Stephen Harper and his Conservative Party of Canada, stated before taking office that he would hold a free vote on the issue,

The Netherlands

In the Netherlands Calvinist Protestants have long had their own political parties, now called the Reformed Political Party (SGP) on the right, and the ChristianUnion (CU) in the center. For generations they operated their own newspapers and broadcasting association. The SGP has about 28,000 members, and three members of parliament. It has always been in opposition to the government. Day, Political parties of the world (2002) p 343

Other countries

In Northern Ireland, the Reverend and Right Honorable Lord Bannside led a Protestant fundamentalist party, the 
Democratic Unionist Party, which had a considerable influence on the province's culture.[ref]Andrew Vincent,
Modern Political Ideologies. John Wiley & Sons, 2009. ISBN 1405154950 (p. 325).[/ref][ref]Richard P. Davis, Mirror Hate: the Convergent Ideology of Northern Ireland paramilitaries, 1966-1992.
Dartmouth, 1994. ISBN 	1855215586 . (p.80)[/ref] Karen Armstrong has mentioned English evangelical leader Colin Urquhart as advocating positions similar to the Christian Right. Ballantine Books, 1994 p. 390.
In Australia, fundamentalist Christianity is the base for Fred Nile and his small Christian Democratic party, as well as the Family First Party. Nile in 1967-68 was Assistant Director of the Billy Graham Crusade in Sydney. Both parties promote social conservatism, opposing gay rights and abortion.Fred Nile, Fred Nile: Autobiography (Sydney: Strand Publishing: 2001) ISBN 1-876825-79-0
The Swiss Federal Democratic Union is a small conservative Protestant party with about 1% of the vote. Day, Political parties of the world (2002) p 449  In Scandinavia, the Centre Party is a bible-oriented fundamentalist party; it has about 4% of the votes in the Faroe Islands. However, the Norwegian Christian People's Party, the Swedish Christian Democrats and Danish Christian Democrats are less religiously orthodox and are similar to mainstream European Christian Democracy.

Associated minor political parties

Some minor political parties have formed as vehicles for Christian right activists:



Notes



 | last     = Williams
 | first       = Daniel K.
 | year        = 2010
 | title       = God's Own Party
 | publisher   = Oxford
 | isbn        = 9780195340846
 | pages       = 372 pages
 | nopp=yes
 }}

Further reading


