[[Quorn, Leicestershire]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Leicestershire, Civil parishes in Leicestershire

Quorn is a village in Leicestershire, England, situated next to the university town of Loughborough. Quorn's name was shortened from Quorndon in 1889, to avoid postal difficulties owing to its similarity to the name of another village, Quarndon, in neighbouring Derbyshire.quornmuseum.php?id=899 The toponym of the village's original name is thought to be derived from the Old English cweorndun, meaning "hill (dun) where millstones (cweorn) are obtained".

History

The first known evidence of the village is in the Lincoln Episcopal Registers for 1209–1235, as Quernendon. Other variations of the village name over the centuries include Querne, Quendon, Querendon, Quim, Quarendon, Qaryndon, Querinden, Querondon, and Quernedon.
The quarrying of stone in Quorn began at a very early age at Buddon Wood, on the edge of the parish. Granite millstones were quarried in the early Iron Age, and under the Romans stone was quarried for building in Leicester. Some of the larger millstones can still be seen in the area, however these days they are either used as garden ornaments, or worked into seats or slabs.
Quorn Hall, off Meynell Road on the eastern edge of the village, was built for the Farnham family in about 1680.

World Wars

96 men from Quorn lost their lives in the two World Wars (77 in World War I and 19 in World War II).quorndon-mag.uk/british_legion/memorials.
Quorn Camp was established on the grounds of Quorn House during World War II. It was used as a PoW camp This incident is today commemorated with a dummy paratrooper and parachute attached to the church in Sainte-Mère-Église.
A number of American veterans come back to Quorn, particularly every tenth anniversary of the D-Day landings, to remember their time in Quorn and their comrades who did not return.
There is a plaque commemorating the lost US servicemen in Quorn's Memorial Gardens, upon which a poppy wreath is placed each year on Remembrance Sunday. There is also an avenue of lime trees in Stafford Orchard (the village park) in remembrance of those American soldiers that died, together with a plaque.

Today

Quorn is built around the old A6 road which runs through the centre of the village. On 28 October 1991 a dual carriageway bypass opened taking the A6 away to the north-eastern edge of the village.
The village has a train station called "Quorn and Woodhouse", shared with the neighbouring hamlet of Woodhouse, which was on the national Great Central Railway network.  The station is now on the preserved Great Central Steam Railway. Numerous royal visitors have disembarked at the station to take part in the Quorn Hunt, including the Prince of Wales (later Kind Edward VIII).railwayarchive.uk/stories/pages.
Sarson Street, running adjacent to Rawlins Community College, features many 19th Century terraced cottages, formerly those of framework knitters. Framework knitting was a major local industry until the onset of major mechanisation, and the cottages along this road display certain features typical of such an activity. Large windows for example were intended to allow in the necessary amount of light by which to work.
M. Wright & Sons Ltd have been manufacturing fabrics at Quorn Mill, on Leicester Road, since 1870. Originally producing fabrics for the footwear and corset trades, the factory now produces high technology textiles for various industries including military, aerospace and leisure.
"The Banks" area of the village is an ornate paved area with seating, designed to resemble the letter 'Q' when seen from the air.
The village prides itself on its green spaces, and more evidence of this can be seen with the opposition to proposed development at Caves field. This is a large cricket pitch with a pavilion near the centre of Quorn, which was the focus of interest from a housing development company. Objection was widespread, not only at the prospect of losing the cricket field but also due to the threat to a neighbouring wetland ecosystem, considered valuable by environmentalists and the village population.
In the past few years, efforts have been made to cater for the local young people. These have resulted in a half pipe being built next to the basketball court on the park, and a green shelter erected on the same site. The large park, with its shaded area by the stream, large football pitch and half pipe now appeals to people of all ages. Examples of how the park contributes to the village can be seen at the large and successful Mayday fete, as well as the local pub football matches occasionally held there.
The Church of St Bartholomew and Farnham Chapel is a Grade I listed building.
Quorn House, off Meeting Street, is currently home to the offices of fitness guru Rosemary Conley.
The non-meat protein Quorn was not named after the village.

Education

St Bartholomew's Primary School is a Church of England controlled school for foundation-age children through year 6.  This is on the site of the Thomas Rawlins Grammar School for Girls.
Loughborough Grammar School have a number of sports pitches on the edge of the village.

Population

The 2001 census showed Quorn's population to be 4,961 (2,412 males and 2,549 females) living in 2,083 households with an average age of 41.leics.uk/quorndon.pdf

Parish Boundaries

The River Soar forms much of Quorn's eastern boundary with the village of Barrow upon Soar and captures Pilling's Lock and parts of the Grand Union Canal, Midland Main Line railway and A6 dual carriageway. The southern boundary, with the neighbouring villages of Mountsorrel, Rothley and Swithland, encompasses Buddon Wood, Mountsorrel Quarry and part of Swithland Reservoir. The Great Central Railway makes up most of western boundary with the village of Woodhouse. The northern boundary captures Bull in the Hollow Farm and is shared with the hamlet of Woodthorpe and the town of Loughborough. 2005.

Representation

Quorn Parish Council is the village administration with around ten elected councillors. At European level, Quorn is in the East Midlands constituency, which has five MEPs in the European Parliament; Derek Clark (UKIP/EFD), Roger Helmer (UKIP), Emma McClarkin (Con/ECR), Bill Newton-Dunn (LD/ALDE) and Glenis Willmott (Lab/S&D).europarl.eu/meps/en/search.html?country=GB

Notable residents








