[[Mars Needs Moms]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 3D films, 2011 science fiction films, Alien abduction films, American films, American animated films, American 3D films, American adventure comedy films, Animated science fiction films, Computer-animated films, Walt Disney Pictures films, English-language films, Films based on children's books, ImageMovers films, IMAX films, Mars in film, Matriarchy, Alien invasions in films, Performance capture in film, Films directed by Simon Wells, 2011 American animated films, Dolby Surround 7.1 films, 2011 computer-animated films

Mars Needs Moms is a 2011 American 3D motion capture animated science fiction comedy film co-written and directed by Simon Wells, and based on the Berkeley Breathed book of the same title. The film is centered around Milo, a nine-year-old boy who finally comes to understand the importance of family, and has to rescue his mother after she is abducted by Martians. It was released on March 11, 2011 by Walt Disney Pictures. The film stars both Seth Green (motion capture) and newcomer Seth Dusky (voice) as Milo. 
This was the last film by ImageMovers Digital before it absorbed back into ImageMovers. The film was a commercial failure, and is the second biggest box office bomb in history, grossing less than $39 million on a budget of $150 million.

Plot

Milo (Seth Green, voice-over by Seth Dusky) is a nine-year-old boy who constantly rebels against his homemaking mother (Joan Cusack) and workaholic father (Tom Everett Scott), who, himself, is leaving for a business trip. Summer is just beginning, and while Milo wants his summer to be fun, his mother assigns him chores. When Milo's mother catches him breaking her "no broccoli, no TV" rule, she grounds him and sends him to bed early. After a heated disagreement with her, Milo wishes that he never had a mother, which leaves his mother heartbroken. Later that night, his wish comes true when his mom is kidnapped by Martians who plan to steal her "momness" to rear their own young. The Martians, led by their villainous supervisor (Mindy Sterling) have been observing Earth mothers, passing up those who are too indulgent or unable to control their children. They select Milo's mother, based on her ability to command Milo to take out the trash. 
To rescue his mom, Milo stows away on a spaceship. Upon arrival on Mars, Milo is locked up in a jail cell, but manages to escape down a garbage chute where he meets a tech-savvy subterranean-dwelling earthling named Gribble (Dan Fogler). Gribble helps him devise a plan to save Milo's mom and get her back to Earth before Earth's night is up. Unfortunately, the plan goes awry at a Martian checkpoint, when Milo is exposed and the troops raid Gribble's hideout, Milo escapes. While hiding from the guards, Milo meets an optimistic Martian named Ki (Elisabeth Harnois) who is fascinated with Earth because of all its colors as opposed to the more stern and sleeker Mars. Milo makes it back to Gribble's hideout, and discovers Gribble has been kidnapped by the Supervisor and the Martians. After rescuing him, they take refuge under the tribes formed by Martians who are friendlier and free-spirited. Gribble confesses to Milo how he wound up on Mars: twenty five years ago, the Martians selected Gribble's mother as a fine example to program their nannybots. Like Milo, Gribble stowed away, but failed to rescue his mother in time and was stranded on Mars.
After Ki manages to locate Milo and Gribble in an untouched part of the Martian underground world, they come across an ancient cave painting that showed Martian families were like Earth families in the past. After evading the guards and capturing a spaceship, Milo manages to wake up his mother, and save her before the download destroys her. They try to escape, but Supervisor halts them, and is about to kill Milo and his mother. Fortunately, Gribble saves them both and then gets into a fight with Supervisor, who fires a shot that causes Milo to trip and break his space helmet.
As Milo begins to choke in the unbreathable Martian atmosphere, Milo's mother gives him her space helmet. Although Milo's life is saved, the life of his mother has now been put at stake. Before the eyes of the Martians, Gribble (not wanting to see another Earth boy lose his mother) manages to find the space helmet he'd attempted to save his mom with and gives it to Milo's mother, showing the Martians the one thing they had overlooked about Earth moms: love for their children. Milo soon realizes that his behavior had been very wrong, so he apologizes to his mother, thus showing his new respect and greater love. The Supervisor attacks the earthlings again and is about to recapture them, but Ki reveals the photo of the ancient cave painting and the Supervisor's deception to the soldiers, causing them to turn against the evil mistress.
With the Supervisor in prison, Ki and Gribble return Milo and his mother to Earth, just before Milo's dad returns home. Having nowhere else to go and having exposed his feelings for Ki, Gribble decides to stay on Mars with her and returns there. Milo then takes out the trash before his mother asks him to, but secretly disintegrates it with a Martian weapon, similar to a human pistol in size and shape. Under the new leadership of Gribble and Ki, the male and female Martians work together in raising their young, while the Supervisor is stuck with nanny duty.  Gribble manages to contact Milo and let him know how he is by using the Spirit rover as a communication station.

Cast

Production

Simon Wells had known Zemeckis since the mid-1980s when he was supervising animator and storyboard artist for Who Framed Roger Rabbit. He also worked on Back to the Future II and III and later worked on The Polar Express, which was why he was attracted into making Mars Needs Moms.
The title of the film is a twist on the title of American International Pictures' 1966 film Mars Needs Women. 
After spending six weeks outfitted in a special sensor-equipped performance-capture suit while simultaneously performing Milo's lines, Seth Green's voice sounded too mature for the character and was dubbed over by that of 11-year-old actor Seth R. Dusky.
The makers came up with their own alien language.

Release

Critical response

The film received mixed to negative reviews from critics. The acting was praised but the writing, story, 3D, and drama were criticized. Opinions of the motion capture animation were also mixed. Some praised it for looking realistic and others criticized it for falling into the uncanny valley and looking creepy. Rotten Tomatoes reported that 37% of critics gave the film a positive review, based on reviews from 110 critics, with an average rating of 5.1 out of 10. The critical consensus was: "The cast is solid and it's visually well-crafted, but Mars Needs Moms suffers from a lack of imagination and heart."

Box office

Mars Needs Moms was a commercial failure and has the worst box-office reception for a Disney-branded film. It earned only $1,725,000 on its first day, for a weekend total of $6,825,000.

Home media

The film was released on Blu-ray, Blu-ray 3D, DVD, and movie download on August 9, 2011.






