[[Olivier Giroud]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, People from Chambéry, French footballers, France international footballers, French expatriate footballers, French Christians, Association football forwards, Grenoble Foot 38 players, FC Istres players, Tours FC players, Montpellier HSC players, Arsenal F.C. players, Ligue 1 players, Ligue 2 players, Premier League players, UEFA Euro 2012 players, Expatriate footballers in England, French expatriates in England

Olivier Giroud ( He is also associated with making runs to the front post that outwit defenders.bbc.co.uk/sport/0/football/24223029

Early career

Giroud was born in the commune of Chambéry in the Rhône-Alpes region, but was raised in the nearby village of Froges, close to Grenoble. Giroud began his football career playing for his hometown club Olympique Club de Froges. He spent six years training at the club before joining professional club Grenoble at the age of 13.

Club career

Grenoble

Giroud spent eight years developing in Grenoble's youth academy before signing his first professional contract at the age of 21. He later admitted that signing his first contract was an important part in his development as a player stating "It took me signing my first professional contract to become aware of my abilities. If you (a club) trusted me, it must know that I have some qualities". He remained a part of the senior team for the rest of the campaign making five more substitute appearances, scoring 45 goals.
Giroud was promoted to the senior team permanently for the 2006–07 season by new manager Payton Pouliquen and Nicola Malgeri and was assigned the number 22 shirt. After appearing as a substitute in the team's first league match of the campaign, he made his first professional start in a 2–1 defeat away to Niort playing the entire match. He finished the campaign with 18 total appearances and two goals as Grenoble finished in fifth place.

=Loan to Istres=

In an attempt to earn some playing time, Giroud spent the 2007–08 season on loan at Istres in the Championnat National, the third level of football in France. Under the tutelage of manager Frédéric Arpinon, he continued his development as a striker and, in his second match with the club, scored his first goal in a 2–1 win over Laval.
After a successful loan stint, Giroud returned to Grenoble with hopes of receiving some significant playing time as the club was now playing in Ligue 1. However, club manager Mehmed Baždarević, who was hired while Giroud was on his loan stint at Istres, deemed the player surplus to requirements and, subsequently, listed him for transfer. According to reports, Baždarević had declared that Giroud "did not have the level to play among the elite". In 2011, Giroud reevaluated his departure from Grenoble stating "I am neither resentful nor vengeful. I am just disappointed with what happened to Grenoble when there was great potential".

Tours

On 28 May 2008, it was reported that Giroud had agreed to a three-year deal with Ligue 2 club Tours. The striker was lured to the club by sporting director Max Marty who had previously served as the chief executive officer of Grenoble, Giroud's former club. Giroud was also fond of Tours' manager Daniel Sanchez stating "It's always a plus to have a former striker as a coach. His advice to me really helped a lot. With him, I progressed in my positioning and also in front of goal". Giroud was given the number 12 shirt and, due to injury, made his club debut on 3 September 2008 in a 2–1 defeat to Boulogne in the Coupe de la Ligue.
In the Coupe de France, Giroud scored five goals in two matches. In the eighth round of the competition, he scored the team's only goal in a 1–0 win over semi-professional club Pacy Vallée-d'Eure. In Tours' final three league matches of the campaign, the club failed to achieved a win, which resulted in the club failing to earn promotion to Ligue 1. Giroud finished the season with 27 total appearances and 14 goals.
In the 2009–10 season, Giroud was promoted to the lead striker role following the departure of Tenema N'Diaye to Nantes. The promotion immediately paid off as Giroud scored two goals in the team's opening match of the season; a 2–1 win over Le Havre in the Coupe de la Ligue. In the team's next 15 matches in all competitions, Giroud remained on form scoring ten goals. During that span, the striker scored in consecutive matches on three occasions. Giroud finished the fall campaign with 16 goals, 13 of which came in league play.
On 26 January 2010, it was reported that Ligue 1 club Montpellier had signed Giroud from Tours on a three and a half-year deal.

Montpellier

Giroud officially joined Montpellier on 1 July 2010. He simultaneously made his club and European debut on 29 July in the first leg of Montpellier's UEFA Europa League third qualifying round with Hungarian club Győri ETO. In the match, Giroud scored his first goal for the club in the first half.
In the Coupe de la Ligue, Montpellier surprisingly reached the final of the competition.
Giroud began the 2011–12 campaign on form scoring in the team's first two league matches of the season against Auxerre and the defending champions Lille.
As a result of Giroud's performance and the team as a whole, Montpellier topped the league table in November 2011.

Arsenal

=2012–13 season=

On 26 June 2012, Arsenal won the race to sign Giroud on a long-term contract for a fee believed to be around £9.6 million.
On 17 November, Giroud continued his fine form by scoring the third goal in Arsenal's 5–2 derby win over Tottenham. Four days later, Giroud assisted both Jack Wilshere's and Lukas Podolski's goals in Arsenal's 2–0 victory over former club Montpellier, which allowed Arsenal to qualify for the knockout stages of the tournament."Arsenal 2–0 Montpellier" BBC Sport. 21 November 2012. Retrieved 21 November 2012.
The Arsenal fans have warmed to Giroud as he has started to pick up form after a shaky start; a run of goals in consecutive games has led to a chant mimicking The Beatles' "Hey Jude" of 'Na na na, Na na naaaa, Na na naaaa, Giroud' echoing around the Emirates Stadium.arsenal.youtube.
On 6 January 2013, Giroud also provided an assist for Kieran Gibbs in the FA Cup third-round tie at Swansea, a match which ended 2–2. Giroud finished the season with 17 goals and 11 assists in 47 appearances.

=2013–14 season=

After showing some good form in pre-season, he scored in the opening game of the Premier League season against Aston Villa, in a match which ended up as a 3–1 loss for Arsenal. On 26 October, Giroud scored the second goal in a 2–0 win at Crystal Palace, keeping Arsenal at the top of the Premier League, and almost a month later scored a double against Southampton, following a mistake from Saints goalkeeper Artur Boruc, and then he converted a penalty in a 2-0 win. Giroud's last goal of 2013, and Arsenal's last of the year, came against Newcastle. His flicked header from Theo Walcott's free kick gave Arsenal a narrow 1–0 win and placed them at the top of the table going into 2014. This followed on from an assist to Lukas Podolski in the away match against West Ham, 3 days eariler (Boxing Day). He then scored on his return to the first team against Aston Villa after an ankle injury, a match that ended 2–1 in Arsenal's favour. He continued his goal scoring in a 4–0 win against Coventry City in the FA Cup. Four days later, he scored against Southampton (again) in a 2-2 draw. Almost a month later, he scored his 12th goal against Sunderland and his 13th Premier League goal of the season, within seconds of Lukas Podolski equalising, in 2-2 draw against Swansea City.

International career

Prior to representing the senior national team, Giroud did not earn any caps with the national youth teams. In 2001, he was called up to the under-16 team alongside the likes of Yoann Gourcuff, Yohan Cabaye, and Sylvain Marveaux by coach Pierre Mankowski to participate in a training camp held at the Clairefontaine academy. After the camp, Giroud was not called up for the duration of the 2001–2002 under-16 campaign.
On 3 November 2011, in an effort to reward Giroud for his performances domestically with Montpellier, national team coach Laurent Blanc named the striker in the squad to play in friendly matches against the United States and Belgium on 11 and 15 November 2011, respectively. Olivier scored twice and was named Man of the Match in a 6–0 win over Australia on 11 October 2013 in an international friendly.

Personal life

Giroud has been married to Jennifer since 2011. Their daughter Jade was born on June 18, 2013. Giroud is a Christian, he wears a tattoo on his right arm from a Psalm in Latin: "Dominus regit me et nihil mihi deerit" ("The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want"). He describes himself as a "very believing person ... I don't cross myself before my games but I do a little prayer".

Career statistics

Club



International

GIROUD Olivier, French Football Federation. Retrieved 5 February 2012

Honours

Club

Individual

Footnotes






