[[Scilly naval disaster of 1707]]

CATEGORIES: Maritime incidents in 1707, Maritime incidents in the United Kingdom, 1707 in England, 1707 in Great Britain, Archaeology of shipwrecks, Disasters in the United Kingdom, History of the United Kingdom, History of the Isles of Scilly, History of Cornwall, Shipwrecks of the Isles of Scilly, Transport in the Isles of Scilly, Cornish shipwrecks

Scilly naval disaster of 1707 is an umbrella term for the events of 22 October 1707 that led to the sinking of a British naval fleet off the Isles of Scilly. With four large ships and more than 1,400 sailors lost in stormy weather, it was one of the worst maritime disasters in the history of the British Isles. It was later determined that the main cause of the disaster was the navigators' inability to accurately calculate their positions. 25–30, ISBN 978-0-946148-85-1.

Background

In summer of 1707, during the War of the Spanish Succession, a combined British, Austrian and Dutch force under the command of Prince Eugene of Savoy besieged and attempted to take the French port of Toulon. During this campaign, which was fought from 29 July to 21 August, Great Britain dispatched a fleet to provide naval support. Led by the Commander-in-Chief of the British Fleets, Sir Cloudesley Shovell, the ships sailed to the Mediterranean, attacked Toulon and also managed to inflict damage on the French fleet caught in the siege. The overall campaign was nevertheless unsuccessful and the alliance was ultimately defeated by Franco-Spanish units. The British fleet was subsequently ordered to return home, and set sail from Gibraltar to Portsmouth in late October. The force under Shovell's command consisted of fifteen ships of the line (.James Herbert Cooke, The Shipwreck of Sir Cloudesley Shovell on the Scilly Islands in 1707, From Original and Contemporary Documents Hitherto Unpublished, Read at a Meeting of the Society of Antiquaries, London, 1 February 1883

Loss of the ships

Shovell's fleet of twenty-one ships left Gibraltar on 29 September, with  for Falmouth, Cornwall. These ships, following a north-easterly course, soon found themselves amongst the myriad rocks and islets to the south-west of the Isles of Scilly, where the Phoenix sustained so much damage that her captain and crew only saved the ship and themselves by running her ashore on the sands between Tresco and St Martin's. See James Herbert Cooke, The Shipwreck of Sir Cloudesley Shovell on the Scilly Islands in 1707, From Original and Contemporary Documents Hitherto Unpublished, Read at a Meeting of the Society of Antiquaries, London, 1 February 1883 The fleet was thought to be sailing safely west of Ushant, an island outpost off the coast of Brittany., London 1998, pp. 11–16, ISBN 1-85702-571-7. However, due to a combination of the bad weather and the mariners' inability to accurately calculate their longitude, the fleet was unaware that it was off course and closing in on the Isles of Scilly instead.Tercentenary Commemorations of the 1707 Association Disaster Before their mistake could be corrected, the fleet struck rocks and four ships were lost:
The exact number of officers, sailors and marines who were killed in the sinking of the four ships is unknown. Statements vary between 1,400biography of Cloudesley Shovell, retrieved 8 January 2010. and over 2,000, making it one of the greatest maritime disasters in British history. For days afterwards, bodies continued to wash onto the shores of the isles along with the wreckage of the warshipsSir Cloudesley Shovell on www.com, retrieved 8 January 2010. and personal effects. Many dead sailors from the wrecks were buried on the island of St Agnes.shipwrecks.uk.com/tricent-leaflet
Admiral Shovell's body, along with those of his two Narborough stepsons and his flag-captain, Edmund Loades, washed up on Porthellick Cove on St Mary's the following day, almost seven miles from where the Association was wrecked. A small memorial was later erected at this site. The circumstances under which the admiral's remains were found gave rise to stories (see below). Shovell was temporarily buried on the beach on St Mary's (see image).A photograph by Frank W. By order of Queen Anne his body was later exhumed, embalmed and taken to London where he was interred in Westminster Abbey. His large marble monument in the south choir aisle was sculpted by Grinling Gibbons. There is a memorial depicting the sinking of the Association in the church at the Narboroughs' home of Knowlton near Dover.

Legends of the disaster

One myth associated with the disaster alleges that a common sailor on the flagship tried to warn Shovell that the fleet was off course but the Admiral had him hanged at the yardarm for inciting mutiny. The story first appeared in the Scilly Isles in 1780 with the common sailor being a Scilly native who recognised the waters as being close to home but was punished for warning the Admiral. It was claimed that grass will never grow on the grave where Shovell was first buried at Porthellick Cove because of his tyrannical act against an islander. The myth was embellished in the 19th century when the punishment became instant execution and the sailor's knowledge of the fleet's position was attributed to superior navigational skills instead of local knowledge. While it is possible that a sailor may have debated the vessel's location and feared for its fate, such debates were common upon entering the English Channel as noted by Samuel Pepys in 1684, naval historians have repeatedly discredited the story noting the lack of any evidence in contemporary documents, its fanciful stock conventions and dubious origins. 1, 1883; Powell, J. W. Damer, "The Wreck of Sir Cloudesley Shovell" The Mariner's Mirror, Vol. 43 (1957): 333–336., J.G." The Mariner's Mirror, Vol 59, No. 2 (1973), 221–223 However the myth was revived in 1997 when author Dava Sobel presented it as an unqualified truth in her book Longitude., London 1998, p. 11-16, ISBN 1-85702-571-7 
Another story that is often told is that Shovell was alive, at least barely, when he reached the shore of Scilly at Porthellick Cove, but was murdered by a woman for the sake of his priceless emerald ring, which had been given to him by a close friend, Captain James Lord Dursley. At that time, the Scillies had a wild and lawless reputation. although several historians doubt the murder legend as there is no record of the ring's return and the story stems from a romantic and unverifiable "deathbed confession". W. Damer, "The Wreck of Sir Cloudesley Shovell" The Mariner's Mirror, Vol. 43 (1957): 333–336., J.G." The Mariner's Mirror, Vol 59, No. 2 (1973), 221–223

Longitude

thumb|230px|Map of the English Channel with the positions of Scilly and Ushant, and Falmouth where Shovell sent some ships as the main fleet was heading for Portsmouth. The disastrous wrecking of a Royal Navy fleet in home waters brought great consternation to the nation. An investigation later determined that the main cause of the catastrophe was the navigators' inability to accurately calculate their longitude. Clearly, something better than dead reckoning was needed to find the way in dangerous waters. As transoceanic travel grew in significance, so did the importance of reliable navigation. This eventually led to the Longitude Act in 1714, which established the Board of Longitude and offered a large money prize for anyone who could find a method of determining longitude accurately at sea. After many years, the consequence of the prize was that accurate marine chronometers were produced and the lunar distance method was developed, both of which became used throughout the world for navigation at sea.
It is not certain that the navigational error leading to the wrecking of Admiral Shovell's fleet was purely one of longitude, as was reported in the newspapers at the time. Some have argued that the disaster was in fact caused more by an error in latitude than in longitude. According to contemporary reports, Shovell initially attempted to determine the fleet's position by astronomical observations and depth soundings before also consulting the sailing masters of his other ships. Shovell's navigation officers believed that the fleet was at a position west of Ushant ().
William May points out that the position of the Isles of Scilly themselves was not known accurately in either longitude or latitude. In addition, his analysis of the 40 extant logbooks from the 21 ships in the fleet do not show the error in longitude to be a significant factor compared to latitude. T. Foulis & Co. Ltd., Henley-on-Thames, Oxfordshire, 1973, ISBN 0-85429-143-1.

Discovery of the wrecks

The ships of Sir Cloudesley Shovell's fleet lay undisturbed on the seabed for almost 260 years, despite several salvage attempts in pursuit of the flagship's cargo of valuable coins, spoils of war from several battles, weapons, and personal effects.ukdiving.co. In June 1967, the Royal Navy minesweeper , equipped with twelve divers under the command of Engineer-Lieutenant Roy Graham, sailed to the Isles of Scilly and dropped anchor off Gilstone Ledge, just to the south-east of Bishop RockFarrell, Nigel, An Island Parish. A Summer on Scilly, Headline Publishing Group, London 2008, pp. 205–207, ISBN 978-0-7553-1764-6. and close to the Western Rocks. The year before, Graham and other specialists from the Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club had dived in this area on a first attempt to find the Association. He recalled some years later: "The weather was so bad, all we achieved was the sight of a blur of seaweed, seals and white water as we were swept through the Gilstone Reef and fortunately out the other side."Interview with Engineer-Lieutenant Roy Graham in December 2005. On their second attempt in summer 1967, using the minesweeper and supported by the Royal Navy Auxiliary Service, Graham and his men finally managed to locate the remains of Admiral Shovell's flagship on the Gilstone Ledge. Parts of the wreck are in 30 feet while others can be found at between 90 and 120 feet as the sea floor falls away from the reef. The divers first discovered a cannon, and on the third dive, silver and gold coins were spotted underneath that cannon. The Ministry of Defence initially suppressed news of the discovery for fear of attracting treasure hunters, but word was soon out and excited huge national interest. As the Isles of Scilly are traditionally administered as part of the duchy of Cornwall, the Duke of Cornwall also has right of wreck on all ships wrecked on the Scilly archipelago. More than 2,000 coins and other artefacts were finally recovered from the wreck site and auctioned by Sotheby's in July 1969. Among the goods sold was Shovell's chamber pot for £270. A battered dining plate, which had been discovered during a dive in 1968, made £2,100. 5) on Friday, 29 January 2010. The rediscovery of the Association by naval divers and the finding of so many historical artefacts in her wreck also led to more government legislation, notably the Protection of Wrecks Act 1973, passed in an attempt to preserve British historic wreck sites as part of the maritime heritage.
The wreck of Firebrand was discovered in 1982, and several items were recovered, including guns and anchors, a wooden nocturne (for determining the time at night), a bell and carved cherubs.
Today photos of the original diving expedition are on display at the Old Wesleyan Chapel in St. Mary's, of the team leader Lt Graham and a naval doctor examining human bones from the wreck of the Association, alongside the ship's bell of the Firebrand with "1692" engraved on it, and many more artefacts. In 2007, the three-hundredth anniversary of the disaster and its consequences were commemorated on the Isles of Scilly with a series of special events, organised by the Council of the Isles of Scilly in partnership with the local AONB office, English Heritage, the Isles of Scilly Museum and Natural England.

Depiction in film

The disaster is featured at the start of the 2000 television drama Longitude, which is based on the book of the same name.








