[[Henry Glover]]

CATEGORIES: 1921 births, 1991 deaths, African-American musicians, American record producers, Songwriters from Arkansas, American trumpeters, American audio engineers, Deaths from myocardial infarction, Musicians from Arkansas, People from Hot Springs, Arkansas, Blues Hall of Fame inductees

Henry Glover (May 21, 1921 – April 7, 1991)
In 2013, Glover was posthumously inducted to the Blues Hall of Fame.

Career

He was born Henry Bernard Glover, in Hot Springs, Arkansas.  As a youngster, he listened to various genres of music on local radio, and learned to play the trumpet. Following high school and college, he joined Buddy Johnson's big band in 1944, and Lucky Millinder's orchestra the following year. In the latter capacity Glover met Syd Nathan, who hired Glover as an A&R man at King Records. As well as A&R duties, Glover helped to construct King's first recording studio.
He went on to produce sessions for the label's established roster of country musicians, including The Delmore Brothers, Hawkshaw Hawkins, Cowboy Copas, Moon Mullican, Grandpa Jones, and The York Brothers. Glover co-wrote "Blues Stay Away from Me" with the Delmore Brothers. Glover's work with Bull Moose Jackson's on his 1945 cover of Joe Liggins' "The Honeydripper" followed, opening up success with a black audience. Further releases produced by Glover appeared in the next couple of years on King's subsidiary label, Queen Records.
In 1947, Queen merged with King Records, heralding further racial integration. Glover's understanding of jump blues and rhythm and blues led to him signing Lucky Millinder plus Tiny Bradshaw, and he went on to produce both Bill Doggett and Wynonie Harris. Glover later produced or wrote music for Hank Ballard & the Midnighters ("Teardrops on Your Letter"), Little Willie John ("Fever"), James Brown, and The Swallows. Glover's own  song "Drown in My Own Tears", originally recorded by Lula Reed, was later successfully covered by Ray Charles.
Glover split with King Records in 1958, and joined the Roulette label. He subsequently worked with Sarah Vaughan, Dinah Washington, Sonny Stitt and Ronnie Hawkins.  Glover also encouraged the latter's backing band, the Hawks, with their own ambitions. Glover later organised the release of an early single of theirs, when they were billed as The Canadian Squires, prior to their becoming known as The Band.
In 1960, Billy Bland recorded his version of "Let the Little Girl Dance" with Glover, and it was released as a single. It was a hit in the US, peaking at #11 on the Black Singles chart and #7 on the Billboard Hot 100.
In early April 1961, Roulette Records president Morris Levy reactivated New York-based American record label Gee Records as a division of Roulette Records and appointed Glover artist and repertoire chief of Gee Records. Glover had further success in 1961 in co-writing Joey Dee & the Starliters' number one "Peppermint Twist";  and two years later, The Rivieras recorded Glover's song "California Sun" resulting in a Top 5 hit. Glover worked with Louisiana Red during the early 1960s, and also created for a short period his own record label.  On it Glover recorded both Larry Dale and Titus Turner. Glover also produced The Essex in 1963 and 1964. 
Glover later returned to King Records and briefly acted as label head until it was bought by Starday.
In 1975, Levon Helm and Glover co-founded a new label, RCO Productions, which released two of Helm's solo projects. The same year Glover produced The Muddy Waters Woodstock Album, which won a Grammy, and the following year Paul Butterfield's, Put It in Your Ear. Also in 1976 Glover partly arranged with Garth Hudson, Howard Johnson, Tom Malone, John Simon and Allen Toussaint the horn section on The Band's concert, The Last Waltz, and thus subsequent album, The Last Waltz.
In 1986 Glover was inducted into the Alabama Jazz Hall of Fame.

Death

He died of a heart attack in April 1991, in St. Albans, New York, at the age of 69.

Songwriting credits








