[[Undisclosed Desires]]

CATEGORIES: Muse (band) songs, 2009 singles, Songs written by Matthew Bellamy

"Undisclosed Desires", also known as "Undisclosed", after "Uprising" in September. It made the UK charts at #49, making it their lowest charting single since "Cave" in 1999, though this could be viewed as a success as there was no physical release and it was not common at the time for a band to have more than one charting single from an album. It has, however achieved large success in Australia where it as since been certified Platinum and is Muse's highest charting single in that country. 

Background and composition

In an interview with English music magazine Mojo, writer Matthew Bellamy described "Undisclosed Desires" as one of "some tracks ... that really take an influence from contemporary R&B, and a little bit from the David Bowie Song "Ashes to Ashes" – heavy beats, syncopation, very melodic, rhythmic vocals," adding that "Dom Muse drummer has done all the drum programming. ... It's the first song we've had where I don't play guitar or piano."

Release and reception

"Undisclosed Desires" was first performed live at the first of the 2009 A Seaside Rendezvous concerts in the band's childhood hometown of Teignmouth on 4 September. On 7 September, the song was played twice on BBC Radio 1 by Zane Lowe as part of the MuseNight programming.
Since the album's release, the song has had a mixed reception by critics, with some chastising the R&B sound while others thought of it as too much of a departure from their already diverse sound.  Andrew Leahey of music website allmusic described the song as "bizarre Timbaland-meets-Depeche Mode ambiance," using it as an example of the band's apparent "tendency to pile excess upon excess." Patashnik went on to criticize the song further, slating it as sounding like "something Timbaland might find down the back of his mixing desk."  Mojo, on the other hand, identified "Undisclosed" as one of the highlights of The Resistance, along with "United States of Eurasia" and "Uprising". Q Magazine also described it favourably, calling it "a stark, gothic take (on Timbaland's style)". On 19 February 2010, "Undisclosed Desires" finished on the Hot30 Countdown at a peak of number 9.

Music video

The video, directed by French duo Jonas & François, depicts all 3 members of Muse in a rather unusual room where there are wires lying and hanging everywhere. Chris is playing slap bass in the corner next to a massive hamster wheel filled with bass guitars; Dom is alternating playing the drum kit and pushing more drums into the kit; and Matt is at the front, playing keytar and singing into two microphones taped together, with three glass frames in front of him labelled "Matt Close up", "Matt Mid shot" and "Matt Long shot", and a small area above him with eight microphones surrounding it, where he occasionally puts his hand in to snap his fingers. There is also a dancer dressed in extravagantly bright colours performing various dance moves. In addition, there are at least thirty monitors on the walls, showing the lyrics word-by-word, all seem to be out of sync execept two or three, but they are all right in sync chorus. At the beginning of the video Matt plugs a wire into his shoe. Sometimes a bleeding heart is seen in front of a white background.

Tracklist

Chart performance

Year-end charts

Certifications

Personnel






