[[Cardiorenal syndrome]]

CATEGORIES: Kidney diseases, Heart diseases, Organ failure

Introduction

In medicine, cardiorenal syndrome (CRS) is an umbrella term that defines  disorders of the heart and kidneys whereby "acute or chronic dysfunction in one organ may induce acute or chronic dysfunction of the other". 

Classification

Ronco et al. first proposed a five-part classification system for CRS in 2008 which was also accepted at ADQI consensus conference in 2010.   These include:
The distinction between CRS type 2 and CRS type 4 is based on the assumption that, also in advanced and chronic disease, two different pathophysiological mechanisms can be distinguished, whereas both CKD and HF often develop due to a common pathophysiological background, most notably hypertension and diabetes. Furthermore, the feasibility of the distinction between CRS type 2 and 4 in terms of diagnosis can be questioned.
Others view the Cardiorenal Syndrome in a more holistic, integrative manner. They defined the Cardiorenal Syndrome as a pathophysiological condition in which combined cardiac and renal dysfunction amplifies progression of failure of the individual organ, by inducing similar pathophysiological mechanisms. Therefore, regardless of which organ fails first, the same neurohormonal systems are activated causing accelerated cardiovascular disease, and progression of damage and failure of both organs.

Risk factors

The following risk factors have been associated with increased incidence of CRS. 

Epidemiology

Renal failure is very common in patients suffering from congestive heart failure. It was shown that renal failure complicates one-third of all admissions for heart failure, which is the leading cause of hospitalization in the United States among adults over 65 years old.    

Pathophysiology

The pathophysiology of CRS can be attributed to low cardiac output, elevation of both intra-abdominal and central venous pressures, and neurohormonal and inflammatory activation. It was previously believed that low cardiac output in heart failure patients result in decreased blood flow to the kidneys which can lead to progressive deterioration of renal function. As a result diuresis of these patients will result in hypovolemia and pre-renal azotemia. However, several studies did not find an association between kidney dysfunction and cardiac output or other hemodynamic parameters. 

Diagnosis

It is critical to diagnose CRS at an early stage in order to achieve optimal therapeutic efficacy. However, unlike cardiac markers such as troponin, creatine kinase, natriuretic peptides, the field of nephrology is lacking reliable markers for acute kidney injury. Recently, research has found several biomarkers that can be used for early detection of acute kidney injury before serious loss of organ function may occur. Several of these biomarkers include neutrophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), N-acetyl-B-D-glucosaminidase (NAG), Cystatin C, and kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1) which have been shown to be involved in tubular damage.  However, there is great variability in the measurement of these biomarkers and their use in diagnosing CRS must be assessed.

Management

Medical management of patients with CRS is often challenging as focus on treatment of one organ may have worsening outcome on the other. It is known that many of the medications used to treat HF may worsen kidney function. In addition, many trials on HF excluded patients with advanced renal dysfunction. Therefore, our understanding of CRS management is still limited to this date.
Diuretics
ACEI, ARB, renin inhibitors, aldosterone inhibitors
Natriuretic peptides
Vasopressin antagonists
Adenosine antagonists
Ultrafiltration
Inotropes




