[[Sukosol Group]]

CATEGORIES: Companies of Thailand, Hospitality companies of Thailand, Companies based in Bangkok

Sukusol Group is a business group operating hotels in Thailand headed by Kamala Sukosol. She heads the Siam Hotel in the Royal Quarter of Bangkok, part of the company's Siam Hotel & Resorts holdings.
Siam Hotels and Resorts and other businesses are part of the Kamol Sukosol Co. Ltd tracing back to 1939, when Mr. Kamol Sukosol started his trading business with a shipment of 12 radio
sets from the United States. Over the following years, Mr Sukosol expanded the business
into several other industries, including automotive, finance, insurance and construction.
When the company needed to form independent business units to maintain focus, the Kamol Sukosol Electric Co. Ltd was established in 1973. Henceforth led by his daughter, Kamala Sukosol, the company now focuses on the trading of electric and medical equipment. The real estate holdings of the group include numerous property and office rentals in and around Bangkok.
Kamala's son Sukie assists with Siam Hotel operations and is also the creator of Thailand's largest indie music label: Bakery (music label). Kamala's father sold General Electric radios before branching out in business with manufacturing, real estate and car dealerships.

Hotel Business

Siam Hotels & Resorts is an independently owned and branded Thai hotel group established in the 1970s, . Its properties consist of the Siam City Hotel in Bangkok and the Siam Bayshore Resort & Spa and Siam Bayview Hotel in Pattaya, a seaside city located two hours south-east of Bangkok. In all, the group currently operates 4- and five-star luxury properties in Thailand with a hotel-room inventory of over 1,000, overseen by a team of 1,100 local and international management and staff.

History

The origins of the brand date back to 1972 when Kamol Sukosol – entrepreneur, business tycoon and chairman of the Kamol Sukosol Company – acquired a  plot of
land in Pattaya and decided to build a resort. The Siam Bayshore Resort opened in 1975 (one of only three hotels in Pattaya at the time), under the leadership of his daughter and
managing director, Kamala Sukosol. In 1983, the family acquired another beachfront plot in
the centre of Pattaya Bay and built the Siam Bayview Hotel. To complement its Pattaya
operations, in 1990 the hotel group opened the Siam City Hotel in down-town Bangkok,
beside the Phayathai Skytrain Station.

Expansion plans

In the coming years the hotel group has further expansion plans, starting with a luxury 39-
room boutique property, The Siam, on the banks of Bangkok's Chao Phraya River, near
Krungthon Bridge. This new addition is slated to open in 2011. Krissada Sukosol Clapp is
helping conceptualise and design the property along with architect Bill Bensley and Associates. The Siam Bayview Hotel in Pattaya is also expanding, in the form of a colonial-inspired two-storey boutique hotel, The Bayview Colonial, to be located at the front of the property directly in front of the beach.

Company name

What began as Siam Bay Hotels in 1983 has changed over time. In 1990, with the addition (along with the Siam Bayview Hotel and Siam Bayshore Resort & Spa) of the Siam City Hotel in Bangkok, the name 'Siam Bay Hotels' was no longer adequate. Thus was born 'Siam City Hotels and Resorts', to represent the three properties. Then again, in 2009, with the looming addition of yet another hotel, The Siam, another name change was instigated. At last, the current name, Siam Hotels & Resorts, was born.

Ownership and management

Siam Hotels & Resorts is wholly owned and operated by the Sukosol family: Kamala Sukosol
is president, her eldest daughter, Marisa Sukosol Nunbhakdi, is executive vice president;
her youngest daughter, Daranee Sukosol Clapp, is vice president of finance, her youngest son, Krissada Sukosol Clapp, is a consulting designer and her eldest son, Kamol Sukosol Clapp, is director of projects. In addition, the hotel is managed by a team of Thai and multi-national hotel professionals. Siam Hotels & Resorts currently has 1,100 employees and is headquartered in Bangkok, Thailand.

Art and architecture (Siam City Hotel)

Located in the geographical center of Bangkok, the Siam City Hotel is the capital's only five-star hotel located in the city's "Palace Quarter"; serving important government agencies, the Foreign Ministry, United Nations and major corporations in the vicinity.
Built on an 8-rai (3.2 acres) plot of land, the hotel comprises two main buildings. The ten-
storey Ayuthaya Wing was an existing building on the acquired property; it has since been
entirely renovated. The 23-storey Siam Wing was designed by the architect, Associate Professor Ajarn Rangsan Torsuwan. He has designed several major buildings in Thailand, including the head offices of several major banks and Huamark Stadium, Thailand's biggest, with over 60,000 seats.
Respectful of the hotel's location near several major palaces – opposite Suan Pakkad Palace,
residence of the grandson of King Rama V, Prince Chumbhot Paribatra; two blocks
east of Chitrlada Palace, His Majesty the King's residence; and two blocks south of King
Rama the V's country villa, Phayathai Palace – the hotel's lobby and Garden Pavilion
courtyard reflect early 20th-century palace architecture as seen during the reign of
King Rama V and King Rama VI. The main lobby is graced by a recreation of a Victorian-style conservatory designed by the American glassmaker Stephen Gormley. Similarly, Bent Severin & Associates, an international hospitality design company, echoed a similar concept in the interior decoration of the hotel, whereby Thai-style ambience is combined with early 20th-century European Art Nouveau and Art Deco influences.
