[[Patrick Ruffini]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, University of Pennsylvania alumni, American bloggers, American political writers, Washington, D.C. Republicans, Place of birth missing (living people), 1978 births, People associated with the Tea Party movement

Patrick Ruffini (born August 2, 1978) is a Republican Party political strategist and blogger in the United States. He is a founding partner of Engage, LLC, a Washington, D.C.-based political media firm.

Biography

Background

Ruffini grew up in France, Italy, and Greenwich, Connecticut, and graduated high school in 1996 from Greenwich High School. Constituents Cool To Clinton's Budget, Hartford Courant (report on 14-year-old Ruffini speaking at town hall in Greenwich for Congressman Chris Shays, criticizing the British health care system)(4 August 1996). Campaign '96 - Web site of the week, The Spokesman-Review He is a 2000 graduate of the University of Pennsylvania, and currently resides in the Washington, D.C. suburbs.

Career

Ruffini began blogging in 2001 when the medium was still in its infancy, and has been a front-page contributor for RedState and Townhall.
In the 2004 election, Ruffini served as webmaster for the Bush-Cheney campaign, managing day-to-day operations on the campaign's Web site and helping oversee development of the grassroots tools that mobilized 1.4 million campaign volunteers. Having come to the campaign with experience as an early political blogger, Ruffini launched and ran the campaign's blog the first ever affiliated with an incumbent President and led rapid response outreach to the then-burgeoning political blogosphere.
Immediately following the 2008 election, Ruffini co-authored the Rebuild the Party platform for Republican renewal that has attracted the support of over 10,000 online activists and five of the six candidates in the 2009 election for RNC Chairman. Planting the Rightroots. The Atlantic. Retrieved on 2010-10-31.
From 2005 to 2007, Ruffini served as eCampaign Director at the Republican National Committee (RNC). As part of the RNC Chairman's leadership team, Ruffini worked to maximize adoption of new media throughout the Republican Party, producing record online fundraising, designing online organizing tools, and spearheading the party's blog and social media strategy. Under Ruffini's leadership, the RNC's Web traffic led that of the Democratic National Committee for 11 out of 12 months in an otherwise challenging 2006 election year according to Nielsen//NetRatings. Politicsmagazine. Retrieved on 2010-10-31.
In 2007, Ruffini founded Engage, LLC, a political media firm where he is currently the company's President.
In 2008, he co-founded The Next Right, a forum for rising young leaders on the right shaping the future of the conservative movement. An Atlantic profile published in 2008 concluded that Ruffini "looks poised to become one of the most influential Republican political strategists of his generation." He has authored a monthly "Digital Democracy" column for Townhall magazine, written for National Review, and appeared as a political analyst on Fox News Channel and C-SPAN's Washington Journal. Ruffini's analysis of emerging political trends has also appeared in the Washington Post, the New York Times, CNN, PBS MediaShift, and Newsweek.
In 2009, Ruffini and Engage helped develop the online political strategy for the Bob McDonnell campaign, who won the 2009 Virginia gubernatorial election. Springtime for Republican Political Technology?. TechPresident. Retrieved on 2010-10-31. In 2010, Ruffini assisted on the Senate campaign of Scott Brown in the Massachusetts special election. Brown's moneybomb raised well over $10 million during the final days of the campaign, propelling him to an upset victory. (January 21, 2010). Lessons of the Mass. revolt: Feel the anger. NYPOST. Retrieved on 2010-10-31. Patrick Ruffini Matters, National Review
In 2013, Ruffini was a signatory to an amicus curiae brief submitted to the Supreme Court in support of same-sex marriage during the Hollingsworth v. Perry case.thedailybeast.html

Works

Articles





Further reading




