[[Heather Morris]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from California, American female dancers, American female singers, American film actresses, American television actresses, Living people, Musicians from Scottsdale, Arizona, Singers from California, So You Think You Can Dance (United States) contestants, People from Thousand Oaks, California, Actresses from Scottsdale, Arizona

Heather Elizabeth Morris (born February 1, 1987) is an American actress, dancer, singer and model, known for her role as the cheerleader Brittany S. Pierce in the musical comedy series Glee.

Early life

Morris was born in Thousand Oaks, California,Heather Elizabeth Morris, Born 02/01/1987 in California | CaliforniaBirthIndex. She began dancing when she was 9. Morris competed at a young age in a variety of styles including jazz, tap, and contemporary.
Morris's father died of cancer when she was 14 years old. "It's something that is hard for me, because I'm sad about it, but I don't dwell on it," she said during an interview workshop with students in December 2009. "I know he's in a better place, instead of suffering." After graduating from Desert Mountain High School, Morris decided to enroll in a local university but realized she was in the wrong place and moved to Los Angeles instead at age 19. "Don't Stop Believin': The Unofficial Guide to Glee." ECW Press. 2010

Career

Morris' first significant appearance was in 2006 on So You Think You Can Dance Season 2 where she made the "green mile" or "Vegas Week" but failed to make the final 20 by a vote of 3-2.
Not discouraged, Morris moved to Los Angeles and actively pursued a career in dancing and was trained in jazz dance. Her big break came in 2007 via Beyoncé. Morris was one of Beyoncé's backup dancers on The Beyoncé Experience world tour and,
In December 2010, Morris was named the Celebrity Style Ambassador for FLIRT! Cosmetics, an Estee Lauder cosmetics line.
In 2010, Morris made the Maxim Hot 100 list, coming in at number 85. On the AfterEllen hot 100 list, she was ranked #2 behind Naya Rivera.
In 2011, Morris starred in a back-to-school commercial for Staples Canada that featured her dancing.
In the October 2011 issue of Fitness magazine, Heather Morris stated that she has had her breast implants removed.  She was quoted saying "Implants were something I thought I wanted when I was younger, and now I don't. It was hard being active with them, because my chest was always sore. It hurt a lot, and I didn't like always being in pain, so they had to go!"

Glee

Morris was taking acting classes and actively pursuing an acting career when she was asked by Woodlee to teach the choreography for Beyoncé's "Single Ladies" dance to the Glee actors. At the same time, the show was looking for a third cheerleader, and Morris ended up landing the role of Brittany.
When a promotional clip for the episode "Sectionals" indicated that Brittany Pierce and Santana Lopez had slept together, Dorothy Snarker, writing for lesbian entertainment website After Ellen, praised the pairing, referring to them by the portmanteau "Brittana". Snarker called the two her "new favorite Glee pairing", commenting that: "While Heather Morris (Brittany) and Naya Rivera (Santana) have had minimal screen time, they've made it count. Heather in particular has brought the laughs as the Cheerio least likely to get a Mensa invitation. Never mind Finn and Rachel — I'm on Team Brittana now."
Morris' role became more prominent during the final nine episodes of season one and, due to the overwhelmingly positive response to her character, was promoted to official series regular status during season two.
In Season 3, she and Rivera's character continue with the lesbian storyline, and others. For example, she had a large role in the episode "Prom-asaurus". During the season finale, she reveals that she had an 0.0 GPA and that she would not be graduating.
During the 2011 Glee Tour, Heather performed Britney Spears' song "I'm a Slave 4 U". She also had a dance spotlight with castmate Harry Shum Jr. during Naya Rivera's performance of "Valerie," and was one of the dancers in the Single Ladies and Safety Dance numbers.
Morris co-wrote and appeared in a January 2011 video for Funny or Die, "Nuthin' But A Glee Thang," a take-off of the Dr. Dre/Snoop Dogg collaboration "Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang". Co-written with actresses Ashley Lendzion and Riki Lindhome, the video features appearances from Modern Family's Sofia Vergara and Morris's Glee castmates Matthew Morrison, Cory Monteith, Harry Shum, Jr., and Naya Rivera.
On June 28, 2013, it was reported that Morris would not be returning as regular on Glee
However, on December 4, 2013, Ryan Murphy informed fans via twitter that Morris would be returning for Glee's 100th episode along with other original cast members.

Personal life

Morris is in a relationship with college baseball player Taylor Hubbell.

Filmography

Awards and nominations

Discography






