[[Damian McGinty]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 births, Living people, Pop singers from Northern Ireland, Male television actors from Northern Ireland, Reality casting show winners, 21st-century male actors from Northern Ireland, Roman Catholics from Northern Ireland

Damian Joseph McGinty, Jr. (born 9 September 1992) On 21 August 2011 McGinty won the Oxygen reality show The Glee Project, earning him a seven-episode guest-starring role on the hit Fox television show Glee which was later extended to 17 episodes.

Early life

McGinty was born into a Catholic family in Derry, Northern Ireland, the son of Damian McGinty, Sr., and Joanne McGinty. Damian has two siblings, Emmet and Gemma. He has been performing for over a decade, winning his first singing competition when he was just five years old. In 2006, McGinty won another competition and the following year he made a CD which was recorded for charity. It was then passed along to Celtic Thunder Producer Sharon Browne and Music Director Phil Coulter, who invited McGinty to sing for their first show. McGinty was later accepted into the group at the age of 14 and has been performing, as well as touring the USA and Canada, with Celtic Thunder.

Career

In 2011, it was stated that McGinty was leaving Celtic Thunder, as a result of winning the Oxygen reality show The Glee Project, which gave him a seven episode arc on the Fox television show Glee. McGinty was selected as one of the top twelve finalists out of 40,000 contenders in a MySpace audition search, who competed for a role on The Glee Project.
Along with Samuel Larsen, McGinty won a seven-episode arc on the third season of Glee. Comments from Glee producer Ryan Murphy fuelled speculation that McGinty's character may become a leading role similar to Cory Monteith's character, Finn Hudson.
Following the final episode of The Glee Project, McGinty was featured in a special video on the Oxygen channel website with Cameron Mitchell, who won the Bing Fan Favorite. The two sang Michael Bublé's "Haven't Met You Yet". His initial seven-episode stint was later extended.
He now lives with co-star from The Glee Project Cameron Mitchell. He is an avid Manchester United fan. He released his first EP on 12 December 2012. 

Filmography

Discography

Celtic Thunder concerts

Glee Cast

EPs






