[[Sea Shepherd Conservation Society operations]]

CATEGORIES: Sea Shepherd Conservation Society, Cetacean research and conservation, Ecuador

The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society engages in various demonstrations, campaigns, and tactical operations at sea and elsewhere, including conventional protests and direct actions to protect marine wildlife. Sea Shepherd operations have included interdiction against commercial fishing, shark poaching and finning, seal hunting and whaling. Sea Shepherd says that they have taken more than 4,000 volunteers on operations over a period of 30 years.

Fishing (1987–present)

Anti-driftnetting campaigns (1987–present)

Sea Shepherd engaged in a multi-year campaign against drift netting practices, which it calls a way of strip mining the ocean's wildlife. Sea Shepherd's Divine Wind vessel investigated suspected driftnet fleets and collected ghost nets in 1987, while in 1990–1992 Sea Shepherd II and the Edward Abbey several times rammed Japanese driftnetting vessels and destroyed their nets. Sea Shepherd only reduced their campaign activities after the United Nations in 1992 banned drift-netting in international waters.
Sea Shepherd in 2006 noted that drift netting had again gained prominence, due to the reduction of fish stocks tempting commercial fisheries to again use the method to keep up their catch volumes.

Mexico tuna boat incident (1991)

In February 1991, representatives of a tuna boat in the Pacific south of Mexico said that they had been rammed by Sea Shepherd II. Sea Shepherd accused it of catching and killing dolphins in its tuna nets and confirmed its ship had dealt the tuna boat a "glancing blow."

Cooperation with Costa Rica (2002)

In April 2002, the Government of Costa Rica invited Sea Shepherd to assist in patrolling for poachers around Cocos Island. The group and Costa Rica had negotiated an agreement for this work which was due to be finalised on April 30, 2002.
Subsequently, Watson was charged with attempted shipwrecking and murder by the fishermen. These charges were dropped on April 29 by the prosecutor when footage of the incident taken by a documentary team aboard the Farley Mowat was shown. Footage of the event can be seen in the film Sharkwater. The prosecutor was reported to have found no evidence of any wrongdoing. A new prosecutor was later appointed to repursue the charges and Watson's lawyer advised he leave the country. Local environmental groups argue that fishing interests opposed to marine conservation were behind the legal proceedings.

Southern Pacific/Galápagos Islands (2000–present)

The Sea Shepherd Conservation Society has operated in the Galápagos marine reserve to protect marine wildlife. The reserve was declared in 1986, with an increased area declared in 1998, and despite government attempts to limit catches, fishing continued in the waters around the Galápagos Islands. The Galápagos Parks Service lacked the manpower to adequately manage the marine park, and fishing laws were regularly flouted.cnn.cukes.BBC News  Accessed August 15, 2009 Longline fishingThe Independent  Accessed August 15, 2009 and illegal netsCDNN  Francisco Chronicle  Accessed August 15, 2009
In December 2000, the Sea Shepherd ship, Sirenian, was sent to the Galápagos to assist in patrolling the 130,000 square kilometre marine reserve around the Islands. Sea Shepherd had signed a five-year agreement with the Galápagos National Parks Service to provide the Sirenian, with some crew, as a patrol vessel. Under the agreement, the Sirenian had an Ecuadorian captain, engineer, and carries Parks Service officers. The Sirenian is a 95-foot former United States Coast Guard Cutter and is now permanently stationed in the Galápagos.
In November 2000, the fishers reacted to new catch limits on lobster by ransacking the Parks Service offices, the facilities of the Darwin Research Centre and trashing the Park Director's home, burning his possessions in the street.abc.au/rn/science/earth/stories/s223307.Business Wire  Accessed August 14, 2009 The Sirenian captured four illegal boats in the first three weeks of March, 2001.
In September 2001, the Ecuadorian Navy detained the Ocean Warrior. This occurred after the Parks Service captured seven illegal shark fishing boats at sea and Sea Shepherd criticized the Ecuadorian Navy for not enforcing the law.guardian.co.
In June 2004, a Sea Shepherd crew-member, Cathy Davies, along with at least six other Sea shepherd members, was taken hostage during protests by fishers who were protesting recently enacted quotas on sea cucumber (Holothuroidea).nzcity.co.aspx?id=40103&cat=977 Accessed August 6, 2009 Armed with clubs, pipes, and Molotov cocktails, the fishers had seized Parks Service offices and tourist locations.independent.co.html Accessed August 6, 2009 Sea Shepherd crew joined Parks Services officers at the barricades erected by fishers around the buildings. Another team of Sea Shepherd crew were dispatched to guard Lonesome George, one of the Galápagos Islands' most famous turtles, as the fishers had threatened to kill him if the quota on sea cucumber was not lifted. About 100 residents of San Cristóbal Island marched in protest against the fishers actions.highbeam.html Accessed August 6, 2009 In July, the High Court of Ecuador upheld the Parks Service limits on the take of sea cucumber. The Parks Service banned the catch of sea cucumber for 2005 and 2006 to allow for the populations to recover from over-fishing. Watson called this a "great victory for conservation in the Galápagos."ENS  The WWF refurbished the boat, which now operates as the Yoshka.wildlifeextra.html#cr Accessed August 15, 2009
In May 2007, the president of Ecuador, Rafael Correa, relaxed an International ban on shark finning by legalizing the sale of fins from sharks caught accidentally. Sea Shepherd's Ecuadorian representative, Sean O'Hearn-Giminez, accompanied a police raid that found two tons of sharks fins caught before a Presidential decree.economist.cfm?story_id=9833189 Accessed August 6, 2009 Fifteen people were arrested in the raid at Manta. However, a prosecutor ordered them released and the shark fins were returned to the fishers. O'Hearn-Giminez was arrested and ordered to be deported. This order was revoked later that day at the request of President Correa. The reason given was that O'Hearn-Giminez had a valid visa, as his wife is Ecuadorian.usatoday.htm Accessed August 6, 2009
In June 2007, O'Hearn-Giminez participated in a raid on a house in Libertad that was being used for illegally processing sea cucumbers. At least 40,000 sea cucumbers were seized and two men arrested.ens-newswire.asp Accessed August 6, 2009 Later that month, Sea Shepherd staff and operatives from the Ecuadorian Environmental Police seized 18,673 shark fins and arrested four men. Sean O'Hearn-Giminez said that "This successful sting is the result of several months working covertly with the co-operation of General Bolivar Cisneros, Chief Commander of the Ecuadorian National Police. Sea Shepherd traced potential exit points in the illegal shark fin trade in the Galápagos and Ecuador."
Paul Watson was awarded the Amazon Peace Prize for his and Sea Shepherd's work on behalf of the environment and marine species in Latin America. The award was given in July 2007 by the Latin American Association for Human Rights and the Ecuadorian vice-President. Watson also signed two agreements at this time, one for Sea Shepherd's involvement in the protection of the Amazon River Dolphin and the Amazonian manatee; the other with the Ecuadorian Police to work with them to detect and destroy illegal fishing boats.
In 2008, US Federal agent Scott West resigned his position and joined Sea Shepherd to work in its intelligence and investigations department. West will work in partnership with the Ecuadorian National Police and the Galápagos National Park to oppose illegal fishing in the marine reserve.com  Accessed August 6, 2009
In early 2010, Sea Shepherd announced that the Dutch Post Code Lottery was giving them an annual €500,000 grant, and an additional €1 million for their conservation programs in the Galápagos.

Canadian sealing (1979–2008)

The first direct action undertaken by Sea Shepherd was against Canadian seal hunting in the Gulf of St. Lawrence. In March 1979, 32 crew aboard the Sea Shepherd protested the hunt and eight members were arrested after going on the ice to spray the pups with colored organic dye so as to render the pelts worthless to traders.
Sea Shepherd protested a Canadian seal hunt in the Gulf of St. Lawrence off the north coast of Nova Scotia in March 1983. The arrival of the group led to a one day suspension of the hunt. On March 25, the Sea Shepherd II was ordered back by Canadian authorities after the vessel came within one half-mile of seal hunters. Watson promised to scuttle the ship if they attempted to board it. Watson was bailed out by actor Mike Farrell and was acquitted upon appeal of the charges.
In March 1995, the group protested the seal hunt in the Magdalen Islands. While staying in the town of Cap-aux-Meules, witnesses reported that 200 club-wielding fishermen stormed the hotel where the group was staying. The group, including Martin Sheen, was escorted to the airport under a heavy police guard. The attackers trashed the room in a two-hour rampage while Watson and Sheen caught a flight to another island.
In 2005, Sea Shepherd campaigned against that year's seal hunt in Canada, which includes a boycott of Canadian seafood products.mywire. to police, but say the sealers were not charged.
The MV Farley Mowat operated during Canadian seal hunting in March and April 2008. The group contends it was in international waters observing Canada's seal hunt, while Canadian authorities allege the vessel was harassing the seal hunters.
On March 29, 2008 the MV Farley Mowat and a Canadian Coast Guard ship collided. The coast guard icebreaker had put itself between the Farley Mowat and a smaller seal hunter's boat. The group says their vessel was rammed while the Canadian Fisheries and Oceans department says the coast guard ship was grazed by the Farley Mowat.
The captain and first officer were arrested for bringing their vessel to within one-half nautical mile of seal hunters on March 30, April 11, and April 12. The location of the ship at the time of the seizure is disputed. Sea Shepherd claims the boat was seized illegally in international waters,.amherstdaily.cfm?sid=125722&sc=508 Accessed 090801 On July 2, 2008, they entered a plea of not guilty. The lawyer set to defend the Captain and First Mate withdrew from the case. They did not want to be represented by a Sydney lawyer and were not represented during their four-day trial. On June 30, they were convicted of endangering lives by bringing the Farley Mowat to within one-half nautical mile from sealing activities without an official permit. The judge found that they had been warned to back away from the sealers but ignored the radioed commands. The Farley Mowat was forfeited and eventually sold by the Canadian Government to Green Ship LLC.

Whaling (1979–present)

Sea Shepherd has protested against whaling throughout the world. Some of its first actions were against whalers. The group has also acted against whaling by countries who they feel have not followed the 1986 internationally recognized nonbinding moratorium on commercial whaling. Dr. Sidney Holt, formerly of the International Whaling Commission and a chief architect of the moratorium, has called Watson's involvement in anti-whaling an "absolute disaster" for the cause. He referenced "blowback" for those who want to see an end to whaling by "playing piracy on the ocean."

Spain and Portugal-area whaling (1979–80)

Sea Shepherd spent part of 1979 hunting for the whaling ship Sierra which was notorious for having undetermined ownership, ignoring whaling agreements, hunting indiscriminately, and using non-explosive harpoons.time.html Accessed July 21, 2009 To increase the effect of a ramming, the bow of the Sea Shepherd was filled with approximately 100 tonnes of cement. In July, the Sierra was found off the port of Oporto, Portugal. Sea Shepherd put non-essential crew ashore and manned by three crew (Paul Watson, Peter Woof, and Jerry Doran), returned to ram and cripple the Sierra. The Sea Shepherd then attempted to reach the United Kingdom, but was intercepted by the Portuguese Navy and escorted back to Oporto. The ship and crew were not arrested but the ship was held for what was called an "informal inquiry."The Age Conservationist Admits Ramming 'Whaler' Accessed July 21, 2009 The Sierra was able to make it back to port for extensive repairs.
While in Lisbon in February 1980, the Sierra was sunk with limpet mines.google." In a 2004 interview Paul Watson said, "Meanwhile, the Sierra had been repaired and was ready to return to sea. It never did so: on February 6, 1980, my crew blew the bottom out of her and permanently ended her career. We traded a ship for a ship, but it was a great trade because we also traded our ship for the lives of hundreds of whales."The "Good" Pirate – The Bite Back Interview with Paul Watson – Satya Magazine, 2004
In April 1980, explosives were used to sink the whalers Isba I and Isba II in Vigo, Spain. Watson said that the boats were "victims of magnetic mines, one of them homemade, which had been planted by the same trio that destroyed the Sierra." Sea Shepherd does show these vessels on the tally of vessels "sunk" on the side of the Farley Mowat and the back of some Sea Shepherd shirts. The whalers Susan and Theresa  are also shown on these tallies. No one was injured during the attacks.

Soviet Union-fleet whaling (1981–82)

In July 1981, The Sea Shepherd II sailed for the Bering Sea with the intention of harassing the Soviet whaler Sevetny. The IWC had authorized a Soviet take of 179 migrating whales off the Siberian coast.
In the summer of 1982, Watson offered a reporter an exclusive story on the group's plan to ram a Soviet vessel. The reporter informed authorities and the ramming did not take place.

Norwegian whaling (1992, 1994)

In late December 1992, O.R.C.A Force (Sea Shepherd) sabotaged the whaler Nybraena in response to Norway's decision to resume commercial whaling of minke whales in 1993. Police found the vessel's engine room nearly full of water at her moorings in the Lofoten Islands but were able to keep it afloat. Watson and Lisa Distefano[ref]Deseret News "2 AMERICANS SENTENCED FOR TRYING TO SINK WHALER"
Accessed August 15, 2009[/ref] were charged with gross destruction of property. Five years later Norway sentenced Watson and DiStefano, in absentia, to four months in prison. Watson was held in the Netherlands on a Norwegian-issued Interpol extradition notice, but after 80 days in detention the notice was denied.Montreal Mirror Accessed August 15, 2009Montreal Mirror Accessed August 15, 2009
In July 1994, Sea Shepherd operated the ship Whales Forever off the coast of Norway to protest the renewed commercial whaling of minke whales. The ship was intercepted by the Norwegian Coast Guard patrol ship Andenes. The Whales Forever and the Andenes, collided in disputed circumstances. The Andenes fired two warning shots, claimed to be non-explosive. The Norwegian Coast Guard warned that they would follow the Sea Shepherd vessel to the Shetland Islands if necessary to arrest the activists.)
In 1994, the Sea Shepherd unsuccessfully attempted to scuttle another Norwegian whaling vessel called the Senet at its wharf in Gressvic.

Faroe Islands whaling (1986, 2000, 2010, 2011)

In 1986, Sea Shepherd went to document and obstruct whaling in the Faroe Islands. In a hunt known as the Grindadráp, islanders drive pilot whales ashore and kill them with knives. The Faroese Coast Guard claim the vessel defied orders to leave territorial waters. The Faroese Coast Guard claimed that they were fired upon with pistols while attempting to board, while Sea Shepherd claimed that they had been repelled by cannons firing chocolate and banana cream pie. The police responded with tear gas canisters. A spokesman for the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society said they were driven away when the police fired machine guns and tear gas, and denied that there were any weapons on board. Accessed 090805
In 2000, Sea Shepherd put pressure on the Faroe Islands to stop the hunting of pilot whales.
In 2010, Sea Shepherd member Peter Hammarstedt posed as a film student in order to film the pilot whale hunt.
In 2011, Sea Shepherd sailed to the Faroe Islands to stop the whaling there. The Steve Irwin and the Brigitte Bardot took part in the "Operation Ferocious Isles" and claimed to have stopped the harvest as long as they were there. This was publicized in the TV show "Whale Wars: Viking Shores".

Icelandic whaling (1986)

In November 1986, the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society claimed responsibility for actions against a whaling station in Hvalfjörður, Iceland. Computers were destroyed with sledgehammers and records were doused with acid. The Hvalur 6 and Hvalur 7, two of the nation's four whaling ships, were sunk by opening their seacocks while they were moored in Reykjavík harbor. The Icelandic National Police did not arrive until the agents had left, and allowed them to pass through a routine traffic stop en route to an airport, after officers found nothing suspicious. Both ships were later raised by a salvaging company and returned to service. Watson was deported from Iceland after having turned himself in to the police for the incident. Kristjan Loftsson of Iceland's largest whaling company told The New Yorker that Watson is persona non grata in the country.

Makah tribe whaling (1998)

In 1998, the group and other activists protested the Makah Native American tribe's reestablished traditional hunt of Gray whales off the coast of the Olympic Peninsula. Under a quota trade deal between the US and Russia In an attempt to scare the whales from the area, the group originally intended to use underwater speakers blasting the sounds of killer whales
On November 2, Makah Tribal Police arrested four protesters who entered the reservation during the demonstration. All four were later released. Angry Makah seized an inflatable boat belonging to the group and threw rocks at the Sea Shepherd's 95-foot former Coast Guard vessel Sirenian.

Japanese whaling (2003–present)

In its anti-whaling efforts, Sea Shepherd attempts to deter Japanese ships that hunt minke and fin whales in the Southern Ocean. In 2005, Japan decided to double its quota from the previous year to 935 minke whales and ten endangered fin whales. In 2007, they planned a take of 50 fin whales and 50 humpback whales. Sea Shepherd claims that its activities reduced catches to a level where the Japanese had not been able to make a profit from the whaling for three years running as of 2010.
The Japanese fleet of the Institute of Cetacean Research consists of a factory ship, two spotter vessels, and three harpoon boats.
Article III.2 of the ICRW, however, requires that no meat from caught whales is wasted, and in order to meet this requirement as well as fund their efforts, the whalers sell the meat on the open market. Among other places, it can be found at Tokyo's famed Tsukiji fish market and Japanese restaurants. Sea Shepherd has stated that one of the main aims of their operations is to make commercial whaling financially unviable.
In his 2009 book, Whaling in Japan, Jun Morikawa states that Sea Shepherd's confrontational tactics have actually strengthened Japan's resolve to continue with its whaling program. According to Morikawa, Sea Shepherd's activities against Japan's whaling ships have allowed the Japanese government to rally domestic support for the program from Japanese who were otherwise ambivalent about the practice of hunting and eating whales. 11.

=Taiji-area dolphin hunts (2003, 2010–present)=

In October 2003, Sea Shepherd documented the method used to kill dolphins in the Japanese historic whaling town of Taiji. They say that Japanese fishermen use unnecessarily brutal methods to hunt dolphins.
In November, two members, including Watson's wife, were arrested for trying to free whales penned in a bay. It was also unclear exactly what species was involved. Watson stated they were dolphins, but Japanese officials said they were probably pilot whales.
In 2004, The Cetacean Society International claimed that the Sea Shepherd's release of captured dolphins "played into the hands of the authorities" and prevented other groups from documenting the activities at Taiji. In 2009, Ian Campbell, a Sea Shepherd board member, called for a boycott of Japan's 2016 Olympic bid because of the reported 23,000 dolphins killed each year at Taiji.watoday.au/breaking-news-national/boycott-japan-olympics-bid-exminister-20090715-dkum.html Accessed August 12, 2009

=Southern Ocean (2005–06)=

Between December 2005 and January 2006, a crew of 43 aboard the Farley Mowat attempted to stop the Japanese whaling fleet in the Southern Ocean. During the campaign, the Farley Mowat 'sideswiped' a Japanese supply ship called the Oriental Bluebird. No damage or injuries were reported. New Zealand Conservation Minister Chris Carter criticized Sea Shepherd as irresponsible for using tactics such as running into the other vessel with a "can opener" device, a seven-foot steel blade on the starboard bow designed to damage the hull of an enemy ship.
Ian Campbell, Australia's environment minister, said Watson's threats to attack the Japanese fleet reflected poorly on legitimate anti-whaling groups and risked "setting back the cause of whale conservation many years." After Watson called the New Zealand government "contemptible" for allowing Japan to continue killing whales, Campbell called Watson a "lunatic" and "rogue pirate on the seas." Watson dispatched a press release that he would stop his attacks if the governments of New Zealand and Australia would initiate legal action to stop the whaling.
On January 16, the organization declared that its fuel supplies had run out and that they were heading to shore. They claimed credit for chasing the whalers from whaling grounds and hindering operations for over 15 days. The vessel covered more than 4000 km over a six-week period.

=Operation Leviathan (2006–07)=

Between December 2006 and February 2007, the Robert Hunter and Farley Mowat participated in "Operation Leviathan" against Japanese whaling in the Southern Ocean. On February 9, 2007, Sea Shepherd was able to intercept the Nisshin Maru and engaged it, but later had to stop and search for one of their missing small boats. On February 12, 2007, the group stated it had spotted the Japanese vessel Kaiko Maru as it pursued a pod of minke whales and moved its vessels to intercept the hunt. The Institute for Cetacean Research in Tokyo said the Robert Hunter rammed the Kaiko Maru and that afterwards, both Sea Shepherd ships came to either side of the Kaiko Maru, stopping her from continuing. The Japanese stated that they then threw smoke pots on to the deck and released ropes and nets. The Japanese had already put out several distress calls due to a propeller they say was damaged during the attacks. Watson told the press that the Farley Mowat chased the whaler into the ice and that the Kaiko Maru then sideswiped the Robert Hunter to push the ship into the ice. The Robert Hunter sustained a one-metre gash in the starboard bow region according to Watson. He also said that shortly after that, the Kaiko Maru reversed and collided deliberately into the port stern section of the Robert Hunter causing a metre-long gash in the hull. This campaign was featured in the documentary At the Edge of the World.

=Operation Migaloo (2007–08)=

The 2007–08 Antarctic campaign was named Operation Migaloo, after the only known albino humpback in the world. This campaign was the focus of the first season of Animal Planet's reality TV series Whale Wars, which premiered on November 7, 2008.
On January 15, 2008, after attempting to entangle the whaling vessel's propeller and throwing containers of butyric acid onto the decks,Japan to release whaling activists, International Herald Tribune/Asahi, January 17, 2008 two Sea Shepherd members, Benjamin Potts and Giles Lane, from the Sea Shepherd vessel 
The crew of the Yushin Maru No. 2 detained the men for two days, before turning them over to the Australian customs vessel MV Oceanic Viking on the orders of Japanese authorities; subsequently, the Steve Irwin rendezvoused with the Oceanic Viking and the two crewmembers were returned to Sea Shepherd.
On March 3, Sea Shepherd members threw bottles of butyric acid and packages of slippery methyl cellulose powder onto the Japanese vessel Nisshin Maru. Australian foreign minister Stephen Smith condemned Sea Shepherd's actions for potentially causing injury The Japanese Government called in the Australian and Netherlands ambassadors to protest the actions and urge those countries to prevent any violence.news.au/couriermail/story/0,23739,23316023-954,00. We filmed and photographed the entire thing. Not a single thing landed anywhere near their crew ... It is their way of trying to get sympathy."
The International Whaling Commission issued a statement on March 8, 2008 that "called upon the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society to refrain from dangerous actions that jeopardise safety at sea, and on vessels and crews concerned to exercise restraint." The Australian Government also called for all parties to "exercise restraint" and "responsible behaviour" in the Southern Ocean. Retrieved January 9, 2010.
On March 17, 2008 Paul Watson claimed that he was shot by the Japanese crew or coast guard personnel during the campaign. The incident is heavily documented during the show in the final episode, and the first six episodes are covered as a buildup to what is portrayed as the major incident during the campaign. The footage in "Whale Wars" shows Watson standing on the deck of the Steve Irwin while Sea Shepherd crew throws glass bottles filled with butyric acid at the Nisshin Maru whaling vessel. The Japanese respond by throwing flashbang devices. Watson is then shown reaching inside his jacket and bullet-proof vest and remarking "I've been hit." Back inside the bridge of the Steve Irwin, a metal fragment is found inside the vest. The Institute of Cetacean Research has dismissed Sea Shepherd's statements as lies. The Institute and Coast Guard said that they used seven flashbang devices designed to flash and make noise in the air without causing harm.smh.au, March 7, 2008 Neither of the two conflicting accounts have been independently verified. The Australian Foreign Affairs Department had condemned "actions by crew members of any vessel that cause injury." Two media releases were made on the same day from the office. One said that the Australian Embassy in Tokyo had been informed by the Japanese that the whalers had "fired warning shots""Incident in the Southern Ocean" Media release, website of the Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs, March 7, 2008. Retrieved January 9, 2010 while the updated version used the phrase "'warning balls' – also known as 'flashbangs' – had been fired", and that no gunshots had occurred."Incident in the Southern Ocean – Update" Media release, website of the Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs, March 7, 2008. Retrieved January 9, 2010
The Tokyo Metropolitan Police Department obtained arrest warrants for three Sea Shepherd crew (Daniel Bebawi, Jon Batchelor and Ralph Koo), for allegedly attempting to foul the propeller of the Keiko Maru and throwing smoke bombs. Japanese authorities also requested to have the men placed on the Interpol 'red notice' list.BBC News Accessed August 10, 2009

=Operation Musashi (2008–09)=

The 2008–2009 Antarctic campaign was named Operation Musashi after the 17th-century Japanese strategist Miyamoto Musashi. On December 4, 2008, actress Daryl Hannah joined Sea Shepherd's crew aboard the Steve Irwin to take part in this season's operation. "Activists vows to protect whales from Japanese", Associated Press, 2008-12-03.
On February 6, 2009, Watson reported that the Steve Irwin had collided with the Yushin Maru 2 as the Steve Irwin tried to block its attempt to prevent the transfer of a dead whale up the slipway of the factory ship Nisshin Maru. As Watson explained the incident, "We were in the process of blocking the transfer from the Yushin Maru 2 when the Yushin Maru 1 moved directly in front of the bow to block us. I could not turn to starboard without hitting the Yushin Maru 1. I tried to back down but the movement of the Yushin Maru 2 made the collision unavoidable." and formed part of a multi-day conflict during which Sea Shepherd attempted to prevent the Japanese fleet from harpooning whales, respectively tried to block whales from being transferred to the factory ship for processing by blockading the Japanese' vessel's slipway. The Japanese made extensive use of LRADs to deter Sea Shepherd. They were also accused of aiming the device at the Steve Irwin's helicopter while in flight, something the group especially condemned, seeing that the helicopter was only engaged in filming, and could have crashed if the pilot had lost control.Sea Shepherd Battles Japanese Whalers in the Ross Sea – Sundance Channel, February 7, 2009
Also in February, the president of the company overseeing the whale hunt used a media release to call upon the government of Australia to prevent what he considered violations of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. He expressed concerns over what he called "deliberately ramming vessels and trying to disable their propellers."

=Operation Waltzing Matilda (2009–10)=

In June 2009, Sea Shepherd announced its 2009–10 Antarctic campaign, called Operation Waltzing Matilda.
On January 5, 2010, Sea Shepherd announced that TV personality Bob Barker had earlier donated $5 million to Sea Shepherd to buy in secret an ex-Norwegian whaling vessel, now named Bob Barker after the donor, and that the ship located the Nisshin Maru Japanese whaling vessel. The Bob Barker reportedly flew the Norwegian flag when within range of the Nisshin Maru. The Norwegian flag was then lowered and the 'Jolly Roger' Sea Shepherd flag raised.
In December 2009 and early 2010, New Zealand representatives of the Institute of Cetacean Research, including PR specialist Glenn Inwood, chartered Australian planes to search for the other Sea Shepherd ship, MV Steve Irwin. Sea Shepherd claims that while doing so, they fraudulently posed as New Zealand government agents – but in any case failed to find the vessel.
Sea Shepherd reported that in this last season, the group had increasingly received information from private persons about the whereabouts of the Japanese fleet, such as by ship passengers on an Antarctic cruise who noted the fleet refueling.
Japan's Fisheries Agency announced on April 12, 2010 that the whaling fleet had caught about half of the 985 whales it has hoped to catch during the 2009–2010 whaling research season as a result of obstruction by Sea Shepherd operations. The whalers harvested 506 southern minke whales and one finback whale. 2.

==Ady Gil collision (2010)==


On January 6, 2010, the Ady Gil was severely damaged in the Antarctic Ocean after the Japanese security vessel the Shōnan Maru 2 collided with it; both sides blamed each other for the incident. The Ady Gil was abandoned on January 7, 2010 at 17:20 GMT.ABC News, January 8, 2010, Ady Gil sinks after whaling skirmish
The Australian Government, and the New Zealand Government called for restraint and expressed concern at the risk of human lives in the hostile environment. The New Zealand government also repeated its opposition to whaling in the Sanctuary. However, New Zealand's Foreign Minister Murray McCully later stated that:
This brought a heated response by Paul Watson, who accused the "know-nothing politician" McCully of ignoring the fact that Sea Shepherd had not killed anyone in over three decades of direct action – and stated that McCully's comments were instead giving Japanese whalers a green light to endanger the lives of Sea Shepherd crews.
A New Zealand spokesman for the Institute of Cetacean Research noted that Japan would continue to protect their operations "in whatever way it can" and that further clashes would be likely unless Sea Shepherd stopped its operations.
On January 9, 2010, Sea Shepherd lodged a piracy complaint against the captain and the crew of the Shōnan Maru 2 in the Dutch courts.
Sea Shepherd noted that after the loss of the vessel, a flood of donations had arrived for the group, with $170,000 being given in the first few hours after the collision.
On February 15, 2010, it was reported that Pete Bethune, the former captain of the Ady Gil, boarded the Shonan Maru at night for the purpose of making a citizen's arrest of its captain for attempted murder of his own crew and the destruction of the Ady Gil. Bethune, who reportedly had to overcome spikes and anti-boarding nets to board the Japanese vessel, was also to present the captain with a bill for $3 million USD and a letter outlining the findings of maritime experts who found that the Japanese vessel was at fault for the collision as it was the overtaking vessel and did not have right of way.
Japan's foreign minister, Katsuya Okada, announced that Bethune was being detained under international maritime law and would be transported to Japan, where he would face charges, possibly of piracy.
Bethune arrived in Japan approximately a month after his boarding. Bethune was interrogated, then brought to trial at the Tokyo District Court, where he was charged with trespassing, causing injuries, obstructing commercial activities, vandalism, and carrying a weapon. Sea Shepherd called these charges "bogus", and described Bethune as a "political prisoner." In a statement, it said "Shame on Japan for blowing Captain Bethune's case out of proportion, and shame on the Japanese maritime authorities for failing to investigate the serious criminal actions of the Shonan Maru 2."
On July 7, 2010, Bethune was given a two-year suspended sentence and banned from Japan for five years.
On January 7, 2013, Watson was sued in Los Angeles County by the owner of the boat for $5 million. Gil says his vessel was rammed by a Japanese whaling ship in 2010 and suffered damage to the nose but the damage was repairable. According to Gil, Watson saw the collision as an opportunity to spin the incident into a major publicity and money maker for his organization so instead of towing the boat to port for repairs, he secretly gave an order to sink the ship "under the cover of darkness" and blamed the Japanese. Gil claims Watson knew that blaming the whalers for the destruction of his ship would garner sympathy for his cause and spark outrage against the whalers inspiring more people to donate to his anti-whaling organization.

=Operation No Compromise (2010–11)=

Sea Shepherd's 2010–2011 campaign, dubbed "Operation No Compromise", consisted of 90 Sea Shepherd crew. The Institute later announced that the total catch was 195 whales. 09.

=Operation Divine Wind (2011–12)=

After Operation No Compromise, Watson said the group was seeking a fourth vessel for the following summer's campaign, "Divine Wind". On September 30, 2011, Japan based Asahi News announced Japan would return to the Southern Ocean, despite rumours that in the wake of the March 2011 tsunami the Japanese government may not justify the research program's continuation.
The Japanese whaling fleet departed Shimonoseki, Yamaguchi Prefecture for the southern oceans on December 6, 2011 with an announced goal of hunting 935 minke whales, 50 fin whales and 50 humpback whales.seashepherd. The hunt was funded, in part, by ¥2.3 billion from the Japanese government's 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami relief budget. The Japanese government explained that the use of its money to support the whaling program was justified as one of the whaling ships was home-ported in Tōhoku. 9; Associated Press, "¥2.3 billion for Tohoku diverted to whale hunt", Japan Times, December 10, 2011, p. 1.
To contest the hunt, the Bob Barker departed Hobart, Tasmania on December 15. The Steve Irwin was to follow from Albany, Australia on December 16 and the Brigitte Bardot from Fremantle, Australia on December 17. 2. Using remote-controlled, pilotless aerial drones, Watson said that they had made contact with the Nisshin Maru west of Perth on December 24, 2011. Watson stated that Japanese security vessels were tailing the Steve Irwin and reporting its location so that the Nisshin Maru would be able to stay away from Watson's ship. According to Watson, however, the Bob Barker and Brigitte Bardot, were free to continue the pursuit of Nisshin Maru.Jiji Press, "Sea Shepherd using drones to track whalers", Japan Times, December 26, 2011, p. 2.
On December 29, 2011, the Brigitte Bardot was severely damaged by a 6-meter swell while following the Nisshin Maru. The Steve Irwin temporarily abandoned its pursuit of the whalers to escort the Brigitte Bardot back to Australia. The Bob Barker continued to follow the whaling fleet,Jiji Press, "Sea Shepherd scouting vessel badly damaged", Japan Times, December 30, 2011, p. 2. and on January 4 found and began to follow the harpoon ship Yushin Maru, with help from the aerial tracking drones. 2. 11. While in port, the Steve Irwin defied an order by the Fremantle harbourmaster to lower her Jolly Roger-styled flag after docking in Fremantle.
After departing the port, a team from environmentalist group "Forest Rescue Australia" approached and illegally The activists were retrieved by an Australian customs service ship and returned to port on January 16, 2012. Gillard stated that the cost of retrieving the activists would be borne by the Australian taxpayers. 2.
There were several incidents in January. Along with receiving attacks consisting of bottles filled with butyric acid and paint, the Institute of Cetacean Research reported that Sea Shepherd had renewed attempts to entangle the propellers of the Shonan Maru 2 and that the activists had attempted to fix hooks and lines to the vessel's rails.
On February 12, 2012, Sea Shepherd activists succeeded in wrapping a rope around the Yushin Maru No. 2's propeller, slowing the ship. The activists also pelted the whaler's crew with butyric acid and enveloped the ship in smoke. The whalers responded by spraying the activists with water. The clash lasted about two hours. 2.
On March 5, 2012, the Bob Barker tracked down the Nisshin Maru. On March 8, Japan announced that it was ending its whale hunt, which was scheduled to end in late March. The Sea Shepherd Society places the number of whales it saved during Operation Divine Wind as 768. 266 Minkes and 1 Fin were killed.seashepherd.org/campaigns/operation-divine-wind/operation-divine-wind

=Operation Zero Tolerance (2012–2013)=

Operation Zero Tolerance was launched in November 2012. The campaign included a new ship called the Sam Simon.
On December 17, 2012, the US Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals issued an injunction against Paul Watson, Sea Shepherd and any party acting in concert with them from physically attacking any person or vessel of the Institute of Cetacean Research and requiring them to stay at least  Sea Shepherd appealed to the US Supreme Court to have the injunction set aside, but the appeal was rejected.sbs.au/news/article/1737280/US-Supreme-Court-rejects-Sea-Shepherd-bid
On 5 January 2013, the MV Steve Irwin docked in Timaru, New Zealand and was met by customs officers who searched the vessel for Paul Watson. Watson, however, had transferred to another vessel in international waters to avoid arrest in relation to two Interpol Red Notices.stuff.co.nz/timaru-herald/news/8148531/Fugitive-not-on-ship-during-visit
Also on that day in Timaru, a distress call was issued in relation to the MV Brigitte Bardot after an observer mistook the vessel for an overturned yacht. While several vessels nearby responded to the call, the MV Brigitte Bardot did not respond and instead turned away at high speed upon the arrival of a rescue helicopter. The South Canterbury Coastguard and Maritime New Zealand criticized Sea Shepherd over the incident, stating "There was no need for Sea Shepherd to behave like this".stuff.co.
On 7 January 2013, Watson stepped down as Captain of the Steve Irwin, which will now be captained by Siddharth Chakravarty of India. In response to an order by the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, Watson also resigned as President of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society in the United States and Australia. He also resigned his position on the Executive Director of the Society in the United States. He also stepped down as the campaign leader for the operation and handed it over to former Greens Party leader and former Australian Senator, Bob Brown.
In January 2013, legal representatives of the ICR wrote to Sea Shepherd alleging a breach of the terms of the injunction due to the MV Brigitte Bardot having approached within 18.5m of the Yushin Maru 3 on 29 January 2013. A motion was subsequently filed in America's 9th Circuit court seeking to find Sea Shepherd in contempt of court over the incident. In response, Sea Shepherd argued that the Brigitte Bardot is not subject to the U.S. law, being an Australian-flagged vessel operating in international waters.3news.co.aspx
On 20 February 2013, the Nisshin Maru collided with multiple vessels after its attempt to refuel met with interference from Sea Shepherd vessels. While Sea Shepherd claimed that the Steve Irwin and Bob Barker were rammed by the Nisshin Maru, Japan's Fisheries Agency attributed blame to Sea Shepherd claiming they had taken the offensive and had hit the Nisshin Maru at least four times during refueling despite verbal warnings.heraldextra.html During the incident, security personnel aboard the Japanese vessels deployed non-lethal deterrence measures including stun grenades and water cannon. No injuries were reported.
On 27 February 2013, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit declared Sea Shepherd "pirates", clearing the way for Japan to pursue further legal action against the organization.  Said chief judge Alex Kozinzki, "When you ram ships, hurl glass containers of acid, drag metal-reinforced ropes in the water to damage propellers and rudders, launch smoke bombs and flares with hooks; and point high-powered lasers at other ships, you are, without a doubt, a pirate."Agence France-Presse/Jiji Press, "U.S. judge labels antiwhaling group 'pirates'", Japan Times, 28 February 2013, p. 2
On 2 March 2013, Sea Shepherd claimed victory The Sea Shepherd Society places the number of whales it saved during Zero Tolerance as 932.seashepherd.au/news-and-media/2013/05/09/sea-shepherd-launches-operation-relentless-its-10th-antarctic-whale-defence-campaign-1516
On 20 March 2013, the Sea Shepherd fleet arrived in Williamstown without Paul Watson.3news.co.aspx Surveyors from the Australian Maritime Safety Authority were scheduled to inspect the Sam Simon, the only Australian-flagged ship, for any evidence of a breach of International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea.

=Operation Relentless (2013-2014)=

The 10th campaign was named Operation Relentless.

Notes


