[[Paris Saint-Germain Féminines]]

CATEGORIES: Paris Saint-Germain F.C. (Ladies), Women's football clubs in France, Paris Saint-Germain F.C., 1991 establishments in France

Paris Saint-Germain Féminines is a professional women's football club based in Paris, France. The club has been the female section of Paris Saint-Germain since 1991. PSG Féminines is managed by Camillo Vaz. The capital club is chaired by Simon Tahar. The Stade Georges Lefèvre of the Camp des Loges in Saint-Germain-en-Laye, with a capacity of 3,500 seats, is the main stadium of the club. The 2010–11 season became their 12th season in Division 1 Féminine and their 10th consecutive season in the top-flight of French football. Paris Saint-Germain won the Division 2 Féminine in 2001 and were promoted to the top-tier. Since then PSG has never been relegated from the Division 1 Féminine. Paris Saint-Germain captured their first major title and most prestigious honour to date after claiming the Coupe de France Féminine in 2010. The ladies were runner-ups of the cup in 2008. PSG finished runners-up in Division 1 Féminine and qualified to the UEFA Women's Champions League for the first time in its history in 2011, following a decisive victory over second-placed Montpellier in the final match of the season.

History

The first record of a Paris Saint-Germain female side can be traced back to 1971. The club had licensed a few women before the 1971–72 season but there wasn't a women's football section or even a team.13  33 women were licensed by the club and a senior female team was registered in the Division d'Honneur de Paris in 1972.9 PSG played in the DH Paris until 1980, when they were promoted to the Division 1 Féminine after its allotment of clubs was increased from 20 to 48. Paris Saint-Germain were vice-champions of the Division 1 Féminine in 1983 and 1985.
PSG Ladies, as the official female section of Paris Saint-Germain, was founded in 1991. Therefore, the club does not recognize the history, titles and statistics before 1991. Casually, that same year the FFF decided to change the competition format of the Division 1 Féminine for the following season. Since 1974, the league consisted of several groups with the winners of each group entering a playoff phase to determine the champion. The 1991–92 season was the last one with that format. A new rule was created, however, to make way for the new competition format being set up for the 1992–93 season and onwards. The Division 1 had 30 clubs spread in three groups with 10 clubs each. The new format, however, consisted of 12 clubs in a single group. In order to eliminate the remaining 18 clubs, the four highest placed teams from each group would stay in the Division 1 while the six lowest placed teams from each group would be relegated to the Division 2 Féminine. The newly formed PSG Ladies suddenly found themselves in Division 2 after finishing fifth just one point behind the fourth spot, synonymous with top-flight status for the 1992–93 season.
PSG Ladies returned to the Division 1 in 1994 after two seasons in the second tier. "Les Parisiennes", however, were relegated back to Division 2 following a disastrous 1994-95 season: 2 wins, 2 draws and 18 losses for a total of only 6 points. Six years later, Paris Saint-Germain won the Division 2, the club's first trophy, and were promoted to the top-flight in 2001. Since then Paris has never been relegated from the Division 1. PSG continued without major problems among the elite but never within the top clubs under coach Cyril Combettes. The best players in the club at the time were Bérangère Sapowicz, Laure Boulleau, Nonna Debonne and Sabrina Delannoy. Cyril Combettes resigned due to relationship problems with the players and was replaced by Éric Leroy in 2007. He guided PSG to the Challenge de France Final against Olympique Lyonnais at the Stade de France in 2008. PSG conceded three goals after having withstood the French champion in the first half.
After a disappointing 2008-09 campaign, Éric Leroy handed over the job to Camillo Vaz in 2009. PSG signed French internationals Élise Bussaglia, Julie Soyer and Jessica Houara. Camille Abily, Sonia Bompastor and Zohra Ayachi also joined the club. Paris Saint-Germain finished third in the league during the 2009–10 season, the highest place in the club's history. PSG captured the Challenge de France by defeating Montpellier 5–0 in the Final at the Stade Robert Bobin. The scoreline is the largest gap in the cup's young history. The title is the club's first major title and most prestigious honour to date. It is also the first time in French football history that both the male and female sections of a club occupy both the country's national cups. The male section of PSG claimed the French Cup. The face of the team changed slightly for the 2010–11 season. Ingrid Boyeldieu, Émilie L'Huillier and Stéphanie Hoffele left PSG, while Gwenaëlle Pelé and Sophie Perrichon joined the coaching staff. Léa Rubio, Léa Le Garrec and Charlotte Lozè arrived as replacements. PSG's star signing Kátia formed a lethal partnership along Élise Bussaglia. The duo played an important role in PSG's qualification to the UEFA Women's Champions League for the first time in its history, crowned with a decisive victory over second-placed Montpellier in the final match of the season.

List of seasons

 
 

|-
|}

Stadia

The Camp des Loges is the training center and club headquarters of Paris Saint-Germain. The Camp des Loges became the training centre of Paris Saint-Germain in 1974. It began hosting the Reserves and Academy in 1975. The training center officially opened on 4 November 1975 and Pedro Alonso became its first director. Bertrand Reuzeau is the current director. Paris Saint-Germain temporarily vacated the Camp des Loges due to renovations in 2006.19 The new Camp des Loges was inaugurated in 2008. The Camp des Loges hosts training sessions for the senior team and also serves as the home facility for the Reserves and Academy and Female sides, which play their home matches at the Stade Georges Lefèvre.

Board and staff



Current squad

French teams are limited to four players without EU citizenship. The squad list includes only the principal nationality of each player; several non-European players on the squad have dual citizenship with an EU country. Also, players from the ACP countries—countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Pacific that are signatories to the Cotonou Agreement—are not counted against non-EU quotas due to the Kolpak ruling.
| title = Effectifs et résultats (féminines)
| url = 
| work = PSG.fr
| accessdate = 16 October 2010}}[/ref] 

Reserves and academy

The Reserves, Paris Saint-Germain Ladies B, play in the DH Île-de-France under the direction of Julien Rigoux, while the Under-19 team participates in the Challenge National Féminine U-19 under manager Pierre-Yves Bodineau. Both sections are the reserve team and academy of Paris Saint-Germain, and have a united squad where players from PSG B can play for the U-19 team and viceversa. Simon Tahar, PSG Association President, has already expressed his strong ambitions for PSG Ladies as the capital club intends to open by 2012 a special formation center whose first professional player might come out in 2014. The initiative will be pursued if PSG Ladies can maintain a good performance throughout the coming seasons. Simon Tahar expects the ladies to secure a big club status in the Division 1 Féminine which will allow the club to fight for the title and participate in the UEFA Women's Champions League. PSG Ladies continued to expand with the creation of a college sports section. Brigitte Henriques, General Manager, detailed the project which is being structured with the support of the entire club. Paris Saint-Germain is aiming to provide a formation center within 3 years and in order to achieve this there several steps to be followed. First, last September, the capital club created a female football school for 6–8 years. The following year, PSG will be opening a college sports section accessible to the 4th and 3rd. The entrance examination will be open to all girls born in 1995-1996. The objective will be to have them join to the professional squad 4 to 5 years. The third stage of the project will be a high school sports section and will open in September 2011. Within three years, PSG will be aiming to inaugurate a formation center for the female section. As women's football is globally booming, the French Football Federation decided to create a Championat National U-18 and PSG seized the news to recruit in this category for them to present a competitive team next season. Currently the club has 105 licensed players, including 30 seniors. The goal is to have 160 or 180 licensed players between 6 and 20 years within three years.

Board and staff



Current squads

| title = Paris Saint-Germain Football Club B
| url = 
| work = Footofeminin.fr
| accessdate = 17 October 2011}}[/ref] 

PSG B

Under-19

List of notable graduates

| title = Paris Saint-Germain Football Club
| url = 
| work = Footofeminin.fr
| accessdate = 27 July 2011}}[/ref] 
|-
|}

Honours

Reserves & Academy



Sports



 
 




