[[Viracopos International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in São Paulo (state), Airports established in 1932, Campinas

Viracopos–Campinas International Airport  It is named after the neighborhood where it is located.
In 2012 the airport was ranked 7th in terms of transported passengers, 9th, in terms of aircraft operations, and 2nd in terms of cargo handled in Brazil, placing it amongst the busiest airports in the country.

History

The IATA airport code of Viracopos is VCP and the specific city code of Campinas is CPQ. Sometimes both codes are used as one although there is a distinction between them in airline reservation systems: VCP, together with CGH (Congonhas) and GRU (Guarulhos), is part of the multiple airport system set around the city of São Paulo (code SAO). An airline that files services with the code VCP has flights displayed when passengers or travel agents request service from São Paulo, whereas flights filed with the code CPQ are displayed as service from Campinas, not São Paulo. A similar example is New York City (NYC), in which the airport codes LGA (LaGuardia Airport), JFK (John F. Kennedy International Airport), and EWR (Newark Liberty International Airport) are used for the same city, although the latter is located in a different city and state.
There are two versions of the origin of the name Viracopos (Turn glasses). The first indicates in the beginning of the 20th century, during an annual fair, there was a misunderstanding between the parish priest and the residents of the neighborhood. This resulted in excessive drinking and quarrels in which the festival booths were torn down, or overturned, during the confusion. The word Viracopos ("flip glasses") was later used by the priest in sermons, referring to the event. Another version says that, on the site of the present airport, previously there had been a bar where herders had regularly met to  exchange views and drink. So "viracopos" was first the name of the district and later of the airport.
Viracopos's origin can be traced to a simple airfield near Campinas built during the 1932 Constitutionalist Revolution in São Paulo. During the 1950s it started being used by cargo companies. In 1960 it was improved with a 3,240 m runway, long enough to accommodate the first generation of intercontinental jet planes such as the Boeing 707, de Havilland Comet, Vickers VC10, Convair 990, and Douglas DC-8, and received its first international flight.
In the 1970s Viracopos became the international airport for São Paulo, because the runway of São Paulo-Congonhas Airport was too short to accommodate intercontinental jet planes. In practice, however, the distance of nearly 100 km from Viracopos to São Paulo made it very inconvenient for passengers and airlines. As a result, direct international passenger service was limited because most international passengers simply opted to fly instead to Rio de Janeiro-Galeão International Airport and then connect to Congonhas Airport, which is located very close to downtown. At that time, Viracopos even appeared on the Guinness Book of Records as the furthest airport from the city it allegedly served.
The position of international airport of São Paulo was lost in 1985 with the opening of Guarulhos International Airport and Viracopos entered into a decade of stagnation, with all international and most domestic flights transferred to Guarulhos and Congonhas.
However, recognizing the strategic importance of Viracopos for the economy, Infraero, the airport administrator in 1995 started to implement a master plan of renovations aiming at the building of a new airport, focusing its efforts on the segment of cargo transportation. The first phase was completed in the first half of 2004, when the airport received new passenger departure and arrival lounges, public areas, commercial concessions and a new cargo terminal. The second phase of the passenger terminal expansion project was completed in 2005 and a new control tower was built, storage and processing facilities for the cargo terminal expanded, and the passenger terminal was entirely revamped. A third phase of expansion, which would build a second runway by 2013, was projected. However, since the airport was conceded in 2012, the deadline for the new runway was postponed until 2018.
Being the second busiest cargo airport in Brazil, Viracopos has 77,000 square meters (646,000 square feet) of cargo terminals, 1,700 square meters (18,300 square feet) for animal cargo, and 1,480 cubic meters (52,200 square feet) of refrigerated space. As a major import/export hub, Viracopos enjoys 'express lanes' for courier traffic which are exceptionally quick and unbureaucratic by Brazilian standards. 
The region of Campinas, like most of the interior of the state of São Paulo, is one of the most prosperous in Brazil, with an impressive economic output. Its local domestic passenger traffic, combined with the intense domestic and international cargo traffic that also serves São Paulo, is large enough to make Viracopos a relatively busy airport. In fact, between 2008 and 2010 passenger traffic grew, from 1.02 million in 2008 to 7.5 million in 2011. The airport can handle 7 million passengers/year. The number of flights offered has increased dramatically since Azul Brazilian Airlines made Viracopos its main hub.
Following a decision made on 26 April 2011 by the Federal Government for private companies being granted concessions to explore some Infraero airports,

Future developments

On 31 August 2009, Infraero unveiled a R$ 2,814 million (US$ 1,482.6 million; € 1,038.8 million) investiment plan to up-grade Viracopos International Airport focusing on the preparations for the 2014 FIFA World Cup and the Summer Olympics in 2016 which will be held in Brazil, São Paulo (99 km away) being one of the venue cities. The investment also intends to provide infra-structure to the airport, alleviating the air-traffic presently concentrated at São Paulo-Guarulhos International Airport. The investiment will be distributed as follows:
However, due to legal and bureaucratic issues, the planned developments never occurred. Since the concession to the Consortium Aeroportos Brasil, a new investment programme was announced by the new (private) operator. This programme includes a new runway and a new passenger terminal, along with other improvements. The new passenger terminal is scheduled to open in May 2014, before the 2014 FIFA World Cup.

Airlines and destinations

Passenger

Cargo

Accidents and incidents

Accidents

Incident

Access

The airport is located  southwest of Campinas, adjacent to the Bandeirantes-Anhanguera highway complex, which connects the capital city to the interior of São Paulo state.








