[[Personal ordinariate]]

CATEGORIES: Canon law (Catholic Church), Types of Roman Catholic organization, Personal Ordinariates, Documents of the Catholic Church, Pope Benedict XVI, Apostolic constitutions


A personal ordinariate, often called more elaborately a "personal ordinariate for former Anglicans"Peter John Elliott, A Little Catechism on the Personal Ordinariates for Former Anglicans (James Goold House Publications, 2012 ISBN 978=1-92115413-3)"The erection of Personal Ordinariates for former Anglicans" - Stephen E. Cavanaugh, Anglicans and the Roman Catholic Church (Ignatius Press 2011 ISBN 978-1-58617499-6) or more informally an "Anglican ordinariate","....." -Fr Aidan Nichols in Andrew Burnham, Heaven and Earth in Little Space (Canterbury Press Norwich 2010 ISBN 978-1-84825-005-5), p. xv is a canonical structure within the Catholic Church established in accordance with the apostolic constitution Anglicanorum Coetibus of 4 November 2009In the Annuario Pontificio such structures are listed under the heading "Personal Ordinariates" followed, in small print, by "in accordance with the Apostolic Constitution Anglicanorum coetibus, 4 November 2009" (Annuario Pontificio 2012, Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2012 ISBN 978-88-209-8722-0, p. 1034).complementary norms The ordinariates were established in order to enable "groups of Anglicans"Note: The Latin title of Anglicanorum Coetibus means "Groups of Anglicans". to join the Catholic Church while preserving elements of their liturgical and spiritual patrimony.
Three such ordinariates exist: Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham (England and Wales, Scotland), Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter (United States, Canada) and Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of the Southern Cross (Australia).

Purpose

The structure of an ordinariate enables Anglicans to enter into full communion with the Pope, while preserving some degree of corporate identity and autonomy from the geographical dioceses for other Catholics of the Latin Church (also known as the "Latin Rite") and maintaining distinctive elements of their Anglican "theological, spiritual and liturgical patrimony".usordinariate.cfm?load=page&page=167 The ordinariates integrate these groups in such ways as "to maintain the liturgical, spiritual and pastoral traditions of the Anglican Communion within the Catholic Church, as a precious gift nourishing the faith of the members of the Ordinariate and as a treasure to be shared",Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham: "Frequently Asked Questions""Rome expected to take five years to approve Personal Ordinariate liturgy", Catholic Herald website."Same talk as published in the newsletter of the Church of England parish of St Mary-the-Virgin, Kenton, Petertide 2010, p. 12"'Anglican Catholics': Bishop Peter Elliott of Melbourne sets me right", The Telegraph website.
The personal ordinariates were originally envisaged for former Anglican communities and clergy seeking to become Catholic, enabling them to retain many aspects of their Anglican liturgy and traditions."Ordinariate Questions & Answers", Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter website. Accordingly, the ordinariates identify as Anglican culturally, but as Catholic theologically and ecclesiologically. Membership in the ordinariates, however, is not restricted to former Anglicans.

Anglican patrimony

In a letter in September 2013, Archbishop Vincent Nichols, President of the Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales, explained that, through the canonical structure of the ordinariate, "Anglicans who wish to enter the full communion of the Catholic Church, bringing with them some of the traditions and beauty of the Anglican heritage in which they were nurtured, may do so.""Archbishop urges Catholics to support the ordinariate", Catholic Herald, 19 September 2013."To All Parishes in the Dioceses of England and Wales", Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham website.
The rites of the ordinariates are characterised by revisions of Anglican rites approved by the Holy See for their use. While the Roman Rite is also permitted for the ordinariates, their official Anglican Use liturgy is based on the Book of Divine Worship that parishes of the United States' Pastoral Provision were already using before the ordinariates were instituted."Liturgy - Anglican Use", Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham website.

Name

"Personal ordinariate" is the official name given to each of the three existing ordinariates in the decree that established it: the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham,Decree of Erection of the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint PeterDecree of Erection of the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter and the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of the Southern Cross. It is also the collective name given to all three in the official yearbook of the Holy See. 1034 and is a name the ordinariates themselves use. PeterPersonal Ordinariate of Our Lady of the Southern CrossLiturgy - Anglican Use
"Ordinariates for former Anglicans" is often used by the ordinariates themselves,"Ordinariate Questions and Answers", Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter website."Resources", Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of the Southern Cross website. by news sources (but not official documents) of the Holy See"First liturgical texts for Ordinariates for former Anglicans", Vatican news network website and episcopal conferences."Pope opens ordinariates for former Anglicans to baptized Catholics", Catholic News Service website. This terminology, however, does not mean that an ordinariate's membership exclusively comprises former Anglicans. The head of the North American ordinariate has said that "ordinariates for former Anglicans must be a bridge to Christian unity and a force for true ecumenism" and the members must "build and rebuild our relationships with confreres who have stayed behind in the Anglican Church"."Ordinariates must be a bridge to Christian unity, ordinary says", BC Catholic, 18 December 2013.
"Anglican ordinariates" is often used by newspapers, such as The Church of England Newspaper"Anglican Ordinariate secure, leaders say", The Church of England Newspaper website. and the Canadian Catholic Register."Hopes Fade for Canadian Anglican Ordinariate", Catholic Register website. It is also often used by communities belonging to the ordinariates."St. Thomas More Catholic Church, a Catholic Church in Toronto of the Personal (Anglican) Ordinariate of the Chair of St. Peter""Anglican Ordinariate Society of the Ozarks" on the website of the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint PeterNewsletter of the Isle of Wight and Portsmouth Group, hosted on the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham website. Peter (the 'Anglican Ordinariate')" The name does not imply that the members of an ordinariate are still Anglicans. While those who have been Anglicans "bring with them, into the full communion of the Catholic Church in all its diversity and richness of liturgical rites and traditions, aspects of their own Anglican patrimony and culture which are consonant with the Catholic Faith", they are "Catholics of the Latin Rite, within the full communion of the Catholic Church ... no longer part of any other communion".

Prospective members

Anglicans

Through the ordinariates, "Anglicans who wish to enter the full communion of the Catholic Church, bringing with them some of the traditions and beauty of the Anglican heritage in which they were nurtured, may do so." In either form they are received by individual profession of faith. The rite of reception would normally also include the sacraments of Confirmation and Eucharist.Complementary Norms for the Apostolic Constitution Anglicanorum coetibus, Article 5 §1
The personal ordinariates have extended the meaning of the word "Anglican" in this context to cover also members of "a Protestant Church linked to the Church of England, such as the Lutheran or Methodist Church"Diocese of Salford, "Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham" and "Anglican, Episcopalian, Methodist, or AME".
Anglicans who join the local Latin dioceses, either beforeAll former Anglicans can join ordinariate, says bishop or afterNorth American ordinate website, "A person is eligible for membership if they, their spouse, or any member of their family is or ever has been Anglican, Episcopalian, Methodist, or AME. This applies even if the person or their spouse has already become a Roman Catholic" the erection of an ordinariate, are permitted to join an ordinariate. Mgr Jeffrey Steenson is an example of someone who first became a member of a Latin diocese before later being a member of an ordinariate.

Non-Anglicans

The founding document of personal ordinariates stated that their members would be either "originally belonging to the Anglican Communion and now in full communion with the Catholic Church" (former Anglicans) or people "who receive the Sacraments of Initiation within the jurisdiction of the Ordinariate".Catechism of the Catholic Church, 1212)
The complementary norms issued at the same time added that "those who have received all of the Sacraments of Initiation outside the Ordinariate are not ordinarily eligible for membership", but indicated that by exception "members of a family belonging to the Ordinariate" can become members also. Such people, not belonging to either of the other two categories of members, are thus a third class.
The same three categories of members are listed in the decree of erection of the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter: "It includes those faithful, of every category and state of life, who, originally having belonged to the Anglican Communion, are now in full communion with the Catholic Church, or who have received the sacraments of initiation within the jurisdiction of the Ordinariate itself, or who are received into it because they are part of a family belonging to the Ordinariate."Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, Decree of Erection of the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter, 1
A 2013 modification of the norms governing personal ordinariates made it clear that membership of an ordinariate is open to those who are Catholics by baptism but have not received both of the other two sacraments of initiation, if evangellising by an ordinariate brings them back to the faith and practice of the Catholic Church. Andrea Tornielli, "Francis makes key amendment giving Ordinariates important role in new evangelisation")Catholic News Agency, "Pope says Catholics seeking confirmation can join Anglican ordinariate" Although they lack an Anglican background, they acquire membership of an ordinariate by receiving within it some of the sacraments of initiation. Other Catholics cannot "for purely subjective motives or personal preference" be enrolled in an ordinariate."Latest News from the Ordinariate", Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham website, 9 July 2013.]"Amendment to Apostolic Constitution Complementary Norms Emphasizes Mission to Evangelize", Personal Chair of Saint Peter website. However, all Catholics may regularly attend and receive communion at ordinariate services, as they can in any Latin or Eastern Catholic parish.
If membership by reception of the sacraments of initiation within an ordinariate is open not only to the Catholics mentioned in the 2013 amendment but to others also who have no Anglican background - something on which no express statement has been issued - anyone who has not yet received all three sacraments of initiation may join. This includes non-Christians, those who, in the view of the Catholic Church, do not have valid baptismArchdiocese of Baltimore, "Valid/Invalid Baptisms & Confirmations" (such as Mormons),Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, "Response to a 'dubium' on the validity of baptism conferred by 'The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints', called 'Mormons'" and those who, again in the view of the Catholic Church, have valid baptism but not valid confirmation or Eucharist. 24 Protestants in general are seen as lacking valid confirmation, but Eastern Christians and some Western groups such as the Old Catholic Church, the Old Roman Catholic Church and the Polish National Catholic Church do administer the sacrament validly.
Latin Rite priests can receive Orthodox Christians, who then belong not to the Latin Church but to the respective Catholic particular church."(Diocese of Salford, "Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham"

History

Background

The apostolic constitution was a response by the Holy See to requests coming from Continuing Anglican churches, particularly the Traditional Anglican Communion; and from Anglo-Catholic sections of the Anglican Communion, such as those involved with Forward in Faith, and, within the Catholic Church, from the Anglican Use parishes, which have existed since the early 1980s, when at the request of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops Pope John Paul II granted the Pastoral Provision allowing the creation, within the territorial Latin Church dioceses of the United States, of parishes in which the liturgy would be celebrated in an approved form of the Anglican tradition and with a married clergy composed of former Anglican priests who were ordained in the Catholic Church on joining it. Many of these Anglican Use Catholics had left the Episcopal Church because of women's ordination especially to the episcopate, revisions of the liturgy, and changes in its moral teaching. These changes evidenced also in the consecration of a homosexual bishop and the blessing of same-sex couples have provoked serious tensions within the composite Anglican world, as Cardinal Walter Kasper said in 2009, leading to the requests to which the apostolic constitution was a response. Cardinal Kasper Between a Rock and a Hard Place" The discussions that led to the granting of the 1980 pastoral provision raised some of the ideas that came to fruition in the decision of 2009. One was the setting up of a structure for former Anglicans similar to the military ordinariate, an idea that was not then acted on because of the small number of Anglicans involved at that time. Barker has given in the article The Pastoral Provision for Roman Catholics in the U.S.A. available on the website of the Catholic Church of Saint Mary the Virgin, Arlington, Texas.
In October 2007 the Traditional Anglican Communion (TAC) presented to the Holy See a petition for full union in corporate form (i.e., as a body, not merely as individuals) with the Roman Catholic Church. This worldwide grouping, under a single primate, of churches of Anglican tradition, but outside of communion with the see of Canterbury, was founded in 1991. It was formed over a number of issues, including liturgical revisions, the ordination of women and open homosexuals as priests, the sanctioning of homosexuality and the importance of tradition.
On 5 July 2008, Cardinal Levada responded to the formal request for "full, corporate and sacramental union" with the Roman Catholic ChurchAnglican Catholic Church of Canada giving written assurance that the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith was giving serious attention to the prospect of "corporate unity" raised in that request.Scott P. Richert Differences between Anglicanism and Roman Catholicism

Announcement and enactment

The decision to institute personal ordinariates for Anglicans who join the Catholic Church was announced on 20 October 2009 by Cardinal William Levada at a press conference in RomeKeith Fournier, "Bridge Over Troubled Tiber: Holy See Welcomes Anglican Christians into Catholic Church" and by the Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, and the Archbishop of Westminster, Vincent Nichols, at a simultaneous press conference in London. As Long As It's According to Tradition"New York Times: "Vatican Bidding to Get Anglicans to Join Its Fold"Guardian: "Roman Catholic church to receive Anglicans"BBC: "Rome rules on admitting Anglicans"Note of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith about Personal Ordinariates for Anglicans Entering the Catholic Church
The apostolic constitution enacting the introduction of personal ordinariates for former Anglicans was released on 9 November 2009, together with supplementary norms for the ordinariates, allowing former Anglicans to enter full communion with the Catholic Church while preserving elements of the distinctive Anglican spiritual and liturgical patrimony. Provision was made for ordination as Catholic priests of married former Anglican clergy, but for historical and ecumenical reasons married men could not be ordained as bishops. The ordinary, who will usually be appointed from among former Anglican clergy, can therefore be either a priest or a bishop. Seminarians in the ordinariate were to be prepared alongside other Catholic seminarians, though the ordinariate might establish a house of formation to address the particular needs of formation in the Anglican patrimony. 4-8
In December 2009 Cardinal Levada responded to each of the bishops of the Traditional Anglican Communion who signed the October 2007 petition for corporate union with the Catholic Church, stating that the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith had completed its long and detailed study with the aim of making available a suitable and viable model of organic unity for their group "and other such groups". The Traditional Anglican Communion then undertook discussions with those other groups and with representatives of the Catholic episcopal conferences and planned to give a formal response after a meeting of their bishops in Eastertide 2010.Statement by Archbishop Hepworth on the Response by the Holy See, 16 January 2010

Acceptance by some Anglican groups

A number of Anglican groups soon petitioned the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith for acceptance into ordinariates.

Developments in certain areas

England and Wales

In October 2010, the parish council of St Peter's in Folkestone voted to enter the Roman Catholic Church. About half the parish, including their priest, were received into the by then established ordinariate on 9 March 2011.
On 8 November 2010, three serving and two retired bishops of the Church of England announced their intention to join the Roman Catholic Church. The serving bishops were suffragan bishops Andrew Burnham of Ebbsfleet, Keith Newton of Richborough, and John Broadhurst of Fulham, who declared their intention to resign from the offices they held with effect from 31 December 2010. The Archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, announced that he had with regret accepted the resignations of Bishops Burnham and Newton. The Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales gave assurance of a warm welcome for those who wished to be part of an ordinariate."Pastoral Letter - 9 November 2010 Ruth Gledhill, religious affairs correspondent of The Times, said that the announcement could prompt "hundreds, possibly thousands" of lay ministers to follow the bishops' example. She added: "It's quite significant as it means the ordinariate - that quite a few people have been saying might not get off the ground - could be a force to be reckoned with.".
On 19 November 2010, the Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales announced that work was proceeding with a view to establishing an ordinariate in January 2011, and that the five Anglican bishops would receive ordination to the Catholic diaconate and priesthood at about the same time and would then assist in the reception of other Anglicans probably in Holy Week, followed during Eastertide by diaconal ordinations and priestly ordination around Pentecost of those former Anglican clergy whose requests for ordination would have been accepted by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith.Statement of the Catholic Bishops' Conference of England and Wales
On 1 January 2011, Broadhurst, Burnham and Newton, together with their wives (except Burnham's wife, who is Jewish) and three former Anglican nuns of a convent at Walsingham, were received into the Catholic Church.
The first personal ordinariate for former Anglicans, the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of Walsingham, was established on 15 January 2011,
In 2014, Monsignor Keith Newton, the ordinary, admitted that the ordinariate had not grown as much as was hoped. It had not yet aroused broad interest among Anglican clergy, who had not welcomed it. To revive interest among Anglican upholders of traditional Christian doctrine, the ordinariate's members, he suggested, should "communicate our message more fully and with more vigour and enthusiasm"."Leader of Anglican ordinariate admits interest has waned" (Catholic World News, 17 April 2014)

United States and Canada

On 1 January 2012, the ordinariate for the United States was established with the name of the Personal Ordinariate of the Chair of Saint Peter. Fr Jeffrey N. Steenson, a former bishop of the Episcopal Church, was named as its first ordinary.S. home in Catholic church In December 2012, the ordinariate was given extended jurisdiction over Canada through the newly established Canadian Deanery of St John the Baptist.  Fr Lee Kenyon, the first Anglican ordinariate priest ordained for service in Canada, was appointed as the first dean.
The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith appointed Cardinal Donald Wuerl, the Archbishop of Washington, as its delegate for the implementation of an ordinariate in the United States. Cardinal Wuerl also led a liaison committee of three bishops of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops for implementation of the ordinariate.
The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith also appointed the Most Reverend Thomas Collins, Archbishop of Toronto, as its delegate for implementation of an ordinariate in Canada. Archbishop Collins also led a liaison committee of bishops of the Canadian Conference of Catholic Bishops.
In November 2010, the Parish of Our Lady of the Atonement  in San Antonio, Texas, an Anglican Use parish, hosted a seminar called "Becoming One" to build relationships and to disseminate information about the possibility of establishing a personal ordinariate in the United States. It was well attended by interested parties from the United States and Canada. In March 2011 a similar conference was held in Mississauga, Ontario, for those interested from across Canada. Fr Christopher Phillips, one of the guest speakers at the conference, celebrated the historic first Anglican Use Mass in Canadian history at St Joseph's Streetsville for the Feast of the Annunciation.
A pastoral letter dated 30 November 2010 from John Hepworth, primate of the Traditional Anglican Communion, stated that announcements similar to those for England and Wales and for Australia were expected to be issued soon concerning Canada and the United States. He also stated that Robert Mercer, a retired bishop resident in England who was formerly the Anglican Bishop of Matabeleland and then a bishop in the Anglican Catholic Church of Canada (a Continuing Anglican church), intended to join the ordinariate for England and Wales.Pastoral Statement of the Primate
However, most of the "continuing" Anglican Church in America (TAC) drew back from joining the ordinariate.
In May 2011, preparations for members of the Traditional Anglican Communion in Canada to join an ordinariate were put on hold in view of reports about intended announcements by Archbishop Collins that those intending to join the ordinariate would have to close their Traditional Anglican parishes and attend a Catholic parish for four to six months and that the dossiers submitted by the clergy concerned showed that their training was inadequate, requiring them to attend a Catholic seminary for an unspecified time. Archbishop Collins denied the reports.Ordinariate talks stall in Canada
In early June 2011, in advance of the report that Cardinal Wuerl was due to present to the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops on interest shown in joining an ordinariate, a 100-member Episcopal parish in Bladensburg, Maryland was reported to have become the first in the United States to ask to be received into the Catholic Church while keeping aspects of its Anglican traditions.Rome ReportsLetter of the Rector of Mount Calvary Church to Parishioners
In his report to the Bishops Conference, Cardinal Wuerl stated that the Holy See had indicated its wish to establish an ordinariate in the United States before the end of 2011.Cardinal Wuerl's oral report of 15 November 2011 He said that of 67 petitions by United States Anglican clergy for ordination as Catholic priests 35 had already received the nihil obstat of the Holy See and would be examined locally for possible acceptance. He also said that two Anglican communities had already entered into full communion with the Catholic Church, one in the Diocese of Fort Worth, the other in the Archdiocese of Washington.

Australia

At the end of November 2010, Bishop Peter Elliott, an auxiliary bishop in Melbourne, Australia,United in Communion, but Not Absorbed said that the Australian bishops intended to follow the example of England and Wales so that an initially "very small" ordinariate could be established in that country, with specific churches designated for its use, by Pentecost 2011. A former Anglican layman, Bishop Elliott is designated as the delegate of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and a liaison to the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference. He expected that, once established, the proposed Australian ordinariate would attract "a much larger number of people".
A national Australian ordinariate festival was held in February 2011 at Coomera in Queensland.
People from the Catholic Church attended, as well as members of the Anglican Church of Australia, the Anglican Catholic Church in Australia, the Church of Torres Strait and the Ukrainian Catholic Church, as well as some Anglican religious who wish to be part of the ordinariate. The implementation committee had its inaugural meeting after the conference.
The consensus of the festival was that unity can be achieved while also preserving the distinctive Anglican heritage of the churches.2011 Kick off for Aust. Ordinariate Bishop Elliott said that membership in the ordinariate by interested persons is sought by a formal application in writing. All clergy transferring to the ordinariate will require a Catholic priest as sponsor and ordination within the Catholic Church.
In a radio discussion on 20 February 2011, Archbishop Hepworth said that some 800 people of his own church, the Anglican Catholic Church in Australia, were committed to joining an ordinariate and that he believed, once implemented, it would grow strongly. The possibility of the Church of Torres Strait (some 9,000 people) joining was also discussed on the radio program.The Anglican Ordinariate of the Roman Catholic Church in Australia
A conference and synod of the Church of Torres Strait, held from 3 to 5 June 2011, decided unanimously to accept the idea of the church becoming a Catholic ordinariate and set a target date of the First Sunday in Advent in 2011 for its implementation after first finding out how many of its membership wish to join the ordinariate.Ordinariate Conference – Church of Torres Strait, TAC, Australia
In his address to an ordinariate information day in Melbourne on 11 June 2011, Bishop Elliott said that the Australian ordinariate was expected to be established in 2012. He also confirmed that the petition of the Church of Torres Strait had been sent to Rome.Peter Elliott, "A Catholic Welcome for Anglicans"
However Archbishop Hepworth, a former Catholic priest who has been married twice, could not be an ordained bishop of the proposed ordinariate. Allen, "Vatican reveals plan to welcome disaffected Anglicans" in National Catholic Reporter A statement issued by the TAC's College of Bishops following a meeting in Johannesburg in March 2012 stated that the body had voted to remain Anglican, despite Archbishop Hepworth's efforts.
As announced by the Australian Catholic Bishops Conference on 11 May 2012,Australian Catholic Bishops Conference - Media Release 11 May 2012 the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith established the Personal Ordinariate of Our Lady of the Southern Cross on 15 June 2012. The 72-year-old Harry Entwistle, who had been the Western Regional bishop (based in Perth, Western Australia) of the Anglican Catholic Church in Australia was appointed the first ordinary and was ordained a priest in the Catholic Church on the same day.dell'Ordinariato personale di Our Lady of the Southern Cross e nomina del primo Ordinario, Bulletin of the Holy See Press Office, 15 June 2012

Nature of the ordinariates

The Anglican ordinariates are intended to integrate groups of Anglicans into the life of the Catholic Church in such a way as "to maintain the liturgical, spiritual and pastoral traditions of the Anglican Communion within the Catholic Church, as a precious gift nourishing the faith of the members of the Ordinariate and as a treasure to be shared"."The Telegraph: Damian Thompson, "'Anglican Catholics': Bishop Peter Elliott of Melbourne sets me right"
The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith establishes, in consultation with the episcopal conference concerned, personal ordinariates for former Anglicans within the episcopal conference's area. There may be more than one personal ordinariate, delimited geographically or otherwise, within the territory of the same episcopal conference. Each ordinariate, composed of lay faithful, clergy, and members of religious institutes originally belonging to the Anglican Communion and now in full communion with the Catholic Church, is juridically comparable to a diocese. The ordinary of each ordinariate, who may be either a bishop or a priest, chosen on the basis of a terna of names presented by the governing council of the ordinariate,Complementary norms, art. 4 §1 is canonically equivalent to a diocesan bishop and an ex officio member of the respective episcopal conference.,Complementary norms, art. 2 §2
An ordinariate shall have a governing council composed of at least six priests and chaired by the ordinary, that exercise the combined functions of the Presbyteral Council and the College of Consultors of a diocese. 12 Each ordinariate is also to have a finance councilApostolic Constitution, X §3 and a pastoral council to perform the same functions as the respective bodies in a diocese. 13 An ordinariate also may establish its own tribunal to process marriage and other cases, though the local diocesan tribunals retain jurisdiction if the ordinariate does not set up a tribunal of its own. XII
The ordinary cannot be a bishop if married or with dependent children. In that case, while not having episcopal holy orders, in particular the power to ordain to the diaconate, priesthood and episcopacy, he has the powers and privileges of other prelates who are canonically equivalent to diocesan bishops, such as territorial prelates. It is he who by issuing dimissorial letters admits candidates to holy orders, having first obtained the consent of the governing council. As an ordinary, he may personally install such candidates in the preliminary ministries of lectorate and acolytate. Like other equivalents of diocesan bishops, he is a full member of the episcopal conference and may use certain episcopal symbols, such as mitre, crosier, ring, pectoral cross, zucchetto, choir dress with purple cassock.
After having heard the opinion of the local diocesan bishop, the ordinary may, with the consent of the governing council and of the Holy See, erect "deaneries", each supervised by a "delegate", that encompass multiple parishes of the ordinariate. 4 §3 The ordinary may also establish and suppress parishes and houses of formation and approve programs of formation with the consent of the governing council.
Like diocesan bishops, the ordinary must make an ad limina apostolorum visit to Rome every five years.  During this visit, the ordinary presents a report on the status of his ordinariate to the Pope through the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith and in consultation with the Congregation for Bishops and the Congregation for the Evangelization of Peoples. XI

Liturgy

The ordinariates use Anglican ritual and have full faculties to celebrate the Eucharist and the other sacraments, the Liturgy of the Hours and other liturgical functions in accordance with the liturgical books proper to Anglican tradition, in revisions approved by the Holy See, so as to maintain the Anglican liturgical, spiritual and pastoral traditions.  This faculty does not exclude liturgical celebrations according to the Roman Rite. III
The Complementary Norms clearly envision considerable pastoral collaboration between the clergy of parishes of personal ordinariates and the clergy of the dioceses within which they would be  located. 8 and Art. 9  The Complementary Norms also specifically grant faculties to the pastor of a geographical parish that has a parish of a personal ordinariate within its boundary to supply liturgical and pastoral services consistent with the needs of the congregation of a parish of an ordinariate that does not have a parochial vicar assigned in the event of the death, incapacity, or unexpected absence of its pastor. 14, §2
In Advent 2013, all three Anglican ordinariates began using a newly revised Order of Mass, updating the 2003 Book of Divine Worship, that "incorporates the sacral language of the Book of Common Prayer... and many elements of the English Missal."

Anglican religious institutes

The apostolic constitution provides a juridical framework within which an Anglican religious community may join the Catholic Church as a group: "Institutes of Consecrated Life originating in the Anglican Communion and entering into full communion with the Catholic Church may also be placed under his (the ordinary's) jurisdiction by mutual consent."Apostolic constitution, VII  The ordinary may also erect new societies of apostolic life and institutes of consecrated life with the permission of the Holy See.

Married former Anglican clergy and rules on celibacy

The Catholic Church does not recognise the validity of Anglican ordination (see Apostolicae Curae), so all who were ordained in the Anglican Communion must receive ordination in the Catholic Church to continue their ministry.  The Apostolic Constitution reaffirms in principle the discipline of clerical celibacy for clergy of the Latin Church, but allows ordination of married former Anglican clergy to the orders of deacon and priest in the service of an ordinariate: "Those who ministered as Anglican deacons, priests, or bishops, ... may be accepted by the Ordinary as candidates for Holy Orders in the Catholic Church″,Apostolic constitution VI §1 "In consideration of Anglican ecclesial tradition and practice, the Ordinary may present to the Holy Father a request for the admission of married men to the presbyterate in the Ordinariate",Complementary norms, 6 §1; cf. Apostolic constitution, VI §2.  This request is granted on a case-by-case basis,Complementary norms, 6 §2 not as a matter of course but by exception: "The norms established in the Encyclical Letter of Pope Paul VI Sacerdotalis coelibatus, n. 42 and in the Statement In June are to be observed."Complementary norms, 6 §1. The first document cited declares: "While, on the one hand, the law requiring a freely chosen and perpetual celibacy of those who are admitted to Holy Orders remains unchanged, on the other hand, a study may be allowed of the particular circumstances of married sacred ministers of Churches or other Christian communities separated from the Catholic communion, and of the possibility of admitting to priestly functions those who desire to adhere to the fullness of this communion and to continue to exercise the sacred ministry. The circumstances must be such, however, as not to prejudice the existing discipline regarding celibacy." The second, which is quoted in press release of the United States Catholic Conference of 12 January 1982, states: "In accepting former Episcopal clergy who are married into the Catholic priesthood, the Holy See has specified that this exception to the rule of celibacy is granted in favor of these individual persons, and should not be understood as implying any change in the Church's conviction of the value of priestly celibacy, which will remain the rule for future candidates for the priesthood from this group." Furthermore, article 6 §2 of the complementary norms excludes exercise of sacred ministry in the ordinariates by those who were ordained in the Catholic Church and later became Anglicans.
On the basis of objective criteria determined by the ordinary in consultation with the episcopal conference and approved by the Holy See, the ordinary may petition the Pope, on a case-by-case basis, to admit married men to the priesthood as a derogation of canon 277 §1canon 277 §1, Code of Canon Law. Retrieved 2009-12-01. of the Code of Canon Law, but the general rule is that the ordinariate will admit only celibate men.

Provisions for former Anglican bishops

Ordination of married men to the episcopacy is excluded in the Catholic tradition, but the apostolic constitution's complementary norms include provisions which take into account the position of married former Anglican bishops.
Overall, these provisions provide considerable flexibility to preserve both the dignity of office and the opportunity for comparable pastoral leadership of former Anglican bishops who are not eligible for episcopal ordination in the Catholic Church.  Note that a former Anglican "diocese" with a married bishop could in fact remain intact as an "ordinariate" with its former bishop, ordained as a priest but granted permission to wear episcopal insignia, serving as its "ordinary".

Similar institutions

The personal ordinariates that the apostolic constitution envisages are similar to military ordinariates for the pastoral care of members of armed forces in that membership is on a personal rather than a territorial basis; but they differ in many aspects, as can be seen by a comparison of Anglicanorum coetibus with the apostolic constitution Spirituali militum cura of 21 April 1986 by which Pope John Paul II restructured the military ordinariates, which were previously called military vicariates.The Implementation of Anglicanorum Coetibus in Canada
The personal ordinariates for former Anglicans differ also from personal prelatures, which, according to canon law, "are composed of deacons and priests of the secular clergy",Canon 294 to whose apostolic works lay people can dedicate themselves by way of agreements made with the prelature. Membership of a personal ordinariate for former Anglicans extends to "lay faithful, clerics and members of Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life, originally belonging to the Anglican Communion and now in full communion with the Catholic Church, or those who receive the Sacraments of Initiation within the jurisdiction of the Ordinariate".Apostolic Constitution, I §4
Much more similar are the eight ordinariates for the faithful of eastern rite, which are listed in the Annuario Pontificio together with the seventeen apostolic exarchates,Annuario Pontificio 2012 (Libreria Editrice Vaticana 2012 ISBN 978-88-209-8722-0), pp. 1029-1033 immediately before the ordinariates for former Anglicans. 1034 Of the ordinariates for the faithful of eastern rite, four (in Argentina, Brazil, France and Poland) are generically for all Eastern Catholics who lack an ordinary of their own rite with jurisdiction for the particular country and who are therefore entrusted to the care of a Latin archbishop in the country. The one in Austria is for Catholics belonging to any of the fourteen particular Churches that use the Byzantine Rite. The other three (Eastern Europe, Greece and Romania) are for members of the Armenian Catholic Church. Such ordinariates have been in existence for a century, having been introduced by the apostolic letter Officium supremi Apostolatus of 15 July 1912.

Comparisons with the Eastern Catholic churches

While the personal ordinariates preserve a certain corporate identity of Anglicans received into the Catholic Church, they are canonically within the Latin Church and share the same theological emphasis and in this way differ from the Eastern Catholic churches, which are autonomous particular churches.
The Latin Church, as a rule, restricts ordination to the priesthood to celibate men - and also to the diaconate except when, by decision of the episcopal conference, married men "of more mature age" (at least 35 years old) may be ordained to the diaconate. The Holy See may grant exceptions for the ordinariates to the general rule on a case by case basis for married former Anglican clergy but not for married laymen.

Prospect of personal ordinariates for Lutherans

On 30 October 2012, Cardinal Kurt Koch, President of the Pontifical Council for Promoting Christian Unity, said in an interview that if Lutherans express a wish for an arrangement similar to the personal ordinariates for former Anglicans, the Catholic Church will have to reflect on it, but that the initiative must come from Lutherans. Archbishop Gerhard Ludwig Müller, Prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, commented on 11 January 2013 that, while the situation of Lutherans is different from that of Anglicans, the Holy See might consider an ordinariate for those among them who might wish to become members of the Catholic Church while retaining "the legitimate traditions they have developed". The Lutheran World Federation General Secretary, Martin Junge, expressed concern at the idea, saying that it would create further difficulties in ecumenical dialogue and discourage the commitment of Lutherans to celebrate in 2017 the 500th anniversary of the Protestant Reformation "in a spirit of ecumenical understanding and cooperation".








