[[Scots language]]

CATEGORIES: Scots language, Languages of Ireland, Languages of Scotland, English languages, Subject–verb–object languages, Language versus dialect

Scots is the Germanic language variety  spoken in Lowland Scotland and parts of Ulster (where the local dialect is known as Ulster Scots).
Because there are no universally accepted criteria for distinguishing languages from dialects, scholars and other interested parties often disagree about the linguistic, historical and social status of Scots.A.J. Aitken in The Oxford Companion to the English Language, Oxford University Press 1992. p.894 Although a number of paradigms for distinguishing between languages and dialects do exist, these often render contradictory results. Broad Scots is at one end of a bipolar linguistic continuum, with Scottish Standard English at the other. Scottish English: Phonology in Varieties of English: The British Isles, Kortman & Upton (Eds), Mouton de Gruyter, New York 2008. p.47 Consequently, Scots is generally regarded as one of the ancient varieties of English, yet it has its own distinct dialects. Alternatively, Scots is sometimes treated as a distinct Germanic language, in the way Norwegian is closely linked to, yet distinct from, Danish.
A 2010 Scottish Government study of "public attitudes towards the Scots language" found that 64% of respondents (around 1,000 individuals being a representative sample of Scotland's adult population) "don't really think of Scots as a language", but it also found that "the most frequent speakers are least likely to agree that it is not a language (58%) and those never speaking Scots most likely to do so (72%)". In the 2011 Scottish census, a question on Scots language ability was featured.

Nomenclature

Native speakers sometimes refer to their vernacular as braid Scots (or "broad Scots" in English) or the "Buchan Claik".J. Aitken in The Oxford Companion to the English Language, Oxford University Press 1992. p.892 occurs occasionally, especially in Northern Ireland. (2002)
Plural Identities—singular Narratives. Berghahn Books. p.107[/ref] The term Lallans, a variant of the Modern Scots word lawlands  Scots in Ireland is known in official circles as Ulster-Scots (Ulstèr-Scotch in revivalist Ulster-Scots) or "Ullans", a recent neologism merging Ulster and Lallans. & Ireland C.A. (2003) Language and Tradition in Ireland: Continuities and Displacements, Univ of Massachusetts Press. p. 159

Etymology

Scots is a contraction of Scottis, the Older Scots and northern version of late Old English Scottisc (modern English "Scottish"), which replaced the earlier i-mutated version Scyttisc. (n.)OED online, Scottish, a. and n. Prior to the end of the 15th century, English speech in Scotland was known as  "English" (written Ynglis or Inglis at the time), whereas "Scottish" (Scottis) referred to Gaelic.
By the beginning of the 15th century, the English language used in Scotland had arguably become a distinct language, albeit one lacking a name which clearly distinguished it from all the other English variants and dialects spoken in Britain. From 1495 the term Scottis was increasingly used to refer to the Lowland vernacular and Erse, meaning Irish, as a name for Gaelic. For example, towards the end of the 15th century, William Dunbar was using Erse to refer to Gaelic and, in the early 16th century, Gavin Douglas was using Scottis as a name for the Lowland vernacular.

History

