[[Marcell Dareus]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Birmingham, Alabama, Players of American football from Alabama, American football defensive ends, American football defensive tackles, Alabama Crimson Tide football players, Buffalo Bills players

Marcell Dareus (born March 13, 1990) is an American football defensive tackle for the Buffalo Bills of the National Football League. He played college football at the University of Alabama, playing defensive end in the Crimson Tide's 3-4 defense. He was seventh in the Southeastern Conference in quarterback sacks in the 2009 season, and was also named Defensive MVP of the 2010 BCS National Championship Game.

Early years

Dareus attended Huffman High School in Birmingham, Alabama, where an ASWA All-State honorable mention defensive lineman. He totaled 117 tackles and 20 sacks as a senior, and also returned a fumble for a touchdown. He was teammates with Andre Smith. Dareus was listed on the Atlanta Journal-Constitution's Super Southern 100, as well as the Mobile Press-Register Elite 18.
Considered a three-star recruit by Rivals. Dareus chose Alabama over scholarship offers from Auburn, Tennessee, North Carolina, among others.

College career

In his true freshman season at Alabama, Dareus played in eight games, making his debut in the Crimson Tide's season opener against Clemson. He registered four tackles while recording three quarterback hurries. Dareus saw playing time at nose tackle in third-down-and-long situations, replacing the pure run-stuffing Terrence Cody.
As a sophomore, Dareus was a big contributor all season at defensive end for Alabama. He played in 14 games and made four starts while serving as the Tide's top pass rusher. He totaled 33 total tackles, 9.0 tackles for loss (−49), seven quarterback hurries, an interception and two pass breakups.
In July 2010, Dareus was investigated by the University of Alabama in conjunction with the NCAA into whether Dareus paid his own expenses when attending a party in Miami, Florida hosted by a sports agent, and whether the circumstances constituted a NCAA violation. At the time of the announcement, he was projected as a first round pick.

College career statistics

Professional career

2011  NFL Draft

Dareus was selected third overall by the Buffalo Bills in 2011. He was the highest selected defensive lineman in Crimson Tide history, and the highest selected Alabama defensive player since Cornelius Bennett in 1987.

Buffalo Bills

Dareus was selected with the 3rd overall pick in the 2011 NFL Draft by the Buffalo Bills on April 28, 2011. Dareus started all sixteen games for the Bills, registering 5.5 sacks, the most for a Bills rookie since the now-retired Aaron Schobel, despite suffering injuries to his shoulder and hand during the season.buffalonews.ece
In 2011 Dareus became a member of School of the Legends (SOTL), an official partner of the NFLPA.
In 2012, Dareus was excused from the team after his younger brother was shot and killed.yahoo.html
He was named to his first Pro Bowl in 2013 as an injury replacement for Justin Smith of the 49ers.






