[[Boxee Box]]

CATEGORIES: D-Link, Linux, 2010 introductions

Boxee Box by D-Link (officially "D-Link Boxee Box DSM-380") is a Linux-based set-top device and media extender that first began shipping in 33 countries worldwide on 10 November 2010. The hardware is based on the Intel CE4110 system-on-a-chip platform (that has a  (100BASE-T) ethernet, and built-in 2.4 GHz 802.11n WiFi. The Live TV dongle, which started shipping in February 2012, enables users to watch digital OTA or Clear QAM cable television channels with EPG. 
The Boxee Box also ships with a small two-sided RF remote control with four-way D-pad navigation and a full QWERTY keypad as standard. This remote is also being sold separately with a USB receiver as "D-Link Boxee Box Remote DSM-22" that can be used with Boxee installed on a computer (so that one can use this remote without owning D-Link's Boxee Box).99, Coming SoonBoxee Box Remote by D-LinkD-Link Boxee Box Remote - DSM-22 The look of both the case and remote prototypes for the Boxee Box was designed by San Francisco-based Astro Studios, the designer of the Xbox 360 and Microsoft Zune. interviews Astro Studios on the design of the BoxeeBoxee Designers Explain Out-of-the-Box Thinking (Exclusive)
As of 16th October 2012, the Boxee team have announced that they intend to discontinue distribution, and will not be releasing any additional major updates.boxee.tv/2012/10/16/boxee-box-past-present-and-future/#idc-cover

Reception

There have been complaints regarding the Boxee Box by D-Link in several aspects.  As of the current version it does not provide support for Hulu or Hulu Plus subscription. 
Another issue is the Boxee Box's software/firmware is not production-ready, but, rather behaves like an Alpha or Beta version.
This issue is more apparent when compared to the older desktop version of Boxee, which can be freely downloaded and installed on commodity PCs.
This viewpoint is furthered by the user interface development changes which took place between the beta version and the version 1.0 software shipped with the Boxee Box, with very little public user testing or input. 
These interface changes place greater emphasis on streaming content versus local downloaded content. Coupled with the removal of the BitTorrent client that was present in the beta version, these changes have led users to believe there is an active shift towards subscription/pay content.
 
On October 31, 2012, Boxee posted a statement on their website that they had to make a decision between releasing a box that was hackable and one that was commercially viable with premium content. 
As it stated, Boxee would have loved for the Boxee Box to be open to other software, but in the end they were bound by agreements with their content providers to ensure the security of the content. This started postings of very negative comments from Boxee Box users on the Boxee blog as the previous Boxee promises had been totally different. 
After less than a day, the entire Boxee page (along with the statement, the blog and its comments) was removed and replaced with a new Boxee TV website. The old Boxee blog was not deleted but moved.






