[[Government of California]]

CATEGORIES: Government of California, State governments of the United States

The government of California is the governmental structure of the state of California as established by the California Constitution. It is composed of three branches: the executive, consisting of the Governor of California and the other constitutionally elected and appointed officers and offices; the legislative, consisting of the California State Legislature, which includes the Assembly and the Senate; and the judicial, consisting of the Supreme Court of California and lower courts. There is also local government, consisting of counties, cities, special districts, and school districts, as well as government entities and offices that operate independently on a constitutional, statutory, or common law basis. The state also allows direct participation of the electorate by initiative, referendum, recall and ratification. 

Executive branch

California's elected executive officers are:

File:Edmund G Brown Jr.jpg|Jerry Brown (D)  
 Governor
File:Gavin Newsom Lieutenant Gov.jpg|Gavin Newsom (D) 
 Lieutenant Governor
File:Kamala Harris Official Attorney General Photo.jpg|Kamala Harris (D) 
 Attorney General
File:Debra Bowen op.gif|Debra Bowen (D) 
 Secretary of State
File:California State Controller John Chiang.jpg|John Chiang (D) 
 State Controller
File:Bill-Lockyer.jpg|Bill Lockyer (D) 
 State Treasurer
File:California Insurance Commissioner Dave Jones -- PD-CAGov.jpg|Dave Jones (D) 
 Insurance Commissioner
File:Tom Torlakson.jpg|Tom Torlakson (D) 
 State Superintendent of Public Instruction

All offices are elected separately to concurrent four-year terms, and each officer may be elected to an office a maximum of two times.

State agencies

State government is organized into many departments, of which most are grouped together into several huge Cabinet-level agencies. These agencies are sometimes informally referred to as superagencies, especially by government officials, to distinguish them from the general usage of the term "government agency."
The independently elected officers run separate departments not grouped within the superagencies, and there are other Cabinet-level departments:

Independent entities

There are many government entities and offices that are under neither executive, legislative, judicial, or local control, but operate independently on a constitutional, statutory, or common law basis.
Examples include the:

Legislative branch

The  California State Legislature is the state legislature. It is a bicameral body consisting of the California State Assembly, the lower house with 80 members, and the California State Senate, the upper house with 40 members.
The Speaker of the California State Assembly presides over the State Assembly. The Lieutenant Governor is the ex officio President of the Senate and may break a tied vote, and the President pro tempore of the California State Senate is elected by the majority party caucus. The Legislature meets in the California State Capitol in Sacramento. Its session laws are published in the California Statutes and codified into the 29 California Codes.

Judicial branch

The Judiciary of California interprets and applies the law, and is defined under the Constitution, law, and regulations. The judiciary has a hierarchical structure with the Supreme Court at the apex. The Superior Courts are the primary trial courts, and the Courts of Appeal are the primary appellate courts. The Judicial Council is the rule-making arm of the judiciary.Constitution of California, Article 6, Section 6(d)
The California Supreme Court consists of the Chief Justice of California and six Associate Justices. The Court has original jurisdiction in a variety of cases, including habeas corpus proceedings, and has discretionary authority to review all the decisions of the California Courts of Appeal, as well as mandatory review responsibility for cases where the death penalty has been imposed. The Courts of Appeal are the intermediate appellate courts. The state is geographically divided into six appellate districts.Auto Equity Sales, Inc. v. Superior Court,, 57 Cal. 2d 450, 369 P.2d 937, 20 Cal. Rptr. 321 (1962).
The California superior courts are the courts of general jurisdiction that hear and decide any civil or criminal action which is not specially designated to be heard before some other court or governmental agency. As mandated by the Constitution, each of the 58 counties has a superior court.Constitution of California, Article 6, ยง 4

Local government

California is divided into counties which are legal subdivisions of the state. Special Districts deliver specific public programs and public facilities to constituents, and are defined as "any agency of the state for the local performance of governmental or proprietary functions within limited boundaries."California Government Code ยง 16271(d) Counties and incorporated cities may promulgate local ordinances, which are usually codified in county or city codes, respectively, and are misdemeanor crimes unless otherwise specified as infractions.








