[[Adolf Hitler's 50th birthday]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 in Germany, Adolf Hitler, Birthdays, Military parades, National days, Parades in Germany, 20th century in Berlin

Adolf Hitler's 50th birthday, on April 20, 1939, was celebrated as a national holiday in Nazi Germany. On that day, the largest military parade in the history of the Third Reich p. 22 was held in Berlin.

Celebrations

On April 18, 1939, the government of Nazi Germany declared April 20, the birthday of Adolf Hitler, a national holiday.  Historian Ian Kershaw comments that the events organized in Berlin by the Nazi minister of propaganda Joseph Goebbels were
Festivities began in the afternoon of the day before, when Hitler was driven at the head of a motorcade of fifty white limousines along Albert Speer's newly completed "East-West Axis", the planned central boulevard for "Germania", which was to be the new capital for the Nazi empire. Hitler had been anticipating a speech from the taciturn Speer and was amused when he evaded this by briefly announcing that the work should speak for itself.  The next event was a torchlight procession of deputations from all over Germany, which Hitler reviewed from a balcony in the Reich Chancellery.  Then, at midnight, Hitler's courtiers congratulated him and presented him with gifts, including
Notably, Speer gave Hitler a model of the gigantic triumphal arch planned for the rebuilding of Berlin, and Hitler's pilot, Hans Baur, gave him a model of the 'Führer Machine', a four-engined Focke-Wulf 200 'Condor' which was to go into service in the summer as Hitler's official airplane.

Military parade

The main feature of the celebrations on the birthday itself was a huge show of the military capabilities of Nazi Germany intended, in part, as a warning to the western powers.
In total, 40,000 Features of the parade were large long range air defence artillery guns, emphasis on motorized artillery and development of air defense units.
Goebbels, the event's organizer
Military leaders throughout the country gave addresses to their troops to celebrate the occasion.  Some, such as Erich von Manstein, were especially effusive in their praise for their supreme commander.
Official guests representing 23 countries took part in the celebrations. Cesare Orsenigo, the Papal envoy, Jozef Tiso, the President of the Slovak Republic, the heads of the branches of Nazi Germany's armed forces, and mayors of German cities offered birthday congratulations at the chancellery of Nazi Germany. The Greek government sent a delegation that included George Kirkimis, the governor general of the Greek region of Macedonia at the time.
The ambassadors of the United Kingdom, France and the United States were not present at the parade, having been withdrawn after Hitler's march into Czechoslovakia. The U.S. was represented at the troop review by chargé d'affaires Raymond H. Geist.
There was no Polish representation at the parade.

Commemoration

A luxury edition of Hitler's book Mein Kampf published in 1939 in honor of his 50th birthday was known as the Jubiläumsausgabe ("Anniversary Issue"). It came in both dark blue and sharp red boards with a gold sword on the cover.
The German author Heinrich Hoffmann wrote a book about Hitler's 50th birthday, entitled Ein Volk ehrt seinen Führer ("A nation honors her leader"). Composer Hans Rehberg wrote a hymn for the occasion.
A film of the birthday celebrations was made — Hitlers 50. Geburtstag. An important example of Nazi propaganda,

Birthday gifts

The Free City of Danzig made Hitler an honorary citizen of the city as a birthday gift. Hitler received the citizenship papers from the hands of Albert Forster, the Nazi leader of the city. Political and military tension between Germany and Poland was heightened and the possibility of Danzig being returned to Germany was reported.
Martin Bormann had the Eagle's Nest constructed as the Nazi Party's birthday gift. However, Hitler did not like the location, as he had a fear of heights.
Hitler did not drink alcohol due to his indigestion. A Munich brewery created a special batch of low alcohol beer for his birthday which then became a regular order.
On the occasion of the birthday, recipients of small incomes received a birthday gift of fifteen German Reichsmarks, plus five Reichsmarks for every dependent, an expenditure totalling 13 million Reichsmarks.

Analysis

According to historian Ian Kershaw;






