[[Fat Tony]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons characters, Fictional American people of Italian descent, Fictional mobsters, Fictional gangsters, Fictional Republicans (United States), Fictional characters introduced in 1991, Fictional criminals

Marion Anthony "Fat Tony" D'Amico is a recurring character in the animated sitcom The Simpsons. He is voiced by Joe Mantegna and first appeared in the third season episode "Bart the Murderer". Commentary for "Bart the Murderer", in The Simpsons: The Complete Third Season DVD. 20th Century Fox. Fat Tony is a gangster and the underboss of the Springfield Mafia. His henchmen include Legs, Louie, and Johnny Tightlips, and he answers to Don Vittorio DiMaggio.

Profile

"Fat Tony" D'Amico was behind several of Springfield's criminal enterprises. His rackets included illegal gambling, cigarette smuggling, and bootlegging. In "The Twisted World of Marge Simpson", Homer contracts with the mafia to drive out Marge's rival snack food distributors. Fat Tony took out a hit on Mayor Quimby in "Mayored to the Mob" in retaliation for a raid on their rat milk facility, which Quimby opposed, as they had promised him "dog or higher". Fat Tony puts out a contract on Homer after his private security business interferes with the mob's interests in "Poppa's Got a Brand New Badge". Homer would have been executed gangland-style if not for Maggie coming to the rescue with her rifle. Fat Tony's son Michael is first mentioned by Fat Tony as he is talking to Marge in "The Seven-Beer Snitch", saying she drove him home from school sometimes. He is then properly introduced in the episode "The Mook, the Chef, the Wife and Her Homer". The episode also reveals that Fat Tony's wife "was whacked by 'natural causes'." Fat Tony and his associates meet in what is known as the "Legitimate Businessman's Social Club". Fat Tony played the violin in "Insane Clown Poppy".
Fat Tony dies in the twenty-second season episode "Donnie Fatso", only to be replaced by his slimmer cousin "Fit Tony." By the end of that episode, Fit Tony's weight gain causes a change of nickname to "Fat Tony", essentially restoring the original character. In "The Real Housewives of Fat Tony", he marries Selma, but the marriage falls apart when Selma discovers Tony only married her to be his goomar and is already married to another woman.

Name

Fat Tony's actual name is the source of some dispute, as several different 'real' names have been revealed over the course of the series. In the third-season episode "Bart the Murderer", Fat Tony is referred to in a news report given by Kent Brockman as William "Fat Tony" Williams, presumably an alias. In the eighth-season episode "The Homer They Fall", the announcer at Homer's boxing match against Drederick Tatum refers to Fat Tony as Anthony D'Amico, which he is called later as well, for example, by the FBI. In the twelfth-season episode "Insane Clown Poppy", Frankie the Squealer claims that Fat Tony's birth name is Marion, a reference to actor John Wayne's real name, Marion Robert Morrison.(2009). Commentary for "Insane Clown Poppy", in The Simpsons: The Complete Twelfth Season DVD. 20th Century Fox.

Character

Development

Fat Tony first appeared in the third season episode "Bart the Murderer". The writers conceived the episode before the film Goodfellas, which has a similar plot, was released. However, when it was, the writers incorporated references to the film in the episode. Fat Tony was modeled on Paul Sorvino, who played mobster Paul Cicero in Goodfellas. The appearance of Louie, one of Tony's henchmen, was based on another Goodfellas actor, Joe Pesci. Commentary for "Bart the Murderer", in The Simpsons: The Complete Third Season DVD. 20th Century Fox.  The end of the episode portrays a TV movie about the events depicted in the episode, in which Joe Mantegna will play Fat Tony (this was before it was decided that Fat Tony would be a recurring character).

Voice

The writers originally wanted Sheldon Leonard to voice Fat Tony. When they were unable to get him, they went with Joe Mantegna. It is his longest-running role. Fat Tony was also voiced by Phil Hartman in the episode, A Fish Called Selma.

Reception

IGN ranked Fat Tony at #18 on their 2006 list of the "Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral Characters".






