[[Cthulhu]]

CATEGORIES: Cthulhu Mythos deities, Fictional characters introduced in 1928, Fictional telepaths, Monsters, Fictional demons

Cthulhu is a fictional cosmic entity that first appeared in the short story "The Call of Cthulhu", published in the pulp magazine Weird Tales in 1928. The character was created by writer H. P. Lovecraft.

Spelling and pronunciation

Cthulhu has also been spelled as Tulu, Clulu, Clooloo, Cthulu, Cthullu, C'thulhu, Cighulu, Cathulu, C'thlu, Kathulu, Kutulu, Kthulhu, Q'thulu, K'tulu, Kthulhut, Kutu, Kulhu, Kutunluu, Ktulu, Cuitiliú, Thu Thu,Harms, "Cthulhu," "PanChulhu," The Encyclopedia Cthulhiana, p. 64. and in many other ways. It is often preceded by the epithet Great, Dead, or Dread.
Lovecraft transcribed the pronunciation of Cthulhu as "Khlûl'hu" and said that "the first syllable Khlûl'-hloo is pronounced gutturally and very thickly. The u is about like that in Umberella; and the first syllable is not unlike klul in sound, hence the h represents the guttural thickness."H. P. Lovecraft, Selected Letters V, pp. 10 – 11. S. T. Joshi points out, however, that Lovecraft gave several differing pronunciations on different occasions.S. T. Joshi, note 9 to "The Call of Cthulhu", The Call of Cthulhu and Other Weird Stories According to Lovecraft, this is merely the closest that the human vocal apparatus can come to reproducing the syllables of an alien language."Cthul-Who?: How Do You Pronounce 'Cthulhu'?", Crypt of Cthulhu #9
Long after Lovecraft's death, the spelling pronunciation  became common, and the role-playing game Call of Cthulhu endorsed it.

Appearance

In "The Call of Cthulhu", H. P. Lovecraft describes the Cthulhu as "A monster of vaguely anthropoid outline, but with an octopus-like head whose face was a mass of feelers, a scaly, rubbery-looking body, prodigious claws on hind and fore feet, and long, narrow wings behind."

Publication history

H. P. Lovecraft's initial short story, "The Call of Cthulhu", was published in Weird Tales in 1928 and established the character as a malevolent entity hibernating within an underwater city in the South Pacific called R'lyeh.  The imprisoned Cthulhu is apparently the source of constant anxiety for mankind at a subconscious level, and also the subject of worship by a number of human religions (located several places worldwide, including New Zealand, Greenland, Louisiana, and the Chinese mountains) and other Lovecraftian monsters (called Deep Ones). The short story asserts the premise that, while currently trapped, Cthulhu will eventually return. His worshippers chant "Ph'nglui mglw'nafh Cthulhu R'lyeh wgah'nagl fhtagn" ("In his house at R'lyeh, dead Cthulhu waits dreaming.")
Lovecraft conceived a detailed genealogy for Cthulhu (published as "Letter 617" in Selected Letters) refers to Cthulhu, while "The Whisperer in Darkness" (1930) hints that one of his characters knows the creature's origins ("I learned whence Cthulhu first came, and why half the great temporary stars of history had flared forth."). The 1931 novella At the Mountains of Madness refers to the "star-spawn of Cthulhu", who warred with another race called the Elder Things before the dawn of man. 66.
August Derleth, a correspondent of Lovecraft, used the creature's name to identify the system of lore employed by Lovecraft and his literary successors: the Cthulhu Mythos. In 1937, Derleth wrote the short story "The Return of Hastur", and proposed two groups of opposed cosmic entities:
According to Derleth's scheme, "Great Cthulhu is one of the Water Beings" and was engaged in an age-old arch-rivalry with a designated Air elemental, Hastur the Unspeakable, described as Cthulhu's "half-brother". 256, 266. Based on this framework, Derleth wrote a series of short stories published in Weird Tales 1944–1952 and collected as The Trail of Cthulhu, depicting the struggle of a Dr. Laban Shrewsbury and his associates against Cthulhu and his minions.
Derleth's interpretations have been criticized by Lovecraft enthusiast Michel Houellebecq. Houellebecq's H P Lovecraft: Against the World, Against Life (2005) decries Derleth for attempting to reshape Lovecraft's strictly amoral continuity into a stereotypical conflict between forces of objective good and evil. P. Lovecraft: Bloodcurdling Tales of Horror and the Macabre.
The character's influence also extended into recreational literature: games company TSR included an entire chapter on the Cthulhu mythos (including statistics for the character) in the first printing of Dungeons & Dragons sourcebook Deities & Demigods (1980). TSR, however, were unaware that Arkham House, who asserted copyright on almost all Lovecraft literature, had already licensed the Cthulhu property to the game company Chaosium. Although Chaosium stipulated that TSR could continue to use the material if each future edition featured a published credit to Chaosium, TSR refused and the material was removed from all subsequent editions.[ref]
</ref>

Legacy

The Californian spider species Pimoa cthulhu, described by Gustavo Hormiga in 1994, is named with reference to Cthulhu.
Two microorganisms that assist in the digestion of wood by termites have been named after Cthulhu and Cthulhu's "daughter" Cthylla: Cthulhu macrofasciculumque and Cthylla microfasciculumque, respectively.
Cthulha won an online contest to name a baby girl.  The parents chose to name her after the second place name "Amelia."  The mother did say "All bow down to the great and powerful Cthula" following her daughter's birth.yahoo.html





Further reading

 | last = Bloch | first = Robert | authorlink=Robert Bloch| chapter = Heritage of Horror | year = 1982 | title = The Best of H. P. Lovecraft: Bloodcurdling Tales of Horror and the Macabre | edition = 1st | publisher = Ballantine Books | isbn = 0-345-35080-4 }}
|last=Lovecraft
|first=Howard P.
|chapter=The Call of Cthulhu
|url=
|origyear=1928
|title=The Call of Cthulhu and Other Weird Stories
|editor=S. T. Joshi
|year=1999
|location=London, UK; New York, NY
|publisher=Penguin Books
|archiveurl=
|archivedate=November 26, 2009
}}




