[[Loyalist Volunteer Force]]

CATEGORIES: Loyalist Volunteer Force, Militant unionism, Proscribed paramilitary organisations in Northern Ireland, Political schisms, Organizations designated as terrorist by the United States government, United Kingdom Home Office designated terrorist groups



The Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF) is a small Ulster loyalist paramilitary group in Northern Ireland. It was formed by Billy Wright in 1996 when he and his Portadown unit split from the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) after breaking the group's ceasefire. They had belonged to the Mid-Ulster Brigade of the UVF and Wright had been the brigade's commander. In a two-year period from August 1996, the LVF waged a paramilitary campaign with the stated goal of combatting Irish republicanism, but during this time it killed at least 14 people in gun and bomb attacks, almost all of them Catholic civilians. The LVF called off its campaign in August 1998 and decommissioned some of its weapons, but in the early 2000s a feud with other loyalists led to a number of killings. Since then, the LVF has been largely inactive, but its members are believed to have been involved in rioting and organized crime.
The LVF has been designated as a terrorist organization by the governments of the United Kingdom, the Republic of Ireland and the United States.Terrorist Exclusion List, US State Department 

Goals

In a document, the LVF outlined its goals as follows:
 
 They also published a magazine called Leading the Way.

History

Early days

Billy Wright was the leader of the Mid-Ulster Brigade of the Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF),Loyalists' feud calls halt to ceasefire Sunday Herald, 9 July 2000 having taken over the command from Robin "the Jackal" Jackson in the early 1990s upon the latter's "retirement". In October 1994, the UVF and other loyalist paramilitary groups called a ceasefire. Internal differences between Wright and the UVF's Brigade Staff in Belfast came to a head in July 1996, during the Drumcree parade dispute. The Orange Order was being stopped from marching through the mostly Irish Catholic and nationalist Garvaghy area of Portadown. There was a standoff at Drumcree Church between thousands of Orangemen and their supporters on one side, and the security forces on the other. Wright was angered that the parade was being blocked, and was often to be seen at Drumcree with Harold Gracey, head of the Portadown Orange Lodge. Northern Protestants: An Unsettled People - Portadown. Blackstaff Press (2000). 
In response to the standoff, Wright's brigade planned to take action. It smuggled homemade weaponry to Drumcree, apparently unhindered by the Orangemen. On 7 July, a day into the standoff, volunteers in Wright's brigade"Murder was 'present' for terror leader" The Telegraph, 8 January 2003. Retrieved 24 July 2009 shot dead Catholic taxi driver Michael McGoldrick near Aghagallon. The man who killed McGoldrick said that he had planned, along with Billy Wright and Mark Fulton, to kidnap three priests from a parochial house in County Armagh and shoot them unless the march was allowed to continue.76 Allegedly, the brigade also planned to drive petrol tankers into the nationalist housing estates and then ignite them. The Troubles: Ireland's Ordeal 1966-1995 and the Search for Peace. Palgrave Macmillan, 2002. Page 517. 
For breaking the ceasefire, Wright and the Portadown unit of the Mid Ulster Brigade were stood down by the UVF leadership on 2 August 1996."UVF disbands unit linked to taxi murder" The Independent, 3 August 1996. Retrieved 18 October 2009 Wright then took most of the Portadown unit with him and set up the LVF. He personally devised its codename of "Covenant" which was used to claim LVF attacks."Religion and Violence: the Case of Paisley and Ulster Evangelicals". The Irish Association - Paper presented by Steve Bruce. UK: University of Aberdeen. 11 October 2003. Retrieved 25 June 2012
Although behind many activities in the Mid-Ulster area –centred on the Lurgan/Portadown area– including many attacks on civilians, Wright was finally charged with menacing behaviour and sentenced to eight years at the Maze prison.The Scotsman 

Death of Billy Wright

On the morning of 27 December 1997, Wright was assassinated by the Irish National Liberation Army (INLA) inside Maze Prison. The operation was undertaken by three INLA volunteers – Christopher "Crip" McWilliams, John Glennon and John Kennaway – armed with two pistols. Page 10-11. The three were imprisoned in the same block as Wright. He was shot as he travelled in a prison van (alongside another LVF prisoner and two guards) from one part of the prison to another. After killing Wright, the three volunteers handed themselves over to prison guards. They also handed over a statement:  Billy Wright was executed for one reason, and one reason only, and that was for directing and waging his campaign of terror against the nationalist people from his prison cell in Long Kesh. 
That night, LVF gunmen opened fire on the dance hall of the Glengannon Hotel, near Dungannon. Three civilians were wounded and one, a former Provisional IRA volunteer, was killed. Police believed that the disco itself was the intended target, rather than the ex-volunteer. Witnesses said it was "an attempt at mass-murder". 
Some loyalists believed that prison authorities colluded with the INLA in Wright's killing. The INLA strongly denied these rumours, and published a detailed account of the assassination in the March/April 1999 issue of The Starry Plough newspaper.

Good Friday Agreement and ceasefire

In March 1998, during the negotiations for the Good Friday Agreement, the LVF issued a statement expressing support for the stance of the anti-agreement Democratic Unionist Party, saying the party's leader, Ian Paisley, had got it "absolutely right". William McCrea - appeared on public platforms with LVF leaders, including Billy Wright.The gospel-singing MP BBC Northern Ireland, 22 September 2000
In May 1998 it called a ceasefire and urged people to vote no in the referendum on the Agreement. The Northern Ireland Office accepted its ceasefire in November, making LVF prisoners eligible for the early release scheme under the Good Friday Agreement. Later, it handed over a small amount of weapons to the Independent International Commission on Decommissioning. 
The decommissioned weapons were as follows:
Also destroyed were 
The destruction of some of the LVF arms were recorded via video. However, since the weapons were decommissioned in mid-1998 the LVF has killed four people.

Post-ceasefire activities

In early 2000, an LVF-UVF feud began and there were a number of tit-for-tat killings. This led the Secretary of State to declare on 12 October 2001 that the government no longer recognised their ceasefire.Politicans assess ceasefire end BBC News, 13 October 2001
After its ceasefire, the LVF continued supporting the Orangemen in their protest at Drumcree. In July 2000, it was revealed that members of neo-Nazi group Combat 18 were travelling from England to join the protest. They were given shelter by LVF volunteers in Portadown and Tandragee. Combat 18 had opposed the LVF's ceasefire, but this trip was said to mark a "healing of the rift".
In 2002, Wright's successor as LVF leader, Mark Fulton, was found hanged in Maghaberry prison. It is believed he committed suicide.Killer of Rosemary Nelson named; Loyalist Mark Fulton is revealed as Sunday Herald, 16 June 2002
In July 2005 the IRA declared it had ended its armed campaign and would disarm. In September 2005 weapons inspectors declared that the IRA had fully disarmed. In response, on 30 October that year, the LVF stated that it was standing-down.Irish Examiner  
In February 2006, the Independent Monitoring Commission confirmed that the LVF-UVF feud was over but said that the LVF's involvement with organised crime and drug trafficking continued, describing it as a "deeply criminal organisation". The twentieth IMC report stated that the group was small and without political purpose. Most of its violence was "more criminal than paramilitary" in nature. LVF members who continued violent activity were said to do so "for personal gain" and only associated with the organisation at large when it was helpful to do so. The report added that simple aggressive police work could damage the group's continuance.Twentieth Report Independent Monitoring Commission

Timeline of attacks

According to the Conflict Archive on the Internet's Sutton Database, the LVF have killed 18 people,CAIN: Sutton Index of Deaths: Organisation responsible for the death which included:
Two further killings of Catholics were claimed by the LVF, but the RUC believed that UDA/UFF volunteers were responsible.
The following is a timeline of attacks and attempted attacks that have been claimed by, or blamed on, the LVF:

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001



Further reading


