[[Hybrid taxi]]

CATEGORIES: Environmentally-friendly taxis, Taxicabs, Hybrid electric vehicles

Hybrid taxi or hybrid electric taxi is a taxicab service provided with a hybrid electric car (HEV), which combines a conventional internal combustion engine propulsion system with an electric propulsion system.
In 2000 North America's first hybrid taxi was put into service in Vancouver, British Columbia, operating a 2001 Toyota Prius which traveled over 

Hybrid taxis by city

San Francisco

San Francisco became in 2005 one of the first cities to introduce hybrids for taxi service, with a fleet of 15 Ford Escape Hybrids, and by 2009 the original Escape Hybrids were retired after 
Out of a total of 1,378 taxis eligible for the incentive (96 wheelchair accessible taxi-vans are excluded) 788 are alternative fuel vehicles, representing 57% of the San Francisco's taxicab fleet by March 2010. Gasoline-electric hybrids accounted for 657 green taxis and compressed natural gas vehicles for the remaining 131.

New York City

The City Council passed a bill in 2003 requiring the New York City Taxi and Limousine Commission to set aside a proportion of new taxi medallions to be granted to vehicles that use cleaner fuels. The Commission cleared the first six hybrid models to be used as taxicabs by mid-2005 as there were concerns about which hybrids on the market had enough leg room. As an incentive for fleet owners to buy hybrids, the Commission auctioned in 2004 the first taxi medallions for hybrids at discounted price of around US$170,000 less than the regular medallion price of US$400,000. In 2006 Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg announced that 254 of the 308 medallions to be auctioned by mid-2006 would be designated for hybrid and alternative-fuel cabs. The remaining 54 were for handicapped-accessible taxis.
As integral part of the 2007 PlaNYC, Mayor Bloomberg set the goal of reducing greenhouse gas emissions by 30 percent by 2030. For this purpose, its component GreeNYC plan established that all new taxi vehicles entering the fleet beginning in October 2008 should have a fuel economy of 
In September 2008 a group of taxi operators sued the city under the allegation that hybrids are not suitable for city taxis and partly based on a report that claimed that "hybrids could not handle 24-hour operation and that air bags might not deploy in taxis that have safety partitions between the driver and passengers." At the time of the ruling NYC already had nearly 1,500 hybrids as a result of voluntary efforts, and only a fraction as a result of the medallion incentives.
In March 2009 the Bloomberg administration attempted a different policy for replacing the taxicab fleet with hybrid or other low-emission vehicles. The Taxi and Limousine Commission enacted a set of incentives to allow taxi fleet owners to charge drivers more to drive hybrid or clean diesel cabs, and penalize fleet owners by lowering the amount they could charge to lease cabs that use more fuel and pollute more. The city argued that drivers would not be hurt by the higher hybrid leasing fees because those cars use less gasoline. 
As of mid-2009 New York City had reached 2,019 hybrid taxis and 12 clean diesel vehicles, representing 15% of New York's  13,237 taxis in service, the most in any city in North America, and by this time owners began retiring its original hybrid fleet after 
The deployment of the city's Taxi of Tomorrow, scheduled to begin in 2013, would result in almost all the existing fleet to be replaced within 3 years with the non hybrid Nissan NV200 passenger van. Only about 1,000 taxis will not be phase out and exempted for various reasons, such as 273 taxis whose medallions require that they be high-mileage vehicles. However, in early 2013 the Greater New York Taxi Association filed suit against the city arguing that the Taxi of Tomorrow plan violates a section of the city's administrative code because the  Nissan NV200 is not a hybrid.

Boston

The city of Boston launched the CleanAir Cabs program in April 2007. The program promotes replacing older fuel-inefficient cabs with hybrid and alternative fuel vehicles as the existing fleet ages out.  The main benefit of the CleanAir Cabs program for cab drivers is the operating savings, as hybrid taxi cabs can get up to three times as many miles per gallon of fuel as the old Crown Victoria cabs. In addition, hybrid taxi drivers get two "front of the line" passes per shift at Logan Airport, allowing them to make two extra trips daily. Hybrid taxi owners who lease vehicles to drivers are allowed to charge drivers 
In August 2008 Boston mandated that all its 1,825 taxi fleet must be converted to hybrids by 2015. As of March 2009 about 10% of the taxicab fleet were already hybrids as owner voluntarily began introducing HEVs since 2002, mainly Toyota Camry Hybrids plus those introduced by the incentives of the CleanAir Cabs.
However, in March 2009 a group of taxi drivers and medallion owners sued in federal court the City of Boston to block the requirement and requested the city to delay the changeover for two or three years. They also complaint that the new rule is unreasonable because it forbids taxi owners from buying used hybrids. Among others, the taxi owners argued that the requirements infringe on federal authority to set fuel-economy and emissions standards, an argument successfully used by New York cab owners to block a similar requirement. 
In April 2012, the City of Boston awarded the Boston Cab Association with the 2012 Green Business Award for its fleet conversion to hybrid vehicles. Boston Cab has more than 400 hybrid taxis out of its 500 vehicle fleet, and has plans to convert the entire fleet.

Paris

The taxi company Verture began operations in Paris in September 2007 with a hybrid only fleet made of Toyota Prius. The company Taxis G7 introduced in October 2007 its first hybrid taxis in Paris, and by early 2012 G7 had 500 hybrid taxis in operation in the city.

Vancouver

Since 2007 all new taxi companies or additions to existing company fleets in British Columbia's two major urban areas must be highly energy efficient vehicles, such hybrids or high fuel economy vehicles.

San Antonio

Through an ordinance, the city of San Antonio, Texas introduced a voluntary program in 2007 that allows taxi owners to swap the permit of one non-hybrid car for two permits valid only for hybrid electric vehicles.

Arlington

The Arlington County Board authorized in September 2007 a new taxi company, EnviroCAB, to operate with an all-hybrid fleet of 50 vehicles. In addition, the Board authorized existing companies permission to add 35 hybrid taxis. The introduction of green taxis is part of a county campaign known as Fresh AIRE, or Arlington Initiative to Reduce Emissions. AIRE aims to cut production of greenhouse gases from county buildings and vehicles by 10% by 2012.
The hybrid taxis began operating in February 2008, allowing EnviroCAB to become the first all-hybrid taxicab fleet in the United States. EnviroCAB fleet consist of Toyota Prii, Toyota Camry Hybrids, Toyota Highlander Hybrids, and Ford Escape Hybrids.
The company claims to be the first carbon-negative taxicab company in the world, as it will completely offset its own emissions by purchasing "clean-source" offset credits. Also, EnviroCAB expects to offset the emissions of 100 of the approximately 685 non-hybrid taxis operating in Arlington by March 2008.

Cambridge

In April 2008, the city of Cambridge, Massachusetts, in partnership with Whole Foods Market, began its Clear Air Cab program to promote the introduction of hybrid taxis with the objective  to reduce the environmental impact of the city's taxicabs by encouraging a switch to hybrid vehicles.
Whole Foods made a 
According to the Cambridge License Commission (CLC), and based on a study conducted by John Moore, along with Boston Cab and the Boston Public Health Commission, the average Cambridge cab driver travels about  per gallon ($0.79 per liter), the cab drivers would save an average of $18 to $21 per shift. During an average shift a Cambridge hybrid taxi will use between three to four gallons of gasoline as opposed to 10 gallons or more burnt by an outdated Crown Victoria taxicab.

Hamburg

In November 2008 Hamburg became the first city in Germany to deploy a fleet of 130 environmentally friendly taxis that run on a hybrid electric or natural gas motor. Under the program, taxicabs that meet the low-emissions standards are allowed to be branded with an "Eco Taxis" logo.

Phoenix

In October 2009, a fleet of 26 Toyota Prius began operating in Phoenix, Arizona, becoming the country's second all-hybrid taxicab fleet after Arlington, Virginia. The new company, Clean Air Cab, plans to expand its fleet to more than 200 hybrids.
Clean Air Cab claims to be a carbon-neutral taxi service. In addition to lowering emissions with its hybrid fleet, the company purchases carbon offsets and supports global reforestation by subsidizing the planting of 10 Brazilian rainforest trees monthly for each cab in service.

Chicago

Chicago has a fleet of 6,700 to 6,800 active taxicabs on any given day. In 2011, green taxis were added to 
the fleet as a result of the Department of Business Affairs and Consumer Protection's Green Taxi Program. As part of  Mayor Rahm Emanuel  action agenda "Sustainable Chicago 2015," the city has the goal to achieve a taxi fleet which is 75% to 80% hybrid or compressed natural gas vehicles.  As part of a 12-month pilot program to encourage alternative-fuel vehicle use, green taxis move to the front of the passenger line at Chicago's airports. A new rate structure was introduced in 2012 to encourage fleet owners to 
buy more fuel efficient taxis. pp. 18-19

Other U.S. cities

Denver and Seattle introduced their first hybrid taxis in 2007.
In Southern California, the city of Burbank approved by mid-2008 a request by United Independent and City Cabs to add hybrids to their fleets, and as of May 2009 hybrids represent 20% of the city's 120 taxi fleet. Long Beach Yellow Cab introduced its first hybrid in September 2008 and the city now has five Ford Escape Hybrids and five Toyota Prius. The first two hybrid cabs in Los Angeles were roll out in May 2009 by Bell Cab, and both are Toyota Prius, out of a citywide fleet of 2,303 taxicabs.
As a result of the legal difficulties faced by several cities to implement policies to replace existing taxi fleets with hybrids and other clean fuel vehicles, Senator Kirsten Gillibrand and Representative Jerrold Nadler, both from New York, introduced the Green Taxis Act in September 2009. The proposed Green Taxi Act would modified federal law to allow local governments to improve the emission control and fuel economy standards of their taxi cabs. Senator Gillibran is planning to reintroduce the legislation in 2011.

Other cities around the world

The first hybrid taxicab in London entered operations in 2004. It was a diesel-electric hybrid black cab. The hybrid taxicab was developed by engine designer Azure Dynamics and London Taxis International with support from the Energy Saving Trust and the Department for Transport. Calgary introduced its first hybrid taxis in 2006 and the city's had 50 hybrid taxicabs by August 2010 roll out by Checker Yellow Cabs, Associated Cabs, and Mayfair Taxi.
Other cities where taxi service is available with hybrid vehicles include Tokyo, Sydney, Melbourne, Rome, Madrid, and Barcelona.








