[[Over Hulton]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Greater Manchester, Geography of Bolton

Over Hulton is a suburb of Westhoughton within the Metropolitan Borough of Bolton, in Greater Manchester, 
England. 
It lies  south west of Bolton.

History

The ancient district of Hulton, contained three townships, Over Hulton, Middle Hulton and Little Hulton, it was recorded as Helghtun and Hulton in 1235, Hilton in 1278 and 1292, Hulton in 1292 although Hilton was still used until the 17th century.
The earliest recorded Hultons were Iorweth and Madoc who came from Wales in 1167. It is possible they were joining family who were in the township from 989.
In 1819, a member of this family, the magistrate William Hulton ordered the Yeomanry Cavalry in to arrest William Hunt as he addressed the demonstration at St Peter's Field in Manchester setting off what was to become known as the Peterloo Massacre. 
The Bolton and Leigh Railway ran to the west serving the Hulton Collieries. The Hulton Collieries Hulton Bank Colliery, otherwise known as the Pretoria Pit, was situated to the south of Hulton Park and just north of the Atherton boundary. The colliery was open from 1901 to 1934. An explosion on 21 December 1910 was the third worst mining disaster in British mining history.
In 1902 a tramway from Lowton via Leigh and Atherton opened to Four Lane Ends where it connected with the trams of Bolton Corporation.
In 2010 the Hulton Park Estate was offered for sale after being home to the Hulton family since 1167.
It was bought by the Peel Group.

Governance

Historically a part of the hundred of Salford in the county of Lancashire, until the 19th century, Over Hulton was a township in the Parish of Deane. In 1898 the Daubhill area of Over Hulton was added to Bolton Borough and the remainder was added to Westhoughton Urban District.

Geography

The area of Over Hulton is  The Manchester to Chorley road, the A6, crosses the Bolton to Leigh road, the A579 at Four Lane Ends which was the original hamlet in the township. The M61 passes to the north of Over Hulton.

Religion

There are two churches in Over Hulton, St Andrew's C. of E.



Notes




