[[Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty]]

CATEGORIES: Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, Arms control treaties, Non-proliferation treaties, Nuclear weapons policy, Foreign relations of India, Foreign relations of Pakistan, 106th United States Congress, Treaties concluded in 1996, Articles with images not understandable by color blind users, Treaties not entered into force, Nuclear weapons testing, Treaties of the Afghan Transitional Administration, Treaties of Albania, Treaties of Algeria, Treaties of Andorra, Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda, Treaties of Argentina, Treaties of Armenia, Treaties of Australia, Treaties of Austria, Treaties of Azerbaijan, Treaties of the Bahamas, Treaties of Bahrain, Treaties of Bangladesh, Treaties of Barbados, Treaties of Belarus, Treaties of Belgium, Treaties of Belize, Treaties of Benin, Treaties of Bolivia, Treaties of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Treaties of Botswana, Treaties of Brazil, Treaties of Brunei, Treaties of Bulgaria, Treaties of Burkina Faso, Treaties of Burundi, Treaties of Cambodia, Treaties of Cameroon, Treaties of Canada, Treaties of Cape Verde, Treaties of the Central African Republic, Treaties of Chad, Treaties of Chile, Treaties of Colombia, Treaties of the Cook Islands, Treaties of Costa Rica, Treaties of Ivory Coast, Treaties of Croatia, Treaties of Cyprus, Treaties of the Czech Republic, Treaties of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Treaties of Denmark, Treaties of Djibouti, Treaties of the Dominican Republic, Treaties of Ecuador, Treaties of El Salvador, Treaties of Eritrea, Treaties of Estonia, Treaties of Ethiopia, Treaties of Fiji, Treaties of Finland, Treaties of France, Treaties of Gabon, Treaties of Georgia (country), Treaties of Germany, Treaties of Ghana, Treaties of Greece, Treaties of Grenada, Treaties of Guatemala, Treaties of Guinea, Treaties of Guinea-Bissau, Treaties of Guyana, Treaties of Haiti, Treaties of the Holy See, Treaties of Honduras, Treaties of Hungary, Treaties of Iceland, Treaties of Indonesia, Treaties of Iraq, Treaties of Ireland, Treaties of Italy, Treaties of Jamaica, Treaties of Japan, Treaties of Jordan, Treaties of Kazakhstan, Treaties of Kenya, Treaties of Kiribati, Treaties of Kuwait, Treaties of Kyrgyzstan, Treaties of Laos, Treaties of Latvia, Treaties of Lebanon, Treaties of Lesotho, Treaties of Liberia, Treaties of the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Treaties of Liechtenstein, Treaties of Lithuania, Treaties of Luxembourg, Treaties of Madagascar, Treaties of Malawi, Treaties of Malaysia, Treaties of the Maldives, Treaties of Mali, Treaties of Malta, Treaties of the Marshall Islands, Treaties of Mauritania, Treaties of Mexico, Treaties of the Federated States of Micronesia, Treaties of Monaco, Treaties of Mongolia, Treaties of Montenegro, Treaties of Morocco, Treaties of Mozambique, Treaties of Namibia, Treaties of Nauru, Treaties of the Netherlands, Treaties of New Zealand, Treaties of Nicaragua, Treaties of Niger, Treaties of Nigeria, Treaties of Niue, Treaties of Norway, Treaties of Oman, Treaties of Palau, Treaties of Panama, Treaties of Paraguay, Treaties of Peru, Treaties of the Philippines, Treaties of Poland, Treaties of Portugal, Treaties of Qatar, Treaties of South Korea, Treaties of Moldova, Treaties of Romania, Treaties of Russia, Treaties of Rwanda, Treaties of Samoa, Treaties of San Marino, Treaties of Senegal, Treaties of Serbia and Montenegro, Treaties of Seychelles, Treaties of Sierra Leone, Treaties of Singapore, Treaties of Slovakia, Treaties of Slovenia, Treaties of South Africa, Treaties of Spain, Treaties of Saint Kitts and Nevis, Treaties of Saint Lucia, Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Treaties of the Republic of the Sudan (1985–2011), Treaties of Suriname, Treaties of Sweden, Treaties of Switzerland, Treaties of Tajikistan, Treaties of the Republic of Macedonia, Treaties of Togo, Treaties of Trinidad and Tobago, Treaties of Tunisia, Treaties of Turkey, Treaties of Turkmenistan, Treaties of Uganda, Treaties of Ukraine, Treaties of the United Arab Emirates, Treaties of the United Kingdom, Treaties of Tanzania, Treaties of Uruguay, Treaties of Uzbekistan, Treaties of Vanuatu, Treaties of Venezuela, Treaties of Vietnam, Treaties of Zambia, Treaties establishing intergovernmental organizations, Treaties adopted by United Nations General Assembly resolutions, Treaties extended to Aruba, Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles

The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) is a multilateral treaty by which states agree to ban all nuclear explosions in all environments, for military or civilian purposes. It was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 10 September 1996 but it has not entered into force due to the non-ratification of eight specific states.

History

To date, over 2,000 nuclear tests have been carried out at different locations all over the world. Arms control advocates had campaigned for the adoption of a treaty banning all nuclear explosions since the early 1950s, when public concern was aroused as a result of radioactive fall-out from atmospheric nuclear tests and the escalating arms race. Over 50 nuclear explosions were registered between 16 July 1945, when the first nuclear explosive test was conducted by the United States at White Sands Missile Range near Alamogordo, New Mexico, and 31 December 1953. Prime Minister Nehru of India voiced the heightened international concern in 1954, when he proposed the elimination of all nuclear test explosions worldwide. However, within the context of the Cold War, skepticism about the capability to verify compliance with a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty posed a major obstacle to any agreement.

Partial Test Ban Treaty

Limited success was achieved with the signing of the Partial Test Ban Treaty in 1963, which banned nuclear tests in the atmosphere, underwater and in space, but not underground. Neither France nor China signed the PTBT. However, the treaty was still ratified by the United States after an 80 to 19 vote in the United States Senate.

Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty

A major step towards non-proliferation of nuclear weapons came with the signing of the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) in 1968. Under the NPT, non-nuclear weapon states were prohibited from, among other things, possessing, manufacturing or acquiring nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. All signatories, including nuclear weapon states, were committed to the goal of total nuclear disarmament. However, India, Pakistan and Israel have declined to sign the NPT on grounds that such a treaty is fundamentally discriminatory as it places limitations on states that do not have nuclear weapons while making no efforts to curb weapons development by declared nuclear weapons states.

Negotiations for the CTBT

Given the political situation prevailing in the subsequent decades, little progress was made in nuclear disarmament until the end of the Cold War in 1991. Parties to the PTBT held an amendment conference that year to discuss a proposal to convert the Treaty into an instrument banning all nuclear-weapon tests; with strong support from the UN General Assembly, negotiations for a comprehensive test-ban treaty began in 1993.

Adoption of the CTBT

Intensive efforts were made over the next three years to draft the Treaty text and its two annexes. However, the Conference on Disarmament, in which negotiations were being held, did not succeed in reaching consensus on the adoption of the text. Under the direction of Prime Minister John Howard and Foreign Minister Alexander Downer, Australia On 10 September 1996, the Comprehensive Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) was adopted by a large majority, exceeding two-thirds of the General Assembly's Membership.

Obligations

(Article I):

Status

The Treaty was adopted by the United Nations General Assembly on 10 September 1996. It opened for signature in New York on 24 September 1996,United Nations Treaty Collection (2009).  "Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty". Retrieved 23 August 2009. when it was signed by 71 States, including five of the eight then nuclear-capable states. As of March 2014, 162 states have ratified the CTBT and another 23 states have signed but not ratified it.[ref]
<br>''In this news article, the number of states ratifying was reported as 154.</ref>
The treaty will enter into force 180 days after the 44 states listed in Annex 2 of the treaty have ratified it. These "Annex 2 states" are states that participated in the CTBT's negotiations between 1994 and 1996 and possessed nuclear power reactors or research reactors at that time.

U.S. ratification of the CTBT

The United States has signed the CTBT, but not ratified it; there is ongoing debate whether to ratify the CTBT.
The United States has stated that its ratification of the CTBT is conditional upon:

Proponents of ratification claim that it would:
Opponents of ratification claim that: 
On 13 October 1999, the United States Senate rejected ratification of the CTBT. During his 2008 presidential election campaign Barack Obama said that "As president, I will reach out to the Senate to secure the ratification of the CTBT at the earliest practical date."
An article in Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists describes how a North Korean underground nuclear test on 25 May 2009 was detected and the source located by GPS satellites. The authors suggest that the effectiveness of GPS satellites for detecting nuclear explosions enhances the ability to verify compliance with the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, giving the United States more reason to ratify it.

Monitoring of the CTBT

Geophysical and other technologies are used to monitor for compliance with the Treaty: forensic seismology, hydroacoustics, infrasound, and radionuclide monitoring. The technologies are used to monitor the underground, the waters and the atmosphere for any sign of a nuclear explosion. Statistical theories and methods are integral to CTBT monitoring
providing confidence in verification analysis. Once the Treaty enters into force, on site inspection will be provided for where concerns about compliance arise.
The Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization (CTBTO), an international organization headquartered in Vienna, Austria, was created to build the verification regime, including establishment and provisional operation of the network of monitoring stations, the creation of an international data centre, and development of the On Site Inspection capability.
The monitoring network consists of 337 facilities located all over the globe. As of May 2012, more than 260 facilities have been certified. The monitoring stations register data that is transmitted to the international data centre in Vienna for processing and analysis. The data are sent to states that have signed the Treaty.

Nuclear testing after CTBT adoption

Three countries have tested nuclear weapons since the CTBT opened for signature in 1996. India and Pakistan both carried out two sets of tests in 1998. North Korea carried out three announced tests in 2006, 2009 and 2013. All three North Korean tests were picked up by the International Monitoring System set up by the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization Preparatory Commission.








