[[Jack Tramiel]]

CATEGORIES: 1928 births, 2012 deaths, Atari people, Commodore International, Polish emigrants to the United States, Polish Jews, American people of Polish-Jewish descent, American company founders, Auschwitz concentration camp survivors, Łódź Ghetto inmates, Technology company founders

Jack Tramiel ( The Commodore PET, Commodore VIC-20 and Commodore 64 are some of the home computers produced while he was running the company.

Early years

Tramiel was born as Jacek Trzmiel into a Jewish family.
After the German invasion of Poland in 1939 his family was transported by German occupiers to the Jewish ghetto in Łódź, where he worked in a garment factory.  When the ghettos were liquidated his family was sent to the Auschwitz concentration camp. He was examined by Dr. Mengele and selected for a work party, after which he and his father were sent to the labor camp Ahlem near Hanover, while his mother remained at Auschwitz. Like many other inmates, his father was reported to have died of typhus in the work camp; however, Tramiel believed he was killed by an injection of gasoline. Tramiel was rescued from the labor camp in April 1945 by the 84th Infantry Division.
In November 1947, Tramiel emigrated to the United States. He soon joined the U.S. Army, where he learned how to repair office equipment, including typewriters.

Commodore

Typewriters and calculators

In 1953, while working as a taxi driver, Tramiel bought a shop in the Bronx to repair office machinery, He named it Commodore Portable Typewriter.
In 1955, Tramiel signed a deal with a Czechoslovak company to assemble and sell their typewriters in North America. However, as Czechoslovakia was part of the Warsaw Pact, they could not be imported directly into the U.S., so Tramiel set up Commodore Business Machines in Toronto. Tramiel wanted a military-style name for his company, but names like Admiral and General were already taken, so he settled on the Commodore name.
In 1962, Commodore went public, but the arrival of Japanese typewriters in the U.S. market made the selling of Czechoslovakian typewriters unprofitable. Struggling for cash, the company sold 17% of its stock to Canadian businessman Irving Gould, taking in $400,000. It used the money to re-launch the company in the adding machine business, which was profitable for a time before the Japanese entered that field as well. Stung twice by the same source, Gould suggested that Tramiel travel to Japan to learn why they were able to outcompete North Americans in their own local markets. It was during this trip that Tramiel saw the first digital calculators, and decided that the mechanical adding machine was a dead end.
When Commodore released its first calculators, combining an LED display from Bowmar and an integrated circuit from Texas Instruments (TI), it found a ready market. However, after slowly realizing the size of the market, TI decided to cut Commodore out of the middle, and released their own calculators at a price point below Commodore's cost of just the chips. Gould once again rescued the company, injecting another $3 million, which allowed Commodore to purchase MOS Technology, Inc. an IC design and semiconductor manufacturer, a company which had also supplied Commodore with calculator ICs. When their lead designer, Chuck Peddle, told Tramiel that calculators were a dead end and computers were the future, Tramiel told him to build one to prove the point.

Home computers

Peddle responded with the Commodore PET, based on his company's MOS Technology 6502 processor. It was first shown, privately, at the Chicago Consumer Electronics Show in 1977, and soon the company was receiving 50 calls a day from dealers wanting to sell the computer. The PET became a success—especially in the education field, where its all-in-one design was a major advantage. Much of their success with the PET came from the business decision to sell directly to large customers, instead of selling to them through a dealer network.  The first PET computers were sold primarily in Europe, where Commodore had also introduced the first wave of digital handheld calculators.
As prices dropped and the market matured, the monochrome (green text on black screen) PET was at a disadvantage in the market when compared to machines like the Apple II and Atari 800, which offered color graphics and could be hooked to a television as an inexpensive display. Commodore responded with the VIC-20, and then the Commodore 64, which became the best-selling home computer of all time. The Commodore VIC-20 was the first microcomputer to sell one million units.  The Commodore 64 sold several million units.  It was during this time that Tramiel coined the phrase, "We need to build computers for the masses, not the classes.""Gamer Decades: The 1980s", IGN

Departure

Neil Harris, editor of the Commodore magazine at the time, recalled: 
In a subsequent interview, Tramiel said that he had resigned from Commodore because he disagreed with Gould "on the basic principles — how to run the company".(1985). Jack Tramiel Interview The disagreement between Tramiel and Gould was so bitter that, after Tramiel's departure, the Commodore magazine was forbidden to state any of Traimel's famous sayings or even mention his name.

Atari

After a short break from the computer industry, he formed a new company named Tramel Technology, Ltd., in order to design and sell a next-generation home computer.[ref]
</ref> The company was named "Tramel" to help ensure that it would be pronounced correctly (i.e., "tra - mel" instead of "tra - meal").<ref name="Takahashi"></ref>
In July 1984, Tramel Technology bought the Consumer Division of  Atari Inc. from Warner Communications. The division had fallen on hard times, due to the video game crash of 1983.  TTL was then renamed Atari Corporation, and went on to produce the 16-bit Atari ST computer line based on Motorola's MC68000 CPU, directly competing with Apple, which also used it.
In the late 1980s, Tramiel decided to step away from day-to-day operations at Atari, naming his son, Sam, President and CEO.  In 1995, Sam suffered a heart attack, and his father returned to oversee operations. In 1996, Tramiel sold Atari to disk-drive manufacturer Jugi Tandon Storage in a reverse merger deal. The newly merged company was named JTS Corporation, and Tramiel joined the JTS board.

Later years

Tramiel was a co-founder of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, which was opened in 1993. He was among many other survivors of the Ahlem labor camp who tracked down U.S. Army veteran Vernon Tott, who was among the 84th Division which rescued survivors from the camp and had taken and kept photographs of at least 16 of the survivors in storage until 2003. Tott, who died of cancer in 2003, was personally commemorated by Tramiel with an inscription on one of the Holocaust Museum's walls saying "To Vernon W. Tott, My Liberator and Hero".
Tramiel died on April 8, 2012, of heart failure at the age of 83.



Further reading




