[[Joseph Gibbs (cricketer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1867 births, 1899 deaths, Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford, Deaths from heart failure, English cricketers, Marylebone Cricket Club cricketers, Somerset cricketers, People from Westminster

Joseph Arthur Gibbs (25 November 1867 – 13 May 1899) was an English cricketer who made ten first-class appearances between 1891 and 1896. He played five first-class matches for Somerset, and also appeared for the MCC and I Zingari. He also published a number of books, including A Cotswold Village; or, country life and pursuits in Gloucestershire and The Improvement of Cricket Grounds on economical principles.

Life and career

Gibbs was educated at Eton College, and then Christ Church, Oxford.

Cricket career

While at Oxford, Gibbs played in a one-day, single innings match against Eton College, opening the batting and scoring 10 runs, and then claiming two wickets as Eton beat them by seven wickets.
During the English winter of 1892–93, Gibbs travelled to Ceylon and India as part of Lord Hawke's tour. Gibbs' top-score on the tour was 14, and although he bowled, he failed to take any wickets. During his only first-class match of the tour, against Bombay, Gibbs caught his Somerset team-mate John Trask in Bombay's second innings.
In his work, A Cotswold Village, Gibbs describes county cricket as being "a little over done", believing the time demands of the game, playing two three-day matches each week through the summer, too great. He thinks that an amateur who has received a good education, composed of public-school followed by university is wasting this education if they then send the majority of the week playing cricket each year. Despite this belief, he is in favour of some amateurs remaining in the game, to "prevent the further development of professionalism." Gibbs hypothesises that the "abnormal extent" of the development of cricket was due to the peaceful times that he lived in, but that in times of war, Englishmen would be glad of the useful lessons in courage and coolness that sport taught them.






