[[Diamante Azul]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 births, Living people, Masked wrestlers, Mexican male professional wrestlers

Diamante Azul ("Blue Diamond") is a Mexican Luchador Enmascarado, or masked professional wrestler, currently working for the Mexican Professional wrestling promotion Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre (CMLL) promotion. He originally wrestled under the ring name El Romano but in 2009 he was given a new Metro name and mask, a ring name at least three other CMLL wrestlers have used before him. The Metro ring character was sponsored by the major Mexico City newspaper, incorporating the newspapers logo and color scheme (Red and gold). In early 2012 he was given a new image and ring name, dropping the "sponsored ring name to become Diamante Azul. Diamante Azul's real name is not a matter of public record, as is often the case with masked wrestlers in Mexico where their private lives are kept a secret from the wrestling fans. He is the current NWA World Historic Light Heavyweight Champion, while also being a former holder of the CMLL World Tag Team Championship with Atlantis and winner of the 2012 Leyenda de Azul tournament.

Professional wrestling career

The wrestler currently known as Diamante Azul was trained for his professional wrestling career by Tony Salazar and Franco Columbo at Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre's (CMLL) wrestling school in Mexico City, Mexico. He made his professional wrestling debut in 2007 under the ring name of "El Romano" (Spanish for "The Roman). He wore a mask fashioned after a Galea or Roman Soldier helmet and was originally scheduled to be a partner of Méssala and Calígula, two CMLL veterans who had a similar Roman soldier ring character. He only worked intermittently as El Romano in 2007 and 2008, disappearing for long stretches of time to receive further training from Salazar and Columbo.

Metro (2009–2012)

On January 7, 2009 he made his debut under a new name and a new mask as Metro. The Metro character is sponsored by the major Mexico City newspaper of the same name, incorporating the newspapers logo and colorscheme (Red and gold). The ring persona has been given to various young wrestlers since 2006, with the latest version being the current Metro. Throughout 2009 Metro worked in low card matches on CMLL shows, slowly advancing up to some times working in the semi-main event on a few shows. On December 19, 2009 it was announced by the Comisión de Box y Lucha Libre Mexico D.F. that Poder Mexica had been stripped of the Mexican National Trios title because Black Warrior had left CMLL, breaking up the team. At the same time they announced an eight team tournament to crown a new trios champion. The top half of the bracket took place on December 22, 2009 and the bottom half of the bracket took place on December 29. In the top bracket Metro teamed with Mascara Dorada and Stuka, Jr. for the first time ever and defeated Los Guerreros Tuareg (Arkangel de la Muerte, Loco Max and Skándalo) in the first round and Los Cancerberos del Infierno (Virus, Euforia and Polvora) in the second round to qualify for the finals.

Diamante Azul (2012–present)

On February 16, 2012, Metro was repackaged under the ring name "Diamante Azul" (Blue Diamond), wearing a mask, trunks and cape very closely resembling Blue Demon and Blue Demon, Jr.

Metro: A shared identity

Several CMLL wrestlers have worked under the sponsored ring name "Metro", the most recent Metro was generally referred to as "Metro III" in writing but none of them are officially numbered nor promoted as separate wrestlers.

In wrestling

Championships and accomplishments




