[[Chuck Palahniuk]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, American horror writers, American journalists, American male novelists, American people of Ukrainian descent, American people of Russian descent, American people of French descent, American satirists, Clarion Workshop, Gay writers, LGBT journalists from the United States, LGBT writers from the United States, Living people, Minimalist writers, University of Oregon alumni, Writers from Oregon, Writers from Pasco, Washington, Cacophony Society, LGBT novelists

Charles Michael "Chuck" Palahniuk (

Early and personal life

Palahniuk was born in Pasco, Washington, the son of Carol Adele (née Tallent) and Fred Palahniuk. His paternal grandfather was Ukrainian and emigrated to New York from Canada in 1907. "Я действительно ходил в группы поддержки для неизлечимо больных". Interview (in Russian), Izvestia, 29 April 2005. Palahniuk grew up living in a mobile home in nearby Burbank, Washington with his family. His parents separated when he was fourteen and subsequently they divorced, often leaving him and his three siblings to live with their maternal grandparents at their cattle ranch in Eastern Washington. "Extreme Sport". The Village Voice. October 19, 1999. Palahniuk's father began a relationship with a woman, whose ex-boyfriend murdered the couple. Later, Palahniuk's mother died of cancer.For the Hell of it
In his twenties, Palahniuk attended the University of Oregon School of Journalism, and graduated in 1986. While attending college he worked as an intern for National Public Radio member station KLCC in Eugene, Oregon. He moved to Portland soon afterward. After writing for the local newspaper for a short while, he began working for Freightliner as a diesel mechanic, continuing in that job until his writing career took off. During that time, he also wrote manuals on fixing trucks and had a stint as a journalist (a job he did not return to until after he became a successful novelist). After casually attending a free, introductory seminar held by an organization called Landmark Education, Palahniuk quit his job as a journalist in 1988."Fright club". The Observer. May 8, 2005. Palahniuk performed volunteer work for a homeless shelter; later, he also volunteered at a hospice as an escort; he provided transportation for terminally ill people and brought them to support group meetings. He ceased volunteering upon the death of a patient to whom he had grown attached. Stranger Than Fiction: True Stories. Garden City: Doubleday, 2004. pp.195-199 ISBN 0-385-50448-9
As an adult, Palahniuk became a member of the rebellious Cacophony Society. He is a regular participant in their events, including the annual Santa Rampage (a public Christmas party involving pranks and drunkenness) in Portland. His participation in the Society inspired some of the events in his writings, both fictional and non-fictional. Stranger Than Fiction: True Stories. Garden City: Doubleday, 2004. .
In September 2003, Palahniuk was interviewed by Karen Valby, a reporter for Entertainment Weekly. During the interview, in confidence, Palahniuk mentioned information pertaining to his partner. It previously had been believed by many that he was married to a woman (some members of the press had claimed he had a wife), but in fact, Palahniuk had been living with his boyfriend. Some time later, Palahniuk came to believe that Valby was going to print this information in her article, without his consent. In response, he made an angry audio recording and put it on his web site, not only revealing that he was gay, but also making negative comments about Valby and a member of her family. Palahniuk's fears turned out to be incorrect, however,  and Valby's article did not reveal anything about his personal life outside of the fact that he was unmarried. The recording was later removed from the web site, making some fans believe that Palahniuk was embarrassed by his homosexuality. According to Dennis Widmyer, the site's webmaster, the recording was not removed because of the statements regarding his sexuality, but because of the negative statements about Valby. Palahniuk later posted a new recording to his site, asking his fans not to overreact to these events. He also apologized for his behavior, claiming that he wished he had not recorded the message. "Chuck Palahniuk: Stranger than fiction". The Independent. August 1, 2004. Palahniuk now is openly gay and according to a profile and interview in The Advocate in May 2008, he and his unnamed male partner, live in "a former church compound outside Vancouver, Washington."

Career

Palahniuk began writing fiction in his mid-thirties. By his account, he started writing while attending workshops for writers that were hosted by Tom Spanbauer, which he attended to meet new friends. Spanbauer largely inspired Palahniuk's minimalistic writing style.

Fight Club

When he attempted to publish his novel, Invisible Monsters, publishers rejected it for its disturbing content. This led him to work on his most famous novel, Fight Club, which he wrote as an attempt to disturb the publisher even more for rejecting him. Palahniuk wrote this story in his spare time while working for Freightliner. After initially publishing it as a short story (which would become chapter 6 of the novel) in the 1995 compilation, Pursuit of Happiness, Palahniuk expanded it into a full novel, which—contrary to his expectations—the publisher was willing to publish. "Is it fistfighting, or just multi-tasking?". Salon. October 13, 1999. While the original hardcover edition of the book received positive reviews and some awards, it had a short shelf life.
Initially, Palahniuk struggled to find a literary agent and went without one until after the publication of Fight Club..." After he began receiving attention from Twentieth Century Fox, Palahniuk was signed by actor and literary agent, Edward Hibbert,Author FAQ: "Who is his agent? Edward Hibbert of Donadio & Olson, Inc. is Chuck's book agent. Check out Edward's double life as an actor..." Hibbert eventually guided and brokered the deal that took Fight Club to the big screen. In 1999, three years after the novel's publication, the film adaptation by director David Fincher was released. The film was a box office disappointment (although it was #1 at the U.S. box office in its first weekend) and critical reaction was mixed, but a cult following soon emerged as the DVD of the film became popular upon release. Three editions of the novel have been published in paperback, in 1999, in 2004 (with a new introduction by the author about the success of the film adaptation), and in 2005 (with an afterword by Palahniuk).

Invisible Monsters, Survivor, and Choke

A revised version of Invisible Monsters, as well as his fourth novel, Survivor, were published in 1999. A few years later Palahniuk managed to make his first New York Times bestseller, the novel Choke, which later was made into a movie.

Lullaby

The year 1999 brought a series of great personal tragedies to Palahniuk's life. At that time, his father, Fred Palahniuk, had started dating a woman named Donna Fontaine, whom he had met through a personal ad under the title "Kismet". Soon after, her former boyfriend: Dale Shackleford, had been imprisoned for sexual abuse. Shackleford had vowed to kill Fontaine as soon as he was released from prison. Palahniuk believes that using a personal ad, Fontaine was looking for "the biggest man she could find" to protect her from Shackleford and Palahniuk's father qualified."Palahniuk, Slapstick, Skyspace". Studio 360, NPR. February 12, 2006. After his release, Shackleford followed Fontaine and the senior Palahniuk to Fontaine's home in Kendrick, Idaho after they had gone out for a date. Shackleford then shot them both and dragged their bodies into Fontaine's cabin home, which he then set afire. In the spring of 2001, Shackleford was found guilty for two counts of murder in the first degree and sentenced to death. In the wake of these events, Palahniuk began working on the novel Lullaby. He has stated that he wrote the novel to help him cope with having participated in the decision to have Shackleford receive the death sentence.

"Guts" and Haunted

While on his 2003 tour to promote his novel, Diary, Palahniuk read to his audiences a short story entitled, "Guts," a sensational tale of accidents involving masturbation, which appears in his book, Haunted. The story begins with the author telling his listeners to inhale deeply and that "this story should last about as long as you can hold your breath." It was reported that forty people had fainted listening to the readings while holding their breath."I dare you". The Guardian. March 13, 2004. Playboy magazine later published the story in their March 2004 issue and Palahniuk offered to let them publish another story along with it, but the publishers found the second work too disturbing to publish. Since then audio recordings of his readings of the story have been circulated on the Internet. In the afterword of the latest edition of "Haunted", Palahniuk reported that "Guts" had been responsible for seventy-three fainting events.
At a 2005 appearance in Miami, Florida, during the Haunted tour, Palahniuk commented that Haunted represented the last of a "horror trilogy" (including Lullaby and Diary). He also indicated that his then-forthcoming novel, Rant, would be the first of a "science fiction trilogy".
In 2008, Palahniuk spent a week at the Clarion West Writers Workshop, instructing eighteen students about his writing methods and theory of fiction ."Clarion West Turns 25". Locus Magazine, September 2008: Page 5

Adaptations

In addition to the film, Fight Club was adapted into a fighting video game  loosely based on the film, which was released in October 2004, receiving poor reviews universally.
Graphic novel adaptations of Invisible Monsters and Lullaby, drawn by comic artist, Kissgz, aka Gabor, are available online.
Following the success of the movie of Fight Club, interest began to build about adapting Survivor to film. The film rights to Survivor were sold in early 2001, but no movie studio had committed to filming the novel. After the attacks on The Pentagon and World Trade Center on September 11, 2001, movie studios apparently deemed the novel too controversial to film because it includes the hijacking and crashing of a civilian airplane. Kinky Mule Films. DVD Video. 2003. In mid-2004, however, Twentieth Century Fox committed to adapting Palahniuk's novel. Palahniuk has said that the same people who made the film, Constantine, will be working on this film. "Chuck Palahniuk: Author of Haunted". SuicideGirls. Retrieved May 12, 2006.
Following that, the film rights to Invisible Monsters and Diary also were sold. While little is known about some of these projects, it is known that Jessica Biel was signed on to play the roles of both Shannon and Brandy in Invisible Monsters, which was supposed to begin filming in 2004, but  is still in development.imdb.com/title/tt0756666/
On January 14, 2008, the film version of Choke premiered at the Sundance Film Festival, starring Sam Rockwell and Anjelica Huston with Clark Gregg directing. Chuckpalahniuk. April 30, 2007. David Fincher has expressed interest in filming Diary as an HBO miniseries. The Chuck Palahniuk Update. Cinematical. June 17, 2005.net. Retrieved October 12, 2006.

Television appearances

Beside his various promotional outings, Palahniuk has made several notable television appearances to discuss cultural issues, including Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations exploring his beloved Pacific Northwest in 2007 "Anthony Bourdain: No Reservations" Pacific NW (2007) and the BBC's Hardtalk Extra in 2004."HARDtalk Extra" Chuck Palahniuk (2006)

Writing style

Palahniuk's books prior to Lullaby have distinct similarities. The characters are people who have been marginalized in one way or another by society, and often react with self-destructive aggressiveness. He labels these stories as transgressional fiction. Beginning with Lullaby, the style of his novels changed to mostly satirical horror stories.
The narratives of Palahniuk's books often are structured in medias res, starting at the temporal end, with the protagonist recounting the events that led up to the point at which the book begins. Lullaby used a variation of this, alternating between the normal, linear narrative and the temporal end, after every few chapters. Exceptions to this narrative form, however, include the more linear Choke and Diary. Often a major plot twist exists that is revealed near the end of the book, which relates in some way to this temporal end (what Palahniuk refers to as "the hidden gun"). His more linear works also include similar plot twists.
Palahniuk's writing style has been influenced by authors such as the minimalist Tom Spanbauer (who taught Palahniuk in Portland from 1991 to 1996), Palahniuk has said that there also are some choruses between novels, noting that the color cornflower blue and the city of Missoula, Montana appear in many of his novels. The characters in Palahniuk's stories often break into philosophical asides (either by the narrator to the reader, or spoken to the narrator through dialogue), offering numerous odd theories and opinions, often misanthropic or darkly absurdist in nature, on complex issues such as death, morality, childhood, parenthood, sexuality, and a deity.
Many of the intellectual concepts in his novels have been influenced by Continental thinkers such as Michel Foucault and Albert Camus.
When not writing fiction, Palahniuk tends to write short non-fiction works. Working as a freelance journalist, he writes essays and reports on a variety of subjects. He sometimes participates in the events about which he writes, which are heavy in field research. He also has written interviews with celebrities, namely, Juliette Lewis and Marilyn Manson. These works appear in various magazines and newspapers, such as the Los Angeles Times and Gear magazine. Some of these writings have shown up in his book, Stranger Than Fiction: True Stories. Palahniuk also includes some non-fiction factoids within his fictional works and according to the author, these are included in order to further immerse the reader in his work.

Awards

Palahniuk has won the following awards:
He was nominated for the 1999 Oregon Book Award for Best Novel for Survivor and for the Bram Stoker Award for Best Novel for Lullaby in 2002 and for Haunted in 2005.

Bibliography

Fiction

According to a February 15, 2013 article in The Oregonian, Palahniuk has announced titles and release dates for his next three fiction works: Doomed was released on October 8, 2013, Beautiful You is to follow in October 2014, and Make Something Up for an unspecified date in 2015. On March 22, 2013 the author announced that he would be writing a sequel to Fight Club in the form of a graphic novel taking place ten years after Tyler's destruction. The unnamed narrator is married to Marla, living in the suburbs and they have a child together. The boredom of normalcy begins to give nihilistic shape in the form of Tyler Durden who kidnaps their child and forces the narrator back into the world of mayhem.

Short fiction

Non-fiction

Films



Notes




