[[Jane Fonda]]

CATEGORIES: 1937 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from New York, Actors Studio members, African-Americans' civil rights activists, American anti–Iraq War activists, American anti–Vietnam War activists, American Christians, American exercise instructors, American film actresses, American people of Dutch descent, American people of Frisian descent, Anti–Iraq War activists, Anti–Vietnam War activists, Art Students League of New York alumni, Best Actress BAFTA Award winners, Best Actress Academy Award winners, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Breast cancer survivors, California Democrats, Converts to Christianity from atheism or agnosticism, Counterculture of the 1960s, Emma Willard School alumni, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie Primetime Emmy Award winners, Feminist artists, Living people, Native Americans' rights activists, Writers from Atlanta, Georgia, People from Fire Island, New York, Spouses of California politicians, Transcendental Meditation practitioners, Vassar College alumni, Fonda family, Christian feminists, American feminists

Jane Fonda (born Lady Jayne Seymour Fonda; December 21, 1937) is an American actress, writer, political activist, former fashion model, and fitness guru. She rose to fame in the 1960s with films such as Barbarella and Cat Ballou and, with interruptions, has appeared in films ever since. She has won two Academy Awards, an Emmy Award and seven Golden Globe Awards (including 3 special awards) among many other accolades. She announced her retirement from acting in 1991, but returned to film in 2005 with Monster in Law, and later Georgia Rule, released in 2007. She also produced and starred in several exercise videos released between 1982 and 1995.
Fonda has been an activist for many political causes; her counterculture era opposition to the Vietnam War and associated activities were controversial. She has protested the Iraq War and violence against women, and  describes herself as a feminist. In 2005, she, Robin Morgan and Gloria Steinem co-founded the Women's Media Center, an organization that works to amplify the voices of women in the media through advocacy, media and leadership training, and the creation of original content. Fonda currently serves on the board of the organization. She published an autobiography in 2005. In 2011, she published a second memoir, Prime Time.

Background

Lady Jayne Seymour Fonda was born in New York City, the daughter of actor Henry Fonda and the Canadian-born socialite Frances Ford Brokaw, née Seymour. According to her father, their surname came from Italian ancestors who immigrated to the Netherlands in the 1500s. There, they intermarried and began to use Dutch given names. Jellis Douwe Fonda (1614–1659), a Dutch immigrant from Friesland (or Vrysland), immigrated and first went to Beverwyck (now Albany) in 1650; he was the founder of the City of Fonda, New York (see 
On April 14, 1950, when Fonda was twelve, her mother committed suicide while under treatment at a psychiatric hospital. 16–17. Later that year, Fonda's father married socialite Susan Blanchard (born 1928), just nine years his daughter's senior; this marriage ended in divorce. At 15, Fonda taught dance at Fire Island Pines, New York. She attended Greenwich Academy in Greenwich, Connecticut.
Fonda attended the Emma Willard School in Troy, New York and Vassar College in Poughkeepsie, where she was an undistinguished student.

Acting career

Fonda became interested in acting in 1954, while appearing with her father in a charity performance of The Country Girl, at the Omaha Community Playhouse. After dropping out of Vassar, she went to Paris for two years to study art. Upon returning to the states, in 1958, she met Lee Strasberg and the meeting changed the course of her life, Fonda saying, "I went to the Actors Studio and Lee Strasberg told me I had talent. Real talent. It was the first time that anyone, except my father — who had to say so — told me I was good. At anything. It was a turning point in my life. I went to bed thinking about acting. I woke up thinking about acting. It was like the roof had come off my life!"Foster, Arnold W., and Blau, Judith R. Art and Society: Readings in the Sociology of the Arts, SUNY Press (1989) pp. 118–119. ISBN 978-0-7914-0116-3.

1960s

Her stage work in the late 1950s laid the foundation for her film career in the 1960s. She averaged almost two movies a year throughout the decade, starting in 1960 with Tall Story, in which she recreated one of her Broadway roles as a college cheerleader pursuing a basketball star, played by Anthony Perkins. Period of Adjustment and Walk on the Wild Side followed in 1962. In Walk on the Wild Side Fonda played a prostitute, and earned a Golden Globe for Most Promising Newcomer.
In 1963, she appeared in Sunday in New York. Newsday called her "the loveliest and most gifted of all our new young actresses".33 Preludes to 33 Variations: The Early Broadway Years of Jane Fonda  However, she also had detractors—in the same year, the Harvard Lampoon named her the "Year's Worst Actress" for The Chapman Report. Fonda's career breakthrough came with Cat Ballou (1965), in which she played a schoolmarm turned outlaw. This comedy Western received five Oscar nominations and was one of the year's top ten films at the box office. It was considered by many to have been the film that brought Fonda to bankable stardom. After this came the comedies Any Wednesday (1966) and Barefoot in the Park (1967), the latter co-starring Robert Redford. 
In 1968, she played the title role in the science fiction spoof Barbarella, which established her status as a sex symbol. In contrast, the tragedy They Shoot Horses, Don't They? (1969) won her critical acclaim, and she earned her first Oscar nomination for the role. Fonda was very selective by the end of the 1960s, turning down lead roles in Rosemary's Baby and Bonnie and Clyde, which went to Mia Farrow and Faye Dunaway, respectively. 

1970s

Fonda won her first Academy Award for Best Actress in 1971, again playing a prostitute, the gamine Bree Daniels, in the murder mystery Klute. She won her second Oscar in 1978 for Coming Home, the story of a disabled Vietnam War veteran's difficulty in re-entering civilian life.Stated in interview on Inside the Actors Studio
Between Klute in 1971 and Fun With Dick and Jane in 1977, Fonda did not have a major film success. She appeared in A Doll's House (1973), Steelyard Blues and The Blue Bird (1976). From comments ascribed to her in interviews, some have inferred that she personally blamed the situation on anger at her outspoken political views: "I can't say I was blacklisted, but I was greylisted."Jane Fonda profile. Hello! Magazine; retrieved April 2, 2006. However, in her 2005 autobiography, My Life So Far, she rejected such simplification. "The suggestion is that because of my actions against the war my career had been destroyed ... But the truth is that my career, far from being destroyed after the war, flourished with a vigor it had not previously enjoyed."Fonda, 2005, p. 378 She reduced acting because of her political activism providing a new focus in her life. Her return to acting in a series of 'issue-driven' films reflected this new focus.
In 1972, Fonda starred as a reporter alongside Yves Montand in Tout Va Bien, directed by Jean-Luc Godard and Jean-Pierre Gorin. The two directors then made Letter to Jane, in which the two spent nearly an hour discussing a news photograph of Fonda.
Through her production company, IPC Films, she produced films that helped return her to star status. The 1977 comedy film Fun With Dick and Jane is generally considered her "comeback" picture. She also received positive reviews, BAFTA and Golden Globe Awards for Best Actress, and an Oscar nomination for her portrayal of the playwright Lillian Hellman in the 1977 film Julia. During this period, Fonda announced that she would make only films that focused on important issues, and she generally stuck to her word. She turned down An Unmarried Woman because she felt the part was not relevant. She followed with popular and successful films such as The China Syndrome (1979), about a cover-up of an accident in a nuclear power plant; and The Electric Horseman (1979) with her previous co-star, Robert Redford.

1980s

In 1980, Fonda starred in Nine to Five with Lily Tomlin and Dolly Parton. The film was a huge critical and box office success, becoming the second highest-grossing release of the year.1980 Yearly Box Office Results. boxofficemojo. She achieved this goal when she purchased the screen rights to the play On Golden Pond, specifically for her father and her."Barbarella comes of age", The Age, May 14, 2005; retrieved May 5, 2008. "If Barbarella was an act of rebellion, On Golden Pond (1981) was a more mature rapprochement: Fonda bought the rights to Ernest Thompson's play to offer the role to her father." On Golden Pond, which also starred Katharine Hepburn, brought Henry Fonda his only Academy Award for Best Actor, which Jane accepted on his behalf, as he was ill and could not leave home. He died five months later.
Fonda continued appearing in feature films throughout the 1980s, most notably in the role of Dr. Martha Livingston in Agnes of God (1985). She was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Actress for her portrayal of an alcoholic murder suspect in the 1986 thriller The Morning After, opposite Jeff Bridges. She ended the decade by appearing in Old Gringo. This was followed by the romantic drama Stanley & Iris (1990) with Robert De Niro, which would be her final film for 15 years.

=Exercise videos=

For many years Fonda took ballet class to keep fit, but after fracturing her foot while filming The China Syndrome, she was no longer able to participate. To compensate, she began participating in aerobics and strengthening exercises under the direction of Leni Cazden. The Leni Workout became the Jane Fonda Workout, which began a second career for her, continuing for many years. This was considered one of the influences that started the fitness craze among baby boomers, then approaching middle age. In 1982, Fonda released her first exercise video, titled Jane Fonda's Workout, inspired by her best-selling book, Jane Fonda's Workout Book. Jane Fonda's Workout became the highest selling home video of the next few years, selling over a million copies. The video's release led many people to buy the then-new VCR in order to watch and perform the workout at home. The exercise videos were produced and directed by Sidney Galanty, who helped to put the deal together with video distributor Stuart Karl, of Karl Home Video. Galanty produced the first video and 11 more after that. She would subsequently release 23 workout videos with the series selling a total of 17 million copies combined, more than any other exercise series. She released five workout books and thirteen audio programs, through 1995. After a fifteen-year hiatus, she released two new fitness videos on DVD in 2010, aiming at an older audience.

Retirement and return

In the early 1990s, after three decades in film, Fonda announced her retirement from the film industry. In May 2005, she returned to the screen with the box office success Monster-in-Law. In July 2005, the British tabloid The Sun reported that when asked if she would appear in a sequel to her 1980 hit Nine to Five, Fonda replied, "I'd love to"."Fonda: 9 To 5 sequel?". The Sun (London); retrieved July 23, 2013. Fonda appeared in the 2007 Garry Marshall-directed film,  Georgia Rule, which co-starred Felicity Huffman and Lindsay Lohan.
In 2009, Fonda returned to act on Broadway for the first time since 1963, playing Katherine Brandt in Moisés Kaufman's 33 Variations."Jane Fonda returns to Broadway in '33 Variations The role earned her a Tony nomination for Best Performance by a Leading Actress in a Play."Search Past Winners". Tony Awards. Retrieved July 19, 2011.
She starred alongside Catherine Keener in Peace, Love and Misunderstanding, which was  released in 2012. Reuters. Retrieved July 19, 2011. She made a return to French cinema, shooting Et Si On Vivait Tous Ensemble (..."Jane Fonda in a French Twist". Daily Express (London). May 24, 2010.
In July 2011, Fonda's planned appearance on the QVC shopping network to promote her latest book, Prime Time: Making the Most of Your Life, was cancelled on short notice. Fonda said the cancellation was a response to viewer complaints about her activities during the Vietnam War.
Since 2012, Fonda has had a recurring role as Leona Lansing, CEO of a major media company, in HBO's original political drama The Newsroom. In 2013, she portrayed First Lady Nancy Reagan in Lee Daniels' The Butler.

Political activism

During the 1960s, Fonda engaged in political activism in support of the civil rights movement, and in opposition to the Vietnam War. Fonda's visits to France brought her into contact with leftist French intellectuals who were opposed to war, an experience that she later characterized as "small-c communism". 139 Along with other celebrities, she supported the Alcatraz Island occupation by American Indians in 1969, which was intended to call attention to failures of the government in treaty rights and the movement for greater Indian sovereignty.
She supported Huey Newton and the Black Panthers in the early 1970s, stating "Revolution is an act of love; we are the children of revolution, born to be rebels. It runs in our blood." She called the Black Panthers "our revolutionary vanguard ... we must support them with love, money, propaganda and risk." She has been involved in the feminist movement since the 1970s, which dovetails with her activism in support of civil rights.

Opposition to Vietnam War

In April 1970, Fonda, with Fred Gardner and Donald Sutherland formed the FTA tour ("Free The Army", a play on the troop expression "Fuck The Army"), an anti-war road show designed as an answer to Bob Hope's USO tour. The tour, described as "political vaudeville" by Fonda, visited military towns along the West Coast, with the goal of establishing a dialogue with soldiers about their upcoming deployments to Vietnam. The dialogue was made into a movie (F.T.A.) which contained strong, frank criticism of the war by servicemen and servicewomen; it was released in 1972.T.A.; retrieved April 2, 2006.
On May 4, 1970, Fonda appeared before an assembly at the University of New Mexico, in Albuquerque, to speak on GI rights and issues. The end of her presentation was met with a discomforting silence. The quiet was broken when Beat poet Gregory Corso staggered onto the stage. Drunk, Corso challenged Fonda, using a four-letter expletive: Why hadn't she addressed the shooting of four students at Kent State by the Ohio National Guard, which had just taken place? Fonda in her autobiography revisited the incident: "I was shocked by the news and felt like a fool." On the same day, she joined a protest march on the home of university president, Ferrel Heady. The protestors called themselves "They Shoot Students, Don't They?" — a reference to Fonda's recently released film, They Shoot Horses, Don't They?, which had just had been screened in Albuquerque. 315
In the same year, Fonda spoke out against the war at a rally organized by Vietnam Veterans Against the War (VVAW) in Valley Forge, Pennsylvania. She offered to help raise funds for VVAW and, for her efforts, was rewarded with the title of Honorary National Coordinator.

="Hanoi Jane" controversy=

Fonda visited Hanoi in July 1972. Among other statements, she said the United States had been intentionally targeting the dike system along the Red River. The columnist Joseph Kraft, who was also touring North Vietnam, said he believed the damage to the dikes was incidental and was being used as propaganda by Hanoi, and that, if the U.S. Air Force were "truly going after the dikes, it would do so in a methodical, not a harum-scarum way".
In North Vietnam, Fonda was photographed seated on an anti-aircraft battery; the controversial photo outraged a number of Americans. In her 2005 autobiography, she wrote that she was manipulated into sitting on the battery; she had been horrified at the implications of the pictures and regretted they were taken. In a recent entry at her official website, Fonda explained:
 It happened on my last day in Hanoi. I was exhausted and an emotional wreck after the 2-week visit ... The translator told me that the soldiers wanted to sing me a song. He translated as they sung. It was a song about the day 'Uncle Ho' declared their country's independence in Hanoi's Ba Dinh Square. I heard these words: "All men are created equal; they are given certain rights; among these are life, Liberty and Happiness." These are the words Ho pronounced at the historic ceremony. I began to cry and clap. These young men should not be our enemy. They celebrate the same words Americans do. The soldiers asked me to sing for them in return ... I memorized a song called "Day Ma Di", written by anti-war South Vietnamese students. I knew I was slaughtering it, but everyone seemed delighted that I was making the attempt. I finished. Everyone was laughing and clapping, including me ... Here is my best, honest recollection of what happened: someone (I don't remember who) led me towards the gun, and I sat down, still laughing, still applauding. It all had nothing to do with where I was sitting. I hardly even thought about where I was sitting. The cameras flashed ... It is possible that it was a set up, that the Vietnamese had it all planned. I will never know. But if they did I can't blame them. The buck stops here. If I was used, I allowed it to happen ... a two-minute lapse of sanity that will haunt me forever ... But the photo exists, delivering its message regardless of what I was doing or feeling. I carry this heavy in my heart. I have apologized numerous times for any pain I may have caused servicemen and their families because of this photograph. It was never my intention to cause harm."The Truth About My Trip To Hanoi". July 22, 2011; accessed January 27, 2014 at the Jane Fonda official website. 
During her trip, Fonda made ten radio broadcasts in which she denounced American political and military leaders as "war criminals". Fonda has defended her decision to travel to North Vietnam and her radio broadcasts. Fonda said the POWs were "military careerists and professional killers" who are "trying to make themselves look self-righteous, but they are war criminals according to the law". Her visits to the POW camp led to persistent and exaggerated rumors which were repeated widely in the press and continued to circulate on the Internet decades later. Fonda has personally denied the rumors. Interviews with two of the alleged victims specifically named in the emails showed these allegations to be false as they had never met Fonda.
In 1972, Fonda helped fund and organize the Indochina Peace Campaign, which
Because of her time in North Vietnam, the ensuing circulated rumors regarding the visit, and statements made following her return, resentment against her among veterans and those currently serving in the U.S. military still exists. For example, for many years at the U.S. Naval Academy, when a plebe shouted out "Goodnight, Jane Fonda!", the entire company replied "Goodnight, bitch!"

=Regrets=

In a 1988 interview with Barbara Walters, Fonda expressed regret for some of her comments and actions, stating: I would like to say something, not just to Vietnam veterans in New England, but to men who were in Vietnam, who I hurt, or whose pain I caused to deepen because of things that I said or did. I was trying to help end the killing and the war, but there were times when I was thoughtless and careless about it and I'm very sorry that I hurt them. And I want to apologize to them and their families. ... I will go to my grave regretting the photograph of me in an anti-aircraft gun, which looks like I was trying to shoot at American planes. It hurt so many soldiers. It galvanized such hostility. It was the most horrible thing I could possibly have done. It was just thoughtless. 
Some critics responded that her apology came at a time when a group of New England Veterans had launched a campaign to disrupt a film project she was working on, leading to the charge that her apology was motivated at least partly by self-interest. "If Fonda is sorry, let her say so". Jewish World Review.
In a 60 Minutes interview on March 31, 2005, Fonda reiterated that she had no regrets about her trip to North Vietnam in 1972, with the exception of the anti-aircraft-gun photo. She stated that the incident was a "betrayal" of American forces and of the "country that gave me privilege". Fonda said, "The image of Jane Fonda, Barbarella, Henry Fonda's daughter ... sitting on an enemy aircraft gun was a betrayal ... the largest lapse of judgment that I can even imagine." She later distinguished between regret over the use of her image as propaganda and pride for her anti-war activism: "There are hundreds of American delegations that had met with the POWs. Both sides were using the POWs for propaganda ... It's not something that I will apologize for." Fonda said she had no regrets about the broadcasts she made on Radio Hanoi, something she asked the North Vietnamese to do: "Our government was lying to us and men were dying because of it, and I felt I had to do anything that I could to expose the lies and help end the war."

=Subject of government surveillance=

In 2013, it was revealed that Fonda was one of approximately 1,600 Americans whose communications between 1967 and 1973 were monitored by the United States National Security Agency (NSA) as part of Project Minaret, a program that some NSA officials have described as "disreputable if not downright illegal".

Feminist causes

Fonda has been a longtime supporter of feminist causes, including V-Day, a movement to stop violence against women, inspired by the off-Broadway hit The Vagina Monologues, of which she is an honorary chairperson. She was present at their first summit in 2002, bringing together founder Eve Ensler, Afghan women oppressed by the Taliban, and a Kenyan activist campaigning to save girls from genital mutilation.
In 2001, she established the Jane Fonda Center for Adolescent Reproductive Health at Emory University in Atlanta, Georgia to help prevent adolescent pregnancy through training and program development.
On February 16, 2004, Fonda led a march through Ciudad Juárez, with Sally Field, Eve Ensler, and other women, urging Mexico to provide sufficient resources to newly appointed officials helping investigate the murders of hundreds of women in the rough border city.
In the days before the September 17, 2006 Swedish elections, Fonda went to Sweden to support the new political party Feministiskt initiativ in their election campaign.
In My Life So Far, Fonda stated that she considers patriarchy to be harmful to men as well as women. She also states that for many years, she feared to call herself a feminist, because she believed that all feminists were "anti-male". But now, with her increased understanding of patriarchy, she feels that feminism is beneficial to both men and women, and states that she "still loves men", adding that when she divorced Ted Turner, she felt like she had also divorced the world of patriarchy, and was very happy to have done so.

Native Americans

Fonda went to Seattle, Washington, in 1970 to support a group of Native Americans who were led by Bernie Whitebear. The group had occupied part of the grounds of Fort Lawton, which was in the process of being surplussed by the United States Army and turned into a park. The group was attempting to secure a land base where they could establish services for the sizable local urban Indian population, protesting that "Indians had a right to part of the land that was originally all theirs." The endeavor succeeded and the Daybreak Star Cultural Center was constructed in the city's Discovery Park. "Self-Determination: Taking Back Fort Lawton. Meeting the Needs of Seattle's Native American Community Through Conversion", Race, Poverty & the Environment, Volume IV, Number 4/Volume V, Number 1 (Spring – Summer 1994), p. 5.

Israeli–Palestinian conflict

In December 2002, Fonda visited Israel and the West Bank as part of a tour focusing on stopping violence against women. She demonstrated with Women in Black against Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip outside the residence of Israel's Prime Minister. She later visited Jewish and Arab doctors and patients at a Jerusalem hospital, followed by visits to Ramallah to see a physical rehabilitation center, and a Palestinian refugee camp."Fonda joins Jerusalem demo". BBC News Online. December 2, 2002; accessed February 8, 2014. She was heckled by three members of Women in Green as she arrived for a meeting with leading Israeli feminists."Jane in Jerusalem". Jewish World Review. December 23, 2002; retrieved April 2, 2006.
In September 2009, she was one of more than 1,500 signatories to a letter protesting the 2009 Toronto International Film Festival's spotlight on Tel Aviv. The protest letter said that the spotlight on Tel Aviv was part of "the Israeli propaganda machine" because it was supported in part by funding from the Israeli government and had been described by the Israeli Consul General Amir Gissin as being part of a Brand Israel campaign intended to draw attention away from Israel's conflict with the Palestinians."Brand Israel set to launch in GTA". Canadian Jewish News. August 21, 2009; accessed February 8, 2014."Canadian director protests TIFF Tel Aviv spotlight". CBC News. August 29, 2009. "Artists protest Tel Aviv focus at Toronto film fest". Reuters. Other signers included actor Danny Glover, musician David Byrne, journalist John Pilger, and authors Alice Walker, Naomi Klein, and Howard Zinn. "Fonda, Loach and Klein Among Those Joining Protest Against TIFF". IndieWire."An Open Letter to the Toronto International Film Festival". September 2, 2009; accessed February 8, 2014.
Rabbi Marvin Hier of the Simon Wiesenthal Center stated that "People who support letters like this are people who do not support a two-state solution. By calling into question the legitimacy of Tel Aviv, they are supporting a one-state solution, which means the destruction of the State of Israel."US actor Jane Fonda backs away from Israel row at Toronto film festival; The Guardian; September 16, 2009  Hier continued, saying that "it is clear that the script protesters are reading from might as well have been written by Hamas.""To criticize Israel is a dangerous thing in today's Canada". Toronto Star. September 11, 2009; accessed February 8, 2014.
Fonda, in The Huffington Post, said she regretted some of the language used in the original protest letter and how it "was perhaps too easily misunderstood. It certainly has been wildly distorted. Contrary to the lies that have been circulated, the protest letter was not demonizing Israeli films and filmmakers." She continued, writing "the greatest 're-branding' of Israel would be to celebrate that country's long standing, courageous and robust peace movement by helping to end the blockade of Gaza through negotiations with all parties to the conflict, and by stopping the expansion of West Bank settlements. That's the way to show Israel's commitment to peace, not a PR campaign. There will be no two-state solution unless this happens."Fonda, Jane (September 15, 2009). "Expanding the Narrative". The Huffington Post. Fonda emphasized that she, "in no way, supports the destruction of Israel. I am for the two-state solution. I have been to Israel many times and love the country and its people." Several prominent Atlanta Jews subsequently signed a letter to The Huffington Post rejecting the vilification of Fonda, who they described as "a strong supporter and friend of Israel". "Atlanta Jews Reject Vilification and Stand Up for Jane Fonda". The Huffington Post; accessed February 8, 2014.

Opposition to the Iraq War

Fonda argued that the military campaign in Iraq will turn people all over the world against America, and asserted that a global hatred of America would result in more terrorist attacks in the aftermath of the war. In July 2005, Fonda announced plans to make an anti-war bus tour in March 2006 with her daughter and several families of military veterans, saying that some of the war veterans she had met while on her book tour had urged her to speak out against the Iraq War. She later canceled the tour, due to concerns that she would distract attention from Cindy Sheehan's activism.
In September 2005, Fonda was scheduled to join British politician and anti-war activist George Galloway at two stops on his U.S. book tour, Madison, Wisconsin and Chicago. She canceled her appearances at the last minute, citing instructions from her doctors to avoid travel following recent hip surgery.
On January 27, 2007, Fonda participated in an anti-war rally and march held on the National Mall in Washington, D.C., declaring that "silence is no longer an option".

Fonda and Kerry

In the 2004 presidential election, her name was used as a disparaging epithet against John Kerry, the former VVAW leader, who was then the Democratic Party presidential candidate. Republican National Committee Chairman Ed Gillespie called Kerry a "Jane Fonda Democrat". Also, Kerry's opponents circulated a photograph showing Fonda and Kerry in the same large crowd at a 1970 anti-war rally, although they were sitting several rows apart." Does a photograph show Senator John Kerry at a 1970 anti-war rally?" Snopes; retrieved April 2, 2006. A faked composite photograph, which gave the false impression that the two had shared a speaker's platform, was also circulated."Does a photograph show Senator John Kerry and Jane Fonda sharing a speaker's platform at an anti-war rally?" Snopes.

Writing

On April 5, 2005, Random House released Fonda's autobiography My Life So Far.  The book describes her life as a series of three acts, each thirty years long, and declares that her third "act" will be her most significant, due in part to her commitment to the Christian religion, and that it will determine the things for which she will be remembered.
Fonda's autobiography was well received by book critics, and was noted to be "as beguiling and as maddening as Jane Fonda herself" in its Washington Post review, pronouncing her a "beautiful bundle of contradictions".
In January 2009, Fonda started chronicling her Broadway return in a blog, with posts ranging from her Pilates class to her fears and excitement about her new play. She uses Twitter and has a Facebook page. In 2011, Fonda published a new book: Prime Time: Love, health, sex, fitness, friendship, spirit—making the most of all of your life. The book offers stories from her own life as well as from the lives of others, giving her perspective on how to better live what she calls "the critical years from 45 and 50, and especially from 60 and beyond".com, Prime Time, August 2011, Random House; ISBN 1-4000-6697-2.

Charitable work

According to IRS filings, Fonda founded the Jane Fonda Foundation in 2004 as a charitable corporation with herself as president, chair, director and secretary; Fonda contributes 10 hours each week on its behalf.Jessica Chasmar. "Jane Fonda Foundation fails to make single contribution in 5 years: report", The Washington Times, December 12, 2013  retrieved December 12, 2013."Records: Jane Fonda's charity foundation hasn't made donation in 5 years" By Hollie McKay, FoxNews.foxnews.

Personal life

Fonda married her first husband Roger Vadim in 1965. The couple had a daughter, Vanessa, born in 1968 and named for actress and activist Vanessa Redgrave. 203. In 1973, following her divorce from Vadim, Fonda married activist Tom Hayden. 342. Their son was born in 1973 and named Troy O'Donovan Hayden, but he later adopted his paternal grandmother's maiden name, "Garity", professionally, as the surnames "Fonda and Hayden carried too much baggage".  "Troy" was the Anglicization of "Troi"; Fonda and Hayden named their son for Nguyễn Văn Trỗi. Fonda and Hayden unofficially adopted an African-American teenager, Mary Luana Williams (known as Lulu),
Fonda grew up an atheist, but turned to Christianity in the early 2000s. She describes her beliefs as being "outside of established religion", with a more feminist slant, and views God as something that "lives within each of us as Spirit (or soul)."
Having been diagnosed with breast cancer, Fonda underwent a lumpectomy in November 2010, and has recovered."Jane Fonda suffers from breast cancer". The Daily Telegraph. November 13, 2010.

Honors

In 1981, she was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award.
In 1994, the United Nations Population Fund made Fonda a Goodwill Ambassador.
In December 2008, Fonda was inducted into the California Hall of Fame, located at The California Museum for History, Women and the Arts.Com, December 15, 2008. In December 2009, Fonda received the New York Women's Agenda Lifetime Achievement Award. She was selected as the 42nd recipient (2014) of the AFI Life Achievement Award.

Filmography



Bibliography 




