[[Detention of Maria Lourdes Afiuni]]

CATEGORIES: Human rights in Venezuela, Venezuelan prisoners and detainees, Prisoners and detainees of Venezuela, Politics of Venezuela, Venezuelan law, Government of Venezuela

Judge María Lourdes Afiuni Mora is a Venezuelan who was 46 years old as of April 2010 Human rights groups accused the late Venezuelan President Hugo Chávez of creating a climate of fear that threatens the independence of the judiciary.

Arrest

Judge Afiuni was arrested by intelligence officers after ordering the conditional release on December 10 of businessman Eligio Cedeño pending his trial for evading currency controls. A "pro-Chavez congressman" stated that a bribe was paid to Afiuni; she denies the charge.
Afiuni said she was following United Nations' guidance when she released Cedeño, who had been detained longer than the time allowed under Venezuelan law.  He also says, "In light of the opinion of the U.N. Working Group, and given the unexcused absence of the prosecutors and the lack of objection by the other government representatives who were present, Control Judge Afiuni granted my conditional release ..."

Detention

María Lourdes Afiuni was incarcerated on 17 December 2009 at the National Institute of Feminine Orientation (INOF), a women's prison on the outskirts of Caracas; her cell is close to convicts whom she sentenced to jail, and she reports she has been threatened.  Responding to concerns that Lourdes Afiuni's life was in danger, Venezuelan authorities reported on 29 December that she was being held separately from the general prison population.
In January 2010, the prosecution filed official charges against Afiuni for alleged irregularities in the release of Eligio Cedeño.
A hearing on Afiuni's case had been postponed several times as of April 2010.  In February 2011, she was granted house arrest during recuperation after emergency surgery for cancer.
In November 2012, Afiuni denounced an alleged physical abuse during her detention. According to her attorney she was raped while in prison, became pregnant, and had an abortion.

Reaction

President Hugo Chávez called the judge a "bandit", applauded her arrest, and said she should be put away in prison for 30 years.
Several international groups have expressed concern about the arrest of Judge Afiuni. In December 2009, three independent human rights experts of the United Nations' (UN) Working Group on Arbitrary Detention called for Judge Afiuni's immediate and unconditional release;  
On 8 July 2010, the European Parliament stated that it "Condemns the public statements made by the President of the Republic of Venezuela, insulting and denigrating the judge, demanding a maximum sentence and requesting a modification of the law to enable a more severe penalty to be imposed; considers that these statements are aggravating the circumstances of her detention and constitute an attack on the independence of the judiciary by the President of a nation, who should be its first guarantor."European Parliament resolution of 8 July 2010 on Venezuela, in particular the case of Maria Lourdes Afiuni 
In July 2011, Noam Chomsky—who according to The Observer "Chávez has long considered ... one of his best friends in the west"—published an open letter asking the government of Venezuela for "a humanitarian act that ends the judge's detention". Chomsky stated, "I am convinced that she must be set free, not only due to her physical and psychological health conditions, but in conformance with the human dignity the Bolivarian revolution presents as a goal. In times of worldwide cries for freedom, the detention of María Lourdes Afiuni stands out as a glaring exception that should be remedied quickly, for the sake of justice and human rights generally and for affirming an honourable role for Venezuela in these struggles."

Release

Afiuni was released on June 14, 2013 but remained on trial.




