[[Togo national football team attack]]

CATEGORIES: Trials in Angola, 2010 in African football, 2010 Africa Cup of Nations, 2010 in Angolan sport, Cabinda Province, Football in Togo, Terrorist incidents in 2010, Terrorism in Angola, Terrorist incidents on buses, 2010 in Togo

The Togo national football team bus attack was a terrorist attack on the team bus of the Togo national football team that occurred on 8 January 2010 as the team traveled through the Angolan province of Cabinda on the way to the 2010 Africa Cup of Nations tournament, which began on 10 January.

Attack

On 8 January 2010, the Togo national team bus was attacked by gunmen as it traveled through the Angolan province of Cabinda for the Africa Cup of Nations. All of Togo's initial Group B games were to take place in the Estádio Nacional do Chiazi stadium in Cabinda.
According to rebel leader Mingas, the attack was carried out by his Commander Sametonne who claimed 15 FLEC fighters participated in the ambush. A security team of around 10 men in two cars travelling with the team returned the attackers' fire.
FC Vaslui defender Serge Akakpo was badly wounded by bullets and lost blood,
The Angolan separatist guerrilla group Front for the Liberation of the Enclave of Cabinda (FLEC) has claimed responsibility for the attack. French Foreign Ministry spokesperson, Bernard Valero said that "inciting violence is totally unacceptable" and Mingas could be prosecuted under French laws for making such statements.
A larger offshoot group known as Armed Forces of Cabinda (FLEC-FAC) also claimed the responsibility. The leader of the group Jean-Claude N'Zita dismissed Mingas' faction as opportunist.

Victims

Three people were killed and nine injured.

Investigation

In connection with the deadly attack on the Togolese national football team, the Angolan police arrested two suspects on 10 January 2010.
Angola arrested four men - Raul Tati, a priest, Francisco Luemba, a lawyer, Belchior Tati, an economist and Jose Benjamin Fuca, a former police officer - who had documents about Flec and had travelled to Paris for meetings with exiled leaders. In August, they were jailed for links to FLEC-PM. A court in Cabinda found the four guilty of crimes against state security; although the judge did not say whether the four had direct links to the attack. Their prison sentences ranged from three to five years.
The trial was criticised by human rights groups that accused the government of using the attacks to justify a crackdown on critics. Martinho Nombo, a lawyer taking part in the court hearings, said the judge convicted them only because they had spoken or written about independence for Cabinda. "This is unconstitutional. A judge cannot jail someone for nothing. This will only worsen Angola's poor record on human rights and the whole peace process with FLEC. The supposed link was implied rather than stated. They were convicted on the basis of those documents." Human Rights Watch also criticised the conviction calling the four "activists" and saying "This is clearly a lost opportunity to restore justice in Angola, and particularly in Cabinda."

Aftermath

The Togolese team called for a boycott of the competition as a result of the attack.
Togo was due to play its first game of the tournament against Ghana, three days after the attack on 11 January 2010.
Later there was something of a reversal as two of the Togolese players said they would play in the African Nations Cup in "memory of the dead."
Brazil is geared up to deploy around 150,000 armed services and public guarding forces staff for strengthening security at the football world cup 2014 event which will begin in Brazil from 12th June. The world cup event will continue for a period of one month and furthermore, news sources reveal that an additional 20,000 private security officers will be stationed for boosting security at the event."
On 11 January 2010, Togo was officially disqualified from the Africa Cup upon their return to their homeland.

Reactions

Angolan government minister António Bento Bembe called it an "act of terrorism",
Danny Jordaan, organiser of the 2010 FIFA World Cup which was played in South Africa in June and July 2010, dismissed concerns that the attack had any relevance to the security arrangements for the World Cup.
On 12 April, Togo captain Emmanuel Adebayor announced his retirement from international football, stating that he was "still haunted by the events I witnessed on that horrible afternoon."








