[[John Cain (junior)]]

CATEGORIES: 1931 births, Living people, Australian Labor Party politicians, Members of the Victorian Legislative Assembly, Premiers of Victoria (Australia), Attorneys-General of Victoria, People educated at Scotch College, Melbourne, Politicians from Melbourne, Melbourne Law School alumni, People educated at Northcote High School, Leaders of the Opposition in Victoria (Australia), Australian barristers, Australian people of Irish descent

John Cain (born 26 April 1931), Australian Labor Party politician, was the 41st Premier of Victoria, holding office from 1982 to 1990. During his time as Premier, changes were enforced to the practices of various institutions in Melbourne which discriminated against women, while other reforms were introduced such as liberalized shop trading hours and liquor laws, equal opportunity initiatives, and occupational health and safety legislation.Ross McMullin, The Light on the Hill: The Australian Labor Party 1891-1991

Biography

Cain was born in Melbourne, the son of John Cain, leader of the Labor Party in Victoria from 1937 to 1957 and three times Premier. He was educated at Bell Primary School, Northcote High School, Scotch College, Melbourne and at the University of Melbourne, where he graduated in law. He practised law in suburban Melbourne, and was Chairman of the Victorian Law Institute in 1971–72. He was also a member of the Law Council of Australia and a member of the Australian Law Reform Commission.
Cain was 24 at the time of the 1955 split in the Labor Party that brought down his father's last government.  He lost a preselection battle with Frank Wilkes for his late father's seat of Northcote in 1957. 
During the 1960s he was a member of the group, known as The Participants, which also included John Button, Richard McGarvie Frank Costigan and Barry Jones, who opposed the left-wing group which controlled the Victorian Labor Party from 1955 onwards. In 1971 he supported the moves by supporters of Gough Whitlam, led by Bob Hawke and others, that in 1971 brought about federal intervention in the Victorian branch and ended left-wing control. He became Vice-Chairman of the Victorian Labor Party in 1973. That group of Participants later became known as the Independents faction which predominantly voted with the Socialist Left.

Political career

In 1976 Cain was elected to the Victorian Legislative Assembly as MP for Bundoora. He became shadow Attorney-General under the leadership of Frank Wilkes, but when Wilkes lost the 1979 election to the Liberal premier, Dick Hamer, Cain challenged him for the leadership, becoming leader in September 1981. In April 1982 Cain defeated the Liberals and formed the first Labor government in Victoria for 27 years since the one led by his father.

First term as Premier

During the first term of his government, Cain's government carried out many reforms to Victorian government, particularly in the areas of education, environment, law reform and public administration. The Government brought in nude beaches, legalized brothels, extended Saturday shop trading hours, extended nightclub hours, extended hotel hours and allowed Sunday VFL football and more gambling opportunities.
Cain was a Keynesian, opposed to the doctrines of economic rationalism, and he increased government spending in the hope of stimulating growth and investment. Following the lead of NSW premier Neville Wran, Cain demanded Government owned enterprises pay dividends to the treasury, these dividends were increased every year forcing these enterprises to borrow to pay the dividend. Other schemes such as the Victorian Economic Development Corporation, and the Victorian Equity Trust promised good returns. These schemes worked so long as the national economy remained buoyant.
The Government of Victoria refused to approve the plans for the upgrade VFL Park in 1982/1983, because the upgrade would have threatened the Melbourne Cricket Ground's right to host the VFL Grand Final. Cain said that such a major event must be played in the centre of Melbourne.
Cain was also responsible for the appointment as Governor of Davis McCaughey, then aged 71, who served from 1986 to 1992. A highly respected theologian, McCaughey was a popular choice after the controversy surrounding after the resignation of Rear Admiral Sir Brian Murray, following disputed accusations that he had improperly accepted free air travel.

Second term

Cain remained very popular with the Victorian electorate, and was easily elected to a second term in 1985, becoming the first Labor premier to be reelected. Due to a tied vote in the upper house province of Nunawading, and having the winning vote drawn from a hat, a Labor government for the first time in its history had control of the Legislative Council. Cain was able to push his Workcare Act. A fresh election ordered by the Court of Disputed Returns after it was found that the Chief Electoral Officer drew a name from the hat rather than caste the deciding vote. The Liberals won re-election and Labor lost its slim majority. Within a week the Chairman of the Victorian Nuclear Disarmament Party, lodged an official complaint about a deceptive NDP how to vote card handed out at the booths. It was claimed that members of the Australian Labor Party were recognised handing out this card and that the allocation of preferences to the ALP on the card damaged the NDP.aph.au/parlInfo/search/display/display.w3p;db=CHAMBER;id=chamber%2Fhansardr%2F1992-10-14%2F0014;query=Id%3A%22chamber%2Fhansardr%2F1992-10-14%2F0080%22
The government entered a cover-up to protect its state secretary Peter Batchelor and the Labor party.Public debt and private pain, The Sun 8 August 1990
During its second term Cain's government began to run into difficulties with the state budget. The stock market crash of 1987 created a crisis which forced the government to cut spending, alienating some trade union supporters. The State Bank of Victoria, in particular its merchant banking arm Tricontinental, ran up a huge portfolion of bad loans, without adequate fiduciary supervision.
Progress had created a vast amount of vacant inner-city land, with the introduction of containerisation in the shipping industry, the docks became inadequate for the new container ships. This made the docks within Victoria Harbour obsolete as the principal docking area shifted closer to the mouth of the Yarra, this was seen as a large urban blight by the Cain state government. The size of the Melbourne Docklands area meant that political influences were inescapable.
The Docklands was high on the government's agenda,[ref]
