[[For Your Entertainment (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 debut albums, Adam Lambert albums, RCA Records albums, Albums produced by Jeff Bhasker, Albums produced by Rob Cavallo, Albums produced by Ryan Tedder, Albums produced by Linda Perry, Albums produced by Dr. Luke, Albums produced by Greg Wells, Albums produced by Howard Benson, Albums produced by Max Martin, Albums produced by Shellback, English-language albums

For Your Entertainment is the debut studio album by American singer-songwriter Adam Lambert, which he started to record after the end of  the eighth season of American Idol. It was released on November 23, 2009 by RCA Records. Three singles have been released from the album worldwide: "For Your Entertainment", "Whataya Want from Me" and "If I Had You" while "Sleepwalker" has been released in some countries as the fourth single. "Fever", "Sure Fire Winners" and "Aftermath" were released as radio-only singles in select countries. The album peaked at position number three on the Billboard 200 and reached Gold and Platinum status in multiple countries. The album's second single "Whataya Want from Me" became an international hit reaching the top ten in fourteen countries. The album was supported by Lambert's first concert tour, the 2010 Glam Nation Tour.

Development

Immediately following his participation on American Idol, Lambert began writing and recording with predominant pop hit makers such as Lady Gaga, Greg Wells, Max Martin, Linda Perry, RedOne, Ryan Tedder, Evan "Kidd" Bogart, Sam Sparro, Kara DioGuardi, Alex James, Rivers Cuomo and Pink. On October 28, Lambert announced that the lead single would be "For Your Entertainment" produced by Dr. Luke. He tweeted, "Debut single is called 'For Your Entertainment' ..." He also confirmed a song called "Soaked" written by Matthew Bellamy of Muse and a song called "Music Again" written by Justin Hawkins of The Darkness.  Another song from Justin Hawkins titled "Suburban Decay" was also considered for the album, but Lambert decided not to record it, saying it was too different than the rest of the album. The guitar solo on the song "Sleepwalker" was performed by Orianthi.

Promotion

To promote the album's release, several songs from the album were performed live on AOL Sessions.
Lambert appeared for the first time on The Jay Leno Show on December 21, 2009, giving a lengthy interview and performing "Whataya Want from Me". as part of his Asian and European promotional tour.
In the same month, Lambert was selected to inaugurate the newly resurrected award-winning VH1 Unplugged concert series, for which he interviewed as well as performed stripped-down versions of five songs from the album.
In May 2010, he returned to Ellen to perform a new single, "If I Had You".

Release

The album was released in the United Kingdom, on November 20, 2009 and November 23 in the United States, to generally positive reception. The album was later released internationally with "Time for Miracles", "Master Plan", "No Boundaries", "Down the Rabbit Hole" and "Voodoo" as bonus tracks. It was later released as a special Tour Edition in 2010, including the bonus tracks, live performances from Iheart Radio and AOL Stripped, music videos for "For Your Entertainment," "Whataya Want From Me," "If I Had You" and the making of "If I Had You"'s music video. The album was released with the same image of the title track artwork.

Critical reception

Critical response to For Your Entertainment was generally positive. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album has received an average score of 71, based on 10 reviews.

Track listing

 

"Glam Nation" World Tour

In support of the album, Lambert embarked on his first headlining world solo tour entitled The Glam Nation Tour. The tour travelled across North America, New Zealand, Australia, Asia and Europe, before finishing with two final shows in Los Angeles, California. The tour began with a sold out show at the Kirby Sports Center in Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania. Opening acts were Allison Iraheta and Orianthi for the North American leg of the tour.

Chart performance

The album sold 198,000 copies in its first week, debuting at number 3 on the Billboard 200. As of May 2012, it has sold 838,000 in the U.S.billboard. The album was officially released in the UK on May 3, 2010 and debuted and peaked at number 36. For Your Entertainment was released across Europe between April and June, being successful mostly in Finland, Germany, Greece, and Sweden peaking at number 4, number 16, number 5 and number 8 respectively. The album was released in Australia on March 5, 2010 and debut inside the top 20 on the ARIA charts in its first week. After the success of singles "Whataya Want from Me" and "If I Had You" the album went on to be certified Gold by ARIA, later being accredited Platinum status for selling over 70,000 copies in Australia.
The album has received success across Asia, being certified Gold in Malaysia and Singapore, with success in Japan also. As of January 2011, the album has sold over 1.2 million units worldwide, while all singles tracks from the albums have a sales total of 4.2 million units worldwide.

Charts and certifications

Charts

Year-end charts

Certifications

Release date






