[[Maritime Security Agency]]

CATEGORIES: Military of Pakistan, Paramilitary forces of Pakistan, Federal law enforcement agencies of Pakistan, Coast guards, Pakistan Navy

The Pakistan Maritime Security Agency (Urdu: ميرى ٹاأم سكيور ٹى ايجنسى; reporting name: PMSA) is a law enforcement service and the one of the six uniform service branch of the Paramilitary command of Pakistan.
Adopting the genesis of the UN Convention on Law of the Sea in 1982, the agency was established in 1987 and gained its constitutional status in 1994 after Parliament ratifying the convention. The agency can conduct military operations under the Ministry of Defence and its legal authority differs from the other three armed services of Pakistan. The agency should not be confused with the Pakistan Coast Guard, which performs littoral patrolling of the coast line, not conducting operations in deep waters. The agency's roles and extends the area of responsibility by protecting the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of Pakistan which is up to   The current director of the agency is Rear-Admiral Waseem Akram who took the directorship of the agency on 26 September 2011.

Mission

The mission of Pakistan Maritime Security Agency states:


Roles and Functions

Pakistan Maritime Security Agency has roles in maritime homeland security, maritime national and international law enforcement (MLE), search and rescue (SAR), marine environmental protection (MEP), and the maintenance of intracoastal and offshore aids to navigation (ATON).  The agency is mandate to protect the fishing vessels and crew against any threat within the Maritime Zones (MZ).
The agency performs military operations authorized by the Ministry of Defence to protect the economical and maritime interest of Pakistan. The agency also provides security and assists the governmental agencies, international organizations and Navy itself for  petroleum and other mineral exploration in Pakistan's naval zones. The agency coordinates the research of the Navy Hydrographic Department  in the oceanographic research and other scientific activities.

Organizational headquarters

Pakistan Maritime Security Agency (PMSA) is usually a paramilitary branch of the Pakistan Navy, not a separate branch.  The officers and personnel, including the equipments, are mostly derived from the Navy. Keeping the military code of the paramilitary command of Pakistan, its original number strength and inventory is classified but it expected to be consisting of approximately 5000 members. The headquarters of the agency is situated in Karachi. Since its inception, the agency's headquarters were located in different hired commercial buildings at different locations in Karachi. In 2007, the Navy Engineering Branch began the construction of the new headquarter building and completed the course of work in 2009. Finally, on 2010, the new building was occupied by the Navy on March 2010 and finally inaugurated on 15 January 2011 by Chief of the Naval Staff. The agency consists of a Director-General and it is commanded by a two-star rank, a Rear-Admiral seconded from Pakistan Navy. The headquarters of the agency and personnel are placed under the command of Commander of Coastal Areas (COMCOAST), who usually supervise the operations for the Ministry of Defence.

Historical overview

Although the Pakistan Coast Guard was established by the Government of Pakistan under the command of Pakistan Army and operate by the Ministry of Interior, the Coast Guard was unable to conduct operations in far deep waters and execute law enforcement which was mainly been done by the Pakistan Navy. The Government of Pakistan adopted the genesis of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in 1982 and acquired an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of about . In order to provide protection to this vast area, the Pakistan Government decided to raise the agency under the Ministry of Defence consisting the members of Navy. The Maritime Security Agency (MSA) was formally inaugurated on 1 January 1987 and gained its constitutional status in 1997 after ratifying the UNCLOS . The agency implements the local and international laws in the EEZ, and provides surveillance against poaching by illegal vessels and unauthorized survey by foreign craft. It also conducts Search and Rescue missions, and implements measures for control of pollution and fishery protection.

Commissioned officers rank

The order of hierarchy, commissioned and non-commissioned ranks structure of Maritime Security Agency are same and as equivalent of Pakistan Navy (as the officers and personnel seconded to the Navy_. The MSA directly reports of the Commander Coast (COMCOAST).

Equipments

Ships and boats

Pakistan Maritime Security Agency is equipped with four corvettes, four fast response boat (FBP). The agency also operates three Britten-Norman Defender aircraft for the purposes of search and rescue and navigation. 
Pakistan Maritime Security Agency currently operates former Pakistan Navy vessels and currently operates the following:

Decommissioned ships

PMSS Nazim was decommissioned on 6 October 2010

Aircraft

The Maritime Security Agency operates only one squadron known as Squadron 93 MSA. The squadron was inaugurated on 23 June 1988 with the induction of Fokker F27 Friendship an interim measure, for surveillance at sea.  The aircraft was placed in Jinnah Terminal for the purpose of logistics support. In 1993, the MSA acquired the Britten-Norman Defender at Mehran Naval Air Station. The aircraft operated by MSA are listed below:








