[[Rude Boy (song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2010 singles, Music videos directed by Melina Matsoukas, Rihanna songs, Song recordings produced by Stargate (production team), Songs written by Rihanna, Songs written by Tor Erik Hermansen, Songs written by Mikkel Storleer Eriksen, UK R&B Singles Chart number-one singles, Number-one singles in Australia, Number-one singles in Romania, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Billboard Rhythmic Airplay number-one singles, Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs number-one singles, Billboard Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) number-one singles, Songs written by Ester Dean, Songs written by Rob Swire, Songs written by Makeba Riddick, 2009 songs, Songs about sexuality

{{Infobox single
| Name           = Rude Boy
| Cover          = Rihanna - Rude Boy Cover.jpg
| Border         = no
| Artist         = Rihanna
| Album          = Rated R
| Released       = 
| Format         = CD single, digital download
| Recorded       = 2009; Metropolis Studios; 
(London, England)
| Genre          = Pop, R&B
| Length         = 
| Label          = Def Jam, SRP
| Writer         = {{Flat list|
| Producer       = 

"Rude Boy" is a song by Barbadian singer Rihanna, taken from her fourth studio album, Rated R (2009), that was released as the third single from the album on February 19, 2010, through Def Jam. Rihanna co-wrote the song with Mikkel S. Eriksen, Tor Erik Hermansen, Ester Dean, Makeba Riddick, and Rob Swire, with Swire also co-producing it with Eriksen and Hermansen, known together as StarGate. "Rude Boy" is an up-tempo song and incorporates elements of raggamuffin, pop and R&B.
The song received mixed to positive reviews from critics; some called it is the highlight of the album, but others criticized Rihanna's "monotone" and "icy" vocal performance. "Rude Boy" peaked at number one the US Billboard Hot 100 in its fourth week for five consecutive weeks, and was Rihanna's sixth US number one single. It was a commercial success globally, peaked at number one in Australia and attained top five positions in Germany, Hungary, Ireland, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Slovakia and the United Kingdom.
The accompanying music video was directed by Melina Matsoukas, used greenscreen techniques and featured  props that included a stuffed lion and zebra. Rihanna performed the song live for the first time at the Pepsi Super Bowl Fan Jam in South Beach, Miami, and later on The Ellen DeGeneres Show, Nickelodeon's 2010 Kids' Choice Awards, and Alan Carr: Chatty Man. "Rude Boy" was also featured on the set lists of Rihanna's Last Girl on Earth, Loud and Diamonds tours. Ester Dean's demo of "Rude Boy" leaked onto YouTube on September 7, 2010. Some analysts have described the lyrics as being sexually explicit.Nerdy feminist analysis of Rude Boy retrieved 25 June 2013

Background and development

"Rude Boy" was written by its producers Mikkel S. Eriksen and Tor Erik Hermansen (under their stage name Stargate) alongside Rihanna herself, Ester Dean, and Makeba Riddick, with additional writing and production by Rob Swire. Rihanna explained: "When we wrote the song, it was kind of a freestyle ... I liked the West Indian influence that the music had, and, I just went in the booth, they were already jotting down some ideas and, that came to me, I just ran in there with the, one of the writers and started coming up with this in the studio and now when people read it back to me like that, 'Come here Rude Boy, is you big enough'?, it does sound so disgusting!" She also explained the development of the song, and said that those lyrics were originally going to be the introduction, but because of the song's infectious beat, Rihanna decided to make it the hook instead.
In an interview with Us Weekly, Makeba Riddick, who assisted with the song's vocal production, spoke about the inspiration for the song. Dean praised Rihanna's ability to take risks with her music, saying "I think Rihanna is sexy and will say things that other chicks won't say. Even if she says let's go kiss some girls, who really cares ... that's Rihanna. Music is about fantasy. This is what people want to do, but are afraid to do."

Composition

"Rude Boy" is an up-tempo pop and R&B song Menachem also wrote about the song's composition, "Steel drums are a welcome presence on the production, which gives a nod to ska and dancehall. Rihanna's swagger has never been as convincing as on this song."

Release and reception

"Rude Boy" was released as the fourth overall single (third international) from Rihanna's fourth studio album, Rated R (2009).

Critical response

Los Angeles Times reviewer Ann Powers stated that the song has a  "ragamuffin-style", and commented on the lyrics, "Even as she offers herself in no uncertain terms—'I'm gon' let you be the captain tonight' she sneers—she questions his prowess. 'Can you get it up? Are you big enough?' she repeats in the singsong chorus, making it tough to imagine that any suitor could rise to this occasion." Bill Lamb of About. However, Lamb added that the "icy feel is wearing thin. Rihanna sounds like she has taken a few steps back to distance herself from the whole song. There is a pleasing swagger, but we're never quite engaged".
Nick Levine of Digital Spy, commenting on the genre of the song and Rihanna's musical direction and transition from her previous album Good Girl Gone Bad (2007), wrote, "

Chart performance

"Rude Boy" debuted on the US Billboard Hot 100 at number sixty-four.
On the UK Singles Chart, "Rude Boy" peaked at number two. It was prevented from reaching the top spot by Tinie Tempah's "Pass Out", which debuted at number one and remained there for two weeks.

Music video

Background and synopsis

The accompanying music video for "Rude Boy" was directed by Melina Matsoukas,
The video features Rihanna in a multitude of vibrant, brightly colored, Caribbean inspired scenes.

Reception and accolades

Upon the video's release, several media outlets noticed a resemblance between the colorful aesthetics of "Rude Boy" and those of British singer-songwriter and rapper M.I.A.'s video  "Boyz"." Vena also wrote about the stylization of the video's content with regard to Rihanna's heritage. She wrote that the video is infused with "a kaleidoscope of prints and colors, embracing her roots in Caribbean dance-hall-inspired costumes."
"Rude Boy" won the award for Most Performed Song at the 2011 ASCAP Pop Music Awards
Sean Kingston and Detail released a cover version of the song, titled "Rude Girl". DJ Earworm used "Rude Boy" in his mash-up of the top 25 songs of 2010 titled "United State of Pop 2010 (Don't Stop the Pop)". He also used "Rude Boy" in his mash-up "Like OMG Baby", designed for the 2010 Capital FM Summertime Ball Concert where Rihanna performed.

Live performances

To promote the song as the third US single from Rated R, Rihanna performed "Rude Boy" live for the first time at the Pepsi Super Bowl Fan Jam on VH1 in South Beach, Miami, on February 4, 2010.
To promote the song's release as a single in the UK, Rihanna made a recorded appearance on Alan Carr: Chatty Man on February 24, 2010, which was broadcast the following day.
On March 27, 2010, Rihanna performed "Rude Boy" as part of a medley with "Hard" and "Don't Stop the Music" at the 2010 Nickelodeon Kids' Choice Awards, held at UCLA's Pauley Pavilion in Westwood, California.

Track listing

Credits and personnel

Credits adapted from the liner notes of Rated R.

Charts and certifications

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Certifications








