[[Waylon Smithers]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons characters, Television sidekicks, Fictional characters introduced in 1990, Fictional gay males, Fictional henchmen, Fictional business executives, LGBT characters in animation

Waylon J. Smithers, Jr., usually referred to as simply Smithers, is a recurring fictional character in the long-running American animated sitcom The Simpsons, who is voiced by Harry Shearer. Smithers first appeared in the episode "Homer's Odyssey", although he could be heard in the series premiere "Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire". He is the consummate executive and personal assistant of Springfield Nuclear Power Plant's owner Montgomery Burns.
Smithers was partly based on how numerous Fox executives and staff members acted towards Barry Diller. The idea for Smithers' orientation came from Sam Simon, who proposed that Smithers should be gay, but the writers should never draw too much attention to it and should try to keep it in the back of their heads. The name Waylon was first used in "I Married Marge" and comes from the puppeteer Wayland Flowers. In his first visual appearance in "Homer's Odyssey", Smithers was mistakenly drawn as an African American by Gyorgi Peluci, the color stylist.
Smithers' relationship with Mr. Burns has long been a running gag on The Simpsons. Smithers is an obedient and sycophantic assistant to Mr. Burns. In many ways, Smithers represents the stereotype of the closeted gay man, and numerous overt allusions and double entendres concerning his homosexuality are made, though some of the show's producers instead refer to him as a "Burns-sexual".

Role in The Simpsons

Waylon Smithers is Mr Burns' devoted executive assistant. His father Waylon Smithers Sr., worked for Burns until he died of radiation poisoning after saving Springfield from a potential nuclear meltdown, when Waylon was a baby.
Burns has remained largely ignorant of Smithers' devoted adoration, much to Smithers' frustration. In later episodes, however, Burns appears to be somewhat wary of these gestures.
Smithers' official job at the power plant appears to be that of executive assistant, which he says is "actually about 2,800 smaller jobs" responsible for monitoring employee attendance, and is often a disciplinarian and has won dozens of employee of the month awards. Smithers has the largest collection of Malibu Stacy dolls in Springfield and is the president of the Malibu Stacy fan club.

Character

Creation

Waylon Smithers was partly based on how numerous Fox executives and staff members acted towards Barry Diller.
Smithers made his first appearance in "Homer's Odyssey", which was the third episode of the first season, although he can be heard over a speaker in The Simpsons series premiere "Simpsons Roasting on an Open Fire".co.uk. Retrieved on March 2, 2007 In his first visual appearance in "Homer's Odyssey", Smithers was mistakenly animated with the wrong color and was made an African American by Gyorgi Peluci, the color stylist. David Silverman has claimed that Smithers was always intended to be "Mr Burns' white sycophant," and the staff thought it "would be a bad idea to have a black subservient character" and so switched him to his intended color for his next episode. The first appearance of a yellow Smithers was "There's No Disgrace Like Home", the fourth episode of the first season.

Development

Smithers' relationship with Mr. Burns has long been a running gag on The Simpsons. Smithers is an obedient and sycophantic assistant to Mr. Burns. There have often been strong hints about Smithers' true feelings for his boss, with one of the earliest references being in the season one episode "The Telltale Head". Smithers' sexual orientation has often come into question, with some fans claiming he is a "Burns-sexual" and only attracted to his boss, while others maintain that he is, without a doubt, gay.
The debate is referenced in "The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular", when the episode host, Troy McClure is answering viewer questions, and one that is asked is "What is the real deal with Mr. Burns' assistant Smithers? You know what I'm talking about." A montage of various clips that shows Smithers' lust for Mr. Burns follows, and in the end, McClure says "as you can see, the real deal with Waylon Smithers is that he's Mr. Burns' assistant. He's in his early forties, is unmarried, and currently resides in Springfield. Thanks for writing!"
Several of the allusions to Smithers' sexuality have turned into battles with the censors. For example, in Smithers' fantasy of a naked Mr. Burns popping out of a birthday cake in "Rosebud", the censors had not wanted Mr. Burns to be naked. Another example is "Marge Gets a Job", which has a dream sequence where Smithers is sleeping and Burns flies through a window. The sequence shows Burns flying towards him and Smithers looking happy, but originally it went on for a few seconds longer. It had to be trimmed down due to scenes that showed "Mr. Burns landing in a particular position on Smithers anatomy".
Mostly in the early seasons, Smithers had a catchphrase, which comes from a recurring joke that Mr. Burns never remembers who Homer Simpson is. Smithers and Burns would watch Homer (usually over a security camera feed) and Burns would ask, "Who is that man?", to which Smithers would reply, "That's Homer Simpson, sir, one of your organ banks, carbon blobs, etc. from sector 7G." Burns would invariably respond, "Simpson, eh?"

Reception

In the second season, the writers started to enjoy writing about Smithers and Burns' relationship, and the writers often pitched episodes with them as the focus, but many never came to fruition.
In 2004, Simpsons producers announced that one of the characters was going to come out of the closet.
In a 2007 article, Entertainment Weekly named Smithers the sixteenth greatest sidekick of all time.

Merchandise

Smithers was made into an action figure, and four different versions were included as part of the World of Springfield toy line. The first shows Smithers in his normal attire with a picture of Mr. Burns at his feet and was released in 2000 as part of "wave two".






