[[Naya Rivera]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, American Christians, American people of German descent, American actresses of Puerto Rican descent, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, Hispanic and Latino American female singers, Singers from Los Angeles, California, Hispanic and Latino American female models, Actors from Santa Clarita, California, 21st-century American singers

Naya Marie Rivera (born January 12, 1987)

Early life

Rivera was born and raised in Valencia, California, and has lived in or around Los Angeles for most of her life. Rivera is of half Puerto Rican, a quarter African American, and a quarter German descent. Her parents are Yolanda and George Rivera. At 8 or 9 months old, Rivera began to be represented by the same talent agent as her mother, who had moved to Los Angeles to pursue modeling.

Career

1991–2008: Career beginnings

Rivera appeared in commercials for Kmart as a baby, but her first significant acting job was at age 4 when she appeared as Hillary Winston in The Royal Family sitcom in 1991.  The show received positive reviews and high ratings initially, but it was canceled soon after after star Redd Foxx suffered a sudden heart attack on set. Rivera received a Young Artist Award nomination for her performance in the series.
Between 1992 and 2002, she had small roles in The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, Family Matters, Live Shot, Baywatch, Smart Guy, The Jersey, House Blend, Even Stevens and The Master of Disguise. In 2002 she also appeared in the music video for B2K's "Why I Love You". She was hired for a single episode guest appearance on The Bernie Mac Show in 2002, but she was brought back to work on a further ten episodes throughout all five seasons. In between auditions and roles, Rivera worked jobs as a telemarketer, a nanny and a greeter at an Abercrombie & Fitch store.

2009–present: Breakthrough and acclaim with Glee, musical solo debut

In 2009, Rivera was cast as Santana Lopez, a high school cheerleader, on Fox's musical comedy series, Glee, about a high school glee club. Rivera's character comes off as a cold-hearted and vicious cheerleader, who often shows her softer side to fellow cheerleader Brittany (played by Heather Morris). Rivera auditioned for the opportunity "to sing, dance and act all in the same show," and because she was a fan of co-creator Ryan Murphy's previous work on Nip/Tuck.
Rivera drew on her own high school experience of unpopularity to prepare for the role, as well as watching films such as Mean Girls to "really get in the zone and feel like a bitchy Sophomore".
After having her screen time and musical involvement increased in the second half of the first season, Rivera was promoted to official series regular status as of the beginning of the second season.
In January 2011, Rivera appeared in a parody of "Nuthin' but a 'G' Thang", called "Nuthin' But a Glee Thang", co-written by Glee co-star Heather Morris.
In July 2011, Rivera was nominated for two ALMA awards, in the categories of "Favorite Female Music Artist" and "Favorite TV Actress—Leading Role in a Comedy". as well as others.
In the second half of the series' third season, Rivera's critical acclaim and featured role continued. 
In May 2011, it was announced that Rivera had signed a deal with Columbia Records to produce a solo album.  
As the 64th Primetime Emmy Awards approached, Rivera was listed by many critics and media outlets as deserving of a nomination.
The musical duo 2Cellos released the second single to their second album, a cover of Muse's "Supermassive Black Hole" featuring vocals by Rivera. She also starred in the music video for the song.
Rivera's debut single "Sorry," featuring fiancé Big Sean, was released as a digital download on September 17, 2013.

Media Appearances

In 2011, Rivera hosted the San Francisco GLAAD Media Awards.
In October 2012, Rivera was featured in the third episode of MTV's new show, This Is How I Made It. In the episode, Rivera recounted her childhood career as an actress and a model, as well as the lean times that came between the age of 16 and 21, leading up to her big break of being cast on Glee. 
Rivera has starred in a recent M&M's commercial that aired during Super Bowl XLVII on February 3, 2013, as the girl that "Red" is referring to (and who is essentially trying to eat him) with a cover of Meat Loaf's I'd Do Anything For Love (But I Won't Do That).

Public image

In April 2012, Rivera was featured on the cover of Latina magazine.

Personal life

Rivera began dating recording artist Big Sean in April 2013. The couple announced their engagement in October 2013. On April 9, 2014, Big Sean released a statement through a rep, saying that they had called off their engagement. |url=
Rivera's brother, Mychal is a tight end for the Oakland Raiders. Their sister, Nickayla, is a model.
Rivera dedicates her time to various charitable organizations,
Rivera took up songwriting at the age of 15, declaring in one interview, "..." 
Concerning her religious views, Rivera noted in an interview with Latina magazine that she was raised a devout Christian but is very private about it, noting the conflict that can result from revealing such information. "It's hard and sort of sad that you do feel the need to tread lightly when you say, 'Yes, I do go to church and I do read the Bible,' because once you do that, people will be like, 'Why are her boobs out? Why is her midriff showing? Why is she playing a lesbian?' I don't want to deal with that stuff, so I've never really discussed it. It's very personal."Latina April 2012, republished at Rivera's official website

Filmography

Discography

Singles

Guest Singles

Music videos

Stage work

Awards and nominations








