[[Toyota Camry (XV20)]]

CATEGORIES: Toyota Camry, Vehicles introduced in 1996, Motor vehicles manufactured in the United States

Introduced on September 3, 1996, the Toyota Camry XV20 is a mid-size car that was sold by Toyota between September 1996 and 2001 in Japan and North America, and 1997 and 2002 in Australia. The XV20 series represented the fourth generation of the Toyota Camry in all markets outside of Japan, which followed a different generational lineage. The XV20 Camry range is split into different model codes indicative of the engine. Four-cylinder models utilize the SXV20 (gasoline) and SXV23 (CNG) codes, with MCV20 designating the six-cylinder versions.
The XV20 Camry continued as a sedan and station wagon (called the Camry Gracia in Japan), though the latter model was not sold in North America, where the sedan was launched in 1996 for the 1997 model year. The XV20 Camry was offered in 2.2-liter I4 and 3.0-liter V6 versions. This was the first Camry to be badge-engineered as a Daihatsu; the Daihatsu Altis sold in Japan was identical to the export version of the Camry. The Japanese Scepter ceased to exist as the Japanese Camrys adopted the  wide and eventually forming the basis of the growing Corolla. In addition, the Vista's sheet metal resembled a tall, formal sedan, while the Camry became sleeker. The Lexus ES 300 was again built from the Windom, which uses the Camry chassis.
As Japanese yen soared in the mid-1990s, the redesigned Camry had less content than the previous model under pressure to reduce costs.
In August 1999 for the 2000 model year, the sedan models in North America received a mid-model upgrade to the front and rear fascias, this included larger headlights that now feature a four-bulb system instead of two, a separated grille with chrome surround, larger taillights, and larger body-side modeling. Toyota Australia started production of the facelift model in 2000.

Market

XV20 Camrys were manufactured in at the Tsutsumi plant in Toyota City, Japan; Toyota Australia's facility in Altona, Victoria; and at the Toyota Motor Manufacturing Kentucky production site in Georgetown, Kentucky, United States. Production in Thailand began in 1999, replacing Australia as the source of Camrys in Southeast Asia.

Australia

In Australia, unlike the previous generation, the Camry name was also applied to the V6 variants, while the Vienta V6 range was revised as the "upmarket" models. The line-up of 4-cylinder Camry models consisted of the CSI, Conquest and CSX models (automatic transmission was standard on Conquest and CSX versions); all three variants were available in sedan or wagon body styles. 
The Camry V6 models consisted of CSI and Conquest, with the wagon models only available in automatic transmission.
The Camry V6 Touring Series sedan model was launched in March 1999.
The Vienta line up consisted of VXI and Grande sedan models and the VXI wagon. The VXI model was basically a V6-powered version of the 4-cylinder Camry CSX model.

In September 2000, the revised Camry was launched. The Vienta V6 range was discontinued due to the launch of the Avalon sedan in July 2000 and two new models were added to the Camry range: the top-of-the-range Azura V6 sedan and the Touring Series V6 wagon, both of which were available with an automatic transmission only. Towards the end of the model run, the limited edition Intrigue and Advantage sedans were launched.
Wheel sizes vary on this shape of Camry, with some using 14" wheels, while others use 15".

Japan

Along with the sedan, a more upmarket version of Camry Gracia wagon was sold in Japan as Mark II Qualis. It had no relation to the Mark II sedan (a rear-wheel drive executive car) besides the front and rear lights, which resembled those of the Mark II. The Mark II Qualis was also available in a 3.0G version, with the 1MZ-FE 3.0-liter V6 engine, not available in the Japanese market Camry. The Camry Gracia was sold only at Toyota Japanese dealerships called Toyota Corolla Store alongside the Camry, while its twin the Mark II Qualis was exclusive to Toyopet Store locations.
An equivalent model was launched as the Daihatsu Altis, it was only sold in Japan, and its production started from this generation. The Altis was introduced March 2000 as a flagship sedan for Daihatsu as a replacement for the Daihatsu Applause. Not very many Altis are sold in Japan because the typical Daihatsu is priced in the entry level pricing range, and the Altis is priced very similar to the comparable model Camry. The Altis was available with the 5S-FE 2.2-liter 4-cylinder engine. Unlike the Camry, which is available as a sedan or wagon in Japan, the Altis is a sedan only. The name "Altis" is a variation of the word "altitude", implying a "high elevation" status as the top-level car for Daihatsu.

Middle East

In Middle East, the Camry was offered in three different trims, the low end XLI plus the better equipped GLI that both carry a four-cylinder engine, the third is the V6 Grande trim which carries the 1MZ-FE engine plus a lot of other options.
The Middle Eastern Camry also was offered as a wagon, with the GLI trim.

North America

In the United States, the Camry SE was dropped and the base model was renamed the CE for the 1997 model year. Both the LE and the XLE trims were carried over from the previous generation. All trim levels were available with either the 2.2-liter I4 or the 3.0-liter V6 engine except the Solara SLE, which was only available with the V6. TRD offered a supercharger kit for 1997–2001 V6 models raising power to  of torque. The LE-based Gallery Edition and Collector Edition were new for 2001 model year. Some of this generation Camry sold in the US are being produced at TMMK as well as at Tsutsumi Plant in Toyota, Aichi, Japan. A Camry manufactured in Japan is denoted with a VIN starting with "JT1"; US-made models are denoted with a VIN starting with "4T1".
Power was increased slightly to  SAE for the 1MZ-FE V6. Manual transmissions (model: S51) were only available on the CE trim level, LE V6, and Solara SE model.
Toyota in 1999 offered a four-cylinder, non-hybrid CNG-powered XV20 Camry in California to fleet customers.
A coupe was added in 1998 for the 1999 model year, and then a convertible form in 1999 for the 2000 model year. In contrast to the coupe from the third-generation Camrys, the new two-door cars were given a separate nameplate Toyota Camry Solara, or simply Solara. They were also a significant styling departure from the sedan. The Solara was available in SE and SLE trims, corresponding roughly to the sedan's LE and XLE trims.
The Camry V6 was again on Car and Driver magazine's Ten Best list for 1997.
The Insurance Institute for Highway Safety gave the Camry a "Good" overall score in their frontal offset crash test.  Front seat-mounted side torso airbags were optional beginning on 1999 models.

Europe

The XV20 was also sold in Europe. But like its predecessor, the Camry XV10, the range was a lot more limited.
Launched somewhere in 1997, the range consisted the 2.2i GL and 3.0i GX models in sedan form only.
The Camry received a four out of five star safety rating in Euro NCAP's test, due to its side airbags.




