[[Pit bull]]

CATEGORIES: Dog types, Dog breeds originating in England, Dog breeds originating in the United States, Dog fighting breeds, Catch dog breeds

The term pit bull is a generic term used to describe dogs with similar physical characteristics.  Usually a "pit bull" is considered one of several breeds including the Staffordshire Bull Terrier, American Pit Bull Terrier, American Staffordshire Terrier, Bull Terrier, or any mix thereof. In some parts of the world, the American Bulldog and Dogo Argentino are also classified as a "Pit Bull-type" dog, despite major genetic differences. Any dog that is mixed with a "bully breed" and while mixed breed dogs are often labelled a "pit bull" if they have certain physical characteristics such as a square shaped head or bulky body type, visual identification of mixed breed dogs is not recommended by the scholarly community.

History

All pit bulls were created with similar cross-breeding between bulldogs and terriers, but each individual pit bull breed has a distinct history.

Pit Bull Terrier

The Pit Bull Terrier was created by breeding Old English Terriers and Old English Bulldogs together to produce a dog that combined the gameness of the terrier with the strength and athleticism of the bulldog.
Pit Bull Terriers successfully fill the role of companion dogs, and police dogs,
In an effort to counter the fighting reputation of pit bull-type dogs, in 1996 the San Francisco Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals renamed pit bull terriers to "St. Francis Terriers", so that people might be more likely to adopt them.

Staffordshire Bull Terrier

The Staffordshire Bull Terrier had its beginnings in the early 19th century by breeding bulldogs, mastiffs, and terriers together. The resulting offspring were originally known as the "bull and terrier dog", the "Pit Dog" and the "Pit Bull Terrier". The early bull terriers of the Elizabethan era were often used for bull baiting and with a weight of between 100 lbs (45 kg) and 120 lbs (54 kg) were significantly larger than the modern bull terrier.
The dog was officially recognised by the The Kennel Club of the United Kingdom as the "Staffordshire bull terrier" in 1935. Not long after, in 1936, they were recognised by the American Kennel Club (AKC) as "Staffordshire Terriers." Breeders started creating exemplars heavier in weight. Since January 1, 1972, the breed was renamed "American Staffordshire Terrier" to describe it as a separate breed from the lighter Staffordshire Bull Terrier of England.

Attacks on humans

Studies

A 9-year (1979–88) review of fatal dog attacks in the United States determined that, of the 101 attacks in which breed was recorded, pit bulls were implicated in 42 of those attacks (42%).
A 20-year (1979-1998) study by the American Veterinary Medical Association into fatal dog attacks on humans concluded that "fatal attacks on humans appear to be a breed-specific problem (pit bull-type dogs and Rottweilers)," and that "pit bull-type dogs and Rottweilers were involved in more than half" (67%) of all the 238 recorded dog bite-related fatalities (DBRF) in the United States during that period, with pit bulls accounting for 66 deaths. They also wrote that:
A 15-year (1991–2005) review of dog attack fatalities investigated by the Kentucky Medical Examiner determined that pit bulls were implicated in 5 of the 11 fatal attacks (45%). In 45% of the attacks, the dog belonged to the victim's family.
A 5-year (2001–05) review of dog attack victims admitted to the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia determined that pit bull terriers were implicated in more than half of the bites where breed was identified. Of the 269 patients where breed was identified, 137 (51%) were attacked by pit bulls. The authors wrote:
A review of the medical literature found that pit bulls and pit bull cross-breeds were involved in 42–45% of dog attacks. Fatalities were most often reported when children were attacked, with 70% of victims being under the age of 10.
Some other studies on the number of human deaths caused by dog bite trauma have surveyed news media stories for reports of dog-bite-related fatalities. This methodology is subject to potential errors, as some fatal attacks may not have been reported, a study might not find all relevant news reports, and the dog breed might be misidentified.
Courts in the United States have ruled that expert identification, when using published breed standards, is sufficient for the enforcement of breed-specific legislation.

Other studies

A study by Raghaven in Canada, which showed that breed specific legislation limits the number of pitbulls, and where sled dogs and free roaming packs of dogs is more common than in the United States, an electronic search of newspaper articles found that pit bull terriers were responsible for 1 (4%) of 28 dog-bite-related fatalities reported in Canada from 1990–2007.
The study also noted that:
In a project called the "Calgary Model," legislation addressing bad owners instead of breeds has been the focus. After implementation, which included fining the owner $350–$1,500 in dog bite cases, there was a 25-year low in the incidence of such cases.
Several studies determined that pit bull owners, and owners of other "vicious" or "high risk" breeds (most commonly identified as Akita, Chow Chow, Doberman Pinscher, Rottweiler, and Wolf-mix), are more likely to have criminal convictions and are more likely to display antisocial behaviors. A 2006 study compared owners of "high risk" dogs to owners of "low risk" dogs. "High risk" dogs included "vicious" dogs by breed (e.g., pit bulls) or "vicious" actions (e.g., any dog that had bitten, attacked, or killed a person or other animal).  The study determined that "high risk" dog owners had nearly 10 times as many criminal convictions than did "low risk" dog owners.

Locking jaws myth

A popular myth is that pit bulls have "locking jaws". Pit bulls also have wide skulls, well-developed muscles, and strong jaws.
Methods to force pit bull-type dogs to release their grip include breaking an ammonia ampule and holding it up to the dog's nose, or using a "break stick" to lever the dog's jaws open if it is biting a person or animal.

Socialization

A Pit bull's genetic make up was developed so it would be a good fighting dog. However, this genetic disposition does not mean that all Pit bulls are aggressive or that they are prone to attacking other animals. Pit bulls require the same amount of socialization training as other dogs during puppy-hood, possibly more. Like any dog, a Pit bull that is well socialized is less likely to attack when it feels threatened. The Pit bull breed is known to be more "rough and tumble" during play time, but frequent socialization with other dogs can mean that a Pit bull pet goes into adulthood with a positive feeling towards other dogs.

Legislation

Widely reported pit bull attacks have resulted in the enactment of breed-specific legislation in several jurisdictions.  The attacks have also led to increased premiums for liability insurance.
Many of the jurisdictions that restrict pit bulls apply their restriction to: (a) the modern American Pit Bull Terrier, (b)  American Staffordshire Terrier, (c) Staffordshire Bull Terrier, and (d) any other dog that has the substantial physical characteristics and appearance of those breeds.  Such jurisdictions include: Ontario (Canada),
All of the breeds share a similar history, with origins rooted from the bulldog and a variety of terriers, except for the Johnson line of American Bulldog (as opposed to the more pure Scott line), which come from the bulldog and a variety of mastiffs. The dogs called bull terriers before the development of the modern bull terrier in the early 20th century may also be called pit bulls.
Approximately 550 jurisdictions have enacted breed-specific legislation (BSL) in response to a number of well-publicised incidents involving pit bull-type dogs, and some government organizations such as the U.S. Army
It is now generally settled in caselaw that jurisdictions in the U.S. and Canada have the right to enact breed-specific legislation.
A third point of view is that breed-specific legislation should not ban breeds entirely, but should instead strictly regulate the conditions under which specific breeds could be owned.  For example, forbidding certain classes of individuals from owning them, specifying public areas from which they would be prohibited, and establishing conditions, such as requiring a dog to wear a muzzle, for taking specific breeds of dogs into public places.
The ASPCA said that along with putative over-reporting, false reporting was a major contributor to public perceptions about the breed.
In England and Wales the Dangerous Dogs Act prohibits the ownership of pit bull terrier along with 3 other breeds. The Act also bans the breeding, sale and exchange of these dogs.
In the Canadian province of Ontario, a pitbull ban was enacted in 2005, making it illegal to breed or import pitbull terriers, including the Staffordshire bull terrier, American Staffordshire terrier, American pitbull terrier, or any breed with "substantially similiar" physical characteristics.

Commercial restrictions

Liability insurance

Dog owners in the United States can be held legally liable for injuries inflicted or caused by their dogs. In general, owners are considered liable if they were unreasonably careless in handling or restraining the dog, or if they knew beforehand that the dog had a tendency to cause injury (e.g., bite); however, dog owners are automatically considered liable if local laws hold an owner strictly liable for all damage caused by their dog, regardless of carelessness or foreknowledge of a dog's tendencies. Homeowners and renters insurance policies typically provide liability coverage from US$100,000–300,000 for injuries inflicted by dogs; requiring owners to restrict their dogs with muzzles, chains, or enclosures; and refusing to write policies for homeowners or renters who have specific breeds of dogs.
Owners of rental properties may also be held liable if they knew an aggressive dog was living on their property and they did nothing to ensure the safety of other tenants at the property; as a result, many rental properties forbid pit bull-type dogs and any other breeds if the rental property's insurance will not cover damage inflicted by that type of dog. The dog breeds most often targeted by insurance companies include pit bull-type dogs, Rottweilers, German Shepherd Dogs, Doberman Pinschers, Akitas (Akita Inu and American Akita), and Chows.
In 2013, Farmers Insurance notified policy holders in California that "it will no longer cover bites by pit bulls, rottweilers and wolf hybrids. A spokeswoman for Farmers said those breeds account for more than a quarter of the agency's dog bite claims."Gephardt, Bill. Some dog breeds too risky for insurance companies. KSL.com, May 8th, 2013

Air carrier restrictions

Several air carriers embargo certain dog breeds, due to the effect of high temperature and humidity on brachycephalic animals, or concerns for the safety of airline property, personnel, and passengers. The following table has a sampling of air carrier embargoes on dogs.
United Airlines formerly embargoed American Pit Bull Terriers for safety reasons. However, pit bulls (along with American Staffordshires and other similar breeds) are now permitted, provided that dogs over six months old or weighing more than 20 pounds (9 kg) are transported in reinforced crates.

Notable pit bulls

Pit Bull breeds have become famous for their roles as soldiers, police dogs, search and rescue dogs, actors, television personalities, seeing eye dogs, and celebrity pets. Historically, the Bull Terrier mix Nipper and the American Staffordshire Terrier, Pete the Pup from the Little Rascals are the most well known. Lesser known, but still historically notable pit bulls include Billie Holiday's companion "Mister",
Modernly significant pit bulls are: Weela, who helped save 32 people, 29 dogs, 3 horses, and 1 cat;



Further reading


