[[List of accolades received by The Lord of the Rings film series]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of accolades by film, Middle-earth lists, The Lord of the Rings (film series)

|- style="background:#d9e8ff;"
| style="text-align:center;" colspan="3"|
|-
|
|
|
|- style="background:#d9e8ff;"
| colspan="3" style="font-size: smaller; text-align:center;" | References
|}
The Lord of the Rings film series is a series of epic fantasy-drama films directed by Peter Jackson. The three films, entitled The Fellowship of the Ring, The Two Towers, and The Return of the King, were released serially worldwide between December 2001 and 2003. They are based on J. R. R. Tolkien's epic fantasy novel, The Lord of the Rings, adapted for the screen by Jackson, Fran Walsh, and Philippa Boyens. Set in Tolkien's fictional Middle-earth, the plot follows the hobbit Frodo Baggins and his fellow members of the Fellowship of the Ring as they embark on a quest to destroy the One Ring, which will rid Middle-earth of the Dark Lord Sauron. A large ensemble cast was featured in the series, which included Elijah Wood, Ian McKellen, Viggo Mortensen, Sean Astin, Orlando Bloom, Liv Tyler, John Rhys-Davies, Sean Bean, Billy Boyd, Dominic Monaghan, Andy Serkis, Cate Blanchett, Christopher Lee, Hugo Weaving, Ian Holm, John Noble, Bernard Hill, David Wenham, Miranda Otto, Karl Urban, and Brad Dourif.
All three films premiered to widespread critical acclaim.
In addition to receiving the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture and National Board of Review Award for Best Cast, many of the actors were also recognized for their individual work, including McKellen (12 nominations), Serkis (10 nominations), Astin (9 nominations), and Mortensen (5 nominations). Composer Howard Shore received recognition for his original score, as he was the recipient of two Academy Awards, two BAFTA nominations, and three Grammy Awards in addition to a number of other awards. The series also received accolades in various technical categories, including those in editing, sound mixing, and visual effects. Walsh, Boyens, and Jackson's screenwriting earned them 10 awards out of 23 total nominations, including the Academy Award for Best Adapted Screenplay (for The Return of the King). In total, the series received 249 awards out of 455 nominations.

The Fellowship of the Ring

The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring was released in theatres worldwide on 19 December 2001. The first film's plot follows Frodo Baggins (Wood) and the rest of the Fellowship of the Ring as they begin their journey to destroy the One Ring and defeat the Dark Lord Sauron once and for all.
According to film site aggregator Rotten Tomatoes, 92 percent of critics were favorable about The Fellowship of the Ring. Entertainment Weekly columnist Lisa Schwarzbaum called the film "thrilling – a great picture, a triumphant picture, a joyfully conceived work of cinema that (based on this first installment, with two more ready for release in the next two years) would appear to embrace Tolkien's classic with love and delight, and rewards both adepts and novices with the highest compliment of all: an intelligence and artistry as a movie independent of blind fidelity to the page."
The Fellowship of the Ring received thirteen Academy Award nominations, winning in four categories. It also earned thirteen nominations at the 55th British Academy Film Awards, leading to wins in the categories for Best Film, Best Direction, Best Special Visual Effects, and the Orange Film of the Year Award. Other notable ceremonies where it received much recognition included the American Film Institute Awards, the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards, the Empire Awards, the Golden Globes, the MTV Movie Awards, the Satellite Awards, and Saturn Awards. Various critics groups, such as those in Chicago and Phoenix, also awarded the film. In total, The Fellowship of the Ring received 71 awards out of 152 nominations.

The Two Towers

The worldwide theatrical release of The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers occurred on 18 December 2002.
The Two Towers received critical acclaim; film site aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 96 percent of critics were positive. CNN film critic Paul Clinton called The Two Towers an "utter triumph",
The Two Towers won two out of six Academy Award nominations and three accolades out of ten nominations at the 56th British Academy Film Awards. Like its predecessor, the second film also received recognition at the American Film Institute Awards, the Broadcast Film Critics Association Awards, the Empire Awards, the Golden Globes, the MTV Movie Awards, the Satellite Awards, and the Saturn Awards. Various critics groups, such as Chicago, Phoenix, and Seattle also awarded the film. In total, The Two Towers received 62 awards out of 129 nominations.

The Return of the King

The worldwide theatrical release of The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King occurred on 17 December 2003.
The Return of the King continued the series' critical success, with Rotten Tomatoes reporting that 94 percent of the critics were positive. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times believed the film to be the best of the three, as it "certifies the Ring trilogy as a work of bold ambition at a time of cinematic timidity." It topped the Southeastern Film Critics top ten films, while the Central Ohio Film Critics Association named it the second best.
The film won eleven Academy Awards, tying Titanic and Ben-Hur for the most Oscars won. The Return of the King also became the first and to date only fantasy film to have won the Academy Award for Best Picture. The Return of the King won five BAFTAs, three Empire Awards, four Golden Globes, one Satellite Award, and eight Saturn Awards, among others. In total, the film received 116 awards out of 174 nominations.





 
 




