[[Lookingglass, Oregon]]

CATEGORIES: 1870s establishments in Oregon, Census-designated places in Oregon, Unincorporated communities in Douglas County, Oregon, Census-designated places in Douglas County, Oregon, Unincorporated communities in Oregon

Lookingglass is an unincorporated community and census-designated place in the Lookingglass Valley of Douglas County, Oregon, United States, about  Lookingglass is considered a suburb of Roseburg.

History

The valley was named in 1846 by surveyor Hoy Flournoy, who said the beautiful green grass of the valley reflected light almost as well as a mirror. Flournoy later returned to settle in the area.
The Lookingglass Store, built circa 1875, was once the terminus for the Oakland to Lookingglass stage and freight road. It was also the beginning of the Coos Bay Wagon Road. Today the store continues to serve as the hub of the community. Lookingglass also has a school, a grange hall, a church and a fire station. Lookingglass post office closed in 1942.
In the 1970s, Lookingglass, population 40 at the time, received national media attention for installing a two-horse parking meter, a telephone booth, and a fire hydrant.
David Brinkley anchored his segment of the NBC Nightly News from the steps of the Lookingglass Store in about 1970. Chet Huntley, David Brinkley's co-anchor of the Huntley-Brinkley Report, was the great-grandson of the Lookingglass area's first settler, Daniel Huntley, who arrived in 1851.
The James Wimer Octagonal Barn near Lookingglass was built in 1892 and is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

Education

Lookingglass Elementary School is part of the Winston-Dillard School District. It was founded in 1898 and currently serves grades kindergarten through six.



Climate

This region experiences warm (but not hot) and dry summers, with no average monthly temperatures above 71.6 °F.  According to the Köppen Climate Classification system, Carpinteria has a warm-summer Mediterranean climate, abbreviated "Csb" on climate maps.Climate Summary for Lookingglass, Oregon






