[[Lexton Moy]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, People from Chinatown, Manhattan, American expatriate soccer players, American soccer players, American people of Chinese descent, American sportspeople of Asian descent, American people of Filipino descent, Filipino people of Chinese descent, Filipino footballers, Philippines international footballers, Filipino expatriate footballers, Filipino expatriates in Hong Kong, Expatriate footballers in Hong Kong, Expatriate footballers in Macau, Association football midfielders, Rutgers Scarlet Knights men's soccer players, LIU Brooklyn Blackbirds men's soccer players, Laredo Heat players, Soccer players from New York, USL Premier Development League players

Lexton de la Cruz Moy (, born 24 January 1985) is a Chinese-Filipino-American Professional footballer. He is a former midfielder for  the Philippines national team and played for Lam Ieng that competed in the Campeonato da 1ª Divisão do Futebol, Tai Chung that competed in the Hong Kong First Division League and Kaya F.C. that competes in the United Football League (Philippines).

Education

Moy attended high school at Friends Seminary, where he was awarded Independent School Athletic League Soccer Player of the Year and League Most Valuable Player from 2001-2003 for his contributions to the sport. After studying Exercise Sport Science at Rutger's University, Moy went on to major in Exercise Physiology and Sports Science at Long Island University. Moy later graduated from Long Island University with a Bachelors of Science in Physical Education (summa cum laude), where he was awarded LIU's Scholar Athlete of the Year in 2008 for his performance on and off the field.

Football career

College and amateur

Moy started his college career at Rutgers University in New Brunswick, New Jersey. He broke his leg his freshmen year taking a medical red-shirt. During his recovery Moy joined the Rutgers Table Tennis Team National Collegiate Table Tennis Association Player List and later rejoined the men's soccer team once he had medical clearance to resume training. In his following year, Moy saw limited action as a RU Scarlet Knight which prompted a transfer his junior year to Long Island University Brooklyn Campus. He captained the Men's NCAA Division I Long Island University Blackbird's his first year and played the remainder of his college eligibility at LIU.Long Island University Player Profile
During his college years, Moy played for the Laredo Heat in the USL Premier Development League capturing the National Championship in the 2007 PDL Season.2007 USL PDL Champions Media Guide He also played for the New York Athletic Club in the National Premier Soccer League in 2008 and 2009.

Professional

In the summer of 2009, Moy traveled to Hong Kong to try out for First Division team Biu Chun Rangers, formerly Fourway Athletics. Unpromising contract agreements prompted Moy to seek trials with Shatin Sports Association. After an unsuccessful try-out with the club, Moy moved on to the newly promoted second-division team Tai Chung FC. In August 2009, Moy signed a one-year contract with Tai Chung FC as a non-resident player. In the 2009–10 season, with his foreign player status, Moy started 9 matches and made 13 appearances.hkfa.pdf Moy registered his first and only goal on September 19, 2009 against Kitchee SC. Tai Chung FC's 2009–10 Hong Kong First Division League season culminated in a 1–1 draw against league champions South China AA to escape relegation for the 2010–11 season.
After his contract expired, Moy moved to Manila and signed with Kaya F.C., that competes in the United Football League (Philippines) on August 16, 2011. Moy played with Kaya FC in the 2011 United Football Cup. The team finished its 2011 Cup bout in fourth place after losing to Global FC in the Consolation match. Moy continued with the team's campaign in the 2012 United Football League (Philippines) and the 2012 United Football Cup.  In 2012, Kaya FC finished second place in the UFL league, but was knocked out of Cup Tournament in the quarter-final round.uflphilippines.ph/standings.uflphilippines.ph/cup/standingscup.
In 2013, Moy signed with Lam Ieng of the Campeonato da 1ª Divisão do Futebol, Macau's first division football league.macaufa.pdf

International

Upon moving to the Philippines in 2011, Moy joined the Philippines national football team. Moy was called up to the 20-man squad for the 2011 Long Teng Cup.
Although being named to the 30 player Squad List for the 2012 AFF Suzuki Cup, Moy was not called to participate in the competition.affsuzukicup.affsuzukicup.html

Honours

Club

National team

Personal

Moy was born and raised in Chinatown, Manhattan. Moy grew up in a small apartment on Bayard Street overlooking Chinatown's Columbus park with his parents, Emelita Dela Cruz Moy and Way Ping Moy, his grand parents, Tsun Wan Chin and Gwong Kang Chin and his older sister Noreen Moy.






