[[Yumeiro Patissiere]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 manga, 2009 Japanese television series debuts, 2010 Japanese television series endings, Anime OVAs, Cooking anime and manga, Fantasy anime and manga, Nippon Television shows, Pierrot (company), Shōjo manga, Shueisha manga, Studio Hibari, Winners of the Shogakukan Manga Award for children's manga


The series was adapted into two anime TV series by Studio Pierrot and Studio Hibari.

Plot

Fourteen-year-old Ichigo Amano is clumsy and doesn't have any talent except for eating sweets (specifically cakes). When she stumbles upon a Sweets Festival, she meets Henri-sensei who acknowledges her ability of taste and invites her to transfer to St. Marie Academy to become a pâtissière. Ichigo has trouble adjusting initially, but with the help of the 3 Sweets Princes (Makoto Kashino, Satsuki Hanabusa, and Sennosuke Andou) and the Sweets Spirits (Vanilla, Chocolate, Caramel, and Cafe), she gains the confidence and skill to work towards becoming a pâtissière.
Two years after studying in Paris, the sixteen-year-old Ichigo now returns to Japan as a professional pâtissière. As soon as she returns, Ichigo finds Team Ichigo breaking up. The Sweets Princes, Hanabusa and Andou, take long absences from school to work for their dreams, leaving only Ichigo and Kashino. Kashino skipped a grade due to having top grades back at Paris. Soon a "new" Team Ichigo is formed by Henri-sensei for the project. The team includes Lemon Yamagishi, Johnny McBeal, Makoto Kashino, and Amano Ichigo. They are now working as professionals for the project and their dreams.

Characters

Main Characters

Sweets Spirits

Supporting Characters

Media

Manga

Written and drawn by Natsumi Matsumoto, the Yumeiro Patissiere manga began serialization in the shōjo manga magazine Ribon on September 3, 2008 in the October issue of the magazine. Each chapter is called a "recette" (French for recipe); The series ended on June 3, 2011 and is 10 volumes total. The series is licensed by Sharp Point Press in Taiwan.

Anime

The anime adaptation was accidentally announced in June 2009 by a listing from one of the card game series based on the manga. The series began airing on October 4, 2009 on Yomiuri TV.

Music

The first season of the anime series uses two pieces of theme music, one opening and one closing. The opening is 

Video Game

A Nintendo DS game based on the series was released on May 27, 2010. The game is entitled 

Card Game

A trading card game based on the manga was released in Japan by Konami during the serialization of the series. There are two different series, Sweets Deco Cards and My Sweets Cards.

Cookbook

A cookbook for the series entitled 

Reception

Carlo Santos of Anime News Network calls the anime "a baking-themed series so rife with clichés that it's hard to tell where the plagiarism stops and the actual show begins."
The manga received the Shogakukan Manga Award for best children's manga of 2010.






