[[History of the Ku Klux Klan in New Jersey]]

CATEGORIES: History of New Jersey, Zarephath, New Jersey, Ku Klux Klan by location

The Ku Klux Klan has had a history in the U.S. state of New Jersey since the early part of the 1920s. The Klan was in the area around Trenton and Camden and had a presence in several of the state's northern counties, but its largest presence was in Monmouth County, where it had a resort at Wall Township's Camp Evans.

History

The first appearance of the KKK in New Jersey was in 1921, where it had crossed over from New York and Pennsylvania. Arthur Hornbui Bell was the state's first Grand Dragon, and continued serving in that post until the Ku Klux Klan was disbanded in 1944.
As early as 1922, arguing that it was a breach of the U.S. legal doctrine of separation of church and state, the New Jersey Klan flexed its political muscle in an unsuccessful attempt to intimidate Paterson, New Jersey's honored burial of the Roman Catholic priest William N. McNulty.
In 1922 George W. Apgar was the King Kleagle just outside Newark.
In 1923, the Klan provided funding to the Pillar of Fire Church to found Alma White College in Zarephath, New Jersey. It became "the second institution in the north avowedly run by the Ku Klux Klan to further its aims and principles." Alma White said that the Klan philosophy "will sweep through the intellectual student classes as through the masses of the people." At that time, the Pillar of Fire was publishing the pro-KKK monthly periodical The Good Citizen.
On May 3, 1923, around 12,000 people attended a Klan meeting in Bound Brook, New Jersey. The speakers then held a meeting at the Pillar of Fire headquarters in nearby Zarephath where a crowd of angry locals surrounded the church to let them know that they were not welcome.
On May 10, 1923 the Klan assaulted a boy, accusing him of stealing $50 from his mother, Bessie Titus, in West Belmar, New Jersey.
On August 24, 1923 the Klan held a large meeting in a ten-acre field off the Freehold Turnpike in western Farmingdale, New Jersey. The Klan claimed to have drawn members from Monmouth, Middlesex and Ocean counties and inducted 1,700 members. 1,200 cars were said to have parked along roadways, in driveways, and in every available spot. Arthur Hornbui Bell opened the meeting then introduced the principal speaker, who was dubbed Colonel Sherman of Atlanta, Georgia. Several inductees from Keyport, New Jersey were escorted to the event by Klansmen from that borough.
In 1925 Alma White published The Ku Klux Klan In Prophecy in Zarephath at the Pillar of Fire Church printing press. She writes: "The unrepentant Hebrew is everywhere among us today as the strong ally of Roman Catholicism. ... To think of our Hebrew friends with their millions in gold and silver aiding the Pope in his aspirations for world supremacy, is almost beyond the grasp of ... The Jews in New York City openly boast that they have the money and Rome the power, and that if they decide to rule the city and state, ..."
In 1926, Arthur Hornbui Bell headed a group that converted Wall Township's Camp Evans into a Klan resort.  The property was formerly known as Marconi Station.  The 
The New Jersey Ku Klux Klan held a Fourth of July celebration from July 3–5, 1926, in Long Branch, New Jersey, that featured a "Miss 100% America" pageant.
In 1926 Alma White published Klansmen: Guardians of Liberty. She writes: "I believe in white supremacy."
In 1928 Alma White published Heroes of the Fiery Cross. She writes: "The Jews are as unrelenting now as they were two thousand years ago."
In 1940, James A. Colescott had Bell removed as head of the Klan in New Jersey. The ouster was from a joint meeting arranged by Bell between the Klan and the German American Bund at the Bund's Camp Nordlund, near Andover, New Jersey.
In 1943 Alma White of the Pillar of Fire Church reprinted her pro-Klan essays and sermons as Guardians of Liberty.
By 1944 the national organization was closed by a tax lien by the Internal Revenue Service. Local chapters closed over the following years.

People

| author = Kristin E. Kandt
| year        = 2000
| title       = Historical Essay:  In the Name of God; An American Story of Feminism, Racism, and Religious Intolerance:  The Story of Alma Bridwell White.
| journal     = American University Journal of Gender, Social Policy and the Law.
| volume      = 8
|quote=Alma White and the Pillar of Fire were unique, however, in their public alliance with the Ku Klux Klan.  In fact, the Pillar of Fire was the only religious group to publicly associate itself with the Klan.
| pages       = 753
}}[/ref]  

Klan-friendly churches

Several New Jersey churches welcomed the Klan:

References and notes




