[[Winter of 2009–10 in Great Britain and Ireland]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 in Ireland, 2009 in the United Kingdom, 2009 meteorology, 2010 in Ireland, 2010 in the United Kingdom, 2010 meteorology, Cold waves, Weather events in Ireland, Cold waves in the United Kingdom, Winters

The winter of 2009–2010 in the United Kingdom (also called The Big Freeze by British media) was a meteorological event that started on 16 December 2009, as part of the severe winter weather in Europe. January 2010 was provisionally the coldest January since 1987 across the country. A persistent pattern of cold northerly and easterly winds brought cold, moist air to the United Kingdom with many snow showers, fronts and polar lows bringing snowy weather with it.
The first snowfall began on 17 December 2009, before a respite over the Christmas period. The thaw came a week later, as temperatures started to increase.
The winter weather brought widespread transport disruption, school closures, power failures, the postponement of sporting events and 25 deaths. A low of .

Timeline

December 2009

=16 December=

On 16 December forecasters warned of very heavy snowfall to come. A band of rain moved southwards over the UK, which brought some snow. Snow fell in Kent, Surrey, Sussex and Hampshire, which brought some disruption. Day time temperatures were around  was recorded in Surrey.

=17 December=

On the 17th, easterly winds brought heavier and persistent snow showers to eastern England and Scotland. Heavy snow showers brought accumulation up to 3 cm in Aberdeenshire, Perth, Kinross and Fife, with some snow showers reaching Glasgow and western parts in the afternoon and evening. In Kent, motorists on the A21 were stuck for several hours during the evening and night.

=18 December=

More heavy snow showers followed on the 18th after heavy overnight snow caused widespread disruption across England in the South East, East Anglia, the East Midlands, Yorkshire and the Humber. Easterly winds brought further snowfalls in both the northern and southern halves of the UK.
Overnight, five Eurostar trains were stuck in the Channel Tunnel after cold temperatures caused electrical failures, trapping 2,000 people for 16 hours. Many schools in England were closed. Four Eurostar trains broke down inside the Channel Tunnel, after leaving France, and one in Kent on 18 December. Although the trains had been winterised, the systems had not coped with the conditions. Snow also disrupted motorways, including the M1, and many airports were closed.

=19 December=

The 19th brought snow to northern areas. The wind changed to a northerly with a front pushing south over Scotland. 3 cm of snow accumulated in northern Scotland, southern Scotland and parts of north and north-east England.

=20 December=

Overnight, north-westerly winds brought snow showers to western, northern and central Scotland, Northern Ireland, north Wales and northern and western England. Northern and western Scotland had the heaviest snow showers with accumulations up to 15 cm in places in the morning. 3 cm of snow was lying within Glasgow by 9.00am; however, during the afternoon and evening, more heavy snowfall occurred across much of Scotland, Northern Ireland and North Wales, which brought accumulations up to 10–15 cm, causing school closures and travel disruption the next day.

=21 December=

On the 21st some further snow showers affected some parts of the UK with some particularly heavy showers in northern areas.
The M25 motorway and large parts of the M3, M23,  M4, M40, M1 and M11 motorways were brought to a standstill until late into the night, and many towns were gridlocked. About 100 people were able to travel from London Victoria Station to Ashford International railway station courtesy of a steam train hauled by Tornado.

=22 December=

Central Scotland, from Argyll through Glasgow to Edinburgh, had very heavy snowfall during the evening, accumulating an additional 7 cm. On the Isle of Lewis, one man died due to the very cold weather. in Edinburgh.
Fresh overnight snowfall brought renewed problems to other parts of the United Kingdom. In England, north Hampshire and the Thames Valley were particularly badly affected. In Basingstoke, some 3,000 motorists were forced to either abandon their vehicles or sleep in them overnight after becoming stuck in gridlocked traffic. 2,000 cars were abandoned.
The AA vehicle recovery service accused some local authorities of not acting quickly enough to grit roads and claimed some "key roads" had "not been gritted at all". The Local Government Association dismissed the claims as "unverified, unsubstantiated and unjustified".

=23 December=

In Scotland, overnight temperatures once again dropped to well below freezing, with Dalwhinnie in the central Highlands of Scotland recording a low of 
Air travel was disrupted in the United Kingdom, with Southampton Airport cancelling or diverting all inbound and outbound flights until around 11:30AM because of a frozen runway.
Two women were killed and more than 40 people injured following a coach crash on an ungritted country road in Cornwall as a party returned from a trip to see Christmas lights in Mousehole the previous evening. Weather forecasters warned of icy conditions and further snowfall into Christmas Eve, affecting particularly northern England and the East Midlands, which would disrupt those who were planning to travel for the Christmas holidays.

=24 December=

Lying snow gave some travel disruption; however, Christmas Eve was a relatively calm day. However, parts of North Yorkshire, particularly the Harrogate area, experienced heavy snowfall during the day.

=25 December=

On Christmas Day parts of Britain had a White Christmas for the first time since 2004 after snow fell in northern and central Scotland, North Wales and parts of England, including Nottinghamshire. A man in Leeds, West Yorkshire froze to death after spending 24 hours in his car. A total of 21 people were reported to have died during the cold snap in the UK.
Many parts of northwestern Ireland had a white Christmas also, whilst freezing rain affected most other parts of the state.

=26 December=

On Boxing Day drivers in Northern Ireland were warned of icy conditions,

=27 December=

Parts of England again suffered repeated power cuts, and Scotland experienced fresh snowfall overnight on 26–27 December with the worst affected area being Perthshire, where between 

=28 December=

Temperatures fell to 

=29 December=

Temperatures dropped to  in parts of the Highlands overnight on 28–29 December, with Braemar recording Britain's lowest temperature of the winter. Fresh travel warnings were issued on 29 December as the wintry conditions continued to cause problems on Scotland's roads.
The runway of Inverness Airport was briefly closed because of snow and ice, and ScotRail reduced services to and from Glasgow Central because of the severe conditions.
The snow and icy conditions were good for the Scottish ski industry, which said the weather helped it to experience its best start to the season for several years.
Warnings of heavy snow were issued for Wales, the Midlands, north-west England, eastern and southern England and Yorkshire and Humber.. Snow was also reported in parts of the West Midlands region and Yorkshire.

=30 December=

Sportscotland Avalanche Information Service (SAIS) issued warnings about conditions on Scottish mountains. However, three people died in three large avalanches.

=31 December=

Continued icy weather in Scotland on New Year's Eve led to the cancellation of Hogmanay celebrations in Inverness amid concerns over public safety. Dublin and most of Leinster in Ireland were hit for the first time in the 2009-10 Winter.

January 2010

=1 January=

Fresh overnight snowfall on New Year's Eve and New Year's Day caused disruption in north-east England, with roads across Northumberland, Tyne and Wear, County Durham, Teesside and the Scottish Borders affected. Snow also fell in parts of East Cumbria. In places it was as deep as 

=2 January=

A weather front carried in the north wind brought heavy snow in the northwest of England. Wythenshawe near Manchester Airport had  with conditions on the M60, M602 and M66 reported to be poor, while Snake Pass, which links Manchester with Sheffield, was closed.
In Scotland, a number of roads across the country were closed, including three junctions of the M9, while the motorway was shut in both directions at the Newbridge Roundabout in Edinburgh during the evening because of heavy snow, and did not open again until the following day. Problems were also reported on the A96 and the A939. Rail services between Inverness and Central Scotland were also affected by poor weather.

=3 January=

Parts of northeast England and Cumbria had 
Following days of disruption because of the weather, Inverness Airport finally could operate normally. It was announced that because of the cold snap it would be illegal to shoot reared mallard, geese, woodcock, snipe and golden plover in Scotland for two weeks from 5 January to 19 January.

=4 January=

In Scotland, Fife Council became the first local authority to confirm that its supply of grit was exhausted after it received less than it had ordered from suppliers. Ministers denied there was a shortage of grit and salt and insisted there were "very substantial" supplies for Scotland's roads.
In its monthly summary, Met Éireann, Ireland's weather service, said December was the coldest month for 28 years for most of the country and the coldest of any month since February 1986 at a few stations.

=5 January=

The Met Office issued weather warnings for every region in the UK except the Northern Isles. An extreme weather warning was issued for southern areas for overnight snowfall which could have brought accumulations from  later in the week. The Met Office also confirmed that the UK is experiencing the longest prolonged cold spell since December 1981. The Harrogate District endured over six inches and had been a regular feature on BBC News broadcasts.
A local record of  of snow was recorded within the Cairngorms National Park. Most parts of Scotland had further snowfalls during the night of 4/5 January.
Due to shortage of road grit conventionally made from rock salt, road grit was being made by or for road-gritters from cooking-type salt mixed with builders' sand,BBC TV news and the public bought up large amounts of cooking salt and table salt from food shops to put on their paths and drives. The Government was reported to have reallocated reserve supplies of  road salt and grit from Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire and sent it to Cumbria and Fife due to the higher priority of even lower salt and grit reserves, along with the greater snow clearance work, according to Radio Oxford.

=6 January=

The synoptic situation in northern Europe settled to a steady northeast wind which brought snow showers and belts of snow.
The British Army had to help stranded motorists in southern areas.
The Met Office confirmed that 
A severe warning issued by the Met Office was in place for every region in the UK.
In Eastern Parts, there were accumulations of 40 cm to 50 cm in places. In Kent, six inches of snow fell in four hours in the early evening.

=7 January=

Overnight temperatures of 
A high of  was recorded at Loch Glascarnoch. Snow showers also affected Wales and the south-west of England, whilst periods of heavy snow dumped a further 5–10 cm of snow across the south-east corner.

=8 January=

Overnight temperatures of 
Heavy snow fell in the North of England throughout the day giving significant accumulations. A high of  was recorded at Tulloch Bridge.

=9 January=

Deal and Sandwich in Kent, England, were virtually cut off by snowdrifts.
Snow showers persisted in the east of the UK. In the far south-east, snow showers merged into longer and more persistent areas of snow. A low of  was recorded at Tulloch Bridge.
The football schedule was also heavily affected by the snowfall; all but seven games (two in both the Premier League and League 1 and three in the Championship) were postponed in England, and all but five Scottish Cup games were played in Scotland. Several Guinness Premiership games and horseracing meets were also cancelled.[ref]
[/ref]

=10 January=

During the Early hours, light snow showers spread across parts of Central England and Wales. The maximum temperature was  was recorded at Kinbrace. In Ireland exceptionally heavy snowstorms moved across Dublin, Kildare and Wicklow counties during the late afternoon hours with up to a foot and more of snow in Kildare and Wicklow. These soon spread across the Irish Sea into Wales, Northwest England and the West Midlands, where North West Wales received up to 40 cm of snow, causing problems mostly for motorists who lived in rural areas.

=11 January=

Rain, sleet and snow travelled northwards throughout the early hours. Allenheads in England had fears over a potential  was recorded in Altnaharra, Highland.

=12 January=

The weather system affecting South Wales and south-west England on the evening of the 12th moved onto The Midlands and South-east England where the snow persisted throughout the early hours until around midday, dropping a further 5–10 cm. The weather system continued north during the evening, affecting much of Northern England before reaching Scotland.
Many schools were once again closed across England and Wales. There were many road accidents and closures; the M25 motorway was down to one lane between Leatherhead and Reigate whilst roads stretching right across southern Great Britain were untreated, causing problems for commuters. Gatwick and Birmingham airports were closed and many flights were delayed at Heathrow.
Due to a mix of the bitter winter weather and the milder system trying to push in from the Atlantic, heavy snowfall in the United Kingdom resumed, with fresh accumulations, on top of existing snow, of up to 15 centimetres on 12 January in Wales and South-west England. Snow later fell in The Midlands and South-east England.
In places in north England (Holmfirth, Barnsley) freezing rain or sleet fell onto deep-frozen roads, making so much black ice that some people found that the only safe way to move about on roads was by crawling. Hospital accident and emergency units in the Sheffield, Rotherham, Doncaster and Barnsley areas of South Yorkshire reported being inundated by people with broken bones and sprains after slipping on what one council official in Sheffield described as the worst black ice seen in the area in living memory.

=13 January=

During 13 January the weather system continued north, affecting much of Northern England before reaching Scotland.

=14 January=

Southerly to south-easterly winds brought bands of snow to parts of northern Britain. An inch of snow fell in Glasgow with further accumulations in areas outside the towns and cities, disrupting travel.

=15 January=

On 15 January rain and thaw came to much of southwest England. In Manchester rain on frozen ground had overnight caused glazed frost which had largely gone by morning, and at midday the clouds were running fast from the south; the January snowfall was melting fast, but the pre-Christmas snowfall, where trodden, had half thawed to slush and then frozen hard to solid ice overnight, was slower to melt. In Scotland it melted fresh snow. Flood warnings were issued.

=18–20 January=

Heavy snowfall occurred in Wales and the Midlands between the 18th and 20th. Exceptionally heavy snow storms occurred on the Welsh Mountains, Shropshire Hills and the Pennines, causing problems on the highest roads. Significant accumulations of up to two feet were reported on the Berwyn range and in Snowdonia.

=25 January=

Widespread snowfall across Scotland brought extreme disruption. 61 cm of snow were recorded in Aviemore as hundreds of people were stranded in cars in Dunblane. Schools and transport services disrupted. Two people died in Glen Coe in an avalanche. Temperatures reached  in Braemar. Some people in Perthshire were stranded in their cars for 17 hours. 45,000 homes in Scotland were left without power. 30 schools were closed.

Effects

The Department of Health predicted that up to 40,000 excess deaths could occur because of the coldest weather for over 40 years. The RSA Insurance Group estimated that the cold weather was costing £690 million per day, due to people unable to get to work or deliver goods, among other factors. Extra potholes and burst water pipes are also thought to have cost £61 million and £20 million in repairs. Use of natural gas has increased by one-third.independent.co.html(retrieved 10 January 2010)
By 7 January 2010, 22 people had died in the UK because of the freezing conditions.Deaths during Britain's big freeze

Transport

Sport

The snowfall in January postponed football games in the English Football League, Premier League, Football League Cup Other affected sports included Gaelic football's O'Byrne Cup, Dr. McKenna Cup, McGrath Cup and FBD League games. The field hockey Irish Junior Cup saw postponements and the prestigious schools cross-country event, the Knole run, was cancelled due to heavy snow on the ground.








