[[CNBLUE]]

CATEGORIES: CNBLUE

CNBLUE (
The band debuted on August 19, 2009 in Japan with their first mini album, Now or Never. They released four teasers for their 1st Korean mini album Bluetory, starring one member per each of the videos in the sequence of Jonghyun, Minhyuk, Jungshin and lastly, Yonghwa on January 6, 8, 11 and 13, 2010 respectively. On January 14, 2010, CNBLUE debuted their first mini-album in Korea with the lead single "I'm a Loner" (). Their fan club is called "Boice".

History

2009: In Japan, Now or Never, and Voice

In mid-June 2009, CNBLUE began to perform on the streets and in live clubs in Japan. They formally debuted on August 19, 2009 with Now or Never. The mini-album was recorded completely in English, and failed to chart on the Oricon. In late September, their original bassist Kwon Kwang Jin left the band and was replaced by Lee Jung Shin later that year. Their second extended play Voice was released in November. Recorded with both English and Japanese tracks, Voice peaked at No. 227 and stayed on the Oricon for two weeks.

2010: Korean debut, ThankU, and other activities

In January, FNC Entertainment unveiled new teaser pictures for CNBLUE's debut in South Korea. Bluetory was released on January 14, 2010, and stayed at the top of the Gaon Chart for two weeks. "I'm a Loner" ( The group debuted their new reality show "CNBluetory" on the Korean music channel Mnet on March 10.
In March, the band started preparations for their first full-length album Thank U in Japan. It was released on March 20, 2010 with two new tracks. The album peaked at No. 90 on the Oricon charts, their highest position thus far. In April, their official fan club name was announced as BOICE, a combination of "blue" and "voice."
CNBLUE headed back to Korea in May and released their next single, "Love Light" (
After their success in Korea, the band headed back to Japan. They released their first single "The Way" on June 23. For the first time, they charted in the Oricon Top 40 at No. 26. The release was followed by "I Don't Know Why" on September 16. The song reached No. 8 on the Oricon Daily Chart, marking the first time the band made it inside the Top 10. On the weekly chart, they peaked at No. 15. The band embarked on a small tour across Japan in order to promote the single.
CNBLUE members Kang Min Hyuk and Lee Jong Hyun starred in the Korean movie "Acoustic". They released a song from the OST on October 7 entitled "High Fly".

2011: "Re-maintenance",  First Step, acting activities, 392, and  "In My Head"

On January 9, CNBLUE released their third Japanese single, "'Re-maintenance". They started off their 2011 Japanese promotions with a Zepp Tour in 4 cities: Osaka, Fukuoka, Nagoya and Tokyo from January 9–16.
FNC Entertainment, their entertainment agency in South Korea, released teasers for a CNBLUE comeback in February 2011.
In April, it was announced that Yong-hwa and Min-hyuk were casted in the MBC drama Heartstrings, also known as "You've Fallen For Me". The first episode aired on 29 June 2011. Yong-hwa played the lead role Lee-shin, the leader of the band Stupid and was paired with actress Park Shin-hye, who has worked with him for the second time after the SBS drama You're Beautiful. Min-hyuk played the role of a cute character Yeo Jun-hee, the drummer of the band Stupid. Yong-hwa sang three of the OSTs in Heartstrings titled You've Fallen for Me", "Because I Miss You" (composed by himself), and "Comfort Song". Min-hyuk sang one OST titled Star. They first performed the full songs of the OSTs in their "BLUESTORM" concert on September 17 at the Olympic Hall, Seoul.com/2011/09/17/info-cnblue-performed-22-songs-at-bluestorm/
After finishing promotions in Korea, CNBLUE made a comeback in Japan with the release of their second and last indie album "392" on September 1, 2011. They also announced that they would make their major debut in Japan on October 19, 2011 under the Warner Music Japan label.

2012: Acting activities, "Where You Are", Ear Fun, Code Name Blue, acting recognitions

In early February, Min-hyuk was casted in the KBS weekend family drama You Who Rolled in Unexpectedly as Cha Se-gwang, the younger brother of the lead role Cha Yoon-hee(played by Kim Nam-joo). This was a long-running drama. The first episode aired on February 25.com/cnblue-kang-minhyuk-to-cast-in-kbs-you-who-rolled-in-unexpectedly/ The series topped the weekly ratings chart for 25 consecutive weeks and reached a peak of over 50%. The series ranked first place overall on the 2012 yearly TV ratings chart.tenasia.co.kr/archives/40272
The group released a new single in Japan on February 1, titled "Where You Are". The single reached number 1 in both Oricon's Daily
CNBLUE and fellow label-mates F.T. Island performed in America for the first time at Los Angeles' Nokia Theater on March 9.
After finishing their overseas activities, CNBLUE returned to Korea to prepare their comeback.
While preparing for their comeback, FNC Entertainment had announced the Jong-hyun will be casted in the SBS weekend drama A Gentleman's Dignity, a romantic comedy television series starring popular celebrities Jang Dong-gun, Kim Ha-neul, Kim Min-jong, Kim Soo-ro, and Lee Jong-hyuk.soompi.Up75YJIbDT8 Jong-hyun played as Colin Black, the biological son of Jang Dong-gun in the drama. This was his television acting debut. He started preparing and filming for the drama after his casting confirmation.
On March 26, the band released their third Korean mini album, Ear Fun. The singles of the album, "Still in Love" (
After completing their mini album promotions, the members proceed on with their individual activities and also held their first fan meeting in Seoul on May 5. They also started preparing for their upcoming Japanese activities.
Beginning July, Heartstrings (TV Series), in which Yong-hwa and Min-hyuk was casted in on 2011, was aired in Japan on the Fuji TV channel.soompi.Up70ypIbDT8 The drama received very good responses. Some of the OSTs had dominated the music charts in Japan. "You've Fallen For Me" topped the yearly ringtone chart of 2012.enewsworld.com/news/news_view. Later in June 2013, the 2 aforementioned OSTs topped the charts in Japan again, with "You've Fallen For Me" ranking #1 weekly and "Because I Miss You" ranking #1 daily.allkpop.
On July 8, Jong-hyun's OST in the drama "A Gentleman's Dignity" was released.cnblue4u.html This was also his first digital solo. The OST charted high on various Korean digital music charts for many weeks and become one of most popular Korean Drama OSTs in 2012. "My Love" was placed No.6 on Billboard K-POP Hot 100 2012 Year End Chart and placed No. 15 on South Korea's National Gaon Yearly Single Chart.
In mid of the members individual schedule the band prepare their next Japanese releases. The 3rd Japanese single Come On was released on August 1 which placed No.5 in Oricon Single Weekly chart follow by their 1st Japanese major debut album Code Name Blue in August 29 which placed No.1 in both Oricon Album Daily and Weekly chart.
Following Min-hyuk's drama, which ended on September 9, Jung-shin's drama My Daughter Seo-young, which marks Jung-shin's acting debut, aired from September 15 to March 3, 2013. Jung-shin played the role of Sung-jae, who is a brother of the lead actor Woo-jae, and has a crush on his tutor Seo-young. This drama has also received positive responses as seen from the high TV ratings. The drama has already achieved high ratings of 20% in the first two episodes,My Daughter Seo-young#cite note-14 and dominated the weekly ratings chart for 22 consecutive weeks. Its peak was on the last episode of 47.6%, Daughter Seo-young#cite note-18 showing the drama's popularity in Korea.
On September 22, they held their first exclusive concert, CNBLUE Live in London at IndigO2 in UK. They performed 22 songs in front of over 3000 fans, some of which came from other European countries. Also during this visit, they took the opportunity to shoot the music video for "I'm Sorry", the lead track for their 4th mini-album Re:Blue.
They closed 2012 with live concert in South Korea, 2012 CNBLUE Live BLUE NIGHT in Seoul on December 15 and 16. This marks their fourth concert in Seoul, of which were sold out in 10 minutes. and released their 4th Japanese single Robot which placed No.2 in both Oricon Single Daily and Weekly chart on December 19.
CNBLUE's long-awaited South Korean comeback was officially announced at their 2012 CNBLUE Live BLUE NIGHT in Seoul concert on December 17, 2012. The release date for their 4th mini-album, Re:Blue was set to be January 14, 2013. The first teaser was released on January 3, 2013
In 2012, all of the members have been recognised for the acting as they are said to be the group that has conquered the year-end award ceremonies with their nominations.topstarnews.html?no=20824&utm_source=dlvr. Yong-hwa has been awarded the Hallyu Star award for his lead role in the 2011 drama "Heartstrings" due to its popularity in Asia, and Min-hyuk has been awarded the Rising Star award for his role in You Who Rolled in Unexpectedly. In the SBS Drama awards, Jong-hyun has been awarded the New Star award. 
Also, not to mention, Jong-hyun's OST "My Love" has been proven to be a hit as he has been nominated in numerous music award ceremonies for his OST. In 2013, he has won the Best OST in the 22nd High1 Seoul Music Awards.Lee Jong-hyun#cite note-ost award-7

2013: Re:Blue, Blue Moon World Tour, acting activities, What Turns You On?

In January 14, which is CNBLUE's 3rd anniversary, the mini-album Re:Blue and music video of "I'm Sorry" were released. They continued their comeback stages on MBC's Music Core with performances of the English version of "Where You Are" and "I'm Sorry" and SBS's Inkigayo by performing "Coffee Shop" and "I'm Sorry" on January 19 and 20, respectively. The band won number 1 on January 30, February 6, and February 13 on Show Champion and February 1 and 8 on Music Bank.
Re:Blue also ranked #1 on the Billboard World Album Chart.
On January 22, FNC Entertainment announced the 2013 CN Blue Blue Moon World Tour, stating "They won't be going to just Asian countries such as China, Singapore,
On April 15, it was announced that Yong-hwa will make a drama comeback on SBS The Heirs as one of the lead roles with actress Park Shin-hye for the third time.allkpop. Later on, on July 16, it was revealed that he was in talks to star in the KBS drama Marry Him If You Dare.allkpop.
On April 20, FNC had announced that CNBLUE will be going on ZEPP Tour in Japan with their first stop at Zepp Sapporo in Hokkaido on July 24 and 25, and the last stop at Zepp Namba in Osaka on August 14 and 15. It was a total of 10 concerts in 5 cities. This was held while the Blue Moon world tour was still ongoing.wordpress.
On April 24, CNBLUE released their 5th major Japanese single, "Blind Love", with three different editions. There is a first edition version A and version B along with a normal version.
On May 9, FNC Entertainment had announced CNBLUE member Lee Jung-shin had been casted on a KBS drama The Blade and Petal.interest. This was just a 3 months after the end of his successful acting debut in My Daughter Seo-young.
On July 1, the official teaser of their 6th Japanese singly Lady was released.youtube. The album Lady was later released on July 31, 2013.
On July 17, FNC Entertainment had announced that CNBLUE member Kang Min-hyuk will be one of the main casts in SBS The Heirs, which was the drama in which Yong-hwa turned down the casting offer on. It was revealed that the casting offers of both members were not on the same role.allkpop.
CNBLUE had also participated in the annual 2-day Japanese rock festival Summer Sonic 2013 as one of the line-ups This was held at two places on August 10 and 11, namely at Tokyo and Osaka. CNBLUE performed at Tokyo on the first day and at Osaka on the second day.summersonic.com/2013/lineup/
On August 13, they released an MV of the title track "One More Time" in the upcoming 2nd major Japanese studio album What Turns You On?.youtube. It includes the previous 3 singles, "Robot", "Blind Love" and "Lady", was released. was released on August 28, 2013.
On November 26, CNBLUE had released their first ever "best-of" album in Korea, titled PRESENT with the title song "Lady", in which the tracks are Korean versions of CNBLUE's more popular tracks in Japan that have not been released in Korea. All of the members took part in the translation of the lyrics.allkpop.com/article/2013/11/cnblue-drop-first-best-of-album-present-featuring-korean-versions-of-their-japanese-songs#axzz2mQliNXJt
In 2013 they appeared in the reality show Cheongdam-dong 111, which followed the daily life of their agency.

2014: Can't Stop , Truth and Solo Activities

On February 12 2014, it was announced that their 5th mini album, Can't Stop will be released February 24, 2014. The album has ranked #1 on Tower Records pre-order chart in Japan.   The release was later said to be upped a day earlier to February 23, 2014. CNBLUE performed their comeback stage on March 2nd through SBS 'All Live Comeback Show: Can't Stop'   
On the first week of its release  Can't Stop  charted #3 on Gaon digital singles chart competing with Girls Generation and 2NE1 generally doing well with such big competition, it charted #2 on the Gaon album weekly charts in the 3rd week of march. On the last week of March, they peaked #1 on the chart.allkpop. CNBLUE again won #1 on the march 28th episode of Music Bank (TV series)   It was also made known by FNC entertainment that Jung Yong Hwa CNBLUE's leader will be releasing a solo album later this year.
CNBLUE will be holding their '2014 CNBLUE LIVE-Can't Stop' solo concert in Daegu on May 24.  
After finishing their promoting activities in Korea, CNBLUE released a new japanese single called Truth and it will be released sometime in april.

Members

Discography

Japanese discography

Korean discography

Concert and tour

Tours

Concerts and Performances

Endorsements

Achievements

Awards and Nominations

Controversy

CNBLUE and its agency FNC Entertainment were sued by Korean punk band Crying Nut for unauthorized use of their song "Pilsal Off-Side" on Mnet's "M Countdown" in 2010. Crying Nut also charged that CNBLUE had released a DVD of the concert in Japan and profited from it. claiming that the intellectual property theft was the responsibility of CJ E&M and the unspecified company responsible for the DVD sales, and that Crying Nut's allegations may have permanently damaged CNBLUE's reputation as Hallyu stars.
Earlier in 2010, CNBLUE was accused by fans of Ynot for plagiarising their song "Blue Bird" in their own song "I'm a Loner." Ultimately, the band was cleared of any wrongdoing.

Philanthropy

CNBLUE undertakes philanthropy work such as donating money and rice to the needy from time to time. Part of their yearly income and the income from the Bluemoon World Tour have been contributed to the construction of CNBLUE Schools. The first CNBLUE School was built in Burkina Faso, Africa in 2012 and can accommodate up to 100 pre-schoolers and 1 000 elementary and junior high school students. CNBLUE Schools will provide meals and daycare services for the enrolled students.
As of January 2014, the second CNBLUE school is slated to be built in The Philippines.






