[[Brandon Jerwa]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1973 births

Brandon Jerwa is an American comic book writer and musician currently residing in Seattle, Washington. Jerwa is best known for his work on comic tie-ins for several prominent licensed properties, including Battlestar Galactica, Highlander, G.I. Joe and Army of Darkness.  Jerwa also collaborates frequently with fellow writer Eric S. Trautmann.
Jerwa is the lead singer and founder of Seattle-area band SD6, and Relay.
Before he began his career in comics, Jerwa was a morning DJ at KRQT "Rocket 107" FM in Longview, Washington.

Biography

Jerwa's comic book career began in 2003, when he submitted a script to Devil's Due Publishing that was accepted, and was eventually published in G.I. Joe: Frontline #11-14. Soon afterwards, he became the main writer on G.I. Joe: A Real American Hero and also wrote several G.I. Joe minseries.  
On May 18, 2006, Brandon was featured on episode #24 of the Game Show Network's I've Got a Secret; 
In 2006 and 2007, Jerwa began writing for Dynamite Entertainment, working on the series Highlander,
On Free Comic Book Day 2007, Jerwa met several people affiliated with DC Comics, including Eric S. Trautmann and Greg Rucka.  Jerwa and Trautmann struck up a partnership and collaborated on a project called Wide Awake, which appeared first as a short story in Popgun Vol. 2, then as a Free Comic Book Day special,  In 2009, the duo pitched an idea for a graphic novel to DC's imprint Vertigo, which was accepted, and soon after Jerwa was contacted about working with DC directly.
Jerwa's first work for DC Comics was in September 2009 as the writer of the Inferno co-feature in The Shield, a monthly series that introduced re-imagined versions of the Red Circle Comics superhero characters into the DC Universe.
In late 2009, Jerwa also wrote for a Dynamite series based on Stargate SG-1.
In 2011 Jerwa raised $19,000 through the crowdfunding website Kickstarter for a comic book-themed documentary title  UNTOLD TALES OF THE COMIC INDUSTRY  News of the film's progress was last updated in March 2013.kickstarter.com/projects/arcmedia/untold-tales-of-the-comic-industry/posts/419825

Bibliography




