[[MissFlag]]

CATEGORIES: Israeli musical groups, Israeli rock music groups, Israeli pop music groups, Alternative rock groups, Musical groups from Jerusalem, Israeli indie rock groups, Musical groups established in 2005, 2005 establishments in Israel

missFlag is an indie pop-rock band from Jerusalem, Israel. Formed in 2005, the band's music is mostly influenced by the new wave of British music and alternative rock.
The band consists of Gil Assayas, keyboards and lead vocals, Assa Bukelman, electric guitar, Shai Saadia, bass, and Assaf Kraus, drums and backing vocals.

History

Formation

missFlag's members have known each other years before forming the band. The group first started working together as a one time Tribute act for the British Rock band Coldplay.
In its earlier days the band consisted of five members, including the musician and songwriter Ohad Eilam (Guitar and Vocals). Later on the band continued working as a four piece band.

First EP

Shortly after the Coldplay tribute, the group started to perform, write and record their own music, which led to the creation of their first release - a self produced EP of 5 songs which was printed in only 1,000 copies.
The EP caught the ear of music producer and songwriter from Los Angeles, California Guy Erez (Jennifer Love Hewitt, Gipsy Kings, Adam Cohen, Sarah Bettens) who later produced missFlag's first studio album.


To Infinity

In early 2007, the group finished writing a lot of new material, from which 10 songs were chosen for the purpose of recording their debut studio album. "To Infinity" was produced by L.A. based producer Guy Erez and came to light later that year. The Album was a mile stone for the band in the crowded US market. Later that year, the group released a single from the album, called "Hidden Thieves" a rock ballad that caught the ear of the renowned radio D.J. and "taste-maker" Nic Harcourt from KCRW, the California based public radio station. (Credited for discovering Travis, Dido, Coldplay, Norah Jones, Pete Yorn, and David Gray). The Jerusalem Post reviewed the album.

Hidden Thieves

Hidden Thieves is probably the group's flag song. The single hit KCRW's top 20 charts, Furthermore, The Spanish/American based radio station Fame Games Radio chose Hidden Thieves to be song of the week four times in a row, leading to a "Track of the Month" title.

Dreams of Flying

In 2009, the group covered the Israeli classic "Uf Gozal" ( Whilst the song was originally written in Hebrew, the band rewrote the lyrics in English and renamed the it Dreams of Flying but maintained the general concept of the song. The melody was kept but the arrangement was changed to fit missFlag's style.
Along the years, missFlag has cooperated with many artists and musicians, both in the studio and live on stage including; Jamie Muhoberac, (from the Hebrew Wiki→) Yirmi Kaplan, Miki Gavrielov, Sharon Moldavi, Lee Biran (Libi), Ohad Eilam, Michael Greilsammer, Mai Lev, Miki Geva, Rebbe-Che and many others.

Still Alive - Portal song

"Still Alive" is a song by Jonathan Coulton, originally written as the ending credits theme for the PC game "Portal" by Valve Corporation. On November 10, 2007 missFlag uploaded to YouTube a cover version of the song, The song was downloaded over 25,000 times and featured in numerous leading gaming sites.

Awards and media appearances

Discography

Singles:






