[[Liam Neeson]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 births, Living people, People from Ballymena, Alumni of Queen's University Belfast, Bohemian F.C. players, Irish male film actors, Irish male voice actors, Irish male television actors, Male film actors from Northern Ireland, Male television actors from Northern Ireland, Immigrants to the United States from Northern Ireland, Expatriates from Northern Ireland in the United States, 20th-century Irish male actors, 21st-century Irish male actors, Volpi Cup winners, Officers of the Order of the British Empire

Liam John Neeson,  is an Irish actor who rose to prominence with his acclaimed starring role in Steven Spielberg's 1993 Oscar winner Schindler's List. He has since starred in a number of other successful films, including Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace, Taken, Michael Collins, Les Misérables, Batman Begins, Kinsey, Clash of the Titans, and The Chronicles of Narnia series. He has been nominated for a number of awards including an Academy Award for Best Actor, a BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role and three Golden Globe Awards for Best Actor in a Motion Picture Drama.
Empire magazine ranked Neeson among both the "100 Sexiest Stars in Film History" and "The Top 100 Movie Stars of All Time".

Early life

Neeson was born in Ballymena, County Antrim, Northern Ireland, the son of Katherine "Kitty" Neeson (née Brown), a cook, and Bernard "Barney" Neeson, a caretaker at the Ballymena Boys All Saints Primary School.
His interest in acting and decision to become an actor was also influenced by minister Ian Paisley, whose Presbyterian church Neeson would sneak into. Neeson has said of Paisley: "He had a magnificent presence and it was incredible to watch him just Bible-thumping away... it was acting, but it was also great acting and stirring too." Also at Queens, he discovered a talent for football and was spotted by Seán Thomas at Bohemian F.C. There was a club trial in Dublin and Neeson played one game as a substitute against Shamrock Rovers, but he was not offered a contract.Gaffers: 50 Years of Irish Football Managers by Trevor Keane

Career

1978–1993

After leaving the university, Neeson returned to Ballymena where he worked in a variety of casual jobs, from a fork-lift operator at Guinness to a truck driver. He also attended teacher training college for two years in Newcastle upon Tyne, before again returning to his hometown. In 1976, Neeson joined the Lyric Players' Theatre in Belfast where he performed for two years. He got his first film experience in 1977, playing Jesus Christ and Evangelist in the religious film Pilgrim's Progress. Neeson moved to Dublin in 1978 after he was offered a part in Ron Hutchinson's Says I, Says He, a drama about The Troubles, at the Project Arts Centre. He acted in several other Project productions and joined the Abbey Theatre (the National Theatre of Ireland).
In 1980, filmmaker John Boorman saw him on stage as Lennie Small in Of Mice and Men and offered him the role of Sir Gawain in the Arthurian film, Excalibur. After Excalibur, Neeson moved to London, where he continued working on stage, in small budget films and in television. He lived with the actress Helen Mirren at this time, whom he met working on Excalibur. Between 1982 and 1987, Neeson starred in five films; most notably alongside Mel Gibson and Anthony Hopkins in 1984's The Bounty and Robert De Niro and Jeremy Irons in 1986's The Mission. He also guest-starred in the third season of the television series Miami Vice in 1986.
In 1987, Neeson moved to Hollywood to star in high-profile roles. That year, he starred alongside Cher and Dennis Quaid in Suspect in a role that brought him critical acclaim. In 1990, he followed this with a starring role in Darkman. Although the film was successful, Neeson's subsequent years would not bring him the same recognition. In 1993, he joined Ellis Island co-star and future wife Natasha Richardson in the Broadway play Anna Christie. They also worked together in Nell, released the following year. He recited the Van Morrison song "Coney Island" on the 1994 Van Morrison tribute album No Prima Donna: The Songs of Van Morrison. A single was also released with Neeson's version.

Schindler's List

Director Steven Spielberg offered Neeson the role of Oskar Schindler in the film about the Holocaust, Schindler's List,
His critically acclaimed performance earned him a nomination for a Best Actor Oscar, and helped the film earn Best Picture of 1993. However, the best actor award went to Tom Hanks for his performance in Philadelphia. Neeson also garnered BAFTA and Golden Globes nominations for his work as Oskar Schindler. Soon after these accolades, Neeson became a very in-demand leading actor. He starred in the subsequent period pieces Rob Roy (1995) and Michael Collins (1996), the latter earning him a win for Best Starring Role at the Venice Film Festival and another Golden Globe nomination. He went on to star as Jean Valjean in the 1998 adaptation of Victor Hugo's Les Misérables and in The Haunting (1999) as Dr. David Marrow.

Star Wars

In 1999, Neeson starred as Jedi Master Qui-Gon Jinn in Star Wars Episode I: The Phantom Menace. Director George Lucas cast Neeson in the role because he considered the actor to have great skills and presence, describing him as a "master actor, who the other actors will look up to, who has got the qualities of strength that the character demands.""Star Wars Episode I Production Notes: The Actors and Characters - Part I". StarWars. 1999-05-01. Archived from the original on 2004-10-23.  Retrieved 2009-04-05. As the first Star Wars film to be released in sixteen years, it was surrounded by a large amount of media anticipation. Neeson's connection to Star Wars started in the Crown Bar, Belfast. Neeson stated to Ricki Lake, "I probably wouldn't have taken the role if it wasn't for the advice of Peter King in the Crown during a Lyric reunion." and a Saturn Award nomination.imdb.com/event/ev0000004/2000
Qui-Gon's disembodied voice, provided by an uncredited Neeson, would later be heard during a brief scene in Star Wars Episode II: Attack of the Clones (2002). Qui-Gon was supposed to make an appearance in Star Wars Episode III: Revenge of the Sith (2005) as a Force Ghost, and Neeson had hinted at involvement. In the animated television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars (2008-2014), Neeson reprised the role of Qui-Gon once again by voicing the character in two episodes of the third season and one episode of the sixth season.

2001–present

Neeson narrated the 2001 documentaries Journey into Amazing Caves, a short about two scientists who travel around the world to search for material for potential cures, His role as Alfred Kinsey in Kinsey again put the actor up for nomination for a Golden Globe Award but he lost to Leonardo DiCaprio for The Aviator.
In 2004, Neeson hosted an episode of the NBC sketch show Saturday Night Live. He starred as a redneck trucker, Marlon Weaver, in an "Appalachian Emergency Room" sketch and a hippie in a one-off sketch about two stoners (the other played by Amy Poehler) who attempt to borrow a police dog to find their lost stash of marijuana. Despite vowing not to play any Irish stereotypes, Neeson did play a stereotypically Irish man named Lorcan McArdle in the home makeover show parody "You Call This A House, Do Ya?" In 2005, Neeson played Godfrey of Ibelin in Ridley Scott's epic adventure Kingdom of Heaven, Ra's al Ghul, one of the main villains in Batman Begins, and as Father Bernard in Neil Jordan's adaptation of Patrick McCabe's novel, Breakfast on Pluto.
In The Simpsons (2005), he voiced the role of a kindly priest who (briefly) converts Bart and Homer to Catholicism. In 2007, he starred in the American Civil War epic Seraphim Falls.
Neeson's voice is featured in the video game Fallout 3 as the main character's father, James.
In the director's commentary of the 2007 Transformers DVD, Michael Bay said that he had told the animators to seek inspiration from Neeson in creating Optimus Prime's body language. Neeson appeared as Alistair Little in the BBC Northern Ireland/Big Fish Films television drama Five Minutes of Heaven, which tells the true story of a young Protestant man convicted of murdering a Catholic boy during The Troubles.
He starred in the action film Taken in 2008, a French produced film also starring Famke Janssen and Maggie Grace. Based on a script by Luc Besson and Robert Mark Kamen and directed by Pierre Morel the film stars Neeson playing a retired Central Intelligence Agency operative from their elite Special Activities Division who sets about tracking down his teenage daughter after she is kidnapped for sexual slavery while travelling in Europe. Taken was a worldwide box office hit, grossing $223.9 million worldwide, making almost $200 million more than its production budget. Taken brought him back into the center of the public eye and resulted in his being cast in many more big-budget Hollywood movies. That year he also narrated the documentary Black Holes: The Other Side of Infinity and again lent his voice to Aslan in The Chronicles of Narnia: Prince Caspian (2008).
Neeson has completed filming the psychological thriller After.
In 2010, Neeson played Zeus in the remake of the 1981 film, Clash of the Titans. The film went on becoming a huge box office hit, grossing $475 million worldwide.
In 2010, Neeson voiced the character Aslan again in the sequel The Chronicles of Narnia: The Voyage of the Dawn Treader. In late 2010, Neeson stated, "Aslan symbolises a Christlike figure, but he also symbolises for me Mohammed, Buddha and all the great spiritual leaders and prophets over the centuries"; this disappointed many fans of the series, who felt that he was "destroying the author's legacy to be politically correct".S. Lewis, vol iii, p 160: "I found the name Aslan... ... And of course I meant the Lion of Judah." In 2011, Neeson starred in Unknown, a German-British-American co-production of a French book, it was filmed in Berlin in early 2010. It has been compared to Taken, which was set in Paris. Despite receiving mixed reviews from critics, the film enjoyed box office success in the United States. It was largely funded by Dark Castle entertainment with smaller amounts coming from the Berlin film agency.
He was set to reunite with director Steven Spielberg and star as Abraham Lincoln in the film based on the book Team of Rivals by Doris Kearns Goodwin.
Neeson also starred as Ben Ryan in the drama Before and After alongside Meryl Streep. This film was about how a family dealt with the aftereffects of a murder their son was accused of committing. It was announced in July 2010 that Neeson would guest-star on the new Showtime series The Big C. In 2011, he played himself, in BBC2's series Life's Too Short. Neeson reprised his role as Ra's Al Ghul for the film: The Dark Knight Rises. He narrated the first trailer for the film.
In late 2011, Liam Neeson was cast to play the lead character, a journalist, in a new album recording and arena production of Jeff Wayne's War of the Worlds. He replaced Richard Burton, who had posthumously appeared in the arena production through CGI animation. Neeson did not physically appear on the stage either, instead playing the role through the use of 3D holography.
In 2012, Neeson starred as John Ottway in Joe Carnahan's The Grey. The film received mostly positive reviews and Neeson's performance as Ottway received critical acclaim. He also starred in Taken 2, a successful sequel to his 2008 blockbuster.
On 31 January 2014, it was reported that Neeson would work with director Martin Scorsese again in an adaptation of the novel Silence.
Neeson had a supporting role as the henchman Bad Cop/Good Cop in the animated film The Lego Movie, which was a critical and commercial success, and went on to become the second highest-grossing film of 2014. He later played Bill Marks in the French American action film, Non-Stop.'Hollywood started seeing me in a different way... I love it. I'm 61, and I'm doing this': Liam Neeson on being cinema's unlikely action hero, Daily Mail, London, England: Associated Newspapers Limited, 22 February 2014, Palmer, M., Retrieved 23 February 2014.  The film was released on 28 February 2014.

Personal life

Neeson lived with actress Helen Mirren during the early 1980s. They had met while working on Excalibur (1981). Interviewed by James Lipton for Inside the Actors Studio, Neeson said Mirren was instrumental in his getting an agent.
Neeson met his future wife, actress Natasha Richardson, while filming Nell. They married on 3 July 1994. In August 2004, Neeson and his wife purchased an estate in Millbrook, New York. On 18 March 2009, Richardson died when she suffered a severe head injury in a skiing accident at the Mont Tremblant Resort, north of Montreal. She and Neeson had two sons together, Micheál (born 1995) and Daniel (born 1996).
A heavy smoker earlier in his career, Neeson quit smoking in 2003, while working on Love Actually, this can be seen because in some scenes he has a toothpick in his mouth, his method for quitting. When he took the role of Hannibal for the 2010 film adaptation of The A-Team, Neeson had reservations about smoking cigars (which is a signature trait of the character) in the film due to being an ex-smoker, but agreed to keep that personality trait of Hannibal intact for the film.
In June 2012, reports that Neeson was converting to Islam were denied by his publicist. However, he has expressed an affection for the Islamic calls to prayer that he grew used to while filming Taken 2 in Istanbul: "By the third week, it was like I couldn't live without it. It really became hypnotic and very moving for me in a very special way. Very beautiful."

Honours and awards

Neeson was offered the "Freedom of the Town of Ballymena" by Ballymena Borough Council, but because of objections made by members of the Democratic Unionist Party regarding his comments that he had felt like a "second-class citizen" growing up as a Catholic in the town, he declined the award, citing tensions. Following the controversy, Neeson wrote a letter to the council, stating; "I will always remain very proud of my upbringing in, and association with, the town and my country of birth, which I will continue to promote at every opportunity. Indeed I regard the enduring support over the years from all sections of the community in Ballymena as being more than sufficient recognition for any success which I may have achieved as an actor."Liam Neeson arrives in Ballymena to receive award". BBC. Retrieved 28 January 2013 On 28 January 2013, Neeson received the Freedom of the Borough from Ballymena Borough Council at a ceremony in the town.
He was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) by Queen Elizabeth II in her 1999 New Year Honours.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Discography






