[[Lillehammer]]

CATEGORIES: Lillehammer, Cities and towns in Norway, Municipalities of Oppland, Populated places established in 1827, Populated places on the Gudbrandsdalslågen

Lillehammer () is a town and municipality in Oppland county, Norway. It is part of the traditional region of Gudbrandsdal.  The administrative centre of the municipality is the town of Lillehammer.  As of May 2011, the population of the town of Lillehammer was 26,639. The city centre is a late 19th-century concentration of wooden houses, which enjoys a picturesque location overlooking the northern part of lake Mjøsa and the river Lågen, surrounded by mountains. Lillehammer hosted the 1994 Winter Olympics and will host the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics.Lillehammer awarded 2016 Winter Youth Olympic Games
It was included as part of a bid with applicant host City of Oslo to host events in the 2022 Winter Olympics if Oslo wins the rights to hold the Games.

Name

The municipality (originally the parish) was named after the old Hamar (Norse Hamarr) farm, since the first church was built there. The name is identical with the word hamarr 'rocky hill'. To distinguish it from the nearby town and bishopric of Hamar, it began to be called "little Hamar": Lilþlæ Hamar and Litlihamarr and finally Lillehammer.
It is also mentioned in the Old Norse sagas as Litlikaupangr ("Little Trading Place").

Coat-of-arms

The coat-of-arms was granted in 1898. The arms show a birkebeiner, carrying a spear and a shield, who is skiing down a mountainside.  It symbolizes the historical importance of when the Birkebeiners carried the to-be-King Haakon from Lillehammer to Rena on skis.

History

The area has been settled since the Norwegian Iron Age.  It is also mentioned as a site for council in 1390. It had a lively market by the 1800s, and obtained rights as a merchant city on 7 August 1827, at which point there were 50 registered residents within its boundaries.
The town of Lillehammer was established as a municipality on 1 January 1838. 
The rural municipality of Fåberg was merged into the municipality of Lillehammer on 1 January 1964.
Lillehammer was the site of the Lillehammer affair in 1973 where operatives of the Israeli Mossad shot and killed a Moroccan waiter they mistakenly thought was involved in the Munich Massacre.
Lillehammer was host city of the 1994 Winter Olympics. It is known for being a typical venue for winter sporting events. Lillehammer will host the 2016 Winter Youth Olympics.  It is currently part of a joint bid with applicant host city Oslo to host events part of the 2022 Winter Olympics if Oslo wins the rights to the games.
In 2005, the popular British automotive show Top Gear aired its "Winter Olympics special", an episode of various Olympic event-themed challenges involving cars, set in the surrounding area of Lillehammer.

Education

A number of schools are located in Lillehammer including the Hammartun Lower Secondary School
Lillehammer High School, Mesna High School, Vargstad High School are the three public high schools in Lillehammer, in addition to the private Norges Toppidrettsgymnas. Lillehammer University College is situated just north of the town itself.
Nansen Academy - the Norwegian Humanistic Academy: The Nansen Academy is an educational institution for adult students with different political, religious, and cultural backgrounds. The Academy is founded on the inheritance of humanism and aims at strengthening the knowledge about this inheritance.
The 14th World Scout Jamboree was held July 29 to August 7, 1975 and was hosted by Norway at Lillehammer.

Geography

Lillehammer is located to the south of the municipality of Øyer, to the southeast of Gausdal, northeast of Nordre Land, and to the north of Gjøvik, all in Oppland county. To the southeast, it is bordered by Ringsaker municipality in Hedmark county. Lillehammer has a subarctic inland climate. It has moderate precipitation, higher in summer and autumn. To the northwest is the mountain Spåtind.

Climate

Economy

The basis for the city's commerce is its position as the northernmost point of the lake Mjøsa and as the gateway for the Gudbrandsdal region, through which the historical highway to Trondheim passes.  The Mesna river has provided the basis for several small industries through the years, but Lillehammer is now all but industry-less.

Transport

One of the major Norwegian rail lines, the Dovrebanen, runs from Hamar to the north through Lillehammer on its way up the Gudbrandsdal, to terminate in Trondheim.
European route E6 passes through Lillehammer.

Attractions

In addition to the Olympic site, Lillehammer offers a number of other tourist attractions:

Sport

Sportclubs

Notable residents

In popular culture

The Norwegian-American television series Lilyhammer takes place in Lillehammer. The show stars Steven Van Zandt who plays Giovanni "Johnny" Henriksen, a New York mobster who moves to Lillehammer through the U.S. Witness Protection Program after being inspired by the 1994 Winter Olympics.
The British automotive television series Top Gear had its Top Gear Winter Olympics special in Lillehammer.
The fictional character Toki Wartooth from the Adult Swim program, Metalocalypse, originates from an abandoned village near Lillehammer.

International relations

Twin towns — Sister cities

The following cities are twinned  with  Lillehammer:








