[[Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec]]

CATEGORIES: 1864 births, 1901 deaths, People from Albi, 19th-century French painters, Post-impressionist painters, Art Nouveau illustrators, Art Nouveau painters, French illustrators, French printmakers, French poster artists, French nobility, French people with disabilities, Lycée Condorcet alumni

Henri Marie Raymond de Toulouse-Lautrec-Monfa or simply Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec (

Early life

Henri Marie Raymond de Toulouse-Lautrec-Monfa was born at the Hotel du Bosc in Albi, Tarn in the Midi-Pyrénées region of France, the firstborn child of Comte Alphonse de Toulouse-Lautrec-Monfa and Adèle Tapié de Celeyran. He was therefore a member of an aristocratic family (descendants of the Counts of Toulouse and Lautrec and the Viscounts of Montfa, a village and commune of the Tarn department of southern France). A younger brother was born on 28 August 1867, but died the following year.
After the death of his brother his parents separated and a nanny took care of Henri. ISBN 1-84013-658-8 Bookfinder – Toulouse Lautrec  At the age of eight, Henri went to live with his mother in Paris where he drew sketches and caricatures in his exercise workbooks. The family quickly realised that Henri's talent lay in drawing and painting. A friend of his father, Rene Princeteau, visited sometimes to give informal lessons. Some of Henri's early paintings are of horses, a speciality of Princeteau, and a subject Lautrec revisited in his 'Circus Paintings'.princeton.edu
In 1875 Henri returned to Albi because his mother recognised his health problems. He took thermal baths at Amélie-les-Bains and his mother consulted doctors in the hope of finding a way to improve her son's growth and development.

Disability and health problems

Henri's parents, the Comte and Comtesse, were first cousins (Henri's two grandmothers were sisters) and Henri suffered from congenital health conditions sometimes attributed to a family history of inbreeding., Natanson, T., & Frankfurter, A. M. (1950). Toulouse-Lautrec: the man. N.p. p. 120. 
At the age of 13 Henri fractured his right thigh bone and, at 14, the left. He is reported to have had hypertrophied genitals. Excerpted from Google Book Search. Books.com
Physically unable to participate in many activities typically enjoyed by men of his age, Toulouse-Lautrec immersed himself in art. He became an important Post-Impressionist painter, art nouveau illustrator, and lithographer, and recorded in his works many details of the late-19th-century bohemian lifestyle in Paris. Toulouse-Lautrec contributed a number of illustrations to the magazine Le Rire during the mid-1890s.
After failing college entrance exams, Henri passed at his second attempt and completed his studies. During a stay in Nice his progress in painting and drawing impressed Princeteau, who persuaded his parents to let him return to Paris and study under the acclaimed portrait painter Léon Bonnat. Henri's mother had high ambitions and, with the aim of Henri becoming a fashionable and respected painter, used the family influence to get him into Bonnat's studio.

Paris

Toulouse-Lautrec was drawn to Montmartre, the area of Paris famous for its bohemian lifestyle and the haunt of artists, writers, and philosophers. Studying with Bonnat placed Henri in the heart of Montmartre, an area he rarely left over the next 20 years. After Bonnat took a new job, Henri moved to the studio of Fernand Cormon in 1882 and studied for a further five years and established the group of friends he kept for the rest of his life. At this time he met Émile Bernard and Van Gogh. Cormon, whose instruction was more relaxed than Bonnat's, allowed his pupils to roam Paris, looking for subjects to paint. In this period Toulouse-Lautrec had his first encounter with a prostitute (reputedly sponsored by his friends), which led him to paint his first painting of prostitutes in Montmartre, a woman rumoured to be called Marie-Charlet.
With his studies finished, in 1887 he participated in an exposition in Toulouse using the pseudonym "Tréclau", an anagram of the family name 'Lautrec'. He later exhibited in Paris with Van Gogh and Louis Anquetin. The Belgian critic Octave Maus invited him to present eleven pieces at the Vingt (the Twenties) exhibition in Brussels in February. Vincent van Gogh's brother, Theo bought 'Poudre de Riz' (Rice Powder) for 150 francs for the Goupil & Cie gallery.
From 1889 until 1894, Henri took part in the "Independent Artists' Salon" on a regular basis. He made several landscapes of Montmartre. At this time the 'Moulin Rouge' opened. Tucked deep into Montmartre was the garden of Monsieur Pere Foret, where Toulouse-Lautrec executed a series of pleasant plein-air paintings of Carmen Gaudin, the same red-head model who appears in The Laundress (1888). When the Moulin Rouge cabaret opened, Toulouse-Lautrec was commissioned to produce a series of posters. His mother had left Paris and, though Henri had a regular income from his family, making posters offered him a living of his own. Other artists looked down on the work, but Henri was so aristocratic he did not care. Among the well-known works that he painted for the Moulin Rouge and other Parisian nightclubs are depictions of the singer Yvette Guilbert; the dancer Louise Weber, known as the outrageous La Goulue ("The Glutton"), who created the "French Can-Can"; and the much more subtle dancer Jane Avril.

London

Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec's family were Anglophiles. Though not as fluent as he pretended to be, he spoke English well enough to travel to London. Making posters in London led him to making the 'Confetti' poster,Confetti – San Diego Museum Of Art
While in London he met and befriended Oscar Wilde. When Wilde faced imprisonment in Britain, Henri was a very vocal supporter of Wilde. Toulouse-Lautrec's portrait of Wilde was painted the same year as Wilde's trial.

Alcoholism

Lautrec was mocked for his short stature and physical appearance, which led him to drown his sorrows in alcohol.info biography  At first this was beer and wine, but his tastes expanded. He was one of the notable Parisians who enjoyed American-style cocktails, France being a nation of wine purists. He had parties at his house on Friday nights and forced his guests to try them. The invention of the cocktail "Earthquake" or Tremblement de Terre is attributed to Toulouse-Lautrec: a potent mixture containing half absinthe and half cognac (in a wine goblet, 3 parts Absinthe and 3 parts Cognac, sometimes served with ice cubes or shaken in a cocktail shaker filled with ice).
In 1893 Lautrec's alcoholism began to take its toll, and as those around him realized the seriousness of his condition there were rumours of a syphilis infection. He even had a cane that hid alcohol so that a drink was always available.

Death

An alcoholic for most of his adult life, Toulouse-Lautrec was placed in a sanatorium shortly before his death. He died from complications due to alcoholism and syphilis at the family estate in Malromé at the age of 36. He is buried in Verdelais, Gironde, a few kilometres from the Château Malromé, where he died.
Toulouse-Lautrec's last words reportedly were: "Le vieux con!" ("The old fool!", although the word "con" can be meant in both simple and vulgar terms
After Toulouse-Lautrec's death, his mother, the Comtesse Adèle Toulouse-Lautrec, and Maurice Joyant, his art dealer, promoted his art. His mother contributed funds for a museum to be created in Albi, his birthplace, to house his works. The Toulouse-Lautrec Museum owns the world's largest collection of works by the painter.

Art

Throughout his career, which spanned less than 20 years, Toulouse-Lautrec created 737 canvases, 275 watercolours, 363 prints and posters, 5,084 drawings, some ceramic and stained glass work, and an unknown number of lost works. His debt to the Impressionists, in particular the more figurative painters Manet and Degas, is apparent. His style was influenced by the classical Japanese woodprints which became popular in art circles in Paris. In his works can be seen parallels to Manet's detached barmaid at A Bar at the Folies-Bergère and the behind-the-scenes ballet dancers of Degas. He excelled at capturing people in their working environment, with the colour and the movement of the gaudy night-life present but the glamour stripped away. He was masterly at capturing crowd scenes in which the figures are highly individualized. At the time that they were painted, the individual figures in his larger paintings could be identified by silhouette alone, and the names of many of these characters have been recorded. His treatment of his subject matter, whether as portraits, scenes of Parisian night-life, or intimate studies, has been described as both sympathetic and dispassionate.
Toulouse-Lautrec's skilled depiction of people relied on his painterly style which is highly linear and gives great emphasis to contour. He often applied the paint in long, thin brushstrokes which would often leave much of the board on which they are painted showing through. Many of his works may best be described as drawings in coloured paint.

Selected works

Paintings

File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 056.jpg|Portrait of Vincent van Gogh (1887), Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam
File:Lautrec equestrienne (at the cirque fernando) 1887-8.jpg|Equestrienne (At the Circus Fernando) (1888)
File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 018.jpg|The Laundress (1889)
File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 025.jpg|Ball at the Moulin de la Galette (1889)
File:Lautrec gabrielle 1891.jpg|Portrait of Gabrielle  (1891)
File:Toulouse-Lautrec - La Goulue arrivant au Moulin Rouge.jpg|La Goulue arriving at the Moulin Rouge (1892)
File:Lautrec at the moulin rouge two women waltzing 1892.jpg|At the Moulin Rouge: Two Women Waltzing (1892)
File:Quadrille at the Moulin Rouge.JPG|Quadrille at the Moulin Rouge (1892)
File:Lautrec woman with a black feather boa c1892. 1892)
File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec Jane Avril.jpg|Jane Avril (1892)
File:Lautrec jane avril dancing 1892.jpg|Jane Avril Dancing (1892)
File:Lautrec in bed 1893.jpg|In Bed (1893)
File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 012.jpg|Salon at the Rue des Moulins (1894)
File:Lautrec rue des moulins, the medical inspection 1894.jpg|The Medical Inspection at the Rue des Moulins Brothel (1894)
File:Toulouse-Lautrec Prostitutes DMA.jpg|Femmes de Maison  (1893)
File:Lautrec le coucher (mme poupoule in chemise by her bed) 1899.jpg|Le Coucher (1899)

Prints

File:Brooklyn Museum - Woman at the Tub from the Portfolio Elles (Femme au Tub ) - Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec.jpg|Woman at the Tub from the Portfolio Elles (Femme au Tub ) (1896)

Posters

File:Lautrec moulin rouge, la goulue (poster) 1891.jpg|Moulin Rouge: La Goulue (1891)
File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 003.jpg|Aristide Bruant in his cabaret (1892)
File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 002.jpg|Ambassadeurs – Aristide Bruant (1892)
File:Lautrec reine de joie (poster) 1892.jpg|Reine de Joie (1892)
File:Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec 019.jpg|Divan Japonais (1892-1893)
File:Jane Avril by Toulouse-Lautrec.jpeg|Avril (Jane Avril) (1893)
File:Lautrec the photographer sescau (poster) 1894.jpg|The Photographer Sescau (1894)
File:Lautrec babylone d'allemagne (poster for 'the german babylon') 1894.jpg|The German Babylon (1894)

Photos

File:Guibert 2. Toulouse paints Mr. Lautrec (ca. 1891)
File:Guibert 3.jpg|Photo taken by Maurice Guibert (1892)
File:Guibert 4.jpg| 
File:Guibert 5. 1887)

Signature

Image:Toulouse-Lautrec monogram.

In popular culture

Toulouse-Lautrec has been the subject of a few biographical films and has been portrayed briefly in others:
Stage productions:
Books:
Others:



Further reading




