[[Static random-access memory]]

CATEGORIES: Types of RAM

Static random-access memory (SRAM or static RAM) is a type of semiconductor memory that uses bistable latching circuitry to store each bit.  The term static differentiates it from dynamic RAM (DRAM) which must be periodically refreshed.  SRAM exhibits data remanence, but it is still volatile in the conventional sense that data is eventually lost when the memory is not powered.

Applications and uses

Characteristics

=Clock rate and power=

The power consumption of SRAM varies widely depending on how frequently it is accessed; it can be as power-hungry as dynamic RAM, when used at high frequencies, and some ICs can consume many watts at full bandwidth. On the other hand, static RAM used at a somewhat slower pace, such as in applications with moderately clocked microprocessors, draws very little power and can have a nearly negligible power consumption when sitting idle in the region of a few micro-watts.
Static RAM exists primarily as:

=Embedded use=

SRAM in its dual-ported form is sometimes used for realtime digital signal processing circuits.

=In computers=

SRAM is also used in personal computers, workstations, routers and peripheral equipment: CPU register files, internal CPU caches and external burst mode SRAM caches, hard disk buffers, router buffers, etc. LCD screens and printers also normally employ static RAM to hold the image displayed (or to be printed).

=Hobbyists=

Hobbyists, specifically homebuilt processor enthusiasts,

Types of SRAM

Non-volatile SRAM

Non-volatile SRAMs, or nvSRAMs, have standard SRAM functionality, but they save the data when the power supply is lost, ensuring preservation of critical information. nvSRAMs are used in a wide range of situations—networking, aerospace, and medical, among many others —where the preservation of data is critical and where batteries are impractical.

Asynchronous SRAM

Asynchronous SRAM are available from 4 Kb to 64 Mb. The fast access time of SRAM makes asynchronous SRAM appropriate as main memory for small cache-less embedded processors used in everything from industrial electronics and measurement systems to hard disks and networking equipment, among many other applications. They are used in various applications like switches and routers, IP-Phones, IC-Testers, DSLAM Cards, to Automotive Electronics.

By transistor type

By function

By feature

By flip-flop type

Design

A typical SRAM cell is made up of six MOSFETs.
Each bit in an SRAM is stored on four transistors (M1, M2, M3, M4) that form two cross-coupled inverters. This storage cell has two stable states which are used to denote 0 and 1. Two additional access transistors serve to control the access to a storage cell during read and write operations.
In addition to such six-transistor (6T) SRAM, other kinds of SRAM chips use 4, 8, 10 (4T, 8T, 10T SRAM), or more transistors per bit.A 160 mV Robust Schmitt Trigger Based Subthreshold SRAMUnited States Patent 6975532: Quasi-static random access memory Four-transistor SRAM is quite common in stand-alone SRAM devices (as opposed to SRAM used for CPU caches), implemented in special processes with an extra layer of polysilicon, allowing for very high-resistance pull-up resistors.  The principal drawback of using 4T SRAM is increased static power due to the constant current flow through one of the pull-down transistors. 
This is sometimes used to implement more than one (read and/or write) port, which may be useful in certain types of video memory and register files implemented with multi-ported SRAM circuitry.
Generally, the fewer transistors needed per cell, the smaller each cell can be. Since the cost of processing a silicon wafer is relatively fixed, using smaller cells and so packing more bits on one wafer reduces the cost per bit of memory.
Memory cells that use fewer than four transistors are possible but, such 3TUnited States Patent 6975531: 6F2 3-transistor DRAM gain cell3T-iRAM(r) Technology or 1T cells are DRAM, not SRAM (even the so-called 1T-SRAM).
Access to the cell is enabled by the word line (WL in figure) which controls the two access transistors M5 and M6 which, in turn, control whether the cell should be connected to the bit lines: BL and BL. They are used to transfer data for both read and write operations. Although it is not strictly necessary to have two bit lines, both the signal and its inverse are typically provided in order to improve noise margins.
During read accesses, the bit lines are actively driven high and low by the inverters in the SRAM cell. This improves SRAM bandwidth compared to DRAMs in a DRAM, the bit line is connected to storage capacitors and charge sharing causes the bitline to swing upwards or downwards. The symmetric structure of SRAMs also allows for differential signaling, which makes small voltage swings more easily detectable. Another difference with DRAM that contributes to making SRAM faster is that commercial chips accept all address bits at a time. By comparison, commodity DRAMs have the address multiplexed in two halves, i.e. higher bits followed by lower bits, over the same package pins in order to keep their size and cost down.
The size of an SRAM with m address lines and n data lines is 2m words, or 2m × n bits.  The most common word size is 8 bits, meaning that a single byte can be read or written to each of 2m different words within the SRAM chip.  Several common SRAM chips have 11 address lines (thus a capacity of 2m = 2,048 = 2k words) and an 8-bit word, so they are referred to as "2k × 8 SRAM".

SRAM operation

An SRAM cell has three different states. It can be in: standby (the circuit is idle), reading (the data has been requested) and writing (updating the contents). The SRAM to operate in read mode and write mode should  have "readability"  and "write stability" respectively. The three different states work as follows:

Bus behavior

RAM with an access time of 70 ns will output valid data within 70 ns from the time that the address lines are valid. But the data will remain for a hold time as well (5–10 ns). Rise and fall times also influence valid timeslots with approximately 5 ns. By reading the lower part of an address range bits in sequence (page cycle) one can read with significantly shorter access time (30 ns). 070731 toshiba.com






