[[Episode 29 (Twin Peaks)]]

CATEGORIES: 1991 television episodes, Television series finales, Twin Peaks (season 2) episodes, Screenplays by Mark Frost

"Episode 29", also known as "Beyond Life and Death", is the twenty-second and final episode of the second season of the American mystery television series Twin Peaks. It was also the second hour of the two-part series finale. The episode was written by the series co-creator Mark Frost, producer Harley Peyton and regular writer Robert Engels and was directed by series co-creator David Lynch, who also allegedly rewrote parts of the script.com/twin-peaks-episode-29-beyond-life-and-death-review/ It features series regulars Kyle MacLachlan, Michael Ontkean, Richard Beymer and Kenneth Welsh; and guest stars Frank Silva as Killer BOB, Michael J. Anderson as The Man from Another Place, Carel Struycken as The Giant, and Heather Graham as Annie Blackburn.
Twin Peaks centers on the investigation into the murder of schoolgirl Laura Palmer (Sheryl Lee) in the small rural town in Washington state after which the series is named. In this episode, after the kidnap of Annie Blackburn, Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) Special Agent Dale Cooper (MacLachlan) and Sheriff Truman (Ontkean) follow Windom Earle (Welsh) to the entrance of The Black Lodge—an evil place which exists on an alternate plane of reality. Upon entering, Cooper encounters tests of courage from Killer BOB, The Man from Another Place, Earle and a number of doppelgängers.
"Episode 29" was broadcast on June 10, 1991 on the American Broadcasting Company (ABC) and was watched by an audience of 10.4 million households in the United States, about 12 percent of the available audience. The episode was well received and has been the subject of vast critical and academic commentary. Several of the episode's cliffhangers were expanded upon in Lynch's 1992 prequel film, Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me.

Plot

Andy and Lucy console one other after the chaos of the Miss Twin Peaks Pageant, where Annie was kidnapped by Windom Earle. Cooper, Harry, and Hawk contemplate the chalkboard map, as Cooper says quietly, "Fire walk with me." Pete Martell enters the police station exclaiming, "Grand theft auto!" and says the Log Lady stole his truck and drove off toward the woods. There were "..." Truman recalls a circle of twelve sycamore trees in the woods: Glastonbury Grove, where Hawk found the ripped pages from Laura's diary. The Log Lady arrives carrying a jar of black oil given to her by her husband before his death. Cooper informs Pete that Windom Earle stole his truck. The Log Lady says, "This oil is an opening to a gateway." The oil smells like scorched engine oil. Hawk brings in Ronnette Pulaski, who recognizes the odor from the night of Laura Palmer's death.
Windom arrives in a dark, wooded grove with Annie, who is quietly reciting Psalm 141. A ghostly red curtain appears behind the pool. They pass through the curtain and vanish.
At the Hurley house, Ed, Norma, and Doc Hayward bandage Nadine Hurley and Mike Nelson's injuries. Nadine suddenly regains her memory, and is horrified to see Ed with Norma. She hollers about the missing drape runners and bursts into tears. Mike apologies to Ed for letting his affair with Nadine "get out of hand."
At the Hayward house, Donna is distraught, having learned that Benjamin Horne is her blood father. Ben and Donna's mother try to console her. Doc Hayward arrives and orders Ben to leave. Ben's wife arrives and becomes angry with him. An enraged Doc Hayward attacks Ben. Ben slams his head on the fireplace and collapses, twitching and bloodied.
At the Blue Pine Lodge, Andrew steals the safe deposit box key from the pie plate and sneaks off, though Pete sees him.
Cooper and Harry find Pete's truck in the woods. They walk deeper into the forest. Eventually Cooper says he must continue alone and leaves Harry behind. Cooper hears an owl, then sees the pool of oil in the circle of trees. Harry watches from a distance as Cooper enters the circle and passes through a red curtain which materializes behind the pool. The curtain glows for a moment then disappears, along with Cooper.
Cooper walks through a red-curtained hallway, in which there is a statue of the Venus de Milo. He passes through another curtain and finds himself in the Red Room from his dream. There are velvet chairs, a zig-zag pattern on the floor, and an anatomically complete statue of the Venus de Milo. The red-suited, backwards-talking Man from Another Place dances into the room and sits in a velvet chair. A strobe light flickers as Jimmy Scott croons a plaintive jazz ballad, "Under the Sycamore Trees."
Andy arrives in the forest and joins Harry. Ten hours pass, and morning arrives, but Cooper has not returned. Andy asks Harry if he wants some food.
Meanwhile, Audrey walks into the Twin Peaks Savings & Loan bank and chains herself to the bank vault, in protest of the Ghostwood project and its environmental effect on the forest weasel. The old, senile, and slow-moving bank president, Dell Mibbler, fetches Audrey a glass of water, but is slow to understand what Audrey is doing. Just then, Andrew and Pete arrive with the safe deposit key, intending to open the box left by Thomas Eckhart. Andrew asks the bank president for help in identifying the proper box in the bank vault. The elderly bank president walks away as Andrew opens the box to find a bomb, which is triggered by the safe deposit box opening. Along with the bomb is a taunting note reading: "Got you, Andrew! Love, Thomas." It explodes, blowing out the bank windows. The clerk's glasses and some money fall on a nearby pine branch.
At the RR diner, Bobby and Shelly smile at each other. Bobby proposes marriage to Shelly, while she asks to think about it considering she is still married to Leo, who at that moment is still holding out in Windom Earle's spider trap. Nearby, Major Briggs and his wife are at a table, happy to be back together. Dr. Jacoby arrives with a dazed Sarah Palmer who delivers a message to Major Briggs in the distorted reversed speech of the Black Lodge: "I'm in the Black Lodge with Dale Cooper. I'm waiting....."
In the Black Lodge, the Man from Another Place tells Cooper, "This is the waiting room," and offers Cooper some coffee. The Man from Another Place tells Cooper, "When you see me again, it won't be me." Laura Palmer appears, saying, "I will see you again in 25 years." She makes a strange pose, says, "Meanwhile," and then is gone. The elderly, senile bellhop appears and brings Cooper a cup of coffee, repeating, "Coffee!" over and over again. He places the cup beside Cooper and is replaced by the Giant, who sits down and says, "One and the same." The Man from Another Place rubs his hands together, and a ringing tone is heard. Cooper attempts to sip the coffee, only to find it frozen solid. He tips the cup forward, and some of the coffee spills out. He tips it again, and now it is thick as syrup. The Man from Another Place says, "Wow, BOB, wow."
The Man from Another Place says, "Fire walk with me." A massive explosion of flames is seen briefly, and then the waiting room turns dark with strobes. Cooper leaves the room, entering another room that looks exactly the same. He returns to the first room, where The Man from Another Place says, "Wrong way." Cooper goes back to the second room and finds The Man from Another Place twitching and laughing maniacally, saying, "Another friend." Maddy appears and warns, "Watch out for my cousin," then disappears.
Cooper returns to the first room to find it completely empty. The Man from Another Place appears, his eyes white cataracts, grimacing and twitching, and says, "doppelganger." An evil Laura doppelganger appears, her eyes cataracts, holding the same pose as before. She menaces, "Meanwhile," then shrieks and charges towards Cooper. Cooper briefly sees the face of Windom Earle over Laura's face and flees the room in fright. Now in the prior room, he has left a trail of blood on the floor from a stab wound in his stomach. He stumbles back to the first room, and sees a woman lying on the floor beside his own body. The woman is Annie, wearing a floral dress bloodied by a chest wound. She sits up, dazed and wide-eyed. The pair of bodies disappears, and then the room turns dark with strobes.
A little later, Cooper walks into a room with a shrine-like table, and Annie appears. She says, "Dale. I saw the face of the man who killed me. It was my husband." Cooper calls her name, but she seems confused. "Who's Annie? It's me." Annie turns into Caroline, wearing the same floral dress. Caroline is replaced by doppelganger Laura, who again shrieks, and then turns into Windom Earle. Annie in her black pageant dress watches as Windom and Cooper face off, and then disappears. Windom cackles, and says if Cooper gives him his soul, he will let Annie live. Cooper says confidently, "I will," and Windom Earle stabs Cooper in the stomach (into his heart). Cooper falls, and then there is another burst of flames. Cooper's stabbing is reversed as we hear BOB screaming. BOB appears, holding a screaming Windom Earle, who is frozen like a puppet. BOB screams at Windom, "Be quiet!" BOB speaks to Cooper, "He cannot ask for your soul. I will take his." Windom screams as a jet of flame shoots from the top of his head and into BOB's hand. Windom faces down, ashen, silent, still. Cooper leaves the room as BOB cackles. A doppelganger of Cooper appears from behind the curtain and joins BOB. The two cackle together.
The doppelganger Leland Palmer, with partially greying brown hair, appears in the hall between the two rooms and says to Cooper, "I did not kill anybody." The doppelganger Cooper comes into the hall and snickers with Leland. He faces the camera and grins, pursuing the real Cooper. Cooper begins to run, but he is caught by his doppelganger just before he can escape The Black Lodge. BOB's face briefly appears, laughing into the camera.
It is nightfall again in the woods. The gateway to the Black Lodge glows red for a moment and disappears. Harry finds Cooper and Annie lying in the circle of trees. Annie's face is bloodied.
Cooper wakes up in his bed at the Great Northern Hotel. Cooper asks about Annie, and Harry tells him that Annie is at the hospital and will be all right. Cooper gets up out of bed and tells Harry and Doc Hayward that he needs to brush his teeth. Once in the bathroom, he begins to put toothpaste on a brush, but then squeezes the tube's contents into the sink. He slowly raises his head, looks into the mirror, and smashes his head into it, shattering it. BOB's face appears in the mirror. As Harry and Doc knock on the door in concern, blood drips from Cooper's head. In a sadistic, mocking voice, Cooper repeats, "How's Annie?" and laughs psychotically.webomatica.com/wordpress/2008/10/30/twin-peaks-beyond-life-and-death/

Production

The officially credited writers for this episode are Mark Frost, Harley Peyton, and Robert Engels. However, David Lynch revised their script significantly sans credit; he maintained the episode's general structure but altered much of the dialogue and many scenes, most notably in the Red Room/Black Lodge sequences, making them more akin to the dream sequences in the first season. Lynch also expanded the cast, bringing back some characters who had not been seen in the series for some time, including The Log Lady, Ronette Pulaski, and all four members of the Palmer family.
James Marshall, Joan Chen and Piper Laurie do not appear in this episode. Ray Wise returns to the regular cast.
In an interview with Chris Rodley, Lynch said that the last episode "was written, but when it came to the Red Room, it was, in my opinion, completely and totally wrong. Completely and totally wrong. And so I changed that part. A lot of the other parts were things that had been started and were on a certain route, so they had to continue. But you can still direct them in a certain way. But I really like that last episode."David Lynch, cited in Lynch on Lynch (Revised Edition) , edited by Chris Rodley. (2005, Faber and Faber), p.182
The major differences between the episode as originally scripted and as actually filmed are as follows:

Notes



Footnotes

Bibliography




