[[Filip Kiss]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 births, Living people, People from Dunajská Streda, Slovak footballers, Association football midfielders, FK Inter Bratislava players, MFK Petržalka players, ŠK Slovan Bratislava players, Cardiff City F.C. players, Slovak First League players, The Football League players, Hungarians in Slovakia, Slovak expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Wales, Ross County F.C. players, Scottish Professional Football League players, Slovak people of Hungarian descent

Filip Kiss (; born 13 October 1990) is a Slovak footballer who plays for Ross County on loan from Premier League club Cardiff City as a midfielder. In his brief career, Kiss has earned a reputation as a tough tackling midfielder who is both physical and aggressive.

Career

Kiss started his professional career at Inter Bratislava in 2008, before moving to Petržalka the following year where he made 23 league appearances. He again moved in 2010 to ŠK Slovan Bratislava.

Cardiff City

On 21 July 2011, Kiss joined Welsh club Cardiff City, who play in the Championship, on a season long loan.
His first start for the Bluebirds was against Yeovil Town and the following day he was given the number 4 shirt for the season.
Kiss's first game as a permanent Cardiff player, came on 17 August 2012, against Huddersfield Town where he came on as a substitute for Jordon Mutch. He played 100th professional game on 5 January 2013, in the FA Cup against Macclesfield Town. Kiss's game-time for the first team was limited in 2012–13, as the Club won the Championship, though the midfielder was a regular in the club's development squad.

Ross County

On 8 January 2014, Kiss signed for Scottish Premiership side Ross County on loan until the end of the season.

International career

Kiss has represented both Slovakia U-19 and Slovakia U-21. He had a spell as the captain of the Under-21 team.

Personal life

Kiss belongs to the Hungarian minority in Slovakia.

Career statistics

:Last updated: 5 January 2013

Honours








