[[Wirginia Maixner]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, Australian surgeons, Neurosurgeons, People from Victoria (Australia), Sydney Medical School alumni

Wirginia June Maixner (born 28 June 1963) is an Australian neurosurgeon and the director of neurosurgery at the Royal Children's Hospital in Melbourne, Australia. She is known for having performed the first auditory brainstem implant on a child in Australia in 2007, and later having separated the conjoined twins, Trishna and Krishna in 2009.

Early life

Maixner grew up on Sydney's northern beaches. Her father was a window dresser and her mother, a public servant. Inspired by her aunt who was Australia's first female flying doctor, she pursued a career in medicine and surgery.

Early life and education

Maixner attended Sancta Sophia College, University of Sydney,News and Events, Sancta Sophia College, November 2009 and in 1986 graduated from the University of Sydney's School of Medicine with a Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery.

Surgical training

She became the third woman accepted into the Royal Australasian College of Surgeons four-year neurosurgery training program. In the early 1990s, while half-way through her training, she became pregnant with her daughter. She remained in the program and became the first person to be granted maternity leave by the Australian Royal College of Surgeons. Maixner went on to complete her training as a single parent and later spent two years in Paris and Canada gaining international hospital experience.

Career

Maixner was appointed to the position of Director of the Royal Children's Hospital Neurosurgery Department in 2001, becoming one of the youngest neurosurgery department heads in Australia and the first female head of neurosurgery at the Children's Hospital.
From October 2001 until July 2004 Maixner served on the Victorian Surgical Consultative Council,Rush, Jonathan (Editor),  Victorian Surgical Consultative Council Inaugural Report, 2001-2004, Victorian Surgical Consultative Council, 2004  a special purpose council established in 2001 by the then-Minister of Health, John Thwaites, which reports to the Minister for Health and analyses, studies and reports on potentially preventable surgical deaths in Victoria, with the aim of improving the safety and quality of surgery in Victoria.The Victorian Surgical Consultative Council, Victorian State Government, Department of Health, 27 August 2009

Achievements

In 2006, Maixner was credited with performing "ground-breaking" surgery when she operated on a three-year-old girl to successfully stop seizures caused by a rare genetic condition. Maixner told media at the time that the surgery was of the same complexity as open-heart surgery.
On 16 May 2007, Maixner worked with Rob Briggs, the medical director at the Royal Victorian Eye and Ear Hospital's Cochlear Implant Clinic and using "pioneering technology" they performed the first auditory brainstem implant on a child in Australasia. At the time, the surgery was hailed as an advancement that "could pave the way for revolutionary advances in medicine".
Between 30–31 August 2009, Maixner presented at the XIV World Congress of Neurological Surgery in Boston, Massachusetts as a faculty member of the "Pediatric Neurosurgery: An Overview with Sub-specialty Applications" program and as a panelist on the "Chiari Type I Malformation in Children" discussion panel.
On 16 and 17 November 2009, Maixner led a team of 16 neurosurgeons, plastic surgeons, and other specialist medical staff at the Royal Children's Hospital in the 32-hour "groundbreaking surgery" to successfully separate three-year-old Bangladeshi conjoined twins, Trishna and Krishna.
On 26 November 2009, Maixner and other members of the medical and surgical team who cared for Trishna and Krishna were honoured with a civic reception hosted at Government House in Melbourne by Governor of Victoria, David de Kretser and Premier John Brumby.
Maixner and fellow Royal Children's Hospital neurosurgeon Alison Wray began sitting for Australian artist Raelene Sharp in December 2009. Sharpe's portrait of the surgeons will be submitted to the Australian portrait competition, the Archibald Prize. The competition will be judged in March 2010 and carries a A$50,000 prize.

Publications




