[[East Jordan Iron Works]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Michigan, Companies established in 1883, Ironworks and steel mills in the United States, Charlevoix County, Michigan, Industrial buildings and structures in Michigan

EJ, also known as East Jordan Iron Works, or EJIW is a company based in  East Jordan, Michigan. The company is a manufacturer and distributor of iron construction castings and infrastructure access products worldwide. In 2007 the company was awarded the National Utility Contractors Association Associate of the year award.

History

EJ was founded in East Jordan, Michigan in 1883. The company was established in November 1883 by William Malpass and his father-in-law, Richard W. Round, to service the logging industry in East Jordan and around Northern Michigan. In the early years of operation, EJ manufactured castings for necessities such as machine parts, ship parts, agricultural uses, and railroads.
In the 1920s lumbering operations began to decrease, after the advent of the Great Depression. By World War II lumbering had moved out of the area, and EJ then shifted their large-scale production to street castings, water works valves, and fire hydrants as well as war materials needed for the war effort such as tank parts.
EJ owns and operates four foundries, with locations in East Jordan (Michigan), Ardmore (Oklahoma), Birr (Ireland), and Picardie (France). The Ardmore location was built in 2000 and opened for operation in 2001. EJ also owns and operates sales offices and distribution centers, as well as fabricated product facilities.
EJ now supplies products to infrastructure projects in over 140 countries across the world.

Sales and Products

Over the past century EJ has grown. EJ sales offices are strategically located across the country to serve major metropolitan markets. The main manufacturing facility, corporate headquarters and Hydrant & Valve assembly lines are still located in East Jordan, Michigan. The foundry production facility in Ardmore, Oklahoma also provides numerous castings for EJ sales operations throughout the United States and the world.
EJ is a producer and supplier of construction castings to hundreds of U.S. cities, townships, counties, and states. The EJ product line includes manhole frames and manhole covers, utility castings for the telecommunications industry, trench grates, tree grates, detectable warning plates, airport and design specific castings, monument boxes, meter boxes, valve boxes, drainage grates, curb inlets, and catch basins. EJ construction castings can be found in major metropolitan areas, as well as world-wide.
EJ offers fabricated products. These products include steel riser rings which minimize traffic disruption, the INFRA-RISER which is multi-purpose rubber composite adjustments riser that prevents infiltration, prolongs structure life, reduces traffic vibration damage, and is environmentally friendly. EJ manufactures iron, aluminum, and steel access hatch doors which provide easy and secure access to subsurface installations.

Environmental Stewardship

EJ complies with regulations set forth both by the government and environmental groups/agencies, from the design, to the manufacturing of the product. To participate in environmental conservation EJ makes use of the by-products from the melt process (slag), and is promoting the natural patina of iron in the place of paint. These efforts allowed for EJ to be named Charlevoix County's Recycler of The Year.
In 2012, EJ was awarded the Emmet County Recycling's Recycler of the Year Award. EJ products can help building customers earn LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) Credit Achievement points, which help to promote green building.
Many of the worldwide facilities operate environmental management systems that are certified to the standards set down in the international standard ISO14001.

Capabilities

Reinvestment in production facilities has allowed for EJ to become a leader in the construction products industry.
3-D solid modeling software assists in the development of casting designs and gives a complete idea of how completed products will look and perform.
At the East Jordan location a cupola furnace is used in the melt process. The mold lines in East Jordan which are used to create the castings include; an automated green sand molding line, a no bake molding line, and a Heinrich Wagner Sinto (HWS) molding line which was installed in 2009 and is capable of producing molds up to 76" long by 60" wide. The Ardmore location uses an electric induction process to melt iron, and houses a mold line that accommodates molds up to 48" long by 48" wide.
Testing occurs during the production process to allow for the production of quality products.
EJ keeps a large inventory of infrastructure access solutions to accommodate for immediate deliveries. Through distribution centers, branch office locations and network of distributors, EJ provides a line of construction and utility castings to contractors and municipalities nationwide.
Central Distribution Centers of EJ include Sunfield, Michigan and Ardmore, Oklahoma. EJ offices are located in markets throughout North America.






