[[WABC-TV]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 establishments in New York, ABC network affiliates, Live Well Network affiliates, Channel 7 digital TV stations in the United States, Channel 7 virtual TV stations in the United States, Companies based in Manhattan, Disney television stations, Major League Baseball over-the-air television broadcasters, Television channels and stations established in 1948, Television stations in New York City, Upper West Side, Television stations in New York, Television stations in New Jersey, Television stations in Connecticut, Television stations in Pennsylvania

WABC-TV, channel 7, is the flagship station of the ABC television network, located in New York City. WABC-TV is owned by the Disney-ABC Television Group division of the Walt Disney Company. The station's studios and offices are located near Lincoln Square on the Upper West Side of Manhattan, adjacent to ABC's corporate headquarters, and its transmitter is atop the Empire State Building.
WABC-TV is best known in broadcasting circles for its highly successful version of the Eyewitness News format and for its morning show Live! with Kelly and Michael, syndicated nationally by corporate cousin Disney-ABC Domestic Television.
In the few areas of the eastern United States where an ABC station is not receivable over-the-air, WABC is available on satellite via DirecTV (which also provides coverage of the station to Latin American countries and through major U.S. air carriers on LiveTV inflight entertainment system) and Dish Network (which carries the station as part of All American Direct's distant network package).

History

The station signed on August 10, 1948, as WJZ-TV,"WJZ-TV starts; elaborate inaugural program." Broadcasting - Telecasting, August 16, 1948, pg. 23.  Channel 7's call letters came from its then-sister radio station, WJZ (770 AM, now WABC). In its early years, WJZ-TV was programmed much like an independent station, as the ABC television network was still, for the most part, in its very early stages of development; the ABC-owned stations did air some common programming during this period, especially after the 1949 fall season when the network's prime time schedule began to expand. The station's original transmitter site was atop The Pierre Hotel at 2 E. 61st Street, before moving to the Empire State Building a few years later. The station's original studios were located at 77 West 66th Street, with studios at 7 West 66th Street. An underground tunnel linked ABC studios at 7 West 66th Street to the lobby of the Hotel des Artistes, a block north on West 67th Street. Another studio inside the Hotel des Artistes was used for Eyewitness News Conference.
The station's call letters were changed to WABC-TV on March 1, 1953,"It's now WABC-AM-FM-TV; ABC also changes slides." Broadcasting - Telecasting, March 2, 1953, pg. 70.  Broadcasting - Telecasting, March 2, 1953, pg. 37.  government."Ambitious ABC planning initiated under new merged ownership." Broadcasting - Telecasting, February 16, 1953, pp. 27-29. 
As part of ABC's expansion program, initiated in 1977, ABC built 7 Lincoln Square on the southeast corner of West 67th Street and Columbus Avenue, on a site of an abandoned moving and storage warehouse. At about the same time, construction was started at 30 West 67th Street, on the site of a former parking lot. Both buildings were completed in June 1979 and WABC-TV moved its offices from 77 West 66th Street to 7 Lincoln Square.
On September 11, 2001, the transmitter facilities of WABC-TV, as well as eight other local television stations and several radio stations, were destroyed when two hijacked airplanes crashed into and destroyed the north and south towers of the World Trade Center. Transmitter maintenance engineer Donald DiFranco died in the attack. In the immediate aftermath, the station fed its signal to several UHF stations that were still broadcasting (notably WNYE-TV), before establishing temporary facilities at the Armstrong Tower in Alpine, New Jersey. The station eventually established transmission facilities at the Empire State Building.
On May 27, 2007, WABC's studios suffered major damage as the result of a fire that knocked the station off the air shortly before the start of the 11:00 p.m. newscast. According to preliminary reports, the fire may have been ignited by a spotlight coming into contact with a curtain inside the news studio; the station's website later reported the cause as an "electrical malfunction". The station's building was evacuated and the fire was brought under control, though the studio was said to be "badly damaged", WABC-TV resumed broadcasting at around 1:00 a.m. on May 28, 2007 (initially carrying the network's 10 p.m. West Coast feed of Brothers & Sisters, followed by the full broadcast of World News Now). Due to the fire, the station broadcast Eyewitness News from a temporary set in the newsroom, while Live with Regis and Kelly, whose set was also affected, moved to the set of Who Wants to Be a Millionaire. Starting with the 5:00 p.m. newscast on June 20, 2007, the station resumed the Eyewitness News and Live... broadcasts from its main studios at Columbus Avenue and 66th Street.
In May 2013, WABC and Philadelphia sister station WPVI-TV became the first two ABC stations to offer live, web-based streaming of programming to authenticated subscribers of participating cable and satellite television providers, as provided through the relaunched Watch ABC mobile apps.

Cable and satellite carriage

Disputes with Cablevision and Time Warner Cable

=Cablevision=

On March 7, 2010, at 12:02 a.m., WABC's signal was removed from Cablevision's New York area systems (including iO Digital Cable) after failing to reach terms on a new retransmission consent agreement; the station was replaced by either a blank screen or a looping video containing a message from Cablevision about the removal. To avoid interruption of programming, the station urged Cablevision subscribers in the station's viewing area (totaling up to three million subscribers) to switch to other services, such as Verizon FiOS and DirecTV, or simply view the station over the air through an over-the-air digital antenna and, if necessary, a digital converter box, for older television sets.
Later that same day at approximately 8:50 p.m., 20 minutes into ABC's broadcast of the 82nd Annual Academy Awards, Cablevision and ABC reached a deal, restoring WABC and WPVI's signals for Cablevision subscribers after a nearly 21-hour blackout.

=Time Warner Cable=

In July 2010, ABC's parent company Disney announced that it was involved in a carriage dispute with Time Warner Cable, its first with that provider in ten years. This dispute involved four ABC owned-and-operated stations (WABC-TV and sister stations KABC-TV in Los Angeles, WTVD in Durham, North Carolina, and WTVG in Toledo, Ohio), Disney Channel and the ESPN networks. If a deal was not in place, the affected stations and cable channels would have been removed from Time Warner and Bright House Networks systems across the country. On September 2, 2010, Disney and Time Warner Cable reached a long-term agreement to keep the channels on Time Warner Cable systems.

Digital television

Digital channels

The station's digital signal is multiplexed:

Analog-to-digital conversion

WABC-TV discontinued regular programming on its analog signal, over VHF channel 7, at 12:30 p.m. on June 12, 2009, the official date in which full-power television stations in the United States transitioned from analog to digital broadcasts under federal mandate. The station's digital signal relocated from its pre-transition UHF channel 45 to its former analog VHF channel 7.
WABC's digital signal was initially difficult to receive over-the-air in New York City. The station was requested by Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to broadcast at a lower power; WABC was among many stations which have found it necessary to increase power to restore coverage to the same level as its former analog signal. On June 29, 2009, WABC filed an application with the FCC to increase power from 11.69 kW to 27 kW.

News operation

WABC-TV presently broadcasts 39 hours of locally-produced newscasts each week (with six hours on weekdays and 4½ hours each on Saturdays and Sundays). The station cooperates with Philadelphia sister station WPVI-TV – which popularized the Action News format – in the production and broadcast of statewide New Jersey political debates. When the two stations broadcast a statewide office debate, such as for governor or U.S. Senate, they will pool resources and have anchors or reporters from both stations participate in the debate. Additionally, the two stations cooperate in coverage of news from New Jersey where their markets overlap, sharing reporters, live trucks, and helicopters.

Beginning-1999

Compared to the other two New York City network flagship stations, WABC was late to the local news game, entering the field in 1962 with an hour-long 6:00 p.m. newscast called The Big News, with Bill Beutel and Jim Barnes as anchors, Howard Cosell doing sports, and Rosemary Haley as "weather girl". However, this effort failed to draw viewers from ratings leader WCBS-TV and second-place WNBC-TV.
In early 1968, Beutel left the station to become the London bureau chief for ABC News and was replaced by Roger Grimsby, who was hired away from San Francisco's KGO-TV after seven years. In a complete revamp, Grimsby was joined by Tex Antoine doing weather, celebrity gossip columnist Rona Barrett, New York Daily News columnist Jimmy Breslin with political commentary, and reviews by Martin Bookspan and Allan Jeffries, while Howard Cosell continued doing sports. Known as Roger Grimsby and the Newsmakers, this format didn't help the ratings, which plunged to an all-time low.
Later that year, newly hired news director Al Primo brought the Eyewitness News format to WABC-TV, in which reporters present their stories directly to the viewers. Having experienced great success introducing the format during his time at KYW-TV in Philadelphia, Primo this time added a twist – a degree of conversational chatter among the anchors, known as "happy talk." The "Tar Sequence" cue from the musical score of the 1967 film Cool Hand Luke, composed by Lalo Schifrin, was introduced as the theme music. The score included a telegraphic-style melody appropriate for a newscast. The Eyewitness News format and theme music were quickly adopted by ABC's other four owned-and-operated stations at the time – WLS-TV in Chicago, WXYZ-TV in Detroit, KABC-TV in Los Angeles, and KGO-TV in San Francisco (though KGO-TV and WXYZ-TV did not use the Eyewitness News title for their programs). The format quickly rejuvenated a station that had long been an also-ran to WCBS-TV and WNBC-TV. Within a year, channel 7 had shot to first place in the ratings for the first time in its history, displacing longtime leader WCBS-TV. It spent most of the decade going back and forth with WCBS-TV for first place. For a time in the 1980s, it fell into last place, but still fought with WNBC-TV for second place.
Retaining only Grimsby, Cosell, and Antoine from the earlier Newsmakers format, Primo also hired Tom Dunn away from WCBS-TV to serve as Grimsby's co-anchor. After Dunn departed for WOR-TV in 1970, Bill Beutel returned to the station as his replacement, and for the next 16 years, Grimsby and Beutel were the faces of Eyewitness News. The duo were split up for the first ten months of 1975, as ABC had reassigned Beutel to its new morning show AM America. The station brought in WXYZ-TV's Bill Bonds and veteran Boston anchor Tom Ellis to help replace Beutel; both Bonds and Ellis co-anchored at 11 p.m. for a time. When AM America was cancelled and replaced with Good Morning America, Beutel was re-teamed with Grimsby at 6 p.m. and Bonds returned to Detroit. Ellis remained until 1977 and was replaced by Larry Kane, who lasted only one year as sole 11 p.m. anchor. Kane's successor, Ernie Anastos, began his New York career at the station; he co-anchored at 11 p.m. for his entire 12-year tenure there.
In the wake of declining ratings, Grimsby was fired on April 16, 1986, a move for which Applegate drew considerable ire, and Grimsby was quickly hired by rival WNBC-TV. Beutel stepped down from the anchor desk in 2001, two years before his retirement, which concluded the longest tenure for a main anchor in New York City television history, at that time. His record has since been surpassed by WNBC's Chuck Scarborough and WXTV's Rafael Pineda. Scarborough's uninterrupted run behind the desk is second in New York television to Pineda, who started with WXTV in 1972.
In 1985, the station lured WLS-TV's news director, Bill Applegate, from Chicago to New York City. Applegate claimed credit for taking WLS-TV from last to first in only two years, and ABC hoped he could work the same magic at the flagship station. Their hopes were rewarded in 1987 when Channel 7 surged back into first place. It has been the ratings leader in New York City since then, and has grown to become the most watched broadcast television station in the United States.

2000-present

WABC's news department is respected for its straightforward presentation (especially during breaking news). For the last decade, it has waged a spirited battle for first place, but for most of the time has held onto the lead, helped in part by lead-ins from highly rated talk and entertainment shows. For over 24 years (December 1986 until May 2011), the lead-in for the 5 p.m. Eyewitness News broadcast had been The Oprah Winfrey Show at 4 p.m., and its strong ratings brought viewers along to the 5 p.m. newscast.
The newscasts were replayed on one of channel 7's digital subchannels, another which also carried a local weather and news channel. WABC-TV's website had a link for live streaming video of "Eyewitness News Now", which offered live local and national weather updated from AccuWeather. Local news headlines and updates were also provided. The format of "Eyewitness News Now" was similar to the defunct NBC Weather Plus. In February 2011, ABC pulled ENN as well as similar news channels on its Los Angeles and Chicago sister stations, replacing them in all three cities with a standard definition, letterboxed simulcast of the Live Well Network.
On December 2, 2006, WABC became the second station in the New York City market to begin broadcasting its local newscasts in high definition. On September 7, 2010, WABC-TV expanded its weekday morning newscast, moving its start time to 4:30 a.m. Three days earlier on September 4, 2010, WABC added an hour-long extension of its Saturday morning newscast from 9 to 10 a.m. On May 26, 2011, WABC-TV added another hour of local news at 4 p.m., replacing Oprah, which aired its final original episode the previous day.
On September 24, 2011, the station began broadcasting its newscasts and public affairs programs from a new street-level window studio at a former Disney Store location in the ABC building on 66th Street and Columbus Avenue. The space previously used for news broadcasts was used to expand the Live with Kelly studio. In January 2012, the station also expanded its weekend 11 p.m. newscasts to an hour.

News/Station Presentation

Newscast Titles

Station slogans

News team

=Current on-air staff=

=Notable former on-air staff=

Live with Kelly and Michael

WABC-TV also produces the nationally-syndicated talk show Live with Kelly and Michael, broadcast live at 9 a.m. (Eastern time). Until the station's newscasts were moved to a separate studio in 2011, the program originated in the same ground-floor studio at 7 Lincoln Square as Eyewitness News, thus creating a situation which forces local news updates broadcast during Good Morning America and Live to be produced from the WABC-TV newsroom, and the morning show's presence also limited the size of the Eyewitness News set.
The program's roots originated with A.M. New York, which debuted in 1970 as a local version of NBC's Today show;
The current show began as the station's second attempt at a local morning show a month later, aptly titled The Morning Show (using the "Circle 7" logo in the actual text for one of the "o"s), and was originally hosted by Regis Philbin and Cyndy Garvey. After Garvey's departure a year later, she was replaced by Ann Abernathy, who in turn, left in 1985 to return to Los Angeles. That year, Kathie Lee Johnson (who would marry Frank Gifford a year later and become known professionally as Kathie Lee Gifford) became Philbin's new co-host, lasting in that role for the next 15 years.
Three years later, in 1988, Buena Vista Television (now Disney-ABC Domestic Television) began syndicating the show nationally as Live with Regis and Kathie Lee. Gifford left the show in 2000 and was eventually replaced by co-host Kelly Ripa. Philbin left the show in November 2011, and the show aired for nearly a year as Live! with Kelly, with Ripa being paired with 60 guest co-hosts – one of them, Michael Strahan, was announced as Ripa's permanent co-host in September 2012, with the show's title being changed accordingly.








