[[World War III]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional wars, Political terminology, Global conflicts, Eschatology, World War III speculative fiction, Possible future wars


World War III (WWIII, WW3 or the Third World War) is a term used to describe a worldwide conflict following World War II. The most common scenario, a hypothetical nuclear war between the superpowers, the Soviet Union and the United States, is widely used as a premise or plot device in books, films, television productions, and video games. However, some writers have applied the term instead to the Cold War, arguing that it met the definition of a world war even though there was no direct conflict between the superpowers.
World War I (1914–1918) was regarded as the "war to end all wars" and it was believed there could never be another global conflict.  World War II (1939–1945) proved that to be false, and with the advent of the Cold War (1945–1991) and the use of nuclear weapons, the likelihood of a third global conflict became more accepted.  It was anticipated and planned for by military and civil authorities in many countries. Scenarios ranged from conventional warfare, to limited or total  nuclear warfare leading to the destruction of civilization.

Operation Unthinkable

British Prime Minister Winston Churchill was concerned that, with the enormous size of Soviet forces deployed in Europe at the end of WWII and the unreliability of the Soviet leader Joseph Stalin, there was a serious threat to Western Europe. In April–May 1945, British Armed Forces developed Operation Unthinkable, thought to be the first scenario of the Third World War.[ref]
[/ref] Its primary goal was "to impose upon Russia the will of the United States and the British Empire." The plan was rejected by the British Chiefs of Staff Committee as militarily unfeasible.

Historical close calls

Cold War

With the development of the arms race in the 1950s, an apocalyptic war between the United States and the Soviet Union was considered possible. Among the historical events considered potential triggers for a nuclear conflict are:

Post–Cold War period

The Cold War as World War III

Norman Podhoretz has suggested that the Cold War can be identified as World War IIINorman Podhoretz:World War IV: How It Started, What It Means, and Why We Have to Win because it was fought, although by proxy, on a global scale, involving the United States, NATO, the Soviet Union and Warsaw Pact countries.
Eliot Cohen, the director of strategic studies at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies at Johns Hopkins University, declared in The Wall Street Journal he considers World War III to be history. "The Cold War was World War III, which reminds us that not all global conflicts entail the movement of multi-million-man armies, or conventional front lines on a map."World War III? | Macleans. Macleans.ca. Retrieved on 26 December 2011.
On the 10 July 2006 edition of Fox News' The Big Story, Michael Ledeen, resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute For Public Policy Research (AEI), Ledeen said World War III had been the Cold War, and said that World War IV was already in progress, probably beginning with the Iranian revolution of 1979.  
Similarly, on the 24 May 2011 edition of CNBC's Kudlow and Company, host Lawrence Kudlow, discussing a book by former deputy Under-Secretary of Defense Jed Babbin, accepted the view of the Cold War as World War III, adding "World War IV is the terror war, and war with China would be World War V."Right-wing media divided: Is U.S. now in World War III, IV, or V? | Media Matters for America. Mediamatters. Retrieved on 26 December 2011.

Fiction

World War III is a common theme in fiction and art. A vast apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic science fiction literature exists describing the postulated execution and aftermath of World War III, several notable movies have been made based on World War III, and it is the topic of various comics, video games, songs, magazines, radio programs, newspapers and billboards.
It is also common that other worldly beings are often connected with World War III in comics, books, etc.



Further reading


