[[National Health Insurance (Japan)]]

CATEGORIES: Health insurance, Universal healthcare, Health in Japan

 is one of the two major types of insurance programs available in Japan. The other is 


History

Japan's first health insurance system was introduced in 1922. It took effect in 1927 to cover laborers and in 1938 was extended to cover farmers also.
The current NHI system, which is managed by local municipal governments, was introduced in 1961. The information in this article relates to Minato Ward in Tokyo, and NHI conditions in other municipalities may differ.

Joining NHI

People are required to join NHI within two weeks of becoming eligible. This is required if a person moves to the municipality from another municipality or overseas and isn't covered by Employees' Health Insurance, withdraws from Employees' Health Insurance (for example, due to job loss), stops receiving public assistance, or is born (and not covered under parents Employees Health Insurance).Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 8
Those who do not register when they become eligible and register later, can be charged for up to two years of back payments.
A person applies to their local ward office or city office, which issues them with a NHI card, and invoices for the NHI premiums. The insured person then pays the premiums, and is now covered.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 4

How the National Health Insurance works

When the insured person uses a medical facility that accepts NHI, they will only need to pay part of the cost. 
The medical facility will then send invoices for the remaining amount to the National Health Insurance Federation, which reviews and pays the medical facility. After this, the NHIF reports on the invoices to the municipal office, which reimburses the NHIF.

Withdrawing from NHI

There are several different grounds for withdrawing from NHI.

Other notifications

Insured people are required to notify the city if they change their address, their name, the head of household, lose their NHI card, or the NHI members covered under the card have changed.

Insurance Premiums

In 2013 the calculation method for premiums changed.
There are three types of NHI premiums. The head of household is responsible for payment, even if they are not a NHI member. The rate at which the premiums are calculated is based on the 
 amount charged by the local municipal government. This is in turn based on income earned by that member during the previous calendar year. Resident's tax is determined in June, and notifications are sent in July. Because of this, the yearly NHI premium is divided into 10 installments. In 2010 the premiums were:Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 18
Calculated by multiplying the total residents tax paid by all NHI members in the household by 0.80. This is the income levy. Then multiplying the number of insured household members by 31,200. This is the per capita levy. These two levies added together are the annual premium that must be paid. The maximum possible is 500,000 per year.
Calculated by multiplying the total residents tax paid by all NHI members in the household by 0.23. This is the income levy. Then multiplying the number of insured household members by 8,700. This is the per capita levy. These two levies added together are the annual premium that must be paid. The maximum possible is 130,000 per year.
Calculated by multiplying the total residents tax paid by all category 2 NHI members in the household by 0.11. This is the income levy. Then multiplying the number of category 2 household members by 12,000. This is the per capita levy. These two levies added together are the annual premium that must be paid. The maximum possible is 100,000 per year.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 16

Collection procedures

If NHI members do not make payment, a reminder will be sent. If payment is still not received after the reminder, the members NHI card will be replaced with a short term (6 month) card. 
If payment has not been received for a year, NHI members may have to return their NHI card, and will be provided with an eligibility certificate. This shows that the person is a NHI member and can receive treatment, but must bear all the costs themselves. However, it is possible that the amount that NHI bears can be applied to the members premiums at a later date.
If payments are not made, the municipality may have the members property (savings, salaries, telephone lines, etc.) seized to pay for the arrears.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 26

NHI benefits

General Medical Benefits

When the insured person uses a medical facility that accepts NHI, they will only need to pay part of the cost. As of 2011 this copayment will be either 10% or 30% depending on the income of the insured person, and in April 2011 the lowest rate will rise to 20%.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 14
Those aged between 70 to 74 are entitled to a NHI Elderly Recipient Certificate. Those with this certificate have to make a copayment of either 10% or 30% depending on their income.

Exceptions

NHI cannot be used in the following cases:
Members can apply for benefits within two years of becoming entitled.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 28

Hospitalization expenses

For those under 70 years of age:
If NHI members show their NHI card and a Maximum Ceiling Amount Applicable Certificate together the member will only have to pay the amount specified as their personally borne expense ceiling. For members who are exempt from residents tax, a Ceiling Applied/Standard Personally Borne Amount Reduction Certificate is required. These certificates must be applied for at the city office.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 30,36
For those over 70 years of age:
If NHI members over 70 years old who pay Resident's tax show their NHI card and an Old Age Medical Insurance card they only have to pay the amount specified as their personally borne expense ceiling.
Maximum Ceiling Amount Applicable Certificate together the member will only have to pay the amount specified as their personally born expense ceiling. For members who are exempt from residents tax, their NHI card, Old-Age Medical Insurance Card and a Ceiling Applied/Standard Personally Borne Amount Reduction Certificate is required. This certificate must be applied for at the city office.

Cash reimbursements

NHI members can go to their city office to apply for cash reimbursements for when they pay the full amount for medical services. It takes about three months. Situations covered are:

Subsidies for high medical expenses

If the personally borne medical expenses exceed a certain amount NHI members can apply to have a certain amount reimbursed. Reimbursements are paid about four months after the medical service is provided.
NHI members under 70 years of age must show their NHI card and either their Maximum Ceiling Amount Applicable Certificate or Ceiling Applied/Standard Personally-Borne Amount Reduction Certificate to pay only their personally borne expense ceiling. Members under 70 years old are not eligible for the high-cost medical benefit.
NHI members over 70 and under 75 years of age are responsible for paying up to their expense ceiling as usual. But members from households who are except from resident's tax will be categorized as Low Income Earner 1 or 2. 
Ceiling Applied/Standard Personally-Borne Amount Reduction Certificate is required for these members to have the amount they must pay decreased from their normal personally borne expense ceiling.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 36

Designated Ceilings for Personally-borne medical expenses

High Medical Expense Subsidy Application Procedures

An application kit should be sent three or four months after the month of the examination/treatment. The form should be completed and returned to the city office.
If the expenses were from hospitalization, members should apply for a Maximum Ceiling Amount Applicable Certificate or a Ceiling Applied/Standard Personally Borne Amount Reduction Certificate, whichever is appropriate. Members who have one of these certificates will only need to pay the maximum ceiling amount for the examination/treatment, and therefore have no need to apply for a High Medical Expense Subsidy.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 44

Loans for High Medical Expenses

As it takes a long time for reimbursements for high medical expenses to be made, loans are available for those who have trouble paying their medical bills in the meantime.
Requirements: Those who are prospective candidates for a High Medical Expense Subsidy.
Loan amount: Within 90% of the estimated High Medical Expense Subsidy.

Meal Expenses During Hospitalization

During hospitalization, members must bear a portion of the meal expense. 
(i) Hospitalized up to 90 days in the last 12 months
(ii) Hospitalized over 90 days in the last 12 months
(iii) Recipient of the Elderly Recipient Certificate whose household is exempt from resident's ta and the total income of the household is ¥0 (Pension income is calculated with deduction amount as ¥800,000.

Childbirth allowance

When a NHI member gives birth, ¥420,000 will be provided for each child. This allowance is also paid in cases of miscarriage or stillbirth if this occurs after 85 days (4 months) of pregnancy. However, this will not be provided to those who receive a childbirth allowance from other health insurance programs. The mother presents her NHI card at the hospital, and NHI will pay the hospital directly. If the cost of childbirth is more than ¥420,000 the member must pay the remainder. If the cost is less than ¥420,000, the member will receive the balance. A form will be sent approximately 2 months after delivery, which must be returned to claim the balance.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 48
It is also possible to apply for this childbirth allowance if the NHI member has their baby outside of Japan, the member should speak to the local city office about the procedures for doing this.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 50

Funeral Allowances

When a NHI member dies, ¥70,000 is paid for funeral services. However, if a person who was covered under Employees' Health Insurance died within 3 months of resignation, Employees' Health Insurance will pay for the funeral allowance, not NHI. Also, if the death was due to the act of a third party (such as a traffic accident) and their compensation is available, NHI will not provide the funeral allowance.

Individual Medical Expense Reductions or Exemptions

A portion of the cost of medical treatment must be paid by the NHI member. However, if their livelihood has been effected by a natural disaster, unemployment, or other difficulties, then reductions of or exemptions from paying their copayment are possible for a period of up to three months.

Injuries from Traffic Accidents or Attacks

Reports are required before receiving treatment with an NHI certificate. For injuries caused by a third party (for example a traffic accident or assault) the person who caused the injury is liable. However, it may be possible to use NHI if the person responsible does not pay and if the proper notifications are filed. The NHI will charge the responsible person afterwards. If you receive treatment using NHI, you must contact the NHI and Pension section of the city office before and submit "report of accident and sickness by the third party" later.

Exceptions

NHI cannot be used in the following cases

Disclosure of Medical Fee Receipts

If it receives a request, after about one month the city will disclose medical fee receipts and other documents to:

Long Life Health Insurance system

When NHI members reach 75 years old (or 65 for those with a certain degree of disability) they can receive medical care under the Long Life Health Insurance System. An insurance card is issued to all eligible members. Premiums are based on the member's income.Minato City National Health Insurance Guidebook 2010, page 60



Notes


