[[Satrio Piningit]]

CATEGORIES: Javanese mythology

Satrio Piningit means "Hidden Knight/ Hidden Ksatria". He is a character of Jongko Joyobhoyo (Jayabaya Prophecies) in Javanese myths and he is a Javanese who would become a Great Leader of Nusantara and around the world from Java.

Jongko Joyoboyo (Jayabaya Prophecies)

Maharaja Jayabaya was a King of Kediri in East Java from 1135 to 1157 A.D. and he was known for his righteousness and prosperous rule, and reputed to have been an incarnation of the Hindu deity, Deva Vishnu so that he had a magical strength (sakti manduroguno) and he was abled to predict the future.
Maharaja Jayabaya is most famous for his oracles or prophesies attributed to him, namely the Serat Joyobhoyo Musoror, Serat Pranitiwekyo, and some debatable others. Jayabaya is also attributed as author of the "Pralembang Joyobhoyo", a prophetic book that played an important role in the Japanese Occupation of Indonesia (1942–1945).
According to a selectively abridged set of stanzas within a Jayabaya prophesy (all are extremely long epic poems):
 
 "The Javanese would be ruled by whites for 3 centuries and by yellow dwarfs for the life span of a maize plant prior to the return of the 'Ratu Adil: whose name must contain at least one syllable of the Javanese Noto Nogoro'." Javanese-Indonesian language at Wikisource
When Japan occupied the Netherlands East Indies, in the first weeks of 1942, Indonesians danced in the streets, welcoming the Japanese army as the fulfillment of the prophecy ascribed to Joyoboyo, who foretold the day when white men would one day establish their rule on Java and tyrannize the people for many years – but they would be driven out by the arrival of yellow men from the north. These yellow dwarfs, Joyoboyo had predicted, would remain for one crop cycle, and after that Java would be freed from foreign domination. To most of the Javanese, Japan was a liberator: the prophecy had been fulfilled. B. Cribb, Audrey Kahin: 2004. ''Historical dictionary of Indonesia: 
Volume 51 of Historical dictionaries of Asia, Oceania, and the Middle East''. Scarecrow Press, 2004. ISBN 0-8108-4935-6, ISBN 978-0-8108-4935-8. 583 pages. pp210[/ref]

Jayabaya Prophecy of Satrio Piningit

Jayabaya predicted that Satrio Piningit would become a Great Leader of Nusantara, he was a descendant of Majapahit's Kings, he was an Intelligent King, Honest, and Righteous. He would uphold justice around the world from Java (in the beginning, he will conquer Nusantara before it) so that he is named "Ratu Adil" (Indonesian: King of Justice, in Javanese, "Ratu" means "King" or "Queen").
According to Jayabaya, in the course of Satrio Piningit's life, he always experiences of misery, always be humiliated, unlucky, and "kesapar" (poor). therefore, he got a nickname "Satrio Wiragung" (The Great Ksatria). Many Javanese people believe this prophecy.
Satrio Piningit wouldn't have served as Head of State (President or King) but more than it. He will conquer the world before the end of the world. He won't be elected from the election, and he never ask for elected. In other words, he will lead a massive revolution. Unique, in the last verses of Jongko Joyobhoyo, there is written the verses about the coming of Satrio Piningit, it told about disasters before Satrio Piningit come.

Some Verses That Tells About Satrio Piningit

 140. polahe wong Jowo koyo gabah diinteri, endhi sing bener endhi sing sejati, poro topo podho ora wani, podho wedhi ngajarake piwulang adi, salah-salah anemani pati. 
translation:
 the behavior of Javanese such as grain sowing, no one true, no one real, all hermits dare not, afraid to express the true teachings, death will actually pick them up. 
 141. banjir bandhang ono ngendhi-endhi, ghunung njebhlug tan anjharwani, tan angimpeni, gehtinge kepathi-pathi marang pandhito kang oleh pati gheni, margo wedhi kapiyak wedhine sopo siro sing sayekti. 
translation:
 flash floods are occurred in everywhere, volcano erupted suddenly, there is no notification, it really hate an meditate priest without eating and sleeping, because the priest is afraid his secret would be uncovered.R.M. Mangkudimedja. 1979. Serat Pararaton Jilid 2. Jakarta: Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Proyek Penerbitan Buku Sastra Indonesia dan Daerah. p. 165 
characteristics of Satrio Piningit is told at chapter 159 (and this story is also told on Wayang Story):
 159. selet-selete yen mbhesuk ngancik tutuping tahun, sinungkalan dhewo wolu, ngesto manggalaning ratu, bakal ono dhewo ngejawantah, apengawak manungsa, apasuryo podho Bethoro Kresno, awatak Bolodhewo, agegaman trisulo wedho, jinejer wolak-waliking zaman, wong nyilih mbhalekake, wong utang mbhayare, utang nyawa bhayar nyowo, utang wirang nyaur wirang. 
translation:
 at the latest, after the end of the year (before the end of the world), it would come a god (dhewo/deva/dewa), which is the human body, his face is like a Batara Krishna, his character is like a Baladewa, his weapon is Trisula Wedha, that is the signs of the changing times, people return their loans, people pay their debts, live for a live, shy for a shy.R.M. Mangkudimedja. 1979. Serat Pararaton Jilid 2. Jakarta: Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Proyek Penerbitan Buku Sastra Indonesia dan Daerah. p. 168 
and events before his advent, chapter 161:
 161. dunungane ono sikil redhi Lawu sisih wetan, wetane bengawan banyu, andhedukuh pindho Radhen Gatotkoco, arupa pagupon doro tundho tigo, koyo manungsa angleledho. 
translation:
 (Satrio Piningit) would come from east foothill of Mount Lawu, east of the river (Bengawan), his house is like a Raden Gatotkaca's, like a three-layered pigeon cage, like a human teasing.R.M. Mangkudimedja. 1979. Serat Pararaton Jilid 2. Jakarta: Departemen Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan, Proyek Penerbitan Buku Sastra Indonesia dan Daerah. p. 168-169 

Analysis

At the Japanese Occupation during World War II (1939-1945 A.D.) and Japanese Soldier took over the Dutch East Indies Rule in Sumatra and Java Island, many people of Java believed that Japanese were the Awaited Satrio Piningit. But Japan was ruling by way of oppressing the people and Satrio Piningit was a Javanese, not Japanese.
And then after independence of Indonesia, many Javanese people (until now) believe that Soekarno were Satrio Piningit. They thought Soekarno had a many of Satrio Piningit's characters. But many people of Indonesia do not believe it because Satrio Piningit would become a leader of the world, not only in Indonesia. And at the end of Soekarno, he treated inhumane by the New Order Regime (1967–1998), starting from rejection of Nawaksara Soekarno at court of MPRS 1966.
Jayabaya only told about his coming from Java Island, and he will lead Nusantara and the last, he will rule the world. Jayabaya didn't tell about post-Satrio Piningit era, so that Satrio Piningit is only the dialectics process.






