[[Meirion Jones]]

CATEGORIES: BBC newsreaders and journalists, Welsh journalists, British investigative journalists, Living people, Year of birth missing (living people)

Meirion Jones is a British journalist working as Investigations Producer on the BBC Two Newsnight programme.
In 2013 he won the London Press Awards Scoop of the Year prize for his part in the investigation into Jimmy Savile. In 2010 he won the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists, Daniel Pearl Award for his investigation of the dumping of Trafigura's toxic waste in Africa. He has been described by Greg Palast, as "the nonpareil investigative journalist"Greg Palast Armed Madhouse, London: Penguin 2007, p.384 and by Robin Denselow in UK Press Gazette as "one of the best investigative journalists around".pressgazette.co.asp?storycode=41166 Jones has investigated many subjects including the 'fixing' of the US Presidential Election in 2000, toxic waste dumping in Africa, how Britain helped Israel's nuclear weapons programme, market-rigging by
multinationals, bogus bomb detectors, Tsunami aid,
political scandals He also worked with journalist Liz Mackean in late 2011 on a Newsnight investigation into the activities of suspected paedophile Jimmy Savile. Its rejection by their superior, (former) Newsnight editor Peter Rippon ultimately led to a major scandal.

Early career

Jones was the first full-time Editor of the Cardiff student paper "Gair Rhydd". then freelanced at New Scientist where he wrote about everything from food poisoning to how to phase out the CFCs which at the time were damaging the ozone layer.google.co.google.co.

Investigations

Jimmy Savile

Immediately after Jimmy Savile's death in October 2011 Jones and his colleague Liz MacKean began an investigation for Newsnight into reports that Savile had been a paedophile. They interviewed one victim on camera and others agreed to have their stories told anonymously. The victims alleged abuse at Duncroft approved school in Staines, Stoke Mandeville hospital and the BBC. Jones and MacKean also discovered that Surrey police had investigated allegations of abuse against Savile. The programme was scheduled for broadcast on 7 December 2011 but the film was never shown and the BBC broadcast tributes to Savile at Christmas 2011. The decision to pull the Newsnight investigation eventually led to a major crisis in public trust of the BBC. The later Pollard Review found that Jones and MacKean had found cogent evidence that Savile was an abuser and that the programme could have exposed Savile in 2011 but a flawed decision was made not to broadcast  There was no public mention of the Newsnight investigation into Savile at the time but In early 2012, several newspapers reported that BBC had investigated allegations of sexual abuse immediately after Savile's death, but the report was not broadcast. An article by Miles Goslett in the The Oldie alleged there had been a cover-up by the BBC.  In March 2013 Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary reported that 214 of the complaints that had been made against Savile after his death would have been criminal offences if they had been reported at the time. Sixteen victims reported being raped by Savile under the age of 16 and four of those had been under the age of ten. Thirteen others reported serious sexual assaults by Savile including four under ten-year-olds. Another ten victims reported being raped by Savile while over the age of sixteen.hmic.uk/media/review-into-allegations-and-intelligence-material-concerning-jimmy-savile.

Trafigura

Jones made a series of films over three years exposing how toxic waste from the oil trader Trafigura came to be illegally dumped in Abidjan in Africa rather than safely disposed of in the Netherlands. The Trafigura row along with the Simon Singh case and others has helped motivate the Libel Reform Campaign which has persuaded the British government to begin reform of the libel laws in 2011.

Vulture funds

Since 2007 Jones and Greg Palast have been investigating Vulture fund operations, which attempt to divert into their own pockets, the money given by Western governments to pay off the debts of poor countries. The Vultures buy up the debt cheaply, and then when it is about to be written off, sue for the full value plus interest often in the British courts. These films formed the centrepiece of a campaign backed by Oxfam and the Jubilee Debt Campaign to outlaw this practice through a Debt Relief Bill. The first film in 2007 exposed an American vulture who liked to call himself 'Goldfinger' who was suing Zambia.

Market rigging

On 15 October 2010 the multi-national Reckitt Benckiser was fined £10 million for rigging the market for Gaviscon following an investigation by Jones and Martin Shankleman.

Nuclear weapons and Israel

In 2005-6 Meirion Jones made three films with Michael Crick on nuclear weapons and Israel which revealed for the first time how Britain had helped Israel's nuclear weapons programme. Papers obtained through Freedom of Information showed how the UK had secretly exported the heavy water to Israel to start up the Dimona nuclear reactor and had supplied Israel with samples of uranium 235, plutonium and lithium 6.

Bogus bomb detectors

On 22 January 2010 the British government announced that it would ban the export of "magic wand" type bomb detectors to Iraq and Afghanistan because of the danger to British and allied troops.

Olympics cash for gold medals scandal

Jones and Anna Adams uncovered evidence of secret payments of nine million dollars from Azerbaijan to a competition called World Series Boxing run by the International Boxing Association (AIBA) which organises boxing at the Olympics. Whistleblowers from inside AIBA/WSB claimed that WSB's chief said the money was in return for a guarantee that Azerbaijani fighters would win two boxing gold medals at the London 2012 Olympics. AIBA and WSB admit they received the money but deny there was any deal to guarantee Azerbaijan gold medals at London. The Ethics Committee of the International Olympic Committee has now asked the BBC for their evidence so they can investigate.

United States Presidential election 2000

Jones and Greg Palast revealed how many black voters in Florida had been barred from voting in the 2000 election by a purge of the Florida Central Voter File. Jones and Palast have been working together since 1998 and have made more than a dozen investigative films on subjects such as oil and the war in Iraq, the Bin Laden family, the Bush family, the coup against Chavez, and Vulture Funds.




