[[List of Beelzebub characters]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of anime and manga characters, Fictional maids


This is a list of characters from the anime and manga series Beelzebub by Ryūhei Tamura.

Main characters

Ishiyama High

Ishiyama is described as "the hoodlum school": with the exception of Furuichi, all students are delinquents who spend most of the time fighting. It is accidentally destroyed by Oga on chapter 37.

Tōhōshinki

The four leaders of the delinquent forces in Ishiyama High. Tōhōshinki is an acronym of their respective last names, . In the English subtitled version of the anime by Crunchyroll, the abbreviation TKKH (using the first letters of their surnames) is used. While initially introduced as antagonists early in the series, the four later become Oga's most loyal followers, each gaining the King's Emblem (located on different parts of their body) that allows them to tap into Beelzebub's demon powers during fights to a level that allows them to go toe-to-toe with other demon contract holders.

Six Killer Elements

=The three kings=

=Three Beasts=

Others

First appearance: chapter 15
Named "Majide Kuukiyomenai 5 ningumi" The Unbelievably Tactless 5, this gang was suspended from school and is famous for its immense cruelty and poor hygiene. They always sport neckties and make a point of appearing in choreographic fashion, often with comical effects. Despite this, they are relatively weak in comparison to most of the other characters and have yet to win a single fight; they are almost always quickly defeated in an instant. They are distinct from most other thugs in that they use firearms loaded with actual bullets, and have even gone so far as to try to eliminate Nene Oomori. Members consist of:

Saint Ishiyama Academy

Oga and his friends were transferred to Saint Ishiyama Academy, the sister school of Ishiyama High, when the latter was destroyed. They are not welcome however, as the school is unwilling to adopt the delinquents. The group is constantly harassed by the students of the school, but they are not the only problem. The school of Saint Ishiyama Academy has a force within it that upholds the rules of conduct. They are known as the  (or horsemen). They are six captains of different sports teams and groups/clubs who possess an extraordinary amount of strength and fighting experience. They have set out to get rid of Oga and his friends, and are backed by an unfair rule that allows them to carry out "judgement" on any person or party within the student body. The six knights challenged Oga and his friends to a sports competition (after a huge fight on the rooftops of Saint Ishiyama). The wager of the battle was clear: if Oga and his friends won, they would not be expelled. Himekawa also managed to clinch a deal with the teacher in charge of student life, whereby if the six knights lost the competition they would be stripped of their authority and privileges. In the end, Ishiyama came out on top.

Six Holy Knights

Others

Demon World

In the Beelzebub series, the demon world bears little resemblance to Christian or Jewish Demonologies. It is described as a realm in another dimension that is inhabited by many fantastic creatures and ruled by the royal dynasty of the Beelzebubs. From what can be inferred, the way of life has traits of common medieval fiction stories, but at the same time contemporary devices such as video games are known. However, the technology seems to be slightly behind the human world's, as Lord En (see below) is shocked by how advanced a PlayStation 2 is. The Beelzebubs' power is not uncontested, though: there are rogues and thieves and other people living outside of the royal family's authority. Demons still have an intent to destroy Man, as in Western belief; however, they are not immortal and can be killed in a similar way to humans, although they are more powerful. They may have many different shapes, but most of those who interact with Oga and other humans are also human-like, with minor anatomical differences in some cases, such as reptilian ears, fangs or spots on the skin.

34th Pillar Squad

A military division that works directly under Lord En. It consists of ten divisions, each one commanded by a "Pillar Head" (or Lieutenant General), who may have one or more "Pillars" (or Brigadier General) under their command, for a total of 24. Each Pillar has 15 "Peons" under them. Ranking officers wear black, peons wear white leather coats. Pillar Heads' names are normally borrowed from mythical or literary dragons or dragon-like creatures; they have special powers and can be distinguished by their fringed epaulettes. Pillars have alphabetic names and are tattooed, each tattoo representing a letter of the demonic alphabet. Their loyalty and deference to En is unwavering, sometimes with comic effect.
Behemoth (first appearance: chapter 116) is the squad's founder and its former leader with the rank of general of the army. At least in the human world, he has the appearance of an eccentric, oddly dressed old man. He is named after the biblical beast. In contrast to the Demon Lord, who could not care less whether Beel or En is the one to destroy humanity, Behemoth wants En to prevail and be advanced as the rightful heir to the throne. He then sends his subordinates to the human world in order to kill Beel's contractor. Later, he builds a school (Akumano Academy, "Akumano" meaning "demon's") for Lord En in the place of the destroyed Ishiyama and populates it both with the other members of the squad and with Ishiyama's lesser thugs, who underwent some sort of brainwashing in the process. After the Squad is defeated by Oga and Akumano is burnt by En's crying, Behemoth and the rest of the Squad remain stuck in the human world.
Jabberwock (first appearance: chapter 120), named after Lewis Carroll's character, is Behemoth's son and just appointed successor as leader of the squad, with the same rank as his father. He has a massive constitution and a big transversal scar across his face. His attitude is haughty and he immediately dismisses Oga as an unworthy opponent on first meeting him. Jabberwock then proceeds to have his pet dragon Sodom (described as a "Grand Bahamut") kidnap Hilda by swallowing her alive. He seems to respect Saotome and wishes to face him in battle, but is more reluctant than his father to be under the leadership of Lord En's, to whom he refers as a stupid kid. His recklessness has earned him the nickname "Crazy Dragon". Jabberwock is very powerful; the Zebub Emblem and even Super Milk Time seem to be ineffective against him, but he develops a little amount of respect for Oga on fighting him for the first time. His nasty temper got him expelled from the squad at a point, but he was readmitted by his father. Jabberwock is eventually defeated by Oga and Beel after a fierce battle. He has his own squadron, whose members seem to have a bad reputation with the rest of the Squad due to their lack of honour.Chapter 133 They include three personal Pillars:Chapter 136
A number of Pillar Heads have been presented, as well as some Pillars working under them.
Naga (first appearance: chapter 85) is first introduced alongside Graffel (see below) when the latter attacks Izuma and Tojo, but maintains a detached attitude that contrasts with Graffel's violence. He rushes with Graffel to Hecadoth's aid against Saotome, only to be dispatched to the demon world by the teacher. It is later revealed that he is known as the Water Dragon King and his power is way above Hecatos' and Graffel's. His black aura often takes the shape of a dragon. He is probably named after the Hindu deity. Naga is eventually defeated by Oga and Beel's Super Milk Time.
Laymia (first appearance: chapter 102) is a Pillar Head and Lamia's mother. She seems to be one of Behemoth's closest advisors. Although her daughter sides with Beel, she is one of the main architects in the plot to kill Oga and deprive the demon baby of his Contractor. She is a tall woman with an unfathomable expression who is seen heading a meeting of the Squad's officers.
Quetzalcoatl (first appearance: chapter 119) is Harlequin-like in appearance and has the ability to control people's minds. He uses this power on Lord En's orders to turn all of Ishiyama's former students who did not go to St. Ishiyama into slaves to corner Furuichi and the others. He then challenges the Ishiyama gang to a game with their lives on the line. He is named after the Mesoamerican deity.
Basilisk (first appearance: chapter 102) is a large, scarred, hirsute man who is seen smoking a cigar with his feet on the table at the meeting Laymia headed. His weapon of choice is a giant ax, and he has the power to immobilise his opponents if they look at him in the eye. Oga falls for the trick, but Beel stops the ax and both defeat Basilisk using Super Milk Time. His power and name are adapted from the Greek mythological monster.
Salamander (first appearance: chapter 102) is a fair-haired young man whose light demeanour and warm smile contrast with the offhand way he discusses executing Graffel and Hecatos for disobedience. His power, Lost Prominence, is a fire that burns memories instead of matter, and which can also be used for mind control. His namesake is the mediaeval mythical creature.
Yata (first appearance: chapter 102) is a young swordsman seen in the meeting headed by Laymia. In the occasion he proposed executing Graffel and Hecatos - even though Graffel is his brother - for attacking Oga without an express order to do so. His power consists of wielding his katana at supersonic speed. His name is probably a derivation of the Japanese deity.
In addition to these characters, the meeting mentioned above introduced Vritra, a woman with a cold attitude. Tojo's return in chapter 132 pits him against Yinglong, a tall man with a ponytail. Ananta, first glimpsed in chapter 123, is a girl with odango hair who battles Kunieda on chapter 134.
Finally, a number of Pillars have made quick appearances. Zela, the 24th, is a tall blond man introduced with Agiel and Odonel while standing sentry at Akumano Academy. When Oga attacks Akumano High (chapter 131), he meets and defeats Din (4th), a young man with shoulder-length black hair; Kne (10th), who wears a French-style beret; Labed (11th), who sports dreadlocks; Wasboga (21st), who wears sideboards; Xoblah (22nd), a plump man who is knocked out by Oga on first sight; and Yshiel (23rd), a blond swordswoman with a patch over her left eye. On chapter 133, Tojo defeats Cemor (3rd), a man with light, pointy hair; and Nebak (13th), a short man with an African lion mask. On chapter 134, Kunieda faces Elim (5th), a little girl in oversized clothes who wields a cane; Fabas (6th), a punk who fights with two backswords; Pamiel (15th), a Hippie who uses a dagger; and Tiriel (19th), a long-haired blonde who uses two swords. On chapter 135, Oga meets Schethalim (18th), a light-haired man first glimpsed in chapter 133; and Vabam (20th), an anthropomorphic dog; both of whom use pistols.

Others

First appearance: chapter 74
The four strongest fighters of Teimou Academy, they ruled over Teimou from the shadows under Kiriya's orders while the latter was in hiding. They are defeated by Oga and Miki, and later go to the Shingetsu Temple to become stronger and get back at St. Ishiyama, only to find Oga already there and be badly beaten again. They are nevertheless taken in by Kunieda's grandfather and begin their training alongside Oga, in what seems to be a temporary truce.
Voiced by: Saori Hayami

South Chinpira High School

San Marx Private Fine Arts Academy




