[[Kent Brockman]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons characters, Fictional broadcasters, Fictional reporters, Fictional television personalities, Fictional characters introduced in 1990, Fictional Jews

Kent Brockman is a fictional character in the animated television series The Simpsons. He is voiced by Harry Shearer and first appeared in the episode "Krusty Gets Busted". He is a grumpy, self-centered local Springfield news anchor.

Profile

Kent Brockman hosts the Channel 6 weekday news, as well as Smartline, a local current-affairs program (a parody of the national current-affairs program Nightline), Bite Back! With Kent Brockman (a parody on "Fight Back! With David Horowitz), Eye on Springfield (a parody of Eye on LA), which focuses mostly on Springfield's entertainment news, the game show Springfield Squares,  and has his own personal commentary segment of the Springfield News, "My Two Cents".
As seen in a flashback to the 1960s in the episode "Mother Simpson", Brockman was known as Kenny Brockelstein early in his career. Brockman has a daughter, Brittany, who may or may not have been the product of his fling with the Channel 6 weather girl.
In "Dog of Death", Brockman won the multi-million-dollar ($130 million) state lottery jackpot and left the news desk while still on the air. However, he remained a news anchor because he was under contract, though he also admitted that he likes making $500,000 a year. He has an ongoing feud with traffic reporter Arnie Pye, and has been shown to criticize Pye's reporting and also even chuckles when it was thought Pye had died in a helicopter accident.
It has been hinted that Brockman is ethnically Jewish, having changed his surname from Brockelstein. He can sometimes be spotted wearing the Hebrew Chai symbol on a necklace. He is seen several times attending Reverend Lovejoy's Protestant church, suggesting he professes Christian religious beliefs.
Brockman's penchant for using offensive language works against him in the 400th episode, "You Kent Always Say What You Want", where, after Homer accidentally spills coffee on Brockman's crotch, he shouts, what Ned Flanders calls, a "super swear" that shocked everyone who watched it. Brockman was demoted to weather man due to the station paying a fine to the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and was soon fired when the network executives deliberately mistook a ring of Splenda in Brockman's coffee for cocaine. Brockman was later given his job back to silence him (after doing an expose that was seen on YouTube uncovering the real reason the FCC is cracking down on obscenity in the media), with a 50% raise, making his new salary $750,000 a year.

Creation and inspirations

Kent Brockman first appeared on television in the first season episode "Krusty Gets Busted", which originally aired April 29, 1990.co.uk. Retrieved on 2008-12-30."Krusty Gets Busted". The Simpsons. Retrieved on 2008-12-31. The character was based on Los Angeles anchormen Hal Fishman and Jerry Dunphy. Commentary for "Homer Defined", in The Simpsons: The Complete Third Season DVD. 20th Century Fox. The director of "Krusty Gets Busted", Brad Bird, designed the character and modeled him after anchorman Ted Koppel. Commentary for "Krusty Gets Busted", in The Simpsons: The Complete First Season DVD. 20th Century Fox. Another influence on the character was The Mary Tyler Moore Shows Ted Baxter, played by Ted Knight. Dunphy was proud of the fact that Brockman was based on him and would tell people that he was Kent Brockman.
Rochester, New York news anchor Don Alhart on WHAM-TV is often compared to Kent Brockman.

Cultural influence

Brockman is responsible for introducing the snowclone "I, for one, welcome our new fill-in-the-blank overlords", sometimes used to express mock submission, usually for the purpose of humor.

Reception

The author of the book Planet Simpson: How a Cartoon Masterpiece Documented an Era and Defined a Generation, Chris Turner, said that "if the institution of the News has a single iconic face on The Simpsons, it's Brockman's"
"You Kent Always Say What You Want" was well received by critics. IGN called it the second best episode of the season.

Merchandise

Playmates Toys created a Kent Brockman action figure for its World of Springfield toy line which was released in July 2001.








