[[Mia Love]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, American Latter Day Saints, American people of Haitian descent, Converts to Mormonism from Roman Catholicism, Living people, Mayors of places in Utah, People from Brooklyn, People from Utah County, Utah, The Hartt School alumni, Utah city council members, Utah Republicans, Women in Utah politics, Women mayors of places in the United States, People associated with the Tea Party movement, African-American Latter Day Saints, African-American mayors

Ludmya Bourdeau "Mia" Love (born December 6, 1975) is an American politician, and the former mayor of Saratoga Springs, Utah  and was the 2012 Republican Party nominee for the United States House of Representatives in Utah's 4th congressional district. She ran on a fiscally conservative platform of limited government, and placed a heavy emphasis on personal responsibility during her campaign. She lost to six-term incumbent Jim Matheson by 768 votes out of 245,277 votes cast. She was also a speaker at the 2012 Republican National Convention.
On May 18, 2013, Love announced that she would run again in 2014. female Republican ever elected to Congress, as well as the first from the state of Utah.

Early life and education

Love was born Ludmya Bourdeau on December 6, 1975, to Mary and Jean Maxine Bourdeau in Brooklyn, New York.
According to Love, her birth granted her entire family citizenship under an immigration law that was set to expire in 1976.
Love graduated from the University of Hartford with a degree in the performing arts. While at the University of Hartford she was part of the Hartt School's Music Theatre program. She worked at Sento Corp. and the Ecopass Corporation. She was also a flight attendant with Continental Airlines. 27, 2004

Career

In 1998 shortly after graduating from college Mia Love joined The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. She had been a Roman Catholic until that point. Upon moving to Utah she got an apartment with a Utah woman she had known as a nanny in Connecticut.  Mia contacted Craig Smith, a missionary she had known in Connecticut for help moving in.  Smith was unable to help, but referred her to Jason Love, whom she had met briefly when he was an LDS missionary in Connecticut, a meeting that Jason remembered much more than did Mia. Jason helped Mia move in and they went on their first date (to a shooting range) in September.  Mia and Jason were married in December, 1998.  Mia turned down an offer to appear in the Broadway show "Smokey Joe's Café" that started two days before her marriage. They have three children.
Love's first foray into civic involvement came in the summer of 2002 when she served as the community spokesperson in an effort to get the developer of her neighborhood in Saratoga Springs to spray against flies.

Saratoga Springs government

=City Council=

Love won a seat on the Saratoga Springs City Council in 2003, becoming the first female Haitian-American elected official in Utah County, Utah; she took office in January 2004.  After six years on the Council she was elected Mayor. "Aspiring first black GOP congresswoman: Don't put me in a box", "The Daily Caller," January 14, 2012

=Mayor=

Love was part of the city council that approved a transition from the agriculture tax to municipal tax. She also worked with other city council members to cut expenses, reducing the city's shortfall during the economic downturn from $3.5 million to $779,000. Saratoga Springs now has the highest possible bond rating for a city of its size. "Mia Love causing a GOP stir nationally", "The Salt Lake Tribune," November 19, 2011
Also during her time as mayor Love led the city through natural disasters of a wild fire and a mudslide shortly later. 26, 2013

2012 congressional election

Love ran in Utah's 4th congressional district, which was created after the 2010 Census. Springs Mayor Mia Love to kick off campaign", "The Salt Lake Tribune," January 4, 2012  She competed for the Republican nomination against attorney Jay Cobb and State Reps. Stephen Sandstrom of Orem and Carl Wimmer of Herriman; she won the nomination on April 21, 2012 at the 2012 Utah Republican Party Convention with over 70 percent of the vote and faced six-term Democrat Jim Matheson in the general election.
Nationally, Love received campaign support from Mitt Romney, the 2012 Republican Presidential nominee, his wife Ann Romney, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor, House Budget Committee Chairman and 2012 Republican Vice Presidential nominee Paul Ryan, and Speaker of the House John Boehner.
In August 2012, National Journal named Love one of "Ten Republicans to follow on Twitter".
Love was a speaker at the 2012 Republican National Convention on August 28, 2012. She spoke of the lessons she learned from her parents, such as self-reliance and the importance of entrepreneurship.
In September 2012, Forbes investigated a claim by a September 2012 article by Mother Jones that Love's parents could not be citizens of the US.  After Forbes investigated the Mother Jones claim, Mother Jones retracted the article.  In an October interview, her father stated that Mia's birth as a US citizen was key to gaining permanent legal status and citizenship.
After final tabulations, Love lost the election to Jim Matheson by 768 votes out of 245,277 votes cast,Utah Lieutenant Governor's Office, General Canvass Report, 2012 a difference of 0.31%.

2014 congressional election

In March 2013, Love stated that she was seriously considering another run against Matheson.washingtontimes.Mitch Shaw, "Mia Love tells Weber GOP women she's running in 2014", Ogden Standard examiner, May 7, 2013 
Love was an opening speaker at the 2013 Western Conservative Summit. She spoke on the need for increased grassroots organization in the GOP, and the need to be independent from the government.
In August 2013, Love was chosen by Newsmax as an "Up and Comer" in their list of top "25 Influential Women of the GOP" In November 2013, Love 
acknowledged the growing consensus that the Tea Party needed to shift away from being the "party of no"Lisa Riley Roche, "Mia Love says I Don't Believe in Labels", Deseret News, Nov. 13, 2013 while still supporting the philosophy of the Tea Party and many of its leaders, including fellow Utahn Sen. Mike Lee.
On December 17, 2013, Matheson announced that he would not run for reelection, leading Love to be the favored candidate to win in the upcoming election.
In early 2014 Love was made a member of the Republican National Committee's National Advisory Council on African-American outreach.March 6, 2014 Florida Courier

Political positions

Love favors "fiscal discipline, limited government, and personal responsibility."Aspiring first black GOP congresswoman: Don't put me in a box, Daily Caller, January 14, 2012 She has also said that she asks herself three questions whenever she approaches an issue, "Is it affordable? Is it sustainable? Is it my job?"Mia Love breaks the GOP mold, LA Times, May 29, 2012 She has advocated for reducing federal aid to students and allowing loan rates to be set by the free market.
At her college orientation Love's father told her, "Mia, your mother and I never took a handout. You will not be a burden to society. You will give back." She underscored this philosophy on the campaign trail to sum up her conservative views.
Love is pro-life and has been endorsed by the Susan B. Anthony List.
Love's race has been the subject of much attention, as she is the first black female mayor in Utah history. "Saratoga Springs swears in Mia Love, Utah's first black woman mayor", "Deseret News," January 9, 2010 She has said that if elected to Congress, she would "join the Congressional Black Caucus and try to take that thing apart from the inside out" and has described the Democrat-dominated Caucus as characterized by "... They sit there and ignite emotions and ignite racism when there isn't. They use their positions to instill fear. Hope and change is turned into fear and blame. Fear that everybody is going to lose everything and blaming Congress for everything instead of taking responsibility."Romboy, Dennis. "Love would 'take apart' Congressional Black Caucus if elected in Utah's 4th District", "Deseret News," January 5, 2012






