[[Bridgeport Bluefish]]

CATEGORIES: Bridgeport Bluefish, Sports in Bridgeport, Connecticut, Visitor attractions in Fairfield County, Connecticut, Professional baseball teams in Connecticut, Atlantic League of Professional Baseball teams

The Bridgeport Bluefish is an American professional baseball team based in Bridgeport, Connecticut. The team is a member of the Liberty Division of the Atlantic League of Professional Baseball, which is not affiliated with Major League Baseball. They play their home games at The Ballpark at Harbor Yard.

History of Bridgeport baseball

The game of baseball was first played in Bridgeport, Connecticut soon after the Civil War ended.  Teams that called the city home were the Victors, Soubrettes, Orators, Crossmen, Mechanics, Hustlers, Bolts, Americans, Bees and the Bears. Bridgeport was the home of Major Leaguer, James "Orator" O'Rourke, who signed the first African-American to play for a professional baseball team in 1895. Visiting Major League and Negro League teams often played exhibition games in Bridgeport in the shadow of the city's smokestacks. The last affiliated minor league baseball team, the Bridgeport Bees, played in the Interstate League and the Colonial League from 1941 to 1950. Professional baseball would not be played in Bridgeport for about another half-century, until the arrival of the Bluefish in 1998.

Bridgeport Bluefish

The first game of the Bridgeport Bluefish was May 21, 1998, and the team has had many winning seasons. The team has been to five Atlantic League Championship Series, and won in 1999 versus the Somerset Patriots. They lost to Atlantic City (1998), Newark (2002) Lancaster (2006) and to York (2010).
The Bluefish, and the Atlantic League itself, tend to attract veteran minor leaguers as well as the occasional Major Leaguer at the end of their careers. Some of the former major-leaguers who have sported Bluefish jerseys include Shea Hillenbrand, Alex Hinshaw, José Offerman, Edgardo Alfonzo, Deivi Cruz, Junior Spivey, Quinton McCracken, Antonio Alfonseca, Willy Mo Pena, Joey Gathright and Mariano Duncan.
The Bluefish won their first league championship in 1999, and have won the most games in Atlantic League history. The land under The Ballpark at Harbor Yard was purchased by the city of Bridgeport from Donald Trump for $1 and with the forgiveness of back taxes owed on the property. The Jenkins Valve plant was demolished to make way for the stadium. The success of the Bluefish led to major redevelopment of the South End, including construction of the Arena at Harbor Yard and a multi-use parking garage.
The original founders of the Bluefish were Mickey Herbert, Jack McGregor, Mary-Jane Foster, and the Bridgeport Waterfront Investors. Herbert anchored the team through a mayoral scandal and difficult financial circumstances. Prior to the 2006 season, the franchise was purchased by Get Hooked, LLC, a group of investors from Fairfield County that included McGregor and Foster.  However, Get Hooked dropped the Bluefish prior to the 2008 season in favor of seeking a new ballpark for the city of Yonkers, New York.  The Bluefish were purchased by Frank Boulton, who is also the owner of the Long Island Ducks and the founder of the Atlantic League.
Before the 2009 season, the Bluefish hired Willie Upshaw, a Major League Baseball alumnus and Fairfield County native, as their bench coach.  He was Bridgeport's first manager from 1998 to 2000, as well as the first base coach for the Cleveland Indians from 2000 to 2005, and the San Francisco Giants for the 2006 and 2007 seasons.  Upshaw spent nine of his ten playing seasons in the Majors with the Toronto Blue Jays. He led the team twice in home runs and RBI. First in 1982 with 21 home runs and 75 RBI and also in 1983 with 27 home runs and 104 RBI. During the 1983 season, Upshaw became the first Toronto player to top 100 RBI in a season.
The Bluefish became the first team in Atlantic League history to record 1,000 victories as a franchise. On June 27, 2012 the Bluefish defeated the York Revolution 2-1 at the Ballpark at Harbor Yard to capture the victory.com/news/index.pointstreak.html?gameid=76514

Logos and uniforms

The official colors of the Bridgeport Bluefish are navy blue, aqua, and silver. The primary logo consists of the "Bluefish" wordmark in navy blue with aqua outline superimposed over a depiction of a cartoon bluefish holding a baseball bat.
The home cap is navy blue with aqua trim on the ventilation holes and an aqua button, with the cap logo depicting a bluefish interwoven with a capital "B" centered on the front. The away cap is navy blue with a gray brim and button, with the same cap logo. The home jersey is white with traditional navy blue piping below the collar and around the sleeves. The "Bluefish" wordmark is centered across the front in navy blue with silver outline and aqua drop shadow. The number on the back is in solid navy blue. The away jersey is grey with navy blue piping, and the "Bridgeport" wordmark centered across the front in navy blue with white outline.  The Bluefish also have teal alternate jerseys, with navy piping.  The interlocking "BB" logo is centered on the left-side chest, with the number on the back in navy outlined in white.

Season-by-season records

Ferry Cup

The Bridgeport Bluefish contend with the Long Island Ducks over the Ferry Cup, which is sponsored by the Bridgeport & Port Jefferson Steamboat Company.  The two teams border on Long Island Sound, and many fans of both teams regularly cross it to support them. The Ducks currently hold the Ferry Cup by winning the 2011 season series 12-6. As of 2011 the Bluefish-Ducks rivalry record is 114-112, in favor of Bridgeport.

Mascots

One of the Bridgeport Bluefish official mascots is an anthropomorphic bluefish named B.B.  He wears the team's alternate jersey (number 98) with white sneakers.  B.B. was born on May 29, 1997 in Cape Hatteras.  He later migrated to the Long Island Sound, and joined the Bluefish soon after.  The mascot's name alludes to the initials of the team and its nickname.
Cap'n L.I. Sounder was another source of entertainment at Harbor Yard.  He donned the uniform of a sailor, and has a short beard.  Cap'n L.I. Sounder's name referred to the nautical rank of captain and a name for a Long Island Sound resident. Cap'n L.I. Sounder no longer appears at Bluefish home games.

Current roster

Retired numbers





Official websites

Blogs



