[[Kichitaro Negishi]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, Living people, Japanese film directors, Pink film directors, People from Tokyo, Waseda University alumni



Life and career

Early career - Nikkatsu

Negishi graduated from Waseda University in the Faculty of Theatre and Film Arts,
After a disappointing second feature High School Girl, Negishi returned to form with the box office hit Wet Weekend,Weisser, pp. 498-499 which won the 9th Best Film award at the 1979 Yokohama Film Festival. Negishi's next film for Nikkatsu, Rape Ceremony was a tale of disaffected youth concerning a feud between former motorcycle gang members and the high school boys who once idolized them and now accuse them of selling out to the system. 324-325 In the June 1980 "Never in the Morning" Negishi uses the office romance sex-farce plot to poke fun at contemporary morality and sexual double standards. 286, 291
Negishi began 1981 with Female Teacher: Dirty After School, the third entry in the 8 episode "Female Teacher" series from Nikkatsu, all based loosely on Noboru Tanaka's 1973 hit film for Nikkatsu, Female Teacher: Private Life. Negishi's film is considered to be one of the best in the series and he was by this time one of Nikkatsu's top directors.148-150 His second film in 1981, Crazy Fruit, another story of alienated youth, was based on a 1956 Nikkatsu film Crazed Fruit, made before the studio's Roman porno period. 93

Into mainstream film

Negishi made his breakthrough into mainstream film with his October 1981 Enrai or Distant Thunder, produced by ATG, New Century Producers (NCP) and Nikkatsu. This film, with its detailed realism and complexity, along with his earlier Roman porno feature Crazy Fruit, won him the Best Director award at the 1982 Yokohama Film Festival. Negishi made one more Roman porno film for Nikkatsu, the June 1982 Cabaret Diary, a satirical look at hostesses and clients in a topless bar in Tokyo's Kabukichō district. 73-74 Negishi left Nikkatsu after this film and was one of the founding members of Director's Company along with eight other young directors.
Soon afterwards he made the light comedy My Wedding (Oretchi no uedingu) followed by the July 1983 thriller Detective Story, starring Yusaku Matsuda in a mixture of romance and mystery. Negishi received much favorable notice from his 1986 drama Uhohho tankentai (literally "Ooh! Exploration Party") written by fellow director Yoshimitsu Morita. The movie, produced by Director's Company and released by Toho, won the Best Film award at the 1987 Yokohama Film Festival
Despite his success in the late 1980s, Negishi worked only sparingly for the next 15 years: a 1992 film based on the manga series Kachō Kōsaku Shima, the short feature Chibusa about a man (Kaoru Kobayashi) caring for his leukemia-stricken wife, and Kizuna (1998), a thriller about a former yakuza with Kōji Yakusho and Ken Watanabe.

Later career

After several years away from filmmaking, Negishi returned in 2004 with Tōkō no ki (literally "Translucent Tree"), an adult romantic drama about a documentary filmmaker and the daughter of the subject of one of his films from 25 years earlier.
Negishi's 2009 melodrama, Villon's Wife, about an author and his long-suffering wife in post-war Japan,

Filmography






