[[Tennis on NBC]]

CATEGORIES: Tennis on television, NBC Sports, 1955 American television series debuts, 1950s American television series, 1960s American television series, 1970s American television series, 1980s American television series, 1990s American television series, 2000s American television series, 2010s American television series, NBC network shows

Tennis on NBC is a television program produced by NBC Sports that broadcasts the main professional tennis tournaments in the United States.



The usual time slot over the NBC network for Meet the Press (the long running Sunday public affairs program for NBC) is airing from 9-10 a.m. local time in most markets, though this may vary by markets due to commitments by affiliates to religious, E/I or local public affairs programing, and varies several weeks in the summer due to morning coverage of Grand Slam tennis and golf tournaments by NBC Sports.

US Nationals coverage

NBC broadcast the US Nationals as early as 1955 and at least up until 1961. Bud Palmer, Jack Kramer, Lindsey Nelson, Don Budge, Bill Stern, and Bill Talbert were among the commentators during this period.

Wimbledon coverage

NBC broadcast The Championships, Wimbledon beginning 1969. Americans had made a tradition of NBC's "Breakfast at Wimbledon" specials at weekends, where live coverage (which under the guidance of then-NBC Sports executive producer Don OhlmeyerJulian Rubenstein, "Monday Night Football's Hail Mary," New York Times Magazine, Sept. 3, 2000. and associate producer Bob Basche, began in 1979 for the men and in 1982 for the women) started early in the morning (the US being a minimum of 5 hours behind the UK) and continued well into the afternoon, interspersed with commentary and interviews from Bud Collins, whose tennis acumen and (in)famous patterned trousers are well-known to tennis fans in the USA. Collins was sacked by NBC in 2007, but was promptly hired by ESPN, the cable home for The Championships in the States. For many years, NBC's primary Wimbledon host was veteran broadcaster Dick Enberg.
Effective the 2012 tournament, all live coverage (something of which NBC has been criticized for not doing"NBC out, ESPN in, no more Wimbledon tape delay," from Los Angeles Times, 7/3/2011"ESPN acquires all rights to Wimbledon," from ESPN Los Angeles, 7/5/2011), including the Finals, will be exclusively on ESPN, marking the second major tennis championship (after the Australian Open) available in the United States exclusively on pay television. The 2011 tournament marked the 43rd and final year of NBC's coverage. NBC issued a statement saying it had been outbid for the rights to future broadcasts.

French Open coverage

NBC's coverage of the French Open began in 1975. With the USTA agreeing to an eleven-year deal with ESPN for exclusive broadcast rights to the US Open, the French Open will be the only tennis tournament on American network television.

Olympic Games coverage

In 2004 and 2006, Bravo carried coverage of the Olympic Games during the overnights and mornings produced by NBC Sports. In 2008, the channel carried no coverage, as NBCUniversal had acquired Oxygen, allowing Bravo to continue to carry their general programming schedule during NBC coverage of the Games.  In 2012, NBC Sports announced that Bravo would serve as the home of Olympic tennis with 56 hours of coverage.

On-screen graphics

NBC Sports first switched to digital on-screen graphics in 1995, although in a very limited, text based form.  In 1999, NBC rolled out their first modern graphics package.  The graphics were transparent black rectangles, with 3D gold bars on top and bottom, with blue accents for most sports (green for golf, purple for Wimbledon, and orange for the tennis French Open).  Interestingly, scoreboxes were still not permanent, and they disappeared during plays.  In 2002, the graphics were modified.  They were changed to rounded edged, and the transparent color was changed from black to the color of the accents, which also replaced gold as the border color.  The graphics still had no animation and the scoreboxes still were not permanent until 2005, when college football and hockey finally adopted scorebars, which didn't match the other graphics.

Commentators






