[[Mark Perry (author)]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American writers, 1950 births

Mark Perry (born 1950) is an American author specializing in military, intelligence, and foreign affairs analysis.  He has authored eight books: Four Stars, Perry's articles have been featured in a number of leading publications including The Los Angeles Times, The Washington Post, The Nation, Newsday, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, the Christian Science Monitor, and The Plain Dealer (Cleveland, Ohio). He is a graduate of Northwestern Military and Naval Academy and of Boston University.

Career

Perry is the former co-Director of the Washington, D.C., London, and Beirut-based Conflicts Forum, Perry served as an unofficial advisor to PLO Chairman and Palestinian President Yasser Arafat from 1989 to 2004. 18, 2012.
Perry has appeared on numerous national and international televised forums. He is a frequent guest commentator and expert on Al-Jazeera television, has appeared regularly on CNN's The International Hour and on Special Assignment. Perry's work on the CIA's program to destabilize the Saddam Hussein regime, originally published by Regardies magazine, was the basis for an award winning  BBC Panorama production of "The Intelligence War Against Iraq". His son, Cal Perry, was a CNN Mideast correspondent and is currently al-Jazeera's Jerusalem correspondent.
Perry's books have met with critical acclaim from Kirkus Reviews, The Washington Post, The New York Review of Books, The New York Times, The New Yorker, and many other publications. He has served as editor of Washington D.C.'s City Paper,
Perry was a senior foreign policy analyst for Vietnam Veterans of America Foundation (VVAF). Perry served as the political director for the VVAF's Campaign for a Landmine Free World.
As of 2011, he was at work on his ninth book, MacArthur At War, to be published by Basic Books in 2012.

Awards

Perry is the recipient of both the 1995 National Jewish Book Award for his second book, A Fire In Zion,




