[[Azienda Agricola Testamatta]]

CATEGORIES: Wineries of Italy

Azienda Agricola Testamatta is an Italian winery run by Bibi Graetz, a winemaker of artist background from Italian/Norwegian heritage, who produces several Tuscan wines from vineyards located in the hills of Fiesole that overlook the city of Florence. Graetz has been described as a "cool winemaker" and "one of the rising young stars in Tuscany". Crazy Thoughts in the Hills of FlorenceVirbila, S. Irene, Los Angeles Times (March 25, 2009). 2006 Bibi Graetz Grilli del Testamatta The wines are all classified as Toscana IGT.

History

Perhaps due to his partial Norwegian ancestry, his mother Sunniva Graetz née Rasmussen married to the Swiss-Israeli sculptor Gidon Graetz, Bibi Graetz and his wines have received a great deal of attention from Norwegian press since the first vintage of 2000. Norsk vinbonde gjør stor suksess i Italia
Favourable scores from Robert Parker, and in particular a score of 98 for the Testamatta 2006 from Wine Spectator,Kramer, Matt, The Oregonian (January 04, 2009). Matt Kramer weighs the merits of multiple vineyard sourcesDalheim, Ulf, Adresseavisen (March 6, 2009). Norsk kunsteventyr på flaske i Toscana Parzen, Jeremy, dobianchi. Tuscan city celebrates 98 points in Wine Spectator Despite imprecise commentary that designates Graetz' wines as Super Tuscans, the wines are exclusively made from traditional Italian grapes, and receive moderate amounts of oak treatment.
Graetz' mid-range wine Soffocone di Vincigliata was banned from U.S. import due to regulations that permit no wine label to feature any type of sexual imagery. This did not come into effect until Graetz had made public the explanation that his Vincigliata vineyard is a favoured destination for local young lovers, and "soffocone" is a crude Firenze term for fellatio, at which point the figurative label depiction was seen in a new light. Bibi sensurert i USA  Zalaznick, Jeff, Always Hungry New York (February 17, 2009). What's In A Name?: Soffocone di Vincigliata A revised label image was later permitted for U.S. import.

Production

Graetz manages . 
Among the winery's bottlings are the flagship wine Testamatta, ("Hothead"), in recent years a 100% Sangiovese with an average production of .  
Additionally the Soffocone di Vincigliata made from single-vineyard grapes with a blending proporetion of 90% Sangiovese, 7% Colorino, 3% Canaiolo has an average production of  and is in some markets sold in bag-in-box.
The winery also produces white wines, among which are the Bugia ("lie") bianco and Cicala del Giglio from the Ansonica grape sourced from the island of Giglio, and Bianco di Casamatta, widely sourced from Tuscan Vermentino grapes.



Bibi Graetz winery facts Michael Skurnik Wines




