[[Big Brother Brasil 10]]

CATEGORIES: 2010 television seasons, Big Brother Brasil, Big Brother (TV series) seasons

Big Brother Brasil 10 was the tenth season of Big Brother Brasil. It premiered on January 12, 2010 and ended on March 30, 2010 on the Rede Globo television network. 
The show was produced by Endemol Globo and presented by news reporter Pedro Bial. The season was officially confirmed since 2008 as part of a millionaire contract between international Endemol and Rede Globo. The prize award was R$1,500,000 without tax allowances.
The winner was 37 year-old  physical education teacher Marcelo Dourado from Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, who won with 60% of 154.878.460 votes cast, a worldwide record. He previously appeared on Big Brother Brasil 4, when he finished in seventh place.
Anamara Barreira and Elieser Ambrosio returned to compete as veterans in Big Brother Brasil 13, where they placed 8th and 10th respectively.



There were seventeen housemates competing for the grand prize (making this the first season to have an odd number of original housemates), a decrease over the previous season. The season lasted 78 days, a decrease of one week over the previous season.

The game

Big Brother divided the housemates into five cliques of three: Sarados (the Fit), Belos (the Beautiful), Cabeças (the Nerds), Ligados (the Tunned) and Coloridos (the Colorful/Gays). 
The housemates play as individuals except when a housemate from a clique wins Head of Household, then all members of that clique are immune from eviction. This concept was first implemented on the eleventh season of Big Brother (U.S.)
Five past housemates returned to support one of the cliques in the House: Joseane Oliveira of Big Brother 3 supported the Belos, Marcelo Dourado of Big Brother 4 supported the Sarados, Rafael Valente of Big Brother 6 supported the Cabeças, Fani Pacheco of Big Brother 7 supported the Coloridos and Natalia Casassola of Big Brother 8 supported the Ligados. 
Fernanda won the first HoH competition for the "Belos" allowing Joseane to return to the House as a full housemate and the first Head of Household. Joseane also could choose one of the two male ex-housemates (either Dourado or Rafael) to enter as a full Housemate. She chose Dourado.

Reunion show

The reunion was hosted by Ana Maria Braga and aired on April 5, 2010 on the morning news and talk show "Mais Você". It was first reunion since Season 5 and all the former housemates attended. Actresses Deborah Secco and Betty Lago, singer Preta Gil, Season 7 winner Diego Gasques and Season 9 runner-up Priscila Pires were special guests.

Controversies

Anamara

A request for exemption was made on January 29, 2010 from housemate Anamara Barreira to the State Military Police  was accepted and the decision was published on February 23, 2010 in the Official Gazette of Bahia. 
Anamara should have returned from her vacation earlier this month. Without the exemption, she would be considered a deserter and could be imprisoned for up to two years. The application was lodged by the procurator of Anamara, Amanda Miller. According to Amanda, Anamara left an attorney before entering the house to the application for exemption from the corporation could be done. With the letter of resignation Anamara could not be considered a defector.

Dourado

Dourado caused disagreements and controversies by displaying manjis in a tattoo on his left arm, which were taken to be swastikas.

Elenita

After recording a post-elimination interview with Elenita for a spin-off show broadcast by cable channel Multishow, Season 7 winner and main host Diego Gasques criticized the former housemate on his Twitter account, commenting that the two had a fight and she was a disgusting and low level woman. Later, he deleted the post, but kept posting sarcastic comments about her. 
A week after the incident, Season 9 runner-up Priscila Pires took over hosting duties from him to interview the last evicted housemate at the time, Angélica Marques.

Housemates

The cast list was unveiled on January 5, 2010.
(ages stated at time of contest)

Voting History

The voting table below records whom each housemate voted to nominate on the diary room during his or her time in the House. The Head of Household vote (cast in front of the other housemates) automatically nominate one housemate from eviction. Then, the other housemates voting and if the vote is tied, the HOH breaks the tie (this type of vote counts towards the total number of nominations received). 






