[[Hurricane How (1951)]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 Atlantic hurricane season, Category 2 Atlantic hurricanes, Hurricanes in Florida, Hurricanes in North Carolina, Hurricanes in New England

Hurricane How was the only tropical cyclone to make landfall on the United States in 1951. It was the eighth storm of the season, forming on September 28 in the northwest Caribbean and, after entering the Gulf of Mexico, turned eastward and became a tropical storm. The storm brought heavy rainfall to Florida, causing flooding and $2 million in damage. Tropical Storm How later became a hurricane, passing near the Outer Banks of North Carolina where it produced strong winds and high tides. A ship called the "Southern Isles" capsized off of Cape Hatteras, killing 17 out of the crew of 23. Rains and high tides occurred in southeastern New England, before the hurricane moved out to sea and became extratropical.

Meteorological history

The origins of Hurricane How were from an easterly wave that organized into a tropical depression, in the western Caribbean Sea on September 28, 1951. It moved to the north-northwest, passing by the Yucatan peninsula before turning to the east in the central Gulf of Mexico on October 1. That day, a reconnaissance aircraft in the system reported gale force winds and, as a result, it was upgraded to Tropical Storm How. The storm strengthened to just below hurricane force, making landfall near Punta Gorda, Florida with 
Tropical Storm How emerged into the Atlantic Ocean near Vero Beach, quickly intensifying to hurricane strength by October 3. Turning northeastward, Hurricane How reached peak winds of 110 mph (180 km/h) on October 4 as it passed near the Outer Banks of North Carolina. Subsequently the hurricane embarked on a slow weakening trend, as it briefly posed a threat to New England. It passed southeast of Cape Cod before turning more to the east-northeast. It became an extratropical storm on October 7, and the next day the remnants of How dissipated in the far northern Atlantic.

Impact and records

As the storm was not very well-organized when it crossed Florida, the strongest winds were not near the center, and instead were confined to squalls in the Florida Keys and the southeast coast. Miami reported a gust of 60 mph (96 km/h), and West Palm Beach reported 55 mph (88 km/h) winds. of tomato and bean fields were deluged.
Further north, the hurricane threatened to strike or move very close to the Outer Banks. Hurricane warnings were posted from Cape Hatteras to Manteo, and ships were advised to remain at port.
Offshore, a ship called Southern Isle was wrecked by the high surf. It had been sailing from Puerto Rico with a full load of iron ore and, as it approached the hurricane, the vessel changed directions and slowed down. By October 5, winds were strong and the seas were moderately rough. Very quickly, the ship broke into two, which prevented any time to escape on lifeboats. Ultimately, 17 people died in the event.
Overall, Hurricane How caused about $2 million (USD) in damage. It was the only storm to strike the United States during the year, and consequently, 1951 had the least tropical cyclone damage in the United States since the 1939 season.






