[[Thisara Perera]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, People from Colombo, Sri Lanka Test cricketers, Sri Lanka One Day International cricketers, Sri Lanka Twenty20 International cricketers, Chennai Super Kings cricketers, Mumbai Indians cricketers, Wayamba cricketers, Living people, Kochi Tuskers Kerala cricketers, Cricketers at the 2011 Cricket World Cup, Basnahira cricketers, One Day International hat-trick takers, Brisbane Heat cricketers, Kandurata Warriors cricketers

Narangoda Liyanaarachchilage Thisara Chirantha Perera (born 3 April 1989 in Colombo) is a Sri Lankan cricketer. He represents Sri Lanka at the Test, One Day International (ODI) and Twenty20 levels. He plays first class cricket in Sri Lanka for the Colts Cricket Club and the Wayamba Wolves. An all-rounder, he is an aggressive left-handed batsman and a right-arm medium-fast bowler. In Australia he is known by his nickname panda, which was bestowed upon him by George Bailey during his stint at BBL with Brisbane Heat, although he prefers TP.sampspeak.html

Early career

Perera attended the prestigious St. Joseph's College, Colombo, which has produced Sri Lankan cricketers such as Chaminda Vaas, Angelo Mathews and Dimuth Karunaratne. He represented Sri Lanka at various youth levels, and was selected for the 2008 ICC Under-19 Cricket World Cup. In November 2008, he made his first class debut for the Colts Cricket Club.

International career

Perera made his international debut for Sri Lanka in December 2009, in a late call-up to play in an ODI against India in Kolkata. The following month, he was purchased by the Chennai Super Kings for US$50,000 in the auction for the 2010 Indian Premier League.
Perera was a member of Sri Lanka's squad for the 2011 Cricket World Cup in Sri Lanka, India and Bangladesh.  He was part of the team defeated in the final of the tournament by India, scoring 22 not out off ten deliveries and taking the wicket of Gautam Gambhir.
In the 4th ODI of the same series, he shocked Pakistan by taking a hat-trick  and managing a run-out in his maiden over took the wicket of saajid and became first Sri Lankan to register a hat-trick against Pakistan.[ref]
</ref> He is also famous for his six hitting ability in T20s and ODI in death overs.






