[[Apu Nahasapeemapetilon]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons characters, Fictional immigrants to the United States, Fictional Indian people, Fictional shopkeepers, Fictional characters introduced in 1990, Fictional American people of Indian descent, Racism in the United States

Apu Nahasapeemapetilon 

Role in The Simpsons

Biography

In the episode Homer and Apu, Apu claimed to be from "Ramatpur." "Ramatpur" is possibly an amalgamation of the names of the rural village Ramapur, the large Kanpur suburb of Rawatpur, and the city of Rampur, all of which are in Uttar Pradesh.
Apu is a naturalised US citizen. He holds a Ph.D. in computer science. He graduated first in his class of seven million at 'Caltech' — Calcutta Technical Institute — going on to earn his doctorate at the Springfield Heights Institute of Technology (S.H.I.T.).
Apu began working at the Kwik-E-Mart during graduate school to pay off his student loan, but he stayed afterward as he had come to enjoy his job and the friends he had made. He remained an illegal immigrant until Mayor Quimby proposed a municipal law to expel all undocumented aliens. Apu responded by purchasing a forged birth certificate from the Springfield Mafia that listed his parents as US citizens Herb and Judy Nahasapeemapetilon, but when he realized he was forsaking his origins, he abandoned this plan and instead successfully managed to pass his citizenship test with help from Lisa and Homer Simpson. Thus, he refers to himself as a "semi-legal immigrant".
During 1985, Apu was a member of the barbershop quartet The Be Sharps along with Homer Simpson, Barney Gumble, and Seymour Skinner. Upon the advice of the band manager Nigel, Apu took the stage name Apu de Beaumarchais (a reference to Beaumarchais, author of The Barber of Seville). Apu is a vegan, and enjoys the Cheap Trick song "Dream Police" even though he knows the words imperfectly. He also claims the title of the Fifth Beatle, although Paul McCartney (who first met Apu during The Beatles' stay in India) rolls his eyes at that claim. Apu is a massive cricket fan, as shown in the episode "Moe Letter Blues".

Family

In the episode "The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons", Apu enjoys a brief period as Springfield's leading ladies' man after being spontaneously drawn into a bachelor auction. He spends the days following the auction on a whirlwind of dates. These come to a sudden halt when his mother announces it is time for his arranged marriage to a woman named Manjula, whom he had not seen in years. Apu tries to wriggle out of the arrangement at first, with Homer making Marge pretend to be his wife until Apu's mother finds her with Homer, but is won over when he meets Manjula face-to-face at the wedding, and the two decide to give the marriage a try (Manjula notes nonchalantly that they can always get a divorce). Later the two actually do fall in love. In the episode "Eight Misbehavin'", Manjula receives too many doses of fertility drugs from herself, Apu, and the well-meaning, but unsynchronized, Simpsons, due to difficulties with having a baby. This leads to her giving birth to octuplets: Anoop, Uma, Nabendu, Poonam, Priya, Sandeep, Sashi, and Gheet. This causes difficulties for the family, but finally they decide to get on with their life. During the episode "Bart-Mangled Banner", when the town changes its name to Libertyville to be patriotic after it is claimed Springfield hates America, Apu temporarily changes his children's names to Lincoln, Freedom, Condoleezza, Coke, Pepsi, Manifest Destiny, Apple Pie, and Superman.
Apu and Manjula have a mostly happy marriage, despite understandable marital problems caused by Apu's workaholic nature and long hours, and the strain of caring for eight children. A further strain came up when Apu was unfaithful to Manjula with the Squishee delivery lady, causing him to briefly move out and even making him contemplate suicide, and one of his punishments was to legally change his name to Slime Q. Slimedog. He and his family are devout Hindus, and he particularly venerates Ganesha."I have a shrine to Ganesha, the god of worldly wisdom, located in the employee lounge."
Sanjay (voiced by Harry Shearer), Apu's brother, helps run the Kwik-E-Mart. Sanjay has a daughter named Pahasatira, and a son named Jamshed. They all share the Nahasapeemapetilon surname. Apu has another younger brother, who is only mentioned in "The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons". When Apu's and Manjula's parents were first arranging their marriage, Apu was shown on a chart as the oldest of three. Apu also has a cousin living in India named Kavi, also voiced by Hank Azaria, who helped Homer while he was in India. Kavi works for several American companies taking service calls using General American, cowboy, and Jamaican accents.

Other appearances

Apu is a playable character in The Simpsons: Hit & Run video game. His quest in the game is to redeem himself for unknowingly selling the tainted Buzz Cola that has driven the residents of Springfield insane.
Apu also makes an appearance in The Simpsons: Road Rage as a passenger and unlockable playable character.

Character

Apu first appeared in the season one episode "The Telltale Head". While creating the character, the writers decided they would not make him ethnic. They felt it would be too offensive and stereotypical and did not want to offend viewers. In the season seven episode "Lisa the Vegetarian" it is revealed that Apu is vegan.
Apu married Manjula in the episode "The Two Mrs. Nahasapeemapetilons". Rich Appel first constructed the idea for Apu's marriage.

Reception

Apu is one of the most prominent South Asian characters on primetime television in the United States.
Apu's image has been widely licensed, on items ranging from board games to auto air fresheners. In July 2007, convenience store chain 7-Eleven converted 11 of its stores in the United States and one in Canada into Kwik-E-Marts to celebrate the release of The Simpsons Movie. There was a mild controversy when the promotion offended members of the Indian-American community who felt that Apu is a caricature that plays on too many negative stereotypes. Despite this, 7-Eleven reported that many of its Indian employees reacted positively to the idea,
Comedian Hari Kondabolu noted the negative reaction to Apu in the Indian-American community in a Totally Biased with W. Kamau Bell web exclusive segment.






