[[Gedeon G. Quijano]]

CATEGORIES: Filipino medical doctors, 1989 deaths, Provincial governors of the Philippines, 1910 births

Gedeon Gador Quijano (Alcantara, Cebu, 13 December 1910 – 15 May 1989) was a Filipino politician, governor of Misamis Occidental,José Veloso Abueva Ramón Magsaysay: a political biography  1971 - Page 197 "He ordered the disarming of the special agents of Governor Gedeon Quijano of Misamis Occidental, jailed eight policemen in Bacolod for discharging their firearms during a Nacionalista meeting, and gave bickering and pugnacious Cebuano ..." and later medical doctor in the United States at Salisbury - W.G. (Bill) Hefner VA Medical Center,Post, R. (1977, December 22).  "Former governor of Philippines".  Salisbury Post, North Carolina, p.1. U.S. Army VeteranRed Cross. Philippines. National Red Cross. (1972)  Achievement and progress: a silver jubilee special, 1947-1972. and lawyer. (1977, December 22).  "Former governor of Philippines".  Salisbury Post, North Carolina, p.1.  

Life

He was the  son of Bishop Juan P. Quijano and was the second eldest of 9 children and younger brother of Gardeopatra G. Quijano, a dentist and writer. (2003, October 6).  "And who's not afraid of Inday Garding?"  Sun Star.  Retrieved from  Occ.  now Tangub City.  Gedeon and Eugenia had three children, Sela Quijano Borromeo (Segundina, Eugenia, Luciana, Ako!), Dr. Zeus Hito T. Quijano (Greek God, Emperor), and Dr. Cari T. Quijano (China, America, Russia, Inglatiera) named after the allies at the time.
Quijano completed his studies at the University of the Philippines along with his sister Gardeopatra and wife Eugenia. While in school, they all took turns in helping care for his eldest daughter Sela. Although, Gedeon grew up as an Aglipayan, being the son of a Bishop of the Aglipay Church now known as the Iglesia Filipina Independiente, his daughter attended Immaculada Concepcion, a Catholic all-girls school at the time. During the war he was recruited as a doctor in the U.S. Army, and his youngest son Cari was born while in hiding from the enemy in the jungle.

Governorship

As a doctor,[ref]Philippine Medical Association. (1963) Journal, Volume 39
[/ref] Gedeon became very popular in his hometown treating poor people in the rural areas for free and charged only the rich. As a result, he was appointed Governor by President Roxas with Congressman Villarin's recommendation when the position became vacant. Quijano  Inspired by the admiration of the people he then pursued to widen his political endeavors and ran for governor in his province Misamis Occidental  He won a landslide victory and became the youngest governor.  He served four terms as governor, appointed in 1946, elected in 1947, 1951, and 1959, during a time of progress and growth. (1977, December 22).  "Former governor of Philippines".  Salisbury Post, North Carolina, p.1.  When he tried to run for another term against a wealthy opponent Henry Regalado who was also supported by a millionaire shipping liner owner Congressman William Chiongbian,Sidel, John Thayer.  A Provincial Dynasty  he realized then it was a very tough competition. And lacking of funds he was forced to finance his political campaign by mortgaging his house. He was defeated and was offered a position under the administration of President Ferdinand Marcos. But he declined because he did not want to betray his faithful supporters by working under the opposite political party affiliation.  Although Gedeon had befriended Marcos, during Marcos's term as Congressman and Senator, he spoke against him as President.  Fearing prosecution Gedeon and Eugenia left the Philippines. (1977, December 22).  "Former governor of Philippines".  Salisbury Post, North Carolina, p.1. They first lived in Virginia for a year and worked in the State Hospital, but he decided to move to Salisbury, North Carolina and accepted a job offer as a physiatrist at the Veteran's Administration Hospital. (1977, December 22).  "Former governor of Philippines".  Salisbury Post, North Carolina, p.1.
Meanwhile in the Philippines, rumors widely spread that President Ferdinand Marcos would declare martial law. Out of fear, Gedeon advised his children to emigrate to the U.S. before martial law was declared in 1972. He pleaded to the U.S. President and U.S. State Department for his daughter and family to be approved for immigration.[ref]Central Foreign Policy Files
 to help push for citizenship and benefits for Filipinos who fought in the WWII with American troops.  Two of his grandchildren served in the U.S. military.
After his political career ended Gedeon had served under five presidents, Roxas, Quirino, Magsaysay,Constantino, L. & Constantino R. (1978)  The Philippines: the continuing past. Garcia, and Macapagal (President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo's father).  With his growing power in the province, Gedeon was alleged for having 500 personal agents of which he was cleared. (1971) Ramon Magsaysay: a political biography.  He was the youngest governor of the province, one of the youngest serving governors in the Philippines, and one of longest serving governors.  Gedeon was also a member of the Freemasons.  He returned years later after Martial Law was lifted to his hometown in 1981 where he always wanted to be buried, and while on his last vacation on May 15, 1989, he suffered a stroke.  Gedeon and Eugenia's home still stand in Oroquieta City, Misamis Occidental, and his family now resides in the U.S.







Gardeopatra G. Quijano

Filipino Veterans Fairness Act

Misamis Occidental

Oroquieta City


