[[Óscar Romero]]

CATEGORIES: 1917 births, 1980 deaths, 20th-century Roman Catholic archbishops, 20th-century Roman Catholic martyrs, 20th-century venerated Christians, Anti-poverty advocates, Assassinated religious leaders, Assassinated Salvadoran people, Catholic martyrs of El Salvador, Deaths by firearm in El Salvador, Human rights in El Salvador, Martyred Roman Catholic bishops, People celebrated in the Lutheran liturgical calendar, People from San Miguel Department (El Salvador), People murdered in El Salvador, Roman Catholic activists, Roman Catholic archbishops of San Salvador, People of the Salvadoran Civil War, Salvadoran religious leaders, Salvadoran Roman Catholic priests, Servants of God, Unsolved murders in El Salvador

Óscar Arnulfo Romero y Galdámez (15 August 1917 – 24 March 1980) was a bishop of the Catholic Church in El Salvador. He became the fourth Archbishop of San Salvador, succeeding Luis Chávez, and spoke out against poverty, social injustice, assassinations and torture. The impact of the Archbishop Oscar Romero's alliance with the struggle for liberation of the Salvadoran people: A discussion of church-state relations (El Salvador) (M.A. thesis) Wilfrid Laurier University Romero was assassinated while offering Mass in 1980.
In 1997, Pope John Paul II bestowed upon him the title of Servant of God, and a cause for beatification and canonization was opened for the assassinated bishop. As the canonization process continues, some In 2008, Europe-based magazine A Different View included Romero among its 15 Champions of World Democracy.A Different View, Issue 19, January 2008.

Early life

Óscar Arnulfo Romero y Galdámez was born on 15 August 1917, He lived in a country where 40% of the land was owned by 13 families. The church was being persecuted at this time and many were being killed or assassinated.
He could often be found at one of the town's two churches during his free time. At age seven, Romero came down with an unknown life-threatening illness, from which he eventually recovered.
Romero entered (government funded) public school, which offered only grades one through three. When finished with public school, Romero was privately tutored by Anita Iglesias, Romero showed exceptional proficiency as an apprentice. Santos wanted to offer his son the skill of a trade, because in El Salvador studies seldom led to employment.

Priesthood

He entered the minor seminary in San Miguel at the age of thirteen, was promoted to the national seminary in San Salvador; and completed his studies at the Gregorian University in Rome, where he received a Licentiate in Theology. He was ordained in Rome on 4 April 1942."Archbishop Oscar Arnulfo Romero", International Day for the Right to the Truth Concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims Unfortunately, his family could not attend his ordination because of WWII travel restrictions. Romero remained in Italy to obtain a doctoral degree in theology which specialized in ascetical theology. Before finishing, in 1943 at the age of 26, he was summoned back home from Fascist Italy by the bishop. He traveled home with his good friend Father Valladares, who was also doing doctoral work in Rome. On the route home they made  stops in Spain and Cuba, being detained by Cuban police for having come from Benito Mussolini's Italy and were placed in an internment camp. After several months in prison, Valladares became sick and some priests of the Congregation of the Most Holy Redeemer helped to have the two transferred to a hospital. From the hospital, they were released from Cuban custody and allowed back home, where they sailed for Mexico and then back home to El Salvador.
Romero worked as a parish priest in Anamorós, but then moved to San Miguel where he worked for over 20 years. He promoted various apostolic groups, started an Alcoholics Anonymous group, helped in the construction of San Miguel's cathedral and supported devotion to the Our Lady of Peace. He was later appointed Rector of the inter-diocese seminary in San Salvador.
In 1966, he began his public life when chosen to be the Secretary of the Bishops Conference for El Salvador. He also became the director of the archdiocesan newspaper Orientación, which became fairly conservative while he was editor, defending the traditional magisterium of the Catholic Church.
In 1970, he was appointed auxiliary bishop to San Salvador Archbishop Luis Chávez y González. In 1974 he was appointed Bishop of the Diocese of Santiago de María, a poor, rural region.

Archbishop

On 23 February 1977, he was appointed Archbishop of San Salvador. His appointment was met with surprise, dismay, and even incredulity. While this appointment was welcomed by the government, many priests were disappointed, especially those openly aligning with Marxism. The progressive priests feared that his conservative reputation would negatively affect liberation theology's commitment to the poor.
On 12 March 1977, Rutilio Grande, a progressive Jesuit priest and personal friend of Romero who had been creating self-reliance groups among the poor campesinos, was assassinated. His death had a profound impact on Romero, who later stated, "When I looked at Rutilio lying there dead I thought, 'If they have killed him for doing what he did, then I too have to walk the same path'".. Romero urged the government to investigate, but they ignored his request. Furthermore, the censored press remained silent.infed.htm
Tension was noted by the closure of schools and the lack of Catholic priests invited to participate in government. In response to Fr. Rutilio's murder, Romero revealed a radicalism that had not been evident earlier. Traditionally, the church had been seen as complicit in the aims of the state and military to privilege the wealthy and powerful while the majority of the population remained in abject poverty. He spoke out against poverty, social injustice, assassinations and torture.
In 1979, the Revolutionary Government Junta came to power amidst a wave of human rights abuses by paramilitary right-wing groups and the government in an escalation of violence that would become the  Salvadoran Civil War.  Romero criticized the United States for giving military aid to the new government and wrote to President Jimmy Carter in February 1980, warning that increased US military aid would "undoubtedly sharpen the injustice and the political repression inflicted on the organized people, whose struggle has often been for their most basic human rights". Carter, concerned that El Salvador would become "another Nicaragua", ignored Romero's pleas and continued military aid to the Salvadoran government.
As a result of his humanitarian efforts, Romero began to be noticed internationally. In February 1980, he was given an honorary doctorate by the University of Louvain. On his visit to Europe to receive this honor, he met Pope John Paul II and expressed his concerns at what was happening in his country. Romero argued that it was problematic to support the Salvadoran government because it legitimized terror and assassinations.

Statements on persecution of the Church

Archbishop Romero denounced the persecution of members of the Catholic Church who had worked on behalf of the poor:Oscar Romero, Voice of the Voiceless: The Four Pastoral Letters and Other Statements (Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books, 1985), pp. 177-187.

Popular radio sermons

By the time of his death, Archbishop Romero had built up an enormous following among Salvadorans. He did this largely through broadcasting his weekly sermon across El Salvador. This was followed by an hour long speech on radio the following day. On the importance of these broadcasts, one writer noted "The archbishop's Sunday sermon was the main source in El Salvador about what was happening.... It was estimated to have the largest listenership of any programme in the country". Similarly, his diocesan weekly paper Orientacion carried lists of cases of torture and repression every week.

Spiritual life

Romero noted in his diary on 4 February 1943: "In recent days the Lord has inspired in me a great desire for holiness.... I have been thinking of how far a soul can ascend if it lets itself be possessed entirely by God." Commenting on this passage, James R. Brockman, S.J., Romero's biographer and author of Romero: A Life, said that "All the evidence available indicates that he continued on his quest for holiness until the end of his life. But he also matured in that quest." 
According to Brockman, Romero's spiritual journey had some of these characteristics:

Assassination

Romero was shot on 24 March 1980 while celebrating Mass,

Funeral

Romero was buried in the Metropolitan Cathedral of San Salvador (Catedral Metropolitana de San Salvador). The funeral mass (rite of visitation and requiem) on 30 March 1980, in San Salvador was attended by more than 250,000 mourners from all over the world. Viewing this attendance as a protest, Jesuit priest John Dear has said, "Romero's funeral was the largest demonstration in Salvadoran history, some say in the history of Latin America."
At the funeral, Cardinal Corripio Ahumada, speaking as the personal delegate of Pope John Paul II, eulogized Romero as a "beloved, peacemaking man of God", and stated that "his blood will give fruit to brotherhood, love and peace."
During the ceremony, smoke bombs exploded on the streets near the cathedral and subsequently there were rifle-fire shots that came from surrounding buildings, including the National Palace. Many people were killed by gunfire and in the stampede of people running away from the explosions and gunfire; official sources talk of 31 overall casualties, while journalists indicated between 30 and 50 died.
Some witnesses claimed it was government security forces that threw bombs into the crowd, and army sharpshooters, dressed as civilians, that fired into the chaos from the balcony or roof of the National Palace. However, there are contradictory accounts as to the course of the events and "probably, one will never know the truth about the interrupted funeral."
Twenty-five years later, the BBC recalled the scene:
As the gunfire continued, Romero's body was buried in a crypt beneath the sanctuary. Even after the burial, people continued to line up to pay homage to their martyred prelate.

International reaction

Archbishop Romero's assassination received considerable attention across the world.

=Ireland=

All sections of Irish political and religious life condemned his assassination, with the Irish Minister for Foreign Affairs Brian Lenihan 'expressing shock and revulsion at the murder of Dr Romero','Three ministers flee El Salvador, 29 March 1980 while the leader of the Trócaire charity, Eamon Casey, revealing that he had received a letter from Romero that very day.'Romero letter received on day of killing;, 26 March 1980, The Irish Times The previous October parliamentarians had given their support to the nomination that Archbishop Romero receive the Nobel Prize for Peace. In March each year since the 1980s, the Irish-El Salvador Support Committee holds a mass in honour of Archbishop Romero.'Permission given for Romero mass', 30 March 2007, The Irish Times

=Great Britain=

In October 1978 119 British parliamentarians had nominated Romero for the Nobel Prize for Peace. In this they were supported by 26 members of the United States Congress. When news of his assassination was reported, the new head of the Church of England, Robert Runcie, was about to be enthroned in Canterbury Cathedral. On hearing of Romero's death, one writer observed that Runcie "departed from the ancient traditions to decry the murder of Archbishop Oscar Romero in El Salvador".'Runcie urges charity', 26 March 1980, The Irish Times

Investigations into the assassination

No persons were ever prosecuted for the assassination.  No persons or organizations ever confessed to it or took credit for it, and no one ever came forward with a claim to have any inside knowledge of the event.
It is widely believed that the assassins were members of a death squad led by former Major Roberto D'Aubuisson.  This view was supported by ex-US ambassador Robert White, who in 1986 reported to the United States Congress that "there was sufficient evidence" to convict D'Aubuisson of planning and ordering Archbishop Romero's assassination.  It was also supported in 1993 by an official U.N. report, which identified D'Aubuisson as the man who ordered the killing. 351-2, 354, 364 D'Aubuisson had also planned to overthrow the government in a coup. Later he founded the political party Nationalist Republican Alliance (ARENA), and organized death squads that systematically carried out politically motivated assassinations and other human rights abuses in El Salvador. Álvaro Rafael Saravia, a former captain in the Salvadoran Air Force, was chief of security for Roberto D'Aubuisson and an active member of these death squads. In 2003, a U.S. human rights organization, the Center for Justice and Accountability, filed a civil action against Saravia. In 2004, he was found liable by a US District Court under the Alien Tort Claims Act (ATCA) (28 U.S.C. § 1350) for aiding, conspiring, and participating in the assassination of Archbishop Romero. Saravia was ordered to pay 10 million dollars for extrajudicial killing and crimes against humanity pursuant to the ATCA. Rafael Saravia, 348 F. Supp. 2d 1112 (E.D. Cal. 2004).  The documentation from this case provides an excellent account of the events leading up, and subsequent, to Archbishop Romero's death.
On 24 March 2010—the thirtieth anniversary of Romero's death—Salvadoran president Mauricio Funes offered an official state apology for Romero's assassination.  Speaking before Romero's family, representatives of the Catholic Church, diplomats, and government officials, Funes said those involved in the assassination "…unfortunately acted with the protection, collaboration or participation of state agents".

Legacy

International recognition

During his first visit to El Salvador in 1983, Pope John Paul II entered the cathedral in San Salvador and prayed at Romero's tomb, despite opposition from the government and from within the Church. Afterwards, the Pope praised Archbishop Romero as "a zealous and venerated pastor who tried to stop violence. I ask that his memory be always respected, and let no ideological interest try to distort his sacrifice as a pastor given over to his flock." John Paul II also asked for dialogue between the government and opposition to end El Salvador's civil war.
On May 7, 2000, in Rome's Colosseum during the Jubilee Year celebrations Pope John Paul II commemorated twentieth-century martyrs. Of the several categories of martyrs, the seventh consisted of Christians who were killed for defending their brethren in the Americas. Despite the opposition of some within the Church, John Paul II insisted that Archbishop Romero be included. He asked the organizers of the event to proclaim Romero "that great witness of the Gospel."Dziwisz, Stanislaw Life with Karol: My Forty-Year Friendship with the Man Who Became Pope , p. 217-218, Doubleday Religion, 2008 ISBN 0385523742
On 21 December 2010, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed 24 March as the International Day for the Right to the Truth concerning Gross Human Rights Violations and for the Dignity of Victims which recognizes, in particular, the important work and values of Archbishop Óscar Arnulfo Romero.
On 22 March 2011, U.S. President Barack Obama visited Romero's tomb during an official visit to El Salvador (his last stop on a Latin American tour).
President of Ireland Michael D. Higgins visited the Cathederal and Tomb of Archbishop Romero on 25 October 2013 during a state visit to El Salvador. Ó hUigínn don tseachtain dar tús 21 Deireadh Fómhair, 2013 Áras an Uachtaráin, 2013-10-21.

Canonization proposal

In 1990, on the tenth anniversary of the assassination, the sitting prelate archbishop of San Salvador, Msgr. Arturo Rivera, appointed a postulator to prepare documentation for a cause of beatification and canonization of Romero. The documents were formally accepted by Pope John Paul II and the Congregation for the Causes of Saints in 1997, and Romero was given the title of "Servant of God". The process continues today with further investigation of the heroism and martyrdom of Romero. Upon the declaration of heroism and martyrdom, it is expected that Romero will achieve the title of "Venerable." If the decree finds that Romero was a martyr, there would be no further obstacles to his beatification. A declaration of only heroic virtue, however, would require that a miracle must be attributed to Romero in order for him to be declared Blessed.
Three decades after Romero's assassination, the canonization cause is still pending. In March 2005, Monsignor Vincenzo Paglia, the Vatican official in charge of the drive, announced that Romero's cause had cleared a theological audit by the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith, at the time headed by Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger (later elected Pope Benedict XVI) and that beatification could follow within six months.
Many
In 2013, Archbishop Gerhard Ludwig Mueller, prefect of the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith has stated that the Vatican doctrinal office has been "given the greenlight" to pursue sainthood for Romero.

In popular culture

Institutions

Television and film

  | title = Romero Days 24–29 March 2010
  | url = 
