[[Michael Bourtzes]]

CATEGORIES: 930s births, Year of death unknown, 10th-century Byzantine people, Byzantine generals, Byzantine governors of Antioch, History of Antioch, Byzantine people of the Arab–Byzantine Wars, Generals of Basil II

Michael Bourtzes (. was a leading Byzantine general of the latter 10th century. He became notable for his capture of Antioch in 969, but fell into disgrace by the Emperor Nikephoros II Phokas (r. 963–969). Resentful at the slight, Bourtzes joined forces with the conspirators who assassinated Phokas a few weeks later. Bourtzes re-appears in a prominent role in the civil war between Emperor Basil II (r. 976–1025) and the rebel Bardas Skleros, switching his allegiance from the Byzantine emperor to the rebel and back again. Nevertheless, he was re-appointed as doux of Antioch by Basil, a post he held until 995, when he was relieved because of this failures in the war against the Fatimids.

Biography

Career under Nikephoros II and John I Tzimiskes

Michael Bourtzes was the first prominent member of the Bourtzes family, originating in the upper Euphrates region, which went on to become one of the major clans of the Byzantine military aristocracy during the 11th century..
Angered by this perceived injustice, Bourtzes joined a conspiracy involving a number of other prominent generals who were discontent at Nikephoros, chief amongst them John Tzimiskes..

Career under Basil II

At the point of Tzimiskes's death, imperial power reverted to the legitimate emperors, the young brothers Basil II and Constantine VIII. In view of their youth and inexperience, however, government essentially continued to be exercised by the powerful parakoimomenos, Basil Lekapenos. Almost immediately, the parakoimomenos moved to forestall any moves by one of the powerful Anatolian magnates to seize the throne and reign as a supposed "guardian" of the two young emperors, like Phokas and Tzimiskes had done..
In spring, however, Bardas Skleros, the newly appointed doux of Mesopotamia and one of Tzimiskes's chief supporters, rose in revolt and proclaimed himself emperor at his base in Melitene. Bourtzes was commanded by Constantinople to lead his force north, join the army of Eustathios Maleinos, now governor of Cilicia, and block the rebel from crossing the Antitaurus Mountains. Leaving his son in control of Antioch, Bourtzes complied and marched north.. After this, Bourtzes again switched sides and rejoined the imperial army, now led by Bardas Phokas.
Uniquely amongst the military leaders who had revolted against him, Basil II continued to rely on Bourtzes and entrusted him again with the critical position of doux of Antioch in 990–995.. 
Nothing more is known of Michael Bourtzes after that. He did, however, have at least three sons, Michael, Theognostos, and Samuel, known because they conspired against Emperor Constantine VIII (sole emperor in 1025–1028) after he blinded Michael's son, named Constantine, in 1025/1026..



Sources




