[[St. Francis Xavier's Church (Bronx)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1928, Roman Catholic churches in New York, Churches in the Bronx, School buildings completed in 1937, Gothic Revival architecture in New York, Roman Catholic churches completed in 1951, Educational institutions established in 1929, Private middle schools in New York City, Roman Catholic elementary schools in New York City, Schools in the Bronx



The Church of St. Francis Xavier is a Roman Catholic parish church under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, located at 1658 Lurting Avenue, Morris Park, in the Bronx. The parish has a church and school, both of which were founded by the Rev. James Edward Kearney (1884–1977), later the Bishop of Salt Lake City and Bishop of Rochester.

Parish

The parish was established in 1928 Father Matthew Furey is the current church pastor.

Buildings

In 1951, a new building was erected at 1658 Lurting Avenue (at the intersection of Van Nest Avenue), in the Morris Park section of the Bronx. The church building was blessed and re-dedicated by Cardinal Spellman with more than 1000 people attending the ceremony. The architecture of the church is very monumental for its neighborhood, if a bit retrograde for its post-ward period of design. However, in contrast to several post-war Modernist brick box churches that the Archdiocese erected in this period, St. Francis Xavier's Church is designed in an early Gothic-style with pointed arched windows and entrances accentuating a stolid masonry mass of low gabled nave and hipped square tower in leafy and manicured lawned surroundings. The architecture is in the style of thirteenth-century Italian Gothic. The general red brick masonry of the walls is elegantly trimmed with white limestone, as is the corbelled tower cornice, which match the white masonry statues above the principal entrance gable and on the tower upper stage side elevations.
"The parish has several substantial buildings, including what appear to be two schools. A convent was refurbished for the Franciscan sisters sponsored by Fr. Benedict Groeschel." The address for the rectory is 1703 Lurting Avenue. The convent was likely originally built for the Sisters of Mercy. The eleven-bay two-storey-over-raised-basement brick school with Romanesque design accents was built 1937, and extended in 1955. The structure has a prominent broad hipped slate roof with an ornamental louvre surmounted by a copper-clad Latin cross. Despite varying dates, all the structures of the complex appear to have been built in harmonious styles with a brick color that very much matches the vernacular neighborhood architecture.

St. Francis Xavier School

The parish school is located at 1711 Haight Avenue and has students from New Beginnings to Eighth Grade. Following the parish's founding in 1928, Fr. Kearney founded the school in 1929, which was initially housed in the "portable" (temporary) auditorium building. The school first opened on September 15, 1930; the first principal was Miss Helen Kelly. Ground was broken for a permanent eight-classroom school building on April 11, 1937, which was then staffed by the Sisters of Mercy. An annex for that building was begun in 1955. The school has around 325 to 370 students.

Music

The organ at St. Francis Xavier Church was designed in 1951 by the Kilgen Organ Company, successor firm to Geo. Kilgen & Sons of St. Louis, Mo. Kilgen's Opus 7529 for St. Francis Xavier has 2 manuals, 18 stops, 16 ranks. "Specifications for Kilgen Organ, Op. 7529" (c.1951), AGO article on St. Francis Organ, New York City Organ Project Website, (Accessed 10 February 2011)

Pastors






