[[Dana Rohrabacher]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, American people of German descent, American anti–illegal immigration activists, American libertarians, Baptists from the United States, California Republicans, California State University, Long Beach alumni, Distinguished Eagle Scouts, Environmental skepticism, Living people, Members of the United States House of Representatives from California, Politicians from San Diego, California, University of Southern California alumni, Reagan Administration personnel

Dana Tyrone Rohrabacher, and previously the 46th, 45th and 42nd, serving since 1989. He is a member of the Republican Party. Rohrabacher's district covers the areas of Seal Beach, Sunset Beach, Huntington Beach, Midway City, parts of Westminster, Fountain Valley, parts of Santa Ana, Costa Mesa, Newport Beach, Aliso Viejo, Laguna Beach, and Laguna Niguel.govtrack.us/congress/members/CA/48

Early life, education, and early political career

Rohrabacher, who is of German descent, was born June 21, 1947, in Coronado, California, the son of Doris M. (née Haring) and Donald Tyler Rohrabacher.  Rohrabacher has a long history in Orange County. Rohrabacher attended elementary school locally, and during his college years, he lived in Sunset Beach.
Rohrabacher graduated from Palos Verdes High School in Palos Verdes Estates, California, attended Los Angeles Harbor College, and earned a bachelor's degree in history at California State University, Long Beach in 1969. He received his master's degree in American Studies at the University of Southern California. While in graduate school and during the early 1970s, he had a side activity as a folk singer.
Rohrabacher served as assistant press secretary to the 1976 and 1980 presidential campaigns of Ronald Reagan. From 1981 to 1988, he was one of President Reagan's senior speech writers. During his tenure at the White House, Rohrabacher played a leading role in the formulation of the Reagan Doctrine. He also helped formulate President Reagan's Economic Bill of Rights, which was a series of policy proposals that Reagan introduced in a speech at the Jefferson Memorial.

U.S. House of Representatives

Elections

Rohrabacher left the Reagan administration in 1988 to pursue the open House seat recently vacated by Dan Lungren. With the fundraising help of friend Oliver North, Rohrabacher was able to win the Republican primary with a plurality of 35%.ourcampaigns.html?RaceID=418202 He won the general election with 64%.ourcampaigns.html?RaceID=38154 He only had serious primary competition twice, in 1992 and 1998. After redistricting, he won a three candidate primary election in 1992 with a plurality of 48%.ourcampaigns.html?RaceID=502191 In 1998, he won an open primary with 54% of the vote.sos.ca.pdf once (2008).
He defeated Democrat nominee Debbie Cook, Mayor of Huntington Beach, 53%–43%, the lowest winning percentage of Dana's career.ourcampaigns.html?RaceID=334946
He defeated Democrat nominee Ken Arnold 62%–38%.ourcampaigns.html?RaceID=488392
After redistricting, he announced that he would run in the newly redrawn California's 48th congressional district. He said "The new 48th District is a good fit and something that will enable me to serve my constituents and the country well." He won re-election in this Orange County district with 61% of the vote.

Tenure

A friend and fellow White House aide, Christopher Cox, won a southern Orange County seat in the same election.
In 2011, Rohrabacher voted against the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2012 as part of a controversial provision that allows the government and the military to indefinitely detain American citizens and others without trial.ibtimes.com/ndaa-bill-how-did-your-congress-member-vote-384362?page=1
During a trip to Iraq in June 2011, he said that Iraq should pay back the U.S. for all the money it had spent since the invasion, when it becomes a wealthy country. Rohrabacher also commented he would be holding a hearing with the Sub-Committee on Oversight and Investigations into if Iraq committed "crimes against humanity" at Camp Ashraf when a massacre occurred last April. The incident left 34 residents killed and over 300 wounded. The delegation was denied access to the camp by Iraqi government, citing their sovereignty. Rohrabacher's delegation was subsequently asked to leave the country.
On November 4, 2005, the Los Angeles Times reported that Rohrabacher was paid 23,000 dollars for a thirty year old screen play of his. At issue was whether the producer paid him for the screenplay or for the introductions to congressional and federal officials. Rohrabacher claims that the introductions were made in good faith, were nothing that was not done regularly for legitimate causes, and that the introductions have only become an issue because of Joseph Medawar's misdeeds.
In May 2006, Rohrabacher announced through his press secretary that he would return the $23,000. The decision was made public shortly before Medawar took responsibility in a United States District Court for bilking $3.4 million from about 50 investors.
Taxes
Foreign policy
Environment
Healthcare
Free trade
Government reform
In January 2004, Rohrabacher proposed giving Washington, D.C. residents the right to vote for congressional representation by treating them as Maryland residents for the purpose of Congressional elections.
In a debate at Orange Coast College, he voiced his support for Proposition 8, which defines marriage in California as only between a man and a woman, and said that he "would suggest not changing the definition of marriage in our society to make a small number of people feel more comfortable."
See also 
Project Vote Smart provides the following results from congressional scorecards.[ref]
</ref>
| url = 
| title = Dana Rohrabacher on Drugs
| work = OnTheIssues.org
| publisher = OnTheIssues
| accessdate = 2008-06-08
}}[/ref]
| url = 
| title = Scorecard for the 109th Congress U.S. House of Representatives
| work = Secular.org
| publisher = Secular Coalition for America
| accessdate = 2007-12-31
|archiveurl =   |archivedate = 2007-09-28}}[/ref]

Committee assignments

Rohrabacher chaired the Space and Aeronautics Subcommittee of the House Science Committee from 1997 until January 2005; he received a two-year waiver to serve beyond the six-year term limit.
As a senior member of the International Relations Committee, Rohrabacher led the effort to deny Most Favored Nation trading status to the People's Republic of China, citing that nation's dismal human rights record and opposition to democracy. His subcommittee assignments are East Asia and Pacific, and Middle East and South Asia.

Caucus memberships

Political positions

Afghanistan

Rohrabacher's interest in Afghanistan extends back at least to the late 80s, before his time in office, when he entered the country in the company of mujahedin fighters who were intent on confronting Soviet occupation forces. Reportedly, these fighters "actually engaged Soviet troops in combat near the city of Jalalabad during the two months Rohrabacher was with them."  In 2003, he defended the new Afghan constitution against those who saw in it mainly empowerment of warlords, saying
 I've heard a lot of negative posturing about......... Just keep that in mind if you're an American. They came to help us defeat people who slaughtered our own people 11, 2001. And I'm grateful for that. And I'm not about to label them in these pejorative terms warlords, especially when the Taliban are still on the border...I would admonish you not to go so quickly in getting rid of people who helped us defeat the Taliban.Quoted in  
Rohrabacher has since become a proponent of withdrawing from Afghanistan. He protested against the troop build up to Afghanistan by President Obama saying "If the Taliban is going is be defeated, it's got to be by the Afghan people themselves, not by sending more U.S. troops, which could actually be counterproductive." When Congressman Jim McGovern offered an amendment earlier this year requiring the Pentagon to draw up an exit plan from Afghanistan, Rohrabacher was just one of six Republicans to sign on. Rohrabacher further voted for McGovern's Amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act, requiring an exit plan from Afghanistan. The bill failed by 204–215 margin.house.xml
Rohrabacher is against President Obama's gradual draw down of troops supporting a full withdrawal. Saying "If we're going to leave, we should leave." Rohrabacher has gone on to state "The centralized system of government foisted upon the Afghan people is not going to hold after we leave," continued Rohrabacher. "So let's quit prolonging the agony and inevitable. 
"Karzai's regime is corrupt and non representative of Afghanistan's tribal culture. This failed strategy is not worth one more drop of American blood. Under the current strategy, our military presence alienates more Afghans that it pacifies. So if you're going to pull the plug, then we need to get the hell out now." 
In April 2012, CNN reported that "A top Republican on the House Foreign Affairs committee was asked by the State Department not to go to Afghanistan because President Hamid Karzai objected to the visit. ... Dana Rohrabacher, R-California, told Security Clearance he was readying to travel with five other Republicans from Dubai to Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, when the State Department requested he stay behind."

Second Iraq War

Rohrabacher voted in support of the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002,

Iran

In August 2012, Rohrabacher noted on his official website that he had written a letter written to the U.S. State Department noting he supported U.S. sponsorship of separatist movements in Iran, which elicited criticism from the Iranian-American community that included challenging Rohrabacher's understanding of the historical background he included in his letter to the Department of State.com/2012/08/27/congressman-dana-rohrabacher-embarrasses-himself-by-calling-for-a-separatist-movement-in-iran-based-on-a-flawed-historical-understaning/
[/ref]

Uzbekistan

During a US Congressional delegation's visit to Uzbekistan in February 2013, Rohrabacher made several controversial statements. The chief among those statements was that the United States should treat Uzbekistan like Saudi Arabia by disregarding the former's human rights abuses in achieving America's national interests, particularly in selling armaments and drones to Uzbekistan.  


Patent Reform

Rohrabacher is a huge opponent of the America Invents Act, a bill that is attempting to change the current Patent System. Rohrabacher opposes changing from a "first to invent system" to a "first to file system" claiming it "hurts the little guy." Rohrabacher commented "Make no mistake, "first to file" weakens patent protection. It is likely to make vulnerable individual and small inventors, who don't have an army of lawyers on retainer. These "little guys" have been the lifeblood of American progress and competitiveness for more than 200 years. Our system was designed to protect individual rights, and it has worked for all – not just the corporate elite." Rohrabacher went on to comment in a Politico article "We're told this is necessary to harmonize with Japanese and European patent law. But those systems were established by elitists and economic shoguns interested in corporate power, not individual rights."

Medical marijuana

Unlike most Republican Party members of Congress, Rohrabacher is a supporter of the medicinal use of marijuana as a right of the state. He and Maurice Hinchey have jointly offered the Hinchey-Rohrabacher medical marijuana amendment to a Commerce Justice and Science appropriations bill that would prohibit the Department of Justice from prosecuting patients in states that have legalized marijuana for medicinal purposes. Rohrabacher said that conservatives should take states' rights into consideration when they consider the issue of marijuana.

Space

Rohrabacher was chairman of the Subcommittee on Space and Aeronautics from 1997 to January 2005[ref]
