[[Public distribution system (India)]]

CATEGORIES: Poverty in India, Government of India, Welfare in India, Food politics, Food security, Civil Supplies

Public distribution system (PDS) is an Indian food security system. Established by the Government of India under Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food, and Public Distribution and managed jointly with state governments in India, it distributes subsidized food and non-food items to India's poor. Major commodities distributed include staple food grains, such as wheat, rice, sugar, and kerosene, through a network of Public distribution shops, also known as Ration shops  established in several states across the country. Food Corporation of India, a Government-owned corporation, procures and maintains the Public Distribution System.
In terms of both coverage and public expenditure, it is considered to be the most important food security network. However, the food grains supplied by the ration shops are not enough to meet the consumption needs of the poor or are of inferior quality. The average level of consumption of PDS grains in India is only 1 kg per person / month. The PDS has been criticised for its urban bias and its failure to serve the poorer sections of the population effectively. The targeted PDS is costly and gives rise to much corruption in the process of extricating the poor from those who are less needy. Today, India has the largest stock of grain in the world besides China, the government spends Rs. 750 billion ($13.6 billion) per year, almost 1 percent of GDP, yet 21% remain undernourished.



Both the central and state governments shared the responsibility of regulating the PDS. While the central government is responsible for procurement, storage, transportation, and bulk allocation of food grains, state governments hold the responsibility for distributing the same to the consumers through the established network of Fair Price Shops (FPSs). State governments are also responsible for operational responsibilities including allocation and identification of families below poverty line, issue of ration cards, supervision and monitoring the functioning of FPSs.
Under PDS scheme, each family below the poverty line is eligible for 35 kg of rice or wheat every month, while a household above the poverty line is entitled to 15 kg of foodgrain on a monthly basis.
A BPL card holder should be given 35 kg of foodgrain and the card holder above BPL should be given 15 kg of food grain as per the norms of PDS. However, there are concerns about the efficiency of the distribution process.

Public distribution shop

A public distribution shop, also known as fair price shop (FPS), part of India's public distribution system established by Government of India, is a kind of shop in India which is used to distribute rations at a subsidized price to the poor. As of date there are about 4.99 lakh fair price shops across India.[ref]
[/ref]
Locally these are known as "ration shop" and chiefly sell wheat, rice, kerosene and sugar at a price lower than the market price. However, other essential commodities may also be sold. These are also called Fair Price Shops. For buying items from this shop one must have a ration card. These shops are operated throughout the country by joint assistance of central and state government. No doubt the item from these shops are much cheaper but are of poor quality. Ration shops are now present in most localities, villages towns and cities. India has 478,000 shops constituting the largest distribution network in the world.
The introduction of rationing in India dates back to the 1940s Bengal famine.

Fallouts of P.D.S.

The public distribution system of India is not without its defects. With a coverage of around 40 crore below-poverty-line (BPL) families, a review of the PDS has discovered the following structural shortcomings and disturbances:Planning Commission 11th FYP document: Nutrition and Social Safety Net, on PDS and Defects and shortcomings
Several schemes have augmented the number of people aided by PDS, but the number is still extremely low. Poor supervision of FPS and lack of accountability have spurred a number of middlemen who consume a good proportion of the stock meant for the poor. There is also no clarity as to which families should be included in the BPL list and which excluded. This results in the genuinely poor being excluded whilst the ineligible get several cards. Awareness about the presence of the PDS and FPS to poverty-stricken societies, namely the rural poor has been dismal.
The stock assigned to a single family cannot be bought in installments. This is a decisive barrier to the efficient functioning and overall success of PDS in India. Many BPL families are not able to acquire ration cards either because they are seasonal migrant workers or because they live in unauthorized colonies. A lot of families also mortgage their ration cards for money. Lack of clarity in the planning and structuring of social safety and security programs in India has resulted in the creation of numerous cards for the poor, and limited information about the overall use of cards has discouraged BPL families from registering for new cards and also increased illegal creation of new cards by such families to ensure maximum benefit for the family membersGovernment of India in afix over illegal creation of ration cards
To improve the current system of the PDS, the following suggestions are furnished for:
In aggregate, only about 42% of subsidised grains issued by the central pool reach the target group, according to a Planning Commission study released in March 2008.
Food stamps given to the needy and to the underprivileged by issue of coupons, vouchers, electronic card transfer etc. they can purchase commodities at any shop or outlet. The state government would then pay back the grocery shops for the stamps said the Finance minister in his budget
However the Finance minister P. Chidambaram in his budget speech went contrary to the idea proposed in the CMP and proposed the idea of the food stamp scheme.

Distribution of food stamps

The government may have to set up a complete system for the same or would have to put this responsibility on Post office, banks or such other institutions. In this process there could be leakages which are a matter of concern. Also there would be a burden which would come on the poor class who has to benefit from the same of going and collecting the food stamps.

Operation Black

Aaj Tak News channel on 14 October 2013 performed Sting Operation on PDS and named it Operation Black. It shows how the distribution reaches to mills instead of fair price shops. Interestingly, all the documentation via computerisation is clean.








