[[White Lies (Mick Flannery album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2008 albums, Mick Flannery albums

White Lies is the second studio album released by Irish singer-songwriter Mick Flannery. The album was released on September 12, 2008.
White Lies went platinum in Ireland. It also received a nomination for the Choice Music Prize. When The Irish Times placed Flannery at number forty-six in a list of "The 50 Best Irish Acts Right Now" it published in April 2009 it referenced the album White Lies in its comments.

Promotion

Earlier in 2008, Flannery made an appearance on RTÉ Two's music television programme Other Voices. The reaction he received was positive, and Flannery was later described by one reviewer as the "where's he been hiding?" act of that series. There were calls for him to receive his own episode of the show.
On the day of the album's release Flannery performed the track "Tomorrow's Papers" on The Late Late Show.
He commenced a nationwide tour of Ireland after the release of White Lies.

Reception

As with his previous album, Flannery's age was noted: he was twenty-four years old at the time White Lies was released. When he released his debut album, Evening Train, in 2005, his age of twenty-one years was also noted. At this stage two of his songs had already won an award each at the International Songwriting Competition, an achievement which has received much attention as he was the first Irish musician to win in this competition.
entertainment. There was praise for the faster songs such as "Tomorrow's Paper" and "What Do You See".
The Irish Times placed Flannery at number forty-six in a list of "The 50 Best Irish Acts Right Now" published in April 2009,

Track listing

Awards

In 2009, White Lies was nominated for the Choice Music Prize's Irish Album of the Year 2008.
White Lies lost to Ritual by Jape. However, Flannery was mentioned in the acceptance speech, as frontman Richie Egan mentioned what his mother had told him before the award: "They all deserve the award -- sure my mother even told me that Mick Flannery was going to win, she said you're good, Ritchie
|-
| 2009 || White Lies || Irish Album of the Year 2008 || 
|-




