[[Dana Plato]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, 1999 deaths, 20th-century American actresses, Actresses from California, Actresses who committed suicide, American adoptees, American child actresses, American film actresses, American robbers, American television actresses, Drug-related suicides in Oklahoma, Forgers, People from the San Fernando Valley

Dana Michelle Plato (November 7, 1964 – May 8, 1999)According to The Smoking Gun. Oklahoma authorities gave Plato's date of birth as November 1, 1963 was an American actress notable for playing the role of Kimberly Drummond on the U.S. television sitcom Diff'rent Strokes.Internet Movie Database
At age 34, after years of struggling with poverty and substance abuse, Plato took a lethal overdose of the painkiller Lortab and the muscle-relaxant Soma.

Childhood

Plato was born Dana Michelle Strain on November 7, 1964, in Maywood, California, to Linda Strain, an unwed teenager. Strain, who was already caring for an 18-month old child, chose to give her second daughter up for adoption.  Dean (August 16, 1926 – February 24, 1997), who owned a trucking company, and his wife Florine "Kay" Plato (December 27, 1938 – January 2, 1988) As per Social Security Death Index website adopted the child in June 1965 and raised her in the San Fernando Valley. When she was three, her adoptive parents divorced, and her mother became her primary caregiver.

Career in television and film

Kay Plato began taking her daughter to auditions when she was very young. By the age of seven, Plato began appearing in television commercials; she reportedly appeared in over 100 commercials for companies as diverse as Kentucky Fried Chicken, Dole, and Atlantic Richfield. Plato would later claim that she was offered two highly sought-after movie roles: the part of possessed child Regan MacNeil in the 1973 film, The Exorcist, and the starring role in Louis Malle's 1978 film, Pretty Baby. According to Plato, her mother vetoed both jobs, either fearing that Plato would be typecast, or subjected to unsavory subject matter. Exorcist producer/author/screenwriter William Peter Blatty was quoted in the book Former Child Stars: The Story of America's Least Wanted that he had "no such recollection" of Plato being offered the role.
Plato made her film debut at the age of 13 in the 1977 horror film Return to Boggy Creek. Other credits included California Suite, High School U.S.A. and Exorcist II: The Heretic.
In addition to her acting talent, Plato was also an accomplished figure skater; at one point she trained for a possible Olympic team spot. It was during this time that she made a brief appearance on TV's The Gong Show and was spotted by a producer who helped her secure what would become her most famous acting role, that of Kimberly Drummond on Diff'rent Strokes. According to Plato, her mother decided that she should cut back on her skating to focus on the role.

Diff'rent Strokes

In 1978, Diff'rent Strokes debuted on NBC. The show featured Phillip Drummond (Conrad Bain), a wealthy white widower in New York City who adopted two young African American boys after the death of their parents. Plato played Kimberly, Drummond's teenage daughter, who at the start of the show became the sister of the two adopted boys, Willis (Todd Bridges) and Arnold (Gary Coleman). Kimberly was the oldest, Willis was second, and Arnold was the youngest. The show was an immediate hit.
Plato appeared on the show from 1978 until 1984 and again from 1985-1986; during her tenure the show appeared on two different networks. During the show's run she became pregnant by her boyfriend, musician Lanny Lambert. The producers of Diff'rent Strokes did not feel that a pregnancy would fit the show's wholesome image, so Plato was let go. Although rumors of drug use and other "problems on the set" swirled around her dismissal, the producers were adamant that the pregnancy was the only reason why her character was written out. Plato actually returned for several appearances during the show's final 1985-1986 season, which appeared on ABC, including an episode (Plato's final appearance in the series) in which Kimberly suffers from the effects of bulimia.

Career after Diff'rent Strokes

After leaving Diff'rent Strokes in 1986, Plato attempted to establish herself as a serious actress, but found it difficult to step out of the long shadow cast by her sitcom career. After her child was born, she had breast implants and appeared in a June 1989 Playboy pictorial, but her career remained in the doldrums. She started taking roles in such B-movies as Bikini Beach Race and Lethal Cowboy.
In 1992, Plato was one of the first celebrities to star in a video game. The game, Night Trap, was not a great success, but is considered a pioneering title because it was the first game to use live actors, specifically a well known personality (Plato).
Toward the end of her career, Plato chose roles that could be considered erotic and softcore. She appeared partially nude in Prime Suspect (1988) and Compelling Evidence (1995), and in the softcore comedy "The Story of Jack and Jill... and Jill" (1997), originally known as Different Strokes: The Story of Jack and Jill... The title was changed after shooting in order to tie it to Plato's famous past, but it was not connected in any way to the sitcom other than through her involvement. 
Plato subsequently would appear in only one more film.

Personal life

Plato began having drug and alcohol problems early in life. At age 14, she overdosed on Valium. She admitted to drinking and using marijuana and cocaine during her years on Diff'rent Strokes.
In December 1983, Plato moved in with rock guitarist Lanny Lambert; the couple married on April 24, 1984. On January 2, 1988, Plato's adoptive mother, Kay Plato, died, aged 49, from scleroderma.  The same week, Plato and Lambert separated. The couple divorced in March 1990, and Lambert was awarded custody of their only child, Tyler Edward (July 2, 1984California Birth Index 1905-1995 – May 6, 2010), During this time, Plato posed nude for Playboy.
In 1991, Plato moved to Las Vegas, where she struggled with poverty and unemployment. At one point she worked at a dry-cleaning store, where customers reported being impressed by her lack of airs. On February 28, 1991, she entered a video store, produced a gun, and demanded the money in the register. The clerk called 911 saying, "I've just been robbed by the girl who played Kimberly on Diff'rent Strokes." Approximately 15 minutes after the robbery, Plato returned to the scene and was immediately arrested. The gun was only a pellet gun and the robbery netted Plato $164. Las Vegas entertainer Wayne Newton posted her $13,000 bail. She made headlines and became a subject of the national debate surrounding troubled child stars, particularly given the difficulties of her Diff'rent Strokes co-stars, Gary Coleman and Todd Bridges. In January 1992, she was again arrested, this time for forging a prescription for Diazepam. She served 30 days in jail for violation of the terms of her probation and entered a drug rehabilitation program immediately thereafter.
Following her appearance in the erotic film, Different Strokes: The Story of Jack and Jill ... and Jill, Plato appeared on the cover of the lesbian lifestyle magazine Girlfriends in 1998. She was interviewed by Diane Anderson-Minshall and came out as a lesbian, but later recanted.
In her interview with Howard Stern, Plato mentioned that the traumatic events of her mother's death and her husband leaving her took place during the course of only a week. In desperation, she signed over power of attorney to an accountant who disappeared with the majority of her money, leaving her with no more than $150,000. She claimed that the accountant was never found, despite an exhaustive search, and that he had also stolen more than $11 million of other peoples' money. Just before her death, she and her fiancé, Robert Menchaca, were living in a recreational vehicle in Navarre, Florida.

Final interview and death

On May 7, 1999, Plato appeared on The Howard Stern Show, where she told Stern and Robin Quivers that she was engaged to 28-year-old Robert Menchaca, and that he was managing her career. She was frank about her life, discussing her financial problems and her past run-ins with the law. She admitted to being a recovering alcoholic and drug addict, but claimed that she had been sober for more than ten years by that point, and was not using any drugs, with the exception of prescribed painkillers due to discomfort and pain caused by the recent extraction of her wisdom teeth. Many callers insulted her, saying that she was a "has-been" and an addict, and she was referred to by one caller as an "ex-con lesbian drug addict with mental problems". This provoked a defiant Plato, who offered to take a drug test on the air (and she even placed a large wager on the results of the test to one particularly doubtful caller). Some callers, as well as Stern, came to Plato's defense by consoling and complimenting her.Dana Plato's final interview with Howard Stern
After the first three negative calls, a caller named Julie told Plato that she looked and sounded great, and that she could not fathom why people were attacking her. Plato wept while offering her gratitude to Julie, as well as to a later caller who claimed that he was a recovering addict, and he told her that he believed everything she said. Other callers asked her relatively "neutral" (mostly Diff'rent Strokes-related) questions, such as "What happened to your kid?", "Did Todd (Bridges) break your arm (in a playful brawl gone wrong) on the set of Diff'rent Strokes?", "Have you ever had the opportunity of seeing Janet Jackson change during the taping of Diff'rent Strokes?" and "I need a date with Dana!", at which Plato laughed. Stern later mentioned that she was scheduled to appear at a concert event, The Expo of the Extreme, in Chicago two weeks after the interview.
The next day, Plato and Menchaca were returning to California. The couple stopped at Menchaca's mother's home in Moore, Oklahoma, for a Mother's Day visit. Plato went to lie down inside her recreational vehicle parked outside the house and subsequently died of an overdose of Vanadom (Soma) and Lortab. Her death was eventually ruled a suicide.  Moore is coincidentally the hometown of castmate Danny Cooksey, her TV stepbrother later in the series.

Son's death

On May 6, 2010, almost 11 years to the day after Dana Plato's death, her son Tyler Lambert died at age 25 of a self-inflicted gunshot wound to the head in Tulsa, Oklahoma.

Filmography






