[[Orval Prophet]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, 1984 deaths, Canadian country singers, Deaths from myocardial infarction, Musicians from Ottawa, Canadian Country Music Hall of Fame inductees, Canadian farmers, Canadian carpenters


Orval William Prophet (31 August 1922 – 4 January 1984) was among the first Canadian country music performers to achieve a career of international scope.

Early life

Prophet was born in Edwards, Ontario, now part of Ottawa. During his teens, he sang pop songs within his family and performed at church and community functions. He changed his focus to country music after he heard Hank Snow's music and concluded that "Western folk-songs would fit my style".
During World War II, Prophet worked on his family's farm since health limitations precluded him from military service. He performed for injured soldiers in Ottawa, walking  from his home to their hospital.
He is a second cousin of Ronnie Prophet who is also a country musician.

Career

From 1944 to 1949, he performed throughout eastern Ontario in a country band led by Bill Sheppard. In Ottawa, his live radio performances were featured on CFRA's Fiddler's Fling from 1947 to 1951.
During his early career, he worked on his family's 
Prophet recorded the song "Mademoiselle" under the name "Johnny Six", released in 1958. Around that time he had a brief residency in the United States to host a radio programme.
Other appearances included CBC Television's The Tommy Hunter Show and at the Grand Ole Opry in Nashville.

Influence

When Waylon Jennings was working as a radio host prior to his singing career, he sought to adopt Prophet's singing style. Johnny Cash and Dallas Harms also wrote material for Prophet.

Death and legacy

Prophet underwent open heart surgery in 1970 following a series of five heart attacks. After this, he continued to perform until his last concert on New Year's Eve at the end of 1983. His first wife, Lois Haley, died in 1969.
Later that year he was inducted into the Canadian Country Music Association Hall of Honour and in 1989 into the Canadian Country Music Hall of Fame.

Discography

Albums

Singles






