[[Japanese aircraft carrier Kaga]]

CATEGORIES: 1921 ships, Aircraft carriers of the Imperial Japanese Navy, Aircraft carriers sunk by aircraft, Attack on Pearl Harbor, Battle of Midway, Ships built in Japan, Tosa-class battleships, World War II aircraft carriers of Japan, World War II shipwrecks in the Pacific Ocean, Scuttled vessels


, which had been damaged during the 1923 Great Kanto earthquake.  Kaga was rebuilt in 1933–35, increasing her top speed, improving her exhaust systems, and adapting her flight decks to more modern, heavier aircraft.
The ship figured prominently in the development of the IJN's carrier striking force doctrine, which grouped carriers together to give greater mass and concentration to their air power. A revolutionary strategic concept at the time, the employment of the doctrine was crucial in enabling Japan to attain its initial strategic goals during the first six months of the Pacific War.
Kagas aircraft first supported Japanese troops in China during the Shanghai Incident of 1932 and participated in the Second Sino-Japanese War in the late 1930s. With other carriers, she took part in the Pearl Harbor raid in December 1941 and the invasion of Rabaul in the Southwest Pacific in January 1942. The following month her aircraft participated in a combined carrier airstrike on Darwin, Australia, helping secure the conquest of the Dutch East Indies by Japanese forces. She missed the Indian Ocean raid in April as she had to return to Japan for permanent repairs after hitting a reef in February.
Following repairs, Kaga rejoined the 1st Air Fleet for the Battle of Midway in June 1942. After bombarding American forces on Midway Atoll, Kaga and three other IJN carriers were attacked by American aircraft from Midway and the carriers  northwest of Midway Island.

Design and construction

Kaga was laid down as a , and was launched on 17 November 1921 at the Kawasaki Heavy Industries shipyard in Kobe. On 5 February 1922 both Tosa-class ships were canceled and scheduled to be scrapped under the terms of the Washington Naval Treaty. 232; Jentschura, p. 35
The Treaty authorized conversion of two battleship or battlecruiser hulls into aircraft carriers of up to  (1922) and Akagi (1927). 128
Kaga was completed with a length of  less than her designed displacement as a battleship. 129  Her complement totaled 1340 crewmembers. 42

Flight deck arrangements

Kaga, like Akagi, was completed with three superimposed flight decks, the only carriers ever to be designed so. The British carriers converted from "large light cruisers", s main flight deck was completely flat until a conning tower was added during the modernization. 54–55
As completed, the ship had two main hangar decks and a third auxiliary hangar with a total capacity of 60 aircraft. The hangars opened onto the middle and lower flight decks to allow aircraft to take off directly from the hangars while landing operations were in progress on the main flight deck above. No catapults were fitted. Her forward aircraft lift was offset to starboard and  and known as the Model Fju (Fju shiki) in the Japanese service.
As originally completed, Kaga carried an air group of 28 Mitsubishi B1M3 torpedo bombers, 16 Nakajima A1N fighters and 16 Mitsubishi 2MR reconnaissance aircraft. 24, gives the carrier's initial aircraft complement as 12 Type 3 fighters (plus three crated spares), six reconnaissance aircraft (with two spares), and 18 torpedo bombers (six spares).

Armament and armor

Kaga was armed with ten 20 cm/50 3rd Year Type guns: one twin-gun Model B turret on each side of the middle flight deck and six in casemates aft. They fired  carriers. See Gardiner and Grey, p. 110.
She was given an anti-aircraft armament of six twin Campbell, p. 194 She had two Type 89 directors to control her 20 cm guns and two Type 91 manually powered anti-aircraft directors (Kōshaki) to control her 12 cm guns. 140, 467
Kaga. 134

Propulsion

When Kaga was being designed the problem of how to deal with exhaust gases in carrier operations had not been resolved. The swiveling funnels of s funnel gases were collected in a pair of long horizontal ducts which discharged at the rear of each side of the flight deck, in spite of predictions by a number of prominent naval architects that they would not keep the hot gases away from the flight deck. The predictions proved to be correct, not least because Kaga was slower than the Akagi which allowed the gases to rise and interfere with landing operations. Another drawback was that the heat of the gases made the crew's quarters located on the side of the ship by the funnels almost uninhabitable.
Kaga was completed with four Kawasaki Brown-Curtis geared turbines with a total of .

Early service and development of carrier doctrine

thumb|right|Kaga conducting air operations in 1930. On the upper deck are Mitsubishi B1M torpedo bombers preparing for takeoff. Nakajima A1N Type 3 fighters are parked on the lower deck forward.Hata, p. 24 The First Carrier Division, along with Hōshō, departed for Chinese waters on 29 January 1932 to support Imperial Japanese Army troops during the Shanghai Incident as part of the IJN's 3rd Fleet. 299). Fighter pilot and future ace Isamu Mochizuki served in the carrier's fighter group sometime between 1929 and 1932 (Hata, p. 342).  The B1M3s carried by Kaga and Hōshō were the main bombers used during the brief combat over Shanghai. 37
Kagas Nakajima A1N2 fighters, including one piloted by future ace Toshio Kuroiwa, escorting three Mitsubishi B1M3 torpedo bombers, scored the IJN's first air-to-air combat victory on 22 February when they shot down a Boeing P-12 flown by an American volunteer pilot. 50–51[ref]
thumb|right|Ikuta, Kuroiwa, and Takeo pose in front of a Nakajima A1N2 Type 3 fighter aircraft. In addition to Petty Officer 3rd Class Kuroiwa, the Kaga fighter pilots involved in the shootdown were Lieutenant Nokiji Ikuta and Seaman 1st Class Kazuo Takeo (see photo). Lieutenant Kotani, the leader of the flight of three torpedo bombers, was killed in the engagement. The American pilot was Robert Short. Sakaida, p. 97, states that Short was killed in the engagement. The Kaga aircrews received a special commendation from the 3rd Fleet commander, Vice Admiral Kichisaburō Nomura, for their actions. (Peattie, pp. 50–51; Hata, pp. 24, 299)  Future ace Mitsugu Mori served in Kagas fighter unit during this time. (Hata, p. 347)[/ref]  Kaga returned to home waters upon the declaration of the cease-fire on 3 March and resumed fleet training with the rest of the Combined Fleet.
At this time, the IJN's developing carrier doctrine was still in its earliest stages.  Kaga and the IJN's other carriers were initially given roles as tactical force multipliers supporting the fleets's battleships in the IJN's "decisive battle" doctrine. In this role, Kagas aircraft were to attack enemy battleships with bombs and torpedoes. Aerial strikes against enemy carriers were later, beginning around 1932–1933, deemed of equal importance in order to establish air superiority during the initial stages of battle. The essential component in this strategy was that the Japanese carrier aircraft must be able to strike first with a massed, preventive aerial attack. As a result, in fleet training exercises the carriers began to operate together in front of or with the main battle line. The new strategy emphasized maximum speed from both the carriers and the aircraft they carried as well as larger aircraft with greater range. Thus, longer flight decks on the carriers were required in order to handle the newer, heavier aircraft which were entering service. 72–76; Stille, p 13; Goldstein (Jisaburō Ozawa), pp. 76–78
Kaga was soon judged inferior to Akagi because of her slower speed, smaller flight deck (s perceived limitations, she was given priority over Akagi for modernization. 55–56  Kaga was relegated to reserve status on 20 October 1933 to begin a second major reconstruction, with an official start date of 25 June 1934. 172

Reconstruction

During her second reconstruction Kaga, serviced the extended hangars. Bomb and torpedo elevators were modified to deliver their munitions directly to the flight deck. Her arrester gear was replaced by a Japanese-designed Type 1 system. A small starboard island superstructure was also installed. 102–03
thumb|upright=1.6|Kaga after reconstruction showing the new, full-length flight deck above the wide battleship hull. New Kampon multi-stage geared turbines were fitted that increased her power from . The lengthy funnel ducting was replaced by a single downturned starboard funnel modeled on that used by the Akagi with a water-cooling system for the exhaust gasses and a cover that could be raised to allow the exhaust gasses to escape if the ship developed a severe list and the mouth of the funnel touched the sea. The space freed up by the removal of the funnel ducts was divided into two decks and converted into living quarters for the expanded air group. 137  The carrier's complement increased to 1708 crewmembers. 467
The two twin turrets on the middle flight deck were removed and four new 20 cm/50 3rd Year Type No. 1 guns in casemates were added forward. Her 12 cm anti-aircraft guns were replaced by eight  Type 11 machine guns were also carried. Six Type 95 directors were fitted to control the new 25 mm guns, but Kaga retained her outdated Type 91 anti-aircraft directors.
Several major weaknesses in Kagas aviation fuel tanks were incorporated directly into the structure of the carrier, meaning that shocks to the ship, such as those caused by bomb or shell hits, would be transmitted directly to the tanks, resulting in cracks or leaks. Also, the fully enclosed structure of the new hangar decks made fire suppression difficult, at least in part because fuel vapors could accumulate in the hangars. Adding to the danger was the requirement from the Japanese carrier doctrine that aircraft be serviced, fueled, and armed whenever possible on the hangar decks rather than on the flight deck.  In addition, the carrier's hangar and flight decks carried little armor protection.  Furthermore, there was no redundancy in the ship's fire-extinguishing systems. These weaknesses would later be crucial factors in the loss of the ship. 65, 70, 159; Stille, pp. 15–16; Willmott, p. 415; Parshall and Tully, p. 245

Sino-Japanese War

Kaga returned to service in 1935 and was assigned to the Second Carrier Division. The carrier embarked a new set of aircraft, including 16 Nakajima A2N Type 90 fighters, 16 Aichi D1A Type 94 dive bombers, and 28 Mitsubishi B2M Type 89 torpedo bombers. 24–25
thumb|left|Kaga conducts air operations in 1937. On deck are Nakajima A2N, Aichi D1A, and Mitsubishi B2M aircraft. The ship's fighter squadron completed training at Ōmura, Nagasaki then helped escort ships taking army reinforcements from Japan to China. On 15 August, along with Hōshō and , the ship took station in the East China Sea as part of the 3rd Fleet and began supporting Japanese military operations along the central China coast around Shanghai and further inland. 103–04Hata, p. 25
Kaga aircraft fought their first battle on 16 August 1937 when six Type 90 fighters engaged four Chinese aircraft over Kiangwan, shooting down three without loss. Between 17 August and 7 September, Kagas fighter pilots claimed to have shot down 10 Chinese aircraft in these encounters without loss. 25–26Lieutenant Chikamasa Igarashi led the six fighters in the 16 August engagement. Also participating in that engagement was future ace Akio Matsuba. The other engagements included:  17 August, when four Type 90s under Warrant Officer Toyoda shot down two Chinese aircraft over Kiangwan; 4 September, two Type 96 fighters under Lieutenant Tadashi Nakajima shot down three Curtiss Hawks; 7 September, three Type 90s under Igarashi shot down five aircraft over T'ai Hu, with Igarashi claiming three of that number. (Hata, pp. 25–26, 263)  On 17 August twelve of the carrier's bombers attacked Hangchow without fighter escort and 11 of them were shot down by Chinese fighters. 213  Beginning on 15 September, six Type 90 and six Type 96 fighters, 18 dive bombers, and 18 torpedo bombers were temporarily deployed to Kunda Airfield from the ship to support land operations. 26
On 26 September the carrier went to Sasebo for reprovisioning. At Sasebo, the carrier received new replacement aircraft including 32 Yokosuka B4Y Type 96 carrier attack planes (torpedo bombers), 16 Aichi D1A2 Type 96 carrier bombers (dive bombers), and 16 more Type 96 fighters. Several Nakajima A4N Type 95 fighter aircraft augmented the carrier's fighter group at an unspecified later date.
Kaga returned to the front in early October 1937, and except for two brief trips to Sasebo, remained off China until December 1938. Using Taiwan (then part of the Empire of Japan) as its base, the carrier steamed  and other neutral ships in the Yangtze River had been knowingly and deliberately planned by an air officer on Kaga. (Toland, p. 49)
Kaga entered the shipyard on 15 December 1938, where her arrester gear was replaced by a Type 3 system and her bridge was modernized. The flight deck and hangar areas were enlarged, increasing the carrier's aircraft capacity. The ship was completely overhauled from 15 November 1939 to 15 November 1940 before returning to active service. In the meantime, a new generation of aircraft had entered service and Kaga embarked 12 Mitsubishi A5M fighters, 24 Aichi D1A dive bombers and 36 Yokosuka B4Y torpedo bombers. Another 18 aircraft were carried in crates as spares. 27Hata, p. 27, gives Kagas aircraft complement after overhaul as 12 fighters with four spares, 18 dive bombers with six spares, and 48 torpedo bombers with 16 spares.
The Japanese carriers' experiences off China had helped further develop the IJN's carrier doctrine. One lesson learned in China was the importance of concentration and mass in projecting naval air power ashore. Therefore, in April 1941 the IJN formed the First Air Fleet to combine all of its fleet carriers under a single command. On 10 April 1941 Kaga was assigned to the First Carrier Division with Akagi as part of the new carrier fleet, which also included the Second and Fifth carrier divisions. The IJN centered its doctrine on air strikes that combined the air groups within carrier divisions, rather than each individual carrier. When more than one carrier division was operating together, the divisions' air groups were combined with each other.  This doctrine of combined, massed, carrier air attack groups was the most advanced of its kind of all the world's navies.  The IJN, however, remained concerned that concentrating all of its carriers together would render them vulnerable to being wiped out all at once by a massive enemy air or surface strike. Thus, the IJN developed a compromise solution in which the fleet carriers would operate closely together within their carrier divisions but the divisions themselves would operate in loose rectangular formations, with approximately  separating the carriers from each other. 82, 86, 137–138, and 416; Peattie, pp. 124–25, 147–53; Tully; Stille, pp. 13–14According to Parshall and Tully, pp. 86–87, the Japanese would not usually launch their entire carrier air groups into a single massed attack. Instead, each carrier would launch a "deckload strike" of all its aircraft that could be spotted at one time on each flight deck. Subsequent attack waves consisted of the next deckload of aircraft. Thus, 1st Air Fleet air attacks would often consist of at least two, massed waves of aircraft. Peattie (p. 152) and Jisaburō Ozawa (Goldstein, pp. 78–80) emphasize that the First Air Fleet was not the IJN's primary strategic striking force. The IJN still considered the First Air Fleet an integral component in the Combined Fleet's decisive battle task force centered on battleships.
Although the concentration of so many fleet carriers into a single unit was a new and revolutionary offensive strategic concept, the First Air Fleet suffered from several defensive deficiencies which gave it, in Mark Peattie's words, a glass jaw':  it could throw a punch but couldn't take one."Peattie, p. 159  Japanese carrier anti-aircraft guns and associated fire control systems had several design and configuration deficiencies which limited their effectiveness. The IJN's fleet combat air patrol (CAP) consisted of too few fighter aircraft and was hampered by an inadequate early warning system, including a lack of radar. Poor radio communications with the fighter aircraft inhibited effective command and control of the CAP. The carriers' escorting warships were deployed as visual scouts in a ring at long range, not as close anti-aircraft escorts, as they lacked training, doctrine, and sufficient anti-aircraft guns. These deficiencies would eventually doom Kaga and other First Air Fleet carriers. 85 and 136–145; Peattie, pp. 155–59: Stille, pp. 14–15, 50–51

World War II

Pearl Harbor

In November 1941 the IJN's Combined Fleet, under Isoroku Yamamoto, prepared to participate in Japan's initiation of a formal war with the United States by conducting a preemptive strike against the United States Navy's Pacific Fleet base at Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. On 17 November Kaga, under the command of Captain Jisaku Okada,Okada was born in Ishikawa Prefecture in 1893. He entered the IJN in 1911 and joined the air service in 1922. (Goldstein; Masataka Chihaya, p. 295) loaded 100 torpedoes at Saeki Bay, Hiroshima; these torpedoes were specially designed for use in the shallow waters of the Pearl Harbor anchorage. On 19 November, Kaga and the rest of the Combined Fleet's mobile strike force (Kido Butai), under Chuichi Nagumo and including six fleet carriers from the First, Second, and Fifth Carrier Divisions, assembled in Hitokappu Bay at Etorofu Island. The fleet departed Etorofu on 26 November and followed a course across the north-central Pacific to avoid commercial shipping lanes. On this day Kaga suffered its first war casualty when a crewmember was swept away by a wave and lost. (Werneth, p. 107)
For the attack on Pearl Harbor, Kaga carried a total of 18 Mitsubishi A6M Zero fighters, 27 Nakajima B5N torpedo bombers and 27 Aichi D3AThe Allied reporting name for these aircraft were "Zeke", "Kate" and "Val" respectively. dive bombers, plus three crated aircraft of each type for the operation. During the morning of 7 December 1941 Kaga aircraft participated in both First Air Fleet strikes launched against Oahu from a position s fighter group leader. (Toland, p. 205)  Upon completion of the attack, the First and Fifth Carrier divisions, including Kaga, returned immediately to Japan.

Pacific conquest

In January 1942, together with the rest of the First and Fifth Carrier Division carriers and staging out of Truk (now Chuuk) in Micronesia, Kaga supported the invasion of Rabaul in the Bismarck Islands. Kaga provided 27 bomb-carrying B5N and 9 Zeros for the initial airstrike on Rabaul on 20 January 1942, during which one B5N was shot down by anti-aircraft fire. They were the first Japanese casualties in the invasion of Rabaul. (Werneth, pp. 115, 140)  The First Carrier Division attacked Allied positions at nearby Kavieng the following day, of which Kaga contributed nine Zeros and sixteen D3As. On the 22nd Kagas D3As and Zeros again attacked Rabaul and two dive bombers had to make emergency landings, but the crews were rescued. Kaga returned to Truk on 25 January and Rabaul and Kavieng were successfully occupied by Japanese forces by February. 175–76; Werneth, p. 140
On 9 February Kaga hit a reef at Palau after she had unsuccessfully sortied against American carrier forces attacking the Marshall Islands on 1 February. The damage reduced the carrier's speed to 18 knots. The discrepancy is not explained in the sources. (Werneth, p. 116)  After temporary repairs, she continued to the Timor Sea, where on 19 February 1942 she, with the other carriers of the First and Second Carrier Divisions, launched air strikes against Darwin, Australia from a point  before turning back after being unable to locate the American carriers, which had already departed the area (Hata, p. 148). Fighter ace Masaaki Shimakawa joined the carrier's fighter unit around this time (Sakaida, p. 130). After the Indian Ocean raid, Kaga was used for limited air operations training by all the First Air Fleet air units in May as the other carriers were in the shipyard for refitting. (Parshall and Tully, p. 88)

Battle of Midway

=Midway raid=

Concerned by the US carrier strikes in the Doolittle, Marshall Islands, and Lae-Salamaua raids, Yamamoto determined to force the US Navy into a showdown to eliminate the American carrier threat. Yamamoto decided to invade and occupy Midway Island, which he was sure would draw out the American carrier forces to battle. The Midway invasion was codenamed by the Japanese as Operation MI. 22
In support of MI, on 27 May 1942, Kaga departed the Inland Sea with the Combined Fleet on her final mission, in the company of carriers Akagi, s Zero pilots claimed to have shot down 12 US aircraft over Midway Island. One Kaga B5N was launched to augment the fleet's reconnaissance of the surrounding ocean. (Willmott, p. 380)  The reconnaissance B5N was commanded by Ensign Haruo Yoshino and covered the search leg south-southeast from the Kido Butai to the west of Midway and over Kure Atoll. The aircraft did not sight any enemy ships and landed back on Kaga minutes before the ship was hit by dive bombers. (Werneth, p. 140) The carrier also put up two Zeros on CAP. 126, 515; Evans and Fuchida, p. 138; Lundstrom, pp. 330–331  Another five Zeros reinforced her CAP at 07:00 and the seven fighters helped to defend the Kido Butai from the first US air attackers from Midway Island at 07:10. Unknown to the Japanese, the US Navy had divined the Japanese MI plan from signals intelligence and had prepared an ambush using its three available carriers, positioned northeast of Midway. 151, 154; Stille, p. 59
At 07:15 Admiral Nagumo ordered the B5Ns still on Kaga and Akagi rearmed with bombs for another attack on Midway itself. This process was limited by the number of ordnance carts used to handle the bombs and torpedoes and the limited number of ordnance elevators. Thus, the torpedoes could not be struck below until after all the bombs were moved up from their magazine, assembled and mounted on the aircraft. This process normally took about an hour and a half; more time would be required to bring the aircraft up to the flight deck and warm up and launch the strike group. Around 07:40 Nagumo reversed his order when he received a message that American carriers had been spotted. 156–59 At 07:30 Kaga recovered three of her CAP. 508

=Sinking=

Kaga, but only limited damage was inflicted on the heavy bombers, although their attacks all missed. Five D3As also joined the CAP around this time. Another trio of Zeros were launched at 08:30. Kaga began landing her returning Midway strike force aboard around 08:35 and was finished by 08:50; one Zero pilot died after crash-landing his aircraft. 196, 199The Zero pilot who died upon landing was Yukuo Tanaka. (Parshall and Tully, p. 196)
The five Zeros launched at 08:15 were recovered aboard at 09:10 and replaced by six more Zeros launched at 09:20. They intercepted the first US carrier aircraft to attack, TBD Devastator torpedo-bombers of VT-8 from the US carrier , led by Eugene E. Lindsey, were spotted. They tried to sandwich Kaga, but the CAP, reinforced by another six Zeros launched by Kaga at 10:00, shot down all but four of the Devastators, and the carrier dodged the torpedoes. 213–14; Stille, p. 62
thumb|right|Dive bomber pilots from Enterprise who helped fatally damage Kaga on 4 June. Ensign John Q. Roberts, who was shot down and killed by Kaga fired four torpedoes at the carrier; one misfired, two others missed, and one hit the burning Kaga around 14:05, but it was a dud. (Parshall and Tully, pp. 302–03) The torpedo that hit broke in two and the warhead portion sank. The remaining, floating half was later used as a life preserver by several Kaga survivors. (Willmott, p. 427)
Unable to contain her fires, Kaga. 338; Tully; Werneth, p. 142  Ensign Takeshi Maeda, an injured Kaga B5N aircrew member rescued by Hagikaze, described the scene: "My comrade carried me up to the deck so I could see the last moments of our beloved carrier, which was nearby. Even though I was in pain tears started to run down my cheeks, and everyone around me was crying; it was a very sad sight."Werneth, p. 121
The carrier's crew suffered 811 fatalities, mainly among the aircraft mechanics and armorers stationed on the hangar decks and the ship's engineers, many of whom were trapped below in the boiler and engine rooms by uncontrolled fires raging on the decks above them. Twenty-one of the ship's aviators were killed. 476Peattie, p. 338, states that eight Kaga airmen were killed in the air and 13 died aboard the ship. Of the 15 Kaga CAP Zeros airborne at the time the carrier was hit, five were destroyed in aerial combat and the remainder were recovered by Hiryū. Two subsequently participated in the second Hiryū airstrike on Yorktown while four others augmented the remaining carrier's CAP. All 10 pilots survived (Parshall and Tully, pp. 502–503; Lundstrom, pp. 351, 414). The two Kaga fighter pilots who joined the attack on Yorktown were Akira Yamamoto and Makoto Bandō. (Parshall and Tully, p. 290)  Four of the five pilots in the downed Kaga CAP Zeros were killed. (Lundstrom, p. 363)  Kagas surviving crewmembers were restricted incommunicado to an airbase in Kyūshū for one to two months after returning to Japan, to help conceal word of the Midway defeat from the Japanese public. (Werneth, p. 156) Many of the survivors were then transferred back to frontline units without being allowed to contact family. Some of the injured were quarantined in hospitals for almost a year. (Parshall and Tully, pp. 386–87)  The loss of Kaga and the three other IJN carriers at Midway (Hiryū was also sunk during the battle), with their aircraft and veteran pilots, was a crucial strategic defeat for Japan and contributed significantly to Japan's ultimate defeat in the war. 231

Wreck survey

In May 1999, the Nauticos Corporation, in partnership with the US Navy, discovered some wreckage from Kaga.. 491–93

Notes

Footnotes



 |last=Brown
 |first=David
 |authorlink =David K. Brown
 |title =Aircraft Carriers
 |publisher =Arco Publishing Company
 |volume =
 |edition =
 |year =1977
 |location =New York
 |pages =
 |isbn =0-668-04164-1}}
 | last = Campbell
 | first = John
 | year = 1985
 | title = Naval Weapons of World War Two
 | publisher=Naval Institute Press
 | location = Annapolis, Maryland
 | isbn = 0-87021-459-4
}}
 | last = Cressman
 | first = Robert J.
