[[Haaretz]]

CATEGORIES: Haaretz, Haaretz Group, Hebrew-language newspapers, Israeli brands, Jewish printing and publishing, Liberalism in Israel, Newspapers published in Israel, Publications established in 1919, Media in Tel Aviv

Haaretz ( and is known for its staunch left-liberal stance on domestic and foreign issues.

History and ownership

Haaretz was first published in 1918 as a newspaper sponsored by the British military government in Palestine. Initially, it was called Hadashot Ha'aretz ("News of the Land"). Later, the name was shortened to "Ha'aretz". The literary section of the paper attracted the leading Hebrew writers of the time. 12, Keter Books, Jerusalem, 1978
The newspaper was initially published in Jerusalem. From 1919 to 1922, the paper was headed by a succession of editors, among them Leib Yaffe. It was shut down briefly due to a budgetary shortfall and reopened in Tel Aviv at the beginning of 1923 under the editorship of Moshe Glickson, who held the post for 15 years. The Tel Aviv municipality granted the paper financial support by paying in advance for future advertisements.Haaretz history, Tom Segev
Salman Schocken, a wealthy German Jewish Zionist who owned a chain of department stores in Germany, bought the paper in 1937. His son, Gershom Schocken, became the chief editor in 1939 and held that position until his death in 1990.A newspaper's mission – Haaretz
Until August 2006, the Schocken family owned 100% of the Haaretz Group, but then the German publisher M. DuMont Schauberg acquired 25 percent of the shares.
On 12 June 2011, it was announced that Russian-Israeli businessman Leonid Nevzlin had purchased a 20% stake in the Haaretz Group, buying 15% from the family and 5% from M. DuMont Schauberg. This means that the Schocken family now owns 60% and M. DuMont Schauberg and Leonid Nevzlin have 20% each.
In October 2012, a union strike mobilized to protest planned layoffs by the Haaretz management. As a consequence, both the Haaretz newspaper and its TheMarker business supplement were not printed for one day. According to Israel Radio, it was the first time since 1965 that a newspaper did not go to press on account of a strike.

Management

The newspaper's editorial policy was defined by Gershom Schocken, who was editor-in-chief from 1939 to 1990. Schocken was succeeded as editor-in-chief by Hanoch Marmari.  In 2004 David Landau replaced Marmari and was succeeded by Dov Alfon in 2008. The current editor-in-chief of the newspaper is Aluf Benn, who replaced Alfon in August 2011.  Charlotte Halle became editor of the English Print Edition in February 2008.

Editorial policy and viewpoints

Haaretz describes itself as having "a broadly liberal outlook both on domestic issues and on international affairs." Others describe it alternatively as liberal,[ref]
In 2006 the BBC said that Haaretz takes a moderate stance on foreign policy and security.

Formatting, circulation and reputation

Compared to other mass circulation papers in Israel, Haaretz uses smaller headlines and print. Less space is devoted to pictures, and more to political analysis. Opinion columns are generally written by regular commentators rather than guest writers. Its editorial pages are considered influential among government leaders.
Despite its historically relatively low circulation in Israel, Haaretz has been for many years been described as Israel's most influential daily newspaper.[ref]

Criticism

Andrea Levin, executive director of the Committee for Accuracy in Middle East Reporting accused the newspaper of doing "damage to the truth" and sometimes making serious factual errors but not often correcting them.
According to its competitor The Jerusalem Post, Haaretz editor-in-chief David Landau said at the 2007 Limmud conference in Moscow that he had told his staff not to report about criminal investigations against Prime Minister Ariel Sharon in order to promote Sharon's 2004–2005 Gaza disengagement plan.[ref]
In 2010, several columnists at The Jerusalem Post, including deputy managing editor Caroline Glick, criticized Haaretz for its role in the Anat Kamm affair.Caroline Glick, "The Haaretz spy scandal: Haaretz provides Israeli affirmation for anti-Israel attitudes", The Jerusalem Post, 16 April 2010.

Internet editions

Haaretz operates both Hebrew The two sites fall under the supervision of Lior Kodner, the head of digital media for the Haaretz Group. Individually, Simon Spungin is the editor of Haaretz.co.

Internet blogs and columns

Offices

The Haaretz building, a low-slung building in south Tel Aviv, is situated on a street named for the Schocken family. The Haaretz building houses the art collection of Amos Schocken, one of the country's major collectors of Israeli art, some of it politically subversive.

Notable journalists

Present

Past





Further reading




