[[Zoë Wanamaker]]

CATEGORIES: 1949 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from New York City, Alumni of the Central School of Speech and Drama, American film actresses, American emigrants to the United Kingdom, British people of Canadian descent, British people of Ukrainian-Jewish descent, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, English film actresses, Jewish English actresses, English people of Russian descent, English stage actresses, English television actresses, English voice actresses, Jewish American actresses, Laurence Olivier Award winners, Royal Shakespeare Company members, People educated at Sidcot School, People educated at King Alfred School, London, 20th-century English actresses, 21st-century English actresses, American people of Canadian descent, American people of Ukrainian-Jewish descent, American people of Russian descent

Zoë Wanamaker, CBE (born 13 May 1949)Zoe Wanamaker profile, FilmReference. is an American-born British actress. She has performed with the Royal Shakespeare Company; in films, including the Harry Potter series; and in a number of television productions, including a long-time role as Susan Harper in the sitcom My Family. Wanamaker has been nominated for a BAFTA Film Award, two BAFTA TV Awards, Four Tony's and nine Olivier Awards, winning two.

Early life and family

Wanamaker was born in New York City, the daughter of Canadian-born actress and radio performer Charlotte Holland, and American-born actor, film director and radio producer Sam Wanamaker, who decided not to return to the United States after being blacklisted in 1952. Her parents were Jewish, although she had a non-religious and non-observant upbringing. Her father's family was of Ukrainian extraction."'Madam Hooch' rides her broomstick in from Odessa: Actress Zoë Wanamaker offers a glimpse into her family history"
The BBC documentary Who Do You Think You Are?, broadcast on 24 February 2009, revealed that Wanamaker's paternal grandfather Maurice Wanamaker (originally Manus Watmacher) was a tailor (born 1895) in Mykolaiv, Ukraine. She was educated at the independent King Alfred School in Hampstead and at Sidcot School, a Quaker boarding school in Somerset. She trained at the Central School of Speech and Drama.
She lived for many years with fellow Royal Shakespeare Company actor David Lyon. In November 1994, she married actor/dramatist Gawn Grainger.

Career

Stage

Wanamaker's career started in the theatre. From 1976 to 1984 she was a member of the Royal Shakespeare Company. She won an Olivier Award for her 1979 performance in Once In a Lifetime
In 1997, Zoe Wanamaker was the first person to speak on the stage of the newly completed replica theatre, Shakespeare's Globe, on London's South Bank. She subsequently became Honorary President of the Globe.Shakespeare's Globe Press Release, 24 February 2012
From 19 May to 2 October 2010 (extended from 11 September), Wanamaker appeared in Arthur Miller's All My Sons as  Kate Keller at the Apollo Theatre on Shaftesbury Avenue in London.

Screen

Starting in the early 1980s, Wanamaker began performing on screen, most notably in a number of critically acclaimed television productions, such as the BBC Television production Edge of Darkness; she was nominated for a BAFTA Award for her portrayal of the love interest of a suspected serial killer in the first instalment of the Granada series Prime Suspect.
Television series have included Paradise Postponed (as Charlotte Fanner-Titmuss, 1986) and Love Hurts (1992–94) with Adam Faith.
She played Madam Hooch in the film Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone.
She played Clarice, one of the dim-witted twin sisters of Lord Groan in Gormenghast (2000), a BBC television adaptation of Mervyn Peake's trilogy.
Wanamaker portrayed Susan Harper in the BBC situation comedy My Family from 2000 to 2011.
She voiced a CGI character named Lady Cassandra in the Doctor Who episode "The End of the World" (2005), and reprised the role (also appearing in the flesh this time) in the episode "New Earth" (2006).
Wanamaker lent her voice to the 2008 Xbox 360 game Fable II as the blind Seeress Theresa, who guides the playing character throughout the game. She returned to voice Theresa again in Fable III in 2010, and again in 2012 for Fable: The Journey.
She has played Ariadne Oliver in several episodes of Agatha Christie's Poirot.
Wanamaker's most recent role was in the Australian Film "We of the Outback" (2013) where she played the role of Sheila Williams, the wife of Australian Bush Legend R M Williams, (played by Brett Hinch). The film won many AFI awards with Wanamaker being awarded the Best Actress title and Hinch Best Actor.

Nationality

Zoë Wanamaker holds both British and American citizenship. She became a British citizen in 2000. 

Honours

Wanamaker was awarded the CBE. She also received an honorary Doctorate of Letters from the University of East Anglia on 19 July 2012.University of East Anglia website

Charity work

Wanamaker has been a Patron of the UK charity Tree Aid,Tree Aid web site since 1997. Tree Aid enables communities in Africa's drylands to fight poverty and become self-reliant, while improving the environment. In 2006 Wanamaker recorded a successful Radio 4 appeal for the charity.
She is a patron of Dignity in Dying, the Lymphoedema Support Network,Zoë Wanamaker becomes LSN Patron Youth Music Theatre: UK and of the Young Actors' Theatre, Islington. She is also one of the Honorary Patrons of the London children's charity Scene & Heard. Wanamaker also supports Survival International's campaign to save the threatened native tribes in Brazil.survivalinternational.org/news/5623

Filmography

Video games

Theatre work

Awards and nominations

year given is year of ceremony






