[[Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan]]

CATEGORIES: Jesuit universities and colleges, Educational institutions established in 1933, Jesuit educational institutions in the Philippines, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the Philippines, Higher education in the Philippines, Nursing schools in the Philippines, Educational institutions in Mindanao, Business schools in the Philippines, Graduate schools in the Philippines, Law schools in the Philippines, Liberal arts colleges in the Philippines, Schools of medicine in the Philippines, 1933 establishments in the Philippines, Educational institutions in Cagayan de Oro

Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan is a private, Catholic university run by the Society of Jesus in Cagayan de Oro, Philippines.
It was founded on June 7, 1933 as the Ateneo de Cagayan by an American Jesuit missionary, Fr. James T. G. Hayes, S.J., who later became the first Bishop and Archbishop of Cagayan de Oro. In 1958, Ateneo de Cagayan became a university and was renamed to its present name, Xavier University, in honor of the Jesuit missionary, St. Francis Xavier.

History

Beginnings

Xavier University was founded in June 7, 1933 as Ateneo de Cagayan, with only 17 First-year high school students.
It was founded by Fr. James T. G. Hayes, S.J., who became the first Bishop and Archbishop of Cagayan de Oro. It was firstly located at Burgos Street, where the former St. Augustine Parochial School was also located.
Cagayan de Oro, then Cagayan de Misamis, with a population of around 50,000, had the finest port in Mindanao and was a fast-growing town. Gradually, the school grew with the community and opened college courses in June 1938, and Grades 5 to 7 in June 1940 to accommodate requests from parents all over Mindanao and Visayas.

World War II

It was then moved to its present location in Corrales Avenue. It eventually grew into a college and offered courses in Liberal Arts, Education and Commerce. The school closed down on December 9, 1941, with only 614 students. It subsequently became the headquarters of the Imperial Japanese Army in Mindanao on May 2, 1942.
On September 9, 1944, planes from the United States Air Force swooped in and bombed most of Cagayan de Misamis into piles of rubble, even for the school itself. Fr. Edward J. Haggerty, S.J., then Rector and Military Vicar to the U.S. Armed Forces from Borneo to Okinawa, wrote these words in his diary:
Fr. Haggerty was awarded the U.S. Bronze Star medal on February 21, 1947 for his services as a volunteer chaplain of the Visayas-Mindanao Force during the war years. He also became an adviser to Fertig's Guerrilla Government. Fr. Haggerty and his successor, Fr. Andrew F. Cervini, S.J., worked to reconstruct the school, and in 1946, regular classes recommenced. This was only interrupted again after the eruption of Mt. Hibok-Hibok on August 30, 1947, when the campus housed refugees from Camiguin, and even sponsored a boxing bout in its gym to raise funds for the victims.

University Status

In a bid for university status, Fr. Francisco Z. Araneta, S.J., then rector, had vowed to St. Francis Xavier that if ever Ateneo de Cagayan is conferred as a university before its Commencement Exercises on March 22, 1958, he will rename the university after the saint.
On that fateful day, an hour before the Commencement Exercises, then-Secretary of Education Manuel Lim, had sent a telegram stating that Ateneo de Cagayan has now been granted university status.
On August 27, 1958, Ateneo de Cagayan was inaugurated as a university and had officially become "Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan". It became the first university in Mindanao, and the first Jesuit institution, among those existing in the Philippines, even first before its sister school Ateneo de Manila to be given university status. After the inauguration, a banquet was held in honor of then-President Carlos P. Garcia, who was conferred, the very same day, the honorary degree Doctor of Laws, the first honorary degree given by the university.

Governance

The University operates as a non-stock education institution governed by its own Board of Trustees with Mr. Elpidio M. Paras, President and CEO of Parasat Cable, Inc., as Chair, and Fr. Roberto C. Yap as University President since June 2011. Fr. Yap succeeded Fr. Jose Ramon T. Villarin, S.J., PhD after the transition period at the Ateneo de Manila University.
One of the five Jesuit colleges and universities in the Philippines, Xavier University works in consortium with Ateneo de Davao University and Ateneo de Zamboanga University.

Academics

Professional Units

=Graduate School=

The Graduate School houses the university's post-baccalaureate programs, ranging from master's degrees to doctorates. Its council is the Graduate School Student Council (GSSC).

=College of Law=

The College of Law offers a Bachelor of Laws program. Its student council is the Association of Law Students (ALS). Its team is called Legis and its mascot is the goddess Dike (Lady Justice).
On November 11, 2011, the college was named an "Outstanding Law School" by the Legal Education Board of the Supreme Court of the Philippines, during the second anniversary of the board held at the Manila Pavilion, for being one of the ten best performing law schools in the Philippines from 2001 to 2011. Likewise, a plaque was presented to its dean, Atty. Raul R. Villanueva, as outstanding law dean.

=Dr. Jose P. Rizal School of Medicine=

Envisioned by Fr Ernesto O Javier SJ as a top producer of medical practicioners, the School of Medicine has been granted Level 1 Accredited Status. The School was recognized by the Commission on Higher Education as a Center of Development in Medical Education after its graduates consistently scored 100% in licensure examinations for a number of years since it started in 1983. It was likewise recognized by the Professional Regulations Commission and the Board of Medicine for having ranked second in the national Physician Licensure Examination in a span of 11 consecutive exams.
Having gained national recognition, the School of Medicine has been chosen by the Philippine Council for Health Research and Development as one of the satellite medical institutions for its project on the development of research capabilities. In collaboration with the XU Community Health Care Center, the School was also the pilot site of the Cervical Cancer Prevention Network Program in 2008, the first in the entire Mindanao area.
The School of Medicine envisions graduates who are committed to addressing the needs of society, particularly in Northern Mindanao. It continues to banner the provision of health care services that are acceptable, accessible, available, and affordable to our people.

Undergraduate Units

=College of Agriculture=

The College of Agriculture was founded in 1954. Its student council is the Agriculture or Aggies Student Council (ASC). They are known by the monikers Aggies and Bullriders, and its mascot is the Bull.
On February 27, 2009, the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) in its Memorandum Order No. 3, declared Xavier as a Center of Development (COD) in Agriculture for a period of three years. This title is the first to be given to a private institution.

=College of Arts and Sciences=

The College of Arts and Sciences offers most of the university's teaching core subjects of all colleges (e.g. Filipino, English). Its student council is the United Arts and Sciences Student Council (UNITASS). Its mascot is the Tiger.

=College of Computer Studies=

The College of Computer Studies, founded in 2011, is the most recent college in the university. Its council is the Computer Studies Student Council (CSSC). Its mascot is the Wizard.
The College of Computer Studies had previously been recognized and included in the first batch of Centers of Development for Excellence in Information Technology Education (CODE-IT) by the Commission on Higher Education (CHED) and its flagship BS in Computer Science is one of the first programs outside Metro Manila to be Level II-accredited by the Philippine Accrediting Association of Schools, Colleges and Universities (PAASCU).

=College of Engineering=

The College of Engineering student council is the Association of the College of Engineering Students (ACES). Its mascot is the Warrior symbolized by Lapu-Lapu.
On November 3–4, 2009, 65% or 11 out of 17 examinees, with national passing of 53% out of 912 examinees, have passed the Chemical Engineering government licensure examination. All of the passers are 2009 graduates.
On September 2010, 100% of 7 examinees, with national passing of 65% out of 2387 examinees, have passed the Mechanical Engineering licensure examination. All of the passers are 2010 graduates. One passer, Roselle Victor C. Lague, came in second place.

=College of Nursing=

The College of Nursing was founded in 1989. Its student council is the Council of Nursing Students (CONUS), and its mascot is the Python.
During the 2008 Nursing Licensure Examination, according to the Commission on the Higher Education (CHED), Xavier is ranked No. 1 among the schools whose students took the board exams.
From 2004 to 2008, the College of Nursing was among the top 20 nursing schools in the Philippines, maintained from 2009 to 2011.blogspot.html The College of Nursing was in second place with 97.82%, next to the University of the Philippines Manila.
In June 2010, 86% of the 14 examinees (100% of first-time examinees (2 who are 2010 graduates) and 71% of 7 repeater examinees), with national passing of 41% out of 91,008 examinees, have passed the licensure examination for nurses.

=School of Business and Management=

The School of Business and Management (formerly College of Commerce) is a recognized center of excellence in accountancy, business, and management education in Mindanao. Its student council is the School of Business and Management Student Council (SBMSC). Its mascot is the Eagle.

=School of Education=

The School of Education was founded in 1938, and was reopened in 1947. Its student council is the Teachers' Guild (TG). Its mascot is the Phoenix.

=Center for Integrated Technologies=

Unlike the other colleges, the Center for Integrated Technologies (formerly Center for Industrial Technology) (CIT) is a technical-vocational school. Its student council is the Center for Integrated Technologies Student Council (CITSC), and its mascot is the Knight.
The CIT was housed at the main campus at Corrales Avenue until 2012. Today, it is currently housed at the Jose Ch. Alvarez Technology Complex in the Manresa campus.
The old CIT building has subsequently been renamed as the Faber Hall in December 2013, in honor of St. Peter Faber, co-founder of the Society of Jesus. It is currently occupied by the College of Nursing and College of Computer Studies.

Basic Education Units

Preparatory and Grade School

Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan offers Preparatory and Grade School. Currently, the University has campuses for the preparatory and grade school levels located in Barangay Macasandig, and in Pueblo de Oro.

High School

Aside from Preparatory and Grade School, Xavier University – Ateneo de Cagayan also offers secondary education. Formerly, the High School was located in the main campus at Corrales Avenue, but was relocated to a separate campus in Pueblo de Oro together with the Grade School levels.
Due to renovation works in the Pueblo campus, the High School occupied certain areas of the SBM (Commerce) building and the Faber Hall in the main campus during the 2013-14 academic year.

Notable people

Alumni

Honoris causa

Faculty

Campuses

Xavier University operates on five campuses: 








