[[Asbestos Mountains]]

CATEGORIES: Mountain ranges of South Africa, Asbestos, Kimberley, Northern Cape

The Asbestos Mountains is a range of hills in the Northern Cape province of South Africa, stretching SSW from Kuruman, where the range is known as the Kuruman Hills, to Prieska. The range lies about 150 km west of Kimberley and rises from the Ghaap Plateau.
The mountains were named for the asbestos which was mined in the 1900s and is found as a variety of amphibole called crocidolite. Veins occur in slaty rocks, and are associated with jaspers and quartzites rich in magnetite and brown iron-ore. Geologically it belongs to the Griquatown series. 
The Griquas, for whom Griquatown was named,  were a Khoikhoi people who in 1800 were led by a freed slave, Adam Kok, from Piketberg in the western Cape to the foothills of the Asbestos Mountains where they settled at a place called Klaarwater. John Campbell, (1766–1840), a Scottish missionary in South Africa, renamed it Griquatown in 1813. The mission station became a staging post for expeditions to the interior - here David Livingstone met his future wife, Mary Moffat, daughter of the missionary Robert Moffat - William Burchell visited here in 1811.   
John Campbell described the mountains in his book "Travels in South Africa: Undertaken at the request of the Missionary Society":

The colour variants which Campbell found, are named, because of their chatoyance,  "Tiger's Eye", "Hawk's Eye", and "Cat's Eye" by lapidaries and are silicified crocidolite. 
Wonderwerk Cave is located in the range near Kuruman and was occupied by man during the Later Stone Age, while much earlier manuports, introduced by hominins in the terminal Acheulean, have been found at the back of the cave. 

Mining history

Serious mining of crocidolite in these mountains started in 1893 when open-cast quarrying produced 100 tons of material. By 1918 underground mining had started and scattered mines were to be found from Prieska to Kuruman along the length of the range, and mills were constructed at both of these towns. Between 1950 and 1960 production had risen to 100 000 tons, each mine was doing its own milling and the tailings dumps had grown in size. Google Books - Mesothelioma by Bruce W. S. Robinson, A. Philippe Chahinian

Health hazards

At the time of Campbell's writing the health hazards of asbestos were unknown. Tens of thousands of mineworkers were exposed to the fibres at their workplaces, and when winds blew across the wastedumps, at their homes. By the mid-1950s the medical profession were still diagnosing asbestosis as "metastatic carcinomas from an unknown primary site". The resulting increase in cases of asbestosis and mesothelioma became alarming. Records later revealed that pleural endothelioma had first been reported in 1917, but had also been considered as metastatic. Three minerals, Three epidemics - Anthony Coombs, John Pickering & Partners
Substitutes for asbestos now include ceramic, carbon, metallic and Aramid fibers, such as Twaron or Kevlar. 
David Goldblatt from the University of the Witwatersrand wrote: 
A similar situation had arisen in the 1920s in the United States with the careless handling of radium and the ensuing scandal of the Radium Girls.
The Green Mountains, for which Vermont was named, were produced by the same geologic processes that produced the Asbestos Mountains - they produced an abundance of serpentine, which is the source of chrysotile asbestos. 



References and notes


