[[Reverend Lovejoy]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons characters, Fictional clergy, Fictional characters introduced in 1990

Reverend Timothy "Tim" Lovejoy is a recurring character in the animated television series The Simpsons. He is voiced by Harry Shearer, and first appeared in the episode "The Telltale Head". Lovejoy is the minister at The First Church of Springfield—the Protestant church in Springfield. Initially kind-hearted and ambitious, Lovejoy has become apathetic towards others because of Ned Flanders's constant asinine scrupulosity.

Role in The Simpsons

Profile

Lovejoy is the pastor of the Western Branch of American Reform Presbylutheranism Church, which most of the show's characters regularly attend. He attended Texas Christian University."Wedding for Disaster" He initially came to Springfield in the 1970s as an eager, enthusiastic, young man,In "Faith Off" he uses an electric guitar in the church to compete against Bart's faith healing musical show. only to become cynical and disillusioned about his ministry, mostly due to Ned Flanders, who constantly pesters him with minor issues such as "coveting his own wife" or thinking that he "swallowed a toothpick." 
Lovejoy would deal with Flanders' concerns very briefly, so that he could return to playing with his model trains. At one point, Lovejoy "just stopped caring,""In Marge We Trust" but rediscovered the joy of helping others, though Ned still irritates him. Lovejoy even suggests Ned join another religion, as "they are all pretty much the same." In the season two episode Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment, Lovejoy helps Lisa with her family's illegal cable hookup. 
His sermons vary between dreary recitations of more opaque parts of the Old Testament, 

Tolerance

His tolerant side is demonstrated when he performs a Hindu marriage ceremony for Kwik-E-Mart shopkeeper Apu
He is especially intolerant of the Roman Catholic Church as he is shown brawling with a priest. and declared that he could not marry two people of the same sex any more than he could put a hamburger on a hot dog bun.

Negative qualities

Lovejoy has been shown to do things that would be considered sinful. Lovejoy has been known to exploit his congregation for money, brawl with a Roman Catholic priest, encourage his pet Old English Sheepdog to foul Ned Flanders's lawn, In "Whacking Day", he made up a passage in the Bible to attempt to convince Lisa that "even God himself endorses Whacking Day." In "The Joy of Sect", the episode in which the whole town of Springfield is deceived into joining a cult, Lovejoy kidnaps Homer with Groundskeeper Willie from the cult and hits him across the head numerous times hoping to knock him out. Also, when Lovejoy sees the spaceship emerge from the "forbidden barn" he throws his religious collar on the ground. After it is revealed that the spaceship is fake, Ned Flanders notices his collar on the ground and informs Lovejoy, who picks it up and puts it back on.
Lovejoy is not always enthusiastic about the Bible, calling it a "2000-page sleeping pill". It is unsure if he even owns a Bible, as it was once said he borrows it from the library every week, although he can exactly quote even obscure passages from memory. In another episode which dealt with marriage counseling, Lovejoy recommends Marge divorce Homer. When Marge objects that the Bible has strict guidelines concerning marriage and divorce, Lovejoy states that "according to the Bible, just about everything is a sin, technically we can't even go to the bathroom".

Family

Lovejoy's rarely seen daughter Jessica loves to cause mischief and manipulate people. Her hijinks are revealed to stem from her hunger for attention, which her father does not sufficiently provide. Lovejoy sent her to boarding school in an attempt to curb her tendencies, but Jessica was expelled. He does nothing about it out of denial and refuses to believe his daughter is worse than Bart. Lovejoy's wife Helen was originally portrayed as a moralistic, judgmental gossip, but in voice actress Maggie Roswell's long absence, her character was seen but not heard. His father is briefly shown in the episode "Bart After Dark" as an older version of Lovejoy (including clerical collar) who visits the Maison Derrière.

Character

Matt Groening has indicated that Lovejoy is named after Lovejoy Street (which in turn is named for Portland co-founder Asa Lovejoy)Corning, Howard M. Dictionary of Oregon History. Binfords & Mort Publishing, 1956. in Portland, Oregon, the city where Groening grew up. Cover Story: D'oh! The Oregonian, July 27, 2007. 'The Simpsons' Cleaverly captures an even bigger slice of Portland life. The Oregonian, November 4, 2000. Matt Groening: On what's so funny about Portland. The Oregonian, September 3, 1999. Lovejoy became the central character in the episode "In Marge We Trust". By season eight, the show had begun to explore secondary characters. Lovejoy was selected for this episode because, aside from being noted as "the priest who didn't care", he had not had much character development.






