[[RAKBANK]]

CATEGORIES: Banks of the United Arab Emirates, Online banks, Ras al-Khaimah

RAKBANKis the trading name of the National Bank of Ras Al-Khaimah PSC, a public joint stock company headquartered in the emirate of Ras Al-Khaimah, in the UAE. The Head Office of the bank is situated in RAKBANK Building on Emirates Road in, Ras Al-Khaimah. The Bank is 52.75% owned by the Government of Ras Al-Khaimah.
RAKBANK is listed on the Abu Dhabi Securities Exchange (ADX) and its shares are publicly traded. The Board consists of several members of the ruling family of the emirate of Ras-Al Khaimah and businessmen from UAE and Kuwait. The bank provides conventional and Islamic retail, small business, and corporate banking services through a network of thirty four branches in the United Arab Emirates, but all the transactions are handled on a strictly commercial basis.
RAKBANK is a retail and small business bank in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) with assets of Dhs. 28.9 billion (US$7.86 billion) as at 30 September 2013. At the start of 2013, the Bank launched an Islamic Banking unit, RAKBANK AMAL, amid a flood of investments in the Shariah (Islamic law)-compliant financial sector in the country. According to The Banker's Top 100 Arab Bank Rankings for 2013 (published by FT Financial Publishing), RAKBANK is 1st in the Arab World by Return On Assets (ROA) and 5th in the Arab World by Return on Capital.
The Bank was amongst the few commercial banks in the UAE which posted profit growth in 2009. Due to the Bank's withdrawal in 2006 from lending in the construction and civil engineering segments outside of its base Emirate, it has very little residual exposure in those segments and has no exposure to construction involving high-rise towers. RAKBANK was chosen as the Bank of the Year by an independent panel of business leaders from the region during the 2012 Business Achievement Awards. In addition, RAKBANK is one of the most active banks in the area of small to medium enterprise (SME) finance, with a dedicated business unit that offers financial solutions to SME clients.

Corporate History

Established in the 1970s, the National Bank of Ras Al-Khaimah underwent a major transformation in 2001, with a shift in focus from corporate banking to retail and small businesses.
Starting with only 5,000 retail customers in 2001, the Bank has close to 700,000 customers today. Branches have also expanded from an initial 7 to 44 branches, while full-time staff numbers have grown from 150 in 1996 to 4,500 employees at the end of 2011.

Milestones

1976
2000 
2001
2004
2006
2007
2008
2009
2010
2011
2012
2013

Operations

Location

RAKBANK is a public joint stock company, headquartered in the emirate of Ras-Al-Khaimah in the UAE. The head office of the Bank is situated in RAKBANK Building, in Ras-Al-Khaimah, and the Bank offers a comprehensive network of branches, ATMS, and EDMs (Electronic Deposit Machines) at locations across the seven emirates of the UAE.
The Bank is 52.75% owned by the Government of Ras-Al-Khaimah with shares that are publicly traded. The Board consists of several members of the ruling family of the emirate and businessmen from across the UAE and Kuwait. RAKBANK is engaged in providing retail and corporate banking services through a network of 33 branches in the United Arab Emirates.

Management

Board of Directors

Financial Results

All financial results have been audited and reviewed by the Dubai office of Pricewaterhouse Coopers. RAKBANK is also rated by Moody's Investor Services, Fitch Ratings and Capital Intelligence. The full ratings are available directly from the respective rating agencies or from their website. Their most current ratings of RAKBANK are:
RAKBANK reported AED 1.14 billion net profit for the nine month ended 30 September 2013, reflecting a 9.6% increase over the same period last year.  The full press release is available on www.ae.

Products and Services

Corporate Banking

The banking/SME division of RAKBANK caters to medium size businesses. The Bank offers customers products ranging from fund-based facilities such as overdrafts, term loans, loans against invoices, bill discounting, import and export finance to non-fund based facilities such as letters of credit, guarantees and foreign exchange forward cover facilities.

Products

=Credit=

==Credit Cards==

Following its entry into the Credit Card market in 2001, the Bank gained around 20 percent market share in the country's credit card sector with around 300,000 customers. Besides the Titanium Credit Card, RAKBANK offers the Visa Gold, Visa Classic and MasterCard Standard Credit Cards. It also provides co-branded cards, the MasterCard NMC and Géant La Carte. RAKBANK was awarded the title of Best Credit Card issuer in the region by The Banker Middle East Product Awards 2011, a region-wide awards program open to banks and financial institutions in the Middle East and North Africa region.

==Debit Cards==

Since 2009, RAKBANK has also offered a MasterCard Debit card, the first debit card in the UAE to offer customers the advantage of cashback as a percentage of purchase.

==Prepaid Cards==

Launched in early 2011, RAKBANK Loaded and RAKBANK Bling are reloadable Cards that can be topped up with money and used at any merchant outlet that accepts MasterCard Cards globally, including online merchants. They replace cash and allow clients to make transactions much like conventional credit or debit cards. The Cards are not linked to any specific account and, therefore, are available to anyone.
RAKBANK recently launched the Bayani prepaid card to cater to the region's large Filipino community which allows customers to instantly send money in US dollars to their family in the Philippines through their computer or mobile phone.

=Wealth Management=

The Wealth Management Division was initiated as part of the Bank's rebranding and retail banking strategy in 2001. It includes a priority banking service 'Al Momiaz' and the RAKinvest investment offering introduced at the end of 2003, with a Relationship Manager acting as a single point of contact.
Wealth Management products include Fixed Deposit accounts with free Life Insurance protection, RAKvantage current account which offers preferential interest rates, the RAKsave savings account and the online Fast Saver account. The Division's investment products include mutual funds, structured products, fixed-income securities, unit linked investment plans, savings plans and life insurance products.
RAKBANK currently has four dedicated Wealth Management Centres in the UAE, offering a range of investment and deposit products as well as customer service. Wealth Management services are available to customers throughout the Bank's 33 branches located across the UAE, with dedicated Wealth Management teams in select branches.

=RAKFinance=

In 2005, RAKBANK established its Business Finance department to cater to banking requirements of Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) in the UAE. The unit provides personalized service to its clients through business centres. The Bank extends loans (termed as RAKFinance Loans) without the need for the borrowing companies to place deposits or assets as financial securities against the loans. The unit also has an extensive range of deposit and transaction banking solutions.

=Insurance=

RAKBANK offers its customers a range of savings, investments and insurance products under the Insurance products family, including motor insurance, term, and life insurance policies as well as savings and insurance plans, death and disability protection and travel protection. These products are offered by Oman Insurance company and other international insurance providers.

=Mortgages=

RAKBANK began mortgage financing in Dubai in 2004 for freehold residential, followed by its entry into Abu Dhabi's property market in 2008. The bank offers mortgage finance for residential projects developed by a selected group of major developers in Dubai and Abu Dhabi. RAKBANK offers mortgages only on reputed projects and for end user financing, in accordance with the bank's practice of being a cautious lender. Therefore, at a time when other banks scaled down lending, RAKBANK's credo for 2010 is: "We are open for business".

=Auto Loans=

Since 2001, RAKBANK offers finance solutions to prospective car buyers in the UAE and conducts various promotions for auto brands. RAKBANK auto-loans are offered to self-employed or salaried customers, as well as to businesses interested in commercial cars or buses, and offers finance for both new and pre-owned vehicles. RAKauto loans are paid in monthly installments that can go up to 60 months. RAKBANK also offers short-term financing for vehicles.

=Personal Loans=

RAKBANK offers Personal loans to eligible nationals and expatriates living in the UAE. The Bank extends conservative loan amounts, allowable as per the guidelines of the UAE Central Bank.

About Amal

RAKBANK has become the latest lender to launch an Islamic banking unit in January 2013, amid a flood of investment into the Sharia-compliant financial sector. RAKBANK established the Islamic unit with an issued capital of Dh100 million (US$27.2m), according to the bank's financial statements.

Products

Accounts

RAKBANK AMAL's Sharia-compliant products include Jood Account, a unique
RAKBANK also offers a Sharia-compliant Amal Business Finance Account.

=Cards=

In addition to its two Debit Cards, RAKBANK AMAL also offers two Credit Cards through RAK Islamic Finance Company, a fully owned subsidiary of RAKBANK.

=Takaful=

RAKBANK offers customers a suite of Takaful policies.

=Auto Finance=

=Business Finance=

AMAL recently expanded its Sharia-compliant offering at the end of the third quarter of 2013 to include premium business finance solutions.

Services

RAKBANK Direct

With the start of 2011, RAKBANK launched RAKBANK Direct. RAKBANK Direct provides customers with online transactions for Banking and Insurance products such as Online Savings Accounts, Motor Insurance, Critical Illness plans, Savings Plans, and Travel insurance, all of which are provided by Oman Insurance Company. Other features of RAKBANK Direct include interactive rate calculators and videos that tell customers about the features and benefits of their products. Visitors to www.ae can also apply for other Banking products including a suite of RAKBANK credit cards, deposit accounts, and Wealth Management solutions.

Online Banking

RAKBANK's Online banking service was launched in 2008 to allow customers to perform banking transactions online, including viewing balances, availing salary advances, and making payments and transfers.

Mobile Banking

In April 2011, RAKBANK launched its Mobile Banking service, an alternative channel that provides customers with the opportunity of conducting banking transactions via their mobile phones. RAKBANK's Mobile Banking is available on smart phones as well as conventional mobiles to ensure that all their customers can make use of this service.

Phone Banking

RAKdirect is RAKBANK's phone banking service, providing support to customers with their banking requests or enquiries. RAKdirect also offers customers the option of performing banking transactions via telephone.

RAKBANKdeals.ae

In October 2011, RAKBANK launched RAKBANKdeals.

Service Quality

Ever since RAKBANK's relaunch in 2001 as a retail bank, its corporate emphasis was on customer satisfaction and one of its first appointments was to recruit a team dedicated to service quality.
Excellence in customer service has become a central theme of the Bank's activities and staff. RAKBANK earned a reputation for offering one of the highest levels of customer service in the industry by topping, the annual  Service Quality Bank Benchmarking Study conducted by independent service specialists Ethos Consultancy from 2005 to 2010.
In addition, RAKBANK is always among the top three in the list compiled by Gulf News that recognizes companies in the UAE for consistent and thorough customer service feedback.

Marketing Approach

Advertising has played a key role in the Bank's emergence as a leading retail bank in the UAE over the last decade. RAKBANK's advertising approach is summarized by its internal marketing guidelines in what the Bank calls its 'Four Cs of Marketing', requiring all marketing messages to be Crystal Clear, Confident, Cheeky and Combative. Even during the economic downturn in early 2009, RAKBANK lived up to its guidelines by openly addressing the credit crunch in its flyers, billboards and broadcasts including a drive around Valentine with the slogan of 'don't let the credit crunch ruin your life' and encouraging jewelry purchases via credit cards.
More recently, RAKBANK won the Gold Summit Creative Award for its AMAL TVC campaign, which featured the talking eggs after competing against 5,000 other submissions from around the world at the 2013 Summit International Award in the United States.
In mid-2009, a campaign promoted the Titanium Credit Card under the theme of "Don't Get Bitten by Other Cards", centered on a creature that lurks in people's wallets waiting to bite.  
The campaign also included an online game, which pitted the RAKBANK Titanium card, personified through the RAKMAN superhero, used in previous advertisements. Players who correctly answered all questions got more chances to win Titanium semi-annual million-dirham draw, once they apply for a credit card.
In late 2009, the Bank conducted a full takeover of bus-shelters branded from top to bottom as part of a larger campaign to promote the Bank's prize of a new apartment for its winning account holder.
RAKBANK won the "Best Marketing Campaign of the Year" award at the Middle East Prepaid Awards 2012 for its MasterCard Bling campaign, a light-hearted and bold marketing campaign which delivered results in both uptake and return on investment.

Standards and recognition

Awards and accreditations






