[[Fernando Aristeguieta]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 births, Living people, Venezuelan footballers, Venezuelan expatriate footballers, Venezuela international footballers, Venezuelan people of Basque descent, Ligue 1 players, Ligue 2 players, FC Nantes players, Expatriate footballers in France, Association football forwards, Sportspeople from Caracas

Fernando Luis Aristeguieta de Luca (born 9 April 1992 in Caracas) is a Venezuelan footballer. He plays for the French Ligue 1 team FC Nantes, as a striker.
In his childhood, he played many international tournaments. Score a goal to Trujillanos Fútbol Club in his professional debut with the Caracas Fútbol Club. At 20 he was the leading scorer in the Torneo Apertura 2012, scoring 14 goals. In his first semester in Europe, he helped his team to ascend with his team to the Ligue 1.
He is the only player in history who has scored a hat-trick in the Clásico del fútbol venezolano, which is the game between the two most popular teams in the country: Caracas Fútbol Club and the Deportivo Táchira Fútbol Club. He also became the first Venezuelan player in history Ligue 1 of France to score a goal.
On August 7 of 2011 he scores his first goal for the Venezuelan national soccer team against El Salvador

Biography

School

He studied at the Colegio San Ignacio de Loyola, developing a good school performance. With only 8 years received by the Mayor of Baruta the award for educational excellence. He also managed to represent their school in Recreational Mathematics Olympics five times, in which he was the runner up in 2006. In the summer of 2007 and 2008 studied English at the institution Cushing Academy, located in the city of Ashburnham, Massachusetts, achieving complete mastery of the language. During these years, he took the decision to leave school in order to fully focus on soccer, causing quarrels with his parents. Aristeguieta wanted to graduate in a school for athletes, however, he decided to finish at his school. In July 2010, he graduated with an average of 16 points over 20.

Sports

At 7 years, he joined the Loyola football team, being coached by former player from Caracas Fútbol Club and Venezuelan national team, Leopoldo "Polin" Páez -Pumar, who Fernando considers his mentor both outside and inside the court. Simultaneously he was practicing tennis, participating in tournaments at regional, national and international levels, and even, in 2002 the Venezuelan Tennis Federation designed the ranking of the 10-years, where Fernando Aristeguieta stood in fourth place. In that list, was leader David Souto, who is currently in first place in the ranking of men's professional tennis Venezuela. However, in the same year of publication, Aristeguieta decided to retire from tennis to specialize in football.
As a soccer player, he represented his school in Caracas Sports School League and the League César Del Vecchio. He also played in several international championships in European cities such as Barcelona, Gothenburg, Regina, Milan, San Sebastián and Dallas. At 15 he left Loyola to join the football team Italo Venezuelan Center. Two months later he joined the Caracas Fútbol Club.

Club career

Caracas Fútbol Club

In his first year at the club he managed to reach sub-17 National Championship 2007-2008 season, remaining as leader by scoring 21 goals. Fernando, turned down offers from teams like CD Tenerife, Real Oviedo, Graasshopper and Grêmio Foot-Ball Porto Alegrense to continue his studies.
He debuted in the first division in Venezuela with Caracas Fútbol Club in the 2009/2010 season. In his first season he played 20 games and scored 6 times, scoring his first professional goal on his debut against Trujillanos FC, in the city of Valera. On March 10 of 2010, he had his international tournament debut, coming in at 77 minutes for Rafael Castellín, in the game of Copa Libertadores 2009 at the Flamengo, that game was the last of Sanvicente Noel | Noel "Chita" Sanvicente coaching Caracas FC.
On July 31, 2010 he suffered a ruptured cruciate ligaments in his left knee that would keep him sidelined nine months missing the Copa Sudamericana 2011 and the South American U-20 Championship 2011.
First division of Venezuela in the season of 2011/2012 was the rebirth of the redhead forward, which few expected after his painful injury. In the first round against Trujillanos FC, he played 26 minutes. He makes his first goal of the season against the Football Club Tucanes Amazon in New Haven when he had entered 67 minutes, from there he was awarded with being a starter. The next match against Llaneros de Guanare Futbol Club he scored two goals. This game was played over two days due to power failure. The next day he repeated the feat at Mineros de Guayana in the Olympic Stadium UCV to score two of the four goals that the Nerazzurri embedded computer, the next 2 days and also scored a run and managed 4 consecutive days scoring. From there, the front began to be recognized and loved by the Reds fans before the game occasionally chanted "Aristeguieta, Aristeguieta". Having already spent a long injury of 9 months, he was still having knee problems since in season 2 occasions received short-term injuries . In the Torneo Clausura 2012, he scored only 4 goals. At this time he was very critical of the low production of plays in attack and the lack of scoring. They had to settle for finishing second in the standings.
For the 2012/2013 season, reinforcements were sought in the offense, with the Uruguayan Rino Lucas, Chilean Sebastián González and around Daniel Febles, the performance of Aristeguieta was dented in the biggest games for the arrival of two foreign players. It opens in the network on August 29 against Atlético Miranda in the 2012 Copa Venezuela. The poor performances of Chilean striker in the first games of the season Aristeguieta helped win more opportunities. In the second leg against Atletico Miranda he scores 2 goals and classified with an overall 7-6. He Scores the third double of his career on October 21, 2012 versus Real Esppor Club . On the 18th of the following month, an excellent performance curdles when getting his first hat-trick to the Llaneros de Guanare, a fundamental part as the team managed to win 4-1. Repeat this action on December 9 against Deportivo Táchira in Sports Pueblo Nuevo  and being the only player that Caracas has scored three goals against his archrival. He finished the Torneo Apertura 2012 ( Venezuela) as a leader in the scoring by scoring 14 goals that helped his team not to pass the second place.

Football Club Nantes

After passing the medical and psychological examinations, January 10 of 2013 signed a six month contract on loan to own the FC Nantes of Ligue 2 of France.
The Debut was the January 19 after entering 87 minutes in the match against Stade Lavallois Mayenne Football Club Laval. Within minutes he had the opportunity to make a header, but the ball went just inches from the corner. He debuted as a starter January 22 in the French Cup at the Stade Athletique Spinalien Epinal against Epinal with a result of 1-1.
On February 12 of 2013 he scored two goals in the match against Le Mans FC. The first came in the 7th minute after a cross from the left and Aristeguieta sleeps with his chest and then finish . In addition to this, he also caused the second yellow card of a rival. On Friday May 17 Nantes secured his promotion to the Ligue 1 after beating CS Sedan
Nantes FC gave the option to buy him for 1.2 million euros, extending the contract for 3 years. He was given the number 10 and also shares a  room with Venezuelans Gabriel Cichero and Oswaldo Vizcarrondo, who had been photographed with Aristeguieta in his first training with the senior team of Caracas Futbol Club.

National Team

U-15

He began his involvement in the Venezuelan selection in this category to compete in the South American U-15 Championship 2007 and played in Porto Alegre. Aristeguieta managed to be the top scorer of his team with three goals, earning a disqualification due to goal difference.

U-17

He was present in 48 friendly matches of the U-17 level in preparation for the League Sudamericano Sub-17, 2009 in the city of Iquique, where the team finished in last place in their group. He also participated in Bolivarian Games of 2009 scoring 1 goal in that tournament and the Venezuela National Team won the bronze medal.

Professional Team

He made his debut in Japan, causing positive feedback on their performance. Aristeguieta used the race number 7 and was replaced by Alexander Rondon. He was again summoned to the senior team for the friendly against the Chile national football team, this being the last game of the Marcelo Bielsa era.
He was subsequently called up for the match against El Salvador national football team, the first after the Copa America 2011, scoring a goal in this game, thanks to an assist from Yonathan Del Valle. Days later he played his fourth game against the Honduras national football team. On September 2011 He made his fifth friendly against the Guinea national football team at the Olympic Stadium UCV.
On October 7 hhe makes his debut in a competitive match with the  Venezuela national football team, at the meeting of the first day of the FIFA World Cup qualification against Ecuador national football team in Estadio Olímpico Atahualpa in Quito. After a year without playing with the Venezuelan selection he played five minutes in the match on November 14 of 2012 against the Nigeria national football team.
Surprisingly, he was placed as a starter in the match of the twelfth day of qualifying against the Colombia national football team. With the number 9,  he had two clear chances, including a possible goal, which was taken from the goal line by a Colombian defender. Finally his team won 1-0 at the Cachamay Stadium.

Club statistics

International goals

|-
| 1. || 7 August 2011 || Robert F. Kennedy, Washington, United States ||  || 0–1 || 2–1 || Friendly
|-
|}

Honours

Club







