[[W. J. M. Starkie]]

CATEGORIES: 1860 births, 1920 deaths, Fellows of Trinity College, Dublin, Greek translators, Irish translators, Irish classical scholars, Members of the Privy Council of Ireland, People educated at Clongowes Wood College, People from Sligo (town), People from County Sligo, People from County Cork, People from County Dublin, 19th-century Irish people, People educated at Shrewsbury School

William Joseph Myles Starkie (10 December 1860 – 21 July 1920) was a noted Greek scholar and translator of Aristophanes. He was President of Queen's College, Galway (1897–1899) and the last Resident Commissioner of National Education for Ireland in the United Kingdom (1899–1920).

Life

He was born at Rosses Point, Sligo, where his father was Resident Magistrate. He was the fifth son of William Robert Starkie JP (1824–1897) and Francis Powers Starkie.989-90. He spent his early years at Creggane Manor in Rosscarbery near Cork with his four older brothers and younger sister, Edyth Starkie, who became a painter and was married to Arthur Rackham.com/irisartsreviyear/pdf/1991/20492685.bannered. He became one of the Shrewsbury (Rowing) crew and was also Head of School before he went to Trinity College, Cambridge in 1880. Three years later he took his First in the Classical Tripos, and then abandoned the chance of a Fellowship to set off and wander in Italy and Greece.Joanna Richardson, Enid Starkie: A Biography, (1973)
On his return to Ireland he chose to lead an academic career. Obliged to begin again as a freshman at Trinity College, Dublin, he won the first classical scholarship, the Berkeley gold medal for Greek and was later awarded the Madden Prize, which allowed him to travel in Palestine and Persia. In 1890, having obtained the highest recorded marks in classics, he became a Fellow and Tutor of Trinity College. In 1897 he published The Wasps of Aristophanes, or Vespae which became the first of the Aristophanic works which established his distinction in the field. In 1914 he became a member of the Privy Council of Ireland. 989-90.
On 25 July 1893 he married May, the daughter of Cornelius Walsh, a Dublin solicitor. She had been one of his students at Alexandra College in Dublin where he had once taught Classics. Hers was a colourful family that their two eldest children went on to describe, Enid in her autobiography, A Lady's Child, and Walter in his autobiography, Scholars and Gypsies. Their other children were Muriel, Ida (known as Chou-Chou), Nancy, and Humphrey Robert who died in infancy (1916).

Resident Commissioner of education

He was appointed Resident Commissioner of National Education for Ireland in February 1899 and showed the vigour and freedom from convention unusual in holders of official positions. He set out to reform the existing educational system and his opponents had reason to dread the vigour of his onslaught. This tended to produce a very mechanical form of teaching aimed mainly at satisfying the Inspector. A child could pass a Reading Test and not understand a word of it. With the payment of a regular salary matters improved.2 In 1904 he began a campaign to amalgamate small schools, but here he ran afoul of the Catholic Bishops and clergy. Catholic Canon law delegated the moral supervision of each child to his parish priest. In addition some clerics opposed the amalgamation of boys and girls schools as being morally dangerous. In the end the Catholic authorities prevailed. Akenson, Education and enmity: the control of schooling in Northern Ireland, (1973), p.13
He was responsible for making Shakespeare familiar to the boys and girls in the National schools throughout Ireland,Walter Starkie, Scholars and Gypsies, (1963), p.36 and he also introduced Irish History into the National School's primary curriculum. 297 Up until then the authorities forbade lessons in Irish History or even Geography to prevent any chance of nurturing independence in the classroom. When authorising the distribution of the pro-establishment Irish history text by Patrick Weston Joyce,Janet Nolan, Servants of the Poor: Teachers and Mobility in Ireland and Irish America, (2004), p.29 Starkie stated, "There can be little doubt that the Board were guilty of narrow pedantry in neglecting as worthless the whole previous spiritual life of the pupil and the multitude of associations, imaginations, and sentiments that formed the contents of his consciousness."Michael C. Coleman, American Indians, the Irish, and government schooling/a comparative study, (2007)p.145 However, after the Easter Rising of 1916, he withdrew Joyce's text from the classrooms declaring the teaching of Irish history too dangerous a subject for the National schools.29 Some even claimed that by carrying recently sanctioned textbooks home children were actually corrupting their parents with nationalism. Coleman, American Indians, the Irish, and government schooling/a comparative study, (2007), p.199
He died at Cushendun on 21 July 1920 from diabetes, one year before the discovery of insulin. His eldest daughter was Enid Starkie, who was known for her biographies of French poets.

Works Translated

Other Writings




