[[Papa Eftim I]]

CATEGORIES: 1884 births, 1968 deaths, People from Yozgat Province, Eastern Orthodox Christians from Turkey, Turkish nationalists, Turkish people of Greek descent, Pontic Greeks, Christianity in Turkey, Autocephalous Turkish Orthodox Patriarchate

Papa Eftim I (Pavlos Karahisarithis () 1884 in Maden, Ankara Vilayet, Ottoman EmpireHurriyet: Türkçe dua eden bir papa (in Turkish) - 14 March 1968, Istanbul, Turkey), was the first Turkish Orthodox Patriarch of the Autocephalous Turkish Orthodox Patriarchate, an unrecognised Orthodox Christian denomination, that he founded. Eftim I had strong influences from Turkish nationalist ideology. He ruled as Patriarch from 1923 until 1962, when he resigned due to ill health. Keeping the title of honorary patriarch, he ordained his younger son as patriarch assuming the name Papa Eftim II.

Earlier years

Karahisarithis was born in Maden qadaa (today Akdağmadeni) of Bozok sanjak in 1884. He worked in a factory. He was ordained as a priest in 1915 and was given the name Eftim (). In the house of his neighbor Çerkes Ethem, he met Mustafa Kemal and became a supporter of his ideas. He took part in 23 April 1920 in the opening of the Turkish Parliament as representative of the Turkish Orthodox Community of All Anatolia (Umum Anadolu Türk Ortodoksları Cemaatleri).
In 1922 the Autocephalous Orthodox Patriarchate of Anatolia was founded in Kayseri by Father Pavlos Karahisarithis a supporter of the General Congregation of the Anatolian Turkish Orthodox. in opposition to Patriarch Meletius IV. During the meeting in a convent in Kayseri, decision was taken to establish a Turkish Christian church independent of the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople.
Karahisarithis moved to Istanbul in 1923. The same year, his supporters, with his tacit support assaulted Patriarch Meletius IV on 1 June 1923. Psomiades] On 2 October 1923 Papa Eftim besieged the Holy Synod and appointed his own Synod. When Eftim invaded the Greek Orthodox Patriarchate he proclaimed himself "the general representative of all the Orthodox communities" (Bütün Ortodoks Ceemaatleri Vekil Umumisi).
With a new Ecumenical Patriarch Gregory VII elected on 6 December 1923 after the abdication of Meletius IV, there was another occupation by Papa Eftim I and his followers, when he besieged the Patriarchate for the second time. This time around, they were evicted by the Turkish police.

Establishment of the Turkish Orthodox Patriarchate

In 1924, Karahisarithis started to conduct the liturgy in Turkish, and quickly won support from the new Turkish Republic formed after the fall of the Ottoman Empire. Being excommunicated for claiming to be a bishop while still having a wife (married bishops are not allowed in Orthodoxy) Karahisarithis, who later changed his name into Zeki Erenerol, called a Turkish ecclesial congress, which elected him Patriarch in 1924.
On 6 June 1924, in a conference in the Church of the Virgin Mary (Meryem Ana) in Galata, it was decided to transfer the headquarters of the Turkish Orthodox Patriarchate from Kayseri to Istanbul. In the same session it was also decided that the Church of Virgin Mary would become the Center of the new Patriarchate of the Turkish Orthodox Church.
Karahisarithis and his family members were exempted from the population exchange as per a decision of the Turkish government, although there was not the exemption for either Karahisarithis' followers or the wider Karamanlides communities of Turkish speaking Christian that was hoped for. Most of the ethnic Turkish speaking Orthodox population remained affiliated with the Greek Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople.
After the death of Mustafa Kemal, Papa Eftim lost some of his prestige in the eyes of the Turkish state. In 1953 he organized a demonstration march against the Greek Orthodox Ecumenical Patriarch Athenagoras I and he continued to make statements against the Greek Patriarchate.

Resignation and death

He resigned in 1962 due to ill health and his elder son Turgut Erenerol (formerly Yiorghos Karahisarithis) became Papa Eftim II, and held this post until his death in 1991. The office was then passed to his younger son Selçuk Erenerol, who took the title Papa Eftim III until 2002. The current holder of the title is Paşa Ümit Erenerol, his grandson (son of Selçuk Erenerol) who has held the title Papa Eftim IV since 2002.
He died on 14 March 1968 and was refused a burial in the Greek Orthodox cemetery of Sisli due to his excommunication, and the Turkish government had to intervene to secure his burial.




