[[St Symphorian's Church, Durrington]]

CATEGORIES: Grade II listed buildings in West Sussex, Grade II listed churches, Church of England churches in West Sussex, Churches in Worthing

St Symphorian's Church is an Anglican church in the Durrington area of the borough of Worthing, one of seven local government districts in the English county of West Sussex.  The original an 13th-century chapelry declined and fell into ruins in the 17th century, partly due to damage caused by the English Civil War.  Anglican worship was re-established in a tin building in 1890 as the former village grew into a suburb of Worthing, and during World War I a permanent church was built.  It was extended during World War II.  English Heritage has listed the building at Grade II for its architectural and historical importance.

History

Durrington was first recorded in 934 as a Saxon estate.  In that year, King Athelstan granted some of the land to one of his thegns.  By the time of the Domesday survey in 1086, Robert le Sauvage—Lord of the Manor of nearby Broadwater—held the land. from east to west.
The Domesday survey recorded that Durrington had "a church, eight acres of meadow and a wood of ten hogs".  When the priory was dissolved in 1459, the Bishop of Winchester William Waynflete acquired the patronage and made the tithes payable to Magdalen College, Oxford, which he had recently founded.
The church was wrecked during skirmishes linked to the English Civil War in the 1640s.
By 1677, the church was in such poor structural condition that the of Dean of Chichester convened a consistory court with three parishioners and asked them why repairs had not been carried out.  When they explained that it had been ruined during the Civil War, that Reverend Stanley had failed to serve them appropriately and that the parishioners could not afford its upkeep, the court accepted this.  The parish was soon the subject of court action again, when the Dean  found that the church bell had been sold without permission.  After conflicting accounts were given, the churchwarden eventually admitted to selling it to raise funds for poor people in the parish.
The area remained rural until the 19th century.  Durrington village always had two centres of population: the southern one, next to the road to Littlehampton, had declined almost to nothing by 1875, but the part to the north near the church began to grow in the last quarter of the 19th century, stimulated by the success of neighbouring Worthing.  The soil was of excellent quality, so land around the village was developed extensively for market gardening as well.  In 1890, the new rector of St Andrew's Church paid for a small temporary mission chapel (a tin tabernacle) to be erected in the grounds of the ruined church.  Services took place every Sunday, and parishioners from St Andrew's donated Eucharistic objects and a font.
The next rector of St Andrew's planned to replace the tin tabernacle with a permanent church to commemorate Queen Victoria's Diamond Jubilee in 1897.  He also sought to make the church independent from West Tarring by creating a separate parish for it.  Fundraising was successful at first—£641 (£
The parish of Durrington was taken put of plurality  on 14 July 1914, and a new priest was appointed later in the year.  Rebuilding started immediately: the remaining parts of the old walls (principally on the south and west sides) were incorporated into the new structure, and despite wartime disruption and shortages enough had been built to allow the church to be opened in 1915.  It was dedicated to St Symphorian on 13 October 1915.  No previous dediction of the church is known.  A consecration ceremony took place on 15 December 1916.  Durrington's rapid residential growth continued, especially after it became part of the Borough of Worthing in 1929, and the church was extended and thereby completed in 1941 with the construction of a chancel by W.H. Godfrey.  The church was rededicated by the Bishop of Chichester George Bell on 3 September 1941.  Lacy Ridge's work had cost £1,735 (£
Regular repairs and damp-proofing have been carried out since the church was completed: the decision to build around the remains of the 13th-century walls meant that damp was able to permeate and the new walls cracked.  The roof also caused problems: in 1961 the timberwork had to be renewed after a woodworm infestation.  Internal reorganisation and renewal was carried out throughout the 1960s and 1970s as well.

Architecture

St Symphorian's Church is a flint structure with stone dressings, built in the Early English style.  The roof is laid with tiles.  The building has a wide nave leading into a taller chancel, a Lady chapel and a vestry.  An entrance porch stands on the southwest side.  The remaining 13th-century structural elements are in the north wall (visible on the inside around one of the windows) and its foundations, and in the south and west walls.  A Saxon-era fragment from the original (pre-Domesday) chapel has also been identified in the north wall.  Also, a piscina of medieval origin was rescued from the ruined chapel and placed on the east wall of the new church.
Inside, the nave roof, built by Lacy Ridge, is considered "remarkable".  It is in two parts, the easternmost of which consists of a series of wide trusses.  The chancel roof has beams supported on decorated corbels.  Most of the windows in the church are lancets.  The north wall has four, there are three on the south and east sides, and the west wall has two and a rectangular window with tracery work.  Stained glass is set into several of the windows; one commemorates victims of the world wars.
Internal fittings and furniture include a white marble font taken from St Paul's Church in central Worthing; an 18th-century altar from a demolished church at Treyford, West Sussex; and an organ installed in 1954 (and rebuilt in 2006) to replace the original.

St Peter's Church

Residential development in the High Salvington area, north of Durrington and within its parish, encouraged the vicar of St Symphorian's Church to open a mission chapel there at his own expense.  The church still had no dedication and was known simply as the Mission Church.  On 3 July 1951, the Archdeacon of Chichester conducted a ceremony at which it was dedicated to Saint Peter.
St Peter's is an iron church (tin tabernacle)—now rare in Britain.  It is the only surviving example in Worthing.  Most of the internal fittings were donated by parishioners.  In 2010 St Peter's Church and the area of High Salvington was transferred to the Parish of All Saints Church, Findon Valley.

The church today

St Symphorian's Church was listed at Grade II by English Heritage on 11 October 1949;  (These totals have since changed because of new listings and delistings.)
The parish, in its present form (ratified in 1974), covers the Durrington, West Durrington and High Salvington suburbs in the northwest of the borough of Worthing, and some surrounding rural areas.  The eastern boundary is formed by Mill Lane, Half Moon Lane and Stone Lane; the main Littlehampton Road marks the southern boundary; and Titnore Lane and field boundaries form the other parts of the boundary.
There is a Eucharistic service every Sunday, daily morning and evening prayer sessions and a daily Eucharistic service (two on Wednesdays).





Notes

Bibliography


