[[Deobandi]]

CATEGORIES: Deobandi, Islam in India, Islam in Pakistan, Sunni Islamic movements

Deobandi ( while the foundation of Darul Uloom Deoband was laid on 30 May 1866.com

History

The movement developed as a reaction to British colonialism in India, which was believed by a group of prominent Indian scholars — consisting of Rashid Ahmad Gangohi, Muhammad Yaqub Nanautawi, Shah Rafi al-Din, Sayyid Muhammad Abid, Zulfiqar Ali, Fadhl al-Rahman Usmani and Muhammad Qasim Nanotvi — to be corrupting the Islamic religion. They therefore founded an Islamic seminary known as Darul Uloom Deoband. Lapidus, A History of Islamic Societies, p 626. ISBN 0521779332 From here the Islamic revivalist and anti-imperialist ideology of the Deobandis began to develop. Through organisations such as Jamiat Ulema-e-Hind and Tablighi Jamaat its ideology began to spread and the graduates of Darul Uloom Deoband from countries like Saudi Arabia, China and Malaysia opened up thousands of madrasas throughout South Asia, specifically in parts of Afghanistan and Pakistan.
A large group of Deobandi scholars opposed Pakistan being established along sectarian lines, particularly the demands of Muhammad Ali Jinnah's Muslim League for the Partition of British India into Muslim and non-Muslim sections.A History of Pakistan and Its Origins By Christophe Jaffrelot, Gillian Beaumont, p. 224, ISBN 1-84331-149-6. The Deobandi movement advocated a notion of a composite nationalism according to which Hindus and Muslims constituted one nation.A History of Pakistan and Its Origins By Christophe Jaffrelot page 222

Presence

In India

The Deobandi Movement has been influenced by Wahhabism from its early days.

In Pakistan

Some 15 per cent of Pakistan's Sunni Muslims would consider themselves Deobandi  and according to Heritage Online, nearly 65% of the total seminaries (Madrasah) in Pakistan are run by Deobandis, 25% by Barelvis, 6% by Ahle Hadith and 3% by various Shia organizations. The Deobandi movement in Pakistan was a major recipient of funding from Saudi Arabia from the early 1980s up until the early 2000s, whereby this funding was pulled in favor of the rival Ahl al-Hadith movement. 282. New Delhi: Har Anand Publications, 2005. Having seen Deoband as a counterbalance to Iranian influence in the region, Saudi funding is now strictly reserved for the Ahl al-Hadith.

In the United Kingdom

According to The Times, about 600 of Britain's nearly 1,500 mosques are run by Deobandi affiliated scholars, and 17 of the country's 26 Islamic seminaries follow Sunni Deobandi teachings, producing 80% of all domestically trained Ulema.Hardline takeover of British Masjid, The Times, 7 September 2007

Beliefs

The Deobandi movement sees itself as a maslak, or scholastic tradition, situated within orthodox Sunni Islam. It grew out of the Islamic scholastic tradition of Medieval Transoxania and Mughal India, and it considers its visionary forefather to be Shah Waliullah al-Dihlawi, the celebrated Indian Islamic scholar and thinker of the eighteenth century.

Fiqh (Islamic Law)

Deobandis are strong proponents of the doctrine of Taqlid. In other words, they believe that a Muslim must adhere to one of the four schools (madhhabs) of Sunni Islamic Law, and generally discourage inter-school eclecticism.Metcalf, Barabara. "Traditionalist" Islamic Activism: Deoband, Tablighis, and Talibs. "These orientations --"Deobandi," "Barelvi" or "Ahl-i Hadith" -- would come to define sectarian divisions among Sunni Muslims of South Asian background to the present." Students at madrasas affiliated with the Deobandi movement will study the classic books of Hanafi Law such as Nur al-Idah, Mukhtasar al-Quduri, Sharh al-Wiqayah, and Kanz al-Daqa'iq, culminating their study of the madhhab with the Hidayah of al-Marghinani.
With regard to views on Taqlid, one of their main opposing reformist groups are the Ahl-i Hadis, also known as the ghair-muqallid, the nonconformists, because they eschewed taqlid in favor of the direct use of Quran and Hadith.
In response to this need to defend their madhhab in light of scripture, Deobandis became particularly distinguished for their unprecedented salience to the study of Hadith in their madrasas. Their madrasa curriculum incorporates a feature unique among the global arena of Islamic scholarship, the Daura-e Hadis, the capstone year of a student's advanced madrasa training, in which all six canonical collections of Sunni Hadith (the Sihah Sittah) are reviewed. In a Deobandi madrasa, the position of Shaykh al-Hadith, or the resident professor of Sahih Bukhari, is held in much reverence.

Theology

In tenets of faith, the Deobandis follow the Maturidi school of Islamic theology. 
Their schools teach a short text on beliefs by the Maturidi scholar Nasafi. ISBN 1136932860

Sufism

Deoband's curriculum combined the study of the revealed sciences (Qur'an, Hadith and Law) with rational subjects (logic, philosophy and science). At the same time it was Sufi in orientation and affiliated with the Chisti order. Its Sufism however, was closely integrated with Hadith scholarship and the proper legal practice of Islam.
According to Qari Muhammad Tayyib — the 8th rector or Mohtamim of the Darul Uloom Deoband who died in 1983 — "the Ulema of Deoband ... in conduct ... are Sufis, ... in Sulook they are Chisti sufi order .... They are initiates of the Chistiyyah, Naqshbandiya, Qadriyah and Suhrawardiyya Sufi orders."Fatawa Rahimiyyah (Eng. Trans.), vol.1, p.58.orgTraversing the path of Suluk| January 26, 2012
Not all sources agree that Deobandis are Sufi."The Wahhabi (Arabia), Deobandi (Pakistan and India) and Jamaat-i-Islami all are anti-Sufi," Barelvi Islam| globalsecurity.net| 19 October 2011"Naqshbandi, the major Sufi cult in Pakistan, consists mainly of the Deobandis."Where sufism stands| August 1, 2010

Movements

Tablighi Jamaat

Tablighi Jamaat, a Muslim missionary organisation, began as an offshoot of the Deobandi movement. Its inception is believed to be a response to Hindu reform movements, which were considered a threat to vulnerable and non-practicing Muslims. It gradually expanded from a local to a national organisation, and finally to a transnational movement, and it now has followers in over 150 countries. Although its beginnings were from the Deobandi movement, no particular interpretation of Islam has been endorsed since the beginning of the movement.

Sipah-e-Sahaba

Sipah-e-Sahaba Pakistan (SSP) is a Deobandi Pakistani banned organization, and a formerly registered Pakistani political party. Established in the early 1980s in Jhang by Maulana Haq Nawaz Jhangvi, its stated goal is to primarily to deter major Shiite influence in Pakistan in the wake of the Iranian Revolution. The organization was banned by President Pervez Musharraf in 2002 as a terrorist organization under the Anti-Terrorism Act of 1997.B. Raman, "Musharraf's Ban: An Analysis", South Asia Analysis Group , Paper no. 395, 18 January 2002"Pakistan: The Sipah-e-Sahaba (SSP), including its activities and status", Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, 26 July 2005
In October 2000 Maulana Masood Azhar, founder of Jaish-e-Mohammed (JeM), was quoted as saying that "Sipah-e-Sahaba stands shoulder to shoulder with Jaish-e-Muhammad in Jehad."

Lashkar-e-Jhangvi

Lashkar-e-Jhangvi; alternately Lashkar-e-Jhangvi (LJ) Jhangvi) is a militant organization. Formed in 1996, it has operated in Pakistan since Sipah-e-Sahaba (SSP) activist Riaz Basra broke away from the SSP over differences with his seniors.[ref]
