[[Antonio Mennini]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, Living people, People from Rome, Roman Catholic titular archbishops, Italian bishops, Diplomats of the Holy See, Pontifical Ecclesiastical Academy alumni, Apostolic Nuncios to Russia, Apostolic Nuncios to Great Britain, Recipients of the Order of Friendship, Bailiffs Grand Cross of the Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George

Antonio Mennini (born 2 September 1947) is an Italian prelate of the Roman Catholic Church. He has served as the Nuncio to Great Britain since 18 December 2010, having been appointed by Pope Benedict XVI.

Biography

Antonio Mennini was born in Rome, Italy, in a family that has strong links with the Holy See. His father, Luigi Mennini, who died in 1997, was managing director of the Holy See's Institute for Works of Religion (the Vatican Bank) at the time allegations of money laundering were made against Archbishop Paul Marcinkus, the Institute's sometime  president.
Antonio Mennini was ordained to the priesthood on 14 December 1974. Mennini obtained a Doctor of Theology degree from the Pontifical Gregorian University of Rome.
Mennini is known in Italy as the priest who heard the final confession of the country's murdered Prime Minister, Aldo Moro, in the 1970s. Moro had been kidnapped and was being held captive in a secret location by the Red Brigades, a leftist Italian militant group. Archbishop Mennini, then an assistant priest, is believed to have delivered a letter to the terrorists from Pope Paul VI and a letter to Mr Moro from his wife. Shortly after his secret mission, the Prime Minister was killed and his body dumped in central Rome. The Vatican has shielded the priest from ever having to testify in subsequent state hearings concerning Moro's abduction and murder.The Tablet - News

Career

After obtaining the  degree Doctor of Theology he entered the diplomatic service of the Holy See in 1981, serving as an attache in the Pontifical Representations in Uganda and Turkey, and then in the Council for the Public Affairs of the Church.

Nuncio to Bulgaria

On 8 July 2000, he was appointed Titular Archbishop of Ferentium by Pope John Paul II. Mennini received his episcopal consecration on 12 September from Cardinal Angelo Sodano, with Cardinals Camillo Ruini and Jean-Louis Tauran serving as co-consecrators.
Upon his arrival in Bulgaria, he began preparing Pope John Paul II's 2002 pastoral visit to the Eastern European country amid great controversy. However, the visit was hailed as a success, largely because the new nuncio established excellent working relations with Orthodox leaders who had originally opposed it.

Nuncio to Russia and Uzbekistan

In 2002 he was posted to Russia and from 2008 was also accredited to Uzbekistan. He is credited with notably improving the Holy See's relations with the former Soviet countries in the Federation and with the Russian Orthodox Church.
As recently as 2001 Rome was criticised by the Russian Orthodox for establishing dioceses without adequate consultation in Russia. However, through the nuncio's fence-mending efforts the situation gradually began to change and in December 2009 President Dmitry Medvedev approved the establishment of  full diplomatic relations between the two states.

Nuncio to Great Britain

Mennini was named Nuncio to Great Britain on 18 December 2010
One of the most important duties facing Archbishop Mennini as Nuncio will be to oversee the vetting process for the appointment of a substantial number of new bishops for England, Wales and Scotland. For example, three of Scotland's eight bishops have applied to retire on age and health grounds; these include Vincent Logan of Dunkeld and John Cunningham, Bishop of Galloway, while two more are expected to have left by the end of 2013.
Most significantly, Pope Benedict XVI accepted the resignation of Cardinal Keith O'Brien, Archbishop of St Andrews and Edinburgh and Britain's then most senior cleric, on 25 February 2013. Two days later, the Pope likewise accepted that of Patrick Altham Kelly, Archbishop of Liverpool. Mennini will play a central role in the appointment of their successors.
A writer in the English Catholic publication The Tablet considered it likely that Archbishop Mennini's appointment was recognition that  delicate diplomatic work that will be required for the establishment of the personal ordinariate for former Anglicans in Britain.

Trivia






