[[Audrey Assad]]

CATEGORIES: American female singers, American people of Syrian descent, American Roman Catholics, American Christians, Christian religion-related songwriters, Singers from New Jersey, Singers from Florida, Sparrow Records artists, Living people, People from Scotch Plains, New Jersey, 1983 births, Converts to Roman Catholicism from Evangelicalism, Musicians from Nashville, Tennessee, Musicians from Phoenix, Arizona, 20th-century American singers, 21st-century American singers

Audrey Nicole Assad (born July 1, 1983) is an American singer-songwriter and contemporary Christian music artist. Her debut album, The House You're Building, was released through Sparrow Records in July 2010 and went to be named Christian Album of 2010 Tenth Avenue North, Matt Maher and Jars of Clay.

Early life

Audrey Assad was born in Secaucus, New Jersey to a Virginian mother and a Syrian father and was raised in a Plymouth Brethren household. She started to play the piano at 2 and spent her youth moving around New Jersey before settling in Scotch Plains from ages 7 to 18. "For openers", San Antonio Express-News, September 11, 2009. Accessed July 21, 2011. "Audrey Assad Young new artist from Scotch Plains NJ weaves her melodic voice with keyboard acoustics and lyrics that explore faith through music." She attended public school until middle school, where her experience there caused her to ask her mother to homeschool her, which she did. Assad spent her adolescence being homeschooled, working at her father's businesses, and attending church events.

Music career

Early career in Florida

When Assad was 18 her family moved to Florida and she spent the next six years there.

Nashville and the Firefly EP

In 2008 when Assad was 24, she decided to move to Nashville, Tennessee to continue and focus on her music career. She raised $7,000 from friends and fans to support her move from Florida. In Nashville she worked with producers Paul Moak and Phillip LaRue, recording a five song EP, Firefly, which sold at shows and featured a handwritten cover made of a brown paper bag. She supported herself by working as a nanny before meeting fellow Catholic musician Matt Maher. Maher took Assad under his wing and brought her to various gigs, where she sang back-up vocals and played sets during his shows. This time together around Maher's home base of Phoenix, Arizona, would later prompt Assad to move there from Nashville. During this time Assad signed on to work as a staff writer for EMI Christian Music Group Publishing, doing songwriting work with other artists.

Sparrow Records and The House You're Building

In 2009 Assad signed with Sparrow Records, who had been talking to Assad after the release of her EP.  For her first album, Assad then met and played for producer Marshall Altman, who would agree to produce what would become The House You're Building. Altman and Assad recorded the album at the Galt Line Studio in Los Angeles. The House You're Building was released on July 13, 2010, and the title track was featured as a free download on iTunes Discovery Download.  The album performed well commercially and critically, going on to become the amazon. The album reached #12 on the Billboard Christian Albums chart and #6 on its Heatseekers chart.

Musical style and themes

Assad grew up in a religious household but listened to secular music growing up through her mother's influence, including The Carpenters, James Taylor and Celine Dion, as well as French and Middle Eastern music from her dad's influence.  Later she discovered and began listening to Christian music such as the Newsboys, Nichole Nordeman and Cindy Morgan.  When she was 2 she started playing the piano, but it wasn't until she was 19 when she began leading worship  that she started writing and performing her own music. Assad played in local Florida venues with a style she described as folky and "average girl with a guitar/piano stuff". The Firefly EP that she recorded with Paul Moak was also described as folky and rootsy.
Her current style is a mix of religious and non-religious themed songs that draw from her Catholic faith as well as literary references from her love of reading literature and poetry. A majority of her religious songs are written in a way that emphasizes being sung to God rather than about God.

Personal life

Growing up Assad was raised in a Protestant religious household and reconfirmed her faith at the age of 19.
Assad currently lives near Nashville, after living in Phoenix, Arizona. She is married to William Gene Price III, whom she met in Arizona while on tour with Matt Maher in 2008. The couple married on February 19, 2011 in Phoenix. In October 2013, Assad announced that they were expecting their first child. Retrieved June 19, 2011.

Discography






