[[Comic Book Guy]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional shopkeepers, The Simpsons characters, Fictional characters introduced in 1991, Nerd culture

Comic Book Guy (CBG) is the common, popular name for Jeff Albertson, a recurring fictional character in the animated television series The Simpsons. He is voiced by Hank Azaria and first appeared in the second-season episode "Three Men and a Comic Book", which originally aired on May 9, 1991. CBG is the proprietor of a comic book store, The Android's Dungeon & Baseball Card Shop. He is based on "every comic book store guy in America" and represents a stereotypical middle-aged comic-book collector. He has become well known for his distinctive accent and catchphrase, "Worst blank ever!".

Role in The Simpsons

Profile

Comic Book Guy (claiming Jeff Albertson to be his real name in the episode "Homer and Ned's Hail Mary Pass" He has long hair, which he always keeps tied in a ponytail. His catchphrase is the declaration "worst/best subject ever", sometimes to the point of breaking the fourth wall. For example, in the episode "Saddlesore Galactica", he wears a T-shirt saying "Worst Episode Ever" and criticizes the idea of the Simpson family keeping a horse since that was the subject of a previous episode. Another example of breaking the fourth wall occurs in an episode when Comic Book Guy's chair collapses, and he sarcastically says "Ooh, a fat man falls. Real original." Despite his solitary life, in The Simpsons Movie, minutes before his likely death, Comic Book Guy says that his obsessive comic book collecting has been a "life well spent". However, in "Treehouse of Horror VIII", when a nuclear missile homes in on him, he says to himself, "Oh, I've wasted my life." (Although the "Treehouse of Horror" episodes are not part of the normal Simpsons canon.) In the 2008 episode "Any Given Sundance" it was revealed that he is also a writer and posts to his own site called "Ain't I Fat News," a take on the real-life movie review website Ain't It Cool News.

Romance

Comic Book Guy was once married in an online role-playing game. He and his Internet wife contemplated having children, but that would have severely drained his "power crystals." but becomes sexually and romantically involved with Principal Skinner's mother Agnes. He later dates Edna Krabappel. They are nearly married at a science fiction convention, but Edna changes her mind. CBG was not particularly surprised by this, saying, "There are a million valid reasons, but which one did you pick?" When Edna gently explains "It's like I'm DC Comics, and you're Marvel", he accepts the comparison without any rancor. In "Married to the Blob" Comic book Guy marries Kumiko a Japanese Manga artist.

The Android's Dungeon

Comic Book Guy is the owner of The Android's Dungeon & Baseball Card Shop, a local comic book store. The comics, collectibles, and toys he sells are of wildly varying quality and often have very high prices. His store is his sanctuary, where he holds some level of self-esteem, imperiously lording over pre-teen kids, like Bart Simpson and Milhouse Van Houten, using a heavily sarcastic tone and often banning certain customers for minor infractions. His store contains a lower level full of illegal videos (which include Mr. Rogers drunk, Alien Autopsy, Illegal Alien Autopsy, a "good version" of The Godfather Part III, and Kent Brockman picking his nose). 
In "Husbands and Knives", the store was closed due to bankruptcy when a rival comic book shop opened across the road, run by an owner with significantly better customer service and social skills. Although his old store was bought by Marge Simpson in the same episode and not returned, Comic Book Guy continues running his store in future episodes and the rival store is usually not mentioned, though it was referred to again when Milo showed up in Married to the Blob.

Character

Creation

Comic Book Guy was partly inspired by a clerk at the Los Angeles Amok book shop who often "sat on the high stool, kind of lording over the store with that supercilious attitude and eating behind the counter a big Styrofoam container full of fried clams with a lot of tartar sauce." Groening noted:  
Azaria based Comic Book Guy's voice on a college contemporary who went by the nickname "F", short for "Flounder" from the movie National Lampoon's Animal House, and lived in the room next door to him at Tufts University. Commentary for "Homer's Barbershop Quartet", in The Simpsons: The Complete Fifth Season DVD. 20th Century Fox. Azaria "loves that the character is an adult who argues with kids as if they're his peers."

Development

Within the series, the character Comic Book Guy is often used to represent a stereotypical inhabitant of the newsgroup alt.tv.
In the eighth season episode "The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show" after Comic Book Guy views the  Itchy & Scratchy episode featuring Poochie, he immediately goes on the Internet and writes, "Worst episode ever" on a message board; a commentary on how the active audience nit-picks the episode. The writers respond by using the voice of Bart Simpson:Alberti, pp. 147-148

David S. Cohen{–}The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show, The Simpsons 
The catchphrase further appears on his T-shirt in the eleventh season episode "Saddlesore Galactica", The catchphrase can also be used for describing other things by saying, "Worst. (Noun). Ever."

Name

A long-running gag on the show was never to reveal the character's name, with other characters referring to him as "Comic Book Guy". The writers had intended to name the character as early as his first episode, but they could not think of a name for him, and they called him "Comic Book Guy", with the intention of naming the character the next time they used him. Commentary for "Three Men and a Comic Book", in The Simpsons: The Complete Second Season DVD. 20th Century Fox. However, they continually procrastinated.  Finally, in the February 6, 2005 episode, "Homer and Ned's Hail Mary Pass", Comic Book Guy nonchalantly tells Ned Flanders: "My name is Jeff Albertson, but everyone calls me 'Comic Book Guy'". His name is also mentioned in The Simpsons Game.

Reception

Hank Azaria has won several Primetime Emmy Awards for Outstanding Voice-Over Performance for his work on The Simpsons, winning one in 2001 for voicing Comic Book Guy and various other characters in the episode "Worst Episode Ever".

Merchandising and other media

Comic Book Guy is featured on the cover of the twelfth season DVD. He appears on other media as well, including t-shirts and drinking glasses. 
In The Simpsons Game, he explains all the clichés that the player comes across during the game. Comic Book Guy has appeared in his own five-part comic book, in which his death influenced a nerd and geek gang war. The Simpsons Library of Wisdom includes a volume entitled "Comic Book Guy's Book of Pop Culture". 
Comic Book Guy appears in Hit and Run as a drivable character, the host for bonus mission level four and host for a level seven mission. He is also a passenger in Road Rage. 
Comic Book Guy makes a cameo appearance in the season two finale of The Cleveland Show saying the line, "Worst. Cameo. Ever". 






