[[Natalia Kills]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, 20th-century English actresses, 21st-century English actresses, 21st-century English singers, Actors from Bradford, British people of Uruguayan descent, English female singers, English people of Jamaican descent, English pop singers, English songwriters, English television actresses, Interscope Records artists, Musicians from Bradford, People educated at Bradford Girls' Grammar School, Polydor Records artists

{{Infobox musical artist 
| name            = Natalia Kills
| image           = Natalia Kills performing at The Bootleg Theater.png
| caption         = Kills performing in 2014.
| background      = solo_singer
| birth_name      = Natalia Noemi Keery-Fisher
| alias           = 

| birth_date      = 
| birth_place     = Bradford, West Yorkshire, England
| genre           = 

| occupation      = {{Flatlist|
| instrument      = {{Flatlist|
| years_active    = 1995–present
| label           = 

Natalia Cappuccini (born Natalia Noemi Keery-Fisher; 15 August 1986),

Although only 5'1",

Biography

Early life

Kills was born in Bradford, West Yorkshire, to a British father of Afro-Jamaican heritage and a Uruguayan mother,
Kills has described her teenage years as "degenerate," stating that she tried to set her ex-boyfriend's house on fire while both were in it. Kills had frequent legal trouble and periodically experienced suicidal depression.

1995–2010: Career beginnings

Kills made her acting debut at age 9 in 1995 in New Voices. She had a regular role as Sima on the TV sitcom All About Me and also played Amy Franks in the BBC's long-running radio drama The Archers. She began writing songs at 14, some of which were featured in films and television shows, including Bring It On 4, Sleepover, Just My Luck, and Entourage. After finishing with The Archers in 2003, Kills began pursuing a music career and had a significant breakthrough as "Candy Rapper" in 2003, when she won a BBC Radio 1 MC Battle in Leeds. She signed to the UK record company Adventures in Music and released her first single "Don't Play Nice" under the name Verbalicious in February 2005. Kills told W that her childhood nickname from her mother was "Verbal" because she talked and sang a lot. She adopted the name and variations of it as her stage name at some points during her career.
In 2007, while writing music for films, Kills posted Wommanequin, a demo she produced and wrote, to MySpace. The song received 2 million plays on the website, and Kills reached the top of the unsigned artists chart. With offers coming in for concerts and festivals, Kills traveled to Los Angeles, where she met with record labels and producers including Akon and Justin Timberlake.  During this time she (under the name Verse) also co-wrote and appeared on "They Talk Shit About Me" by French recording artist M. Pokora and met underground director Guillaume Doubet, who would go on to direct many of her videos, in Paris.
Kills moved to Los Angeles in 2008. Arriving without money or a place to live, Kills "lived out of these motels, bumming around, trying to work with or make songs with anyone who would have me for a couple of hours in the studio. I was a degenerate. I was terrible. I did awful things. I was just trying to survive and I was too young to know better."

2010–12: Perfectionist

Kills adopted the stage name Natalia Kills reportedly after her record company advised her that her legal name, "Natalia Cappuccini" (her grandmother's surname)
Kills released her debut album Perfectionist in Germany in April 2011 following the release of her first single, "Mirrors," which hit the German Top 10. The album was described as a concept album by Kills, who claimed everybody is a perfectionist.
Kills was featured on LMFAO's 2011 single, "Champagne Showers," as well as on Junior Caldera's single "Lights Out (Go Crazy)" with Far East Movement. It was released on 13 March 2012. Kills also features in Tatana's single, "You Can't Get in My Head (If You Can't Get in My Bed)." "Zombie", was used in an episode of Face Off.

2012–14: Trouble and other endeavors

On 14 September 2012, Kills unveiled the video for "Controversy" to start promotion of her second studio album, Trouble, which was released on 3 September 2013, through will.i. Recorded in Los Angeles and New York,  Trouble  was written and recorded in collaboration with Jeff Bhasker and Emile Haynie, who has worked with Lana Del Rey, Kid Cudi, and Eminem, among others.
Kills attended an after-party for the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards, held on 25 August 2013 in Brooklyn, New York City, where she performed various songs from Trouble. She said she was working to "making something on stage that is remotely accurate" to the cover art of the album and the sound of the songs. Two days later, the song "Outta Time" was released as the album's second promotional recording free of charge in a Polydor Records newsletter,
For the US release of Trouble, "Boys Don't Cry" was premiered on the website of the magazine Glamour. On 18 October 2013, a remix of the song was available on Cosmopolitan.
After an uncredited appearance during the introduction of the track Black Dahlia from American rapper Angel Haze's debut album Dirty Gold, released in late 2013, Kills decided to collaborate a second time with Haze for a remix of her song Problem. Produced and realized by Kills' boyfriend, New Zealand-born musician Willy Moon, this remix has been unveiled online on February 11, 2014.com/NKStreetTeam/status/433271872935841792
Eight days later, a music video for the title track Trouble, directed by filmmaker Emile Rafael, made its premiere on her VEVO channel.youtube. However, 
this was an "off-promotion" project and not a real single knowing that no digital or physical release was published as such, except from a Cherry Cherry Boom Boom remix featuring Canadian musician Peaches.apple.com/us/album/trouble-cherry-cherry-boom/id849344708

2014–present: New projects and international breakthrough

On 27 February 2014, Cherrytree Records hinted via a tweet that Kills was in studio in Stockholm, some time after a performance on stage at a gala evening in Moscow, accompanied by electronic music producers David Guetta and Giorgio Tuinfort.com/cherrytreerec/status/438812500327276544 The trio was later joined by Dutch producer Afrojack, and finally by Swedish DJ Avicii.com/djafrojack/status/439075515224584192 Several pictures of the team in studio were posted on Kills' Instagram account, including one where she indicates composing a new track.com/p/k7XKdpwjYL/ This last minute meeting was conducted in order to work on a new project that remains uncertain: independent, for Guetta' upcoming sixth studio album, planned for summer 2014 or even Kills' future record. Foremost, this collaboration aims to sign her international breakthrough.
A month later during the week of March 17, 2014, Kills was briefly seen in the streets of New York City, shooting a commercial for Venezuelan designer Carolina Herrera's fragrance, 212 VIP Rosé. Photos taken during the shoot leaked online, with new scenes filmed indoors.com/nataliakillsro/status/446376084422942721
On April 10, 2014, American singer-songwriter Madonna posted a picture of herself on her Instagram account, alongside with Kills and Kierszenbaum in a recording studio with caption saying "Working the midnight shift with Natalia Kills. 2 girls on a couch..........

Discography

Filmography

Concerts






