[[David Zaslav]]

CATEGORIES: American television executives, 1960 births, Living people, Binghamton University alumni, Boston University School of Law alumni, NBCUniversal people, Discovery Communications, American chief executives

David M. Zaslav (born January 15, 1960)

Career

Zaslav earned a Bachelor of Science degree from Binghamton University. Following this, he graduated with honors (JD) from Boston University School of Law in 1985 and started his career as an attorney with LeBoeuf, Lamb, Lieby and MacRae in New York.

NBC Universal

Zaslav had a distinguished career at NBC, spanning nearly two decades. Joining in 1989, he was instrumental in developing and launching CNBC, MSNBC and negotiating landmark deals on behalf of NBCU with DirecTV, Comcast and Time Warner.  Zaslav was on the forefront of bringing films and TV shows to consumers through new platforms.  As president of Cable and Domestic TV and New Media Distribution, he oversaw content distribution to all forms of TV, led negotiations for cable and satellite carriage of NBC Universal networks and forged innovative new media partnerships, including a pioneering video-on-demand deal with the leading cable operator, Comcast.
His responsibilities extended to Bravo, CNBC World, SCI FI, ShopNBC, Sleuth, Telemundo, Telemundo Puerto Rico, mun2, Trio, Universal HD, USA Network, NBC Weather Plus and the Olympics on cable. Zaslav also oversaw NBC Universal's interests in A&E, The History Channel, The Biography Channel, National Geographic International, the Sundance Channel and TiVo.

Discovery Communications

Zaslav took the helm at  in January 2007and set the company on course for a rapid transformation, with a dedicated focus on growth, performance and operational efficiency.  Under his leadership in 2008, Discovery began trading as a public company on the Nasdaq stock exchange.  Since that time, Discovery's market capitalization has grown from less than $6 billion to approximately $30 billion.
Zaslav has spearheaded strategic efforts to clarify and strengthen Discovery's world-class brands, including a renewed focus on creativity and a two-fold increase in investment in original content.  These efforts have helped drive viewership share growth of Discovery's networks from 7% in 2008 to 10% in 2012 in the U.S. alone, and more than 2 billion cumulative subscribers in over 220 countries worldwide.
During Zaslav's tenure, the company has premiered such iconic programming as the award-winning natural history specials Planet Earth, Life, Frozen Planet and North America.  In addition, the company has expanded into ground-breaking, live entertainment specials with increased engagement across all platforms.  The most recent success includes the epic Discovery Channel programming event Skywire Live with Nik Wallenda, in which the acclaimed daredevil walked across the Grand Canyon untethered, riveting 25 million viewers worldwide. The company has also continued to air franchise-defining events such as the annual Shark Week on Discovery, the original and longest-running themed programming week on television.
Over the last seven years the company has elevated existing brands and launched many new ones.  Animal Planet  had its most successful series in network history with River Monsters, Call of the Wildman and Tree House Masters, and delivered its most watched quarter in 2013.  In 2008, Investigation Discovery  launched which has been one of the fastest-growing cable networks in the U.S. and a top 15 network among women.  In 2012, the company debuted Velocity  a network that has become the leader in upscale male programming, beating several sports niche competitor channels in ratings.  Destination America  which launched in May 2012, features several new and successful series including BBQ Pitmasters and Mountain Monsters, becoming #1 with men among ad-supported cable networks of similar size.
In addition to expanding and launching brands within the corporate portfolio, Zaslav also has brokered joint ventures with strategic partners like Hasbro for the Hub Network  children's and family network; Sony and IMAX to launch 3net   In three years since its launch, OWN has grown to become a top five network with African-American women and recently announced it became cash flow positive in 2013.  OWN has enjoyed double and triple digit ratings growth following the success of the iconic series Oprah's Next Chapter, Where are They Now, Welcome to Sweetie Pies, Iyanla: Fix My Life, and ground-breaking Tyler Perry series The Haves and the Have Nots and Love Thy Neighbor.
During Zaslav's tenure, Discovery Networks International has expanded to become the #1 international cable programmer in the world, with more than 190 networks in over 220 countries and territories, including the TLC brand now available in more than 150 markets and the most widely distributed female-targeted entertainment and lifestyle channel brand in media.
In 2013, Zaslav led Discovery's expansion of its international operations with two large-scale investments: the acquisition of SBS Nordics and a 20% ownership stake in Eurosport, the largest pan-European pay TV sports network reaching nearly 60 countries with four different sports brands and digital platforms.  SBS Nordics is a top-three portfolio of television and radio brands across Denmark, Norway, Sweden and Finland that features leading nonfiction content, as well as locally produced entertainment programs, sports and top scripted series and movies from major studios.  Other recent international investments include Switchover Media (owner of a suite of four free-to-air channels in Italy) and Fatafeat (a female lifestyle network in the Middle East).  The company also has focused on investing in resources and talent to strengthen its global content pipeline, including the acquisition of UK-based independent production house betty.
During Zaslav's tenure, the company also has focused its efforts on being the #1 non-fiction media company on all screens, demonstrated by the 2012 acquisition of San Francisco-based Revision3, a leading internet TV company, and an increased focused on video content across all platforms.
Building on Discovery's heritage of education and igniting curiosity, Zaslav also has led the transformation of the company's burgeoning education division, Discovery Education, into the nation's leading provider of digital content, reaching over 35 million students in the U.S. and supporting school systems in over 50 countries worldwide.

Discovery Impact

Discovery has expanded its corporate social responsibility and environmental programs.  Zaslav has spearheaded Discovery Impact  the umbrella brand for Discovery's CSR programs, which leverage the power of Discovery's brands, businesses and employees to give back and make a difference in the communities where they live and work through initiatives such as the annual Discover Your Impact Day of global employee volunteerism.
For these and other accomplishments, in 2009, Zaslav was honored by the Natural Resources Defense Council (NRDC) with its Forces for Nature award  for his vision and leadership in driving Discovery's ongoing commitment to embracing "green" as a corporate value and developing the highest quality programming that celebrates the wonders of our planet for audiences around the world.  In 2012, he received the Steven J. Ross Humanitarian Award by the UJA-Federation for New York, which honors people of vision, energy and sustained achievement in the entertainment, media and communications industries.

Boards and Other Activities

Zaslav serves on the boards of Sirius XM Radio, Inc., Univision Communications, Inc., the National Cable & Telecommunications Association, The Cable Center, Center for Communication and Skills for America's Future.
He also is a member of the Board of Trustees for the Paley Center for Media, the Mt. Sinai Medical Center and previously served as an adjunct professor at Fordham University, where he created and taught a graduate-level course on the business of cable television.






