[[Rebstar]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 births, Living people, Swedish hip hop musicians, People from Malmö

Rebin Shah (born 4 October 1988) better known by his stage name Rebstar, is a Swedish recording artist and entrepreneur. He is also the co-founder and serves as the CEO of record label Today Is Vintage.

Early life

Rebin Shah was born in Malmö, Sweden on October 4, 1988. He is the only child of a Persian mother and a Kurdish father. He found his love for hip hop at an early age, having mentioned Fresh Prince and Redman as his early influences. He grew up in the infamous district Rosengård until his late teens.wikipedia. His mother insisted he enroll in an international elementary school that taught English, hoping that it would afford him more opportunities in the future. Upon graduation from high school, he moved to the UK to study Law at the University of Aberdeen. However he is known to have dropped out and moved back to Sweden to pursue music full-time.sr.aspx?programid=2842&grupp=3879&artikel=3382849

Music career

In late 2008 Rebstar released his debut single "Without You". The song is produced by Canadian T-Minus and features Trey Songz.atlanticrecords. The success of the single led to Trey Songz coming to Sweden for a promotional tour with Rebstar in December 2008.mynewsdesk. "Without You" has garnered airplay on MTV outlets in over 10 countries worldwide, including Finland, France, UAE, Netherlands and New Zealand.
In October 2009, the song "Drive" leaked which is rumored to be a featured cut from the upcoming Need for Speed: Burnout soundtrack.yungdrew.com/2009/02/23/rebstar-drive-prod-redrama/
In December 2009, during an interview with Craig David on Kiss 100, he mentioned that he has collaborated with Rebstar for an upcoming project. Whether or not these songs will be on Craig David or Rebstar's album remain unclear.
Rebstar's debut mixtape Arrival was released on his birthday, October 4, 2010. It features production by Boi-1da, T-Minus, REO, DJ Pain 1.credmag.htm
A follow-up mixtape entitled Arrival 2.0 was released on May 3, 2011.freeonsmash.com/news/2011/05/03/rebstar-rebstars-arrival-2-0-mixtape/
In July 2011 a song by Rebstar entitled "Good Life" featuring Drake & Rock City was leaked and surfaced on multiple blogs.dubcnn. Rebstar commented on his Twitter that it was a premature leak and encouraging fans not to download it. In September 2011, Swedish pop singer Eddie Razaz announced he has commissioned Rebstar as a songwriter for the singer's debut album.scandipop.co. The first offering is Falling which was released online October 3, 2011.
March 2012 he released the mixtape Bad Karma with promotional support from The Piratebay, Spotify and Mediafire. Bad Karma has reached over 150 000 downloads since its release. The mixtape features production mainly by DJ Pain 1 and additional production by Kid Klassic and Madison.
Rebstar is known for being one of few independent artists from Sweden gaining international exposure.yoraps.php?subaction=showfull&id=1291027647&archive=&start_from=&ucat=4 Additionally, Rebstar has also been songwriting for various R&B and pop artists as well as serving as the chairman for non-profit music organization Vintage Initiativet
Rebstar is currently finalizing his upcoming project "Girls Like Nicole" slated for a mid-2014 release.

2fresh Records and Today Is Vintage

2fresh was a Swedish music publishing and independent record label founded by Rebstar.
2fresh was established in 2008 with the intent of self-publishing and releasing material by its founder, Rebstar. The label was also known for signing Swedish producer and artist Leslie Tay, who went on to win a Grammis award for his production on Adam Tensta album It's A Tensta Thing.grammis.se/?page=105
2fresh also served as the label for Rebstar's music and has released singles in collaboration with acts such as Trey Songz, Ray J, The label was commemorated by Warner Music Sweden and Atlantic Records for being the first Swedish record label to collaborate with American urban major-label artists.mynewsdesk.com/se/pressroom/warnermusic/pressrelease/view/trey-songz-foersta-sverigebesoek-243167
In June 2010, an announcement was made that there will be drastic roster changes within the label.credxtra.htm Consequently, the departure of all its artists with the exception of Rebstar was made official. Most recently, Swedish rapper Eurokid announced on Swedish television TV4 that he had signed with 2fresh.sydsvenskan.html
Autumn 2011, Rebstar announced the founding of a new label Today Is Vintage, and has not mentioned 2fresh Records since. Although never officially announced, 2fresh Records is assumed to be defunct.
After disbanding 2fresh Records, Rebstar co-founded entertainment company Today Is Vintage in 2011. The current artist roster of Vintage is not known, however it is widely rumored that Swedish artist Eurokid followed Rebstar to the new label. Producer's DJ Pain 1 and Madison are reported to be in-house producers at Vintage.kingsizemagazine.aspx?ArtNo=20915
As of 2013, the current roster of Today Is Vintage consists of Rebstar, Kállay Saunders, Hamid Lamin and in-house producer Madison.

Business ventures

Rebstar is known to own several establishments in Sweden, including a translation agency, a B2B catering firm as well as a recording studio in central Malmö. He also serves as the CEO of record label Today Is Vintage.sydsvenskan.html

Discography

Mixtapes

Album

TBA (2013)

Singles

Collaborations

Notes




