[[Stephen E. Ambrose]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, 2002 deaths, American Congregationalists, American historians, American military historians, American military writers, Deaths from lung cancer, Dwight D. Eisenhower, Historians of the American West, Historians of the United States, Johns Hopkins University faculty, Kansas State University faculty, Louisiana State University faculty, National Humanities Medal recipients, Naval War College faculty, Official biographers to the Presidents of the United States, People from Decatur, Illinois, People from Helena, Montana, Writers from New Orleans, Louisiana, People from Whitewater, Wisconsin, Plagiarism controversies, University of New Orleans faculty, University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni, Wisconsin Badgers football players, Writers from Illinois, Writers from Wisconsin, World War II historians, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers, 20th-century historians, 21st-century historians

Stephen Edward Ambrose (January 10, 1936 – October 13, 2002) was an American historian and biographer of U.S. Presidents Dwight D. Eisenhower and Richard Nixon. He was a longtime professor of history at the University of New Orleans and the author of many best selling volumes of American popular history.
Beginning late in his life and continuing after his death, however, evidence and reports have continued to surface documenting longtime patterns of plagiarism and inaccuracies in many of his published writings and other work. In response to one of the early reports, Ambrose said he was not "out there stealing other people's writings." In the wake of his death, a reviewer for the New York Times did not absolve him completely, but opined that "he certainly deserved better from some of his envious peers" and credited the historian with reaching "an important lay audience without endorsing its every prejudice or sacrificing the profession's standards of scholarship."William R. Everdell, "Personal history: How Stephen Ambrose turned himself into America's most prominent chronicler of World War II, " New York Times Book Review, November 17, 2002, p. 51

Early life

Ambrose was born in Lovington, IllinoisAmbrose, Stephen E. Comrades: Brothers, Fathers, Heroes, Sons, Pals. Simon & Schuster, 2000, p. 132. He attended college at the University of Wisconsin-Madison where he was a member of Chi Psi Fraternity and played on the University of Wisconsin football team for three years.
Ambrose originally wanted to major in pre-medicine, but changed his major to history after hearing the first lecture in a U.S. history class entitled "Representative Americans" in his sophomore year. The course was taught by William B. Hesseltine, whom Ambrose credits with fundamentally shaping his writing and igniting his interest in history. Ambrose bio by Stephen Ambrose. While at Wisconsin, Ambrose was a member of the Navy and Army ROTC. He graduated with a B.A. in 1957. Ambrose received a master's degree in history from Louisiana State University in 1958, studying under T. Harry Williams. Ambrose then went on to earn a Ph.D. from the University of Wisconsin–Madison in 1963, under William B. Hesseltine. Hale, "Stephen Ambrose Dies," Perspectives, December, 2002.

Career

Academic positions

Ambrose was a history professor from 1960 until his retirement in 1995, having spent the bulk of his time at the University of New Orleans, where he was named the Boyd Professor of History in 1989, an honor given only to faculty who attain "national or international distinction for outstanding teaching, research, or other creative achievement"."Boyd Professors," Louisiana State System  retrieved March 4, 2014 During the academic year 1969-70, he was Ernest J. King Professor of Maritime History at the Naval War College. In 1970, while teaching at Kansas State University, Ambrose participated in heckling of Richard Nixon during a speech the president gave on the KSU campus. Given pressure from the KSU administration and having job offers elsewhere, upon finishing out the year Ambrose offered to leave and the offer was accepted. His opposition to the Vietnam War stood in contrast to his research on "presidents and the military at a time when such topics were increasingly regarded by his colleagues as old fashioned and conservative."Jaime Holguin, "Historian Stephen Ambrose Dead at 66," CBS News, October 13, 2002  Ambrose also taught at Louisiana State University, Johns Hopkins University, Rutgers University, U.C. Berkeley, and a number of European schools, including the University College of Dublin, where he taught as the Mary Ball Washington Professor of American History.The Mary Ball Washington Professorship of American History
He founded the Eisenhower Center at the University of New Orleans in 1989Eisenhower Center D-Day Collection, Special Collections, University of New Orleans  "The mission of the Eisenhower Center is the study of the causes, conduct, and consequences of American national security policy and the use of force as an instrument of policy in the twentieth century."Eisenhower Center for American Studies, University of New Orleans The Center's first efforts, which Ambrose initiated, involved the collection of oral histories from World War II veterans about their experiences, particularly any participation in D-Day. By the time of publication of Ambrose's D-Day, June 6, 1944: The Climactic Battle of World War II, in 1994, the Center had collected more than 1,200 oral histories. BR1  Ambrose, "Writer Pleas for Local D-Day Museum Support," New Orleans Times-Picayune, August 7, 1998

Writings

Ambrose's earliest works concerned the Civil War. He wrote biographies of the generals Emory Upton and Henry Halleck, the first of which was based on his dissertation.M. R. D. Foote, "Stephen Ambrose: Historian and author of Band of Brothers," The Independent, October 14, 2002, accessed May 27, 2010.
Early in his career, Ambrose was mentored by World War II historian Forrest Pogue. Ambrose Installs New Faith in Some Old Heroes. Lexington Herald-Leader. November 9, 1997. Ambrose to Leave Historic Legacy: UNO Prof in Colin Powell's Camp. Times-Picayune. April 30, 1995. In 1964, Ambrose took a position at Johns Hopkins as the Associate Editor of the Eisenhower Papers, a project aimed at organizing, cataloging and publishing Eisenhower's principal papers. From this work and discussions with Eisenhower emerged an article critical of Cornelius Ryan's The Last Battle, which had depicted Eisenhower as politically naîve, when at the end of World War II he allowed Soviet forces to take Berlin, thus shaping the Cold War that followed. Ambrose, "Refighting the Last Battle: The Pitfalls of Popular History," by Stephen E. Ambrose, Wisconsin Magazine of History, vol. 49, no. 4 (Summer 1966), pp. 294-301. Ambrose expanded this into a book, Eisenhower and Berlin, 1945: The Decision to Halt at the Elbe (1967). Rives, "Ambrose and Eisenhower: A View from the Stacks in Abilene," History News Network, May 17, 2010. Ambrose was aided in the book's writing by comments and notes provided by Eisenhower, who read a draft of the book.hnn.us/article/126705
In 1964 Ambrose was commissioned to write the official biography of the former president and five-star general Dwight D. Eisenhower. This resulted in a book on Eisenhower's war years, The Supreme Commader(1970) and a two-volume full biography (published 1983 and 1984), which are considered "the standard" on the subject. "His work on Eisenhower is penetrating and readable, lively, balanced and insightful. Indeed, these efforts have long stood alongside Fred Greenstein's The Hidden-Hand Presidency as the standards against which other Eisenhower scholarship is judged." Regarding the first volume, Gordon Harrison, writing for the New York Times, proclaimed, "It is Mr. Ambrose's special triumph that he has been able to fight through the memoranda, the directive, plans, reports, and official self-serving pieties of the World War II establishment to uncover the idiosyncratic people at its center.com/books/98/11/22/specials/ambrose-supreme. Although Ambrose was a strong critic of Nixon, the biography is considered fair and just regarding Nixon's presidency. "Nixon: The Education of a Politician 1913-1962, by Stephen E. Ambrose" (book review), Commentary Magazine, August 1987. "Nixon is competently, sometimes brightly, written, and one gets the impression that Ambrose is striving, above all, to be assiduously fair."
A visit to a reunion of Easy Company veterans in 1988 prompted Ambrose to collect their stories, turning them into Band of Brothers, E Company, 506th Regiment, 101st Airborne: From Normandy to Hitler's Eagle's Nest. (1992) D-Day (1994), built upon additional oral histories, presented the battle from the view points of individual soldiers and became his first best seller. A reviewer for the Journal of Military History commended D-Day as the "most comprehensive discussion" of the sea, air, and land operations that coalesced on that day. Ramsay edited by Robert W. Love, Jr. and John Major/D-Day 1944 edited by Theodore A. Wilson/and others, The Journal of Military History, vol. 60, no. 1 (Jan. 1996), p. 186 Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, writing for the New York Times, proclaimed that "Reading this history, you can understand why for so many of its participants, despite all the death surrounding them, life revealed itself in that moment at that place."Christopher Lehmann-Haupt, "Books of the Times; Putting a Human Face on One Shattering Day," New York Times, June 6, 1994, p. 613  Citizen Soldiers became a best seller, appearing on the New York Times' best sellers lists for both hardcover and paperback editions in the same week. During the same week, in September 1998, D-Day and Undaunted Courage, Ambrose's 1996 book on Meriwether Lewis and the Corps of Discovery, appeared on the best seller list, also."Best Seller," New York Times Book Review, September 20, 1998, p. BR38 and BR40. He also wrote The Victors(1998), a distillation of material from other books detailing Eisenhower's wartime experiences and connections to the common soldier, and The Wild Blue, that looks at World War II aviation largely through the experiences of George McGovern, who commanded a B-24 crew that flew numerous missions over Germany. His other major works include Undaunted Courage about the Lewis and Clark Expedition and Nothing Like It in the World about the construction of the Pacific Railroad. His final book, This Vast Land, a historical novel about the Lewis & Clark expedition written for young readers, was published posthumously in 2003.
Ambrose's most popular single work was Undaunted Courage: Meriwether Lewis, Thomas Jefferson, and the Opening of the American West (1996), which stayed on the New York Times best seller list for a combined, hardcover and paperback, 126 weeks."Best Seller," New York Times Book Review, March 23, 1997, p. BR26, and "Best Seller," New York Times Book Review, January 17, 1999, p. BR32 Ambrose consolidated research on the Corps of Discovery's expedition conducted in the previous thirty years and "synthesized it skillfully to enrich our understanding and appreciation of this grand epic," according to Alvin M. Josephy, Jr., who reviewed the book for the New York Times. Josephy, Jr., "Giants in the Earth," New York Times, March 10, 1996, p. BR9  & Schuster, Boks Retrieved March 6, 2014
In addition to twenty-seven self-authored books, Ambrose co-authored, edited, and contributed to many more and was a frequent contributor to magazines such as American Heritage. He, also, reviewed the works of other historians in the Journal of Southern History, Military Affairs, American Historical Review, Journal of American History, and Foreign Affairs. He served as a contributing editor to MHQ: The Quarterly Journal of Military History, also. 21-27.

Television, film, and other activities

Ambrose appeared as a historian in the 1974 ITV television series, The World at War, which detailed the history of World War II.
He served as the historical consultant for the movie Saving Private Ryan. Tom Hanks, who starred in the movie, admitted he "pored over D-Day" and Band of Brothers in researching his role. 2  Hanks, also, credited "Ambrose's books" with providing extensive detail, particularly regarding D-Day landings.Roger Ebert, "Tom Hanks Recalls 'Private Ryan' Shoot," July 23, 1998
The HBO mini-series, Band of Brothers (2001), for which he was an executive producer, helped sustain the fresh interest in World War II that had been stimulated by the 50th anniversary of D-Day in 1994 and the 60th anniversary in 2004. Ambrose served as executive producer for Price for Peace, a documentary concerning the war in the Pacific theater during World War II, and for Moments of Truth, a TV documentary containing interviews with World War II veterans."Stephen Ambrose,"IMDb
In addition, Ambrose served as a commentator for Lewis & Clark: The Journey of the Corps of Discovery, a documentary by Ken Burns. He provided commentary in twenty made-for TV documentaries, covering diverse topics, such as World War II, Lewis & Clark, and America's prominence in the 20th century. He, also, appeared as a guest on numerous TV programs or stations, including the "Charlie Rose Show," C-Span programming, CNN programming, NBC's "Today Show," CNBC's "Hardball," and various programming on The History Channel and the National Geographic Channel. Ambrose's association with National Geographic stemmed, in part, from his designation as an Explorer-in-Residence by the Society.
In addition to his academic work and publishing, Ambrose operated a historical tour business, acting as a tour guide to European locales of World War II. Also, he served on the board of directors for American Rivers and was a member of the Lewis and Clerk Bicentennial Council.Biography, Stephen Ambrose, Book Reporter

National World War II Museum

Ambrose's work for the Eisenhower Center, specifically his work with D-Day veterans, inspired him to found the National D-Day Museum in New Orleans. Ambrose initiated fundraising by donating $500,000.National WW II Museum, "About the Founder," He secured large contributions from the federal government, state of Louisiana, Tom Hanks, Steven Spielberg, and many smaller donations from former students, who answered a plea made by Ambrose in the New Orleans Times-Picayune. "The Stephen E. Ambrose Memorial Fund continues to support the development of the museum's Center for Study of the American Spirit, its educational programs and oral history and publication initiatives."

Awards

In 1998, he received the National Humanities Medal. In 2000, Ambrose received the Department of Defense Medal for Distinguished Public Service, the highest honorary award the Department of Defense offers to civilians. In 2001, he was awarded the Theodore Roosevelt Medal for Distinguished Service from the Theodore Roosevelt Association. Ambrose won an Emmy as one of the producers for the mini-series Band of Brothers. Ambrose also received the George Marshall Award, the Abraham Lincoln Literary Award, the Bob Hope Award from the Congressional Medal of Honor Society, and the Will Rogers Memorial Award.
Upon Ambrose's death, U.S. Senator Mary Landrieu of Louisiana offered a resolution in the Senate, which received unanimous consent, saluting the "excellence of Stephen Ambrose at capturing the greatness of the American spirit in words."Tribute to Stephen E. Ambrose, capitolwords.org/date/2002/10/16/luker#ixzz2uTBVBwBF. Retrieved February 25, 2014.

Personal life, final years, and death

He married his first wife, Judith Dorlester, in 1957 and they had two children, Stephenie and Barry. Judith died in 1965, when Ambrose was 29. Ambrose married his second wife, Moira Buckley (1939–2009), in 1967 and adopted her three children, Andrew, Grace, and Hugh. Moira was an active assistant in his writing and academic projects. After retiring, he maintained homes in Helena, Montana and Bay St. Louis, Mississippi. A longtime smoker, he was diagnosed with lung cancer in April 2002. His health deteriorated rapidly and seven months after the diagnosis he died, at the age of 66. George McGovern, the primary focus of Ambrose's The Wild Blue said, "He probably reached more readers than any other historian in our national history."

Legacy

Ambrose donated $500,000, half the amount needed, to the University of Wisconsin, to endow a chair in the name of William B. Hesseltine, Ambrose's mentor. The chair's position would focus on the teaching of American military history. When the chairs became fully endowed, after Ambrose's death, it was renamed the Ambrose-Hesseltine Chair.Ralph Luker, "Sit in My Chair," Inside Higher Ed, December 4, 2006
The Ambrose Professor of History was established at the University of New Orleans after his death. The position is reserved for a military historian.Endowed Chairs and Professorships, University of New Orleans
Each year the Rutgers University Living History Society awards the Stephen E. Ambrose Oral History Award to "an author or artist who has made significant use of oral history." Past winners include Tom Brokaw, Steven Spielberg, Studs Terkel, Michael Beschloss, and Ken Burns."Rutgers' Stephen Ambrose Oral History Award Goes to Michael Beschloss," Rutgers Today, May 14, 2013 

Criticism

Plagiarism controversy

In 2002, Ambrose was accused, by Tulane Law Professor Sally Richardson and others, of plagiarizing several passages in his book, The Wild Blue. The Historian's Toolbox: A Student's Guide to the Theory and Craft of History Armonk NY: M E Sharpe Inc (2003) ISBN 0-7656-1093-0 pp 88-89David D. Kirkpatrick, "As Historian's Fame Grows, So Does Attention to Sources," New York Times, January 11, 2002, accessed May 27, 2010. Fred Barnes reported in The Weekly Standard that Ambrose had taken passages from Wings of Morning: The Story of the Last American Bomber Shot Down over Germany in World War II'', by Thomas Childers, a history professor at the University of Pennsylvania. Ambrose had footnoted sources, but had not enclosed in quotation marks, numerous passages from Childers' book."How the Ambrose Story Developed," History News Network, June 2002.
Ambrose asserted that only a few sentences in all his numerous books were the work of other authors. He offered this defense:

A Forbes investigation of his work found cases of plagiarism involving passages in at least six books, with a similar pattern going all the way back to his doctoral dissertation.D. Thesis," Forbes, May 10, 2002. The History News Network lists seven of Ambrose's more than 40 works—The Wild Blue, Undaunted Courage, Nothing Like It In the World, Nixon: Ruin and Recovery, Citizen Soldiers, The Supreme Commander, and Crazy Horse and Custer—contained content from twelve authors without appropriate attribution from Ambrose.

Factual errors and disputed characterizations

=Pacific Railroad=

A front page article published in The Sacramento Bee on January 1, 2001, entitled "Area Historians Rail Against Inaccuracies in Book",Barrows, Matthew "Area Historians Rail Against Inaccuracies in Book". The Sacramento Bee, January 1, 2001 listed more than sixty instances identified as "significant errors, misstatements, and made-up quotes" in Nothing Like It in the World: The Men Who Built the Transcontinental Railroad, 1863–1869, Ambrose's non-academic popular history about the construction of the Pacific Railroad between Council Bluffs, Iowa/Omaha, Nebraska and the San Francisco Bay at Alameda/Oakland via Sacramento, California, which was published in August, 2000. The discrepancies were documented in a detailed "fact-checking" paper compiled in December, 2000 by three Western US railroad historians who are also experienced researchers, consultants, and collectors specializing in the Pacific Railroad and related topics.J., Strobridge, E.T., & Sweet, C.N. Ambrose The Central Pacific Railroad Photographic History Museum (CPRR. (2002). Stephen Ambrose: Off the Rails. History News Network.
On January 11, 2001, Washington Post columnist Lloyd Grove reported in his column, The Reliable Source, that a co-worker had found a "serious historical error" in the same book that "a chastened Ambrose" promised to correct in future editions. Reviewer Walter Nugent observed that it contained "annoying slips" such as mislabeled maps, inaccurate dates, geographical errors, and misidentified word origins,Walter Nugent, Review: Nothing Like It in the World: The Men Who Built the Transcontinental Railroad, 1863-1869 by Stephen E. Ambrose, The Journal of American History, vol. 88, no. 2 (Sep. 2001), p. 657. while Don L. Hofsommer agreed that the book "confuses facts" and that "The research might best be characterized as 'once over lightly'."Don L. Hofsommer, untitled review, Technology and Culture, vol. 43, no. 1 (Jan. 2002), pp. 169-170.

The Eisenhower controversy

In the introduction to Ambrose's biography of Eisenhower, he claims that the former president approached him after having read his previous biography of Henry Halleck,
but Tim Rives, Deputy Director of the Eisenhower Presidential Center, says it was Ambrose who contacted Eisenhower and suggested the project, In his response, Eisenhower stated that "the confidence I have derived from your work by reading your two books—especially the one on Halleck—give reasons why I should be ready to help out so far as I can."Hugh Ambrose, "Eisenhower and My Father, Stephen Ambrose," History News Network, May 20, 2010  The Halleck biography "still sits on a shelf" at the Eisenhower National Historic site in Gettysburg.
After Eisenhower's death in 1969, Ambrose made repeated claims to have had a unique and extraordinarily close relationship with him over the final five years of the former President's life. In an extensive 1998 interview, before a group of high school students, Ambrose stated that he spent "a lot of time with Ike, really a lot, hundreds and hundreds of hours." Ambrose claimed he interviewed Eisenhower on a wide range of subjects, and that he had been with him "on a daily basis for a couple years" before his death "doing interviews and talking about his life."Interview with Stephen Ambrose May 22, 1998, Academy of Achievement, Washington, D.C. The former president's diary and telephone records show that the pair met only three times, for a total of less than five hours. Rives has stated that interview dates Ambrose cites in his 1970 book, The Supreme Commander, cannot be reconciled with Eisenhower's personal schedule, but Rives discovered, upon further investigation, a "hidden" relationship between the two men. Eisenhower enlisted Ambrose in his efforts to preserve his legacy and counteract criticisms of his presidency, particularly those charging that Eisenhower's actions at the end of World War II produced the Cold War. Ambrose wrote a review and book supporting the former general, with Eisenhower providing direction and comments during the process. Rives could not square the questionable interview dates cited by Ambrose in later works, but uncovered a relationship with Eisenhower that was "too complicated" to be described by Ambrose's critics.

Works

Sole author

|title= Eisenhower and Berlin, 1945: The Decision to Halt at the Elbe.
| location = New York: |publisher= W.W. Norton|year=1967 |OCLC= 203781}}

With others

Edited works






