[[James Meredith]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, Living people, People from Kosciusko, Mississippi, People from Jackson, Mississippi, American shooting survivors, Racially motivated violence against African Americans, American people of Choctaw descent, Columbia Law School alumni, History of African-American civil rights, Jackson State University alumni, Ku Klux Klan crimes in Mississippi, University of Mississippi alumni, Local civil rights history in the United States, Mississippi Republicans, School desegregation pioneers, 20th-century African-American activists

James Howard Meredith (born June 25, 1933) is an American civil rights movement figure, a writer, and a political adviser. In 1962, he was the first African-American student admitted to the segregated University of Mississippi, an event that was a flashpoint in the American civil rights movement. Motivated by President John F. Kennedy's inaugural address, Meredith decided to exercise his constitutional rights and apply to the University of Mississippi. 60. His goal was to put pressure on the Kennedy administration to enforce civil rights for African Americans.

Early life and education

Meredith was born in Kosciusko, Mississippi, of Choctaw and African-American heritage. His recent biography titled "James Meredith: Warrior and the America that created him" was written by his niece, Meredith Coleman McGee, who refers to his racial identity as "a Negro of Choctaw descent" with extensive genealogical material in the appendix. Meredith Coleman McGee. (2013) James Meredith: Warrior and the America that created him. Santa Barbara, California: Praeger. p. 133 & "Family Tree of James Howard Meredith" Appendix. ISBN 978-0-313-39739-4Thousands of Choctaw had stayed in Mississippi when most of the people left their traditional homeland for Indian Territory in the removal of the 1830s. The subject's family nickname was "J-Boy". 15.
After attending local segregated schools and graduating from high school, Meredith enlisted in the United States Air Force. He served from 1951 to 1960.
He attended Jackson State University for two years, then applied to the University of Mississippi which, under the state's legally imposed racial segregation, had traditionally accepted only white students. In Brown v. Board of Education (1954), the US Supreme Court ruled that publicly supported schools had to be desegregated.

University of Mississippi

Meredith wrote that he wanted admission for his country, race, family, and himself. Meredith said, "Nobody handpicked me...I believed, and believe now, that I have a Divine Responsibility... 317. I am familiar with the probable difficulties involved in such a move as I am undertaking and I am fully prepared to pursue it all the way to a degree from the University of Mississippi." He was denied twice. During this time, he was advised by Medgar Evers, a civil rights leader.
On May 31, 1961, Meredith with backing of the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund filed suit in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Mississippi, alleging that the university had rejected Meredith only because of the color of his skin, as he had a highly successful record. The case went through many hearings and finally to the U.S. Supreme Court, which ruled that Meredith had the right to be admitted to the state school. Though Meredith was legally entitled to register, the Governor of Mississippi, Ross Barnett, tried to block him by having the Legislature pass a law that "prohibited any person who was convicted of a state crime from admission to a state school." The law was directed at Meredith, who had been convicted of "false voter registration." Since passage of its 1890 constitution, the state had voter registration rules that effectively disfranchised black voters.
On September 13, 1962, the District Court entered its injunction directing the members of the Board of Trustees and the officials of the University to register Meredith. Barnett, 
The US Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy had a series of phone calls with Governor Barnett between September 28 or 29 to October 1. 318. Some white students and segregationists, many who had driven in for the event, protested his enrollment by rioting on the Oxford campus. 319-322.
Robert Kennedy called in 500 U.S. Marshals to take control, who were supported by the 70th Army Engineer Combat Battalion from Ft Campbell, Kentucky. They created a tent camp and kitchen for the US Marshals. To bolster law enforcement, President John F. Kennedy sent in U.S. Army troops from the 2nd Infantry Division from Ft. Benning, GA under the command of Maj. Gen Charles Billingslea and military police from the 503rd Military Police Battalion, and called in troops from the Mississippi Army National Guard. Gen. Bllingslea's staff car was mobbed and set on fire at the entrance to the university gate. General Billingslea, the Deputy Commanding General, John Corley, and aide, Capt Harold Lyon, were trapped inside the burning car but managed to force the car door open and had to crawl 200 yards into the gate to the University Lyceum Building while someone was shooting at them and continued to shoot the windows out, though the Army never returned fire. Gen Billingslea had established a series of escalating secret code words for issuing ammunition down to the platoons with another one for issuing it to squads, and a third one for loading, none of which could take place without the General himself, confirming the secret codes.
In the violent clash, two people died, including the French journalist Paul Guihard, on assignment for the London Daily Sketch.  He was found dead behind the Lyceum building with a gunshot wound to the back. One hundred-sixty US Marshals, one-third of the group, were injured in the melee, and 40 soldiers and National Guardsmen were wounded.
Many students harassed Meredith during his two semesters on campus but others accepted him. According to first-person accounts chronicled in Nadine Cohodas's book The Band Played Dixie (1997), students living in Meredith's dorm bounced basketballs on the floor just above his room through all hours of the night. Other students ostracized him: when Meredith walked into the cafeteria for meals, the students eating would turn their backs. If Meredith sat at a table with other students, all of whom were white, the students would immediately get up and go to another table.
In 2014, vandals linked to the Sigma Phi Epsilon fraternity vandalized Meredith's honorary University of Mississippi campus statue by putting a noose around its neck and draping it with a controversial former Georgia state flag. In response, he said "that just clearly shows that we're not training our children like the Bible says. They don't know right and wrong, good and bad and how to apply it to life."

Education and activism

Meredith continued his education, focusing on political science, at the University of Ibadan in Nigeria. He returned to the United States in 1965. He attended law school through a scholarship at Columbia University and earned an LL.B (law degree) in 1968.
During this time, Meredith organized and led a civil rights march, the March Against Fear from Memphis, Tennessee to Jackson, Mississippi beginning on June 6, 1966. This was his public effort to encourage blacks to register and vote after passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965, which promised federal enforcement of rights.  He hoped to help blacks overcome fear of violence at the polls. During this march he was shot by Aubrey James Norvell.

Political career

In 1967 while living and studying in New York, Meredith decided to run as a Republican against the incumbent Adam Clayton Powell, Jr. in a special election for the Congressional seat in Harlem, but withdrew.  Powell was re-elected.
After returning to Mississippi to live, in 1972 Meredith ran for the US Senate against the Democratic senator James Eastland, who had been the incumbent for 29 years. Meredith conceded that he had little chance of winning unless Governor George Wallace of Alabama entered the presidential race and split the white vote.
An active Republican, Meredith served from 1989 to 1991 as a domestic adviser on the staff of United States Senator Jesse Helms. Faced with criticism from the civil rights community for working for the former avowed segregationist, Meredith said that he had applied to every member of the Senate and House offering his services, and only Helms' office responded. He also wanted a chance to do research at the Library of Congress.
In 2002, officials marked the 40th anniversary of Meredith's historic admission to the University of Mississippi with a year-long series of events. Of the celebration, Meredith said,  "It was an embarrassment for me to be there, and for somebody to celebrate it, oh my God. I want to go down in history, and have a bunch of things named after me, but believe me that ain't it."  He said he had achieved his main goal at the time by getting the federal government to enforce his rights as a citizen. He saw his actions as "an assault on white supremacy." That year he was far more proud that his son Joseph Meredith graduated as the top doctoral student at the university's business school.
During the anniversary year, Meredith, 69, was the special guest speaker for a seminar at Mississippi State University. Among other topics, Meredith spoke of his experiences at Ole Miss. During a question-and-answer session, a young white male asked Meredith if he had taken part in a formal rush program. Meredith replied, "Doesn't that have something to do with being in a fraternity?" The young man replied "Yes," and Meredith did not respond further. It was enough for the audience to remember that as a 29-year-old veteran, he had to be accompanied by armed military personnel to secure his safety at that time.

Political viewpoint

Meredith has identified as an individual American citizen who demanded and received the constitutional rights held by any American, not as a participant in the U.S. civil rights movement. There have been tensions between him and representatives of the movement. When interviewed in 2002, the 40th anniversary of his enrollment at University of Mississippi, Meredith said, "Nothing could be more insulting to me than the concept of civil rights. It means perpetual second-class citizenship for me and my kind."
In a 2002 interview with CNN, Meredith said, "I was engaged in a war. I considered myself engaged in a war from Day One. And my objective was to force the federal government—the Kennedy administration at that time—into a position where they would have to use the United States military force to enforce my rights as a citizen."

Books

Marriage and family

On March 14, 1956, two and a half months after they met, Meredith married Mary June Wiggins Meredith,Meredith Coleman McGee, James Meredith: Warrior and the America That Created Him (ABC-CLIO, 2013):125. later a High School English teacher, who died of heart failure in December 1979. Johnson, "Of Dr. King and Mrs. Meredith: A Tribute in Honor of Dr. King", (January 16, 2012). McGee, "James Meredith's Biography". They had three sons, James, John and Joseph Howard Meredith, and one daughter, Jessica Meredith Knight. In 1982 Meredith married Judy Alsobrooks in Gary, Indiana.Meredith C. McGee,"James Meredith's Biography". They had two children: Kemp Naylor and Jessica Howard Meredith.
John Meredith is the founder of the Meredith Advocacy Group, a Washington, D.C.-based advocacy firm.
In 2002, Joseph Meredith graduated from the University of Mississippi as the most outstanding doctoral student in the School of Business Administration. Joseph had previously earned degrees from Harvard University and Millsaps College. James Meredith said of the occasion, "I think there's no better proof that white supremacy was wrong than not only to have my son graduate, but to graduate as the most outstanding graduate of the school..." He was survived by his wife and a daughter, Jasmine Victoria.
James Meredith currently lives in Jackson, Mississippi, with his second wife, Judy Alsobrook Meredith.





Works

Further reading




