[[Lionel Hutz]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons characters, Fictional realtors, Fictional lawyers, Fictional con artists, Fictional characters introduced in 1991

Lionel Hutz, a.k.a. Miguel Sanchez, a.k.a. Dr. Nguyen Van Phuoc, was a recurring character in the animated television series The Simpsons. He was voiced by Phil Hartman, and his first appearance was in the season two episode "Bart Gets Hit by a Car". Hutz is a stereotypical ambulance chasing lawyer in Springfield with questionable competence and ethics. He is nevertheless often hired by the Simpsons. Following Hartman's death in 1998, the character was retired; Hutz' final speaking role was in the season nine episode "Realty Bites".  

Role in The Simpsons

Personality

Lionel Hutz is an inept ambulance chaser and, according to Lisa Simpson, a "shyster" whom the Simpsons nonetheless repeatedly hire as their lawyer (a fact remarked on by Marge Simpson in a typically self-aware aside). and even an almost-full Orange Julius he once had handy.
Hutz is characterized as both a grossly incompetent lawyer and an unethical individual in general.
In the episode "Marge in Chains" he describes the following as his "problem" with Judge Snyder:
Hutz is a recovering alcoholic; also in "Marge in Chains", he hastily leaves the courtroom after handling a bottle of bourbon in order to consult his sponsor, David Crosby. He then gives his closing statement, unaware that he is not wearing any pants and thinks that Clarence Darrow was "The Black guy on The Mod Squad". Beyond the law, he also tries his hand at selling real estate, reasoning that it was a natural move as most of his clients ended up losing their homes anyway, Hutz was briefly married to Selma Bouvier, although this storyline is not shown in an episode. Hutz has also been known to use a phone booth as an office.
Lionel Hutz does not seem to care about conflict of interest; in "A Streetcar Named Marge" he represents clients in a lawsuit against the producer(s) of a local production of A Streetcar Named Desire for not giving them any roles in the play, although he had a role himself.
Another display of his incompetence takes place in "The Boy Who Knew Too Much" when, while representing a French waiter who is accusing Mayor Quimby's nephew Freddy of battery, he is surprised when the opposing counsel mentions that Hutz's client is an immigrant (despite the client's French accent). Hutz then demands that his client tell him everything from then on. He also misunderstands simple legal terms like "mistrial" and "lawyer"."Marge in Chains"

Cases won

Although Hutz loses most of his cases, he does win several cases for the Simpsons, for instance representing Homer in his case against the Sea Captain and the Frying Dutchman restaurant over its "All You Can Eat" offer ("The most blatant case of false advertising since the so-called The Never Ending Story"). He also won a case against Sideshow Bob, who was Mayor at that time, for electoral fraud, in which Bart and Lisa found evidence connected to it, as stated in "Sideshow Bob Roberts".
The only other case technically won by Hutz was in "Treehouse of Horror IV", where he represents Homer against Satan (represented as Ned Flanders). In a purportedly-deleted scene for this episode, as subsequently seen in "The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular", Hutz's slogan is "Cases won in 30 minutes or your pizza is free". After he thinks he has lost the case, he gives the Simpsons their pizza. However, Marge informs him that they did win. Then, he tells them that the box was empty anyway. In the video game The Simpsons: Hit & Run, billboards can be seen around Downtown Springfield promoting Lionel Hutz's free pizza offer.

Retirement

After Hartman's death in 1998, The last episode to feature Hutz speaking was the season 9 episode "Realty Bites". Since the Simpson family frequently appears in court, other characters have represented the Simpsons in legal matters since Hutz's retirement. For example, in "Sweets and Sour Marge", the equally-incompetent Gil Gunderson stepped in. The Blue Haired Lawyer  - who is just as unethical yet very competent - has also served as the family's attorney. Following Hartman's death, Hutz appeared infrequently in clip shows and flashbacks, as well as crowd scenes, but only in non-speaking roles. His last appearance in the series was in the season 12 episode "A Tale of Two Springfields". Hutz and McClure still appear in Simpsons Comics.

Reception

Entertainment Weekly named Hutz as one of their 15 favorite fictional television and film lawyers.






