[[Duck Hunt]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 video games, Arcade games, Intelligent Systems games, Light gun games, Nintendo Entertainment System games, Nintendo Research & Development 1 games, Nintendo Vs. Series games, PlayChoice-10 games, Hunting video games, First-person shooters

 is a light gun shooter video game developed and published by Nintendo for the Nintendo Entertainment System (NES) video game console. The game was first released in Japan on April 21, 1984. It was released on October 18, 1985 in North America as a launch game for the NES, and on August 15, 1987 in Europe.
In Duck Hunt, players use the NES Zapper to shoot ducks that appear on the television screen. The ducks appear one or two at a time, and the player is given three shots to shoot them down. The player receives points upon shooting each duck. If the player shoots the required number of ducks in a single round, he will advance to the next round; otherwise, he will receive a game over.
The game initially received few reviews, but was given mild critical praise and elicited a positive gamer reaction. Prior to the NES version, Nintendo also made a Duck Hunt game based on Laser Clay Shooting System released in 1976., and later a triple game with the same two games plus World Class Track Meet.

Gameplay

Duck Hunt is a shooter game in which the objective is to shoot moving targets on the television screen in mid-flight. The game is played from a first-person perspective and requires the NES Zapper light gun, which the player aims and fires at the screen. Each round consists of a total of ten targets to shoot. Depending on the game mode the player selects prior to beginning play, one or two targets will appear on the screen at any given time and the player has three shots, or attempts, to hit them before they disappear.
The player is required to successfully shoot a minimum number of targets in order to advance to the next round; failure will result in a game over. The difficulty increases as the player advances to higher rounds; targets will move faster and the minimum number of targets to shoot will increase. The player receives points upon shooting a target and will also receive bonus points for shooting all ten targets in a single round. Duck Hunt keeps track of the players' highest score for all games played in a single session; it is lost, however, upon shutting the game off.
Duck Hunt has three different game modes to choose from. In "Game A" and "Game B", the targets are flying ducks in a woodland area, and in "Game C" the targets are clay pigeons that are fired away from the player's perspective into the distance. In "Game A", one duck will appear on the screen at a time while in "Game B" two ducks will appear at a time. "Game A" allows a second player to control the movement of the flying ducks by using a normal NES controller.

Vs. Duck Hunt

Duck Hunt was also released as an arcade game in the Nintendo Vs. series in 1984Duck Hunt at Arcade Vault. Retrieved November 21, 2006. as Vs. Duck Hunt, and is included in the PlayChoice-10 arcade console. The console supports two light guns, allowing two players at once.
Gameplay consists of alternating rounds of Games B and C, with 12 ducks/targets per round instead of 10. In addition, the player is given a limited number of lives; every duck/target that is not hit costs one life. When all lives are gone, the game ends.
After every second round, a bonus stage is played in which ducks can be shot for points as they fly out of the grass. However, the dog occasionally jumps out, putting himself in the line of fire and creating a distraction. If the player shoots the dog, the bonus stage immediately ends.

Development

Duck Hunt is based on a 1976 electronic toy version titled Beam Gun: Duck Hunt, part of the Beam Gun series.
Duck Hunt has been placed in several combination ROM cartridges. In the Action Set configuration of the NES in the late 1980s, Duck Hunt was included with Super Mario Bros..

Reception

Allgame called the game an "attractive but repetitive target shooter" and "utterly mindless... the game is fun for a short time, but gets old after a few rounds of play."

Legacy

Duck Hunt features a nameless non-playable hunting dog (often referred to by the media as the "Duck Hunt Dog" or the "Laughing Dog") that accompanies the player in the "Game A" and "Game B" modes who provokes and retrieves the fallen ducks. The dog is infamous and iconic for laughing at the player whenever the player fails to shoot any of the ducks on screen. The Laughing Dog has been labelled as "one of the most annoying video game characters ever" by numerous gaming critics and journalists, including IGN, GamesRadar, and ScrewAttack,
UGO. Duck Hunt.








