[[A Man Called Sarge]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 films, 1990s comedy films, Alternate history films, American films, American comedy films, American parody films, Films directed by Stuart Gillard, Films set in Africa, Films shot in Israel, French Foreign Legion in popular culture, Golan-Globus films, North African Campaign films, Parody films, Slapstick films, World War II films

A Man Called Sarge is a 1990 American parody film, written and directed by Stuart Gillard, starring Gary Kroeger, Marc Singer, Gretchen German and introducing a young Natasha Lyonne. Set during the World War II North African Western Desert Campaign, it follows a misadventurous squad of French Foreign Legion deserters, led by their charismatic Sarge, who set out across the Sahara desert to strike a blow on the Nazi-occupied city of Tobruk.
The humour is built on slapstick and verbal puns, in the fashion of comedy filmmaking trio Zucker, Abrahams and Zucker, spoofing a variety of classic war movies – notably Casablanca
A memorable moment in the movie is when Miss Sadie (Gretchen German), a naïve mission school teacher, sings a song called "Jesus was a Black Dude", with a full gospel choir, to the Arab children in her class.
The film was shot on location in Israel.

Cast

 
 

At the time of production, Iowa-born actor Gary Kroeger was mostly remembered for his work on the late-night comedy and variety TV show Saturday Night Live, where he was a regular from 1982 to 1985. He had previously worked with director Stuart Gillard as the main character in Disney's 1987 television movie The Return of the Shaggy Dog.
Marc Singer was a well established TV actor when he enrolled as General Von Kraut, with a career spanning almost 20 years, including the lead role in the highly successful series V. As a feature actor, he was best known for the 1982 film The Beastmaster, which grew a cult film status. A Man Called Sarge marks a return to the big screen and the start of a prolific film career during the 1990s. This was the Canadian-American actor's second collaboration with producer Gene Corman, the first being If You Could See What I Hear, released in 1982. They worked together again on Watchers II, released in the summer of 1990.
Canadian actress Gretchen German had an active television career since the mid-'80s when she was cast for the role of Sarge's love interest, Miss Sadie, marking her debut in feature film.
American actress Natasha Lyonne, who was living in Israel at the time, She continued her acting career in the USA and is mainly recognized for her supporting role in the American Pie film series.

Production notes

A Man Called Sarge was produced by Gene Corman, brother and production partner of Roger Corman, Eventually, The Cannon Group filed bankruptcy a few years later.
Gene Corman had previously produced Tobruk, a 1967 war action film, set during the failed British attempt to capture Tobruk, in September 1942.
Although the city of Tobruk is located in Libya, filming was done in Israel. One of the final scenes, the showdown between Sarge and Von Kraut, was shot in the Khan al-Umdan caravanserai, in the historical centre of Acre.

Release

A Man Called Sarge had a short-running theatrical release on February 2, 1990, earning $92,706 at the domestic box office. It was released on VHS later the same year and re-released in 2001, as an Amazon.exclusive Amazon.Cover of UK VHS edition archived from the Cannon Home Video Galleries of cannon.uk
On some promotional material, the taglines used were:
Like many other low-budget films,  A Man Called Sarge has a complex history of copyright ownership and distribution rights. Cannon Releasing, part of The Cannon Group,  handled the theatrical distribution rights. Worldwide video distribution was in charge of Cannon Video, in association with several partners, including MGM/UA Home Video and Warner Home Video.
Currently, the film's rights are owned by MGM, after the acquisition of The Cannon Group catalogue, almost in its entirety, following bankruptcy in 1993.
Although British actor Andy Greenhalgh, who played the role of Major Browning, estimates this to be "a long-forgotten American feature film",Andy Greenhalgh's website it occasionally airs on TV channels around the world, mainly through the MGM Channel and its affiliates.
A home video edition was officially released on DVD in November 2011, as part of the Limited Edition Collection - MGM's On-Demand DVD-R line.








