[[Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 albums, Albums produced by George Martin, Albums recorded at Abbey Road Studios, The Beatles albums, Capitol Records albums, Concept albums, Counterculture of the 1960s, English-language albums, Recorded music characters, Fictional sergeants, Grammy Award winners for Album of the Year, Mobile Fidelity Sound Lab albums, Parlophone albums, Psychedelic rock albums, Recording Industry Association of America Diamond Award albums, United States National Recording Registry recordings, Grammy Award for Best Pop Vocal Album, Albums with cover art by Peter Blake (artist)



Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band is the eighth studio album by the English rock band the Beatles. Released in June 1967, it was an immediate commercial and critical success, spending 22 weeks at the top of the UK Albums Chart and 15 weeks at number one on the US Billboard 200. It won four Grammy Awards in 1968, including Album of the Year, the first rock LP to receive this honour.
Regarded as an early concept album, Sgt. Pepper continued the artistic maturation seen on the Beatles' preceding releases while advancing the use of extended form in popular music. It is often described as one of the first art rock albums, aiding the development of progressive rock. An important work of British psychedelia, the multigenre album incorporates diverse stylistic influences, including vaudeville, circus, music hall, avant-garde, Western and Indian classical music. Following the Beatles' August 1966 retirement from touring and the ensuing three-month break from Abbey Road Studios, they endeavored to improve upon the production quality of their prior releases. The group adopted an experimental approach to composition and the producer George Martin's innovative recording of the album's tracks, such as "With a Little Help from My Friends", "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" and "A Day in the Life", included the liberal application of signal processing and the use of a forty-piece orchestra. The album cover was designed by the English pop artists Peter Blake and Jann Haworth from a sketch by Paul McCartney that depicted the band posing in front of a collage of celebrities and historical figures.
In 2003 the Library of Congress placed Sgt. Pepper in the National Recording Registry, preserving the work as "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant". In 2005 Rolling Stone magazine ranked it number one in its list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. As of 2014 it has sold more than 30 million copies worldwide, making it one of the best selling albums of all time. The music scholar David Scott Kastan described it as "the most important and influential rock and roll album ever recorded".

Background


By 1966 the Beatles had grown weary of live performance.
Upon the Beatles' return to England, rumours began to circulate that they had decided to break-up..

Concept and inspiration

In November 1966, during a return flight to London from Kenya, where he had been on holiday with Beatles' tour manager Mal Evans, McCartney had an idea for a song that eventually formed the impetus of the Sgt Pepper concept. Martin remembered:

During the early and mid-1960s, the American group the Beach Boys released music that displayed an increasing level of sophistication. Led by their principal songwriter, bassist and producer Brian Wilson, they combined jazz-inspired vocal harmony with surf music, creating their unique sound.

Recording and production

According to the musicologist Walter Everett, Sgt. Pepper marks the beginning of McCartney's ascendancy as the Beatles' dominant creative force. He wrote more than half of the album's material while asserting increasing control over the recording of his compositions. He would from this point on provide the artistic direction for the group's releases.
"Strawberry Fields Forever" and "Penny Lane" were subsequently released as a double A-sided single in February 1967 after EMI and Epstein pressured Martin for a single.
Sgt. Pepper was recorded using four-track equipment.
A key feature of Sgt. Pepper is Martin and his engineer's liberal use of signal processing to shape the recording, which included the application of dynamic range compression, reverberation and signal limiting.

In an effort to get the right sound, the Beatles attempted numerous re-takes of "Getting Better". When the decision was made to re-record the basic track, Starr was summoned to the studio, but called-off soon afterward as the focus switched from rhythm to vocal tracking.
The UK pressing of Sgt. Pepper was the first pop album to be mastered without rills, the momentary gaps that are typically placed between tracks as a point of demarcation.

Music and lyrics

Sgt. Pepper is a multigenre album that is a work of rock and pop.

Concerns that some of the lyrics in Sgt. Pepper refer to recreational drug use led to the BBC banning several songs from the radio, such as "A Day in the Life" because of the phrase "I'd love to turn you on", with the BBC claiming that it could "encourage a permissive attitude toward drug-taking." 
In the opinion of the author Sheila Whiteley, Sgt. Pepper

Side one

Sgt. Pepper opens with the title track, starting with 10 seconds of the combined sounds of a pit orchestra warming-up and an audience waiting for a concert, which introduces the illusion of the album as a live performance.
McCartney acts as the master of ceremonies near the end of "Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band", introducing Starr as an alter ego named Billy Shears.

Despite widespread suspicion that the title of "Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds" contained a hidden reference to LSD, Lennon insisted that it was derived from a pastel drawing by his four-year-old son Julian. A hallucinatory chapter from Lewis Carroll
MacDonald considers "Getting Better" to contain "the most ebullient performance" on Sgt. Pepper.
In Womack's opinion, the lyrics to "Fixing a Hole" focus on "the speaker's search for identity among the crowd", in particular the "quests for consciousness and connection" that differentiate individuals from society as a whole.
In Everett's opinion the lyrics to "She's Leaving Home" address the problem of alienation "between disagreeing peoples", particularly those distanced from each other by the generation gap.
Lennon adapted the lyric for "Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!" from an 1843 poster for Pablo Fanque's circus that he purchased at an antique shop in Kent on the day of filming the promotional film for "Strawberry Fields Forever".

Side two

After it was decided that "Only a Northern Song" was not good enough for inclusion on Sgt. Pepper, Harrison wrote the Hindustani classical music-inspired "Within You Without You".
MacDonald cites "When I'm Sixty-Four" as an example of the Beatles' versatility. In his opinion the track is "aimed chiefly at parents", borrowing heavily from the English music hall style of George Formby and Donald McGill, with a sparse arrangement that includes clarinet, drums, guitar and bass.
Womack characterises "Lovely Rita" as a work of "full-tilt psychedelia" that contrasts sharply with the preceding track.
Inspired by a television commercial for Kellogg's Corn Flakes, from which Lennon adapted a jingle as the song's refrain, "Good Morning, Good Morning" utilises the bluesy mixolydian mode in A that in Everett's opinion "perfectly expresses Lennon's grievance against complacency."
"Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band (Reprise)" serves as a bookend for the album and a segue to its finale. The hard-rocking song was written after the Beatles' assistant, Neil Aspinall, suggested that since "Sgt. Pepper" opened the album the fictional band should make an appearance near the end.

As the last chord of the "Sgt. Pepper" reprise plays an acoustic guitar strumming offbeat quavers begins, introducing what Moore describes as "one of the most harrowing songs ever written.": "among the most penetrating and innovative artistic reflections".
As "A Day in the Life" ends a 15-kilohertz high-frequency tone is heard; it was added at Lennon's suggestion with the intention that it would annoy dogs.

Cover artwork

Sgt. Pepper
The 30 March 1967 photo session with Cooper also produced the back cover and the inside gatefold, which according to the musicologist Ian Inglis conveys "an obvious and immediate warmth ... which distances it from the sterility and artifice typical of such images."
The collage includes 57 photographs and 9 waxworks that depict a diversity of famous people, including writers, musicians, actors and – at Harrison's request – the Self-Realization Fellowship gurus Mahavatar Babaji, Lahiri Mahasaya, Sri Yukteswar and Paramahansa Yogananda.

Release

After having finished Sgt. Pepper, but prior to its commercial release, the Beatles brought an acetate disc to the American singer Cass Elliot's flat off King's Road in Chelsea, where at six in the morning they played the album at full volume with speakers set in open window frames. Beatles' press agent Derek Taylor remembered that residents of the neighbourhood opened their windows and listened without complaint to what they understood to be an unreleased Beatles album. Rolling Stone magazine's Langdon Winner recalls:

In the opinion of the musicologist Tim Riley, Sgt. Pepper "drew people together through the common experience of pop on a larger scale than ever before."

Reception

Most contemporary reviews were positive, with Sgt. Pepper receiving a widespread critical acclaim that matched its immediate commercial success.
One of the best-known American critics at the time, Richard Goldstein, wrote a scathing contemporary review in The New York Times that described Sgt. Pepper as "spoiled" and "reeking" of "special effects, dazzling but ultimately fraudulent".
At the 10th Annual Grammy Awards in 1968, Sgt. Pepper won in the categories of Best Album Cover, Graphic Arts, Best Engineered Recording, Non-Classical and Best Contemporary Album. It also won Album of the Year, the first rock LP to receive this honour.For the 1968 Grammy Awards see: 

Legacy

Sgt. Pepper continued the artistic maturation seen on the Beatles' albums Rubber Soul (1965) and Revolver (1966), aiding the development of progressive rock through its focus on self-conscious lyrics, studio experimentation, and its efforts to expand the barriers of conventional three-minute tracks.
While gathering material for his 1979 anthology, Stranded: Rock and Roll for a Desert Island, the editor Greil Marcus polled the twenty rock critic contributors regarding their choice for the best rock album of all time, and while Rubber Soul was mentioned Sgt. Pepper was not.
With certified sales of 5 million copies, Sgt. Pepper is the second best-selling album in UK chart history behind Queen's Greatest Hits.

Recording and cover

In MacFarlane's opinion, Sgt. Pepper
According to Inglis, almost every account of the significance of Sgt. Pepper emphasizes the cover's "unprecedented correspondence between music and art, time and space".

Concept revisited

According to Womack, with Sgt. Pepper
MacFarlane notes that – despite these concerns – Sgt. Pepper "is widely regarded as the first true concept album in popular music."

Track listing

Sgt. Pepper was the first Beatles album to be released with identical track listings in the UK and the US.

Track list information according to Mark Lewisohn and Ian MacDonald..

Personnel

According to Mark Lewisohn and Ian MacDonald:.

Charts

In the US the album appeared on the Billboard 200 chart for 175 non-consecutive weeks through 1987. It remained at number one in the US for 15 weeks, longer than any other Beatles album in the US.

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Decade-end charts

Certifications






Notes



Sources

Guinness Book of Top 1000 Albums
|publisher=Gullane Children's Books|year=1994|edition=1|isbn=978-0-851-12786-6|ref=harv}}




