[[Rupert Hamer (journalist)]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, 2010 deaths, British journalists, People educated at Gresham's School, Alumni of the University of Leeds, Journalists killed while covering the War in Afghanistan (2001–present), Deaths by improvised explosive device in Afghanistan

Rupert James Hamer (28 February 1970 – 9 January 2010) was a British journalist and, at the time of his death, was the defence correspondent for the Sunday Mirror.

Career

Hamer was educated at Town Close School in Norwich and Gresham's School in Holt before joining the Eastern Daily Press as a trainee reporter in the late 1980s. In 1991 he attended Leeds University where he studied Politics, and edited a satirical column for the university's newspaper, the Leeds Student, entitled "Rupert Hamer on Friday". After graduating he worked as health correspondent for the Bournemouth Evening Echo, where he met his wife Helen, before moving to London in 1997. After working as a freelance for both the INS news agency and the Sunday Mirror, he accepted a staff job appointment by the newspaper in 1997. He was appointed as the Sunday Mirror's defence correspondent in 2004 reporting from both Afghanistan and Iraq.

Death

Hamer and his Mirror colleague, photographer Philip Coburn, flew to Afghanistan on New Year's Eve 2009, where Hamer commenced his fifth assignment reporting from that country. They were to spend a month reporting from the war zone. 
Coburn, who had worked with Hamer in several war zones, suffered severe leg injuries and was evacuated to the British military hospital at Camp Bastion in Helmand, to be flown back to the UK. 
Hamer and Coburn were travelling in a Mine Resistant Ambush Protected vehicle (MRAP), the most advanced of all vehicles designed specifically to protect its passengers against explosions of mines and IEDs.
The explosion brought the number of journalists who had died in Afghanistan since 2001 at 18. This was the first time that a British reporter was killed in the conflict and Hamer was the first of them to die in a warzone since the death of ITN's Terry Lloyd in Iraq in 2003.
Hamer was honoured by US Marines of 1st Battalion, 3rd Marine Regiment, in a battlefield memorial ceremony at Forward Operating Base Geronimo in Nawa, Helmand Province, Afghanistan on 19 January.

Personal life

Hamer is survived by a wife, Helen, and their three young children.




