[[Mary Angeline Teresa McCrory]]

CATEGORIES: 1893 births, 1984 deaths, Scottish emigrants to the United States, Scottish Roman Catholic religious sisters and nuns, American Roman Catholic religious sisters and nuns, Editors of Christian publications, Roman Catholic activists, Servants of God, 20th-century venerated Christians, Founders of Roman Catholic religious communities, Anti-poverty advocates, Carmelites, People from County Tyrone, Ulster Scots people

The Venerable Mary Angeline Teresa McCrory, O., (21 January 1893 – 21 January 1984), was an Ulster-born immigrant to the United States. She became a Roman Catholic Religious Sister who worked as an advocate for the impoverished elderly, founding a new religious congregation for this purpose, the Carmelite Sisters for the Aged and Infirm. Her cause for canonization has been opened, and her life has been acknowledged by the Holy See as one of heroic virtue.

Early life

She was born and baptized Brigid Teresa McCrory to a Northern Irish family in Mountjoy, County Tyrone, now part of Northern Ireland in the United Kingdom. When she was seven years old, her family moved to Scotland. At the age of 9 or 10 on her own she change the spelling of her name from Brigid to Bridget. In 1912, aged 19, she left home to join the Little Sisters of the Poor, a French Roman Catholic congregation engaged in the care of the destitute aged. She did her novitiate in La Tour, France, and after her profession she was sent to the United States.Mother Mary Angeline Teresa McCrory profile
In 1926, Mother Angeline was appointed superior of a nursing home of the Little Sisters of the Poor in the Bronx, New York. While on a retreat the following year, she felt urged to do more for the aged under her care. She felt that the European model of the care of the elderly and many of the customs in France did not meet the needs of Americans. In addition, she felt that caring for only the destitute elderly, as is the practice of the Little Sisters, was not sufficient, as old age strikes all classes of people, leaving them alone and frightened.

Care for all the elderly

Being unable to effect any necessary changes in her present situation, Mother Angeline sought advice and counsel from Cardinal Patrick Joseph Hayes, the Archbishop of New York. The Cardinal encouraged her in her work and suggested that she expand her ministry to include the aged throughout the New York City area. Eventually, this need was recognized throughout the United States. In order to accomplish what she felt called to do, and with the blessing of the Cardinal, Mother Angeline and six other Sisters withdrew from the Congregation of the Little Sisters of the Poor and were granted permission from the Vatican to begin a new congregation for the care of the aged, incorporating Mother Angeline's ideals.
Thus, though the inspiration Mother Angeline received from the congregation dedicated to the aged, she was now able to further develop this needed apostolate with new methods. From the very start, the Carmelite friars in New York took a deep interest in Mother Angeline and her companions. In 1931 the new congregation became affiliated with the Carmelite Order and was henceforth known as the Carmelite Sisters for the Aged and Infirm.
From their motherhouse in Germantown, New York, the Carmelite Sisters serve in 18 elder-care facilities around the country, plus one in Ireland.Catholic blogsite

Death

Mother Mary Angeline Teresa McCrory died on 21 January 1984, her 91st birthday, at the motherhouse of the congregation. She was interred in the congregation's cemetery at St. Teresa's Motherhouse in Germantown.
She was fond of saying: "If you have to fail, let it be on the side of kindness. Be kinder than kindness itself to the elderly."Profile, ibid.

Veneration

The cause for her cause for canonization has been officially opened and  is being investigated in Rome. John Neumann Pastoral Center, where the Most Rev. Paul Gregory Bootkoski, Bishop of the Diocese of Metuchen, formally opened the investigation of a possible miracle on 18 May 2009 in order to consider evidence possibly leading to Mother Angeline's canonization.Investigation into possible canonization for Mother Mary Angeline Teresa McCrory
The diocesan investigation is the first phase in ­a fact-finding church process designed to determine whether McCrory's intercession in Heaven resulted in a miracle on earth. Two verified miracles must be attributed to a deceased candidate for sainthood before he or she can be canonized. The alleged miracle involves a family in the Diocese of Metuchen who prayed to McCrory to intercede with God after their unborn child was diagnosed with a genetic abnormality. After the child was born, the defect was not present to the degree expected.Catholic blogsite
On 28 June 2012, Pope Benedict XVI issued a decree formally acknowledging that McCrory had led a life of "heroic virtue". This decision will be made by the Vatican's Congregation for the Causes of Saints. If the miracle is verified, the Pope can then beatify McCrory, giving her the title of "Blessed". If a second miracle is then attributed to her, she will be eligible for canonization, honored with the title of "Saint".




