[[Troy McClure]]

CATEGORIES: The Simpsons characters, Fictional actors, Fictional television personalities, Zoophilia in culture, Fictional characters introduced in 1991

Troy McClure was a fictional character in the American animated sitcom The Simpsons. He was voiced by Phil Hartman and first appears in the second season episode "Homer vs. Lisa and the 8th Commandment". McClure is a washed-up actor, usually shown doing low-level work, such as hosting infomercials and educational films. He appears as the central character in "A Fish Called Selma", in which he marries Selma Bouvier to aid his failing career and quash rumors about his personal life. McClure also 'hosts' "The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular" and "The Simpsons Spin-Off Showcase".
McClure was partially based on B movie actors Troy Donahue and Doug McClure as well as Hartman himself. Following Hartman's death on May 28, 1998, all of his Simpsons characters were retired, with Hartman's last appearance in the tenth season episode in "Bart the Mother". McClure is often cited as one of the series' most popular characters; in 2006 IGN ranked him first on their list of the "Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral Characters".

Role in The Simpsons

Troy McClure is a stereotypical Hollywood has-been.
McClure's most prominent role occurs in the seventh-season episode "A Fish Called Selma". In the episode, McClure begins a relationship with Selma Bouvier, whom he meets when she gives him an eye test at the Department of Motor Vehicles. The relationship revives his career, leading him to star in Stop the Planet of the Apes, I Want to Get Off!, a stage musical version of the film Planet of the Apes. To further boost McClure's career, McClure's agent suggests that he get married. Unaware of McClure's motivation, Selma accepts his proposal, and moves into McClure's house, a Modernist building which resembles the Chemosphere. At his bachelor party, a drunken McClure tells Homer Simpson that the marriage is just a sham to help his career. Homer says nothing at the wedding, but later offhandedly mentions McClure's admission to Marge, who then informs her sister. Selma decides to remain with McClure anyway, but she becomes disturbed when McClure's agent advises the pair to have a child (since "all the big parts these days are going to family men"). Having a child will secure McClure's casting as McBain's sidekick in McBain IV: Fatal Discharge, but Selma is unwilling to bring a child into a loveless relationship and decides to leave McClure. McClure ultimately gets the role, but turns it down in order to direct and star in his own pet project, a 20th Century Fox film called The Contrabulous Fabtraption of Professor Horatio Hufnagel.
In addition to his in-story appearances, McClure appears as host of "The Simpsons 138th Episode Spectacular" and "The Simpsons Spin-Off Showcase". The first is a behind the scenes look at The Simpsons, answering questions and featuring extra "never before seen" material.

In other media

McClure was made into an action figure as part of the World of Springfield toy line, and was released in the "Celebrity Series 1" wave.

Character

Creation

McClure was based on the typical "washed up" Hollywood actor. B movie actors Troy Donahue and Doug McClure served as inspiration for his name and certain character aspects. When he was designed, McClure was given an extra line under his eyes to suggest that the character had gotten a facelift. (2003). Commentary for "Homer Alone", in The Simpsons: The Complete Third Season DVD. 20th Century Fox.
In a very brief appearance in the season 2 episode "Bart's Dog Gets an F", Troy was voiced by Dan Castellaneta.

Development

According to executive producer Al Jean, the writers often used McClure as a "panic button" and added the character when they felt an episode needed more humor. (2003). Commentary for "Homer Alone", in The Simpsons: The Complete Third Season DVD. 20th Century Fox. McClure's character is most developed in "A Fish Called Selma", which provides a more in-depth look into his private life and backstory. Show runners Bill Oakley and Josh Weinstein were fans of Phil Hartman, and wished to make an episode entirely about McClure in order to give Hartman as much to do as possible. From this came the idea of McClure's marriage to Selma Bouvier, as she was "always marrying people". Animator Mark Kirkland was particularly pleased that McClure was the star of the episode. He enjoyed interpreting Hartman's voice-over performances, and the episode allowed him and the other animators to "open McClure up visually as a character". Throughout "A Fish Called Selma", it is hinted that McClure has strange sexual behavior. The writers did not initially know what the "unsavory" sexual preference would be, but eventually decided on a fish fetish, using a suggestion from executive producer James L. Brooks. Josh Weinstein described the fish fetish concept as "so perverted and strange, it was over the top".

Retirement

After Hartman's death in 1998,

Reception and cultural influence

Even after his retirement, Troy McClure remains a popular supporting character. IGN ranked McClure first in their 2006 list of the "Top 25 Simpsons Peripheral Characters", calling him "a wonderfully bizarre and entertaining character that showcases the best of what small roles on The Simpsons can be".
McClure's most prominent episode, "A Fish Called Selma", is a favorite of many of the show's staff members, and has been cited as one of the series' best episodes by several publications. Entertainment Weekly placed the episode eighth on their top 25 The Simpsons episode list,
McClure was one of Phil Hartman's best known-roles. He often used his McClure voice to entertain the audience between takes while taping episodes of NewsRadio. He remarked, "My favorite fans are Troy McClure fans."






