[[Pétanque]]

CATEGORIES: Ball games, Bowls, Provence, Lawn games, Throwing sports, Sports originating in France

Pétanque () is a form of boules where the goal is to throw hollow metal balls as close as possible to a small wooden ball called a cochonnet (literally "piglet") or jack,The cochonnet is also sometimes called a bouchon (literally "little ball", from the Occitan bochon) or le petit ("the small one"). while standing inside a starting circle with both feet on the ground. The game is normally played on hard dirt or gravel, but can also be played on grass, sand or other surfaces. Similar games are bocce, bowls and (adapted to ice) curling.
The current form of the game originated in 1907 in La Ciotat, in Provence, in southern France. The French name pétanque (borrowed into English, with or without the acute accent) comes from petanca in the Provençal dialect of the Occitan language, deriving from the expression pès tancats , meaning 'feet together'Marco Foyot, Alain Dupuy, Louis Almas, Pétanque - Technique, Tactique, Etrainement. Robert Laffont, 1984. or more exactly 'feet anchored'.

International participation and competition

The casual form of the game of pétanque is played by about 17 million people in France, mostly during their summer holidays. It is also widely played in neighboring Spain. There are about 600,000 players sanctioned with the Fédération Internationale de Pétanque et Jeu Provençal ('International Federation of Pétanque and Jeu Provençal'), 375,000 in France with the Fédération Française de Pétanque et Jeu Provençal (FFPJP, 'French Federation of Pétanque and Jeu Provençal') and some 3,000 in the United Kingdom.
The Pétanque World Championships is an international team competition that takes place every two years, while the main individual tournament, Mondial la Marseillaise de pétanque, takes place every year in Marseille, France, with more than 10,000 participants and more than 150,000 spectators.flyprovence.html
Petanque is actively played in many nations with histories of French colonial influence during the last centuries, especially in Southeast Asia, including Laos, north Thailand, Vietnam, Cambodia, and Puducherry, India, as well as some parts of Africa, e.g. Madagascar.
In the United States the Federation of  USA (FPUSA) has 1,500 members in 40 clubs, and estimates about 30,000 play nation wide. Another 20,000 or so play in Québec. Additionally, pétanque clubs have arisen in cities throughout the United States in recent years. In the United States, the largest annual tournament is the Petanque America Open, held in November at Amelia Island, Florida.

History

The ancient Greeks are recorded to have played a game of tossing coins, then flat stones, and later stone balls, called spheristics, trying to have them go as far as possible, as early as the 6th century BC. The ancient Romans modified the game by adding a target that had to be approached as closely as possible. This Roman variation was brought to Provence by Roman soldiers and sailors. A Roman sepulchre in Florence shows people playing this game, stooping down to measure the points.
After the Romans, the stone balls were replaced by wooden balls. In the Middle Ages, Erasmus referred to the game as globurum, but it became commonly known as boules (i.e. 'balls'), and it was played throughout Europe. King Henry III of England banned the playing of the game by his archers, and in the 14th century, Charles IV and Charles V of France forbade the sport to commoners; only in the 17th century was the ban lifted. cit. pg. 16
By the 19th century, in England the game had become "bowls" or "lawn bowling"; in France, it was known as boules, and was played throughout the country. The French artist Meissonnier made two paintings showing people playing the game, and Honoré de Balzac described a match in La Comédie Humaine. In the South of France it had evolved into jeu provençal (or boule lyonnaise), similar to today's pétanque, except that the field was larger and players ran three steps before throwing the ball. The game was played in villages all over Provence, usually on squares of land in the shade of plane trees. Matches of jeu provençal around the start of the 20th century are memorably described in the memoirs of novelist Marcel Pagnol.
Pétanque in its present form was codified in 1907 in the town of La Ciotat near Marseilles by a French jeu provençal player named Jules Hugues or Jules Lenoir, whose rheumatism prevented him from running before he threw the ball. Seeing that his brother was unhappy about being unable to play, he invented a variation of the game with the player in one place, and a shorter field;[/ref] the length of the pitch or field was reduced by roughly half, and the moving delivery was replaced with a stationary one.
The first pétanque tournament with the new rules was organized in 1910 by the brothers Ernest and Joseph Pitiot, proprietors of a café at La Ciotat. After that the game grew with great speed, and soon became the most popular form of boules in France. the governing body Fédération Internationale de Pétanque et Jeu Provençal was founded in 1958 in Marseille and has about 600,000 members in 52 countries .
In the late 1800s, with the introduction of inexpensive mass-produced nails, wooden boules gradually began to be covered with nails, producing boules cloutées ('cleated boules').  The 1920s saw the introduction of hollow all-metal boules (first of bronze-aluminum alloy, then steel), and all-metal balls rapidly became the norm.
The first World Championships were organized in 1959. The most recent championships were held in Faro (2000), Monaco (2001), Grenoble (2002, 2004 and 2006), Geneva (2003), Brussels (2005), and Pattaya, Thailand (2007). Fifty-two teams from 50 countries participated in 2007.
Pétanque is not currently an Olympic sport, although the Confédération Mondiale des Sports de Boules ('World Federation of the Sport of Boules') - which was created in 1985 by three international boules organizations (and has since been joined by a fourth) specifically for this purpose - has been lobbying the Olympic committee since 1985 to make it part of the summer Olympics.[ref]
History of the FIPJP at the FIPJP web site.[/ref]

Playing the game

Pétanque is played by two teams, where each team consists of one, two, or three players.  In the singles and doubles games each player has three boules; in triples each player has only two. A coin is tossed to decide which side goes first. The starting team draws a circle on the ground which is 35-50 centimeters in diameter: all players must throw their boules from within this circle, with both feet remaining on the ground. The first player throws the jack 6–10 meters away.

Order of play

A player from the team that threw the jack then throws their first boule. A player from the opposing team then makes a throw. Play continues with the team that is not closest to the jack having to continue throwing until they either land a boule closer to the jack than their opponents or run out of boules.
If the closest boules from each team are an equal distance from the jack, then the team that played last plays again. If the boules are still equidistant then the teams play alternately until the position changes. If the boules are still equidistant at the end of the game then no points are scored by either team.
The game continues with a player from the team that won the previous end drawing a new circle around where the jack finished and throwing the jack for a new end.

Scoring

Play ends, and points may be scored when both teams have no more boules, or when the jack is knocked out of play. The winning team receives one point for each boule that it has closer to the jack than the best-placed boule of the opposition.
If the jack is knocked out of play, no team scores unless only one team has boules left to play. In this case the team with boules receives one point for each that they have to play.
The first team to reach 13 points wins.

Further rules

Equipment specifications

Boules

Competition boules must meet the following specifications set by the FIPJP:
When purchasing competition boules, a purchaser has a choice of a number of characteristics of the boules, including the size (diameter), weight, and hardness of the boules.  
Leisure boules are boules that do not meet competition standards, but are less expensive than competition boules and completely adequate for "backyard" games.  Unlike competition boules, leisure boules are a "one size fits all" affair — they come in one weight and size.

The jack

Competition jacks must meet the following specifications:

Playing area

Pétanque can be played on almost any flat, open space. The ground may be irregular and interrupted by trees or rocks, and the surface is likely to be uneven, with some areas hard and smooth and other areas rough and stony. When an area is constructed specifically for the purposes of playing petanque, the playing surface is typically loose gravel, decomposed granite, brick grog or crushed sea shell.   Sandy beaches are not suitable, although light plastic boules are sometimes used to adapt the game for the beach. There is no requirement for backboards or sideboards (as in bocce), but dedicated playing areas are often enclosed in boards or some other structural barrier.
In France, village square, paths in parks, etc. are often used as pétanque playing areas.  In addition, many towns have recreational facilities (boulodromes) constructed especially for playing pétanque.
An area where a single pétanque game is played is called a terrain.  A playing area is an area where one or more petanque games are being played. At any given time a playing area may be hosting one or more terrains.
For tournaments, a large playing area is subdivided and marked off (typically using nails and string) into rectangular marked terrains so that multiple games may be carried on simultaneously. For tournament play, a marked terrain is a rectangle at least 4 meters wide and 15 meters long.
A marked terrain is also known as a piste. Pétanque terminology varies across languages and countries and the distinction between playing area, terrain, marked terrain, and piste is frequently blurred.  For piste, the FIPJP International Rules use the French word cadre, which the FPUSA translates as the English word court and some British and Australian versions translate as lane or pitch.   Although a petanque playing area is often referred to as a petanque court, pétanque proponents dislike the word court because it suggests (falsely) that neighborhood play requires an expensive dedicated facility (a pétanque court) in the same way that bocce does.  As the Pétanque America website puts it: "Actually the word 'court' is a misnomer. We use it here because many people search for that term. Pétanque is by nature a game one can play without a setup, sort of like frisbee."
In the United States, proponents of pétanque such as author Byron Putman often urge the use of non-dedicated public terrains – public walking paths, playground areas, dirt/gravel parking lots, and baseball infields – as terrains.

Strategy

Shooters and pointers

Throwing is divided into two classes — pointing and shooting. 
Players who are skillful enough to shoot effectively are called shooters; players who usually point are called pointers.  (The French terms are tireur and pointeur, respectively.)  As a matter of strategy, pointers play first and shooters are held in reserve in case the opponents place well.
A boule located in front of the jack is much more valuable than one behind the jack, because a boule in front may (intentionally or accidentally) be hit and pushed closer to the jack. Hence the saying boule devant, boule d'argent — roughly: a ball in front is a money ball.

Throwing a boule

When throwing the first boule, the goal of the pointer is to place his boule somewhere in front of the jack and reasonably close to the jack — but not too close. If the opposing team has an effective shooter, a first boule that is placed too close to the jack will be wasted.  Its proximity to the jack will force the opposing shooter to shoot it immediately.
After the first boule, a player about to throw faces the classic petanque question: "To shoot or to point?"  Factors that affect the decision include:
Generally speaking, for example, it is bad strategy to try to shoot with your team's last boule.  If the opposing team has a boule that is kissing the jack, and your team is about to throw its last boule, you don't want to try to shoot the opposing boule.  The better strategy is to "limit the damage" by placing your team's last boule so close to the jack that the opposing team is limited to winning only one point.

Throwing the jack

The team that throws the jack may throw it in any legal direction and to any legal distance.
Strategic considerations involved in the throw of the jack include:
Distance
Direction

Glossary of special terms

Image gallery

Image:Pétanque a Aigues-Mortes-France.JPG|Playing pétanque in the late afternoon at Aigues-Mortes
Image:Toulon Playing Boules. Louis in Toulon.
Image:Pétanque Championnats du monde à Grenoble (308551840).jpg|The 2006 Pétanque World Championship in Grenoble, France
Image:Petanque batignolles.
Image:Petanque in brighton.JPG|Players of the Brighton & Hove Petanque Club on the Peace Statue Terrain, Brighton & Hove, UK








