[[Dave Morales]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American radio personalities

Dave Morales (born May 5, in El Paso, Texas, United States), is a nationally known on-air radio personality, DJ and independent producer. Dave Morales has worked for some of the top rated radio stations in the United States, as an on-air personality, promoter, artist interviewer, and events specialist. Cesar Milan "The Dog Whisperer", Shine Down member Eric Bass, and Sarah, Duchess of York. Morales spent the early part of his childhood in El Paso, Texas. As a child he moved to Houston, where he graduated from Cypress Creek High School, and went on to Texas Tech University, to study broadcasting.

Career

On-Air Radio Personality

Dave Morales has been an on-air radio personality at some of the top rated radio stations in the United States, including many owned by Clear Channel Communications. He also worked for Houston's Mix 96.5, which is owned by CBS. Along with being a radio DJ, Dave hosted celebrity interviews and reviewed newly releasing movies.

Record Producer

Dave Morales started a co-partnered mangagement company in 2010, called Red Team Entertainment, with Jonathan Stenvall.  Their first band is a Houston local band, called Versecity.  The most notable song by VerseCity is "Tik Tok Rok" which hit the Billboards Top 100 singles. They debuted the song live, on "Fox 26 Morning News" on Fox television network, in early 2010.

BackstageOL

On June 20, 2011 Dave Morales launched an online entertainment website called BackstageOL.  The website officially launched on the Fox 26 Morning News where BackstageOL. Other recent interviews and features have included segments with Tom Hanks, Cameron Diaz, Justin Timberlake, Forever The Sickest Kids, and Yellowcard.

Personal life

Dave Morales was born in El Paso, Texas to Irene Morales. As a child, he moved to Houston, Texas. Morales attended Bleyl Jr. High and graduated from Cypress Creek High School. He went on to Texas Tech University to study broadcasting. Here, he was offered his first job at a radio station, which he left college to do. This was the start of his career in radio. Morales has been an avid sports enthusiasts, and supports Houston professional teams, including the Houston Astros, Houston Texans, and Houston Dynamo. He is also a musical and Walt Disney enthusiast, as well. He has participated in many charity events, such as "Feed the Houston Homeless".

Contribution

Morales works annually to host events such as feeding the needy. He has donated time and drawn attention to the less fortunate and to those living in poor living conditions. He has also made many broadcasts to support charity events.



Notes




