[[Baloch people]]

CATEGORIES: Baloch people, Iranian peoples, Social groups of Balochistan, Pakistan, Social groups of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa, Ethnic groups in Afghanistan, Ethnic groups in Pakistan, Ethnic groups in Iran, Ethnic groups in the Middle East, Balochistan, Pakistan, Nimruz Province, Sistan and Baluchestan Province

The Baloch or Baluch (Balochi: ) live mainly in the Balochistan region of the Iranian plateau in Iran, Pakistan and Afghanistan.
They are an Iranian people and mainly speak Balochi language which itself is a branch of the Iranian languages, and more specifically of the Northwestern Iranian languages. The Baloch population worldwide is estimated to be in the range of 10 to 15 million. They make nearly 4% of the Pakistani population and live in the Pakistani provinces of Balochistan, Sindh and Punjab. They make up 2% of Iran's population (1.5 million). There are many Baloch living in other parts of the world, with the bulk living in Eastern Arabia countries of the Persian Gulf. However, the exact number of Baloch and GCC citizens of Baloch ancestry is difficult to determine.
About 50% of the total Baloch population live in East Balochistan, a western province of Pakistan. "Baloch". Pakistan: A Country Study. Washington: GPO for the Library of Congress, 1995. 40% Baloch are settled in Sindh and also a significant number of Baloch people in South Punjab of Pakistan. Many of the rest live in Afghanistan, Turkmenistan, Oman, United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Kuwait, India and in some parts of Africa, namely Kenya, and Tanzania (Tabora has a large community). Small communities of Baluch people also live in Europe particularly Sweden, Norway, Denmark, England and in Perth, Australia, where they arrived in the 19th century.

Origin

According to legend, the first settlement of the Baloch people is said to be in Aleppo/Halab from where they migrated to Iraq where they remained until, siding the sons of Hazrat Ali and taking part in the Battle of Karbala against Yazid I, they were expelled by Yazid, the second of the Umayyad Caliphs, in 680 AD. Thence they first went to Kerman, and eventually to Sistan where they were hospitably received by Shams-ud-Din, ruler of that region. According to Dames there was a Shams-ud-Din, independent Malik of Sistan, who claimed descent from the Saffarids of Persia who died in 1164 AD (559 AH) or nearly 500 years after the Baloch migration from Aleppo. Badr-ud-Din appears to be unknown to history. His successor, Badr-ud-Din, demanded, according to eastern usage, a bride from each of the 44 clans of the Baloch. But the Balochs had never paid tribute in this form to any ruler, and they sent therefore 44 boys dressed in girls' clothes and fled before the deception could be discovered. Badr-ud-Din sent the boys back but pursued the Baloch, who had fled south-eastwards, into Kech-Makran where he was defeated at their hands. At this period Mir Jalal Khan, son of Mir Jiand Khan the first, was the ruler of all the Baloch. He left four sons, Rind, Lashar, Hooth, and Korai, and a daughter Jato, who married his nephew Murad. These five are the eponymous founders of the five great divisions of the tribe, the Rinds, Lasharis, Hooths, Korais,Kubras and Jatois. 337 

History

Maka is mentioned by Greek historian Herodotus as one of the early satraps of Cyrus the Great, who successfully united several ancient Iranian tribes to create an empire.
The present region of Makran, which is inhabited by Baluch people, derived its name from the word "Maka". The Babylonians made voyages using Maka to communicate with India. which then translates as "the land of Mykians". They are mentioned as "the men from Maka" in daeva inscriptions. The "daeva inscription" is one of the most important of all Achaemenid inscriptions; in the Baluchi language, dêw translates as "giant devil or monster".
Mykians were responsible for many inventions, such as qanats and underground drainage galleries that brought water from aquifers on the piedmont to gardens or palm groves on the plains. These inventions were important reasons behind the success of the Achaemenid Empire and survival of Mykians in their largely harsh natural environment. Other inscriptions record that gold, silver, lapis lazuli, turquise, cornalin, cedar wood, wood and the decoration for the relief at Susa were from Maka. Historical evidence suggests that Baloch people were the ancient inhabitants of the Maka satrapy in the Achaemenid empire and Baloch were also part of the army of Cyrus the Great and Darius I.
Baloch in Persian means cocks comb or Crest cause the Baloch troops who fought for Astyages of Kai Khusrau in 585-550 BC were wearing helmets with cocks comb crest,they got the nickname of the Baloch. While listing the warriors of Kai Khusrau, Firdowsi mentioned the baloch in his book of kings Shahnameh under the command of general Ashkash As follows :
 "Next after gustaham came shrewd askash
 Endowed with prudent heart and ready brain,
 his troop was from the wanderers of the koch and
 Baloch wearing exalted cocks comb crests very rams
 To fight,no one had seen their backs in the battle or
 One of their fingers bare of armour,their banner was a
 Pard with claws projecting,akash felicitated Kai
 Khusrau at large upon the happy turn of fortune"
            Shahnameh -e- Firdowsi
Ferdowsi described the Baloch as part of the army of cambyses(siahwash), son of Kay Khosrow of the Achaemenid Dynasty.
Baluch inhabiting the coastal areas in the region of Makran Chabahar, Gwadar, Gulf Oman, Kuwait, Bahrain) and Arabian Sea Karachi and other parts of Sindh and tribes including the Jatoi, Mirani, Rind, Bizenjo, Brahui and Gabol are highly skilled in designing boats, fishing and other skills required to survive in their environment. Herodotus mentions that Darius had made use of the ocean in this region of Sindh. The Sulemani Baluch who inhabit the region of Balochistan including Makran—for example, tribes including the domki Marri, dasti or dashti Bugti, Buzdar, Lund, Ranjhani, Ahmedani, Mazari, Mengal, Denari, Jiskani, Laghari, Chandio, Muhammad Hassani, Nausherwani, MirJat, Rind, Mandwani,  Bizenjo, Zehri, Dehwar, Changwani and others—carry different skills to survive in their mostly mountainous environment and have a history of aggressive behavior towards invasions. These tribes are not confined to one specific location as they also contain sub-tribes and can be found all over the region.

Baluchi culture

Baluchi customs and traditions are conducted according to codes imposed by tribal laws. These strong traditions and cultural values are important to Baluch people and have enabled them to keep their distinctive ancient cultural identity and way of life with little change to this day. The culture and traditions of the Baluch have historically been passed down from mother to daughter, and from father to son.
Baluchi culture is mentioned in the Pir M. Zehi's account of his travel to the province of Sakestan, or the present-day Sistan province of Iran, which holds strong significance to the culture of Baluch people. Baluch people have preserved their traditional dress with little change over the centuries. The Baluch men wear long shirts with long sleeves and loose pants. The dress is occasionally accompanied by a pagh (turban) or a hat on their heads.
The Baluchi costume varies from Iran to Pakistan. Iran Baluch dress code is more conservative in sense of length and material. Some Baluch women in Iran also cover their faces with thick red color wools (Burqah) and wear a (Sareeg) which is the head scarf and (Chadar) which is a long veil.
The dress worn by Baluch women is one of the most interesting aspects of Baluchi culture. They are of strong significance to the culture of Iran and hold a special place in the society. The women put on loose dress and pants with sophisticated and colourful needlework, including a large pocket at the front of the dress to hold their accessories. The upper part of the dress and sleeves are also decorated with needlework, a form of artistry that is specific to the clothing of the Baluch women. Often the dress also contains round or square pieces of glass to further enhance the presentation. They cover their hair with a scarf, called a sarig in the local dialect.
These customs are unique to the people of Iran and the art of this needlework on women's clothing may provide one with a picture of the freedom and high status of Baluch women in Achaemenid era.
Gold ornaments such as necklaces and bracelets are an important aspect of Baluch women's traditions and among their most favoured items of jewellery are dorr, heavy earrings that are fastened to the head with gold chains so that the heavy weight will not cause harm to the ears. They usually wear a gold brooch (tasni) that is made by local jewellers in different shapes and sizes and is used to fasten the two parts of the dress together over the chest. In ancient times, especially during the pre-Islamic era, it was common for Baluch women to perform dances and sing folk songs at different events. The tradition of a Baluch mother singing lullabies to her children has played an important role in the transfer of knowledge from generation to generation since ancient times. Apart from the dressing style of the Baluch, indigenous and local traditions and customs are also of great importance to the Baluch.
Baluch people are culturally and traditionally regarded as secular. However, Baluch people are a minority, and growing Islamic fundamentalism in the region is seen as a threat to Baluchi culture.

Baluchi music

Folk music has always played a great role in Baluchi traditions. Baluchi music belong to the same branch of Iranian music performed by many other Iranian peoples including Persians, Kurds, Lurs, Tajiks and others. Traditions like the transfer of knowledge from generation to generation by singing lullabies to children and praising warriors also have a significant role in Baluchi music traditions. The fact that both men and women participate in folk music reflects on the pre-Islamic significance of folk music in Baluchi culture. Many years of invasions, wars and later adopted religious values have prevented Balouchi music from prevailing further in the 21st century. However, a Swedish folk band, Golbang and Padik with the lead singer Rostam Mirlashari originally from Zahedan & Lashar in Balochistan, has made progress in introducing Balouchi folk music to the Western world. The most commonly used instruments in Balouchi folk music are tanbur, long-necked lutes. Lutes have been present in Mesopotamia since the Akkadian era, or the 3rd millennium BC. The dohol, a large cylindrical drum with two skin heads, is the principal accompaniment for the surna, an ancient Iranian woodwind instrument that dates back to the Achaemenid Dynasty (550-330 BC). The ney is also commonly played, using single or double flutes. The Suroz, a Baluchi folk violin, which is considered as the official instrument of the Baluches. Other Baluchi musical instruments include the tar and the saz.

Cuisine

Geographic distribution

The total population of ethnic Baluch people is estimated to be around 15 million worldwide. However, the exact number of those who are Baluch or claim to be of Baluch ancestry is difficult to determine. As of 2012, the Baluch are 7.11% of Pakistan's 177 million people
Baluch ancestry is also claimed in the neighboring areas that adjoin Baluch majority lands. Those who speak Brahui are known as Brahuis. Pasnionline.com. Retrieved on 2013-07-12. Many Baluch outside of Balochistan are also bilingual or of mixed ancestry due to their proximity to other ethnic groups, including the Sindhis, Saraikis and Pashtuns. A large number of Baluch have been migrating to or living in provinces adjacent to Balochistan for centuries. In addition, there are many Baluch living in other parts of the world, with the bulk living in the GCC countries of the Persian Gulf.  The Baluch are an important community in Oman, where they make up a sizable minority.
Many Baloch over the years have migrated to Punjab for its lush green fertility and they can be found in large numbers in South Punjab, Central Punjab and in Lahore but most of them identify themselves now as Punjabis. There is a small population of Baluch in several Western countries such as Sweden and Australia. Some Baluch settled in Australia in the 19th century; some fourth-generation Baluch still live there, mainly in the western city of Perth.

Balochs in Oman

The Baluch in Oman have maintained their ethnic and linguistic distinctions. The Southern Baluch comprise approximately 25% of the country's population. The traditional economy of Baluch in Oman is based on a combination of trade, farming and semi-nomadic shepherding.

Balochi language

The Balochi language is spoken in Pakistan, Iran, Afghanistan, the Persian Gulf Arab states, Turkmenistan, and as far as East Africa and some Western countries. It is classified as a member of the Iranian group of the Indo-European language family, which includes Kurdish, Persian, Pashto, Dari, Tajik and Ossetian. The Baluchi language has the closest similarities to Kurdish, Avestan, old Persian and other Iranian languages.
Two main dialects are spoken in Sistan va Balochestan and Balochestan: Eastern and Western. The exact number of Baluch speakers is difficult to know, but the estimated number could be around 15 million. The majority speak Western Baluchi, which is also the dialect that has been most widely used in Baluchi literature. Within the Western dialect are two further dialects, Rakhshani and Nousherwani (spoken mainly in the northern areas) and Makurani (in the south).
The Baluch have several tribes and sub-tribes. Some of these tribes speak Brahui, while most speak Balochi. Multilingualism is common, with many Baluch speaking both Brahui and Baluchi. The Rind Marri, Magsi, Domki and Bugti tribe speak Balochi. The Mengal tribe, who live in the Chagai, Khuzdar, Kharan districts of Balochistan. the sarpara tribe, who live in kardigap, Meskan Qalat/Kharan, Larkana, and they speak both Brahui and balochi, The Meskanzai (sarpara) tribe who live in the Meskan Qalat kharna, and Quetta, and they speak Balochi and Brahui.  and in southern parts of Afghanistan, speak Brahui. The Muhammad Hasni tribe speak Brahui, Balochi and some other languages according to the area they are living. The Lango tribe, who live in central Balochistan in the Mangochar area, speak Brahui as their first language and Balochi as their second. The Bizenjo tribe speak both languages. The Bangulzai tribe mostly speaks Brahui, but has a Baluchi-speaking minority known as Garani.
The Talpur, Mastoi, Jatoi, Wahocha, Gabol, Chandio, Mirani, Nutkani, Ahmedani, Jagirani, Marri, Khushk, Magsi, Domki, Khosa, Bozdar, Jiskani, Bijarani, Hesbani, Leghari, Lashari, Muhammad Hasni, Kalpar, Korai, Zardari, Rind, Mandwani or Bhurgari, MirJat, Jakhrani, and other Baluch tribes that are settled in Sindh speak Sindhi, Baluchi and Seraiki. The Gadi and Qaisrani Baluch living near Taunsa Sharif in the Punjab province of Pakistan speak Seraiki and Baluchi, while their clansmen living in Dera Ghazi Khan tribal areas speak Baluchi. The Lund Baluch living in Shadan Lund speak Sindhi, Seraiki and Baluchi.








