[[Izet Hajrović]]

CATEGORIES: 1991 births, Living people, Swiss footballers, Bosnia and Herzegovina footballers, Swiss people of Bosnia and Herzegovina descent, Bosniak people, Swiss Muslims, Grasshopper Club Zürich players, Swiss Super League players, Association football midfielders, Dual internationalists (football), Galatasaray S.K. footballers, Süper Lig players, Bosnia and Herzegovina international footballers, Switzerland international footballers, Switzerland under-21 international footballers, Switzerland youth international footballers

Izet Hajrović (born 4 August 1991) is a Bosnian professional footballer who plays as a winger for Turkish Süper Lig club Galatasaray and the Bosnia and Herzegovina national team. Hajrović is a winger with noted dribbling skills, playmaking skills, and he is known for his long shots and his free kicks.

Club career

Grasshoppers

Hajrović spent nine years in Grasshoppers academy from 2000 to 2009. He finally broke into the first team during the 2009–10 season. He was used mostly as an attacking midfielder and as a right winger. His strong left foot made him a valuable asset on the right side of midfield, as he often cut into the left to shoot with his stronger foot. His brother, Sead Hajrović, also played with him in the academy before moving on to Arsenal.

Galatasaray

On 7 January 2014, he was officially transferred to Turkish club Galatasaray for €3.5 million on a four-and-a-half year deal.galatasaray.php
He cited his Bosniak roots and Islam as some of the reasons he agreed to join Galatasaray. Hajrović made his season debut against Bursaspor, coming in as a substitute in the second half in a 6-0 home win.uefa.html He scored his first goal against Tokatspor on 5 February, in a 3–0 win for the campaign's Turkish Cup.galatasaray.php

International career

On 14 November 2012, he made his senior international debut for Switzerland, coming on as an 83rd minute substitute in a friendly match against Tunisia. Hajrović confirmed in June 2013 that he would opt to play for Bosnia and Herzegovina national football team in the future.
On 13 August 2013, FIFA have confirmed that he is now available for Bosnia and Herzegovina national team, due his application for changing his sport citizenship from Swiss to Bosnian.
On 26 August Bosnia national team manager Safet Sušić included Izet in his squad for two September world cup qualification games against Slovakia at home and away.

Personal life

His parents are Bosniaks from Bijelo Polje, Montenegro, but they relocated to Sarajevo in 1980.  They moved to Switzerland in 1987. His younger brother, Sead Hajrović is also a footballer, with the Swiss Super League side Grasshopper Club Zürich.

Career statistics

Club



International goals

Honours

Club






