[[It's OK (CeeLo Green song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2010 singles, CeeLo Green songs, Songs written by CeeLo Green

"It's OK" is the second single from American soul singer Cee Lo Green's third studio album, The Lady Killer. The song is produced by Element,

Background

Unlike the first single from the album, "It's OK" was exclusively released in the UK and certain areas of Europe. The song received its first recognition on the British charts following the video premiering on 4 Music on December 9, 2010. The single was released on two formats only: the physical release, which features the main album version and the Paul Epworth remix of the title track; and the digital release, which includes two remixes of the title track, exclusive B-Side "Bridges" and a live recording of "Radioactive" taken from the Radio 1 Live Lounge Sessions.

Critical reception

In the context of The Lady Killer, the song was positively reviewed. David Carr for Chicks With Guns (CWG) Magazine says, "On the more up tempo numbers The Lady Killer, "Cry Baby, and It's OK," you may feel as if you are watching reruns of the 70's TV show Love American Style as Cee Lo creates some great lyrical vignettes to go with his amazingly versatile voice. Don't even think of asking if the man uses auto-tune because the answer is a resounding no!"
Not all reviews of "It's OK" were positive, however. Robin Murray for Clash Magazine (reviewing It's OK as a single release) opines, "blessed with an undoubtedly pleasant voice, it's a shame that Cee Lo Green uses it on such undramatic material. Sure, 'Forget You' had it's cheeky charm but you can't help but feel that Cee Lo could do so much more. 'It's OK' is another pleasant, melodic single which will be adopted by the nation but the middle of the road is such a boring way to travel."

Commercial performance

After its December 27, 2010 release, It's OK entered the UK Singles Chart at #44, and in its fourth week rose to #24.

Music video

The music videoofficial video It's OK YouTube for "It's OK" was released to YouTube on December 2, 2010, and features Solange Knowles. Gil Kaufman published this summary of the video for MTV.com:

Live performances

Cee Lo is touring with an all-female backing band named Scarlet Fever, performing this song on
November 11, 2010, as part of the Symmetry Live Concert Series at the W Hotel in Midtown Manhattan, New York,
February 25, 2011, for Shockwaves NME Awards Big Gig opening for Foo Fighters at Wembley Arena,
and throughout their 2011 concert tours.
Cee Lo also appeared on the latest series of Alan Carr: Chatty Man to promote the single.

Tracklisting

Personnel

Source:

Charts

Release history




