[[Sweden Democrats]]

CATEGORIES: Political parties established in 1988, Nationalist parties, Political parties in Sweden, Criticism of Islam, Anti-Islam political parties in Europe, Eurosceptic parties, Right-wing populism, Euroscepticism in Sweden, 1988 establishments in Sweden

The Sweden Democrats or Swedish Democrats  (
The Sweden Democrats reached 11,876 members in December 2013. Young members are organised in the Sweden Democratic Youth (SDU), founded in 1998. The party also distributes a newspaper to its members, called SD-Kuriren.
In the 2010 general election, the Sweden Democrats for the first time crossed the four percent threshold necessary for parliamentary representation. This increase in popularity has been compared by international media to other similar anti-immigration movements in Europe. The party polled 5.7% and won 20 parliamentary seats.

History

Early years (1988–1995)

The Sweden Democrats were founded on 6 February 1988 The party did sponsor the music of a nationalist Viking rock band Ultima Thule, and various party leaders today acknowledge that the band's music figured prominently in their decision to become politically engaged. Since the late 1990s, the party nevertheless underwent an extensive moderation policy. 108.

Moderation (1995–2010)

From 1995, the party's new leader Mikael Jansson (previously a member of the Centre Party) strove to make the party more respectable, and introduced a uniform ban in 1996, possibly as a result of photographs of members posing in Nazi uniforms at party meetings reaching the media. In 1999, however, SD left its membership in Euronat to its youth organisation. In 2001, the more radical faction in the party was expelled, which later led to the establishment of the National Democrats. 109.
Since the 2000s (decade), the so-called "Scania gang" or "Gang of Four"; Jimmie Åkesson (party leader since 2005), Björn Söder, Mattias Karlsson and Richard Jomshof continued the moderation policy which included ousting openly extremist members. Before the 2002 election, former Moderate Party MP Sten Christer Andersson defected to SD, citing that the party had gotten rid of its extreme right elements. In 2003, the party declared the Universal Declaration of Human Rights to be a cornerstone of its policies. 116. In 2006, the party changed its logo from the torch, to featuring an Anemone hepatica, reminiscent of the party's very first, but short-lived logo: a stylized Myosotis scorpioides.

In parliament (2010–present)

In the 2010 general election, SD won representation in the Swedish Riksdag for the first time, with 5.7% of the vote and 20 MPs.
Swedish Democratic MP William Petzäll was persuaded to leave the party on 26 September 2011 while still retaining his parliamentary seat. This was done because of Petzäll's alcoholism and the problem that might cause for SD's public image. Petzäll later died of an overdose, and the seat was turned over to Stellan Bojerud in September 2012.
In November 2012, videos recorded in August 2010 were released in chunks over three days by Swedish newspaper Expressen. The videos, recorded by MP Kent Ekeroth , and featuring him and fellow Sweden Democrats Erik Almqvist (MP) and Christian Westling, showed Almqvist arguing with comedian Soran Ismail, among other things referring to Sweden as "my country, not your country". They were also shown threatening a drunken man, calling a woman a whore, and picking up iron bars
Only two weeks after Almqvist and Ekeroth were forced to step down, fellow MP Lars Isovaara reported being robbed of his backpack and pushed out of his wheelchair by "two unknown men of an immigrant background". When trying to get into the Riksdag, Isovaara was himself reported by the police for racial abuse against safety guards.

Ideology and political positions

The Sweden Democrats' party programme is based on nationalism and social conservatism. The journalist and historical author Henrik Arnstad has characterized the party as fascist. The party has been described by sociologist Jens Rydgren, and others, as xenophobic, racist and right-wing populist. Från skattemissnöje till etnisk nationalism: Högerpopulism och parlamentarisk högerextremism i Sverige. Studentlitteratur, Lund. |sid=124Nationalencyklopedin: Sverigedemokraterna (2009-10-27). Populist Radical Right Parties in Europe. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. The Centre for the Study of European Politics and Society (Jens Rydgren). 19 october 2012. In 2013, a Sveriges Radio journalist called the party xenophobic, which resulted in a complaint lodged to the broadcasting regulator. The Swedish Broadcasting Commission determined that this description was acceptable to use.SvD: Granskningsnämnden: Tillåtet att kalla SD främlingsfientligt

Immigration

The Sweden Democrats believe that the current Swedish immigration and integration policies have been a failure. 
SD is the only party in the Swedish Parliament without an integration policy. 
They oppose integration because they believe that integration involves "meeting in the middle" and do not think that the Swedish people should have to bear the burden of what they see as a reckless immigration policy.
SD feels that the current situation with a large number of immigrants living in cultural enclaves is not beneficial for the country. The immigrants themselves are rootless, there have been rising antagonistic tensions between various population groups (socially, ethnically, religiously and culturally), and the immigration in itself, SD says, has caused social and economic strains on the country.
As the party considers Sweden to have had too much immigration in later years, which it claims have seriously threatened national identity and societal cohesion, SD wants to reinstate a common Swedish national identity which in turn would mean a stronger inner solidarity. SD rejects the policy of multiculturalism, but accepts a multiethnic society where cultural assimilation is promoted. SD wishes to strongly restrict immigration, and give generous support for immigrants who instead of wanting to assimilate in Sweden voluntarily prefer to emigrate back to their country of origin. As more state funds are made free from funding mass immigration, SD believes that Sweden in turn will have the possibility to better help refugees in their own nearby locations.
SD has referred to the recommendations from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) which state that the return of refugees should be the solution to refugee problems. Former party secretary between 2003–2004, Torbjörn Kastell had said in 2002 that the party wanted "a multicultural world, not a multicultural society. In a 2008 survey, a significant minority of 39 percent of all Swedes thought that there were "too many foreigners in the country", and in 2007 a survey showed that 49 percent of all Swedes wanted to restrict the number of asylum seekers.
According to Aftonbladet, 14% of SD members are of immigrant origin,

The elderly

SD wishes to lower the tax rate for the elderly, as well as increase subsidized housing for the elderly. SD also wishes to allocate additional resources to municipalities in order to provide seniors with greater food assistance and, in general, improve quality of life. SD has also emphasized a desire to crack down on abuses and crimes which, in particular, targets the elderly.se/vara-asikter/vara-viktigaste-fragor/en-trygg-och-vardig-alderdom/

Sami people

The Sweden Democrats are critical of the special rights given to the indigenous Sami people of northern Sweden. It has been argued that the Sweden Democrats want to abolish their constitutional status as "indigenous" and even deport members of other ethnic groups.

Law and order

SD wishes to instate the possibility of life without parole for the worst crimes and to repatriate foreign citizens found guilty of serious crime (which already is general practice in Sweden, though the repatriation is usually limited to a few years after which the offenders are welcome to reapply for asylum). SD also wants to establish a public register of convicted pedophiles.

Foreign policy

The Sweden Democrats in their foreign policy reject joining the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union, are opposed to the Accession of Turkey to the European Union and want to renegotiate Swedish membership of the European Union.

Culture

The Sweden Democrats advocate a cultural policy that would strip funding for multicultural initiatives and strengthen support for traditional Swedish culture. This agenda has often manifest in opposition to state funding of immigrant cultural organizations and festivals, and support for traditional Swedish craft, folk music, and folk dance groups. The party also tends to oppose state-support for cultural initiatives deemed provocative or elitist.Teitelbaum 2013:242-265

Family

The Sweden Democrats are in favour of the traditional nuclear family and believe that every child should have "one father and one mother", according to their website. According to Social Democrat Björn Andersson's blog, SD is opposed to adoption rights for homosexual couples, and to letting lesbian women become inseminated. Although SD strongly criticizes what it calls a Homosex Lobby, the party claims that it is not hostile to homosexuals. Furthermore, party leader Jimmie Åkesson expressed concern that what he describes as Islamization of Sweden will eventually lead to the rights of sexual minorities being violated.svd.svd
Published by SD Party secretary Björn Söder on 1 August 2007, a blog article titled Botten måste snart vara nådd

Controversies

During the 1990s, many outspoken far-right people were involved with the party.

The Sweden Democrats' response

The party claims to dissociate itself from all forms of totalitarianism and racism and states that it considers the 1948 Universal Declaration of Human Rights a fundamental component of its politics. Furthermore, the party says that its fundamental goal is to combine the principle of social and economic justice with traditional conservative values. For this reason, the party believes that it is not easily pinpointed on the traditional left-right political spectrum in Swedish politics.

Media boycott

The Sweden Democrats have complained about difficulties buying advertising space due to the media banning the party from advertisement,

The Muhammad cartoon debate

After the Danish daily newspaper Jyllands-Posten published twelve cartoons depicting Muhammad and ignited the Jyllands-Posten Muhammad cartoons controversy during the 2005 autumn and winter, the Sweden Democrats gave their unreserved support to the publication with reference to the freedom of speech. SD stated that it saw no reason why a Danish newspaper should be forced to abide by Muslim rules and prohibitions regarding expression. When the boycott of Danish products was launched in the Middle East, SD launched a "Buy Danish" campaign in support of Danish workers.
The publication attracted the attention of the Swedish government which informed internet service provider Levonline about the SD's publications. Subsequently, Levonline shut down SD's web page. The government and the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Laila Freivalds, denied any direct interference. However, at the same time Laila Freivalds condemned the publication as a provocation. Freivalds then resigned as Minister after being accused of interference with press freedom and lying about such actions.
This event spurred debate on government censorship in Sweden. The Sweden Democrats also had a hate speech charge filed against them due to the posted caricature.
The Sweden Democrats originally planned to publish a set of cartoons in their newspaper SD-Kuriren. However, after the controversy erupted, Jimmie Åkesson issued a statement on SD's website on 9 February 2006, stating that it would refrain from further publications online and in print, due to concerns that it might spur hostile actions against Swedes and Swedish interests.
The shutdown of Sweden Democrats' websites was reported to Konstitutionsutskottet by the Liberal People's Party leader Lars Leijonborg. The spokesperson of the Green Party Peter Eriksson also expressed concern over possible government involvement in the event.

Electoral results

Parliament (Riksdag)

European Parliament

Party leaders

Other prominent party member

Bibliography






