[[Capitol Theatre (Port Chester, New York)]]

CATEGORIES: Theatres on the National Register of Historic Places in New York, Theatres completed in 1926, Buildings and structures in Westchester County, New York, Port Chester, New York, 1926 establishments in New York

The Capitol Theatre is a historic theatre located in the village of Port Chester, Westchester County, New York. It was designed by noted theater architect Thomas W. Lamb (1871 - 1942) and built in 1926.  The 1,800-seat facility currently operates as a concert venue, hosting musicians and occasionally comedians, as owned and operated by NYC-based concert promoter Peter Shapiro.  The Capitol Theatre has had a long history, with tenures as a movie theater and catering hall, in addition to hosting concerts.

Building Structure

It consists of two parts: a three story section containing three storefronts, the theater entrance, two stories of office space; and the theater auditorium.  The front section is nine bays wide and four bays deep with a truncated hipped roof.  It features a decorative terra cotta cornice.  The theater structure is irregular in shape and ranges from four to seven stories in height.

History

Movie Theater

The Capitol Theatre was built for Vaudeville and Cinema and continued as a movie theater until 1970.

Concert Venue

In the 1970s, the theatre was renovated for use as a performance space.  
In 1984, The Capitol Theatre was added to the National Register of Historic Places.  In the 1980s, the frequency of live events at the theatre diminished, partially due to a village curfew for live music after 1:00AM.  The Capitol would host off-Broadway plays and musicals, and events run by the Port Chester Council of the Arts.  The 1990s would see some live music again, with the likes of Phish, Blues Traveler, Spin Doctors and Strangefolk.  Both David Bowie and The Rolling Stones performed at the Capitol in 1997, as part of episodes of the MTV television program Live From The 10 Spot.

Catering Hall

It later became a catering and special-events facility, run by owner Marvin Ravikoff.  The lower level seats were removed to create a flat space for tables and a dance floor for weddings, Bar Mitzvot and other events.

Reopening as Concert Venue

In December 2011, The New York Times announced that the Theatre was to be re-opened by music entrepreneur Peter Shapiro, owner of Brooklyn Bowl and former owner of NYC club Wetlands Preserve, to present major concerts at the venue, in partnership with concert promoter The Bowery Presents. A two million dollar renovation took place; "state-of-the-art" sound and lighting equipment has been installed.  Part of the renovations included purchasing the adjacent Capitol Jewelers store and converting it into a bar, which would be open to the public on nights when the theater does not have an event.  The Capitol Theatre reopened on September 4, 2012, with Bob Dylan as its first act.  Initially, Shapiro had a 20-year lease on the Capitol Theatre, which, at the time, was owned by Marvin Ravikoff.  In December 2012, Shapiro purchased the theater. The theater has hosted many famous performers such as, George Lopez, Al Green, the B-52s (6/6/13), and Yo Gabba Gabba.
In 2013 the venue hosted Dawes, Blondie, Pat Benatar, Billy Idol, The Rascals, and Chicago, and scheduled Neil Young & Crazy Horse, Willie Nelson, Chris Isaak, Yes, Foreigner, Patti Smith, Courtney Love, Bonnie Raitt, Jonny Lang, Cyndi Lauper, Herbie Hancock and many other top performers.
November 3, 2013 The New York Times reported that Phil Lesh, longtime bass player of The Grateful Dead, would play 45 shows with Peter Shapiro. 30 of these shows would take place at The Capitol Theatre in Port Chester, NY, and the first at Brooklyn Bowl on November 14, 2013 








