[[AERO Specialties]]

CATEGORIES: Aircraft ground handling, Aviation ground support equipment companies

AERO Specialties, Inc. is a manufacturer and international distributor of new and refurbished aircraft ground support equipment (GSE). AERO Specialties was founded in 1987 by President Matt Sheehan to supply GSE products to corporate, fixed-base operator (FBO), commercial, military, and general aviation customers globally.
AERO Specialties has experienced significant international growth due to the expansion of its CE marked product line for the European Economic Area, which was introduced in 2006.
AERO Specialties has partnered with Wainbee International to produce its own line of hydraulic power units (HPU) or hydraulic mules.

Services

In addition to supplying new and used GSE, AERO Specialties maintains and repairs GSE for clients. Equipment can be refurbished or zero-timed.
AERO Specialties regularly rents and leases GSE for specific purposes or special events.

Events

AERO Specialties provided GSE to all FBOs (Avitat, Landmark Aviation, and Million Air) at Vancouver International Airport (YVR) during the 2010 Vancouver Winter Olympics to meet increased aircraft traffic demands from athletes, fans and organizers. AERO Specialties supplied approximately 40 pieces of equipment including Eagle TT-series pushback tractors, TLD and JetGo GPUs, and AERO brand towbars, towbar heads, lavatory and potable water carts.
AERO Specialties supplied GSE to FBOs for the First inauguration of Barack Obama and 2009 Super Bowl.

Awards

AERO Specialties received the U.S. Department of Commerce Small Business Association (SBA) Northwest regional exporter award on May 4, 2011.  This honor came in addition to being recognized as the SBA exporter of the year in Idaho.
On May 6, 2009, in honor of World Trade Day, AERO Specialties was awarded the U.S. Department of Commerce Commercial Service Export Achievement Certificate for recent accomplishments in the global marketplace, presented by the Idaho Export Council.
The Boise Metro Chamber of Commerce awarded AERO Specialties its Small Business of the Year award in June 2002.

Associations and conventions

AERO Specialties is a member of these associations:
AERO Specialties is a regular exhibitor at these conventions:






