[[Great Ocean Road]]

CATEGORIES: Visitor attractions in Victoria (Australia), Visitor attractions in Geelong, Otway Ranges, Warrnambool, Highways in Victoria (Australia), Scenic routes, Australian military memorials, Coastline of Victoria (Australia), Victorian Heritage Register

The Great Ocean Road is an Australian National Heritage listed  stretch of road along the south-eastern coast of Australia between the Victorian cities of Torquay and Allansford. Built by returned soldiers between 1919 and 1932 and dedicated to soldiers killed during World War I, the road is the world's largest war memorial. Winding through varying terrain along the coast and providing access to several prominent landmarks, including the Twelve Apostles limestone stack formations, the road is an important tourist attraction in the region.

General

The Great Ocean Road officially starts at Torquay and travels 243 kilometres westward to finish at Allansford near Warrnambool, the largest city along the road. and is covered by a speed limit changing between 80 kilometres per hour and 100 kilometres per hour
The road is considered a tourist attraction in the area, At the stretch of the Great Ocean Road nearer to Geelong, the road meanders along the coast, with tall, almost-vertical cliffs on the other side of it. Road signs put up along the road warn motorists of possible rockfalls, which have occurred before. 
The city of Geelong, close to Torquay, experiences great benefit from Australian and international visitors to the road; with Geelong Otway Tourism affirming it as an invaluable asset.

Great Ocean Road Marathon

Besides standard vehicular travel, a 45 kilometre section between Lorne and Apollo Bay is used for the annual Great Ocean Road Marathon, first started in 2005.

History

The Great Ocean Road was first planned towards the end of the first world war, when chairman of the Country Roads Board William Calder asked the State War Council for funds to be provided for returned soldiers to work on roads in sparsely populated areas in the Western district.
Surveying for the road, tentatively titled the South Coast Road, started in 1918 – with the road suggested to travel from Barwon Heads, follow the coast west around Cape Otway, and end near Warrnambool.

Construction effort

Construction on the road began on 19 September 1919, built by approximately 3,000 returned servicemen as a war memorial for fellow servicemen who had been killed in World War I. An advance survey team progressed through dense wilderness at approximately 3 kilometres a month. Construction was done by hand; using explosives, pick and shovel, wheel barrows, and some small machinery, and was at times perilous, with several workers killed on the job; the final sections along steep coastal mountains being the most difficult to work on.  Anecdotal evidence from ABC archives in 1982 suggested workers would rest detonators on their knees during travel, as it was the softest ride for them.
The soldiers were paid 10 shillings and sixpence for eight hours per day, also working a half-day on Saturdays. They used tents for accommodation throughout, and made use of a communal dining marquee and kitchen; food costing up to 10 shillings a week. Despite the difficulty involved in constructing the road, the workers had access to a piano, gramophone, games, newspapers and magazines at the camps.  Additionally, in 1924, the steamboat Casino became stranded near Cape Patton after hitting a reef, forcing it to jettison 500 barrels of beer and 120 cases of spirits. The workers obtained the cargo, resulting in an unscheduled two-week-long drinking break.

Completion and early usage

On 18 March 1922 the section from Eastern View to Lorne was officially opened with celebrations.  However it was then closed from 10 May 1922 for further work; opening again on 21 December along with tolls to recoup construction costs.  The charge, payable at Eastern View, was two shillings for motor cars, and 10 shillings for wagons with more than two horses.
In November 1932, the section from Lorne to Apollo Bay was finished, bringing the road to completion. The road was officially opened with Victoria's Lieutenant-Governor Sir William Irvine holding a ceremony near Lorne's Grand Pacific Hotel, and the road subsequently being acknowledged as the world's largest war memorial.

In its original state, the road was considered a formidable drive; fitting only a single vehicle comfortably at a time.  Areas with sheer cliffs would be most hazardous, with only few places for drivers to pull over to allow others to proceed in the opposite direction.  On 2 October 1936, the road was handed to the State Government; with the deed for the road presented to the Victorian Premier at a ceremony at the Cathedral Rock toll gate.  It was at this time that the tolls were also removed.
In 1962, the road was deemed by the Tourist Development Authority to be one of the world's great scenic roads.
Over its life, the Great Ocean Road has been susceptible to natural elements; in 1960 the section at Princetown was partially washed away by water during storms. In January 2011 a section of the overhanging cliffs collapsed due to heavy rain.
In 2011, the road was added to the Australian National Heritage List.

Great Ocean Walk

In 2004, the Great Ocean Walk opened, connecting 104 km of walking trails that follow the coastline near the Great Ocean Road, stretching from Apollo Bay to the 12 Apostles.








