[[Sant'Anna dei Palafrenieri]]

CATEGORIES: Churches in Vatican City, Religious buildings completed in 1583

The Church of Saint Anne in Vatican (
Commissioned by the , Giacomo Barozzi da Vignola introduced the oval plan to church design, for the first time in the churches of Sant'Andrea in Via Flaminia and Saint Anne in Vatican, pioneering a plan which was to become influential to Baroque architecture.

History

The motu proprio of 20 November 1565 of Pope Pius IV authorized the Archconfraternity of the Pontifical Grooms to build a church, close to the Apostolic Palace, dedicated to Saint Anne. With a design attributed to Renaissance architect Giacomo Barozzi da Vignola,
After a smooth start, the building of the church slowed down due to the financial difficulties of the Archconfraternity. After Vignola's death in 1573, the church was finished by his son Giacinto Barozzi, according to a payment made by the Archconfraternity.  The church was consecrated in 1583 with a temporary roof. The facade attributed to Borromini and later attached to the oval church The facade was completed between 1700 and 1721 by Alessandro Specchi while the dome was finally built in 1763 and completed in 1775.
In 1603 the Archconfraternity commissioned Caravaggio to paint a picture of Saint Anne for the altar of the papal Grooms () in the Basilica of Saint Peter. Painted in 1605-1606, the painting Madonna and Child with St. Anne was briefly exhibited in the parish church of Saint Anne in Vatican. It was subsequently sold to Cardinal Scipione Borghese, and now hangs in his palazzo turned into the museum of the Galleria Borghese.
The church belong to the Archconfraternity until the Lateran Treaty of 1929, which constituted the Vatican City. Pope Pius XI was erected the church a parish, with the Apostolic Constitution "Ex Lateranensi pacto" of 30 May 1929. The pastoral care of the new parish was entrusted to the Augustinian Order.
In return, Pope Pius XI gave the Archconfraternity the Church of Santa Caterina della Rota as new headquarters.Official website of the vicariate of Rome - Santa Caterina della Rota

Interior

The interior, built to Vignola's design, is elliptical with eight side chapels. The main entrance is located at one end of the major axis of the ellipse. The minor axis ends with two chapels.
Four doors surmounted by a pediment and framed by travertine columns with Corinthian capitals are distributed between the main altar and the side chapels. Four large arches rise at the ends of the two main axes, framing the areas of entry, the altar and the two chapels. The sacred area of the main altar is a square enclosed by four arches as a clear counterpoint to the oval part of the church.
The dome itself rests on a plinth with a cornice with three strips, pierced at the base by eight windows. At the top of the dome stands the lantern, the only source of natural light onto the main altar. It is decorated with the dove of the Holy Spirit, from which golden rays radiate in circle.
Until mid 18th century, the inner walls of the church were white and the columns showed the natural color of the travertine stone, typical of Renaissance churches. Influenced by the rise of the Baroque in Rome, the Archconfraternity started redecorating the church with more lavish decorations and plenty of gilt and stucco. The façade was re-decorated in the Baroque style by Alessandro Specchi who added the upper facade to Vignola's church. The dome was designed by Francesco Navole. Four windows were walled and replaced with four frescoes depicting scenes from the life of Saint Anne. Giovan Battista de' Rossi also made in stucco shells with festoons decorating the frescoes. The decorator Annibale Rotati (c. 1673-1750) colored the walls in blue, cream and light gray. The door jambs were decorated with marble stucco marbled by Giacomo de Rocchi. The gold and silver stucco was made by Pietro Ricci. Despite the Baroque decoration, the initial plan of the church is still visible.



Notes



Further reading




