[[John Perdew]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, 1943 births, American physicists, Tulane University faculty, Temple University faculty, Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences

John P. Perdew (born August 30, 1943) is a theoretical condensed matter physicist known for his contributions to the fields of solid-state physics and quantum chemistry. His work on density functional theory has led to him being one of the world's most cited phycisists.[ref]
 Special Issue in Honor of John P. Perdew for His 65th Birthday
[/ref] Perdew currently teaches and conducts research at Temple University. 

Early life and education

John Perdew was born and raised in Cumberland, Maryland. After showing an aptitude for mathematics in high school, Perdew received a National Merit Scholarship and attended Gettysburg College, where he developed his interest in physics. 
Perdew graduated Summa cum laude from Gettysburg College with a Bachelor of Arts in physics in 1965. He then received a Ph.D. in physics from Cornell University in 1971. His doctoral advisor was John W. Wilkins, who introduced Perdew to solid-state theory.

Academic career

Perdew began his academic career as a postdoctoral fellow under Sy Vosko at the University of Toronto from 1971-74, and then with David Langreth at Rutgers University from 1975-77.
Perdew started his teaching career in 1977 at Tulane University, where he taught until 2013. During his time at Tulane, Perdew taught physics and supervised nine completed Ph.D.'s as well as 11 postdoctoral fellows. He received the Outstanding Researcher Award from Tulane's School of Science and Engineering in 2007
In 2013, Perdew moved to Temple University, where he is a professor of physics at Temple's School of Science and Technology, as well as the founding director of the Center for Materials Theory.

Work in density functional theory

John Perdew's best-known scientific contributions are in the field of density functional theory (DFT). He was introduced to DFT by his postdoctoral supervisors at University of Toronto and Rutgers, before it became widely used. 
Perdew was one of the early pioneers of density functional theory, helping it become accurate enough for calculations in quantum chemistry, materials science, and geoscience. He made important contributions to the exact adiabatic connection formula for the exchange-correlation energy, the derivative discontinuity and its contribution to the fundamental gap, scaling and other exact constraints on the functionals, the self-interaction correction, the nonempirical generalized gradient approximation (GGA), and the nonempirical meta-GGA. 
Visualizing DFT functionals to be a succession of ladder steps, Perdew formulated the Jacob's Ladder strategy for constructing improved density functionals for the exchange-correlation energy. Perdew first presented this theory at the International Congress of Quantum Chemistry's DFT2000 symposium in June 2000, describing five generations of functionals in a sequence he called the Jacob's Ladder.
Perdew continues DFT research in his role at Temple University. His current research interests include the construction of a better meta-GGA and improved descriptions for strong correlation and for the van der Waals interaction.

Impact on field

John Perdew is one of the world's most cited physicists, with over 118,000 Google Scholar citations referring to his work in the field of density functional theory. A study identifies him as possibly the world's most-cited physicist for articles published between 1981 and 2010. Of Perdew's more than 260 published works, a 1996 paper titled "Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple" from the journal Physical Review Letters has been cited more than 32,000 times and was the most-cited paper in the field of physics from 1996-2010. In total, Perdew has five works among the 10 most-cited physics papers of the past 30 years.
Many of Perdew's peers recognize his influence on the field of density functional theory. Upon naming Perdew as the recipient of the 2012 Materials Theory Award, the Materials Research Society cited Perdew's "pioneering contributions" that resulted in thousands of other researchers being able to perform DST calculations and simulations.

Honors and Awards

John Perdew was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 2011, and is one of 2,000 distinguished scientists from all fields that help advise the U.S. government on scientific policy. Other notable awards and honors include:






