[[Deprogramming]]

CATEGORIES: Human rights abuses, Religious persecution, Disengagement from religion, Anti-cult terms and concepts, Mind control methods

Deprogramming is an attempt to force a person to abandon allegiance to a religious, political, economic, or social group.[ref]''Encyclopedia of religion
, Volume 4 '', Lindsay Jones , Macmillan Reference USA, 2005, 
pages 2291-2293[/ref][ref]Children held hostage: dealing with programmed and brainwashed children,
American Bar Association archive publications, Authors Stanley S. Clawar, Brynne V. Rivlin, American Bar Association. Section of Family Law Publisher Section of Family Law, American Bar Association, 1991 ISBN 0-89707-628-1, ISBN 978-0-89707-628-9, pages 142-144[/ref] 
Methods and practices may involve kidnapping and coercion. 
The person in question is taken against his/her will, which has led to controversies over freedom of religion, kidnapping and civil rights, as well as the violence which is sometimes involved, and deprogramming has been shown to result in PTSDKeiko Ikemoto, Masakazu Nakamura, Forced deprogramming from a religion and mental health: A case report of PTSD, International Journal of Law and Psychiatry, Volume 27, Issue 2, March–April 2004, Pages 147-155, ISSN 0160-2527, 
Deprogramming is commissioned by relatives, often parents of adult offspring, who object to someone's membership in an organization or group, and has sometimes been performed with tacit support of law enforcement and judicial officials. Gordon 2002. Cults, Religion, and Violence. West Nyack, NY, USA: Cambridge University Press.
It was started in the 1970s in the United States by Ted Patrick.
Because deprogramming had come to be associated with coercion and confinement and because it so often worked (about two-thirds of the time), it caused quite a controversy. Cults railed against it, in large part because it was effective in persuading their members to leave. But even some cult critics denounced it on legal and ethical grounds., and Paul R. Martin. "Viewpoint: Deprogramming, Exit Counseling, and Ethics: Clarifying the Confusion." Christian Research Institute Journal (30 June 1994) 1993: page 46 (Retrieved 26  April 2014)
Similar actions, when done without force, have been referred to as "exit counseling". 
Sometimes the word deprogramming is used in a wider (and/or ironic or humorous sense), to mean the freeing of someone (often oneself) from any previously uncritically assimilated idea.
According to Carol Giambalvo, "exit councillors are usually former cult members themselves".
Deprogrammings have been carried out "by the thousands".[ref]Reflexivity and objectivity in the study of controversial new religions James T Richardson  Religion 
Vol. 21, Iss. 4, 1991[/ref]

Background

Deprogramming is a "private, self-help process whereby participants in unpopular new religious movements (NRMs) were forcibly removed from the group, incarcerated, and put
through radical resocialization processes that were supposed to result in their agreeing to leave the group"Richardson, James T. 2011. "Deprogramming: from private self-help to governmental organized repression." Crime, Law and Social Change 55 (4): 321-336.
Law professor Douglas Laycock, author of Religious Liberty: The free exercise, wrote:
[/ref]
John LeMoult writes that the person subject to deprogramming is "seized, held against his will, subjected to mental, emotional, and even physical
pressures until he renounces his beliefs", and compared this power to that of Nazis over their prisoners[ref]24 T. Marshall L. Rev. 359 (1998-1999) 
Holy Wars: Involuntary Deprogramming as a Weapon against Cults; McAllister, Shawn[/ref]
Legal scholar Dean M. Kelley called deprogramming "protracted spiritual gang-rape"(Dean Kelley, Deprogramming and Religious Liberty, Civil Liberties Review 23 (July/Aug, 1977)
Deprogramming has been compared to exorcismAnson D. Shupe, JR, Roger Spielmann, and Sam Stigall Deprogramming: The New Exorcism American Behavioral Scientist July 1977 20: 941-956, doi:10.1177/000276427702000609
Atrocity stories served as justification for deprogramming of Unification Church members in the USA. Gods in the Global Village: The World's Religions in Sociological Perspective 2007, Pine Forge Press, ISBN 1-4129-2715-3, page 228

Procedures

There has never been any standard deprogramming procedure and the descriptions vary greatly. There are many anecdotal reports and studies involving interviews of former deprogrammees. Deprogrammers generally operate on the assumption that the people they are paid to extract from religious organizations are victims of mind control (or brainwashing). Books written by deprogrammers and exit counselors say that the most essential part of freeing the mind of a person is to convince them that they had been under control.
Ted Patrick, one of the pioneers of deprogramming, used a confrontational method:
Once the person was restrained, Patrick would  then "demonstrate the inconsistencies in the cult's belief and show how Bible passages taken in context were contrary to the cult's altered version of Biblical truth" 24 T. Marshall L. Rev. 359 (1998-1999) Holy Wars: Involuntary Deprogramming as a Weapon against Cults; McAllister, Shawn
Patrick enlisted psychiatrists and psychologists to assist him in the deprogramming" process 
A number of criminal proceedings against Patrick have resulted in felony convictions for kidnapping and unlawful imprisonment. Regulation of religious proselytism in the United States. Brigham Young University Law Review. 2001 537-574.
Patrick described details of some of his abductions in his book Let Our Children Go! (E. P. Dutton, 1976, page 96) "Wes had taken up a position facing the car, with his hands on the roof and his legs spread-eagled. There was no way to let him inside while he was braced like that. I had to make a quick decision. I reached down between Wes's legs, grabbed him by the crotch and squeezed—hard. He let out a howl, and doubled up, grabbing for his groin with both hands. Then I hit, shoving him headfirst into the back seat of the car and piling in on top of him." 
Sylvia Buford, an associate of Ted Patrick who has assisted him on many deprogrammings, described five stages of deprogramming:(Stoner, C., & Parke, J. (1977). All God's children: The cult experience - salvation or slavery? Radrior, PA: Chilton )

Kidnapping

Deprogramming has often been associated with kidnapping, which has in some cases been part of the procedure. The percentage stated of cases involving kidnapping varies considerably, depending on the source. Joseph Szimhart, a deprogrammer and former cult member, says "until 1992, in a low percentage of my cases, included situations in which families elected to confine and sometimes abduct a 'cultist' to a deprogramming."Kent, S.A., and Szimhart, J. (2002) Exit counseling and the decline of deprogramming. Cultic Studies Review, 1, 241-291

Violence

The deprogramming accounts vary a lot regarding the use of force, with the most dramatic accounts coming from deprogrammed people who returned to the group.
Steven Hassan in his book Releasing the Bonds spoke decidedly against coercive deprogramming methods using force or threats.
The deprogramming case observed by Dubrow-Eichel did not include any violence.
Sociologist Eileen Barker wrote in Watching for Violence:
In Colombrito vs. Kelly, the Court accepted the definition of deprogramming by J. Le Moult published in 1978 in the Fordham Law Review:
Deprogrammer Carol Giambalvo writes in From Deprogramming to Thought Reform Consultation

Effectiveness and harm

Alan W. Gomes (chairman of the department of theology at Talbot School of Theology, Biola University) in his 2009 book Unmasking the Cults reports:
Zondervan Guide to Cults and Religious Movements, Zondervan, 2009
ISBN 0-310-86455-0, ISBN 978-0-310-86455-4[/ref]
The Dialog Center International (DCI) a major Christian counter-cult organization founded in 1973 by a Danish professor of missiology and ecumenical theology, Dr. Johannes AagaardObituary, 23 March 2007 rejects deprogramming, believing that it is counterproductive, ineffective, and can harm the relationship between a cult member and concerned family members. Chryssides, Continuum International Publishing Group, 2001, ISBN 0-8264-5959-5,  ISBN 978-0-8264-5959-6, pages 353-254
Professor of psychiatry Saul Levine suggests that it is doubtful that deprogramming helps many people and goes on to say that it actually causes harm to the victim by very nature of the deprogramming. For deprogramming to work, the victim must be convinced that they joined a religious group against their will. They then must renounce responsibility and accept that in some mysterious way that their minds were controlled. He states that deprogramming destroys a person's identity and is likely to create permanent anxiety about freedom of choice and leave the deprogrammed subject dependent upon the guidance and advice of others. "Fundamentally deprogramming denies choice and creates dependency.  It robs people of their sense of responsibility.  Instead of encouraging people to accept that they made a mistake, it encourages people to deny their actions and blame others."  Understanding Cults and New Age Religions, by Irving Hexham, Karla Poewe, and J. I. Packer

Government

Deprogramming activities often fall outside of the law. Government agencies have at times been aware and have  taken part in  deprogramming to enforce official views of correct beliefs and behaviors.  This can involve "vigorous, even violent, efforts to dissuade people from participating in
groups deemed unacceptable to the government" and have been "given legal sanction by the passage of laws that make illegal the activities or even the beliefs
of the unpopular movement or group being targeted."

Controversy and related issues

In the United States, from the mid-1970s and throughout the 1980s mind control was a widely accepted theory in public opinion, and the vast majority of newspaper and magazine accounts of deprogrammings assumed that recruits' relatives were well justified to seek conservatorships and to hire deprogrammers. It took nearly 20 years for public opinion to shift.
One aspect that gradually became disturbing from a civil rights point of view, was that relatives would use deception or other ethically questionable methods--even kidnapping--to get the recruit into deprogrammers' hands, without allowing the person any recourse to a lawyer or psychiatrist of their own choosing. Previously, there would be a sanity hearing first, and only then a commitment to an asylum or involuntary therapy. But with deprogramming, judges routinely granted parents legal authority over their adult children without a hearing.
One of main objections raised to deprogramming (as well as to exit counseling) is the contention that they begin with a false premise. Lawyers for some groups who have lost members due to deprogramming, as well as some civil libertarians, sociologists and psychologists, argue that it is not the religious groups but rather the deprogrammers who are the ones who deceive and manipulate people.
David Bromley and Anson Shupe wrote:
A number of factors contributed to the cessation of deprogramming:
Some of the deprogrammed adult children began suing their parents or deprogrammers, and also, in the mid-1980s, psychologist Margaret Singer stopped being accepted as an expert witness after the APA declined to endorse the DIMPAC report.May 11, 1987, APA MEMORANDUM available online
The American Civil Liberties Union published a statement in 1977 which said:
In the 1980s in the United States, namely in New York (Deprogramming Bill, 1981), Kansas (Deprogramming Bill, 1982), and Nebraska (conservatorship legislation for 1985), lawmakers unsuccessfully attempted to legalize involuntary deprogramming.
Rev. Sun Myung Moon, founder of the Unification Church (many of whose members were targets of deprogramming) issued this statement in 1983:
During the 1990s, deprogrammer Rick Ross was sued by Jason Scott, a former member of a Pentecostal group called the Life Tabernacle Church, after an unsuccessful deprogramming attempt. In 1995, the jury awarded Scott $875,000 in compensatory damages and $2,500,000 in punitive damages against Ross, which were later settled for $5,000 and 200 hours of services. More significantly, the jury also found that the leading anti-cult group known as the Cult Awareness Network was a co-conspirator in the crime and fined CAN $1,000,000 in punitive damages, forcing the group into bankruptcy. Ross, Workman, Simpson. Retrieved May 31, 2007. This case is often seen as effectively closing the door on the practice of involuntary deprogramming in the United States.

Referral and kickback system

Anti-cult groups play a central role in maintaining the underground network of communications, referrals, transportation, and housing necessary for continued deprogramming.[ref]
Davis, D. and B. Hankins. 2003. New Religious Movements and Religious Liberty in America: Baylor University Press.[/ref]
Groups such as the Cult Awareness Network operated a referral scheme (NARDEC) in which they would refer people to deprogrammers in return for a 'kickback' in the form of a donation or as a commission. and S.E. Darnell. 2011. Agents of Discord: Deprogramming, Pseudo-Science, and the American Anticult Movement: Transaction Publishers. Deprogrammers such as Rick Ross, Steven Hassan and Carol Giambalvo were amongst the CAN referred deprogrammers."The Cult Awareness Network and the Anticult Movement: Implications for NRMs in America" (with Susan E. Darnell and Kendrick Moxon) in New Religious Movements and Religious Liberty in America. edited by Derek H. Davis and Barry Hankins. Waco: J.M. ISBN 0-929182-64-2

Victims

In 1974, Kathy Crampton--whose abduction and deprogramming were televised nationally--went back to the Love Family group several days after her apparently successful deprogramming. Patrick was charged for kidnapping, but he was acquitted with the reasoning: "where parents are, as here, of the reasonable and intelligent belief that they were not physically capable of recapturing their daughter from existing, imminent danger, then the defense of necessity transfers or transposes to the constituted agent, the person who acts upon their belief under such conditions. Here that agent is the Defendant Patrick '' (District Court of the United States 1974: 79; New York Times 1974).
In 1980, Susan Wirth, a 35-year-old teacher living in San Francisco, was abducted by her parents to be deprogrammed in reaction to her leftist political views and activities.  Patrick was paid $27,000 to carry out the deprogramming, which involved handcuffing her to a bed for two weeks and denying her food."Feared kidnapped, she reconciles with mother", Merced Sun-Star, July 29, 1980
In 1980, Patrick was convicted of conspiracy, kidnapping, and false imprisonment. These charges were related to the abduction and attempted deprogramming of Roberta McElfish, a 26-year-old Tucson waitress.
In 1981, Stephanie Riethmiller, who lived in Ohio, was kidnapped by deprogrammers who were hired by her parents to remove her from a lesbian relationship. She was held against her will and repeatedly raped. After her release she filed civil charges against her parents and the deprogrammers, which were dismissed in a trial that generated some controversy in the media.[ref]Violence Against Lesbians and Gay Men, 
Gary David Comstock, Columbia University Press (April 15, 1995)
ISBN 0-231-07331-3
ISBN 978-0-231-07331-8. page 201[/ref]
In 1990, Patrick attempted to deprogram Elma Miller, an Amish woman who had joined a liberal sect. He was hired by her husband to return her to him and the Amish church. Criminal charges of conspiracy were filed against Miller's husband, brother, and two others but were later dropped on her request to the prosecuting attorney.Amish Woman Charges Deprogramming, Pittsburg Press, November 30, 1990, page 8Amish Woman Asks Prosecutor to Drop Charges on Kidnapping, Madison Courier'', December 8, 1990, page 3
During the 1990s, Rick Ross, a noted cult intervention advocate who took part in a number of deprogramming sessions, was sued by Jason Scott, a former member of a Pentecostalist group called the Life Tabernacle Church (part of United Pentecostal Church International), after an unsuccessful forcible deprogramming. The jury awarded Scott $875,000 in compensatory damages and $1,000,000 in punitive damages against the Cult Awareness Network (CAN), and $2,500,000 against Ross (later settled for $5,000 and 200 hours of services "as an expert consultant and intervention specialist").[ref]
</ref><ref name=JSvRR>JASON SCOTT, PLAINTIFF v. RICK ROSS, A/K/A/ RICKEY ALLEN ROSS, MARK WORKMAN, CHARLES SIMPSON, CULT AWARENESS NETWORK, A CALIFORNIA NONPROFIT CORPORATION AND JOHN DOE 1–JOHN DOE 20, DEFENDANTS. Case No. C94-00796. November 29, 1995</ref><ref name=cesnur></ref>

Exit counseling

Deprogramming and exit counseling, sometimes seen as one and the same, are distinct approaches to convincing a person to leave a cult. Some people blur the distinctions on purpose: some practitioners do so to avoid criticism; some opponents do so to intensify it.
Proponents of the distinction, however, state that deprogramming entails coercion and confinement, whereas exit counseling assures the cult member of the freedom to leave at any time. Deprogramming typically costs $10,000 or more, mainly because of the expense of a security team. Exit counseling typically costs $2,000 to $4,000, including expenses, for a three- to five-day intervention, although cases requiring extensive research of little-known groups can cost much more. Deprogramming, especially when it fails, entails considerable legal and psychological risk (for example, a permanent alienation of the cultist from his or her family). The psychological and legal risks in exit counseling are significantly reduced. Although deprogrammers do prepare families for the process, exit counselors tend to work with them directly, expecting those requesting the intervention to contribute more to the process; that is, exit counseling requires that families establish a reasonable and respectful level of communication with their loved one before the program itself can begin. Because they rely on coercion, which is illegal except in the case of conservatorship and is generally viewed as unethical, deprogrammers' critiques of the unethical practices of cults will tend to have less credibility with cult members than the critiques of exit counselors.iclnet.html
Steven Hassan, author of the book Combatting Cult Mind Control, states that he took part in a number of deprogrammings in the late 1970s, and has spoken out against them since 1980. Hassan is one of the major proponents of exit counseling as a form of intercession, and he refers to his method as "strategic intervention therapy."

In popular culture





Notes

Bibliography




