[[Samuel Richardson]]

CATEGORIES: English novelists, English Anglicans, People from Mackworth, 1689 births, 1761 deaths, 18th century in London, 18th-century English writers, 18th-century British novelists

Samuel Richardson (19 August 1689 – 4 July 1761) was an 18th-century English writer and printer. He is best known for his three epistolary novels: Pamela: Or, Virtue Rewarded (1740), Clarissa: Or the History of a Young Lady (1748) and The History of Sir Charles Grandison (1753). Richardson was an established printer and publisher for most of his life and printed almost 500 different works, with journals and magazines.
Richardson lost his first wife along with their five sons, and eventually remarried. Although with his second wife he had four daughters who lived to become adults, they had no male heir to continue running the printing business. While his print shop slowly ran down, at the age of 51 he wrote his first novel and immediately became one of the most popular and admired writers of his time.
He knew leading figures in 18th century England, including Samuel Johnson and Sarah Fielding. In the London literary world, he was a rival of Henry Fielding, and the two responded to each other's literary styles in their own novels.
His novel Pamela, which deals with a romantic relationship between a Catholic and a Protestant, was listed on the Index Librorum Prohibitorum, the list of books that Catholics were not allowed to read.

Biography

Richardson, one of nine children, was probably born in 1689 in Mackworth, Derbyshire, to Samuel and Elizabeth Richardson.  The older Richardson was, according to the younger:

His mother, according to Richardson, "was also a good woman, of a family not ungenteel; but whose father and mother died in her infancy, within half-an-hour of each other, in the London pestilence of 1665".
The trade his father pursued was that of a joiner (a type of carpenter, but Richardson explains that it was "then more distinct from that of a carpenter than now it is with us").

Early life

The Richardsons were not exiled forever from London; they eventually returned, and the young Richardson was educated at Christ's Hospital grammar school.  The extent that he was educated at the school is uncertain, and Leigh Hunt wrote years later:

However, this conflicts with Richardson's nephew's account that "'it is certain that Richardson was never sent to a more respectable seminary' than 'a private grammar school" located in Derbyshire".

Little is known of Richardson's early years beyond the few things that Richardson was willing to share.
After his writing ability was known, he began to help others in the community write letters.  Although this helped his writing ability, he in 1753 advised the Dutch minister Stinstra not to draw large conclusions from these early actions:

He continued to explain that he did not fully understand females until writing Clarissa, and these letters were only a beginning.

Early career

The elder Richardson originally wanted his son to become a clergyman, but he was not able to afford the education that the younger Richardson would require, so he let his son pick his own profession.

While working for Wilde, he met a rich gentleman who took an interest in Richardson's writing abilities and the two began to correspond with each other.  When the gentleman died a few years later, Richardson lost a potential patron, which delayed his ability to pursue his own writing career. He decided to devote himself completely to his apprenticeship, and he worked his way up to a position as a compositor and a corrector of the shop's printing press.
In 1719, Richardson was able to take his freedom from being an apprentice and was soon able to afford to set up his own printing shop, which he did after he moved near the Salisbury Court district close to Fleet Street.
A key moment in Richardson's career came on 6 August 1722 when he took on his first apprentices: Thomas Gover, George Mitchell, and Joseph Chrichley.
One of Richardson's first major printing contracts came in June 1723 when he began to print the bi-weekly The True Briton for Philip Wharton, 1st Duke of Wharton. This was a Jacobite political paper which attacked the government and was soon censored for printing "common libels". However, Richardson's name was not on the publication, and he was able to escape any of the negative fallout, although it is possible that Richardson participated in the papers as far as actually authoring one himself.
Over their ten years of marriage, the Richardsons had five sons and one daughter, and three of the boys were named Samuel after their father, but all of the boys died after just a few years. Soon after William, their fourth child, died, Martha died on 25 January 1731.  Their youngest son, Samuel, was to live past his mother for a year longer, but succumbed to illness in 1732.  After his final son died, Richardson attempted to move on with his life; he married Elizabeth Leake and the two moved into another house on Blue Ball Court. However, Elizabeth and his daughter were not the only ones living with him since Richardson allowed five of his apprentices to lodge in his home.
In 1733, Richardson was granted a contract with the House of Commons, with help from Onslow, to print the Journals of the House.

First novel

Work continued to improve, and Richardson printed the Daily Journal between 1736 and 1737, and the Daily Gazetteer in 1738.
Richardson made the transition from master printer to novelist on 6 November 1740 with the publication of Pamela: or, Virtue Rewarded. Richardson explained the origins of the work:

After Richardson started the work on 10 November 1739, his wife and her friends became so interested in the story that he finished it on 10 January 1740.
Later that year, Richardson printed Rivington and Osborn's book which inspired Pamela under the title of Letters written to and for particular Friends, on the most important Occasions. Directing not only the requisite Style and Forms to be observed in writing Familiar Letters; but how to think and act justly and prudently, in the common Concerns of Human Life.
In September 1741, a sequel of Pamela called Pamela's Conduct in High Life was published by Ward and Chandler.

Later career

After the failures of the Pamela sequels, Richardson began to compose a new novel.  Hill refused, saying,

In July, Richardson sent Hill a complete "design" of the story, and asked Hill to try again, but Hill responded, "It is impossible, after the wonders you have shown in Pamela, to question your infallible success in this new, natural, attempt" and that "you must give me leave to be astonished, when you tell me that you have finished it already". A frustrated Richardson wrote to Edward Young in November 1747:

Richardson did not devote all of his time just to working on his new novel, but was busy printing various works for other authors that he knew.
By 1748 his novel Clarissa was published in full: two volumes appeared in November 1747, two in April 1748, and three in December 1748.
However, his condition did not stop him from continuing to release the final volumes Clarissa after November 1748.
The response to the novel was positive, and the public began to describe the title heroine as "divine Clarissa". Those who disagreed included the Sussex diarist Thomas Turner, writing in about July 1754: "Clarissa Harlow sic, I look upon as a very well-wrote thing, tho' it must be allowed it is too prolix. The author keeps up the character of every person in all places; and as to the maner sic of its ending, I like it better than if it had terminated in more happy consequences."Thomas Turner: The Diary of a Georgian Shopkeeper, 2nd e., ed. G. H. Jennings (Oxford etc.: OUP, 1979), p. 2.
Others wanted Lovelace to be reformed and for him and Clarissa to marry, but Richardson would not allow a "reformed rake" to be her husband, and was unwilling to change the ending.  In a postscript to Clarissa, Richardson wrote:

Although few were bothered by the epistolary style, Richardson feels obliged to continue his postscript with a defence of the form based on the success of it in Pamela.
However, some did question the propriety of having Lovelace, the villain of the novel, act in such an immoral fashion.  The novel avoids glorifying Lovelace, as Carol Flynn puts it,

But Richardson still felt the need to respond by writing a pamphlet called Answer to the Letter of a Very Reverend and Worthy Gentleman.
In 1749, Richardson's female friends started asking him to create a male figure as virtuous as his heroines "Pamela" and "Clarissa" in order to "give the world his idea of a good man and fine gentleman combined".

Death

In his final years, Richardson received visits from Archbishop Secker, other important political figures, and many London writers.
At the same time as he was associating with important figures of the day, Richardson's career as a novelist drew to a close.
After June 1758, Richardson began to suffer from insomnia, and in June 1761, he was afflicted with apoplexy.  This moment was described by his friend, Miss Talbot, on 2 July 1761:

Two days later, on 4 July 1761, Richardson died at Parson's Green and was buried at St. Bride's church near his first wife Martha.
During Richardson's life, his printing press produced about 2,349 items.

Epistolary novel

Richardson was a skilled letter writer and his talent traces back to his childhood.
In his first novel, Pamela, he explored the various complexities of the title character's life, and the letters allow the reader to witness her develop and progress over time.

Notes






