[[Church of the Holy Sepulchre, Warminghurst]]

CATEGORIES: 13th-century architecture, Church of England churches in West Sussex, Grade I listed churches in West Sussex, Horsham, Former places of worship in West Sussex

The Church of the Holy Sepulchre is a former Anglican church in the hamlet of Warminghurst in the district of Horsham, one of seven local government districts in the English county of West Sussex.  The present building, which is no longer used for worship, has 13th-century origins, but a church may have existed on the site in the 11th century or earlier.  Often administered in connection with other churches in the rural area of West Sussex in which it was built–churches at nearby Steyning, Ashington and Thakeham were all involved with it at various times–its congregations declined and closure came first in the 1920s and then for good in 1979, when it was declared redundant.  Unlike many ancient churches in Sussex, it was not subject to restoration in the mid-19th century: its interior has been called "the finest example in Sussex of how many must have looked before the Victorian restorers".  After a period in which the Early English Gothic stone-built church fell into dereliction, prompting one Sussex historian to lament its "unloved" appearance, it was taken into the care of the Churches Conservation Trust.  English Heritage has listed the church at Grade I for its architectural and historical importance.

History

Warminghurst (from Old English meaning "the high wood of Wyrma's people")
One of the earliest descriptions of Warminghurst was as an appurtenance of Steyning, a more significant nearby town,
The present church, a simple sandstone building, was built at the end of a lane a short distance from the church in neighbouring Thakeham in about 1220. 1158.  The bell it houses, cast in about 1200, is one of the oldest survivors in Sussex.
The three-light east window, containing plain glass and with quatrefoils at the top,
The ecclesiastical status of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre varied over the centuries following its split from Steyning.  Late 16th-century curates and rectors were also linked to the churches at Thakeham and Itchingfield; after a long period in the late 17th century when the church had a resident vicar, curates once more served the church, usually from Thakeham but later from Ashington; and from 1845 the vicar of Ashington celebrated services himself.  The parish was linked with that of Thakeham throughout the 18th century, until 1804; soon afterwards, until the church's first closure, it was linked to Ashington.  A period of closure from about 1920 until 1933 led to damage by vandals, and repairs were carried out prior to the church's reopening.  More damage, this time associated with the Second World War and declining congregations, led to the only full-scale restoration in the church's history: John Leopold Denman of the firm Denman & Sons carried out a "very sensitive" series of works ("beautifully done" according to Nikolaus Pevsner) in 1959–60, in which all parts of the building were inspected and structural defects corrected, the east window was improved and the ceiling was stripped down to reveal its original timbers.
The church was officially reunited with Thakeham again in 1940; it had been served from there since its 1933 reopening.  The declining number of worshippers made it unviable, though, and on 1 April 1979 the Diocese of Chichester declared the Church of the Holy Sepulchre redundant.
The Church of the Holy Sepulchre was listed at Grade I by English Heritage on 15 March 1955.  Such buildings are defined as being of "exceptional interest" and greater than national importance.

Architecture and fittings

The Church of the Holy Sepulchre has a simple layout, only slightly altered from its 13th-century origins.  It consists of a long, low single cell containing nave and chancel, a porch on the south side (now blocked, and containing the original entrance door), a vestry (formerly a private chapel) on the north side, an entrance in the liturgical west end and a bell-turret topped with a broach spire on the roof at the liturgical east end.  The porch and vestry are of brick, but the rest of the building is stone with some protective render in places.  There is no chancel arch.  A round window of the 13th century sits high in the gabled west wall—a structure which has some local marble laid in courses.  Other windows are single-light lancets, mostly given brick surrounds in the 17th or 18th century.  The east window is wider, with three lights and quatrefoils—a good example of a simple 14th-century window in the Decorated Gothic style.  Inside, the roof is also simple: single-framed with a few exposed beams.  It probably dates from when the church was built.
The church has a "typically 18th-century" interior despite its mostly 13th-century exterior.  The pale woodwork (mostly pine), large areas of plain glass and whitewashed walls give a bright appearance.  The best feature, with no rival in Sussex for completeness and structural condition, is the late 18th-century pine box pews with Gothic Revival-style tracery at the ends.  Also described by one historian as the best in the county
The north chapel was built in 1619 by Henry Shelley as a vault and private chapel for the Shelley family.  One family member, Edward Shelley (died 1554), is commemorated by a small brass memorial in a Perpendicular Gothic-style wall recess, depicting his wife and ten children kneeling in front of him.  Other memorials include two large "Baroque-style"





Notes

Bibliography


