[[Reliance MediaWorks]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Mumbai, Media companies of India, Reliance Anil Dhirubhai Ambani Group, Companies established in 1975, Companies listed on the Bombay Stock Exchange

Reliance MediaWorks Limited (RMW) is a Film and Entertainment Services Company and a member of the Reliance Group.
The company is one of India's leading film and entertainment services companies with a presence across several media businesses including the theatrical exhibition of films, television content production and distribution, and film and media services. The company facilities have been MPAA certified. Services provided by the company include Motion Picture Processing and DI, Digital Distribution, Audio Restoration and Image Enhancement, 2D to 3D conversion, Digital Master, Studios and Equipment rentals, Visual Effects, Animation and Post Production for TV Advertisements. RMW's operations are spread across India, UK and the US. Phoenixtheatres. Retrieved on 2013-12-06.
Reliance MediaWorks operates BIG Cinemas, one of India's largest cinema chains with over 425 screens in both India and the United States, catering to 55 million customers worldwide.
RMW's television venture BIG Synergy is engaged in the television programming industry housing popular shows such as Kaun Banega Crorepati and Indian Idol.
Reliance MediaWorks' sound stages have also been utilized for events such as The Filmfare Awards, the movies Singham and Agneepath, and numerous television commercials.

History

2005–2008

The company was initially established as Adlabs Films Limited in 1975 by Manmohan Shetty. The company began to expand into the film industry and in 2001, the company entered the multiplex business, setting up the world's largest 3D IMAX screen in Mumbai.

2008–2009

RMW expanded by setting up Asia's first Digital Intermediate Lab with a 4K facility. The lab was accredited by the Federation Against Copyright Theft. Rbe.co. Retrieved on 2013-12-06.
In 2008, RMW acquired a 100% stake in Lowry Digital, a renowned image restoration and enhancement services company based in Burbank, California.
RMW also began to restore approximately 1,000 films from the National Film Archive of India.
On the 40th anniversary of the moon landing in 16 July 2009, NASA tasked RMW to restore original video footage of the missing Apollo moon landing tapes. Neil Armstrong expressed his appreciation, stating that "your restored video is now a valuable contribution to space exploration and space communication history…thanks for all you did beyond the call of duty. Our grandchildren and their grandchildren will benefit. Reliance Media Works. Retrieved on 2013-12-06."

2010

In early 2010, RMW acquired iLAB UK, a film processing and post production facility located in Soho, London.Reliance Mediaworks buys Ilab in UK, Reuters, Jan 8 2010
By May 2010, the company commissioned a Media BPO in Airoli, Mumbai in order to handle projects exclusively for international clientele. RMW's Airoli facility was utilized to initiate a 2D-to-3D conversion BPO, an Animation studio and a VFX setup. The Airoli office also housed an image restoration facility where the company continued to work on restoring films from the National Film Archive of India.
The company expanded its offerings to their domestic clientele, commencing an equipment rental facility for cameras, lights and grips, and establishing a post facility for broadcast television clients in Mumbai's western suburbs. Projects they catered to included Dus Ka Dum, Jhalak Dikhla Ja and Femina Miss India.
In September, RMW created a VFX setup for India's domestic film market in their Film City Office.
By December, a team of artists were recruited to cater specifically for international clients in their Airoli office.
Towards the end of 2010, RMW received an award in Creativity and Innovation from the Hollywood Post Alliance.

2011

In early 2011, RMW commissioned one of Mumbai's largest indoor sound stages.
In March 2011, RMW received a patent called "Obsidian" for creating a method fo removing semi-transparent artifacts from digital images caused by contaminants in the camera's optical path. This process received a significant amount of recognition within the entertainment industry, resulting in RMW receiving a Scientific and Technical Oscar from The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences.Reliance MediaWorks' 'Lowry Process' wins Technical Oscar, Dear Cinema, January 10, 2012
RMW delved deeper into 3D film consulting, providing support during film shoots and advising filmmakers on 3D image alignments.
By the end of year, the company had provided post production services for 110 out of 114 Bollywood films that released in 2011.

2012

In September 2012, RMW along with China's Galloping Horse acquired post production assets from Digital Domain, a legendary Hollywood studio founded by James Cameron.0) allowed RMW to participate in projects such as Amazing Spiderman, Transformers 3, John Carter, The Smurfs, Green Lantern and Enders Game.

2013

By 2013, Reliance MediaWorks expanded its business by teaming with a variety of production companies as equity investors. Hiring Academy Award winning George Murphy as the company's Chief Creative Officer in April 2013,India's Reliance MediaWorks Names VFX Veteran George Murphy Creative Head, The Hollywood Reporter, April 9, 2013 RMW signed multimillion dollar deals with Ethyrea FilmsEthyrea Films Announces Multi-Million Dollar Deal with Reliance MediaWorks. Indiaprwire. Retrieved on 2013-12-06. and Random Cow. Box Office India (2013-03-18). Retrieved on 2013-12-06.
In August 2013 RMW signed award winning director Vadim Perelman as their Creative Director in India. Perelman will be leading RMW's creative team, conceptualizing television commercials for Indian clients.Turner ties up with Reliance MediaWorks for post-production, The Business Standard, September 30, 2013

Awards

• RMW received an Oscar in Scientific and Technical excellence from the Academy of Motion Pictures Arts and Sciences in 2012 for its development of a unique and efficient system for "Reduction of noise and other disturbances", thereby providing high quality images required in the film-making process.Reliance Mediaworks' image-processing technique bags Oscar, Business Today, January 9, 2012
• RMW's Burbank Image Processing facility was one of the four companies to be recognized by the Hollywood Post Alliance for their Creativity and Innovation for Post Production Award in 2010.
• RMW Studios was rated amongst the top 10 International studios in the 2012 international survey conducted by The Hollywood Reporter.
• RMW's Processing Lab is the only lab in India to have won the National Awards for Best Cinematography 15 times.

Recent Film Credits

Transformers 3: Dark of the Moon – VFX
Don 2 – 3 D Conversion
Conan The Barbarian – 3D Conversion and VFX
Expendables 2 – VFX
G.I. Joe: Retaliation – VFX
Star Wars Trilogy – Restoration and 3D Conversion
The Conspirator – VFX
Rock of Ages – VFX
Paranoia - VFX
Chennai Express - VFX






