[[Cow (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2009 films, Chinese films, Mandarin-language films, 2000s comedy-drama films, Films set in Shandong, Second Sino-Japanese War films

Cow () is a 2009 Chinese film directed by Guan Hu. A black comedy, Cow takes place during the midst of the Second Sino-Japanese War. A villager, played by Huang Bo, has been entrusted to care for a Dutch cow when a Japanese attack leaves him and the cow the only survivors. 
The film premiered at the 66th Venice International Film Festival as part of its "Horizons" program.

Plot

The film takes its story from oral traditions of Shandong. A bumbling villager, Niu'er (Huang Bo), is charged with caring for a Dutch cow, considered an object of awe to the village given its larger size and ability to produce large amounts of milk,they forced Niu'er to take care of the cow,when the village head and members of 8th Route Army members that holds out the village before retreating. When the village is bombed by the Japanese, Niu'er flees from his home, only to return to devastation and a mass grave,containing all villagers killed by a Japanese unit,including Niu'er's love,Jiu. The cow, however, has survived, and the two make their way across the landscape,although they return to the village,just holding on,avoiding Japanese troops,hungry survivors and mountain bandits before eventually meeting with the Communist 8th Route Army.He almost killed by the squad leader by bayonet until some 8th Route Army soldiers attack the village,killing the holdouts,except one and some Chinese soldiers.Some time later,they met some refugees,although he gave the villagers some milk,some refugees wants to kill the cow at any means possible.And then he entered a tunnel,when he spotted a survivor,he prepared to kill the soldier when he saw the Japanese soldier trying to milk the cow in vain.When the Nationalist soldier found the Japanese soldier,he shot him,wounding Niu'er and killing both of them.Upon returning to the village,he was thrown on a well,and forcing the cow to mate a Chinese cow.The cow uses itself as cover while the firefight intensifies.After the fight forced to make the cow stand up,while sobbing.He travels the area,settling  at a mountain for 7 years until he was found by People's Liberation Army troops leaving the at the area.The commander took his fingerprint on the document.

Reception

The film was well received by English-language critics during its screening in Venice. Derek Elley of Variety for example, felt the firm was strong enough to deserve a competitive spot in the festival and extolled both the film's aesthetic and its lead performer in Huang. 
The reception in Asia was similarly positive. Given its small budget, the film's release in China was a strong 7.7 million RMB box office for the opening weekend, particularly in light of the film's competition, the highly publicized The Founding of a Republic. Cow was also nominated in seven categories for Taiwan's 46th Golden Horse Film Awards, including Best Director.

Style

Despite its seemingly simple story, Guan Hu's presentation of Cow has been described as both "hyper-realistic and surreal" and "magical-realist" by critics, particularly in its use of a non-linear narrative structure.






