[[Business model]]

CATEGORIES: Business models, Strategic management, Management, Types of marketing

A business model describes the rationale of how an organization creates, delivers, and captures value,Business Model Generation, A. Osterwalder, Yves Pigneur, Alan Smith, and 470 practitioners from 45 countries, self published, 2010  in economic, social, cultural or other contexts. The process of business model construction is part of business strategy.
In theory and practice, the term business model is used for a broad range of informal and formal descriptions to represent core aspects of a business, including purpose, target customers, offerings, strategies, infrastructure, organizational structures, trading practices, and operational processes and policies. The literature has provided very diverse interpretations and definitions of a business model.  A systematic review and analysis of manager responses to a survey defines business models as the design of organizational structures to enact a commercial opportunity. 2011. The business model in practice and its implications for entrepreneurship research.  Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 35(1): 83-111 Further extensions to this design logic emphasize the use of narrative or coherence in business model descriptions as mechanisms by which entrepreneurs create extraordinarily successful growth firms. 2012. Models of opportunity: How entrepreneurs design firms to achieve the unexpected.  Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-17084-0
Business models are used to describe and classify businesses, especially in an entrepreneurial setting, but they are also used by managers inside companies to explore possibilities for future development. Well-known business models can operate as "recipes" for creative managers.  Business models are also referred to in some instances within the context of accounting for purposes of public reporting.

History

Over the years, business models have become much more sophisticated. The bait and hook business model (also referred to as the "razor and blades business model" or the "tied products business model") was introduced in the early 20th century. This involves offering a basic product at a very low cost, often at a loss (the "bait"), then charging compensatory recurring amounts for refills or associated products or services (the "hook"). Examples include: razor (bait) and blades (hook); cell phones (bait) and air time (hook); computer printers (bait) and ink cartridge refills (hook); and cameras (bait) and prints (hook). A variant of this model is Adobe, a software developer that gives away its document reader free of charge but charges several hundred dollars for its document writer.
In the 1950s, new business models came from McDonald's Restaurants and Toyota. In the 1960s, the innovators were Wal-Mart and Hypermarkets. The 1970s saw new business models from FedEx and Toys R Us; the 1980s from Blockbuster, Home Depot, Intel, and Dell Computer; the 1990s from Southwest Airlines, Netflix, eBay, Amazon.
Today, the type of business models might depend on how technology is used. For example, entrepreneurs on the internet have also created entirely new models that depend entirely on existing or emergent technology. Using technology, businesses can reach a large number of customers with minimal costs.

Theoretical and empirical insights to business models

Design logic and narrative coherence

Design logic views the business model as an outcome of creating new organizational structures or changing existing structures to pursue a new opportunity. Gerry George and Adam Bock (2011) conducted a comprehensive literature review and surveyed managers to understand how they perceived the components of a business model.  In that analysis, these authors show that there is a design logic behind how entrepreneurs and managers perceive and explain their business model. In further extensions to the design logic, George and Bock (2012) use case studies and the IBM survey data on business models in large companies to describe how CEOs and entrepreneurs create narratives or stories in a coherent manner to move the business from one opportunity to another.  They also show that when the narrative is incoherent or the components of the story are misaligned that these businesses tend to fail. They recommend ways in which the entrepreneur or CEO can create strong narratives for change.

Complementarities of business models between partnering firms

Studying collaborative research and the accessing of external sources of technology, Hummel et al. (2010) found that in deciding on business partners, it is important to make sure that both parties' business models are complementary.[ref]
</ref> For example, they found that it was important to identify the value drivers of potential partners by analyzing their business models, and that it is beneficial to find partner firms that understand key aspects of our own firm's business model.<ref>Hummel, E., G. Slowinski, S. Matthews, and E. Gilmont. 2010. Business models for collaborative research. Research Technology Management 53 (6) 51-54.</ref>

Taxonomy of Business Models

Shift from Pipes to Platforms

Sangeet Paul Choudary (2013) distinguishes between two broad families of business models in an article on Wired Magazine. Platforms, Sangeet Paul Choudary, Wired Magazine Choudary, of Platform Thinking,Platform Thinking, Sangeet Paul Choudary contrasts Pipes, linear business models, with Platforms, networked business models. In the case of Pipes, firms create stuff, push them out and sell them to customers. Value is produced upstream and consumed downstream. There is a linear flow, much like water flowing through a pipe. Unlike pipes, platforms do not just create and push stuff out. They allow users to create and consume value.
In an op-ed on MarketWatch,What Twitter knows that Blackberry didn't, Choudary, Van Alstyne, Parker, MarketWatch Choudary, Van Alstyne and Parker further explain how business models are moving from Pipes to Platforms leading to disruption of entire industries.

Platform Business Models

In an earlier article on Harvard Business Review,Three elements of a successful platform, Sangeet Paul Choudary, Harvard Business Review Sangeet Paul Choudary elaborates on the three elements of a successful platform business model. The Toolbox creates connection by making it easy for others to plug into the platform. This infrastructure enables interactions between participants. The Magnet creates pull that attracts participants to the platform. For transaction platforms, both producers and consumers must be present to achieve critical mass. The Matchmaker fosters the flow of value by making connections between producers and consumers. Data is at the heart of successful matchmaking, and distinguishes platforms from other business models.
Chen (2009) pointed out that the business model in the twenty-first century has to take into account the capabilities of Web 2.0, such as collective intelligence, network effects, user generated content, and the possibility of self-improving systems. He suggested that the service industry such as the airline, traffic, transportation, hotel, restaurant, Information and Communications Technology and Online gaming industries will be able to benefit in adopting business models that take into account the characteristics of Web 2.0. He also emphasized that Business Model 2.0 has to take into account not just the technology effect of Web 2.0 but also the networking effect. He gave the example of the success story of Amazon in making huge profits each year by developing a full blown open platform that supports a large and thriving community of companies that re-use Amazon's On Demand commerce services. F. 2009. Building a platform of Business Model 2.0 to creating real business value with Web 2.0 for web information services industry. International Journal of Electronic Business Management 7 (3) 168-180.

Applications

Malone et al., May 2006 at MIT found that some business models, as defined by them, indeed performed better than others in a dataset consisting of the largest U.S. firms, in the period 1998 through 2002, while they did not prove whether the existence of a business model mattered.
In the context of the Software-Cluster, which is funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research, a 
business model wizard for software companies has been developed. It supports the design and analysis of software business models. The tool's underlying concept and data were published in various scientific publications.Software Industry Survey, Pussep, A; Schief,M and Buxmann,P Sep 2012
The concept of a business model has been incorporated into certain accounting standards.  For example, the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) utilizes an "entity's business model for managing the financial assets" as a criterion for determining whether such assets should be measured at amortized cost or at fair value in its financial instruments accounting standard, IFRS 9.
Both IASB and FASB have proposed using the concept of business model in the context of reporting a lessor's lease income and lease expense within their joint project on accounting for leases.

Business model design

Business model design refers to the activity of designing a company's business model. It is part of the business development and business strategy process and involves design methods.

Definitions of business model

=Economic consideration=

Stewart and Zhao (2000) defined the business model as ''a statement of how a firm will make money and sustain its profit stream over time.'' Lee, G. K. and R. E. Cole. 2003. Internet Marketing, Business Models and Public Policy. Journal of Public Policy and Marketing 19 (Fall) 287-296.

=Component consideration=

Osterwalder et al. (2005) consider the Business Model as the blueprint of how a company does business., Pigneur, Y. and C. L. Tucci. 2005. Clarifying Business Models: Origins, Present, and Future of the Concept. Communications of the Association for Information Systems 16 1-40. Slywotzky (1996) regards the business model as ''the totality of how a company selects its customers, defines and differentiates it offerings, defines the tasks it will perform itself and those it will outsource, configures its resources, goes to market, creates utility for customers and captures profits.'' Slywotzky, A. J. 1996. Value Migration. Boston (MA): Harvard Business Review Press.

=Strategic outcome=

Mayo and Brown (1999) considered the business model as ''the design of key interdependent systems that create and sustain a competitive business.'' Mayo, M. C. and G.S. Brown. 1999. Building a Competitive Business Model. Ivey Business Journal63 (3) 18-23.

Definitions of business model design or development

Zott and Amit (2009) consider business model design from the perspectives of design themes and design content. Design themes refer to the system's dominant value creation drivers and design content examines in greater detail the activities to be performed, the linking and sequencing of the activities and who will perform the activities. and R. Amit. 2009. Business Model Design: An Activity System Perspective. Long Range Planning 43 216-226

Design themes emphasis of business model design

Developing a Framework for Business Model Development with an emphasis on Design Themes, Lim (2010) proposed the Environment-Strategy-Structure-Operations (ESSO) Business Model Development which takes into consideration the alignment of the organization's strategy with the organization's structure, operations, and the environmental factors in achieving competitive advantage in varying combination of cost, quality, time, flexibility, innovation and affective. 2010. Environment-Strategy-Structure-Operations (ESSO) Business Model. Knowledge Management Module at Bangor University, Wales.

Design content emphasis of business model design

Business model design includes the modeling and description of a company's:
Business model design is distinct from business modeling. The former refers to defining the business logic of a company at the strategic level, whereas the latter refers to business process design at the operational level.
A business model design template can facilitate the process of designing and describing a company's business model.
Daas et al. (2012) developed a decision support system (DSS) for business model design. In their study a decision support system (DSS) is developed to help SaaS in this process, based on a design approach consisting of a design process that is guided by various design methods., Hurkmans, T., Overbeek, S. and Bouwman, H. 2012. Developing a decision support system for business model design. Electronic Markets - The International Journal on Networked Business, published Online 29. Dec. 2012.

Examples of business models

In the early history of business models it was very typical to define business model types such as bricks-and-mortar or e-broker. However, these types usually describe only one aspect of the business (most often revenue model). Therefore, more recent literature on business models concentrates on describing business model as a whole instead of one most visible aspects.
The following examples provide an overview for various business model types that have been in discussion since the invention of term business model:
Other examples of business models are:

Business model frameworks

Technology centric communities have defined "frameworks" for business modeling. These frameworks attempt to define a rigorous approach to defining business value streams. It is not clear, however, to what extent such frameworks are actually important for business planning. A state of the art review on business model frameworks can be found in Krumeich et al. (2012).''J. Krumeich, T. Burkhart, D. Werth, and P. Loos. Towards a Component-based Description of Business Models: A State-of-the-Art Analysis. Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS 2012) Proceedings. Paper 19.  In the following some frameworks are introduced.

Related concepts

The process of business model design is part of business strategy. The implementation of a company's business model into organisational structures (e.g. organigrams, workflows, human resources) and systems (e.g. information technology architecture, production lines) is part of a company's business operations.
It is important to understand that the implementation of business model is enabled by business operations, which refers to the firms process-level activities, capabilities, functions and infrastructure (e.g., business processs and business process modeling), at the operational level, whereas business model design and innovation refer to defining the business logic of a firm (or a network of firms) at the strategic level. Hence, an operationally viable and feasible business model requires lateral alignment with the underlining business operations."Solaimani, S. 2014. The alignment of Business Model and Business Operations within Networked Enterprise Environments. PhD Dissertation, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands."
The brand is a consequence of and has a symbiotic relationship with the business model since the business model determines the brand promise and the brand equity becomes a feature of the model. Managing this is a task of integrated marketing.
The standard terminology and examples of business models do not apply to most nonprofit organizations, since their sources of income are generally not the same as the beneficiaries. The term funding model is generally used instead.
Ten Nonprofit Funding Models, Stanford Social Innovation Review. 2009-03-05.[/ref]





Further reading


