[[Jack McInerney]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 births, Living people, American soccer players, American people of Irish descent, Association football forwards, People from Fulton County, Georgia, Philadelphia Union players, Harrisburg City Islanders players, Montreal Impact players, Soccer players from Georgia (U.S. state), Philadelphia Union draft picks, Major League Soccer first round draft picks, Major League Soccer players, Major League Soccer All-Stars, USL Second Division players, United States men's youth international soccer players, United States men's under-23 international soccer players, 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup players, CONCACAF Gold Cup-winning players

John Seamus "Jack" McInerney (born August 5, 1992 in Chattanooga, Tennessee) is an American soccer player who currently plays for the Montreal Impact in Major League Soccer.
He is a striker known for his positioning in "picking his spots, timing his runs, holding back just behind the play only to come in and at the exact right moment exploit a spot the defense missed."

Career

Youth

McInerney graduated from Bradenton Preparatory High School in Bradenton, Florida, and played club soccer for the Cobb Futbol Club in Georgia. He was named the NSCAA National Youth Player of the Year for 2009,Brock, McInerney Named NSCAA Youth Players of the Year having already established a regional reputation as a member of the Georgia 1992 Boys Olympic Development Program.

Professional

McInerney turned professional straight out of high school; he was drafted in the first round – 7th overall – of the 2010 MLS SuperDraft by Philadelphia Union. He made his professional debut on March 25, 2010, in the opening game of the 2010 MLS season against Seattle Sounders FC.espn.go.1 He scored his first professional goal on May 1, 2010 in a game against Los Angeles Galaxy.
McInerney was loaned to USL-2 club Harrisburg City Islanders on July 22, 2010.pennlive.html
McInerney's good start in MLS at a uniquely young age recalls starts by future national team players Bobby Convey, Eddie Gaven, and Jozy Altidore. His second goal of his rookie season was a game-tying goal against the New England Revolution on August 28, 2010. Four days later, McInerney scored a game-winning goal against Mexican power CD Guadalajara in a friendly match at PPL Park.mlssoccer.mlssoccer.com/matchcenter-recap/union-use-mcinerney-strike-defeat-chivas-de-guadalajara
McInerney scored his first goal of the 2011 season against the Houston Dynamo on August 6.
McInerney became the Philadelphia Union leading consecutive games goals scorer on October 20, 2012 against Houston Dynamo in a 3-1 loss. McInerney surpassed Sebastien Le Toux and Danny Mwanga, who both had 3. McInerney now holds the franchise record with four. On March 27, 2013 McInerney was called, "The American Chicharito," in a podcast posted on the MLS website.
On April 4, 2014, it was announced that McInerney had been traded to Montreal Impact in exchange for Andrew Wenger. 

International

McInerney was a member of the USA Under 15 National Team during 2006 and 2007, and as a member of the U.S. Under-17 Team scored two goals in the 2009 FIFA U-17 World Cup.

Career statistics

Updated April 12, 2014








