[[2010 attacks against places of worship in Malaysia]]

CATEGORIES: Religion in Malaysia, Politics of Malaysia, Religiously motivated violence in Malaysia, Destruction of churches by Muslims, Attacks on places of worship, Sectarian violence

Attacks against places of worship in Malaysia were carried out in January 2010 in response to Malaysia v. The Herald, a controversial court decision holding government regulations prohibiting non-Muslim publications from using the word 'Allah' to be unconstitutional. The government and many religious leaders condemned the attacks and called for calm and unity among Malaysians. The police are conducting investigations into the attacks and several arrests and prosecutions have been made.

Attacks

A total of 10 churches and few mosques have been attacked or vandalized since the 31 December 2009 decision in Malaysia vs. The Herald. Only one church has been seriously damaged and no deaths or major injuries have been reported.
Three churches
On 8 January 2010, preparations for another attack were found at the Good Shepherd Lutheran Church in Jalan Othman which is located about 1.5 km from the Assumption Church in Jalan Templer.com.asp?file=/2010/1/10/nation/5445109&sec=nation In the early morning of Sunday, 10 January 2010, the All Saints' Church at Taiping and a Catholic Convent school were shocked with the discovery of Molotov cocktails near church grounds. Black paint was thrown at the Malacca Baptist Church in Durian Daun.com.asp?file=/2010/1/10/nation/20100110121327&sec=nation
Sunday worship at targeted churches went on smoothly just a few days after the attacks. The Metro Tabernacle Church, which was badly damaged in the attack on January 8, held services at the Wisma MCA's Dewan San Choon and churchgoers were said to be, "somber but joyful." Roughly 1,700 members of the Protestant church packed the hall for joint Mandarin and English services.com.asp?file=/2010/1/11/nation/5447631&sec=nation
Apart from Christian churches, a Muslim surau in Klang, Selangor and a Sikh gurdwara in Sentul, Kuala Lumpur were also attacked on 10 January 2010 and 12 January 2010 respectively. In a later incident, a rum bottle was thrown into the compound of a mosque in Sarawak on 16 January 2010.
While authorities have denied any links to these attacks with the spate of church attacks, Sikhs also use the term Allah to describe God in the Punjabi language and the Malaysian Gurdwaras Council unsuccessfully sought to be a party to the Malaysia v. The Herald.

Political response

All major political parties in Malaysia consisting of the ruling Barisan Nasional coalition have united in condemnation of these attacks.

Government reaction

Prime Minister Najib condemned the church bombings, directed police to increase security at all places of worship, and called for unity amongst the Malaysian people.nst.my/Current_News/NST/articles/20100109075357/Article/index_html The government will hold inter-faith dialogues including prominent religious leaders to find "common denominators of understanding." Tan Sri Dr Koh Tsu Koon, Minister in the Prime Minister's Department, said the government has already met separately with religious groups.com.asp?file=/2010/1/11/nation/5446687&sec=nation
Najib visited the church most badly damaged in the attacks, the Protestant Metro Tabernacle church in Kuala Lumpur and promised a grant of RM500,000 to assist with recomstruction. CIMB Foundation donated an additional RM100,000 to the church.timesonline.co.ece
The Malaysia Home Affairs Ministry met with over 60 foreign diplomats for a briefing to discuss the attacks and security issues on 11 January 2010. Secretary-General of the Malaysian Home Affairs Ministry, Mahmood Adam, emphasized that Malaysia is still a safe country and that daily life has not been significantly disrupted. Those are some of the issues raised but most importantly, they wanted to understand the situation here and we explained that Malaysia is totally different," the home minister said.ministry seeks to reassure foreign missions", Asrul Hadi Abdullah Sani, Malaysia Insider, 11 January 2010

Opposition reaction

Opposition leader, Anwar Ibrahim of the Pakatan Rakyat coalition, stated that the UMNO-controlled newspaper Utusan Malaysia's "racist propaganda" over the Allah issue and "inflammatory rhetoric"  both contributed to the spate of arson attacks. and that the publication must be held responsible.
PKR vice-president Azmin Ali has claimed that at least four UMNO members were involved in the arson attack on the Metro Tabernacle church.

Local community and international reaction

The 2010 church attacks generated strong condemnation from Muslims and non-Muslims alike. Roughly 130 Muslim non-profit organizations and volunteer police officers have stepped forward to provide security for churches.Police Probe Eight Incidents as Church Attacks Mount", Bloomberg, 11 January 2010

Police investigation

Police say that eight suspects have been arrested in connection to the arson committed at the Metro Tabernacle Church in Desa Melawati. Information obtained during this arrest led to the capture of seven other suspects.detained for church arson", Malaysian Mirror, 20 January 2010
The police and government officials have asked the public not to fan religious and ethnic tension by spreading rumors via the internet and text messages. Ismail said, "Please don't play the fool by posting fake information on the Internet through Facebook, blogs or via SMS. Please come to us if you have any information."on church arson suspects", Andrew Sagayam, The Star, 14 January 2010
Police are investigating posts on Facebook claiming to have witnessed the making of explosives used in the attacks. Police have warned that the claims may be a hoax.attacks: Cops investigating Facebook posting", Steven Daniel, The Star, 11 January 2010 The student responsible for at least some of the posts has been arrested and released on bail.

Prosecutions

Azuwan Shah, a Malaysia Muslim, was prosecuted for his alleged role in starting a fire at a Protestant church on 8 January 2010 but acquitted due to lack of evidence in July of the same year. Two witnesses said Azuwan was not at the church when the fire started.Malaysian Muslim acquitted of torching church, AP, 30 July 2010
Two brothers, Raja Mohamad Faizal Raja Ibrahim, aged 24, and Raja Mohamad Idzham Raja Ibrahim, aged 22, also Muslim, were charged and convicted in the same attack. The pair were convicted of "mischief by fire" on 13 August 2010. Komathy Suppiah, a district court judge in Kuala Lumpur, presided over the trial. She called the attack "appalling and despicable" and told the brothers that their conduct, "..." As of 17 August 2010 the brothers have not yet been sentenced but face a maximum penalty of twenty years in prison.Malaysia church arsonists convicted, Al Jazeera, 13 August 2010




