[[State funeral of John F. Kennedy]]

CATEGORIES: John F. Kennedy, Assassination of John F. Kennedy, State funerals in the United States, Burials in the United States

The state funeral of John F. Kennedy, 35th President of the United States, took place in Washington, D.C. during the three days that followed his assassination on Friday, November 22, 1963, in Dallas, Texas.
The body of President Kennedy was brought back to Washington and placed in the East Room of the White House for 24 hours.
Representatives from over 90 countries attended the state funeral on Monday, November 25. Kennedy is the most recent president to have died in office.

Preparations for the state funeral

After John F. Kennedy was assassinated in Dallas, his body was flown back to Washington,
They headed to the White House and worked with the president's brother-in-law, Sargent Shriver, also director of the Peace Corps, and Ralph Dungan, an aide to the president.
The day after the assassination, the new president, Lyndon B. Johnson, issued Presidential Proclamation 3561, declaring Monday to be a national day of mourning,
Several elements of the state funeral paid tribute to Kennedy's service in the Navy during World War II. The hymn "O God of Loveliness" was played as the casket was brought down the Capitol steps; "The Barren Rocks of Aden" as it was brought to the White House, and "Ave Maria" when it arrived at St. Matthew's Church.John F. Kennedy Fast Facts: Funeral Music

White House repose

After the autopsy at Bethesda Naval Hospital, Kennedy's body was prepared for burial by embalmers from Gawler's Funeral Home in Washington, who performed the embalming and cosmetic restoration procedures at Bethesda instead of the funeral home. The motorcade bearing the remains was met at the White House gate by a Marine honor guard, which escorted it to the North Portico.
The pallbearers bore the casket to the East Room where, nearly one hundred years earlier, the body of Abraham Lincoln had lain.
Mrs. Kennedy, still wearing the blood-stained raspberry-colored suit she wore in Dallas, had not left the side of her husband's body since his death.
Kennedy's body lay in repose in the East Room for 24 hours, The Special Forces troops had been brought hurriedly from Fort Bragg, North Carolina, at the request of Attorney General Robert F. Kennedy, who was aware of his brother's particular interest in them.
Mrs. Kennedy requested that two Catholic priests remain with the body until the official funeral. A call was made to The Catholic University of America, and Msgr. Robert Paul Mohan and Fr. Gilbert Hartke, two prominent Washington, D.C. priests, were immediately dispatched for the task.
Outside the White House and in Lafayette Park, across the street from the White House, crowds stood in the rain, keeping a vigil and paying quiet respects.

Lying in state

On Sunday afternoon about 300,000 people watched a horse-drawn caisson, which had borne the body of Franklin D. Roosevelt and the Unknown Soldier, carry Kennedy's flag-covered casket down the White House drive, past parallel rows of soldiers bearing the flags of the 50 states of the Union, then along Pennsylvania Avenue to the Capitol Rotunda to lie in state. The only sounds on Pennsylvania Avenue as the cortège made its way to the Capitol were the sounds of the muffled drums and the clacking of horses' hooves, including the riderless horse Black Jack.
The widow, holding her two children by the hand, led the public mourning for the country. Three-year-old John Jr. was briefly taken out of the rotunda so as not to disrupt the service. Mrs. Kennedy maintained her composure as her husband was taken to the Capitol to lie in state, as well as during the memorial service.
Brief eulogies were delivered inside the rotunda by Senate Majority Leader Mike Mansfield of Montana, Chief Justice Earl Warren, and Speaker McCormack.
Kennedy was the first president in more than 30 years to lie in state in the rotunda, the previous one being the only president to ever serve as chief justice, William Howard Taft, in 1930.

Public viewing

In the only public viewing, hundreds of thousands lined up in near-freezing temperatures to view the casket.
The original plan was for the rotunda to close at 9:00 p.m. and reopen for an hour at 9:00 the next morning. More than half the mourners came to the rotunda after 2:45 a.m., by which time 115,000 had already visited. Military officials doubled the lines, first to two abreast, then to four abreast.
NBC broadcast uninterrupted coverage of the people passing through the Capitol rotunda during the overnight hours.

Arrival of dignitaries

As Kennedy lay in state, foreign dignitaries—including heads of state and government and members of royal families—started to arrive in Washington to attend the state funeral on Monday.
Some of the dignitaries that arrived on Sunday to attend the funeral included Soviet First Deputy Premier Anastas Mikoyan,
Queen Frederika of Greece, and King Baudouin I of the Belgians were just some of the other members of royalty attending. Some law enforcement officials, including MPDC Chief Robert V. Murray, later said that it was the biggest security nightmare they ever faced.

Funeral

As people were viewing the casket, military authorities held meetings at the White House, at MDW headquarters, and at Arlington National Cemetery to plan Monday's events.  On Sunday evening the State Department issued its Official Narrative of Events for November 25:
Unlike Sunday's procession, which was led by only the muffled drum corps, The cadets traveled with Irish President Éamon de Valera, and together they paid tribute to Kennedy's Irish ancestry.
Approximately one million people lined the route of the funeral procession, from the Capitol back to the White House, then to St. Matthew's Cathedral, and finally to Arlington National Cemetery.
The day's events began at 8:25 a.m., Thirty-five minutes, later, the doors closed, ending the lying in state; the last visitors passed through at 9:05 a.m.
At 10:00 a.m., both houses of Congress met to pass resolutions expressing sorrow.
Earlier that morning the State Department also issued the following directive:

Procession to cathedral

After Jacqueline Kennedy and her brothers-in-law, Attorney General Robert Kennedy and Massachusetts Democratic Senator Ted Kennedy, visited the rotunda, the coffin was carried out onto the caisson. At 10:50, the caisson left the Capitol. A platoon of the Marine company turned in the northeast gate and led the cortege into the North Portico.
At the White House, the procession resumed on foot to St. Matthew's Cathedral, led by Jacqueline Kennedy and the late president's brothers, Robert and Edward (Ted) Kennedy. They walked the same route that John F. Kennedy and Jacqueline Kennedy often used when going to Mass at the cathedral.
The new president Lyndon B. Johnson, his wife Lady Bird, and their two daughters Luci and Lynda also marched in the procession. Johnson had been advised not to do so because of the potential risk in the wake of Kennedy's assassination. Johnson recounted his experiences in his memoirs, saying, "I remember marching behind the caisson to St. Matthew's Cathedral. The muffled rumble of drums set up a heartbreaking echo."
Merle Miller quoted him as having said, "Walking in the procession was especially one of the most difficult decisions I had to make," but it was something he "could do, should do, would do, and did so." When he moved into the Oval Office the next day, there was a letter from Mrs. Kennedy on his desk in which she thanked him for marching in the procession.
Not since the funeral of Britain's King Edward VII, in 1910, had there been such a large gathering of presidents, prime ministers, and royalty at a state funeral. Most of the dignitaries passed unnoticed, following respectfully behind the former first lady and the Kennedy family during the relatively short walk to the cathedral along Connecticut Avenue.
As the dignitaries marched, there was a heavy security presence because of concerns for the potential assassination of so many world leaders,
NBC transmitted coverage of the procession from the White House to the cathedral by satellite to twenty-three countries, including Japan and the Soviet Union, allowing hundreds of millions on both sides of the Iron Curtain in Europe to watch the funeral. In the Soviet Union, their commentators said that "the grief of the Soviet people mingles with the grief of the American people." There was no coverage in East Germany, where television audiences had only a soccer match to watch.
The widow, wearing a black veil, led the way up the steps of the cathedral holding the hands of her two children, with John Jr., whose third birthday fell on the day of his father's funeral, on her left, and Caroline on her right. Because of the funeral and the day of mourning, the widow postponed John Jr.'s birthday party until December 5, the last day the family was in the White House.

Funeral Mass at cathedral

About 1,200 invited guests attended the funeral Mass in the cathedral. The Archbishop of Boston, Richard Cardinal Cushing, celebrated the Pontifical Requiem Low Mass at the cathedral where Kennedy, a practicing Catholic, often worshipped.
At the request of the First Lady, the Requiem Mass was a Low Mass
There was no formal eulogy at the Low Requiem Mass. (The first presidential funeral to feature a formal eulogy was that of L.B.J. in 1973.)
Jacqueline Kennedy requested that Luigi Vena sing Georges Bizet's "Agnus Dei", as he had at her wedding to John F. Kennedy ten years prior. Instead, he was told to sing Pie Jesu and Franz Schubert's Ave Maria after the offertory. For a few moments, she lost her composure and sobbed as this music filled the cathedral.

Burial

The casket was borne again by caisson on the final leg to Arlington National Cemetery for burial.
Virtually everyone else followed the caisson in a long line of black limousines passing by the Lincoln Memorial and crossing the Potomac River. Many of the military units did not participate in the burial service and left just after crossing the Potomac. Security guards walked beside the cars carrying the dignitaries, with the one carrying the French president having the most—10.
At the end of the burial services, the widow lit an eternal flame to burn continuously over his grave. At 3:34 p.m. EST, the casket containing his remains was lowered into the earth as "Kennedy slipped out of mortal sight—out of sight but not out of heart and mind." Kennedy thus became only the second president to be buried at Arlington, after William Howard Taft, which meant that, at that time, the two most recent presidents to lie in state in the Capitol rotunda were buried at Arlington.

Gallery

File:JFK casket in White House. Kennedy lying in repose in the East Room of the White House on November 23, 1963.
File:JFK casket up Capitol steps, 1963. Kennedy, Jr., on November 24, 1963.
File:KennedyLiesInState.
File:JFK funeral - Jacqueline & Robert Kennedy entering limousine.
File:Photograph of President Lyndon B. Johnson and his family walking from the White House as part of the funeral... - NARA - 200453. Johnson, Lady Bird Johnson, and the Johnson family walking from the White House as part of the funeral procession accompanying President Kennedy's casket to Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle on November 25, 1963.
File:Kennedy family leading funeral procession, 25 November 1963. Kennedy and Senator Edward Kennedy, walking from the White House as part of the funeral procession accompanying President Kennedy's casket to Cathedral of St. Matthew the Apostle in Washington D.C. on November 25, 1963.
File:Honor Guard prepares to fold flag over JFK casket, 25 November 1963.
File:JFK Funeral and temporary grave November 25 1963. Kennedy walk away from President Kennedy's casket during interment at Arlington National Cemetery on November 25, 1963.








