[[Inverted repeat]]

CATEGORIES: Biology, Molecular biology

An inverted repeat (or IR) is a sequence of nucleotides followed downstream by its reverse complement. The intervening sequence of nucleotides between the initial sequence and the reverse complement can be any length including zero.  When the intervening length is zero, the composite sequence is a palindromic sequence.
Both inverted repeats and direct repeats constitute types of nucleotide sequences that occur repetitively.   These repeated DNA sequences often range from a pair of nucleotides to a whole gene, while the proximity of the repeat sequences varies between widely dispersed and simple tandem arrays. Though the most familiar loci of the repetitive sequences are the centromere, and the telomere, a large portion of the repeated sequences in the genome are found among the noncoding DNA.
Inverted repeats have a number of important biological functions.  They define the boundaries in transposons and indicate regions capable of self-complementary base pairing (regions within a single sequence which can base pair with each other). These properties play an important role in genome instability and contribute not only to cellular evolution and genetic diversity but also to mutation and disease.  In order to study these effects in detail, a number of programs and databases have been developed to assist in discovery and annotation of inverted repeats in various genomes.

Understanding inverted repeats

Example of an inverted repeat

Beginning with this initial sequence:

            
The complement created by base pairing is:

            
The reverse complement is:

            
And, the inverted repeat sequence is:

            
"nnnnnn" represents any number of intervening nucleotides.

Direct repeat vs. inverted repeat

A direct repeat occurs when a sequence is repeated with the same pattern downstream.  There is no inversion and no reverse complement associated with a direct repeat. The nucleotide sequence written in bold characters signifies the repeated sequence. It may or may not have intervening nucleotides.
Linguistically, a typical direct repeat is comparable to saying "bye-bye".

Palindrome vs. inverted repeat

An inverted repeat sequence with no intervening nucleotides between the initial sequence and its downstream reverse complement is a palindrome. 
    EXAMPLE:

        Step 1: start with an inverted repeat: 

        Step 2: remove intervening nucleotides: 

        This resulting sequence is palindromic because it is the reverse complement of itself.

Biological features and functionality

Conditions that favor synthesis

The diverse genome-wide repeats are derived from transposable elements, which are now understood to "jump" about different genomic locations, without transferring their original copies.

Regions where presence is obligatory

Terminal inverted repeats have been observed in the DNA of various eukaryotic transposons, even though their source remains unknown. The replication origins of the phage G4 and other related phages comprise a segment of nearly 139 nucleotide bases that include three inverted repeats that are essential for replication priming.

Inverted repeats in the genome

To a large extent, portions of nucleotide repeats are quite often observed as part of rare DNA combinations. The three main repeats which are largely found in particular DNA constructs include the closely precise homopurine-homopyrimidine inverted repeats, which is otherwise referred to as H palindromes, a common occurrence in triple helical H conformations that may comprise either the TAT or CGC nucleotide triads. The others could be described as long inverted repeats having the tendency to produce hairpins and cruciform, and finally direct tandem repeats, which commonly exists in structures described as slipped-loop, cruciform and left-handed Z-DNA.

Inverted repeats common in different organisms

Past studies suggest that repeats are a common feature of eukaryotes unlike the prokaryotes and archeabacteria.

Inverted repeats in pseudoknots

Pseudoknots are a common structural motifs found in RNA.  They are formed by two nested stem-loops such that the stem of one structure is formed from the loop of the other.  There are multiple folding topologies among pseudoknots and great variation in loop lengths making them a structurally diverse group.
Inverted repeats are a key component of pseudoknots as can be seen in the illustration of a naturally occurring pseudoknot found in the human telomerase RNA component. Four different sets of inverted repeats are involved in this structure.  Sets 1 and 2 are the stem of stem-loop A and are part of the loop for stem-loop B.  Similarly, sets 3 and 4 are the stem for stem-loop B and are part of the loop for stem-loop A.
Pseudoknots play a number of different roles in biology.  The telomerase pseudoknot in the illustration is critical to that enzyme's activity.  The ribozyme for the hepatitis delta virus (HDV) folds into a double-pseudoknot structure and self-cleaves its circular genome to produce a single-genome-length RNA.  Pseudoknots also play a role in programmed ribosomal frameshifting found in some viruses and required in the replication of retroviruses.

Inverted repeats in riboswitches

Inverted repeats play an important role in riboswitches, which are RNA regulatory elements that control the expression of genes that produced the mRNA, which they are part of.  A simplified example of the flavin mononucleotide (FMN) riboswitch is shown in the illustration. This riboswitch exists in the mRNA transcript and has several stem-loop structures upstream from the coding region.  However, only the key stem-loops are shown in the illustration which has been greatly simplified to help show the role of the inverted repeats.  There are multiple inverted repeats in this riboswitch as indicated in green (yellow background) and blue (orange background). thumb|800 px|left
In the absence of FMN, the Anti-termination structure is the preferred conformation for the mRNA transcript. It is created by base-pairing of the inverted repeat region circled in red.  When FMN is present, it may bind to the loop and prevent formation of the Anti-termination structure.  This allows two different sets of inverted repeats to base-pair and form the Termination structure.  The stem-loop on the 3' end is a transcriptional terminator because the sequence immediately following it is a string of uracils (U).  If this stem-loop forms (due to the presence of FMN) as the growing RNA strand emerges from the RNA polymerase complex, it will create enough structural tension to cause the RNA strand to dissociate and thus terminate transcription.  The dissociation occurs easily because the base-pairing between the U's in the RNA and the A's in the template strand are the weakest of all base-pairings.  Thus, at higher concentration levels, FMN down-regulates its own transcription by increasing the formation of the termination structure.

Inverted repeats, mutations, and disease

Inverted repeats are often described as "hotspots" of eukaryotic and prokaryotic genomic instability.
The illustration shows an inverted repeat undergoing cruciform extrusion. DNA in the region of the inverted repeat unwinds and then recombines, forming a four-way junction with two stem-loop structures. The cruciform structure occurs because the inverted repeat sequences self-pair to each other on their own strand.
Extruded cruciforms can lead to frameshift mutations when a DNA sequence has inverted repeats in the form of a palindrome combined with regions of direct repeats on either side. During transcription, slippage and partial dissociation of the polymerase from the template strand can lead to both deletion and insertion mutations.  Deletion occurs when a portion of the unwound template strand forms a stem-loop that gets "skipped" by the transcription machinery. Insertion occurs when a stem-loop forms in a dissociated portion of the nascent (newly synthesized) strand causing a portion of the template strand to be transcribed twice.

Antithrombin deficiency from a point mutation

Imperfect inverted repeats can lead to mutations through intrastrand an interstrand switching.  The antithrombin III gene's coding region is an example of an imperfect inverted repeat as shown in the figure on the right.
The stem-loop structure forms with a bump at the bottom because the G and T do not pair up. A strand switch event could result in the G (in the bump) being replaced by an A which removes the "imperfection" in the inverted repeat and provides a stronger stem-loop structure. However, the replacement also creates a point mutation converting the GCA codon to ACA. If the strand switch event is followed by a second round of DNA replication, the mutation may become fixed in the genome and lead to disease. Specifically, the missense mutation would lead to a defective gene and a deficiency in antithrombin which could result in the development of venous thromboembolism (blood clots within a vein).

Osteogenesis imperfecta from a frameshift mutation

Mutations in the collagen gene can lead to the disease Osteogenesis Imperfecta which is characterized by brittle bones. In the illustration, a stem-loop formed from an imperfect inverted repeat is mutated with a thymine (T) nucleotide insertion as a result of an inter- or intrastrand switch. The addition of the T creates a base-pairing "match up" with the adenine (A) that was previously a "bump" on the left side of the stem. While this addition makes the stem stronger and perfects the inverted repeat, it also creates a frameshift mutation in the nucleotide sequence which alters the reading frame and will result in an incorrect expression of the gene.

Programs and databases

The following list provides information and external links to various programs and databases for inverted repeats:






