[[Cyclone Tasha]]

CATEGORIES: Category 1 Australian region cyclones, 2010 in Australia, 2010–11 Australian region cyclone season, Cyclones in Australia

Tropical Cyclone Tasha was a short-lived, but devastating tropical cyclone that exacerbated widespread floods in Queensland, Australia during the 2010 Christmas holiday.

Meteorological history

Tropical Cyclone Tasha was first identified on 24 December 2010 by the Joint Typhoon Warning Centre (JTWC) as a weak area of low pressure accompanied by increasing deep convection. At the surface, the structure of the storm's circulation was uncertain as feeder bands provided a clear indication of its centre; however, the lack of westerly winds at the surface refuted this. Situated roughly 
Within hours of the BoM declaring Tasha a tropical cyclone, the JTWC followed suit and issued their first advisory on the storm, designating it as Tropical Cyclone 04P. Situated along the northwestern edge of a subtropical ridge, Tasha tracked southwestward towards Queensland, Australia and intensified. The remnants of Tasha persisted in the region for several more days, bringing heavy rains to much of Queensland.

Impact and aftermath

Following the Bureau of Meteorology's first advice for the tropical low on 24 December, a cyclone warning was declared for areas between Port Douglas and Lucinda, Queensland. Some parts of Queensland were already suffering from flooding and additional rainfall was expected to worsen the situation.
Although a relatively weak storm, Tasha produced widespread torrential rains in Queensland, amounting to more than  One fatality took place in Mareeba, near where Tasha made landfall, where a man drowned after being swept off a footbridge.brisbanetimes.au/queensland/man-found-dead-in-flooded-creek-20101230-19aga.html
Areas as far south as Brisbane were affected by Tasha. There, roughly 1,100 emergency calls for help were made as hundreds of drivers became trapped on flooded roads. In New South Wales, 175 people were evacuated to emergency shelters as the flooding spread south. An additional 800 people were isolated in the towns of Urbenville and Bonalbo on 28 December as flood waters blocked off roads.
By 28 December, nearly half of Queensland was flooded and preliminary damage estimates exceeded A$1.4 billion. Total economic losses also reached A$6 billion, roughly 0.5% of the nation's gross domestic product. In response to the severe flooding, the Government of Queensland declared numerous towns as disaster areas, allowing for federal funds to be used. By 27 December, flood waters began to recede in Babinda and Gordonvale, leaving behind debris and thick black mud. The following day, Prime Minister Julia Gillard announced that additional Blackhawk helicopters would be sent to assist in evacuation efforts.








