[[Borate]]

CATEGORIES: Borates, Oxoanions

Borates are the name for a large number of boron-containing oxyanions. The term "borates" may also more loosely refer to chemical compounds which contain borate anions. Larger borates are composed of trigonal planar BO3 or tetrahedral BO4 structural units, joined together via shared oxygen atomsEgon Wiberg, Arnold Frederick Holleman (2001) Inorganic Chemistry, Elsevier ISBN 0-12-352651-5 and may be cyclic or linear in structure. Boron most often occurs in nature as borates, such as borate minerals and borosilicates.

Structures

The simplest borate anion, the orthoborate ion,  BO33− is known in the solid state, for example in Ca3(BO3)2.

Boric acid

All borates can be considered derivatives of boric acid, B(OH)3. Boric acid is a weak proton donor that is acidic due to its reaction with water, forming tetrahydroxyborate, releasing a proton:
In the presence of cis-diols such as mannitol, glucose, sorbitol and glycerol the pK is lowered to about 4.

Polymeric ions

Under acid conditions boric acid undergoes condensation reactions to form polymeric oxyanions:
The tetraborate anion (tetramer) includes two tetrahedral and two trigonal boron atoms symmetrically assembled in cyclic structure. The two tetrahedral boron atoms are linked together by a common oxygen atom and each also bears a negative net charge brought by the supplementary OH- groups laterally attached to them. This intricate molecular anion also exhibits three rings: two distorded hexagonal rings and one distorded octagonal cycle. Each ring is made of a succession of alternate boron and oxygen atoms. 
The tetraborate anion occurs in the mineral borax, as an octahydrate, Na2B4O5(OH)4·8H2O. The borax chemical formula is also commonly written in a more compact but equivalent notation as Na2B4O7·10H2O, simply by converting stoechiometrically 4 OH- as 2 O2- and 2 H2O. 
Sodium borate can be obtained in high purity and so can be used to make a standard solution in titrimetric analysis.
A number of metal borates are known. They arise by treating boric acid or boron oxides with metal oxides. Examples hereafter include linear chains of 2, 3 or 4 trigonal BO3 structural units, each sharing only one oxygen atom with adjacent unit(s): 
Metaborates, such as LiBO2 contain chains of trigonal BO3 structural units, each sharing two oxygen atoms with adjacent units, whereas NaBO2 and KBO2 contain the cyclic B3O62– ion.

Borosilicates

Borosilicate glass, also known as pyrex, can be viewed as a silicate in which some SiO44− units are replaced by BO45− centers, together with a cation to compensate for the difference in valence states of Si(IV) and B(III). Because of this substitution leads to imperfections, the material is slow to crystallise and forms a glass with low coefficient of thermal expansion and is resistant to cracking when heated, unlike soda glass.

Minerals and uses

Common borate salts include sodium metaborate, NaBO2, and borax. Borax is soluble in water, so mineral deposits only occur in places with very low rainfall. Extensive deposits were found in Death Valley and transported out using the famous twenty-mule teams (1883 to 1889). Later (1925), deposits were found at Boron, California on the edge of the Mojave Desert. The Atacama Desert in Chile also contains mineable borate concentrations.
Lithium metaborate or lithium tetraborate, or a mixture of both, can be used in borate fusion sample preparation of various samples for analysis by XRF, AAS, ICP-OES, ICP-AES and ICP-MS. Borate fusion and energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence spectrometry with polarized excitation have been used in the analysis of contaminated soils.
Disodium octaborate tetrahydrate is used as wood preservatives or fungicide. Zinc borate is used as a flame retardant.

Borate esters

Borate esters are organic compounds of the type B(OR)3 where R is alkyl or aryl. They are conveniently prepared by condensation reaction of boric acid and the alcohol:
A dehydrating agent, such as concentrated sulfuric acid is typically added.
Borate esters form more spontaneously when treated with diols such as sugars.
Trimethyl borate, B(OCH3)3, is used as a precursor to boronic esters for Suzuki couplings:
These esters hydrolyze to boronic acids, which are used in Suzuki couplings.








