[[Episode 1.1 (Secret Diary of a Call Girl)]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 television episodes

"Episode 1.1" is the series 1 premiere of the British television show Secret Diary of a Call Girl.

Plot

The episode begins with Hannah Baxter walking across the eastern Golden Jubilee Bridge, she is then seen entering The May Fair and heading towards the lift. Whilst doing so she narrates, telling the viewer that she is a "whore".
Hannah then wakes in her flat and begins directly addressing the audience, differentiating between herself and her alter-ego, Belle. She then continues describing her personal and professional life, her personal and professional living space and even her and Belle's contrasting fashion. However she is interrupted by a call from her agent, Stephanie, who informs her that a client will be round in 30 minutes.
The client arrives and as he does Hannah runs through her "rules" with the audience, telling what makes her a good prostitute. Hannah quickly establishes that the man has a public sex fantasy, in particular in fields and stables.
The scene then changes to a London café, where Hannah meets her best friend and ex-boyfriend, Ben, who has no idea of her double life as a call girl. Whilst walking past an estate agent's office, and Ben asks whether they should play a game of "spoilt little rich girl". The two the view a luxurious London townhouse and half way through the tour of the property they run out.
She then meets another client at a hotel, a young man named Daniel; however, he leaves halfway through his appointment, whilst Hannah is performing fellatio on him. Stephanie later discloses that he wanted somebody with a 'girl next door' image. Hannah persuades Stephanie to book Daniel with him, yet this time she dresses in a simple manner to please him. Her next client is scheduled with her first client and when he arrives she pulls out a saddle and asks who should wear it. The episode ends with the client entirely nude aside from a saddle placed on his back as Hannah rides him like a horse.

Broadcast and reception

Broadcast

The series premiere garnered an average of 1,997,000 viewers,s Sunday repeat ranked at 6.

Reception

The episode was mostly well received by reviewers. IGN noted the similarities between the show and Sex and the City and Piper's skill whilst breaking the fourth wall. "Piper does lots of talking to the camera, a stylistic similarity to the early episodes of Sex and the City. While that show eventually dropped Carrie's on camera monologues, Call Girl is clearly borrowing the voice from Belle's Brooke Magnanti writings – and Piper manages to pull off what would usually seem awkward." To summarise, IGN stated it was "well written, well acted and stylish".
Slant Magazine, despite giving a positive review, mentioned that Hannah's "frequent voiceovers and direct-camera addresses turn the awkwardly named show into a how-to guide for prospective prostitutes".
Entertainment Weeklys American broadcaster, for not simply buying format rights, saying "I'm just thankful that Showtime imported Call Girl without recasting it like its sister network CBS is doing with Worst Week of My Life or ABC did with Life on Mars."






