[[Greg Rosenbaum]]

CATEGORIES: Harvard University alumni, American Jews, Private equity and venture capital investors, Living people

Greg Rosenbaum is an American merchant banker based in Bethesda, Maryland."Palisades Associates, Inc." 

Personal Life

Rosenbaum was born in Toledo, Ohio and attended Whitmer High School. His father, Marvin Rosenbaum, was a furniture salesman and later the owner of a premiums and incentives distributor, and his mother, Edith Millman Rosenbaum, was a vice president at a local advertising agency. Rosenbaum graduated from Harvard College in 1974 with an A.B. in Government.  He received a joint master in public policy and juris doctor from the Harvard Kennedy School and Harvard Law School in 1978.  At Harvard Law he was a member of the winning team in the 1976 Ames Moot Court Competition."Associate Members - Harvard Kennedy School Alumni Association" Rosenbaum is married to Marti Radlo Rosenbaum, and has three grown children and one grandchild.

Policy Debate

At Harvard, Rosenbaum was a member of the winning team at the 1974 collegiate National Debate Tournament.  In 1979, he was one of the coaches for Harvard's National Debate Tournament-winning team.Southworth, William, "The Decade's 'Best' in Debate (The 1970s)", Journal of the American Speech Association, Fall 1981.
Currently, Rosenbaum serves as the chairman of the board of trustees of the National Debate Tournament, and on the board of directors of Harvard Debate, Inc."NAUDL - Board of Directors"

Business

Rosenbaum is currently the president of Palisades Associates, Inc., a Bethesda, Maryland-based private equity firm. TVC Communications Acquired by WESCO", Nov. 17, 2010.  He was previously a consultant with the Boston Consulting Group and a vice president of buyout firm Dyson-Kissner-Moran."Greg Rosenbaum - Palisades Associates, Inc."
In 1987, Rosenbaum was one of the five founders of the Carlyle Group. 5, 1987, F33. He left within the first year.C. Investment Firm Wall Street's Attention," Washington Post, June 6, 1988, F1. 12, 2007.
From 2003 to 2010, he was the Chairman of TVC Communications, LLC, a distributor to the broadband industry, until its purchase by WESCO International.
From 2003 to 2012 Rosenbaum was the Chairman of Empire Kosher Poultry, Inc., the largest producer of kosher poultry in the United States, and from 2006 to 2012 he was the company's chief executive officer.

Politics

In 2013, President Barack Obama appointed Rosenbaum to the United States Holocaust Memorial Council, the governing body of the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum."Museum Council - USHMM"President Obama Announces More Key Administration Posts", March 12, 2013 In 2011, Rosenbaum was named to the board of directors of the National Jewish Democratic Council (NJDC), and in 2013 was named to the council's executive committee."Board and Leadership - NJDC" In the 2012 election cycle, Rosenbaum was a co-chair of NJDC's political action committee.
Rosenbaum is a charter member of the Clinton Global Initiative and was listed as a donor in reports released by the Clinton Foundation."Harvard Kennedy School Magazine", "Final Say", Winter 2013.

Philanthropy

In 2011, the Metropolitan Council on Jewish Poverty granted Rosenbaum its Humanitarian Award. As the CEO of Empire Kosher, Rosenbaum oversaw the donation of kosher food products to community food pantries. 6, 2009.New York City Government, "News from the Blue Room"
In 2009, the Philadelphia Jewish Labor Committee granted Rosenbaum, along with U.S. Senator Bob Casey, a Labor Human Rights Award."Jewish Labor Committee - Philadelphia's Labor Human Rights Award" In 2007, the Jewish Labor Committee granted Rosenbaum a National Trade Union Council for Human Rights Award.Leon, Masha, "JLC Honors NYC Mayor", The Forward, August 9, 2007.
Rosenbaum is currently a trustee of the United States Olympic Foundation, which supports the United States Olympic and Paralympic teams. Rosenbaum and his family are also supporters of the USA Swimming Foundation."Foundation News", March 2013




