[[Asia Carrera]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Actresses from New York City, American bloggers, American female adult models, American female pornographic film actors, American people of German descent, American pornographic film actors of Japanese descent, Living people, People from Little Silver, New Jersey, People from St. George, Utah, Pornographic film actors from New Jersey, Pornographic film actors from New York, Rutgers University alumni, American atheists, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Mensans

Asia Carrera (born Jessica Steinhauser on August 6, 1973) is an American former pornographic actress.

Early life

Asia Carrera was born in New York City to a Japanese father and German mother, She was raised in Little Silver, New Jersey, attending the Little Silver School District and Red Bank Regional High School.  She studied piano as a child and performed at Carnegie Hall twice before the age of 15. At the age of 16, she taught English at Tsuruga College in Japan."The Women of Porn", Playboy, March 2002, page 128
She was awarded a full academic scholarship to Rutgers University, where she majored in Japanese and Business but from which she did not graduate,

Career

Adult film career

Carrera's adult film career ran from 1993 to 2003 and included over 400 films and video features. Filmograpy, AsiaCarrera. Retrieved September 10, 2012  According to interviews, she chose her stage name surname from actress Tia Carrere, changing the spelling for legal reasons.
Carrera was the first Asian performer ever to win the award AVN Female Performer of the Year Award.
Carrera lent her voice to several erotic hentai OVAs for publisher Pink Pineapple, such as Inmu (2001)
Carrera was also in the 2010 documentary After Porn Ends, which is about life after being a porn actor.
In 2011, Complex magazine ranked her at #5 in their list of "The Top 50 Hottest Asian Porn Stars of All Time."

Other work

In 1998, she appeared in an uncredited cameo role in the film The Big Lebowski in the faux pornographic movie Logjammin' within the film.
Carrera was a guest reviewer for Maximum PC magazine. July 2002. p. 72.
Carrera was featured in the book Part Asian, 100% Hapa by artist Kip Fulbeck.  She also provided one of three featured quotes on the book jacket.

Personal life

After growing tired of impostors claiming to be her on MySpace, Carrera posted her own authentic profile.
Carrera is an avid player of Unreal Tournament. She designed her own game skins and was featured in the show Players on the G4 games cable channel, where she revealed that her screen name is "Megabitchgoddess." Carrera hosted her own Unreal Tournament server that featured custom maps designed by fans who frequented the chatroom that she has hosted on her site since 1997.
She identified investor Warren Buffett as her hero on her website, which Buffett was pleased to learn. The Snowball: Warren Buffett and the Business of Life. Bloomsbury. p. 729
Carrera is an atheist.

Relationships

In September 1995, Carrera married adult film director Bud Lee. They divorced in 2003, but remain good friends. Eventually, Carrera got a message from an insurance company that a life insurance policy she had forgotten about did exist for her husband, and she was granted it after mandatory investigation.
On May 13, 2007, she announced on her website that she had filed a request to legally change her son's name to Devin D'Artagnan Lemmon, in honor of Devin DeVasquez, the woman who first introduced her to Donald. She explained that "He's not Don, he never will be Don, and it made me want to start crying every time a random stranger would say, 'Oh he's so cute, what's his name?'" The state made an error in changing his name, however, keeping the "III".
On April 14, 2010, Carrera confessed on her blog that she became an alcoholic after the death of her husband, Donald, that she had joined Alcoholics Anonymous, and was in her third week of sobriety. She emphasized that she still did not believe in God, and that it is "actually not mandatory for joining AA."

Commentary on the Susan Russell pornography case

In 2006, Carrera was asked for commentary by The Spectrum, a St. George, Utah-area newspaper, on the local case of Susan Russell, who was charged with 15 counts of third-degree felony distribution of pornographic material. Russell allegedly sold pornographic materials and sex toys from a back room in her Earrings and More store, potentially violating the "community standards" of the Mormon-dominated town per the Supreme Court case Miller v. California. Carrera opined:
However, she also said,
Nevertheless, she reiterated that the community's conservatism was the reason she moved there, and that she had no plans to challenge it.

Awards






