[[David G. Greenfield]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, People from Brooklyn, American Orthodox Jews, New York Democrats, New York City Council members, Jewish American politicians, Touro College alumni, Georgetown University Law Center alumni, New York lawyers

David G. Greenfield is an American attorney and a member of the New York City Council representing the 44th council district, which comprises the neighborhoods of Bensonhurst, Borough Park, and Midwood in Brooklyn, New York.
Greenfield is the founding director and counsel of TEACH NYS  
As Director and Counsel of TEACH NYS, Greenfield organized state-wide advocacy campaigns that resulted in private and public school parents receiving tax breaks and private schools receiving more government assistance.

Electoral Office

On January 7, 2010 Greenfield announced his candidacy on the Zev Brenner radio show to replace Simcha Felder. He received the support of local NYC council members Domenic Recchia, Lewis Fidler, Michael C. Nelson, and Vincent J. Gentile, as well as the backing of the Kings County Conservative Party and Kings County Democratic party boss Vito Lopez. 
Assemblyman Dov Hikind  

Political Commentator

Greenfield has appeared as a commentator on many national news shows including Fox & Friends  Greenfield also hosts a popular weekly audio show Inside Politics on the Jewish news site Yeshiva World News, with thousands of listeners and is a regular guest on the weekly Thursday night Nachum Segal radio show broadcast on 620AM.  David Greenfield has also provided commentary under the pseudonym Dov Gordon.  

Political Action

Greenfield recently issued letters to City officials complaining about the parking ticket enforcement blitz that targeted his district in Brooklyn.vosizneias.

Religious Beliefs

Greenfield is Orthodox Jewish and prays in Landau's Synagogue in the Midwood section of Brooklyn. Due to his religious beliefs, Greenfield was the only member of the City Council to vote against an August 2010 bill that required the City Clerks office to post on its website, and hand out at its office, information on where exactly in the U.S. and the world same sex couples are able to get married.Gotham Gazette report on Greenfield's vote against same sex marriage info from city clerks

Political Views

Greenfield is a political moderate who has made passing quality of life legislation and promoting common sense solutions to government problems his signature issues. Greenfield authored a law that banned the Department of Sanitation from placing hard-to-remove stickers on vehicles that were parked on the wrong-side of the street. 

Electoral history

Greenfield, a first time candidate, won after defeating Joe Lazar. He sits on the New York City Council, representing the 44th Council District. After polls were closed on March 23, 2010, Greenfield had 57% of the vote while Lazar had 37%.Yeshive World results of Greenfield v Lazar race 








