[[Evan Oberg]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 births, Living people, Camrose Kodiaks players, Canadian ice hockey defencemen, Chicago Wolves players, Ice hockey people from Alberta, Manitoba Moose players, Minnesota–Duluth Bulldogs men's ice hockey players, Norfolk Admirals players, People from Flagstaff County, Alberta, Rochester Americans players, San Antonio Rampage players, Syracuse Crunch players, Undrafted National Hockey League players, Tampa Bay Lightning players, Vancouver Canucks players

Evan Oberg (born February 16, 1988) is a Canadian professional ice hockey defenceman. He is currently playing with the Chicago Wolves of the American Hockey League (AHL). Oberg played two seasons of college hockey for the University of Minnesota-Duluth, after spending his junior career with the Camrose Kodiaks of the Alberta Junior Hockey League (AJHL). Unselected in the NHL Entry Draft, Oberg was signed by the Vancouver Canucks of the NHL as a free agent in April 2009. He played two seasons with the Canucks AHL affiliate, the Manitoba Moose, with a total of four games for the Canucks over that time. Oberg was then traded to the Florida Panthers in February, 2011, and spent the remainder of the season with their AHL affiliate, the Rochester Americans. Oberg changed teams in the off-season as Florida switched affiliations to partner with the San Antonio Rampage. Florida then traded Oberg to the Tampa Bay Lightning in December, 2011 and he then joined the Admirals.

Playing career

Oberg played two seasons with the Camrose Kodiaks of the Alberta Junior Hockey League (AJHL) before joining the University of Minnesota-Duluth. After six games with the Bulldogs, Oberg was seriously injured during a team practice. Pushed into the boards feet first, he dislocated his fibula, fractured his tibia and tore his left ankle on his left leg. The injuries forced Oberg to miss eight weeks. Oberg finished the season with one goal, a game-winner, and two assists in twenty-four games. Oberg's second season with Minnesota-Duluth saw improvements, as he had seven goals and twenty assists in forty-three games.
After two seasons with Minnesota-Duluth, Oberg left the school when he signed a free-agent contract with the Vancouver Canucks of the National Hockey League (NHL) on April 10, 2009. He played all 70 games for the Moose in the 2009–10 AHL season, and led all team defencemen in scoring with 26 points.
In 2010–11, Oberg was recalled to the Canucks on February 17, 2011. On February 28, 2011, Oberg, along with a third round pick in the 2013 NHL Entry Draft, was traded to the Florida Panthers, for left winger Chris Higgins.
On December 2, 2011, Oberg was traded by the Panthers, along with Mike Kostka, to the Tampa Bay Lightning for James Wright and Mike Vernace.
At the conclusion of his contract with the Lightning, Oberg was released as a free agent and signed a one-year AHL deal with the Chicago Wolves on August 19, 2013.

Career statistics

Regular season and playoffs






