[[Solanum]]

CATEGORIES: Solanum, Medicinal plants, Eudicot genera

Solanum is a large and diverse genus of flowering plants, including two food crops of the highest economic importance, the potato and the tomato. It also contains the nightshades and horsenettles, as well as numerous plants cultivated for their ornamental flowers and fruit.
Solanum species show a wide range of growing habits, such as annual and perennials, vines, subshrubs, shrubs, and small trees. Many formerly independent genera like Lycopersicon (the tomatoes) and Cyphomandra are now included in Solanum as subgenera or sections. Thus, the genus today contains roughly 1,500-2,000 species.  

Name

The generic name was first used by Pliny the Elder (23-79) for a plant also known as strychnos, most likely S. nigrum. Its derivation is uncertain, possibly stemming from the Latin word sol, meaning "sun," referring to its status as a plant of the sun.  Another possibility is that the root was solare, meaning "to soothe," or solamen, meaning "a comfort," which would refer to the soothing effects of the plant upon ingestion.

Nightshades

The species usually most commonly called nightshade in North America and Britain is Solanum dulcamara, also called bittersweet or woody nightshade. Its foliage and egg-shaped red berries are poisonous, the active principle being solanine, which can cause convulsions and death if taken in large doses.  The black nightshade (S. nigrum) is also generally considered poisonous, but its fully ripened fruit and foliage are cooked and eaten in some areas. The deadly nightshade (Atropa belladonna) is not in the Solanum genus, but is a member of the wider Solanaceae family.

Food crops

Most parts of the plants, especially the green parts and unripe fruit, are poisonous to humans (although not necessarily to other animals), but many species in the genus bear some edible parts, such as fruits, leaves, or tubers. Three crops in particular have been bred and harvested for consumption by humans for centuries, and are now cultivated on a global scale:
Other species are significant food crops regionally, such as Ethiopian eggplant and gilo (S. aethiopicum), naranjilla or lulo (S. quitoense), turkey berry (S. torvum), pepino (S. muricatum), or the "bush tomatoes" (several Australian species).

Ornamentals

The species most widely seen in cultivation as ornamental plants are:-

Medicine

While most medical relevance of Solanum is due to poisonings which are not uncommon and may be fatal, several species are locally used in folk medicine, particularly by native peoples who have long employed them. Giant devil's-fig (S. chrysotrichum) has been shown to be an effective treatment for seborrhoeic dermatitis in one preliminary study.

Ecology

Solanum species are used as food plants by the larvae of some Lepidoptera species (butterflies and moths) - see list of Lepidoptera that feed on Solanum.

Systematics

The genus was established by Carl Linnaeus in 1753. Its subdivision has always been problematic, but slowly some sort of consensus is being achieved.
The following list is a provisional lineup of the genus' traditional subdivisions, together with some notable species. Many of the subgenera and sections might not be valid; they are used here provisionally as the phylogeny of this genus is not fully resolved yet and many species have not been reevaluated.
Cladistic analyses of DNA sequence data suggests that the present subdivisions and rankings are largely invalid. Far more subgenera would seem to warrant recognition, with Leptostemonum being the only one that can at present be clearly subdivided into sections. Notably, it includes as a major lineage several members of the traditional sections Cyphomandropsis and the old genus Cyphomandra.

Subgenus Bassovia

Section ''Allophylla''
Section ''Cyphomandropsis''
Section ''Pachyphylla''

Subgenus Leptostemonum

Section ''Acanthophora''
Section ''Androceras'': 12 spp.jstor.org/pss/2418419
Section ''Anisantherum''

Section ''Campanulata''

Section ''Crinitum''

Section ''Croatianum''

Section ''Erythrotrichum''
Section ''Graciliflorum''

Section ''Herposolanum''
Section ''Irenosolanum''
Section ''Ischyracanthum''

Section ''Lasiocarpa''
Section ''Melongena''
Section ''Micracantha''
Section ''Monodolichopus''

Section ''Nycterium''

Section ''Oliganthes''
Section ''Persicariae''
Section ''Polytrichum''

Section ''Pugiunculifera''

Section ''Somalanum''

Section ''Torva''

Subgenus Lyciosolanum

Subgenus Solanum sensu stricto

Section ''Afrosolanum''

Section ''Anarrhichomenum''
Section ''Archaesolanum''
Section ''Basarthrum''
Section ''Benderianum''

Section ''Brevantherum''
Section ''Dulcamara''
Section ''Herpystichum''

Section ''Holophylla''
Section ''Juglandifolia''

Section ''Lemurisolanum''

Section ''Lycopersicoides''
Section ''Lycopersicon''
Section ''Macronesiotes''

Section ''Normania''

Section ''Petota''
Section ''Pteroidea''

Section ''Quadrangulare''

Section ''Regmandra''

Section ''Solanum''

Other notable species

Formerly placed here

Some plants of yet other genera also were placed in Solanum in former times:






