[[Hold It Against Me]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 singles, Britney Spears songs, Dance-pop songs, Jive Records singles, Music videos directed by Jonas Åkerlund, Song recordings produced by Max Martin, Song recordings produced by Dr. Luke, Song recordings produced by Billboard (producer), Songs written by Max Martin, Songs written by Dr. Luke, Songs written by Bonnie McKee, Songs written by Billboard (producer), Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Billboard Dance/Mix Show Airplay number-one singles, Canadian Hot 100 number-one singles, Number-one singles in Denmark, Number-one singles in Finland, Number-one singles in New Zealand, Ultratop 50 Singles (Wallonia) number-one singles, Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs number-one singles, Songs about sexuality

{{Infobox single 
| Name           = Hold It Against Me
| Cover          = Britney Spears - Hold It Against Me.png
| Alt            = The face of a blond woman. She has her hands in her cheeks and her wavy hair seems to be in motion, next to her eyes. On the lower left corner, the words "hold it against me" are written in black small letters. Below them, the words "BRITNEY SPEARS" are written in black capital letters. 
| Border         = yes
| Artist         = Britney Spears
| Album          = Femme Fatale
| Released       = 
| Format         = {{Flat list|
| Recorded       = 2010;
Conway Studios, Dr. Luke's
(Los Angeles)
| Genre          = Dance-pop
| Length         = 3:49
| Label          = Jive
| Writer         = {{Flat list|
| Producer       = 

"Hold It Against Me" is a song by American recording artist Britney Spears, released as the first single from her seventh studio album, Femme Fatale. It was written and produced by Max Martin, Dr. Luke and Billboard, with additional writing by Bonnie McKee. Luke explained that he wanted "Hold It Against Me" to sound unlike his previous productions. The song was originally offered to Katy Perry, but Luke and Martin felt that it did not suit her. A demo version of the track by McKee was leaked on January 6, 2011, and the single became available for streaming on January 10, 2011. It was released the following day.
Musically, "Hold It Against Me" blends pulsating industrial and trance beats with elements of grime. The chorus has lilting synths that lift her vocals and contrast them with the hard beats. The song features a dubstep-influenced breakdown, in which Spears moans and blows kisses, and the song ends with a final chorus with elements of rave. The lyrics portray the singer seducing someone on the dancefloor, and the chorus revolves around pick-up lines. After the song was released, The Bellamy Brothers criticized it for being similar to their 1979 hit "If I Said You Had a Beautiful Body Would You Hold It Against Me". They were sued by Martin, Luke, McKee and Billboard for defamation and libel, but the case was dismissed after The Bellamy Brothers apologized. McKee stated in an interview that the title was inspired by a discussion she had with Katy Perry about the latter's body.
Most reviewers praised "Hold It Against Me", although some criticized its lyrical content. The song debuted at number one in Belgium (Wallonia), Canada, Denmark, Finland and New Zealand, as well as on the US Billboard Hot 100, where it became her fourth chart topper. In the United States, "Hold It Against Me" made Spears the second artist in Billboards history to debut at number one more than once, behind Mariah Carey. "Hold It Against Me" was Spears's second consecutive single to debut at number one. The feat also made her the third female artist to score number one singles in three consecutive decades, and the seventh artist overall. In 2012, it was voted the best song to reach the top position on the Hot 100 over the past two years. The single has also charted in the top five in countries such as Australia, Ireland, Italy, Scotland, Finland and Norway.
The accompanying music video for the song was directed by Jonas Åkerlund. It premiered on February 17, 2011, following a two-week promotional campaign of teasers. The video features Spears as a pop star who fell from space to find fame on Earth. There, she becomes overwhelmed by the pressures of being a celebrity and breaks down. The video received mixed to positive reviews; critics complimented its artistic concept and visuals, but dismissed the use of product placement. Spears performed "Hold It Against Me" at Rain Nightclub, Good Morning America and Jimmy Kimmel Live!. She has also performed it as the opening number of the Femme Fatale Tour (2011).

Background

"Hold It Against Me" was written and produced by Max Martin, Dr. Luke and Billboard, with additional writing by Bonnie McKee.
On January 10, 2011, the single became available for streaming on Ryan Seacrest's website, who premiered it on his radio show shortly after.

Composition

"Hold It Against Me" is three minutes and forty-nine seconds long. It is a dance-pop song that blends pulsating industrial and trance beats with elements of grime. The chorus, reminiscent of other pop productions by Max Martin, has lilting synths that lift her vocals and contrast them with the hard beats. After the second chorus, the beats drop and Spears speaks the lines in the hook. This is followed by a dubstep-influenced breakdown, which lasts about thirty seconds. Spears moans, blows kisses and sings the lines "Gimme something good, don't wanna wait I want it now / Pop it like a hood and show me how you work it out." "Hold It Against Me" continues with a second breakdown, which is more similar to the sound of the track. The final chorus has a smattering of rave chords and the song has a sudden end.
Rob Sheffield of Rolling Stone commented that the song "recalls the synth-gloom ambience of Britney's 2007 gem, Blackout." He also compared the riff to AC/DC's "Dirty Deeds Done Dirt Cheap" (1976). The hook was noted by Ann Powers of Los Angeles Times to be reminiscent of "(I Just) Died in Your Arms" (1986) by Cutting Crew. Nick Levine of Digital Spy felt the song had a "clubby and au courant" feel, comparable to "Only Girl (In the World)" (2010) by Barbadian recording artist Rihanna. According to the sheet music published at Musicnotes., "Hold It Against Me" is set in the compound meter time signature, with a moderate dance beat infused metronome of 133 beats per minute.
After "Hold It Against Me" was released, The Bellamy Brothers criticized it for being similar to their 1979 hit "If I Said You Had a Beautiful Body Would You Hold It Against Me". In a statement, David Bellamy said "professionally, well, in all honesty, we feel completely ripped off. Where's the originality?"

Critical reception

"Hold It Against Me" has received positive reviews from most critics.
Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune commented, "It's one of the tougher-sounding Spears singles yet and should do the job as a dancefloor-filler for listeners who are starting to wear out on the latest singles from Katy Perry and The Black Eyed Peas". However, he also dismissed the lyrical content and said that Spears sounds "bored ... as is the case with most of her recent work."
Edna Gundersen of USA Today criticized the use of pick-up lines, but said the single "delivers enough dizzying dance-pop ecstasy to ensure another chart-topping ride."

Chart performance

After its first day of release in the United States, "Hold It Against Me" set the record for most radio plays during a first day, registering 619 plays on Mediabase and 595 plays on Nielsen Broadcast Data Systems (BDS).
"Hold It Against Me" also debuted atop the Hot Digital Songs chart, with 411,000 copies sold. The sum marked the most downloads in a first week by a female artist, beating the previous record held by Taylor Swift's "Today Was a Fairytale" (2010). The current record is held again by Swift, with her 2012 single "We Are Never Ever Getting Back Together" selling 623,000 downloads in its first week.
The song debuted on the ARIA Charts of Australia at number ten, and peaked at number four the following week. It became her eleventh top five hit and her ninth highest peaking single. The song stayed on the charts for twelve weeks. It has since been certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association (ARIA) for sales of 70,000 units. On January 17, 2011, "Hold It Against Me" debuted atop the New Zealand RIANZ charts, becoming her fourth number one hit. However, it only stayed on the charts for eight weeks. On January 13, 2011, the song debuted at number six on the Irish Singles Chart, and moved up to number five the following week. The single also debuted atop the Canadian Hot 100, becoming Spears' fourth Canadian number one single as well as the sixth song in the chart's history to debut at number one. With digital sales of 37,000 copies, "Hold It Against Me" also debuted at number one on Canada's Digital Songs chart, the highest debut sales total, and the second highest one week sales behind The Black Eyed Peas's "The Time (Dirty Bit)" (2010). It debuted at number eleven on the country's Hot 100 Airplay chart, the highest debut since Michael Bublé's "Haven't Met You Yet" (2009) as well as entering the Top 40/CHR airplay chart at number twelve, the second highest debut in the last five years, only behind Madonna's "4 Minutes" (2008).

Music video

Development


The music video for "Hold It Against Me" was filmed on January 22 and 23, 2011.
On January 22, 2011, Spears tweeted from the video shoot, saying it was "an incredible experience" and would "be one of the best videos I have ever done." On February 2, 2011, accusations came from TMZ. Both her representatives and the director denied the rumors, and Åkerlund commenting, "Britney's been great throughout the entire process. ... I've been around long enough to know when an artist gives it their all, and to me it doesn't get better than this. This video is gonna be fucking awesome! It's all Britney."
Friedman revealed that Jonas' wife, B. Åkerlund, was the stylist for the video. B. is known for her work with Madonna and Lady Gaga, but Friedman assured that "it is not 'Britney does Gaga.'"

Synopsis

The main idea behind the video is the rise, fall, and revival of Spears herself. The video begins when a meteoroid heads for Earth, and lights up a city when it finally lands, symbolizing Spears' entrance to fame and her skyrocketing career in the late 1990s as she became a household name. After this, black-and-white interspersed scenes of Spears getting ready in a soundstage are shown, while the words "Britney Spears" and "Hold It Against Me" appear in Def Leppard-inspired multicolored letters. She is seen rising up the cylinder-shaped metal room and her past music videos surround her, symbolizing her ever growing career in the music industry (and possibly referring to the carousel of Logan's run). When the second verse begins, Spears sings, wearing sparkly red skull-shaped shoulder pads, with microphones around her.
A pastiche of following scenes alternates between Spears dancing on the soundstage, singing with the microphones and a scene of just red lips, a reference to the opening shot of the 1975 film The Rocky Horror Picture Show. This begins to show her losing grip, reminiscent of her break down. When the breakdown starts, she begins to eject painting through IVs in her fingers, staining the room and the monitors, symbolizing her own fall as her name becomes tainted. Then, two versions of Spears, both wearing blue and red dresses with flowing trains, are seen fighting each other, another symbolism, this time of her fighting her inner demons. After this, both versions of Spears, as well as her on the wedding dress, fall exhausted to the ground, symbolizing the lowest point of her life during the breakdown. While interspersed scenes of Spears in the soundstage are shown, the other versions of herself start to wake up, showing her getting her feet back on the ground and making a comeback, refusing to give up. The final scene shows Spears dressed in a short black dress with her dancers in black on a stage, with confetti and pyrotechnics around them. In the final shot a question mark (?) appears in multicolored letters. This final scene shows her as she once was, a superstar who is back to reclaim her title. The video ends with the same multicolored lettering of a question mark, symbolizing the unknown that is to come.

Release and reception

Spears announced through her Twitter account on February 4, 2011, that one teaser would be posted daily during fourteen days. The first teaser posted featured Spears in a flowing white gown, surrounded by TV screens as a light and camera are pointed at her face. James Montgomery of MTV 
called the teasers "brilliant" and commented that they "earned her a spot in promotional history", comparing Spears' and her team use of social media to past campaigns by Kanye West, Radiohead and iamamiwhoami.
James Montgomery from MTV said that while the video surpassed her most iconic clips in terms of sheer spectacle, it still displayed a level on restraint in its themes. He summarized the review by saying it was one of her all-time best videos, adding that "there's genuine art to it, which makes it both beautiful to look at and powerful."
Leah Greenblatt of Entertainment Weekly commanded the direction of Åkerlund, but criticized Spears for her lack of involvement, and commented, "It's hard not to wonder: Is Britney having any fun?"

Live performances

Spears first performed "Hold It Against Me" at Rain Nightclub in the Palms Casino Resort on March 25, 2011. Following a montage of her music videos, Spears appeared onstage wearing a sequined bodysuit and was flanked by male dancers. According to Jocelyn Vena of MTV, the performance "included sexy hair-tossing and a wind machine." She also performed "Big Fat Bass" and "Till the World Ends".

Cover versions

"Hold It Against Me" was covered by American recording artist Miguel for Billboard.

Track listing

Credits and personnel

Credits adapted from "Hold It Against Me"'s CD single liner notes.

Charts and certifications

Weekly charts

Certifications



 


Year-end charts

Radio adds and release history






