[[Vicki Leekx]]

CATEGORIES: Albums produced by M.I.A, Albums produced by Diplo, Albums produced by Danja, M.I.A. (rapper) albums, 2010 mixtape albums, Albums free for download by copyright owner

Vicki Leekx is a mixtape by British recording artist M.I.A. which was released on 31 December 2010. Following the release of her album Maya earlier in 2010, the artist announced via Twitter that she would be releasing a mixtape on the last day of the year, and subsequently made it available free to download. It incorporates reworked versions of tracks from Maya and new material and was reported as having been inspired by the 2010 Wikileaks controversy, although much of its content is not politically inspired.

Background

British-Tamil musician M.I.A. (Mathangi "Maya" Arulpragasam) released her third album Maya in July 2010 to mixed reviews. Zach Baron, writing for The Village Voice, contended that the singer deliberately chose to release the mixtape at the point in the year when internet traffic is traditionally at its lowest, so as "not to feed the online content machines that chewed her up this year".

Music and lyrics

The material included reworked tracks and out-takes from Maya, The tracks "Meds and Feds" and "Steppin' Up" from Maya appear in radically altered forms, including the removal of the heavy guitar played by Derek E. Miller of the group Sleigh Bells on the original version of the former.

A number of reviewers made a connection between the mixtape's title and the 2010 Wikileaks controversy. much of the content is not related to the controversy or politically themed. Musically, the mixtape is less abrasive in style than the industrial-influenced Maya, but the lyrics contain a number of attacks on "imitators, haters, and ... psychos" and "bitches who are fame hoes". The female voice heard at the start, identified by reviewers as the "title character", returns sporadically during the mix speaking internet slogans. At different points the music incorporates heavy percussion, Auto-Tuned vocals, and "bhangra-style" sounds similar to those heard on her second studio album Kala. Most of the mix is at a high tempo, although it slows towards the end, where the longest sections are found.

Release and reception

Vicki Leekx has been downloadable for free since 31 December 2010 from a bespoke website. In its review of the mixtape, Sputnikmusic commented that "Maya Arulpragasam might have had a rough year, but with Vicki Leekx, she's ended it with a bang".

Track listing

Although the mixtape consists of a single 36-minute file, the artwork released to accompany it lists twenty "tracks".

Personnel

The artwork released to accompany the mixtape credits the producers, listed as M.I.A. herself, Danja, Munchi, Diplo, Blaqstarr, Switch, Rusko, VIIXIIV (a pseudonym for her brother Sugu Arulpragasam) and So Japan, and featured vocals by Rosaly Pfeffer, credited mononymously as Rosaly. is also prominently displayed, although it is unclear what involvement the duo had in the project.




