[[Eugene Seeley Coler]]

CATEGORIES: 1896 births, 1953 deaths, American military personnel of World War II, American World War I flying aces, Aviators from New York, Recipients of the Bronze Star Medal, Recipients of the Legion of Merit, United States Air Force officers, United States Army Air Forces officers, United States Army Air Forces pilots of World War II, Recipients of the Distinguished Flying Cross (United Kingdom)

Lieutenant (later Colonel) Eugene Seeley Coler was an American World War I flying ace who served in the British Royal Flying Corps and Royal Air Force. He was credited with 16 aerial victories.theaerodrome.php Retrieved 9 January 2010.

Early life and service

Although born in New York City, Coler was native to Newark, New Jersey.theaerodrome.php Retrieved 9 January 2010. His parents were William Nichols (Jr.) and Lillie Seeley Coler, and his brother was William Nichols Coler III.archive.txt Retrieved 9 January 2010.
Eugene Coler joined the RFC in Canada in 1917.theaerodrome.php Retrieved 9 January 2010. After several weeks training, he embarked for England on 29 October 1917. He received further flight training in England. On 12 March 1918, he was assigned to No. 11 Squadron RFC (later to become No. 11 Squadron RAF), which was operating from Vert Galand on the Western Front. At that time, No. 11 Squadron was flying long range reconnaissance sorties.

World War I combat service

Flying Bristol F.2 Fighter No. C792, he and his gunner Cyril Gladman attacked a formation of 14 German fighters on 9 May 1918. They drove three German Pfalz D.
On 13 August 1918, Coler and Gladman destroyed three Fokker D. The action began when Coler dived on 20 Fokker D. He sent another spinning down out of control before his Vickers machine guns jammed. While he was clearing the jam, Gladman knocked a Fokker down out of control. As Coler cleared his guns' stoppage, a Fokker crossed before him 50 yards out; Coler fired 60 rounds into it and set it afire. Gladman then was shot in the right shoulder while changing ammunition drums. Nothing daunted, he shot it down left-handed, sending it down in flames.
The following day, Coler and Gladman  were forced to land behind British lines, the gunner being severely wounded. Their conqueror seems to have been Otto Könnecke.
On 30 August, Coler changed gunners and planes, flying Bristol F.2 Fighter No. E2215 when he destroyed a Pfalz D.VII almost simultaneously. He then destroyed two enemy fighter planes each on 6 September, 15 September, and 16 September. On the latter date, he was wounded in action.theaerodrome.php Retrieved 9 January 2010. Bruno Loerzer scored his 40th victory by puncturing the fuel tank and cutting the aileron controls on Coler's Bristol and driving it into a crash-landing near Beugny. While Coler was power diving into this controlled crash, two Germans who were chasing him overran their prospective target and were shot down by Coler and his gunner.

After World War I

He became a doctor after the war; his practice was in New York City.
In 1951, Coler returned to service once again, with the United States Air Force. He was assigned to the 7th Air Division as the air division's flight surgeon at the time of his death.theaerodrome.php Retrieved 9 January 2010.

Honors and awards

Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC)
Lieut. (A./Capt.) Eugene Seeley Coler. (FRANCE)
Bold in attack and skilful in manoeuvre, this officer never hesitates to engage the enemy regardless of disparity in numbers. On 13 August when on escort duty, he dived on a formation of twenty enemy aeroplanes. In the engagement that ensued he himself destroyed three and his observer two making a total of five machines destroyed in the fight; a fine performance, reflecting great credit on the officers concerned.Supplement to the London Gazette, 3 December 1918 (31046/14320)





Bibliography




