[[United Hospital Fund]]

CATEGORIES: Health charities in the United States, Foundations based in the United States

The United Hospital Fund of New York (UHF) is a nonprofit organization that focuses on improving health care in New York. It conducts health policy research and supports numerous health care initiatives through fundraising, grantmaking, and collaboration with other health care organizations. It is currently led byJames R. Tallon, Jr.

Founding and early program history

The United Hospital Fund was founded as a charitable organization in 1879,Hirsh J with B Doherty (1954). raising money for New York hospitals that provided health care for people who could not otherwise afford it."The United Hospital Fund." New York Times, November 19, 1919. Rusk H A (1954)."United Hospital Fund Called Proof This City Has a Heart; Group, Marking 75th Year, Helps Pay Bill for Less-Than-Cost Institutional Care." New York Times, November 28, 1954.  Originally called the Hospital Saturday and Sunday Association of New York City, it was formed "to obtain benevolent gifts for the hospitals of New York... and to provide for distributing these gifts... among such hospitals."Certificate of Incorporation, Hospital Saturday and Sunday Association of New York. Included in Hirsh (1954), page 115. The organization changed its name to the United Hospital Fund of New York in 1916.
In 1935, the Fund established the Associated Hospital Service of New York (AHS), which later became Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Greater New York."Key Events In The Evolution Of Health Insurance." Blue Cross Blue Shield website.  Accessed July 31, 2013. It also helped found organizations that became the Greater New York Hospital Association (1904),"History of GNYHA." Greater New York Hospital Association website. Accessed July 31, 2013. United Way of New York City (1938), and the New York Blood Center (1956). United Hospital Fund, 2004. 

Recent research and notable activities

In accordance with its mission, the Fund's research, policy analysis, and grantmaking focus on health care, primarily in New York.uhfnyc. Its research addresses health insurance coverage, health care quality, and patient safety. It also has been committed to reorienting health care services toward the needs of particular populations: the aging, people with HIV/AIDS, the chronically ill, and family caregivers."Agency of the Month. The United Hospital Fund: A Broader Vision of Health Care." New York Nonprofit Press, February 2005.  
Since 2005, the Medicaid Institute at United Hospital Fund has published numerous reports and studies exploring ways to improve New York's Medicaid program.medicaidinstitute. Separately, the Fund's health insurance project has published a series of reports on the logistical and policy implications of setting up a health insurance exchange in the state following the passage of the Affordable Care Act."What should NY's insurance exchange look like?" Albany Times-Union, Wednesday, April 27, 2011. Accessed July 31, 2013.
Working with the Greater New York Hospital Association, the Fund has led and participated in numerous efforts focused on quality improvement and patient safety at New York hospitals. These initiatives have led to lower incidence of central-line associated bloodstream infections[ref]
[/ref] and cardiac arrest, as well as lower mortality rates from severe sepsis. "Governor Cuomo Announces New York State to Lead the Nation in Fighting Sepsis – the #1 Killer in Hospitals – and Make Major Improvements in Pediatric Care Through 'Rory's Regulations'."  Relevant quote: "From January 2011 to September 2012, the 55 hospitals in the GNYHA/United Hospital Fund STOP Sepsis Collaborative – whose singular goal has been to reduce mortality from severe sepsis and septic shock – achieved a 22% reduction in severe sepsis inpatient mortality rates." 
The Fund's Aging in Place initiative, begun in 2000, explores ways to provide health care and social services to seniors in their homes and communities, Alderman L. "Aftercare Tips for Patients Checking Out of the Hospital." New York Times, June 18, 2010. 
Following the events of September 11, the Fund allocated $1 million to an initiative focused on Disaster Relief Medicaid, which helped get temporary health insurance coverage to 340,000 New Yorkers. Prepared for the Office of Medicaid Management, New York State Department of Health by Cornell University, School of Industrial and Labor Relations.  







