[[Accrington Stanley F.C.]]

CATEGORIES: Accrington Stanley F.C., Football League clubs, Sport in Hyndburn, Association football clubs established in 1968, Accrington, 1968 establishments in England, Lancashire Combination, North West Counties Football League clubs, Northern Premier League clubs, Football Conference, Football clubs in Lancashire

Accrington Stanley Football Club is an English football club based in Accrington, Lancashire. The club participates in Football League Two, the fourth tier of the English football league system.
The club was formed in 1968, with the town regaining a club with league status after 44 years when they were promoted as champions of the Football Conference on 15 April 2006.
Ilyas Khan saved the club from possible oblivion in late 2009 and stepped down as chairman in 2012 after keeping the club financially secure. Former Club President Peter Marsden was appointed chairman soon after.

History & re-formation

Accrington had been without a football team following the collapse of the original Accrington Stanley in 1966. The original team had been formed in 1891 and played in The Football League from 1921 to March 1962; it had spent its final four seasons in the Lancashire Combination. At a meeting in the town library in October 1968 the revival was initiated by Stanley Wotherington, Since their formation, Stanley have climbed the non-League pyramid to reach The Football League. Eric Whalley, a local businessman, took control of the club in 1995 and began the development of the club's ground. After the club was relegated in 1999, Whalley appointed John Coleman as manager. In 2005–06, Stanley won the Football Conference and were promoted to League Two, switching places with relegated Oxford United – in a reversal of fortune, the team that had been elected to replace the former Accrington Stanley as members of the Football League in 1962.
The club's recent rise to the Premier level, and eventually to the League, is attributed in part to the windfall of hundreds of thousands of pounds reaped by the sell-on clause in the December 2001 transfer of former Stanley star Brett Ormerod to Southampton, which paid Blackpool over a million pounds for his contract. Stanley had taken £50,000 from Blackpool in 1997 with the agreement that Blackpool would pay Accrington a quarter of what it might have received if it in turn transferred Ormerod to another team. The 2002–03 championship of the Northern Premier League followed quickly on Accrington's getting the cash.

Conference years

Following the 2002–03 win of the Northern Premier League, the club was promoted for the first time in its history to the Football Conference. The club's first-ever game in the league was away to another re-formed club, Aldershot Town, on Sunday 10 August 2003. The game was shown live on Sky Sports and resulted in a 1–2 loss. The season was a success, with a final league position of 10th being achieved. The highlight of that first season back in the 5th tier was a sensational run to the FA Cup 3rd round, only losing in a replay away to League One side Colchester United.
The following season 2004–05 also resulted in a 10th place finish despite the club only being run on a part-time basis. Club legend Paul Mullin was yet again amongst the goal scorers, adding another 20 to his tally.
The 2005–06 season saw the return of Stanley to the Football League. Finishing on 91 points, the club went on a 19-game unbeaten run stretching from October to March, leaving the club an easy passage to League Two. The likes of Paul Mullin, Rob Elliot and Gary Roberts led the club back to the league after 46 years away.

Return to the Football League

The club's first Football League game took place on 5 August 2006 away to now-defunct club Chester City; it resulted in a 0–2 loss.  The club was involved in a relegation battle throughout its first season in the 4th tier. A run of 5 wins in the last 9 games of the season led to a 20th place finish and was enough to save the club from relegation in its first season back in the Football League.
Highlights of that first season back included the club's first-ever Football League Cup match against former European Cup Winners Nottingham Forest. The game resulted in a 1–0 win leaving the club a 2nd-round away tie against then Premier League team Watford, eventually losing 6–5 on penalties after a 0–0 draw and extra–time. The club also took part in the Football League Trophy for the first time as a league club (after playing in the two previous seasons as one of 12 Conference sides, beating Bradford City away in Sept 2004) and, after defeating Carlisle United and Blackpool in the early rounds, were knocked out by Doncaster Rovers in the Area Quarter-finals.
The 2007–08 season produced more of the same, with the club involved in another relegation battle with strugglers Chester City, Wrexham and Mansfield Town. Following 5 wins in the last 12 games it was enough to secure a 17th place finish and another season in the 4th tier of English Football. As during the previous season, the club failed to win a game in the FA Cup and League Cup losing to Huddersfield Town and Leicester City respectively.
Performance during the 2008–09 season improved, with the club achieving a modest 16th place finish in League Two. A run of 6 League wins in the last 12 games was a nice way to finish the season. This season saw the emergence of young prospect Bobby Grant, who finally fulfilled the early promise seen in previous seasons. The club again failed to make it past the early round of any of the domestic clubs, losing in the first round to Wolverhampton Wanderers in the League Cup and Tranmere Rovers in both the FA Cup (albeit after a replay) and Football League Trophy.
The 2009–10 season was far better, with the club pushing for a playoff place at the turn of the year. A run of 9 wins in 10 League games saw the club with a chance of making the playoffs only for this to fade in March/April. The emergence of the Michael Symes and Bobby Grant partnership was a key aspect and following their achievements throughout the season both moved on to bigger clubs. In terms of cup performance the club was superb, reaching the 2nd round of the League Cup losing only 1–2 to Queens Park Rangers, the quarter finals of the Football League Trophy losing 0–2 to Leeds United and the 4th round of the FA Cup losing 1–3 to Premier League team Fulham.
The club reached the Football League Two play-offs during the 2010–11 season, one of the most successful in its history. A run of 1 loss in 19 games from February till May saw the club finish in a best-ever 5th position, eventually losing to League Two newcomers Stevenage in the Playoff Semi-finals. The season saw the emergence of Jimmy Ryan as a star in the making along with a number of others, including goalkeeper Alex Cisak and midfielder Sean McConville. In the domestic cups Stanley reached the 2nd round of the League Cup losing 2–3 to Premier League team Newcastle United. The club actually won the 1st round game of the Football League Trophy away to Tranmere Rovers but was then forced to resign from the competition after fielding the ineligible Ray Putterill in the game. The club also reached the 2nd round of the FA Cup but lost to fellow League Two side Port Vale.
2011–12 was a season of transition for the club. The loss of no less than six of the playoff-chasing side of the previous season was a tough act to follow. Following a shaky start to the season the arrival of Bryan Hughes in October transformed the club's fortunes. A run of 6 wins in 7 games over the Christmas period saw the club briefly enter the play-offs. However, following the sale of club captain Andrew Procter to Preston North End in the January 2012 transfer window, the third-longest serving management team of John Coleman and Jimmy Bell departed for Rochdale. Former Burnley and club favourite Paul Cook was brought in as manager along with the promotion of Leam Richardson from caretaker manager to full-time assistant. Only 3 wins in the final 17 games of the season was a pretty poor finish the season. However, this meant the club achieved a solid mid-table finish in 14th position. In terms of the domestic cups Stanley exited both the League Cup and FA Cup at the 1st round stages, losing to Scunthorpe United and Notts County respectively. The club reached the second round of the Football League Trophy after knocking out holders Carlisle United but lost to Tranmere Rovers in the 2nd round after an eventual replay. This was following a serious head injury to young defender Thomas Bender in the initial tie.

Name

The original town club, Accrington, was amongst the twelve founder members of the Football League in 1888, before resigning from the league after just five years. A team called Stanley Villa already existed at the time, named as such because they were based at the Stanley W.M.C. on Stanley Street in Accrington. With the demise of Accrington, Stanley Villa took the town name to become Accrington Stanley. 
The club currently plays at the Store First Stadium (formerly known as the Crown Ground), and has done since the move from former home Peel Park. The ground has undergone expansion in recent years, including a new roof section on the Clayton End Terrace as well as a new hospitality suite. Despite these and a number of other recent improvements the ground remains one of the poorest in League Two and talks are still ongoing with a view to a permanent move to a new stadium located in Church, a small town bordering Accrington.

Television advertisement

In the 1980s, the club was mentioned in a British advert for milk, which briefly brought the club to the attention of the general public. The advertisement featured two young boys in Liverpool replica shirts and made reference to Accrington Stanley's obscurity in comparison to Liverpool's success at the time.

BOY 1: "Milk! Urghh!"

BOY 2: "It's what Ian Rush drinks."

BOY 1: "Ian Rush?"

BOY 2: "Yeah. And he said if I didn't drink lots of milk, when I grow up, I'll only be good enough to play for Accrington Stanley."

BOY 1: "Accrington Stanley, who are they?"

BOY 2: "Exactly."
In the weekly football show, Soccer A.M, the phrase "Accrington Stanley, who are they?" is said every time a fixture is read out that has the club in it, referring to the milk advert.

The Stanley Ultras

In 2004 a number of fans founded the Stanley Ultras, in an effort to improve the atmosphere at both home and away matches. The mission statement of the Ultra's reads "Stanley Ultras are a group of like-minded fans who are dedicated to their role of twelfth man, adding colour, noise and support levels. We may support one of the smaller clubs in the UK, but our pride and passion shown on and off the terrace is second to none".

Players

In a PFA Fans' Favourites survey published by the Professional Footballers' Association in December 2007, Chris Grimshaw was listed as the all-time favourite player amongst Accrington Stanley fans.

Current squad

Out on loan

Honours

League history






