[[Hyuna]]

CATEGORIES: 1992 births, 4Minute members, Hyuna, Japanese-language singers, Konkuk University alumni, Korean-language singers, Living people, Female rappers, Hip hop singers, Singers from Seoul, Running Man (TV series) contestants, South Korean composers, South Korean female models, South Korean female singers, South Korean pop singers, South Korean rhythm and blues singers, South Korean idols, South Korean rappers, South Korean singer-songwriters, South Korean television personalities, South Korean television presenters, Wonder Girls members

Kim Hyuna ( and musical duo Trouble Maker.
Hyuna first rose to fame as the lead rapper of the Korean girl group Wonder Girls, before leaving in 2007 due to issues relating to her health.  She has also become notable for her solo career outside of her girl group, with her debut single, "Change" reaching sales of over 2 million copies, and her cameo appearance in Psy's "Gangnam Style", later featuring in the women's perspective follow-up, "Oppa Is Just My Style". She describes her own solo career as "performance-oriented music".

Early life and education

Hyuna was born on June 6, 1992 in Seoul, South Korea. She attended Choongam Middle School and Korea High School of Music and Arts and currently attends Kyunghee University, majoring in art culture, receiving special admission to the school.
Originally, Hyuna's Hanja name was supposed to be "泫我". (simplified Chinese: 泫我; traditional Chinese: 泫我; pinyin: Xuàn Wǒ). However, her Chinese teacher told her that it sounded weird in Mandarin and recommended her to adopt "泫雅" (simplified Chinese: 泫雅; traditional Chinese: 泫雅; pinyin: Xuàn Yǎ) as her name for promotional activities in Taiwan. Hyuna agreed to the change after commenting that "泫雅" sounded adorable.

Career

2007: Wonder Girls

In 2007, Hyuna made her debut with the Wonder Girls, a girl group managed by JYP Entertainment, as the group's main rapper. She participated in the songs of the group's debut album The Wonder Begins, released in February 2007. 
In July, Hyuna left Wonder Girls, when she was removed by her parents due to their concern over her health—in particular, chronic gastroenteritis and fainting spells. Yang, Jeff. Asian Pop: Next stop, Wonderland. San Francisco Chronicle. April 9, 2008. Retrieved March 2, 2009.
In 2008, she transferred to Cube Entertainment. Kim, Hyeon-wu.데뷔 하루 앞둔 포미닛 "라이브 걱정없어, 실력으로 승부하겠다" (Morning Before Debut, 4minute States "We Do Not Worry About Live Performance; We Will Win Through Talent"). Joins. June 17, 2009. Retrieved 10 January 2010.

2009: Collaborations

Hyuna collaborated with Lee Gi-kwang for the song "2009" from his debut album First Episode: A New Hero, and she also appeared in his first single "Dancing Shoes"'s music video which was released on March 30, 2009.
On August 13, 2009 she rapped for Navi's song "Wasteful Tears" and she also appeared in the MV for this song.
Hyuna also appeared in Mighty Mouth's music video for "Love Class" with Uee from After School.
On August 18, 2009 Hyuna featured for Brave Brothers together with Maboos, Red Roc, Basick & M for his song "Bittersweet".
She became part of the "Dream Team Girl Group" for Samsung's Anycall called "4 Tomorrow". Their first digital single "Tomorrow" was released on October 6, 2009, and the official music video was released on October 12, starring actor Lee Dong Gun, who also starred in each member's individual drama version of the video. 복받은 이동건, 가인-한승연-유이-현아와 무슨관계? '4투모로우 뮤비 출연' (Lucky Lee Dong-gun, What Connection with Gain-Han Seungyeon-Uee-Hyuna? "4 Tomorrow Music Video Participation"). Joins. October 12, 2009. Retrieved January 16, 2010. Hyuna's version was released on October 27, 2009. The Dream Team was composed of Hyuna (4Minute), Seung Yeon (Kara), Uee (After School) & Gain (Brown Eyed Girls).
Hyuna was also part of Invincible Youth, a South Korean variety show. However, she left the show due to some scheduling conflicts with her group's overseas promotions on 11 June 2010.

2010: Solo debut and controversy

On January 4, 2010, Hyuna released the single "Change" which debuted high on various online charts while also becoming a top search term.
On January 14, 2010, the "Change" music video was flagged with a 19+ rating due to Hyuna's provocative dancing, citing it to be inappropriate to minors. Cube Entertainment stated that the music video would be re-edited and submitted for approval. However, broadcast station SBS, announced the music video would be restricted for a 15+ audience instead, and MBC announced that it would still be viewable for all audiences.현아, 뮤비 19금(禁) 판정 "선정성 이유, 재심의 요청할 것". Newsen. January 14, 2010. Her "Change" promotions ended in March 2010.
On February 10, Hyuna released a digital single, "Love Parade", featuring T-MAX's member Park Yun-hwa.
On April 16, Hyuna released another digital single, "Outlaw in the Wild ()", featuring Nassun, and produced by E-Tribe.포미닛 현아·낯선 '황야의 무법자', 박명수·제시카의 '냉면' 될까. My Daily. June 8, 2010.현아-낯선 부른 이트라이브 '황야의 무법자' 제 2의 '냉면' 될까?. Newsen. June 8, 2010.
On October 14, 2010, Hyuna played a cameo role in the thriller movie Midnight FM along with fellow band member Jihyun.Ji Hyun & Hyuna to cameo in thriller movie "Late Night FM"
She also rapped a duet with G. The duet was released on November 10, 2010.

2011: Bubble Pop! and Trouble Maker

CEO Hong Seungsong of Cube Entertainment announced that Hyuna would make a comeback with her first mini-album in May, 2011. He stated that, "Hyuna will have her second solo song which is expected to be released in May. Though this time, fans should expect a radical change in her concept."
Hyuna was featured in SS501's Heo Young-saeng's title track "Let It Go" from his first solo mini album, Let It Go released on May 12, 2011."SS501 Heo Young-saeng to release solo album on May 12", 10 Asia. 4 May 2011. Retrieved 2011-10-31
Hyuna appeared in the Korean version of Dancing with the Stars. The show started broadcasting on June 10. 포미닛 현아, 오디션쇼 '댄싱 위드 더 스타' 출연 확정. nate. May 20, 2011. Retrieved June 5, 2011.
After several teasers, Hyuna released her first mini album, titled Bubble Pop! featuring five new songs, with a title track titled "Bubble Pop!". The MV teaser for "Bubble Pop!" was released on June 30, 2011 and the music video was released on July 5. The MV also stars MBLAQ's Lee Joon. In August, the Korea Communications Standards Commission partially banned TV broadcasting of the video for allegedly racy content."Hyuna's Latest Music Video Too Racy for TV Censors", Chosun Ilbo, Aug. 05, 2011
On September 28, 2011, Hyuna ranked 17th on Billboards '21 Under 21′, showcasing the staff's top picks for the world's hottest underage stars. The list included other young stars such as Justin Bieber, Selena Gomez and Miley Cyrus. "4Minute's Hyun=a make into Billboard '21 Under 21'". Billboard. September 27, 2011. Retrieved October 2, 2011.
On November 24, 2011, Cube revealed that she will be in a co-ed sub-unit called Trouble Maker with BEAST's Hyunseung.
Trouble Maker's first mini album, Trouble Maker, consists of a dance track as well as an emotional ballad, a solo song for Hyuna, and a solo song for Hyunseung. The unit started revealing their teaser photos on November 25 through their official YouTube channel "troublemakerofficial", and unleashed their album on December 1."Cube to launch co-ed unit 'Trouble Maker' with B2ST's Hyunseung and HyunA", allkpop. Nov. 2011.
Hyuna's "Bubble Pop" was No.9 and No.3 on USA's Spin magazine's "Best 20 Songs of 2011″ and "SPIN's Favorite Pop Tracks of 2011".

2012: Ice Cream

On February 12, 2012 it was revealed that "The Birth of a Family" Season 2 will follow up with Hyuna and singer G.NA. Birth of a Family is an "animal communion variety" program where idols adopt stray pets and take care of them for a certain period of time to raise awareness for animal rights. Hyuna and G. The first episode with the two singers will be broadcast on March 3.
On March 14, 2012, it was revealed that Hyuna will be launching her own fashion brand called Hyuna x SPICYCOLOR. Hyuna x SPICYCOLOR will be a "retro, chic, and sexy" concept, pulling inspiration from the vintage looks of the 1950s and 1960s. Hyuna intends to be highly involved, starting from the concept development, design, as well as directing the photo shoots. Hyuna stated, "Although as an artist I did show a lot of sexy concepts, for this brand which will be launching at the end of March, I worked very hard to deliver styles that are not only sexy, but also fashionable and stylish. For this spring, if you own a single item mixed with lace, anyone can easily complete a trendy look."GhostWriter (14 March 2012). "Hyuna to launch her own fashion brand, 'Hyuna x SPICYCOLOR'". allkpop.
Hyuna also appeared as the central female dancer and love interest in the Psy music video for "Gangnam Style," having been selected personally by Psy during the initial production stage. Psy released the female version of Gangnam Style, known as "Oppa Is Just My Style" in August 2012, featuring additional vocals by Hyuna.
Hyuna released her second mini album titled Melting on October 21, 2012 with the title track "Ice Cream". The song was produced by mega hitmaker Brave Brothers, being the first collaborative effort between the producer and Hyuna as a solo artist. The video for Ice Cream was released on October 22, 2012 and features a cameo by Psy. Melting is also notable for Hyuna's contributions as a lyricist and composer for "Very Hot" and "To My Boyfriend". "4Minute Hyuna's Upcoming Solo Album to Include Co-Penned, Co-Written Track, 'Very Hot'". CJ E&M enewsWorld.
In October, reports suggested that "Very Hot" from Hyuna's second EP Melting was banned by television networks KBS and MBC. The networks objected to the use of the brand KakaoTalk.이연정 (17 October 2012). "포미닛 현아 신곡 '베리 핫' 방송 불가 판정". Yonhap news. "HyunA's "Very Hot" banned from KBS and MBC". allkpop. And she expressed her opinion on TV.
On November 14 was revealed that Hyuna with Hara & Hyolyn have been chosen to be soju models for Lotte Liquor. "Hara, HyunA, and Hyorin to take Lee Hyori's trademark spot as soju models". allkpop.
On the October 21, 2012 episode of Inkigayo, the live music show revealed a teaser video hinting that twenty of the most-wanted K-pop stars would transform into four new project groups in the yearly event. Hyuna will be part of the super idol group Dazzling Red with Sistar's Hyolin, Secret's Hyoseong, After School's Nana and Kara's Nicole. Brave Brothers is set to produce the group's new title song. Slated to air on December 29, the group will perform the tunes only one time on stage and the profits from online streaming and downloading of the songs would be donated to people in need. "SBS prepares project groups for year-end show". Daily K Pop News. The song "This Person" was released on December 27, 2012. "Dazzling Red (HyunA, Nana, Hyorin, Hyosung, Nicole) release "This Person"". allkpop.
On December 28, 2012 Hyuna was featured in Eru digital single "Don't Hurt". "Eru releases digital single "Don't Hurt" feat. 4minute's HyunA". allkpop.

2013: Chemistry

On February 18, 2013 Hyuna has been chosen as the new model for casual fashion brand G by Guess, with a concept of 'Fun design with sexy style'.
On March 7, Hyuna was announced to be a spokesmodel for Toyota Corolla. Hyuna released for Toyota a new song called "My Color". A music video teaser was released on March 8, with a full music video released on March 12.
She appeared on the April 27 episode of Saturday Night Live Korea.
On May 24, Hyuna as G by Guess's spokesperson and makeup artist SON & PARK launched charitable activities "KISS OF HOPE". G by Guess launched "KISS OF HOPE" package in which all the income will be donated to the education of children in poor countries.4minute Hyuna enthusiastic support poor children's charity
In October, Cube Entertainment had Hyuna and Hyunseung make a comeback as Trouble Maker. They released the single "There Is No Tomorrow" from its Chemistry EP  The song reached number one on ten of Korea's major music charts, and was deemed by Instiz.

2014

On March 11, Hyuna performed at the SXSW 2014 music festival at Austin, Texas as part of the "K-Pop Night Out" program. On March 28, Hyuna has been chosen as the new model for  for popular game Netmarble Mystic Fighter. She is seen posing coolly holding a sword and shows various poses as a fierce warrior.Hyuna transforms into a female warrior for 'Mystic Fighter'

Personal life

Hyuna has a tattoo on her left shoulder that says, "My mother is the heart that keeps me alive."

Discography

EPs

Singles

Filmography

Movies

Television series

Endorsements

Aside from her endorsements alongside 4Minute, Hyuna has also endorsed the following brands:

Awards and nominations






