[[St. Peter's Church (Hyde Park, New York)]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1837, Roman Catholic churches in New York, Churches in Dutchess County, New York, 1837 establishments in New York

Church of St. Peter is a Roman Catholic parish church under the authority of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York, located in Hyde Park, Dutchess County, New York. It was established as a parish in 1837(initially in Poughkeepsie). It is the second oldest Catholic Church on the Hudson (after St.

History

Background

During the Revolutionary War, Col. James Livingston raised a regiment comsisting of about 200 Canadians. On November 12, 1776 the Canadian Corps was at Fishkill, NY, where Fr. Lotbinier attended the wounded and dying. Fr. Lotbinier had been appointed chaplain January 26, 1776 by General Arnold at Montreal, which appointment was confirmed by the Congress on August 10, 1776. The History of Dutchess County New York, pp 611-612, S.A. Mathieu, Poughkeepsie, NY 1909

Congregation of the Hudson

Twenty-two years after the Diocese of New York was founded in 1808, Bishop John DuBois, in 1830, authorized a Dominican, Father Phillip O'Reilly to establish parishes on the Hudson River north of Manhattan Island. The first congregation he ministered to was the small group of 28 Irish-born Catholic families, who on October 14, 1831 were organized as the Congregation on the Hudson. Before 1836, Poughkeepsie was visited once a month in summer by Fr. O'Reilly. Fr. Patrick Duffy was the first pastor to the "Congregation on the Hudson" from 1835 to 1837.Peter's Parish When the house of Robert Belton became too small for the number attending, Mass was celebrated in the old brewery, near the lower landing.T.D., Censor, The Catholic Church in the United States of America: Undertaken to Celebrate the Golden Jubilee of His Holiness, Pope Pius X. Volume 3: The Province of Baltimore and the Province of New York, Section 1: Comprising the Archdiocese of New York and the Diocese of Brooklyn, Buffalo and Ogdensburg Together with some Supplementary Articles on Religious Communities of Women.. (New York City: The Catholic Editing Company, 1914), p.426

St.Peter's Church

By 1825 emigrants from Ireland were numerous enough in Poughkeepsie to form a well defined segment of the population.  In 1837 a church building was erected on land donated by Peter Everett. When some bigoted individuals threatened to burn it down, a vigilance committee, made up of Catholics and Protestants, was formed to defend it. Dr. Pyne, a non-Catholic offered the defenders the loan of a small cannon. There was no further trouble. The church was dedicated by Bishop DuBois on November 26, 1837.

=Mission churches=

In those early days, the spiritual needs of the local Catholic community were met by priests riding circuit out of St. Peter's in Poughkeepsie. Father Maginnis (1837) was pastor not only of all Dutches County, but also of Rondout and Saugerties across the river. By 1840 St. Peter's parish also included mission churches in Sylvan Lake and New Hamburg. Father Michael Riordan, pastor of St. Peter's, and Father Myles Maxwell are remembered among a number of priests from St. Peter's' who also tended to St.History of St.F.
In 1965 St. Peter's parish re-located the Hyde Park, NY. Until acquiring the Chapel of Our Lady of the Rosary, in 1999, St. Peter's functioned as a parish without a church. Masses were held in the school gymnasium.

Our Lady of the Rosary Chapel

The chapel of Our Lady of the Rosary is located on the grounds of the former Hudson River State Hospital and was a gift to the archdiocese by the Smith Brothers (of cough drop fame), in memory of their sister, Sister Mary Loretta Smith R.S.M. It was designed and built by Father John Casey S.J. in 1906. The altar is Carrera marble. The stained glass windows depicting the life of Mary and Jesus are all Lafarge, a protégé of Tiffany. The ceiling arches and pews are all hand-hewn oak. The Baptistery and Pulpit are from an 1880 Church in Philadelphia in which Mother Saint Katherine Drexel was baptized. The marble altar angels and Last Supper were sculptured in a studio in New York City in 1907. The roof is of local blue slate and the outside walls are built of New York field stone. It is located in the center of a hollow with winding roads and a stone bridge all designed by the famous New York City Central Park architect, Frederick Law Olmstead. The chapel has a seating capacity of about 400. All the statues and stations of the cross were created the year the chapel was built in 1906. 
The vacant chapel was ready for demolition in 1999 when Rev. James Garisto advocated for the NY Archdiocese to purchase the property located on the grounds of the old abandoned psychiatric hospital. The property was purchased from the State of New York and restored by the parishioners of Saint Peter's.Chapel of Our Lady of the Rosary

Pastors

St. Peter's School

St. Peter's School was established 166 years ago when Father Michael Riordan, Pastor of St. Peter's Church, saw a need for Catholic education in the Poughkeepsie area.  The school was established in the basement of the Church, which was then on Mill Street in Poughkeepsie. By 1860, there was a great need to expand. It was around that time that the Sisters of Charity of Mount St. Vincent arrived to take charge of the girl's school on Clove St. In 1869, a boy's school was established across the street. In 1914 there were 325 boys enrolled in the school taught by five Marist Brothers, and 310 girls at the girls' school taught by 6Sisters of Charity. 
In 1965, the school was relocated to its present location on Violet Avenue, where it remains to this day.St. Peter's School

St. Peter's Cemetery

Old St.Y. on the east side of East Mansion St. and was in use from 1841 to 1884. The burying ground an East Mansion street, a parochial cemetery, was the resting place of a number of the first generation of Irish Immigrants to this locality. Subsequently, a second St. Peter's Cemetery  was established on Salt POint Rd. in Poughkeepsie.

Celtic cross

On a prominent rise overlooking St. Peter's Cemetery is a World War I monument in memory of over 100 local men who served in WWI. The Celtic cross was originally built in 1917 of pre-cast concrete. By 1993 it was so badly deteriorated that it was dismantled and replaced the following year by one of solid granite approximately 30 feet tall.

Churches that developed from St. Peter's






