[[Scoundrels (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 2010s American television series, 2010 American television series debuts, 2010 American television series endings, American Broadcasting Company network shows, American drama television series, American television series based on non-American television series, English-language television programming, Television series by Buena Vista Television

Scoundrels is an American television series that aired on the ABC network. It is based on the New Zealand TV series Outrageous Fortune.  The eight-episode run ended on August 15, 2010.

Plot

Cheryl West is a middle-aged woman with four children: twin brothers Logan and Cal, and daughters Heather, an aspiring model and Hope, the youngest and an aspiring filmmaker. After Cheryl's career criminal husband Wolf is sentenced to five years in prison, Cheryl forces her family to quit its criminal activities. However, even from jail, Wolf interferes with her attempts to reform their family.

Cast

Development and production

The series is based on the New Zealand TV series Outrageous Fortune, which was created by James Griffin and Rachel Lang. (See also "Honest" starring Amanda Redman - a UK version of the New Zealand series which transmitted on ITV in 2008.)   Lyn Greene and Richard Levine wrote the pilot of Scoundrels for American television, and they serve as the series show runners. ABC green-lit the series in January 2010 with an eight episode order.
Madsen was cast in early February, followed by Flueger.
This is ABC's second attempt at reformatting Outrageous Fortune for an American audience. In 2008, a pilot named Good Behavior wasn't picked up by the network.

Reception

Critical reception

The series pilot "And Jill Came Tumbling After" received mixed reviews with The Boston Herald claiming the show was "wicked fun" and praised the show's cast. The show's second episode Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary got overall a better response than the pilot with it earning positive reviews. TV Fanatic gave the episode 3/5 saying "the episode was an improvement on the pilot, with the characters developing and the show overall finding its tone and footing a bit." and "there were decent dramatic moments and good laughs in "Mary, Mary, Quite Contrary."

Cancellation

On October 24, 2010 it was revealed on ABC's Twitter page that Scoundrels would not be returning for another season.

Episodes

Ratings

U.S. Nielsen ratings

=Weekly ratings=

=Seasonal ratings=

Canadian Ratings







