[[Leviathan gas field]]

CATEGORIES: Natural gas fields in Israel, Israeli–Lebanese conflict

The Leviathan gas field is a large natural gas field located in the Mediterranean Sea off the coast of Israel, 

History

The first well, Leviathan 1, was first drilled to a depth of  While the probability of finding oil or gas in this unexplored layer is thought to be very small, were they to be found, it would also greatly increase the probability of finding additional hydrocarbon resources in similar ultra-deep geological formations located elsewhere in the region.
At the time of discovery, the Leviathan gas field was the largest find ever discovered in the under-explored area of the Mediterranean Sea and the largest discovery in the history of Noble Energy. Noble Energy operates Leviathan with a 39.66% working interest; Delek Drilling holds 22.67%; Avner Oil Exploration holds 22.67%; and Ratio Oil Exploration holds the remaining 15%.  In February 2014, Woodside Energy agreed to buy a 25% stake of the Leviathan field for up to US$2.55 billion.

Rights dispute

Lebanon initially argued that the field extends into Lebanese waters. Lebanon's Parliament Speaker Nabih Berri stated that Israel is "ignoring the fact that according to the maps the deposit extends into Lebanese waters," Agence France-Presse reported on June 9. Israeli Minister of National Infrastructures Uzi Landau responded "We will not hesitate to use our force and strength to protect not only the rule of law but the international maritime law," in an interview. Robbie Sable, a professor of international law at Jerusalem's Hebrew University, has stated that the claim may be complex due to Lebanon's border with Israel being indented, making it harder to establish where Israel's sea boundary ends and Lebanese waters begin.
In August 2010, Lebanon submitted to the United Nations its official view regarding the maritime border, indicating that it considered the Tamar and Leviathan gas fields to be outside Lebanese territory (though it indicated other prospective fields in the region may be within Lebanese territory). The US expressed support for the Lebanon proposal.







Articles


