[[E. W. Middlemast]]

CATEGORIES: 1864 births, Alumni of St John's College, Cambridge, English mathematicians, University of Madras, British people of colonial India, Year of death missing, Presidents of the Indian Mathematical Society

Edgar William Middlemast (born 1864) was a British mathematician and educator in India in the early twentieth century. He served as the Deputy Director of the Department of Public Instruction, Madras Presidency, as Professor of Mathematics at the Presidency College, Madras from 1910 and as Principal of the college in 1915.

Early life and education

Middlemast was born to Edward William Middlemast of Northumberland, a provision dealer, and his wife Margaret at Wallsend on December 9, 1864; he was baptised on April 16, 1865. He had his schooling at the Royal Grammar School, Newcastle upon Tyne and studied at St John's College, Cambridge between 1882 and 1886. Middlemast was placed tenth wrangler in the Mathematical tripos, Part I in 1886.

Career

Middlemast was appointed Professor of the Madras Engineering College in September 1888 and served till March 1897, when he was appointed Principal of the Government Arts College, Rajahmundry.
Middlemast was appointed Professor of Mathematics at the Presidency College, Madras in 1910,

Ramanujan

On 21 September 1911, Middlemast wrote the following letter of recommendation for a then unknown youth named Srinivasa Ramanujan, who was applying for the position of Clerk at the Madras Port Trust.  
 Letter of Recommendation 
Madras 

21 September 1911
I can strongly recommend the applicant.  He is a young man of quite exceptional capacity in Mathematics and especially in work relating to numbers.  He has a natural aptitude for computation and is very quick at figure work.  Though he has had no experience of statistical work, I am confident that he can pick up the details in a very short time.
E. W. Middlemast 

Acting Principal and Professor of Mathematics 

The Presidency College.
According to S. Narayanan, who in 1957 was a retired mathematics lecturer in Madura College, Madura, Middlemast's first impression of Ramanujan was not so favourable.  Narayanan, who had met Ramanujan in 1907, reminisced some 50 years later:  My brother-in-law, N. Swaminathan, while studying in the SPG College, Trichinopoly in the BA classes used to tell me that a young smart Aiyangar youth was loitering about, amidst the students at Trichinopoly talking about the Taylor's in the Differential Calculus and its universal applicability.  Since then, I was longing to meet him.  At last, about the year 1907, in the company of the late Prof. V. Ramaswami Aiyar, the founder of the Indian Mathematical Society, the late Mr. S. Narayana Aiyar, MA, Chief Accountant, Madras Port Trust Office and myself (then Mathematics Lecturer, Presentation Convent College, George Town, Madras), Ramanujam came to us, one fine morning with a quarto size, 400 pages bound note book, in his hand and handed it over to us for perusal and opinion.  We went through its pages carefully.  They contained only a string qf his mathematical researches, numbering 2276, 2277, 2278 and so on.  We could not make out the relation between one result and the successive one, even after an hour's explanation by him.  He was not conversant with our mathematical terms and conventions but he went on in his own queer way.  We realized that he must be a mathematical genius whose depth could not be measured by us and at once directed him to Prof. Middlemast, the then Principal and Professor of Mathematics in the Presidency College. He went through the pages of the note book for a few minutes and brushed it aside as "Nonsense."  We then persuaded Narayana Aiyar to take him to Sir FJE Spring (The Engineer who constructed the Ganges Bridge) who was the Chief Engineer and President, Madras Port Trust. He was struck with the personality of Ramanujam and provided him with a Time-Keeper's Place in his office on a salary Rs. 40/- per mensem leaving instructions to the Manager, not to give Ramanujam any hard work and but just to keep him on, leaving him to continue his mathematical researches in the office.   
Narayanan goes on to say:   Meanwhile, he held correspondence with Prof. Hardy, of Cambridge for the purpose of verifying whether Ramanujam's results were really valuable and for this purpose, about a dozen mathematical results of Ramanujam were sent by Mr. Spring to Prof. Hardy.  Meanwhile about the year 1907 or thereabouts, Prof. EH Neville of Cambridge paid a visit to Madras. We, then in consultation with the then other resident members of the Indian Mathematical Society arranged for a tea-party in honor of Mr. Neville in the Presidency College, under the auspices of the Indian Mathematical Society. We had arranged that Ramanujam should read a paper. He chose for his subject (Elliptic Functions).  At the close of the Tea party, Ramanujam read his paper. At the outset, he gave his own definition of Elliptic Function and in a few minutes explained and arrived at the Modular Transformations in Elliptic functions, which took a whole life for Prof. Cayley to formulate.  Mr. Neville was struck with it and promised to do something on his return to Cambridge.  By this time, Mr. Spring's letter had its effect and synchronised with Neville's with the result that Ramanujam was to be sent to Cambridge.  But being orthodox, he would not easily go. It was R. Ramachandra Rao, then Collector of Kurnool, that took great pains in persuading Ramanujam's mother to permit her son to go to England.  The rest is the life sketch of Ramanujam. I may add that R. Ramachandra Rao, spent a lot of his private money, incognito, to support Ramanujam. I was in close contact with him, I have often dined in his house and he, in mine.  During conversation, he used to fall into religious trances, crying out "Oh, Goddess Namagiri!" 

Notes




