[[Mei-Ann Chen]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, 21st-century conductors (music), American classical violinists, American conductors (music), American music educators, Living people, New England Conservatory alumni, People from Kaohsiung, Portland Youth Philharmonic conductors, Taiwanese emigrants to the United States, University of Michigan alumni, Women conductors (music)

Mei-Ann Chen (born 1973) is a Taiwanese American conductor currently serving as music director of the Chicago Sinfonietta and the Memphis Symphony Orchestra. Encouraged by her parents, Chen began playing violin and piano at a young age and later taught herself how to play the trumpet. By observing her conductor, she began to teach herself how to conduct and even collected batons. Chen attended the Walnut Hill School, a preparatory school affiliated with the New England Conservatory in Boston, Massachusetts, starting at age sixteen. She continued her undergraduate and advanced degree work at the Conservatory and became the first student to graduate from the institution with a double master's degree in conducting and violin performance. Chen later obtained a Doctor of Musical Arts degree from the University of Michigan.
Chen became the Portland Youth Philharmonic's fourth conductor in 2002. During her five-year tenure, the orchestra debuted at Carnegie Hall, earned an ASCAP award in 2004 for innovative programming, and began collaborating with the Oregon Symphony and Chamber Music Northwest. She also served as assistant conductor of the Oregon Symphony from 2003 to 2005 and as cover conductor for the Los Angeles Philharmonic. In 2005, Chen became the first woman to win the Malko Competition, which recognizes young conductors. That same year she won the Taki Concordia Fellowship. Chen left the Philharmonic in 2007, to become assistant conductor of the Atlanta Symphony. Chen served as assistant conductor of the Baltimore Symphony Orchestra for its 2009–2010 season. She was appointed music director of the Memphis Symphony Orchestra; her three-year tenure began in September 2010 and was renewed for an additional three years in 2012. Chen also began serving as music director for the Chicago Sinfonietta during its 2010–2011 season. 
Throughout her career, Chen has appeared with the following symphonies throughout the United States and Canada: Alabama, Chautauqua, and Sarasota symphony orchestras, as well as the National Symphony of Mexico and the Netherlands Philharmonic Orchestra.

Early life and education

Native to Taiwan, Mei-Ann Chen wanted to be a conductor since she was ten years old.
In 1989, Chen attended a concert in Taipei by the American Youth Orchestra, a touring ensemble of Boston's New England Conservatory. Following the performance, Chen's accompanist escorted her backstage, introduced her to the conductor and asked if she could play for him. Chen's opportunity came the next morning when she played for conductor Benjamin Zander in a closed basement hotel bar and was offered a scholarship immediately.
Chen remained in Boston for nine years until she attended the University of Michigan to obtain a Doctor of Musical Arts degree in conducting. There she studied with Kenneth Kiesler and Martin Katz, served as music director of the campus orchestras, and also became conductor for the Arbor Opera Theater. Chen said she pursued the doctorate degree because she did not receive any job offers and she questioned whether that was due to her being "young, a woman, Asian, or the combination of all three."

Career

In 2001, while attending the University of Michigan, Chen guest conducted the Toledo Symphony Orchestra's "Halloween Spooktacular" concert. That same year she was the youngest finalist in the Maazel-Vilar Conductor's Competition in Tokyo. Leonard Slatkin invited Chen in 2002 to conduct the National Symphony at the Kennedy Center in the National Conducting Institute. Chen received a fellowship to study at the Aspen Music Festival and School with David Zinman. The following year the American Symphony Orchestra League (now known as the League of American Orchestras) invited Chen to be showcased at the National Conductor Preview.

Portland Youth Philharmonic

Chen became the Portland Youth Philharmonic's (PYP) fourth conductor in 2002 after being selected by a committee of "musically inclined" parents, a member of the orchestra, and representatives of the Oregon Symphony and Portland Opera. She conducted both the Philharmonic ensemble as well as the Conservatory Orchestra. One board member of the organization recalled that during her audition Chen very quickly captured the rapport of the orchestra and displayed "wonderful communication skills and genuineness".
During her five-year tenure with the organization, PYP debuted at Carnegie Hall, Chen was presented the Sunburst Award from Young Audiences for her contribution to music education and was named "Educator of the Week" by KKCW.
While conductor of the Philharmonic, Chen set up a box in her office so that students could leave notes for her about themselves. One musician of the orchestra felt that Chen was "kind of formal" during rehearsal but felt "like a big sister" once practice ended. Chen has been described as a "firecracker: small, bright and full of ka-boom", and her enthusiasm at times caused her to lose her breath. One board member of the organization praised Chen's attitude and felt that her lack of ego was a "rare quality in top symphony performers". 
Chen turned down a position with the Oregon Symphony to continue work at PYP, later recalling: 
In 2007, she accompanied the orchestra on an international tour to Asia, where her parents saw her conduct for the first time. Though Chen initially thought she would remain with the Philharmonic for ten years, she left in 2007 to become assistant conductor of the Atlanta Symphony. She said of her departure: "The musicians at PYP have become my kids. When I look back, these five years will always be the most memorable time of my musical career." Guest conductors during the 2007–2008 season included Ken Selden, director of orchestral studies at Portland State University, former Seattle Symphony conductor Alastair Willis, along with former PYP conductors Huw Edwards and Chen herself.

Baltimore, Memphis, Chicago

Chen served as the Los Angeles Philharmonic's cover conductor during her tenure with PYP. Following her departure, she became assistant conductor of the Atlanta Symphony for two seasons (2007–2009).
In October 2010 Chen returned to the New England Conservatory to guest conduct the Philharmonia. Chen dedicated the concert to the late Marylou Speaker Churchill, and thanked Benjamin Zander and dean emeritus Mark Churchill for "making her career possible". Chen began serving as music director for the Chicago Sinfonietta during its 2010–2011 season. Chen plans to record a commercial album with the Sinfonietta in June 2012 and hopes to launch an international competition for rising musicians and composers. 
Chen returned to Atlanta in October 2011 to guest conduct the symphony.

Interests

As a child Chen was interested in earth science. Chen finds satisfaction in "loud" and "elaborate" noises, particularly ones generated without musical instruments. Her favorite composer is Pyotr Ilyich Tchaikovsky; other favorites include Ludwig van Beethoven, Leonard Bernstein, and Aaron Copland. Her favorite composition is Beethoven's Symphony No. 5, which she will be conducting during Chicago Sinfonietta's 2011–2012 season. She likes Romantic music the most "because the music in this era was an expression of your life". In addition to working with minority or unconventional artists, Chen prefers to incorporate classic compositions as well as new works into her repertoire. She enjoys reading detective stories, fiction or non-fiction, and has shared that she would want to be a detective or a professor if she were not a conductor. She moved to Mud Island, Memphis in order to be close to nature, inspiration and the Cannon Center.








