[[Stuart Kellett]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Living people, English darts players, Professional Darts Corporation players

Stuart Kellett (born 12 August 1981) is an English darts player for the Professional Darts Corporation (PDC).

Career

Kellett reached the last 16 of the 2007 Winmau World Masters, having beaten Andy Fordham among others on the way to the televised stages. He lost 1-3 in sets to the then BDO world champion Martin Adams.
He also qualified for the 2008 Zuiderduin Masters, losing both of his group games to Mareno Michels and Darryl Fitton.
In 2010, Kellett won both the Scottish Open and the Antwerp Open. His good run of form helped him to qualify for the 2010 Winmau World Masters as the second seed. He knocked out Tony West in the last 16, before defeating Ted Hankey and Martin Phillips (both in sudden-death legs) to reach the final. He lost 3-7 to Adams, who won his third consecutive World Masters title.Adams celebrates Masters treble BBC Sport
Kellett also qualified for the 2011 BDO World Darts Championship, again as the second seed. He defeated two-time semi-finalist and pub team-mate Darryl Fitton 3-0 in the first round, losing just one leg along the way. Bookmakers slashed his odds of winning the championship from 16/1 to 9/2 after this performance, but he was unable to produce the same standard against Jan Dekker in the second round and lost 4-1. During this tournament commentators and pundits began affectionately referring to Kellett as the 'cocky craftsman' (in a nod to Eric Bristow), due to his confidence on-stage in comparison to his otherwise humble nature off it.
Kellett's form took a dip after his loss to Dekker, as he dropped out of the world's top 16 and failed to qualify for the 2011 Masters or the 2012 World Championship.
In January 2012, Kellett successfully earned a Professional Darts Corporation tour card on day two of the PDC's Pro Tour 'Q School' qualifying tournament. In June, he qualified for the European Tour Event 3 after defeating Nigel Heydon and William O'Connor in the UK qualifier.
Kellett reached his first PDC final in March at the first European Tour event of the year, the UK Masters. He overcame Peter Wright, Colin Lloyd, Dave Chisnall, Robert Thornton and Andy Hamilton en route to the final, where he lost 6–4 to three-time world champion John Part. He went into his final match knowing a win over Paul Nicholson would see him advance to the last 16, but he was beaten 5–2 to finish third in the group. 
Kellett earned over £30,000 in ProTour events during 2013 to finish 18th on the ProTour Order of Merit and qualify for the Players Championship Finals for the first time.
He played in a last leg decider against Gary Anderson, having led 4–1, and missed a dart at tops to complete a 120 finish for the match to lose 6–5.
He took the first of sixteen spots available to non-qualified players through the 2013 ProTour Order of Merit for the 2014 World Championship and faced Paul Nicholson in the first round, losing 3–0.

Personal life

Kellett works as a web designer and is not yet a full-time darts player.

World Championship results

BDO

PDC






