[[Kamehameha I]]

CATEGORIES: 1758 births, 1819 deaths, Royalty of the Kingdom of Hawaii, Founding monarchs, House of Kamehameha, 18th-century monarchs, Monarchs of the Hawaiian Islands, Hawaiian military personnel, Hawaiian adoptees (hānai)

Kamehameha I (i Ka Liholiho Kūnuiākea.

Birth and concealment

Traditional chants indicate he was born in the month of ikuwā (winter) or around November. According to Hawaiian historians Samuel Kamakau
He was known as Pai 

Parentage controversy

His father Keōua and his mother Chiefess Kekū
Alapaʻinui, who was the present king of Hawai
They raised Paiea until the accidental death of the loyal kahu during a sham battle.
Another story says the name Paio's, life, by blocking a blow from a pāhoa (dagger).
PaiĀwini.

Naha Stone

Legend has it that the man who moves the stone would be the one to unite the islands. Many have tried and failed to get the stone to move from its original spot and those who have tried were of high ranking "naha'' blood line. Kamehameha was of the nīo descent and Ululani (high-ranking chiefess of Hilo) believed Kamehameha was not worthy of attempting to move the stone. Kamehameha ignored all negativity and in the end, not only had he moved the stone but legend says the stone had been overturned. Kamehameha went on to unite the islands through a series of hard fought battles., ''The Legend of the Naha Stone.'' Donch website, 15 November 2013. Retrieved on 4 December 2013.

Unification of Hawaiʻi

When Alapaōpala was slain and Kalaniʻōpuʻu claimed victory. For his loyal service to his uncle, Kamehameha was made Kalaniʻōpuʻu's aide.
In 1779, Kamehameha again traveled with Kalaniʻōpuʻu to Kealakekua Bay. This time he, among other young chiefs accompanying their senior chief, met with Captain James Cook. During Kamehameha's first contact with non-Hawaiians, he may have stayed aboard Cook's ship, the , for at least one night.

Hawaii Island

Raised in the royal court of his uncle Kalaniʻōpuʻu, Kamehameha achieved prominence in 1782, upon Kalaniʻōpuʻu's death. While the kingship was inherited by Kalaniʻōpuʻu's son Kīwalaʻō, Kamehameha was given a prominent religious position, guardianship of the Hawaiian god of war, Kūkā
Kamehameha then moved against the district of Puna in 1790 deposing Chief Keawemaū, took advantage of Kamehameha's absence and led an uprising. When Kamehameha returned with his army to put down the rebellion, Keōua fled past the Kīlauea volcano, which erupted and killed nearly a third of his warriors from poisonous gas.
Questioning a kahuna on how best to go about securing the rest of the island, Kamehameha resolved to construct a temple (heiau) to Kūkāi's body on it.
When the Pu

Maui and Oʻahu

Kamehameha's dreams included far more than the island of Hawai
With his new army, Kamehameha felt confident enough to move on the neighboring islands of Maui and Oi invaded those islands.
In 1795, Kamehameha set sail with an armada of 960 war canoes and 10,000 soldiers. He quickly secured the lightly defended islands of Maui and Molokauanu Pali mountain ridge; these notches, like those on a castle turret, would serve as gunports for Kalanikūpule's cannon.
In a series of skirmishes, Kamehameha's forces were able to push back Kalanikūpule's men until the latter was cornered on the Pali Lookout. While Kamehameha moved on the Pali, his troops took heavy fire from the cannon. In desperation, he assigned two divisions of his best warriors to climb to the Pali to attack the cannons from behind; they surprised Kalanikūpule's gunners and took control of the weapons. With the loss of their guns, Kalanikūpule's troops fell into disarray and were cornered by Kamehameha's still-organized troops. A fierce battle ensued, with Kamehameha's forces forming an enclosing wall. By using their traditional Hawaiian spears, as well as muskets and cannon, they were able to kill most of Kalanikūpule's forces. Over 400 men were forced off the Pali's cliff, a drop of 1,000 feet. Kailimoku.
Kamehameha wanted not only to conquer the islands but to win the hearts of the people. After the victory at Nuo (Honolulu: Kamehameha Schools Press, 1921), 418-419.

Kauai

Kamehameha was now ruler of all the Hawaiian Islands from Oōpio Hūhā. During this time, a triple hull canoe (pūkolu), presumably the first of its kind in the islands, was built and named Kaenakāne, though it proved ineffective.
In 1803 he tried again, but this time, disease broke out among his warriors; Kamehameha himself fell ill, though he later recovered. During this time, Kamehameha was amassing the largest armada Hawaii as bad for the sandalwood trade.
In April 1810, Kaumuali

King of Hawaii

As king, Kamehameha took several steps to ensure that the islands remained a united realm even after his death. He unified the legal system and he used the products he collected in taxes to promote trade with Europe and the United States. Kamehameha did not allow non-Hawaiians to own land; they would not be able to until the Great Māhele of 1848. This edict ensured the islands' independence even while many of the other islands of the Pacific succumbed to the colonial powers.
In fact, the Kingdom of Hawaii that Kamehameha established retained its independence, except for a five-month British occupation in 1843, until it was annexed by the United States in 1898. It was this legacy that earned Kamehameha the epithet "Napoleon of the Pacific" (Napoleona o ka Pākīpika in the Hawaiian language).
Kamehameha also instituted the Māmalahoe Kānāwai, the Law of the Splintered Paddle. Its origins derived from before the unification of the Island of Hawai
Although he ended human sacrifice, Kamehameha was a devout follower of the Hawaiian religion and Hawaiian traditions (such as Lua). He believed so strongly in his religion and culture that he would execute his subjects for breaches of the strict rules called kapu. Although he entertained Christians, he did not appear to take them seriously.
Kamehameha would be lucky to have visitors from other countries such as John Young, Isaac Davis, and George Vancouver. Young and Davis became advisors to Kamehameha and provided him with advanced weapons that helped in combat. Kamehameha was also a religious king and the holder of the war god Kukai (Honolulu: Kamehameha Schools Press, 1991), 180-181.

Later life

After about 1812, Kamehameha spent his time at Kamakahonu, a compound he built in Kailua-Kona.
It is now the site of King Kamehameha's Beach Hotel, the starting and finishing points of the Ironman World Championship Triathlon.
As the custom of the time, he took several wives and had many children, although he would outlive about half of them.

Final resting place

When Kamehameha died May 14, 1819, his body was hidden by his trusted friends, Hoapili and Hoolulu, in the ancient custom called hūnākele (literally, "to hide in secret"). The mana, or power of a person, was considered to be sacred. As per the ancient custom, his body was buried hidden because of his mana. His final resting place remains unknown. At one point in his reign Kamehameha III asked that Hoapili show him where his father's bones were buried, but on the way there Hoapili knew that they were being followed, so he turned around. History of the Hawaiian Kingdom. Bess Press. ISBN 1-57306-150-6.

Honors

Statues

Five major statues exist, where each of the statues varies slightly from each other in details such as having different weaponry, gilding or painting:

Other legacy

Family

Family tree

Children

Ancestry



Bibliography



|-
 1795–1819


 1782–1795
 1795–1810

 1810–1819


