[[Eternal Light Peace Memorial]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures completed in 1938, Ceremonial flames, American Civil War military monuments and memorials, Limestone buildings, Paul Philippe Cret buildings, Towers in Pennsylvania, Gettysburg Battlefield, Peace monuments and memorials

The Eternal Light Peace Memorial is a 1938 Gettysburg Battlefield monument commemorating the 1913 Gettysburg reunion for the fiftieth anniversary of the 1863 Battle of Gettysburg.  The natural gas flame in a one ton bronze urn is atop a tower on a stone pedestrian terrace with views from the terraced hill summit over about  away.

History

In 1887, "the Philadelphia Brigade, Col. Cowan and others" advocated a "grand monument to American Heroism on this battlefield",
The original plan was for a $250,000 "monument of peace" at The Angle,

Dedication

Attendance for the memorial's dedication at the 1938 Gettysburg reunion was 250,000; a further 100,000 attempted to attend but failed to arrive due to congested roads. President Franklin D. Roosevelt arrived at a temporary platform on his special train via the Reading Railroad from the North after leaving Springwood at Hyde Park NY that morning. The U.S. 3d Cavalry Division escorted the President's motorcade to the memorial on Oak Hill, and Roosevelt's open car arrived with a 21 gun salute.
Roosevelt used "a new Mobile sound system unit" to address the audience including the veterans on specially-constructed grandstands under a canopy. Grand Army of the Republic chaplain Martin V. Stone ended the ceremony with a benediction prayer, and on the way to his car Roosevelt spoke with the oldest attending veteran, William Barnes of the US Colored Troops, age 112. A Sixth Field Artillery battery near Oak Hill fired a 21 gun salute as the President departed at 7 p.m. (his train to Washington used the Western Maryland Railroad.
The flame was reduced to a pilot light during World War II (from December 25, 1941) and just prior to the 1946 Paris peace conference, President Truman commented about the inscribed motto, Peace Eternal in a Nation United: "That is what we want, but let's change that word (nation) to world and we'll have something."  The deteriorated Alabama limestone in the lower section that had been approved for use by the Bureau of Standards was replaced with gray granite in June 1941, and repairs were also made in 1950.  A 1962 protest against nuclear arms and testing was held at the memorial, and the flame was extinguished in 1974 for the oil crisis






