[[Meged oil field]]

CATEGORIES: Oil fields in Israel, Oil field disputes

The Meged oil field is an oil field that was first discovered in the 1980s but declared to not be commercially viable at the time. 



The Meged oil field is located near the towns of Kfar Saba and Rosh Ha'Ayin in Israel. It is situated close to the southern tip of the Palmyra rift system, a geological formation that extends across Syria to the northeast.
|accessdate=20 June 2013|newspaper=globes|date=20 June 2013|author=globes}}[/ref]
In early January 2012, Givot Olam reported that the state had rejected the company's proposal to drill at Meged wells 6, 7 and 8.

Agreements

In 2010 Givot Olam sold 240 barrels of oil obtained from Meged 5 to Oil Refineries Ltd (BAZAN), an Israeli oil refining company.
During the first quarter of 2011 Givot sold NIS4.6 million worth of crude oil extracted from the Meged field to refineries.
An agreement signed between Givot Olam and Natural Gas for Israel Ltd. (GTL) in March 2012 stipulated that the former would supply natural gas to GTL from the Meged 5 well for a period of three years in exchange for $4.4 million, beginning in 2013.

Religion

Givot Olam founder Tovia Luskin was drawn to the Meged site after interpreting a geological survey of the area in 1988 as confirming a biblical passage in the Book of Deuteronomy (33:15) and its associated commentary by Rashi.
In order to accommodate Jewish religious proscriptions against performing labor on the Sabbath, in 2011 Givot Olam introduced Shabbat clocks into its production system to obviate the use of manual faucets.

Land rights

Efraim Sneh has stated that although the oil drilling site is in Israel the oil reservoir may extend to the West Bank near the West Bank village of Rantis. Sneh suggested that cooperation between the Israeli and Palestinian sides could lead to the construction of a joint oil pipeline.
The Meged 5 well is located on land designated a training zone by the Israel Defense Forces.

Controversy

With the location of Meged Oil field directly next to the border between Israel and the West Bank, which is under control of the Palestinian National Authority, it remains controversial. 
Palestinians claim, that only after the creation of the Israeli West Bank barrier that annexed the oil field, which was originally located within the borders of the Palestinian city of Ramallah, Givot Olam declared to have made it commercially viable to drill.
According to a source in the Palestinian Authority, eighty percent of the Meged oil field is on land owned by Palestinians.
Feb 18, 2014 - Givot Olam Oil ousts CEO Tovia Luskin, who began serving as Givot CEO on August 13, 2010, and has appointed special consultant IDF Major General (res.) Giora Eiland as acting CEO.
The company said that the official reason for his ouster was "disagreements with and dissatisfaction of the board of directors about his performance as CEO."


Fracking

According to reports published by Givot Olam, the methods used in determining the potential for oil extraction at some of the Meged wells involve fracking.








