[[2011 Alexandria bombing]]

CATEGORIES: Terrorist incidents in Egypt in 2011, History of Alexandria, Religiously motivated violence in Egypt, Massacres in Egypt, Coptic history, 2011 in Egypt, Suicide bombings in Egypt, Mass murder in 2011, Persecution of Copts, Islamic terrorism, Massacres in places of worship

The 2011 Alexandria bombing was an attack on Coptic Christians in Alexandria, Egypt, on Saturday, 1 January 2011. Twenty three people died as a result of the attack, which occurred as Christian worshipers were leaving a new year service.

Background

Copts in Egypt complain of increasing persecution, including attacks by Muslim extremists and what they see as official discrimination by the state. Copts celebrate Christmas on 7 January. This was the second consecutive Christmas with violence. On Christmas Eve in 2010, a Muslim gunman fired on worshipers leaving a church in Upper Egypt, killing 7 people and wounding 10 others.
In the months prior to the incident, the religious ambiance in Egypt had been clouded by anti-Church sentiment, in particular regarding the public allegation made by Mohammad Salim Al-Awa that the Coptic Orthodox Church was storing weapons in churches and monasteries.
In November, a group calling itself Al-Qaeda in Iraq announced that all Christians in the Middle East would be "legitimate targets." The Alexandria bombing occurred almost two months to the day after the attack on Our Lady of Salvation church in central Baghdad in what militants called a response to the mistreatment of Muslim converts by Egyptian Copts. Al-Qaeda's Iraqi affiliate claimed responsibility for that attack and made new threats against Christians. The group threatened to attack Egyptian Copts if their church did not free two Christians, it said had been "imprisoned in their monasteries" for having converted to Islam. The two women were Camilia Chehata and Wafa Constantine, the wives of Coptic priests whose claimed conversion caused a stir in Egypt.
Two weeks before the bombing an Islamist website called for attacks on a list of Egypt's churches, and included the church that was hit."Suspected suicide bomber kills 21 in attack on Egyptian church". By Bill Roggio. 1 January 2011

Bombing

An explosive device detonated in front of the Coptic Orthodox church of Saint Mark and Pope Peter in the Sidi Bishr neighbourhood in Alexandria.
At the time of the blast, several thousand Coptic Christians were attending midnight prayer service at the church at the occasion of the new year. The explosion resulted in scattered body parts, destroyed cars and smashed windows. 21 Coptic Christians were killed immediately following the explosion, or soon after, and about 97 people – most of them Christians – were injured. The remains were covered with newspapers until they were brought inside the church. Two more Copts died in the hospital over the few days following the attack, raising the total number to 23, all of whom were Coptic Christians. According to one eyewitness report, the first victim was a Muslim salesperson who sells Quran books across the street from the Saints Church.
Forensic testing confirmed that the explosive device used was homemade and contained nails and ball-bearings. The Interior Ministry stated that the bomb was filled with small pieces of metal to serve as shrapnel, and that a foreign-backed suicide bomber may have been responsible.

Responsibility

Egypt's former Interior minister Habib Ibrahim El Adly said on 23 January that evidence proved that the Gaza-based Army of Islam planned and executed the attack. The group quickly denied the charge, while also reportedly expressing support for the bombing. On the other hand, various reports claim that Habib Ibrahim El Adly himself was involved in the bombings. 

Reactions

Coptic community in Egypt

Copts were deeply aggrieved by this attack, many believing that the Egyptian state security's failure to deal firmly with past attacks on Christians in Egypt contributed to this attack, while others went as far as to directly blame the State Security for the bombings. One member of the Coptic community declared, "The government is the reason this happened. They are the terrorists who attack us every day."
Following the bombing, several thousand Copts took to the streets in protest. Furious Christians clashed with Egyptian police and Egyptian security forces."Deadly church blast sparks Christian rage in Egypt". Euronews, 1 January 2011 Christians and Muslims pelted each other with rocks, and cars were torched. After these overnight protests, more than 100 Christians protested the following morning near the church that was attacked, chanting "We sacrifice our souls and blood for the Holy Cross" and "O Mubarak, the heart of the Copts is on fire". The Egyptian police reacted by firing rubber bullets and tear gas at the Christians.
In Cairo, about 4,000 Christians and Muslims demonstrated against terrorism in the predominantly Christian neighborhood of Shubra. (in Arabic) The demonstration lasted for six hours and was joined by both government and opposition members of the Egyptian parliament and a number of political figures, including a former minister and Tomorrow Party founder Ayman Nour. In the same neighborhood of Shubra, thousands of Coptic Christians clashed with riot police for three consecutive days, resulting in injuries to both Coptic civilians and riot police soldiers.
Thousands of Copts demonstrated at the Monastery of Saint Simon the Tanner in Cairo. The demonstrators called for the resignation of the Egyptian government. They chanted, "With our souls and blood we redeem our Cross". They then clashed with the Egyptian security forces, resulting in injuries to 12 of the Coptic demonstrators.
In addition, thousands of Coptic Christians demonstrated outside the Egyptian ministry of foreign affairs and the state television buildings for two consecutive days.
Pope Shenouda III strongly condemned the "criminal assault", blaming it on "forces that wish no good for Egypt". The Pope also called upon the government to "speedily arrest and prosecute the perpetrator of this criminal act." His personal secretary said the incident had "severely grieved us, because it is very alien to the love and harmony in which the nation lives".
The top cleric in Alexandria, the Patriarchal Vicar Hegumen Ruweis Marcos, said that the Egyptian government and security forces wanted to blame the bombing on a suicide bomber instead of a car bomb in order to write off the crime as something carried out by a lone attacker. He also denounced the lack of protection in front of the church, stating he was surprised to find only three soldiers and one officer guarding the church at such a sensitive time in spite of the recent numerous threats against Copts.
The Synod of priests in Alexandria unanimously criticized the lax attitude of the Egyptian authorities towards the public expression of hatred against Coptic Christians. In a statement issued by the Synod, the priests said that the attack on the church was "the result of anti-Christian mobilization and the lies recently propagated against the Coptic Orthodox Church."
On the Sunday following the bombings, Coptic parishioners at the bombed church of Saint Mark and Pope Peter expressed anger, and protested discrimination that Christians in Egypt are facing. One of the parishioners declared "in this country, we cannot even pray in churches." Another blamed the anti-Coptic sentiments spread by the Islamic mosques. The priest of the church blamed "Islamic fanaticism" and "Islamic extremism". He called upon the Egyptian government to ensure the rights of the Christians in "life, prayer and work".
Officials of the Coptic Orthodox Church announced that prayers for Eastern Christmas would still be held, but that celebrations would be canceled.

Coptic community in the diaspora

Memorial services were held in Coptic churches across Europe in memory of the victims of the bombing.
The Coptic Orthodox Church in the United Kingdom issued an official statement condemning the massacre, and expressing concern that incidents of violence and terror against Christians in Egypt were increasingly spiraling out of control. The statement also criticized the fact that crimes against the Copts in Egypt were going unchecked and unresolved, and their perpetrators were not brought to justice.
In Montreal, Canada, all five Coptic churches in the city decided to proceed under tightened security with the Eastern Christmas Eve mass on the eve of Eastern Christmas but decided not to hold any celebrations.

Domestic

The Egyptian government issued a statement immediately following the bombing blaming "foreign elements" for the planning and execution of the bombing.
President Hosni Mubarak promised in a televised address that terrorists would not destabilize Egypt or divide Christians and Muslims. He said the attack "carries evidence of the involvement of foreign fingers" and vowed to pursue the perpetrators.
The governor of Alexandria, Adel Labib, accused Al Qaida of planning the bombing, without giving any further details.
Many Egyptians expressed their disappointment regarding the government's claims that Al Qaida and foreign elements were behind the massacre, seeing those claims as a way for the government to evade the issue of growing sectarian divisions in the country.
In a message to Pope Shenouda III, Patriarch Theodore II of the Greek Orthodox Church of Alexandria strongly condemned the "brutal criminal attack" against a church "where prayers were being recited for the peace of Egypt, for the peace of those in power, and for the peace of the world." Patriarch Theodore II also described the victims as "Martyrs of the Church".
Refaa al-Tahtawi, spokesman for Al-Azhar, Sunni Islam's main institution based in Cairo, appeared on television to denounce the attack, which he said targeted "Egyptian national unity". He also appealed to Christians and Muslims for calm.
The attack was also condemned by the Muslim Brotherhood,Ikhwanweb: The Muslim Brotherhood Official English Website who also called upon Muslims to protect Christian churches.[ref]
[/ref]
Both government and independent newspapers warned that civil war could break out in Egypt unless Muslims and Christians close ranks. Newspapers also urged the Egyptian government to focus on the situation of the Copts, who often complain of discrimination.
In a provocative act that deepened the feelings of the Coptic community of being increasingly victimized and marginalized, a high-ranking state security officer walked over to a row of demonstrators standing vigil in Cairo and slowly, methodically blew out the white candles they were holding to remember those who died in the attack.
Interior minister Habib al-Adly said on 23 January that evidence proved that the Gaza-based Army of Islam planned and executed the attack. The group quickly denied responsibility, while also reportedly expressing support for the bombing.
In an interview that aired on Al-Fareen TV (Egypt) on 3 January 2011 (as translated by MEMRI), Former Egyptian Deputy Minister Abdallah Al-Ash'al stated that:
 
 "Today, many young people in Egypt are unhappy. They flee the country and prefer to die on the shores of the Mediterranean, because they have no job opportunities here... The people who carried out this attack are Egyptians, but the Mossad exploited them... When Israeli military intelligence chief Amos Yadlin submitted a report about the past four and a half years, he stated clearly that Israel was exploiting the peace treaty in order to infiltrate Egypt."Egyptian Intellectuals Accuse the Israeli Mossad for the Alexandria Church Bombing, MEMRI TV, Clip No. 2747, 2–3 January 2011.
Egypt's general prosecutor opened probe on former Interior Minister Habib el-Adly's reported role in the New Year's Eve bombing.

International community



Funeral

The funeral of the victims was held in the Monastery of Saint Mina, about 30 km west of Alexandria.(in Arabic) Between 5,000 and 10,000 people attended the funeral, all of whom adamantly rejected the condolences of president Hosni Mubarak, shouting "No! No! No!" as bishop Youanis attempted to thank Mubarak for his condolences and his statement regarding the bombing.
In addition to Bishop Youanis, Pope Shenouda III delegated Metropolitan Bakhomios to preside over the funeral of those killed in Alexandria.

Further threats

In Europe, Coptic churches have been threatened with further attacks. Coptic bishops and priests in France and Germany filed complaints and called for governmental protection. In the UK, officials reported that threats were outlined against two Coptic churches in the country.
In Canada, Coptic churches were on high alert following threats by Al Qaida against Copts in Canada. All five Coptic churches in Montreal decided to proceed under tightened security with the Eastern Christmas Eve mass on the eve of Eastern Christmas. Following Coptic Christmas, Canadian prime minister Stephen Harper met with Coptic Christian leaders to condemn the Alexandria massacre and to confirm that Canada stands behind the right of the Copts to safely practice their faith. He also declared that the international community must stay vigilant against such violence against Coptic Christians.
The bombing also raised fears that jihadists would increase violence against Christians worldwide. The website called for the murder of all those whose names appear on the list, accusing them of defaming Islam and converting Muslims to Christianity.







| accessdate=27 January 2011| archiveurl=  archivedate= 1 February 2011 | deadurl= no}}
| last=  Chick
| first=  Kristen
| url=  
| title= Egypt's Christians pick up the pieces after deadly News Year's Eve church bombing
| publisher=The Christian Science Monitor
| date=  2 January 2011
}}
| last=  Shahine
| first=  Alaa
| url=  
| title=  Egyptian Christians Clash With Police in Cairo After Deadly Church Bombing
|publisher=bloomberg
| date=  2 January 2011
| accessdate=27 January 2011| archiveurl=  archivedate= 1 February 2011 | deadurl= no}}
| last=  Fahim
| first=  Kareem
| url=  
| title=  Egyptians Back at Services After Bomb
|work=The New York Times
| date=  2 January 2011
}}
| last= Hauslohner
| first=  Abigail|url= title=  Mourning in Alexandria: Egypt's Christians Worship and Worry|newspaper=Time Magazine|date=  2 January 2011}}

