[[Nancy Schaefer]]

CATEGORIES: 1936 births, 2010 deaths, 2010 murders in the United States, Georgia (U.S. state) State Senators, Georgia (U.S. state) Republicans, Women state legislators in Georgia (U.S. state), Murder–suicides in the United States, People from Rabun County, Georgia

Nancy Schaefer (28 June 1936) was an American politician and conservative activist, who served in the Georgia State Senate from 2004 to 2008.

Political Career

Born in Clayton and of German descent, Schaefer became a prominent conservative political activist in Georgia in the 1980s. She subsequently ran for Mayor of Atlanta in 1993, before running as the Republican Party's nominee for Lieutenant governor of Georgia in 1994, where she lost to incumbent Democrat Pierre Howard. 

Causes and Beliefs

Throughout her career as an activist and politician, she was a champion of Christian conservative causes, opposing the department of Child Protective Services (a.k.a Department of children and Families). Which, after 4 years of investigation, on November 16, 2007 she published a report entitled "The Corrupt Business of Child Protective Services". After publishing the report, in a press conference she exclaimed that the report caused her to lose her position as a Georgia State Senator. In addition, she stood firmly in her support of the Pro-Life agenda, and also opposed Gay marriage. However, in expressing her Christian beliefs she promoted the display of the Ten Commandments in public places.  She was a senior official in the Baptist church, having served as a First Vice President of the Georgia Baptist Convention.

Murder

Schaefer died at her home near Turnerville in Habersham County on 26 March 2010 with her husband of 52 years, Bruce Schaefer. Police concluded the deaths to have been a murder–suicide perpetrated by her husband.
Before her death, she published and promoted the report "The Corrupt Business of Child Protective Services", Upon her death, fellow State Senator Ralph Hudgens eulogized her as "almost like a rock star of the Christian right".




