[[New Jersey Devils]]

CATEGORIES: New Jersey Devils, Sports clubs established in 1974, Sports in Newark, New Jersey, Ice hockey teams in New Jersey, Atlantic Division (NHL), Metropolitan Division, National Hockey League in the New York metropolitan area, Ice hockey teams in the New York metropolitan area, Sports in East Rutherford, New Jersey

The New Jersey Devils are a professional ice hockey team based in Newark, New Jersey. They are members of the Metropolitan Division of the Eastern Conference of the National Hockey League (NHL). The club was founded in Kansas City, Missouri as the Kansas City Scouts in 1974, moved to Denver, Colorado as the Colorado Rockies after only two seasons, and then established in New Jersey in 1982.
The franchise had been poor to mediocre in the eight years before moving to New Jersey.  The pattern continued in its first five years in New Jersey as they failed to make the playoffs and never finished higher than fifth in their division.  However, under the guidance of president and general manager Lou Lamoriello, hired in 1987 and who still holds these positions today, the Devils have made the playoffs all but four times between 1988 and 2013, including thirteen berths in a row from 1997 to 2010. They finished with a winning record every season from 1992–93 to 2009–10.nhl.
The Devils were known for their defense-first approach throughout their years of Cup contention, but have moved towards a more offensive style.
Since the departure of the Nets to Brooklyn, the New Jersey Devils are the only major professional sports team to explicitly brand itself as a New Jersey franchise. Although the New York Giants, New York Jets and New York Red Bulls are headquartered, train and play in New Jersey, these three teams still brand themselves as being from New York City.

History

Kansas City and Colorado

In 1974, the NHL ended its first expansion period by adding teams in Kansas City, Missouri and Washington, D.C.
On October 9, 1974, the Scouts hit the ice for the first time at Maple Leaf Gardens in Toronto and lost 4–2 to the Maple Leafs. Due to a rodeo being held in Kansas City's brand-new Kemper Arena, the Scouts were forced to wait nine games before making their home debut. Although they lost that game to the Black Hawks 4–3, the next night they beat their expansion brethren, the Washington Capitals, 5–4. Like most expansion teams, the Scouts were terrible, garnering only 41 points in their inaugural season. The next season, they won only 12 games (including only one win in their last 44 games)—still the worst in franchise history. The Scouts failed to make the playoffs in either season in Kansas City and won only 27 of 160 games.
Although they were better than the Capitals (who won only eight games in their inaugural season), the Scouts began to suffer from an economic downturn in the Midwest. For their second season, the Scouts sold just 2,000 of 8,000 season tickets and were almost $1 million in debt.  The Scouts' owners did not have the resources or the patience to handle such massive losses, and decided to get out after only two years.  After the 1975–76 season, the franchise was moved to Denver and was renamed the Colorado Rockies.
The team made a fresh start in Colorado, winning its first game 4–2 over Toronto. They picked up momentum and looked like a possible playoff contender, but things collapsed in February, and the Rockies finished the 1976–77 season with a record of 20–46–14; good for 54 points. The next season, they seemed to regress, finishing with only 59 points and 21 games under .500, the sixth-worst record in the league.  However, the Smythe Division was so weak that year (only the Black Hawks finished above .500) that the Rockies were able to edge out the Vancouver Canucks for second place in the division by two points.  In those days, the division runners-up were guaranteed a playoff spot.  They didn't last in the playoffs long, though; the Philadelphia Flyers eliminated them in a two-game sweep.
A lack of stability continually dogged the team. In their first eight years, the Scouts/Rockies went through ten coaches (including eight in their first seven years), none lasting more than one full season. While in Denver, the team changed owners twice.
Prior to the 1978–79 season, owner Jack Vickers sold the team to New Jersey trucking tycoon Arthur Imperatore, who announced that he wished to move the team to the New Jersey Meadowlands. The NHL vetoed the move since the Brendan Byrne Arena was still being built, and there was no suitable temporary facility in the area. In 1979, the team hired Don Cherry as head coach and traded for Maple Leafs star Lanny McDonald. Despite these moves, the Rockies still posted the worst record in the NHL. They played the next two seasons with the possibility of moving until May 27, 1982, when Imperatore sold the Rockies to another New Jersey millionaire, shipping magnate John McMullen (who also owned Major League Baseball's Houston Astros).  McMullen's first act was to announce that the long-expected move to New Jersey would finally come to pass.
The team would now be playing right in the middle of the New York–New Jersey–Connecticut tri-state area, home to the three-time defending Stanley Cup champion New York Islanders, as well as the very popular New York Rangers. The Devils had to compensate the Islanders, Rangers and Flyers for "invading" New Jersey.

New Jersey

=1982–1993: Building the foundation=

On June 30, 1982, the team was renamed the New Jersey Devils, after the legend of the Jersey Devil, an ominous cryptozoological creature supposed to inhabit the Pine Barrens of South Jersey. Over 10,000 people voted in a contest held by local newspapers to select the name. The team began play in East Rutherford, New Jersey at the Brendan Byrne Arena, later renamed the Continental Airlines Arena and now the Izod Center, where they would call home through the 2006–07 season. The Devils were placed in the Patrick Division, where their 1974 expansion brethren, the Washington Capitals, were also playing.
The Devils' first game ended in a 3–3 tie to the Pittsburgh Penguins. Their first win, a 3–2 victory, came in New Jersey at the expense of their new trans-Hudson rivals, the New York Rangers. The team finished with a 17–49–14 record, putting them three points above last place in the Patrick Division.
In the following season, the Devils were publicly humiliated by Wayne Gretzky after they were blown out 13–4 by his team, the Edmonton Oilers. Gretzky was upset that former teammate Ron Low played for what he considered an inferior team, and in a post-game interview said:
Later, Gretzky publicly admitted that his comment went too far, but privately maintained that his comment was accurate.
In the 1983–84 season, the Devils hosted the annual NHL All-Star Game at the Brendan Byrne Arena. Chico Resch was the winning goaltender, and Devils defenseman Joe Cirella tallied a goal as the Wales Conference beat the Campbell Conference 7–6. However, the team did not achieve much success. Head coach Bill MacMillan was fired midway through the season and replaced with Tom McVie, and the Devils won only 17 games. After the season, McVie was replaced by Doug Carpenter.
Meanwhile, with stable ownership at last in place, the Devils began a slow journey to respectability. They assembled a nucleus of young players; John MacLean, Bruce Driver, Ken Daneyko, Kirk Muller and Pat Verbeek all complemented the veteran leadership of Resch. The team's record improved each season between 1984 and 1987. However, playing in a division where the same three teams—the Flyers, Capitals and Islanders—made the playoffs every year for six years running meant that the Devils found themselves in a losing battle with the Rangers and Pittsburgh Penguins for the division's last playoff spot. The Devils actually finished last in the Patrick in 1986 and 1987 despite improving their record.
Hoping to light a spark under the team, McMullen hired Providence College coach and athletic director Lou Lamoriello as team president in April 1987. Lamoriello appointed himself general manager shortly before the 1987–88 season. This move came as a considerable surprise to NHL circles. Although Lamoriello had been a college coach for 19 years, he had never played, coached, or managed in the NHL and was almost unknown outside the American college hockey community.
The 1987–88 Devils garnered the first winning record in the franchise's 14-year history. On the final day of the regular season, they were tied with their nemesis, the Rangers, for the final playoff spot in the Patrick Division. After New York defeated the Quebec Nordiques 3–0, all eyes were on the Devils, who were playing the Blackhawks in Chicago. The Devils were trailing 3–2 midway through the third period when John MacLean tied the game, and with two minutes left in overtime, he added the winning goal. Although the Rangers and Devils both finished with 82 points, the Devils had two more wins, sending them to the playoffs for the first time in franchise history as the New Jersey Devils.New Jersey Devils on SportsEcyclopedia
The team made it all the way to the conference finals, but lost to the Boston Bruins in seven games. In that series, head coach Jim Schoenfeld verbally abused referee Don Koharski after the third game, screaming obscenities. During the exchange, Koharski slipped and fell against the wall. He immediately claimed that Schoenfeld had pushed him, but Schoenfeld retorted that Koharski had fallen down. As Koharski snapped that Schoenfeld was "gone," Schoenfeld replied, "Good, 'cause you fell, you fat pig. Have another doughnut!" League disciplinarian Brian O'Neill ordered Schoenfeld to sit out game four. The Devils demanded a hearing, but O'Neill refused. Claiming their rights as well as Schoenfeld's had been violated, the Devils appealed to New Jersey Superior Court judge James F. Madden—an unprecedented appeal to authority outside the league. Forty minutes before game time, Madden ordered the suspension overturned pending a formal league hearing. In his order, Madden pointed out that the NHL's investigation consisted of two phone calls—one to Koharski and one to Schoenfeld—and criticized O'Neill for not reviewing the videotape. In protest, referee Dave Newell and linesmen Gord Broseker and Ray Scapinello refused to work the game. After more than an hour's delay, three off-ice officials—Paul McInnis, Jim Sullivan and Vin Godleski—were tracked down to work the game. McInnis served as the referee, while Sullivan and Godleski worked the lines wearing yellow scrimmage sweaters. Notably, league president John Ziegler was away on personal business and could not be contacted, leaving Chicago Blackhawks owner Bill Wirtz, as chairman of the league's board of governors, to give the order to play the game with backup officials.
Ziegler conducted a hearing on May 10, and suspended Schoenfeld for game five and fined him $1,000; the Devils were fined $10,000. Schoenfeld later admitted he regretted his comments. Nonetheless, Devils fans and broadcasters claimed that the officials shortchanged them for several years afterward.
The next season, the Devils once again slipped below .500 and missed the playoffs. Lamoriello made several postseason player changes, notably signing of two Soviet stars: Viacheslav Fetisov and Sergei Starikov. The Devils drafted Fetisov years earlier in the 1983 entry draft, but the Soviet government did not allow Fetisov, who was an Army officer as well as a member of the national team, to leave the country.
The team changed coaches midway through each of the next two seasons. Schoenfeld was replaced with John Cunniff in 1989–90, and Tom McVie was re-hired midway through the 1990–91 season and helmed the team through its third-straight first-round elimination in 1991–92. Herb Brooks, who coached the 1980 "Miracle on Ice" team, was brought in for the 1992–93 season, but when the team yet again was eliminated in the first round, he was fired and replaced with former Montreal Canadiens coach Jacques Lemaire.

=1993–2000: A championship franchise=

Under Lemaire, the team roared through the 1993–94 regular season with a lineup including defensemen Scott Stevens, Scott Niedermayer and Ken Daneyko, forwards Stephane Richer, John MacLean, Bobby Holik and Claude Lemieux, and goaltenders Chris Terreri and Martin Brodeur, the latter goaltender being honored as the league's top rookie with the Calder Memorial Trophy. The Devils' first 100-point season earned them the NHL's second-best record behind the New York Rangers. However, due to the NHL's new playoff format, the Devils were seeded third in the East, behind the Atlantic Division champion Rangers and Northeast Division champion Penguins. The Devils and Rangers met in a memorable Eastern Conference Finals match up, which went seven games. The Devils had lost all six regular season meetings to the Rangers, but were up for the challenge, after Richer scored the game-winning goal in the second overtime of Game 1. Going into Game 6, the Devils led the series 3–2 after having dominated Game 5 in Madison Square Garden. Before the game Rangers captain Mark Messier made his famous guarantee that the Rangers would win Game 6. Keeping true to his word, Messier led his team back, netting a natural hat trick, and leading the Rangers to a 4–2 victory (after the Devils were up 2–0). In Game 7, the Devils' Valeri Zelepukin tied the game with 7.7 seconds remaining, but the Devils were defeated in double overtime, on a goal by Stephane Matteau. Devils fans, however, claimed that Esa Tikkanen was in the crease, and the goal should have been wiped out. Nonetheless, the series is viewed by many hockey fans as one of the best playoff series in NHL history.
Despite the setback, the team returned to the Eastern Conference Finals during the lockout-shortened 1995 season and defeated the Philadelphia Flyers four games to two. They swept the heavily favored Detroit Red Wings to win New Jersey's first-ever Stanley Cup, and the first major professional sports championship in the state's history, as they brought the Stanley Cup across the Hudson River from "the Garden to the Garden State," with the Rangers having won the Stanley Cup the year before. Claude Lemieux was awarded the Conn Smythe Trophy as playoffs MVP. The Devils established an NHL record by posting 11 road victories in one playoff season. The success also came amid constant rumors that the team would move for the third time in its history to Nashville (which eventually gained their own NHL expansion team).
The Devils missed the playoffs by 2 points the following season, with a 37–33–12 record. They were beaten by the Tampa Bay Lightning for the last playoff spot in the East on the last day of the season. It marked the first time in 26 years that a defending Cup champion failed to reach the playoffs. For most of the remainder of the decade, the Devils failed to live up to expectations. Despite annually having one of the best regular season records in the league, they were ousted by the New York Rangers in the second round of the 1997 playoffs, and were eliminated in the first round by the Ottawa Senators and the Pittsburgh Penguins the next two seasons.
During the 1999–2000 season, New Jersey was in the midst of a late-season swoon. Despite having one of the best records in the league, Lamoriello feared another early playoff collapse and made the controversial decision to fire head coach Robbie Ftorek and replace him with assistant Larry Robinson. The move paid off, as New Jersey defeated the Florida Panthers, the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Philadelphia Flyers to make the Stanley Cup Finals. In the Finals, the Devils reached the top again, defeating the defending champion Dallas Stars in six games to win the Stanley Cup for the second time. Stevens, Holik, Niedermayer and Brodeur, all integral parts of the 1995 team, were augmented with new players acquired in the intervening five years including Patrik Elias, Petr Sykora, Jason Arnott, Alexander Mogilny, and rookies Brian Rafalski, John Madden, and Calder Trophy recipient Scott Gomez. A highlight of the Devils' second championship run was their come-from-behind victory in the conference finals. They trailed the Philadelphia Flyers three games to one, but rebounded to win three straight games and the series. This was both the first time in Devils playoff history and in NHL Conference Finals history that a 3–1 deficit was surmounted. and assisted on Jason Arnott's Stanley Cup-clinching goal in double-overtime of Game 6 in Dallas.
Shortly before this victory, McMullen sold the team to Puck Holdings, an affiliate of YankeeNets, for $175 million. The owners wanted to use the Devils and the New Jersey Nets (also a tenant at Continental Airlines Arena) for programming on what eventually became the YES Network and move both teams to a new arena in Newark. Neither of these proposals became reality under Puck Holdings' ownership.

=2001–2007: A third Cup and the lockout=

Led by the Elias-Arnott-Sykora line (The A Line), Bobby Holik, and the goaltending of Martin Brodeur, the Devils reached the Stanley Cup Finals for the second straight year in 2001. They lost the series to the Colorado Avalanche despite leading 3–2 and having Game 6 on home ice; Brodeur had a subpar series, with a save percentage under 90%, and was bested by Colorado Hall of Fame goaltender Patrick Roy. The team's strong regular season was recognized at the NHL's annual awards that year, with Madden becoming the first player in franchise history to win the Frank J. Selke Trophy (for top defensive forward), along with Brodeur and Stevens named as finalists for the Vezina Trophy (top goalie) and Norris Trophy (top defensemen) awards respectively.
In the 2001–02 season, they were expected to be contenders once again, and they finished the season as the 3rd best team in the Atlantic Division, with 95 points. The Devils entered the playoffs as a 6 seed, but lost in the first round to the number 3 seed Carolina Hurricanes.
In 2003, the Devils finished first in the Atlantic Division with 108 points, earning the number 2 seed in the East. Their playoff run included a seven-game conference final series victory, decided in the final three minutes on a goal by newly acquired forward Jeff Friesen, over the Ottawa Senators, who won the President's Trophy that season. In the Stanley Cup Finals, the Devils and Mighty Ducks of Anaheim had a back and forth battle, with both teams winning only their home games. This was the first time since 1965 that all the games in a Stanley Cup Final were won by the home team. The Devils brought the Stanley Cup to New Jersey a third time, defeating the Mighty Ducks in the 7th game of the Finals in New Jersey. Martin Brodeur, Scott Stevens, Scott Niedermayer, Ken Daneyko and Sergei Brylin each won their third Cup, and after the series, Daneyko, a long-time fan favorite, However, Brodeur was awarded the Vezina Trophy as outstanding goaltender in the regular season for the first time in his career. The New Jersey Nets were in their finals at the same time the Devils won this Stanley Cup, but lost to the San Antonio Spurs in six, which denied the state of New Jersey from having both NBA and NHL championships in the same year.
In the 2003–04 season, Martin Brodeur took home the Vezina Trophy again. Despite the permanent loss of long time team captain Scott Stevens the Devils finished second in the Atlantic Division with 100 points. With the sixth seed in the Stanley Cup playoffs, the Devils lost to the Philadelphia Flyers four games to one. In March 2004, near the end of the season, Lehman Brothers executive Jeffrey Vanderbeek purchased a controlling interest from Puck Holdings and resigned from Lehman Brothers to assume full-time ownership. He had been a minority owner since the 2000 sale.  Like Puck Holdings/YankeeNets, Vanderbeek has largely left the Devils in Lamoriello's hands.
Vanderbeek was a strong proponent of the proposed arena in Newark, which first received funding from the city council during Puck Holdings' ownership in 2002.
Though construction was well underway, in late summer 2006, Cory Booker, who had recently taken office as Mayor of Newark, promised to reevaluate the deal and considered backing out.
During the 2004–05 NHL lockout, many Devils players played in European leagues and in the hockey world championships. Assistant coach Larry Robinson, the team's head coach from 2000 to 2002, was promoted to start the season.
The Devils struggled early in the 2005–06 season, ending the 2005 calendar year with a 16–18–5 record.
On April 29, 2006, the Devils won their first round Stanley Cup playoff series against the New York Rangers four games to none, extending their winning streak to fifteen games and marking the first time the Devils defeated their cross-river rival in a playoff series. The team's season ended in the next round with a 4–1 Game 5 loss to the Carolina Hurricanes, who eventually won the Stanley Cup.
In the offseason, the Devils hired former Montreal Canadiens coach Claude Julien to replace Lamoriello behind the bench. The move is reminiscent of Robbie Ftorek's firing with eight games left in the 1999–2000 season, after which the Devils won the Stanley Cup. Lamoriello defended the move saying, "I don't think we're at a point of being ready both mentally and physically to play the way that is necessary going into the playoffs." The Devils went on to win their seventh Atlantic Division title and earn the second seed in the Eastern Conference after finishing ahead of the Pittsburgh Penguins by two points. They defeated the Tampa Bay Lightning in six games in the first round, but struggled against the fourth-seeded Ottawa Senators in the Eastern Conference Semi-Finals and lost to them in five games. Their final loss of the series on May 5, 2007, marked the final game of the Devils' 25-year history at the Continental Airlines Arena.

=2007–2010: Move to Newark=

During the move to Newark, the Devils lost a few prominent members. On July 1, 2007, long-time Devils Scott Gomez and Brian Rafalski left the team as unrestricted free agents; Gomez to the rival Rangers, and Rafalski to his hometown Detroit Red Wings. Back-up goalie Scott Clemmensen went to Toronto, and local favorite, forward Jim Dowd, signed with Philadelphia. The Devils, however, were able to sign Buffalo forward Dainius Zubrus and Rangers defenseman Karel Rachunek. On July 5, the Devils signed Rangers goalie Kevin Weekes as a backup to Brodeur, as well as Nashville Predators defenseman Vitali Vishnevski on July 10.
On July 13, 2007, Brent Sutter was named the 14th head coach of the team. Previous coach Larry Robinson was named to aide John MacLean as the second assistant coach. On August 7, 2007, the Devils signed former Islander Arron Asham. As the Devils preseason came to an end, prospects Nicklas Bergfors and David Clarkson made the final roster. The Devils opened their new arena, the Prudential Center, on October 27, 2007, against the Ottawa Senators, after opening the season with a nine-game road trip. The game ended with a 4–1 win for Ottawa.
On October 31, 2007, the New Jersey Devils won their first home game at the Prudential Center by beating the Tampa Bay Lightning, 6–1. In a dramatic last game of the season against their rivals the New York Rangers, the Devils won in a shootout, giving them home ice advantage over the Rangers in the playoffs, though the Devils lost the series against the Rangers 4–1, losing all three games at home. Brodeur did win the Vezina Trophy for the fourth time in five years for his performance in the regular season.
For the 2008–09 season, the Devils signed Brian Rolston, Bobby Holik, Brendan Shanahan, Mike Rupp and Scott Clemmensen, all making their second stints with the team. The Devils' season looked to be in jeopardy after Brodeur tore a biceps tendon in November and was sidelined for four months, but strong play by scoring leader Zach Parise and backup goalie Clemmensen kept the Devils atop the NHL standings. Brodeur would return strong and make history. On March 17, 2009, before a sellout home crowd, Brodeur broke Patrick Roy's record for regular season wins with his 552nd victory, while Patrik Elias became the franchise's all-time leading scorer with his 702nd point. In the opening round of the playoffs, the Devils suffered two losses to the Hurricanes within the final minute of regulation play. In Game 4, the Devils overcame a 3 goal deficit, only to lose on a goal with 0.2 seconds left in the game in which Brodeur claimed he was interfered with.Carolina Hurricanes stun New Jersey Devils with two goals in final 80 seconds to win Game 7, 4–3 Newark Star Ledger
On June 9, 2009, the New Jersey Devils announced that head coach Brent Sutter was stepping down from his position, citing personal and family reasons. However, in a controversial move three days later, Sutter was introduced as the new head coach of the Calgary Flames. A month later, the Devils named former head coach Jacques Lemaire head coach of the New Jersey Devils. Assistant Coach John MacLean was named head coach of the Lowell Devils. Scott Clemmensen signed with the Florida Panthers and Mike Rupp signed with the Pittsburgh Penguins. All four had won the Stanley Cup with New Jersey.
After several weeks of fruitless contract negotiations late in the season, the Atlanta Thrashers traded star left wing Ilya Kovalchuk, along with defenseman and former Devil Anssi Salmela, to the Devils on February 4, 2010, for defenseman Johnny Oduya and forwards Niclas Bergfors, young prospect Patrice Cormier, and a first round draft pick in the 2010 draft. The Devils finished the season in first place in the Atlantic Division, second in the Eastern Conference. Their seeding matched them up against Philadelphia in the first round, who eliminated the Devils 4 games to 1. Kovalchuk was held to two goals in the series.
After head coach Jacques Lemaire retired from coaching, the Devils announced that the team's all-time leading scorer, John MacLean, would become their new head coach. Former team head and assistant coach, Larry Robinson and former NHL all-star Adam Oates joined MacLean as assistants. During the offseason, the Devils signed Ilya Kovalchuk to a seventeen-year contract, keeping him in New Jersey until the conclusion of the 2026–27 season. The contract was the longest contract ever held by an NHL player, beating out Rick DiPietro's fifteen-year contract with the New York Islanders.com The NHL rejected Kovalchuk's 17-year contract for allegedly circumventing the NHL Collective Bargaining AgreementNHL.com before the NHL officially accepted a fifteen-year contract worth $100 million.
John MacLean led the team to a record of 9–22–2, and sitting in last place in the NHL on December 23 he was removed in favor of Jacques Lemaire, coming out of retirement for his third stint as head coach of the Devils and second in less than two seasons. During the tumultuous season, the Devils lost superstar Zach Parise to a meniscus tear in November and he finally returned in March for just one game in which the Devils were mathematically eliminated from playoff contention. Adding to the team's woes, goaltender Martin Brodeur suffered two multi-game injuries, an elbow injury in November and a minor knee sprain in February. Following the trade of captain Jamie Langenbrunner to the Dallas Stars, the Devils managed an astonishing turnaround with an impressive run of 26–7–3. They saw a dramatic increase in offensive production, in addition to the outstanding performance of backup goaltender Johan Hedberg. On March 12, the Devils found themselves just six points out of a final playoff spot. The other major trade of the season was Jason Arnott to the Washington Capitals for center David Steckel and a second round draft pick.
During their astonishing late winter run the players did not talk about any playoff aspirations and maintained the motto of "one game at a time." Jacques Lemaire also refused to talk about the team's playoff potential and told reporters to ask him about the Devils' chances once they were five points back. The Devils ultimately came within one point of Lemaire's benchmark but were eliminated by the Montreal Canadiens on April 2, 2011, thus missing out on the playoffs for the first time since the 1995–96 season. After winning their last game of the season, Jacques Lemaire announced that he would not return as head coach for another season with the Devils. Overall, this was the first losing season for the Devils since 1990–91.

=2011–2013: A new coach and a return to the Finals=

In the 2011 offseason, Lemaire was replaced by former Florida Panthers head coach Peter DeBoer. Kovalchuk and Elias both finished as top ten point scorers during the regular seasons, with 83 and 78 points, respectively. Forwards Kovalchuk, Parise and David Clarkson all scored over 30 goals during the regular season while rookie forward Adam Henrique totaled 51 points and earned a Calder Trophy nomination for Rookie of the Year.cbssports.com/nhl/blog/eye-on-hockey/18705696/henrique-landeskog-nugenthopkins-announced-as-calder-trophy-finalists
The Devils finished the regular season as the 6 seed in the East with 102 points. Returning injured center Travis Zajac led the team's offense as they then proceeded to knock the Florida Panthers out of the playoffs in 7 games, winning game 6 in overtime with a goal from Zajac and another in double overtime in game 7 from Henrique.cbslocal.go. The Devils won Games 4 and 5 to become only the third team in NHL history to force a Game 6 in the Finals after being behind three games to none, but Los Angeles eliminated the Devils in Game 6 to win their first Stanley Cup in franchise history. 
Martin Brodeur, their longtime goalie signed to the team for two additional years, and ended speculation that his career was over. He will enter his 21st season, after turning 40 on May 6, 2012, during the Stanley Cup Playoffs second round, game 4 against the Philadelphia Flyers.
The 2012 off season was a busy one. On July 4, 2012, Zach Parise signed a 13 year, $98 million contract with the Minnesota Wild, leaving the Devils after one season as team captain. On July 17, 2012, the Devils announced former defenseman and team captain Scott Stevens will return to the team as an assistant coach as well as Matt Shaw, who worked for the San Jose Sharks, who will serve as the offensive assistant coach, running the power play unit.
The Devils entered the lockout-shortened season with Bryce Salvador as its new captain. However, the Devils failed to repeat the performance of the year past, finishing 19-19-10 in 48 games, missing the playoffs. Injuries to Brodeur and Kovalchuk only made the season tougher, with the Devils losing 10 games in a row at their lowest point. Goalie Johan Hedberg and rookie goalie Keith Kinkaid were used when Brodeur was injured however neither of them preformed well enough to help the Devil put anything together.
During the offseason, the Devils acquired goalie Cory Schneider from the Vancouver Canucks for their 9th overall draft pick. Lou Lamoriello stated that Brodeur would still remain the starter, but that Schneider would get significant ice time. David Clarkson was lost in free agency and Henrik Tallinder via trade, but Lamoriello managed to bring in Jaromir Jagr, Ryane Clowe, and Michael Ryder from the Bruins, Rangers, and Canadiens, respectively. Matt Shaw was replaced by Mike Foligno as power-play coach, and Patrik Elias resigned for 3-years and $16.5 million. However, weeks later, Kovalchuk shocked the Devils community by announcing his retirement from the NHL and his intention to play for the KHL in his native Russia.

=2013–present: the Harris–Blitzer era=

The Devils' longtime financial struggles worsened during the 2013 season, and at one point the team needed to borrow $30 million to meet their payroll. This prompted owner Jeffrey Vanderbeek to sell the team. Andrew Barroway, the attorney who loaned the team the $30 million, was one potential buyer. Ultimately, the team was sold to Josh Harris, owner of the NBA's Philadelphia 76ers, and David S. Blitzer, for over $320 million. The sale was formally announced on August 15, 2013. The sale allowed the Devils organization to clear all of the debt from its books (about $200 million).
On March 6, 2014, the NHL announced that it had decided to partially reverse the penalties against the Devils for the signing of Ilya Kovalchuk in 2010, whose contract was ruled to have circumvented the NHL salary cap. The penalties, which stipulated that the Devils had to forfeit a third-round draft pick in 2011, a first-round pick in one of the next four drafts, and pay a $3 million fine, was reduced to a $1.5 million fine and saw the Devils get their first round pick back. The Devils will now draft 30th overall in the 2014 NHL Entry Draft.

Season-by-season record

Last six seasons:
''Note: GP = Games played, W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, OTL = Overtime Losses, Pts = Points, GF = Goals for, GA = Goals against''

Team identity

Logo

The Devils' logo is a monogram of the letters "N", and "J",  rendered with two devil horns at the top of the "J" and a pointed tail at the bottom. The monogram is red with a black outline, and sits inside an open black circle. The logo lies on a field of white in the middle of the chest on both uniforms. 
Before the Devils' move from Colorado in 1982, then-owner John McMullen's wife designed a prototype logo, which was then modified by a professional graphic design and marketing firm, and became the green-and-red logo used by the team for the first ten years in New Jersey.

Fans

The Devils have a group of fans that has become known as the "Devils Army." the Devils were the NHL's most social team, a distinction based on their interactions with fans on various social media outlets.

Jerseys

The current team colors are red, black and white, and they can be seen on both the home and road jerseys. The home jersey, which was the team's road jersey until the NHL swapped home and road colors in 2003, Unlike most teams, the team kept the same uniform design when the NHL switched to the Rbk EDGE jerseys for the 2007–08 NHL season.
On August 20, 2009, Lamoriello announced that the Devils would wear their classic red, white and green jerseys on their Saint Patrick's Day 2010 game against the Pittsburgh Penguins. Lamoriello stated, "The original red, green and white jerseys are a part of our history here in New Jersey. We have always been an organization that takes great pride in its tradition. This is something we believe our fans will enjoy for that one special night."Retro Rewind – New Jersey Devils – News The Devils defeated the Penguins, 5–2. Martin Brodeur wore a special replica helmet of the one from his first NHL game. They wore the retro jerseys again on March 18, 2011, against the Washington Capitals; a road game was scheduled on St. Patrick's Day that year. The Devils lost 3–0. They wore them a third time on March 17, 2012, losing 5–2 to the Penguins. The throwbacks were used again in a 7–3 loss to the Rangers in the 2014 NHL Stadium Series at Yankee Stadium on January 26, and on March 18 in a 4–2 loss to the Boston Bruins.

Mascot

The current mascot is "NJ Devil", a 
Prior to 1993, the mascot was "Slapshot", a large Devils hockey puck that interacted with the fans. However, the man inside the costume resigned after he was accused of touching three women inappropriately while in costume. The lawsuit and all charges were dropped as nothing could be proven. However, to remove the stigma of the lawsuit, Slapshot was retired and has not returned since.

Style of play

The Devils have been known as a defense-first team since Jacques Lemaire's first tenure,
Under Brent Sutter, the team adopted less of a trap and more of a transitional, aggressive forechecking style of play which also emphasized puck possession and instilled the cycle to start the 2007–2008 season. This led to many high scoring games early in the 07–08 season for New Jersey. New Jersey went on to score 244 goals in the '08–09 season, the most the team had scored in eight seasons. However, with the return of Jacques Lemaire as head coach, the Devils resumed a more defense-oriented playing style, scoring just 222 goals and allowing only 191, an NHL best in the 2009–10 season, earning Martin Brodeur his fifth William M. Jennings Trophy.
Lemaire has since re-entered retirement, and was replaced by former Florida Panthers coach Peter DeBoer on July 19, 2011. The team showed greater offensive prowess during the 2011–12 season, employing a more aggressive forecheck. Unlike Sutter's system, DeBoer's system still relies heavily on solid defense to be equally as prevalent as the offense, not favoring one side of the ice over another.

Players and personnel

Current roster

Honored members

=Retired numbers=

The Devils have retired three numbers thus far, all of whom were key players on their three Stanley Cup-winning teams in the late 1990s and early 2000s.

Hall of Famers

Nine members of the Hockey Hall of Fame have had experience with the Devils upon election; six players, one coach, and one executive. One broadcaster has been honored by the Hockey Hall of Fame.

Team captains

 
  
 
''This list does not include the former captains of the Kansas City Scouts and Colorado Rockies.

Head coaches

 
  
 
* President and General Manager Lou Lamoriello took over as interim head coach twice in the middle of the season: after Larry Robinson resigned for health reasons in 2005, and after Claude Julien was fired in 2007.
** Jacques Lemaire took over as interim head coach in the middle of the season: after John MacLean was fired.
''This list does not include the former coaches of the Kansas City Scouts and Colorado Rockies.

Franchise records

These are the top-ten point-scorers in franchise history. Figures are updated after each completed NHL regular season.
 
 = current Devils player

Home arenas

Prudential Center is the current home arena of the team.

Former arenas

This list does not include the former arenas of the Kansas City Scouts and Colorado Rockies.

Broadcasters

Television: MSG, MSG Plus, MSG 2
Radio: WFAN
Public Address:

Notable events





General

Footnotes




