[[Bulgarian presidential election, 2011]]

CATEGORIES: Elections in Bulgaria, 2011 elections in Europe, 2011 in Bulgaria

A presidential election was held in Bulgaria on 23 October 2011, with a runoff held on 30 October 2011. No candidate won outright in the first round, resulting in a second round runoff between the eventual winner, Rosen Plevneliev of Citizens for European Development of Bulgaria, and Ivaylo Kalfin of the Bulgarian Socialist Party.Bulgarian ruling party candidate leads in presidential vote Business Week, 24 October 2011

Candidates

There are 18 registered candidates.Leading MEP runs for Bulgarian presidency Eurative, 19 July 2011 The candidates are:GERB's Plevneliev has narrow lead in tight presidential race - poll The Sofia Echo, 18 September 2011

Results

Controversies

MPs interfering with the ballot count

Two GERB MPs were photographed at the Sofia electoral commission amid the chaos that erupted at the Sofia commission right after the first round of presidential and local elections. These two MPs were not authorized to be present at the electoral commission at that time: an offence under Bulgarian law. One of the GERB MPs, Stanislav Ivanov, was photographed carrying a large bag around the Sofia Electoral Commission building. This bag was presumably full of ballots. The Central Electoral Commission held a meeting on the case but failed to reach a decision, because voting could not reach the required 2/3 majority.

Universiada Hall crisis

As the elections were 2 in 1 they meant more work for the Electoral Committees. 
In the day of the elections and day after one member of Municipal Committee in Varna died, six ambulances arrived at Universiada Hall to assist fainted committee members , while the number of fainted man and women, and those suffering health problems during and after elections is not known, according to witnesses people were fainting in the Hall and at the queues for delivering elections protocols, and in the first lines at the committee members meeting in Universiada people were in constant fainted and wakening cycles condition because of lack of air, cold, malnutrition and exhausture. Retrieved 2011-10-26 
People slept on floor, on bags with bulletins Picture made by member of committee at Universiada Hall, October 25, 2011. Retrieved 2011-10-26. .
In the first announcement of the situation no politician or Central Committee member expressed any sorry or apology for it,Simeon Djankov at newspaper Dnevnik comics "I laugh again and you will cry again", October 25, 2011. Retrieved 2011-10-26. and party GERB said that the reason of this was the one hour delay of the starting of the electoral day but in fact the starting of the electoral day was marked by no voters in the first 2 hours, while people was arriving at sections to vote around 8 am .
After the scandal of the situation of people still at Universiada Hall sparked in media, it was announced that committee members held there will receive 60 lv or 30 Euro more as a compensation for the long hours stay.

International statements

The PACE delegation noted that whilst the election was conducted in a generally orderly and peaceful way, there remained concerns about a lack of an equal access to the media, blurred distinctions between newspaper editorials and political advertisements, the lack of a dedicated voter roll and the candidate registration system which particularly affected independent candidates. PACE also recommended that voting for expatriate Bulgarians should be improved.OSCE positive about Bulgarian election but worried by vote-buying, media coverage The Sofia Echo, 25 October 2011






