[[Change.org]]

CATEGORIES: 2007 establishments in the United States, American political blogs, Internet properties established in 2007, Online petitions

Change.org, Inc., an American certified B Corporation and hosts sponsored campaigns for organizations.
Nonprofits and political campaigns, including Amnesty International and the Humane Society, pay the site to host their petitions. Popular topics of Change.

History

Change.org was launched on February 7, 2007,
In 2008, the organization partnered with MySpace to create an index of crowdsourced ideas for implementation by the incoming presidency of Barack Obama, drawing comparisons to similar approaches by change.
In 2011, Change.org claimed it was the subject of a distributed denial of service attack by "Chinese hackers",
In 2011, there is a proposal about merging the Spanish-speaking counterpart website Actuable into Change. Finally it that took place in 2012 when they approved the voluntary union of Actuable users into the Change.Actuable se fusiona con Change.org adquiere la española Actuable. La plataforma de ciberactivismo de Estados Unidos compra Actuable por una cantidad simbólica, El País, 20/9/2011
In 2012, Arizona State University decided to block access to Change.  University officials claimed that "Change.
In response, Internet Campaign Director Josh Levy of the Free Press, stated that "disabling access to any lawful site violates the spirit and principles of Net Neutrality, chills academic freedom, and possibly rises to the level of a First Amendment violation."
It was reported on April 5, 2012, that Change. At that time, they were receiving 500 new petitions per day. "Change. TechCrunch.
On May 13, 2012, The Guardian, BBC News and other sources reported that Change.org in competition with 38 Degrees, a British not-for-profit political-activism organization.
In January 2013, Jennifer Dulski joined the company as president and COO.
An August 2013 Fast Company article reported that Change. They will also be able to create their own Decision Maker page, which will show all petitions against them, the number of signatures gathered, and their statuses." 

Petitions

In the United States

On March 8, 2012, a petition entitled "Prosecute the killer of our son, 17-year-old Trayvon Martin" was posted on Change.  The petition received over 2.2 million signatures – at that time the largest number of signatures for any campaign in Change.  The petition called for the prosecution of George Zimmerman, a neighborhood watch volunteer, who, on February 26, 2012, shot and killed Trayvon Martin in Sanford, Florida, a suburb of Orlando.  Zimmerman, armed with a 9 mm gun, said he was acting in self-defense against the unarmed teenager, and he was set free the night of the killing without being charged.  Social media technology (including Change. On April 11, 2012, Zimmerman was arrested and charged with second-degree murder. He stood trial in the months of June and July and was acquitted of all charges on July 13, 2013.
On October 1, 2011, Molly Katchpole, a "22 year old nanny with two jobs" in Washington D.C., started a petition on Change.  Less than one month later, 300,000 signatures were collected.  The petition was widely cited as a contributing cause for the bank formally announcing to drop the new banking fee.  U.S. President Barack Obama signed the petition; U.S. Senator Dick Durbin, the Democratic senator from Illinois, responded to Bank of America and the petition on Twitter.  It may have contributed to the U.S. Congress deciding to "look at legislation for out-of-control banking fees".
In December 2011, a fourth-grade class in Brookline, Massachusetts, launched the "Lorax Petition Project" through Change. Seuss children's story.  The website and trailer lacked the important message from the book, "to help the environment".
On the morning of February 2, 2012, Stef Gray, a 23-year-old graduate in New York, held a news conference at the Washington offices of Sallie Mae where she presented the results of her Change. That afternoon the company changed its forbearance fee policy.
In November 2013, John Doe of Arlington, Texas launched a petition against changes made to the YouTube commenting system by Google.  The changes force YouTube users to create an account on Google+ and also removes the "reply" mechanism on comments unless they were posted on Google+.  This petition received over 100,000 signatures in less than a week, and over 200,000 within two weeks.change.Org
In November 2013, Aaron Thompson from Tuscaloosa, Alabama started a petition, directed at Seth MacFarlane to bring back Brian Griffin on Family Guy, after his death in Season 12 episode "Life Of Brian", he stated that "He added a witty and sophisticated element to the show," petition creator Aaron Thompson wrote. "Family Guy and Fox Broadcasting will lose viewers if Brian Griffin is not brought back to the show... they killed off the dog who has lived in our homes for the last 15 years. They killed the dog we all have come to love. They killed America's dog!" Thompson's petition gained 30,000 signatures within 36 hours and is still causing controversy today.change.org/petitions/seth-macfarlane-and-fox-broadcasting-company-bring-brian-griffin-back-to-family-guy

In Germany

Also in 2012, Philip Matesanz, a 21-year-old German university student, started a petition to allow third-party recording tools for YouTube. To date,

In Spain

In February 2013, over one million people, a figure equivalent to around two percent of the total population of Spain, had signed the petition calling for the entire Spanish government to resign. The call was motivated by an unprecedented corruption scandal involving the majority of key leaders of the People's Party, including the Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy himself. 

Business model

The website makes revenue by running advertisements called sponsored petitions for advocacy organizations such as Amnesty International

Criticism

Under certain conditions, it does not work if the signature was forged or appears on another site operated by Change.
There has been debate and criticism around the fact that Change.org domain suffix rather than the commercial . The site has been accused of fooling its users and hiding the fact that it is "a for-profit entity that has an economic incentive to get people to sign petitions". 
Change. It's not just that we're not yet making a profit – it's that we are decidedly not for-profit." 
Change.








