[[Antoine Vollon]]

CATEGORIES: 1833 births, 1900 deaths, Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery, Deaths from stroke, Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur, Officiers of the Légion d'honneur, People from Lyon, Artists from Paris, 19th-century French painters, French Realist painters

Antoine Vollon (April 23, 1833 – August 27, 1900)

Family and early years

Vollon was born the son of an ornamental craftsman in Lyon, France.  He taught himself to paint. He began an apprenticeship to an engraver, and studied under Jehan Georges Vibert at the École des Beaux-Arts in Lyon to become a printmaker. He then worked at decorating enamelled pans and stoves. In 1860 he and Marie-Fanny Boucher married and later had two children, Alexis and Marguerite.

Paris and becoming a painter

In 1859 he moved to Paris, with the intention of becoming a painter. There he became a student of Théodule Ribot and was influenced by Dutch still life painters of the 17th century. He became friends with Alexandre Dumas, Jean-Baptiste Carpeaux, Honoré Daumier and Charles-François Daubigny. Vollon once described himself as a young artist "madly in love with painting".

Figures and still lifes

He aspired to paint figures and not only still lifes which were the lowest acceptable genre for the Salon. Along the way, Vollon submitted a figure painting of a woman carrying a large basket on her back, Femme du Pollet à Dieppe (Seine-Inferieure), to the 1876 Salon, where it won first prize writing for Nineteenth-Century Art Worldwide:

Later years and awards

Carol Forman Tabler wrote:
Tabler describes his ambition and the decades-long strategies Vollon used to secure a place in history. After one year in the Salon des Refusés in 1863, beginning in 1864 he exhibited his work at the Paris Salon. Vollon won a third-class medal in 1865, a second-class in 1868, and first-class in 1869. Vollon was a member of the Salon's jury for at least ten years starting in 1870.
He became a Chevalier of the Legion of Honor in 1870 and eight years later, received the Officer's cross. He was elected to the Académie des Beaux-Arts in 1897. In 1900 he was awarded the Grand Prix at the Paris World's Fair.
In July 1900 he had a stroke while painting at Versailles and later caught a fever. He died in August and is buried in the Père Lachaise Cemetery.

Legacy

Wildenstein showed more than 70 works by Vollon in Manhattan in 2004. For The New York Times, a reviewer wrote, "Vollon smacks too much of other artists to be Truly Important, but his sensuous wallows in paint are well worth wider notice". But an earlier reviewer for the same newspaper quotes a critic writing in 1883, "He is, perhaps, the greatest painter living...."
His son Alexis Vollon (1865–1945) became a painter.
Two streets in France are named for him: Rue Antoine Vollon in Bessancourt and in Paris, whilst an intersection with a fountain in Lyon is named Place Antoine Vollon.

Gallery

File:04.23-AntVollon-MndOfButter.
File:Brooklyn Museum - Fish - Antoine Vollon - overall. Often they are in the act of dying.
File:Brooklyn Museum - After the Storm - Antoine Vollon - overall. 1877)
File:Antoine Vollon - Natureza-Morta com Macaco e Violão.

Notes




