[[Pluristem Therapeutics]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 2001, Companies listed on NASDAQ, Companies listed on TASE, Biotechnology companies of Israel, Haifa

Pluristem Therapeutics is an Israeli company engaged in the development of human placental adherent stromal cells for commercial use in disease treatment. In 2012 a procedure involving a stem cell treatment developed by Pluristem saved the life of a 7-year-old girl suffering from bone marrow aplasia.

Corporate history

Pluristem was founded in 2001 by Shai Meretzki of the Technion, who made use of stem cell patents he had developed with colleagues from the Weizmann Institute of Science. In 2007 the name was changed again, this time to Pluristem Therapeutics Inc. Pluristem's shares are traded on the NASDAQ exchange and the Tel Aviv Stock Exchange, as well as on the Frankfurt Stock Exchange.
In 2007 Pluristem entered into a collaborative research agreement with the Charité medical school in Berlin for a period of five years. In 2012 Pluristem announced that the agreement had been renewed until 2017.

Products

Pluristem is in the process of clinically testing the use of its PLX (PLacental eXpanded) cells to treat peripheral arterial disease (PAD).
The USFDA has conferred orphan drug status on Pluristem's PLX cells for the treatment of Buerger's disease (2011) and aplastic anemia (2013).

Human applications

In May 2012 Pluristem reported that its experimental PLacental eXpanded cells were injected into the muscles of a 7-year-old Romanian girl undergoing treatment for bone marrow aplasia disease at the Hadassah Medical Center in Jerusalem. The girl had undergone two allogenic stem cell transplants since being admitted in August 2011, both of which failed to improve her condition. Two months thereafter, with the patient's condition deteriorating rapidly, the Director of Bone Marrow Transplantation, Cell Therapy and Transplantation Research Center at Hadassah felt that all available options had been exhausted and turned to Pluristem's PLX cells. The Helsinki committee at Israel's Ministry of Health approved the procedure under compassionate use. According to Pluristem CEO Zami Aberman, it was the first time ever that stem cells were injected into the muscle rather than into the body's blood system. Pluristem announced that the treatment led to a significant increase in the girl's red cells, white cells and platelets, effecting a reverse in her condition.
In September 2012 Pluristem reported saving the life of a third bone marrow disease patient using its PLacental eXpanded cell treatment, again at Jerusalem's Hadassah Medical Center and again under the terms of compassionate use. The 45-year-old patient suffered from acute myeloid leukemia and pancytopenia, and his condition was determined to be life-threatening. After two intramuscular injections of Pluristem's PLX cells, the patient's condition improved significantly and he was released from the hospital.








