[[Big Miracle]]

CATEGORIES: American films, British films, English-language films, British drama films, American drama films, Films set in 1988, Films set in Alaska, Films about whales, Universal Pictures films, Working Title Films films, Films shot in Alaska, 2012 films, Films directed by Ken Kwapis, Films set in the Arctic, Films about animal rights

Big Miracle is a 2012 family drama film starring Drew Barrymore and John Krasinski. The film, directed by Ken Kwapis, is based on the 1989 book Freeing the Whales by Tom Rose, which covers Operation Breakthrough, the 1988 international effort to rescue gray whales trapped in ice near Point Barrow, Alaska. The film was released on , 2012.
The movie flopped at the box office, only opening to more than $7 million and pulling in $24,719,215 overall.

Synopsis

In small town Alaska, Adam Carlson a news reporter recruits his ex-girlfriend Rachel– a Greenpeace volunteer – on a campaign to save a family of gray whales trapped by rapidly forming ice in the Arctic Circle. Adam names the whales Fred, Wilma, and Bamm-Bamm an infant whale.
Drawn into the collaborative rescue work are several normally hostile factions: Inupiat whale hunters, a Greenpeace environmental activist, an oil executive, ambitious news reporters, the National Guard, the American president and politicians on the state, national and international levels. Also joining in the effort are two entrepreneurs from Minnesota, who provide de-icing machines to help keep the hole open. Finally an enormous Soviet ice-breaker ship arrives to remove the last barrier before the whales die. The ice is finally broken and the adult whales Fred and Wilma escape the ice. Sadly, the infant whale Bamm-Bamm dies from injuries and does not surface again. In the epilogue narrated by Nathan reveals that McGraw used his new reputation to uphold a contract to clean up the oil spilt by the Exxon-Valdez, Karl and Dean's de-icers made them local celebrities, Scott and Kelly were married, Jill worked her way up to a national news network, Greenpeace membership became more prominent, Adam confesses his love for Rachel and she returns his affections and they share a kiss, Adam got to stay being a news anchor, and both Nathan and Malik became closer to one another, and Nathan recalls about the hole in which the whales were first found and quotes "It kept getting bigger and bigger, until it let the whole world in".
In a post-credits scene Fred and Wilma swim away free in the ocean.

Cast

Production

Warner Bros. bought the screenplay by Jack Amiel and Michael Begler in April 2009, and in the following June, Kwapis was attached to direct.
The film's working title was Everybody Loves Whales, which is a line still heard in the film.

Post-production

Visual effects on Big Miracle were created by Rhythm and Hues Studios and Modus FX.
Burger King promoted the movie with toys.
The MPAA has rated this film PG for language.

Reception

Critical response

The film received generally positive reviews from critics. On Rotten Tomatoes the film currently holds a rating of 74% based on 95 reviews. The site's consensus was: "Big Miracle uses real-life events as the basis for a surprisingly satisfying family drama."

Box office

The film opened with $2,267,385 on its opening day, ranking at No. 4 behind Chronicle, The Woman in Black, and The Grey at the box office.com/daily/chart/?sortdate=2012-02-03&p=. On its second weekend the film dropped to #8, with $3,946,050.com/weekend/chart/?view=&yr=2012&wknd=06&p=.



Further reading




