[[The Glimmer Man]]

CATEGORIES: 1996 films, 1990s action films, American action thriller films, American films, English-language films, Film scores by Trevor Rabin, Films directed by John Gray (director), Films set in Los Angeles, California, Films shot in California, Police detective films, Serial killer films, Warner Bros. films

The Glimmer Man is a 1996 American action film directed by John Gray,  and produced by Steven Seagal, who also starred in the film. The film also co-stars Keenen Ivory Wayans, Bob Gunton and Brian Cox. The film was released in the United States on October 4, 1996.
Seagal plays Jack Cole, a former government intelligence operative known as "The Glimmer Man", because he could move so quickly and quietly through the jungle that his victims would only see a glimmer before they die. He now works as a detective with the Los Angeles Police Department. Wayans co-stars as Cole's partner Detective Jim Campbell.

Plot

Jack Cole (Steven Seagal) was once a government intelligence operative known as "The Glimmer Man," because he could move so quickly and quietly through the jungle that his victims would only see a glimmer before they died. Having left the Glimmer Man job behind him, Cole—steeped in buddhism and not used to working with others has become a detective with the Los Angeles Police Department.
Cole is partnered with Jim Campbell (Keenen Ivory Wayans), a tough, no-nonsense cop who has little patience for Cole's New Age philosophies and outsider attitude. Cole and Campbell have to set aside their differences when they're assigned to track down a serial killer called "The Family Man," for his habit of killing entire households.
The Family Man's latest victims turn out to be Cole's former wife Ellen and her current husband Andrew Dunleavy—and Cole's fingerprints are found on Ellen's body. Cole and Campbell think that Cole's former bosses in the government may somehow be involved in the killings. Cole contacts his friend Smith (Brian Cox), unaware that he has been working with local crime boss Frank Deverell (Bob Gunton).
Cole and Campbell receive a tip that leads them to Christopher Maynard (Stephen Tobolowsky), who admits that he committed the Family Man murders that happened before Cole arrived in Los Angeles. Someone else has been committing the more recent murders and making it look like Maynard's work. Cole fatally shoots Maynard in self defense.
Cole, hoping to get a lead on the new killer, goes to the home of Deverell's Russian translator Celia Roslov (Susan Reno), who was a victim of the killer. The killer attacks Cole, and later sets Campbell's home on fire.
Cole and Campbell discover that Deverell's stepson Johnny (Johnny Strong) knows some important information. Johnny tells Cole and Campbell that Deverell's right-hand man, Donald Cunningham (John M. Jackson), is the new killer who has been making his killings look like Maynard's work.
Johnny also tells them that Smith has been working with Deverell. Cole and Campbell confront Smith, and torture him into revealing that Deverell is smuggling chemical weapons into the USA from Russia, with plans to sell the weapons to a group of Serbian terrorists. Smith made the contacts, with the deal being cut by a group of Russian terrorists known as the Russian Liberation Fighters. The meeting for the deal is scheduled to take place at a downtown welfare hotel. Cole and Campbell storm the hotel, where Cunningham fatally shoots Deverell, and Cole kills Cunningham by throwing him through a window and onto a wrought iron fence below. Campbell, having been shot, tells Cole that, ever since he met him, he's been nothing but trouble. Cole says he'll keep that in mind, as Campbell is taken away in an ambulance.

Cast

Production

Filming was shot on location in and around Los Angeles and California.
Brian Cox's character Mr. Smith was originally intended for Steven Seagal's Under Siege co-star Tommy Lee Jones, and he was attached to the film before leaving shortly before filming began. Cox replaced him on very short notice.
Seagal wrote two original songs for the film, "Bulletproof" and "Snake", performed by the Jeff Healey Band and Taj Mahal, respectively.
Trevor Rabin, formerly of Yes, composed the score, his first as a film music composer. He has since composed scores for many other films.

Reception

Critical response

The film received mostly negative reviews from the film critics. Critic Lawrence van Gelder, writing for The New York Times, did not like the film. He wrote, "Short on suspense, routine in its action and monotonous in its performances, this movie opened yesterday without benefit of press screenings, usually a sign that the distributors have detected cinematic rigor mortis before audiences formally withdraw such life support systems as tickets, popcorn and the glucose drip of spilled Coke."van Gelder, Lawrence. The New York Times, film review, "Peaceful Man With a Flair for Violence," October 5, 1996. 
Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 13% based based on 24 reviews.

Box office

The film debuted at No. 2 at the box office behind The First Wives Club,






