[[Norman Kamaru]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, Indonesian police officers, Viral videos, Internet celebrities, Indonesian male singers

Norman Kamaru (born Gorontalo, 27 November 1985; also known as Briptu Norman) is a resigned Indonesian police officer from the Mobile Brigade (Indonesia) Indonesian Police Force that is present to be a singer, he's rank before resignation from the Police was First Police Brigadier which is known as 'Briptu' in Bahasa Indonesia which is an abbreviation from Brigadir Polisi Satu. "Catapulting" to stardom after a video of him singing "Chaiyya Chaiyya" by A.R.

Biography

Kamaru was born in Gorontalo, Gorontalo, Indonesia on 27 November 1985. He is the youngest of nine children
He eventually joined the Mobile Brigade, rising to the rank of First Brigadier.

Celebrity

Kamaru became famous after a video of him in uniform lip-synching "Chaiyya Chaiyya" and imitating Shahrukh Khan while on duty at a guard post
The video was a hit on YouTube, with viewers considering his actions "perfectly" like Khan's in Dil Se.., 
As a result of his newfound celebrity, Kamaru became a guest on Opera Van Java and Bukan Empat Mata, hosted by Tukul Arwana.
However, the performing schedule detracted from his duties. As a result, on 7 July 2011 he was taken from the set of Hitam Putih, where he was filming a skit, by twenty people. Although first reported to be a kidnapping, it was later revealed that it had been officers of the Bureau of Professionalism and Security Affairs who had taken him as he had not secured permission to be on the show. 

In order to create a new, more modern image, in April 2012 Norman Kamaru initial rap single 'Forget It' (Lupa-kan) and collaborate with rapper Saykoji.

Reception

Initially the police department intended to punish Kamaru for his dancing, calling his behaviour  "undisciplined and childish" as well as "unethical", noting that police officers should be ever vigilant when on duty.
In response to the threatened police sanctions, Kamaru received popular support. Noted singer and songwriter Glenn Fredly tweeted that the police should instead punish those who "call themselves singers but are unable to lip-sync as cool as Norman", while legislator Eva Kusuma Sundari noted that actions like Kamaru's were good public relations for the police.
Salingsilang.






