[[Diego Portales University]]

CATEGORIES: Diego Portales University

Diego Portales University () is one of the first private universities founded in Chile and is named after the Chilean statesman Diego Portales.
UDP has campuses in the Barrio Universitario de SantiagoA literal translation of Barrio Universitario de Santiago would be The Santiago university neighborhood. This neighborhood lies in downtown Santiago and has several educational facilities.

History

Universidad Diego Portales (UDP) was founded in 1982. It was an initiative of the founders of the "Professional Institute of Sales and Advertising (IPEVE)" which at that time (1963) had already been in existence for almost 20 years.
In 1983, the University embarked on its academic programme with the creation of three faculties: the Faculty of Law, the Faculty of Administrative Sciences, and the Faculty of Psychology. In 1989, two new faculties were created, the Faculty of Information and Communications and the Faculty of Engineering Sciences.
In 1991, the University voluntarily decided to undergo the process of national accreditation with the aim of subsequently attaining the status of Autonomous University.
On March 18, 1993, the Superior Council for Education in plenary session ratified Universidad Diego Portales as successfully fulfilling its institutional mission, for which it was designated as having "Full Institutional Autonomy", authorized to bestow all categories of academic degree and title independently. Since 1993, the University has embarked on a process of consolidation and growth in its academic programme.
In 1994, degree courses in Advertising and Design were transferred from IPEVE to Universidad Diego Portales, and the Bachelor of Arts degree programme was introduced. Five years later in 1999, the Faculty of Architecture, Design and Fine Arts was created and the Faculty of Humanities founded.
In 2002, Universidad Diego Portales took a step in its growth as an academic institution with the creation of new programs and its incursion into two new fields of knowledge: Health and Education.
UDP that same year designed a plan for long-term infrastructural growth, involving the issue of a Security Bond guaranteed by the World Bank for the sum of approximately US$ 25 million, thus becoming the first educational institution to utilize this type of financing.
In 2004 Universidad Diego Portales became one of the first private universities to achieve institutional accreditation as a university from the National Undergraduate Accreditation Commission (CNAP) in three areas: Institutional Management, Undergraduate Teaching, and Equipment and Infrastructure.

Academic Schools and Programs

At the present, Universidad Diego Portales offers 31 undergraduate programs in daytime and evening formats at its various Faculties.
Faculty of Economics and Business at sunset
There are a total of 11,877 registered undergraduate students and more than 1,000 graduates students, with a total number of more than 16,000 alumni network.
Additionally, the University imparts various postgraduate programmes.
The Faculty of Education and Humanities runs Master of Psychology programmes specializing in Social Psychology, Theoretical and Clinical Psychoanalysis, Clinical Psychology specializing in Family and Couples Therapy, and Cognitive Development specializing in Dynamic Learning Propensity Assessment Device; Postgraduate courses in Clinical Psychoanalysis specializing in Adults, Clinical Psychology: Specialist in Transpersonal Humanist Psychotherapy, Psychomotricity, Specialist in Juvenile-Infant Clinical Psychology; Specialist Programmes in Education (Language and Communication, English as a Foreign Language, Artistic Education, Mathematical Education, Nature Study, Social Studies and Physical Education); and Diplomas in Juridical and Forensic Psychology and an International Diploma in Sports Psychology.
The Faculty of Health Sciences, in conjunction with the IberoAmerican University Foundation, offers an International Masters Degree in Nutrition and Dietetics, and a Postgraduate degree in Nutrition and Applied Dietetics.
The Faculty of Communications and Letters offers a programme leading to an International Masters Degree in Communication and an International Diploma in Management Communication.
The Faculty of Law offers Masters Degrees in Infant– Adolescent and Family Law, Constitutional Law and Public Institutions, and Criminal Law and the Penal Process; and postgraduate courses in Family Mediator Training.
The Faculties Economics and Business joined with the Faculty of Engineering through their Graduate Schools have developed an MBA programme with dual degree in Universitat Pompeu Fabra with specializations in Finance, Human Resources, Strategic Communication, Marketing and Quality Control and a Master in Finance; Masters programmes in Educational Management, Organizational Development and Behaviour, Information Technology Management, Systems Administration and Business Administration.
Finally, the Humanities Institute offers a Masters Degree programme in Contemporary Thought and a Diploma in Contemporary Thought.
In 2005, the total number of registered postgraduate students was 959.

International Relations and Agreements

UDP has an extensive network of working alliances and agreements with reowned universities, research centres, foundations and overseas organizations in more than 25 countries around the world.
UDP maintains agreements with 120 universities from countries such as: Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, France, Germany, Honduras, Italy, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Poland, Puerto Rico, Romania, Russia, Spain, The United States, Venezuela.

Knowledge Production – Research

The growing importance of knowledge in the development of nations has led UDP to implement a programme of research and knowledge production oriented towards the search for solutions to national problems of high public impact.
In consequence, the Centre for Juridical Research of the Faculty of Law has made significant contributions towards the Penal Procedures Reform which is being implemented throughout the country; whilst two other Centres belonging to the Faculty of Humanities and Education (Cognitive Development Centre) and the Faculty of Communication and Letters (Journalism and Advertising Research Centre, CIPP) are implementing programmes of public interest in the areas of cognitive development, community strengthening and the role of the communications media in society.
Added to the above, the Humanities Institute and the Social Sciences Research Institute have embarked on multidisciplinary research programmes oriented towards relevant national issues, contributing to the national debate on a permanent basis from a rigorous new perspective.
At present, the University is implementing 21 programmes with external financing from the National Fund for Scientific and Technological Development (FONDECYT), the Fund for the Development of Art and Culture (FONDART), the Bicentennial Programme of the National Council for Science and Technology (CONACYT), the Ministry of Planning and Cooperation (MIDEPLAN), the Ministry of Education (MINEDUC), the United Nations Development Programme and the National Council for Narcotics Control (UNDP-CONACE), and the European Commission's 6th Marco Programme, in the fields of Education, Psychology, Health, Law, Social Sciences, Humanities and Engineering. To these must be added the over 25 research projects that are financed internally.
Moreover, members of our academic staff have published more than 50 articles in ISI-indexed publications from 2005 to June 2006.

Quality Infrastructure

With the implementation of their Infrastructural Plan, UDP has established a solid presence in the centre of Santiago in buildings extending over an area of 94,582 square metres that serve its entire university community.
This colossal project is the result of the work of a team of architects from the academic staff of the Faculty of Architecture, Art and Design of the University. With this project, UDP now possesses the largest student infrastructure in the University District of Santiago, considered and projected around the university life of its students, empowering the development of their academic, sporting and social activities.
UDP is now building  a new campus for economics faculty and postgrade, in "Ciudad empresarial", one business area of the city, located at the north of Santiago. It is also building a new library, first central library of Diego Portales University, at Santiago downtown.

Indicators by January 2008

Founded on: 4 October 1982 
Inauguration of the academic programme: 1983 
Full Autonomy: 18 March 1993

National Undergraduate Accreditation Committee (CNAP) Institutional Accreditation 2008-2013

Areas of accreditation:
Institutional Management
Undergraduate Teaching
Infrastructure and Equipment

UDP in Rankings

The UDP has permanently obtained 1st place for four undergraduate programs of the ten evaluated by several national rankings amongst all private universities. Those are:
- Architecture
- Law
- Journalism
- Psychology
Ranking for the Faculty of Economics and Business:
- 1st place MBA with Management specialization in Chile, "America Economia" magazine, Ranking Latin American MBA, 2008.
- 5th place MBA with Management specialization amongst all universities in Latin America, "America Economia" magazine, Ranking Latin American MBA, 2008.
- 2nd place, Ranking of Economics and Business departments of Chilean Private Universities, "Que Pasa" magazine, 2008.
- 3rd place in preference of recruiters, "Capital" magazine, 2008.
- 6th place amongst all Chilean universities to pursue undergraduate degrees in Economic and Business, Ranking "Emol.

Infrastructure

Built-up area: 94,582 square metres
Total land surface area of grounds: 61,341 square metres
Surface area of Laboratories:: 5,000 square metres
Nº of laboratories: 28
Clinical Departments in the Health Faculty: 33
Surface area of Computation Facilities: 430 square metres
Number of computers available: 1,396
Total number of undergraduate students: 11,877 (day and night school)
Places per year
Total in 2008: approximately 2,300
Alumni Network: 18,794 UDP graduates
Academic Staff
Total
1,331 professors 
PhDs
132  
Masters Degrees
389
Licentiates and Technicians 
810
UDP Library System
Nº of libraries: 11 
Nº of books in libraries: 106,114 
Nº de texts in libraries: 55,662
Number of Scholarships Awarded per Student
Total
1,923 
Internal
1,835  
External
88

Research

Professors participating in research projects: 149
Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) Publications (to date): 200
Scientific Electronic Library Online (SciELO) Publications (to date): 90
Projects (2005-2006)
Nº of projects financed internally (to date): 131 
Nº of projects with external financing (to date): 65 
National Fund for Scientific and Technological Development (FONDECYT) Projects awarded: 37 
Total UDP projects (main institution): 206

Notes




