[[Martian meteorite]]

CATEGORIES: Mars, Martian meteorites

A Martian meteorite is a rock that formed on the planet Mars, was ejected from Mars by the impact of an asteroid or comet, and landed on the Earth. Of over 61,000 meteorites that have been found on Earth, 132 were identified as Martian (as of March 03, 2014).
The term does not refer to meteorites found on Mars, such as Heat Shield Rock.
On January 3, 2013, NASA reported that a meteorite, named NWA 7034 (nicknamed "Black Beauty"), found in 2011 in the Sahara desert, was determined to be from Mars and found to contain ten times the water of other Mars meteorites found on Earth. The meteorite was determined to have formed 2.1 billion years ago during the Amazonian geologic period on Mars.

History

By the early 1980s, it was obvious that the SNC group of meteorites (Shergottites, Nakhlites, Chassignites) were significantly different from most other meteorite types. Among these differences were younger formation ages, a different oxygen isotopic composition, the presence of aqueous weathering products, and some similarity in chemical composition to analyses of the Martian surface rocks in 1976 by the Viking landers. Several workers suggested these characteristics implied the origin of SNC meteorites from a relatively large parent body, possibly Mars (e.g., Smith et al.R. et al., "Petrogenesis of the SNC (Shergottites, Nakhlites, Chassignites) Meteorites: Implications for Their Origin From a Large Dynamic Planet, Possibly Mars" - (PDF) Proceedings of the fourteenth Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Part 2, Journal of Geophysical Research, Vol. 89, Supplement, pp. B612-B630, February 15, 1984. and Treiman et al., "Core formation in the Earth and Shergottite Parent Body (SPB):Chemical evidence from basalts" - (PDF) Geochemica et Cosnochimica Acta Vol. 50, pp. 1071-1091 (1986).). Then in 1983, various trapped gases were reported in impact-formed glass of the EET79001 shergottite, gases which closely resembled those in the Martian atmosphere as analyzed by Viking. These trapped gases provided direct evidence for a Martian origin. In 2000, an article by Treiman, Gleason and Bogard gave a survey of all the arguments used to conclude the SNC meteorites (of which 14 had been found at the time) were from Mars. They wrote, "There seems little likelihood that the SNCs are not from Mars. If they were from another planetary body, it would have to be substantially identical to Mars as it now is understood."

Subdivision

As of January 9, 2013, 111 of the 114 Martian meteorites are divided into three rare groups of achondritic (stony) meteorites: shergottites (96), nakhlites (13), chassignites (2), and ones otherwise (3) (which includes the oddball meteorite Allan Hills 84001 usually placed within a specific "OPX group"). Consequently, Martian meteorites as a whole are sometimes referred to as the SNC group. They have isotope ratios that are said to be consistent with each other and inconsistent with the Earth. The names derive from the location of where the first meteorite of their type was discovered.

Shergottites

Roughly three-quarters of all Martian meteorites can be classified as shergottites. They are named after the Shergotty meteorite, which fell at Sherghati, India in 1865. They fall into three main groups, the basaltic, olivine-phyric (such as the Tissint group found in Morocco in 2011 They can be categorised alternatively into three or four groups based on their rare-earth element content.
The shergottites appear to have crystallised as recently as 180 million years ago, which is a surprisingly young age considering how ancient the majority of the surface of Mars appears to be, and the small size of Mars itself. Because of this, some have advocated the idea that the shergottites are much older than this. et al., 2009. Martian meteorite chronology and the evolution of the interior of Mars. Earth and Planetary Science Letters
Volume 280, pp. 285-295. " [/ref] This "Shergottite Age Paradox" remains unsolved and is still an area of active research and debate.
The 3 million year old crater Mojave, 58.5 km in diameter and the youngest crater of its size on the planet, has been identified as the likely source of these meteorites.

Nakhlites

Nakhlites are named after the first of them, the Nakhla meteorite, which fell in El-Nakhla, Alexandria, Egypt in 1911 and had an estimated weight of 10 kg.
Nakhlites are igneous rocks that are rich in augite and were formed from basaltic magma about 1.3 billion years ago. They contain augite and olivine crystals. Their crystallization ages, compared to a crater count chronology of different regions on Mars, suggest the nakhlites formed on the large volcanic construct of either Tharsis, Elysium, or Syrtis Major Planum.H., "The nakhlite meteorites: Augite-rich igneous rocks from Mars" - (PDF) Chemie der Erde 65, p. 203-270, (2005). URL accessed July 30, 2011.
It has been shown that the nakhlites were suffused with liquid water around 620 million years ago and that they were ejected from Mars around 10.75 million years ago by an asteroid impact. They fell to Earth within the last 10,000 years.

Chassignites

The first chassignite, the Chassigny meteorite, fell at Chassigny, Haute-Marne, France in 1815. There has been only one other chassignite recovered, named Northwest Africa (NWA) 2737. NWA 2737 was found in Morocco or Western Sahara in August 2000 by meteorite hunters Bruno Fectay and Carine Bidaut, who gave it the temporary name "Diderot." It was shown by Beck et al., "The Diderot meteorite: The second chassignite" - (PDF) 36th Annual Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, March 14–18, 2005, in League City, Texas, abstract no.1326. URL accessed September 8, 2006. that its "mineralogy, major and trace element chemistry as well as oxygen isotopes revealed an unambiguous Martian origin and strong affinities with Chassigny."

Ungrouped meteorites

Among these, the famous specimen Allan Hills 84001 has a different rock type than other Martian meteorites: it is an orthopyroxenite (an igneous rock dominantly composed of orthopyroxene). For this reason it is classified within its own group, the "OPX Martian meteorites". This meteorite received much attention after an electron microscope revealed structures that were considered to be the fossilized remains of bacteria-like lifeforms. , scientific consensus was that the microfossils were not indicative of Martian life, but of contamination by earthly biofilms. However, in 2009, new analyses ruled out earthly and non-biological origins, presenting strong evidence of life on Mars.com, Scientific American ALH 84001 is as old as the basaltic and intermediate shergottite groups — i.e., 4.1 billion years old.
In March 2004 it was suggested that the unique Kaidun meteorite, which landed in Yemen on March 12, 1980, may have originated on the Martian moon of Phobos. Because Phobos has similarities to C-type asteroids and because the Kaidun meteorite is a carbonaceous chondrite, Kaidun is not a Martian meteorite in the strict sense. However, it may contain small fragments of material from the Martian surface.

Origin

The majority of SNC meteorites are quite young compared to most other meteorites and seem to imply that volcanic activity was present on Mars only a few hundred million years ago. The young formation ages of Martian meteorites was one of the early recognized characteristics that suggested their origin from a planetary body such as Mars. Among Martian meteorites, only ALH 84001 and NWA 7034 have radiometric ages older than about 1400 Ma (Ma = million years). All nakhlites, as well as Chassigny and NWA 2737, give similar if not identical formation ages around 1300 Ma, as determined by various radiometric dating techniques..
It is claimed recently that all shergottites meteorites come from the Mojave Crater on Mars.sciencemag.1247282

Age estimates based on cosmic ray exposure

The amount of time spent in transit from Mars to Earth can be estimated by measurements of the effect of cosmic radiation on the meteorites, particularly on isotope ratios of noble gases. The meteorites cluster in families that seem to correspond to distinct impact events on Mars.
It is thought, therefore, that the meteorites all originate in relatively few impacts every few million years on  Mars. The impactors would be kilometers in diameter and the craters they form on Mars tens of kilometers in diameter. Models of impacts on Mars are consistent with these findings. Eugster, G. F. Herzog, K. Marti,
M. W. Caffee Irradiation Records, Cosmic-Ray Exposure Ages, and Transfer Times of Meteorites, see section 4.5 Martian Meteorites LPI, 2006[/ref]
Ages since impact determined so far includeL.E. NYQUIST1, D.D. BOGARD1, C.-Y. SHIH2, A. GRESHAKE3, D. STÖFFLER AGES AND GEOLOGIC HISTORIES OF MARTIAN METEORITES 2001Tony Irving Martian Meteorites - has graphs of ejection ages - site maintained by Tony Irving for up to date information on Martian meteorites
It is claimed recently that a specific crater on Mars all shergottites meteorites come from the Mojave Crater. 

Possible evidence of life

Several Martian meteorites have been found to contain what some think is evidence for fossilized Martian life forms. The most significant of these is a meteorite found in the Allan Hills of Antarctica (ALH 84001). Ejection from Mars seems to have taken place about 16 million years ago. Arrival on Earth was about 13 000 years ago. Cracks in the rock appear to have filled with carbonate materials (implying groundwater was present) between 4 and 3.6 billion-years-ago. Evidence of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) have been identified with the levels increasing away from the surface. Other Antarctic meteorites do not contain PAHs. Earthly contamination should presumably be highest at the surface. Several minerals in the crack fill are deposited in phases, specifically, iron deposited as magnetite, that are claimed to be typical of biodepositation on Earth. There are also small ovoid and tubular structures that might be nanobacteria fossils in carbonate material in crack fills (investigators McKay, Gibson, Thomas-Keprta, Zare).
Many studies disputed the validity of the fossils. and C. Powell. In Focus Bugs in the Data?  1996. Scientific American. October. 20-22Controversy Continues: Mars Meteorite Clings to Life - Or Does It? By Leonard David - Senior Space Writer, posted: 20 March 2002, Space. A serious difficulty with the claims for a biogenic origin of the magnetites is that the majority of them exhibit topotactic crystallographic relationships with the host carbonates (i.e. there are 3D orientation relationships between the magnetite and carbonate lattices), which is strongly indicative that the magnetites have grown in situ by a physico-chemical mechanism.J.; Scott E.R.D. (2002) "Origin of supposedly biogenic magnetite in the Martian meteorite Allan Hills ALH84001". Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci USA, 99: 6556.








