[[Clickatell]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, Telecommunications companies of the United States, Companies based in Redwood City, California

Clickatell is a privately held mobile communications company founded in 2000 in South Africa and headquartered in Redwood City, California, USA, with offices in Cape Town and Johannesburg, South Africa Clickatell's customer base includes more than 10,000 small, medium and large enterprises in industries that need software as a service (SaaS) messaging services and bulk SMS gateway connectivity.

History

The company was founded to address a need in South Africa for an SMS provider that could enable the sending of multiple texts to different countries from a single website. It was founded by Pieter DE Villiers in Cape Town, South Africa. 
In 2006, the company acquired the assets of Multimode, Inc., an application service provider that offers global delivery of time-critical notifications to communication devices of all types, and established its headquarters in Redwood City, California. In 2008 Clickatell received venture capital funding from Sequoia Capital and became a USA private company backed by large private equity investors.
In 2009, Clickatell provided the U.S. Department of State (USDOS) with a mobile message service to enable it to give African and international/non-U.S. citizens around the world live speech highlights during a speech given by U.S. President Barack Obama from Accra, Ghana. In addition, enrolled participants were able to send comments via text message back to the USDOS, where selected responses were posted online.

Technology

Clickatell's SMS gateway enables businesses, financial institutions, governments, and communities to use mobile messaging to aid their businesses.
Integration with front-end and legacy systems is carried out via application programming interface (API) connections. These offer developers a choice of connection options (HTTP/S, SMPP, SMTP, FTP, XML, SOAP).




