[[Des Moines, Iowa]]

CATEGORIES: Des Moines, Iowa, Cities in Iowa, Cities in Polk County, Iowa, Des Moines metropolitan area, County seats in Iowa, Populated places established in 1843, Populated places on the Underground Railroad

Des Moines 
Des Moines is a major center of the U.S. insurance industry and also has a sizable financial services and publishing business base. In fact, Des Moines was credited as the "number one spot for U.S. insurance companies" in a Business Wire article and named the third largest "insurance capital" of the world. The city is the headquarters for the Principal Financial Group, Athene USA insurance, the Meredith Corporation, Ruan Transportation, EMC Insurance Companies, and Wellmark Blue Cross Blue Shield. Other major corporations such as Wells Fargo, Voya Financial, Nationwide Mutual Insurance Company, ACE Limited, Marsh, Monsanto and Pioneer Hi-Bred have large operations in or near the metro area. In recent years Microsoft, Hewlett Packard and Facebook  In 2014, NBC ranked Des Moines as the "Wealthiest City in America" according to its criteria.today.com/money/des-moines-where-regular-folks-can-live-rich-life-2D11965288
Des Moines is an important city in U.S. presidential politics because it is the capital of Iowa, which is home to the first caucuses of the presidential primary cycle. Hence, many presidential candidates set up campaign headquarters in Des Moines. A 2007 article in The New York Times stated "if you have any desire to witness presidential candidates in the most close-up and intimate of settings, there is arguably no better place to go than Des Moines."

Etymology

Des Moines takes its name from Fort Des Moines (1843–46), which was named for the Des Moines River. The French "des Moines" (pronounced ) translates literally to either "from the monks" or "of the monks".
The historian Virgil Vogel claimed that "Moingona" was derived from the Algonquian clan name "Loon".
Some historians and researchers lacking linguistic or Algonquianist training concluded that Moingona meant "people by the portage" or something similar, a reference to the Des Moines Rapids, where the earliest meetings between the Moingona and European explorers took place.
One popular interpretation of "Des Moines" ignores Vogel's research, and concludes that "Des Moines" refers to French Trappist monks, who lived in huts on top of what is now known as Monks Mound near St. Louis some  from the Des Moines River."Defining 'Des Moines'", Des Moines Register, September 14, 2003.
A controversial recent hypothesis using a study of Miami-Illinois tribal names concludes the word Moingona comes from mooyiiinkweena, a derogatory name which translates roughly to "the excrement-faces." The name was apparently given to Marquette and Joliet by a tribal leader to dissuade them from doing business with a neighboring tribe."Is 'Des Moines' just some dirty joke?", Des Moines Register, September 14, 2003.

Prehistory

Prehistoric inhabitants of early Des Moines

The juncture of the Des Moines and Raccoon rivers has attracted humans for at least 7,000 years. Several prehistoric occupation areas have been identified in downtown Des Moines by archaeologists. Discovered in December 2010, the "Palace" is an expansive 7,000-year-old site located at the new wastewater treatment plant in southeastern Des Moines. It contains well-preserved house deposits and numerous graves. State of Iowa archaeologist John Doershuk was assisted by the University of Iowa archaeologists at this dig.
At least three Late Prehistoric villages stood in or near downtown Des Moines, dating from about AD 1300 to 1700. In addition, 15 to 18 prehistoric American Indian mounds were observed in downtown Des Moines by early settlers. All have been destroyed.

History

Origin of Fort Des Moines

The City of Des Moines traces its origins to May 1843, when Captain James Allen supervised the construction of a fort on the site where the Des Moines and Raccoon Rivers merge. Allen wanted to use the name Fort Raccoon; however, the U.S. War Department told him to name it Fort Des Moines. The fort was built to control the Sauk and Meskwaki Indians, who had been transplanted to the area from their traditional lands in eastern Iowa. The fort was abandoned in 1846 after the Sauk and Meskwaki were removed from the state.
The Sauk and Meskwaki did not fare well in Des Moines. The illegal whiskey trade, combined with the destruction of traditional lifeways, led to severe problems. One newspaper reported: "It is a fact that the location of Fort Des Moines among the Sac and Fox Indians (under its present commander) for the last two years, had corrupted them more and lowered them deeper in the scale of vice and degradation, than all their intercourse with the whites for the ten years previous."
Even after official removal, the Meskwaki continued to return to Des Moines until ca. 1857. Archaeological excavations have demonstrated that many fort-related features survived under what is now Martin Luther King, Jr. Parkway and First Street. 2 and the Archaeology of a City. Iowa Heritage Illustrated 86(1):12–21. Soldiers stationed at Fort Des Moines opened the first coal mines in the area, mining coal from the riverbank for the fort's blacksmith. Lees, History of Coal Mining in Iowa, Chapter III of Annual Report, 1908, Iowa Geological Survey, 1909, page 566.

Early settlement

Settlers occupied the abandoned fort and nearby areas. On May 25, 1846, Fort Des Moines became the seat of Polk County. Arozina Perkins, a school teacher who spent the winter of 1850–1851 in the town of Fort Des Moines, was not favorably impressed:
 This is one of the strangest looking "cities" I ever saw... This town is at the juncture of the Des Moines and Raccoon rivers. It is mostly a level prairie with a few swells or hills around it. We have a court house of "brick", and one church, a plain, framed building belonging to the Methodists. There are two taverns here, one of which has a most important little bell that rings together some fifty boarders. I cannot tell you how many dwellings there are, for I have not counted them; some are of logs, some of brick, some framed, and some are the remains of the old dragoon houses... I have been into but four of them... Society is as varied as the buildings are. There are people from nearly every state, and Dutch, Swedes, etc. In Women Teachers on the Frontier, edited by P. W. Kaufman, pp. 126–143. Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut. 
In May 1851, much of the town was destroyed during the Flood of 1851. "The Des Moines and Raccoon rivers rose to an unprecedented height, inundating the entire country east of the Des Moines river. Crops were utterly destroyed, houses and fences swept away."Mills and Company (1866) Des Moines City Directory and Business Guide. Mills and Company, Des Moines Iowa, p. 6. Microfilm, State Historical Society Library, Iowa City. This flood provided a clean slate for the city to grow on.

Era of growth

On September 22, 1851, Des Moines was incorporated as a city, the charter was approved by voters on October 18. In 1857, the name "Fort Des Moines" was shortened to "Des Moines" and the state capital was moved here from Iowa City.
Growth was slow during the Civil War period, but the city exploded in size and importance after a railroad link was completed in 1866. Volume 1. S. J. Clarke, Chicago.
In 1864, the Des Moines Coal Company was organized to begin the first systematic mining in the region. Its first mine, north of town on the west side of the river, was exhausted by 1873. The Black Diamond mine, near the south end of the West Seventh Street Bridge, sunk a  coal bed. By 1876, this mine employed 150 men and shipped 20 carloads of coal per day. By 1885, there were numerous mine shafts within the city limits, and mining began to spread into the surrounding countryside. By
1893, there were 23 mines in the region. Lees, History of Coal Mining in Iowa, Chapter III of Annual Report, 1908, Iowa Geological Survey, 1909, pages 566–569. By 1908, the coal resources of Des Moines were largely exhausted.  Nonetheless, in 1912, Des Moines was home to eight locals of the United Mine Workers union representing a total of 1,410 miners. 16 – Feb. 2, 1912, Indianapolis; Volume 2, pages 180A-184A. This represents about 1.7 percent of the city's population in 1910.
By 1900, Des Moines was Iowa's largest city with a population of 62,139. In 1910, the Census Bureau reported Des Moines' population as 97.3% white and 2.7% black.

"City Beautiful", industrial decline, and rebirth

