[[El-Tod]]

CATEGORIES: Archaeological sites in Egypt

El-Tod ( A modern village now surrounds the site.

History

The history of the site can be traced to the Old Kingdom period of Egyptian history. A granite pillar of the Fifth dynasty pharaoh, Userkaf, is the oldest object found at El-Tod. It was this same pharaoh who ordered that the temple to Monthu be enlarged. Evidence of Eleventh dynasty building is shown in the discovery of blocks bearing the names of Mentuhotep II and Mentuhotep III. Under Senusret I, these buildings were replaced with a new temple. Further additions to this temple were made under Ptolemy VIII.

Culture

Aside from Monthu, to whom a temple was dedicated, the Egyptian goddess Junit was of local importance.

Remains



Tod Treasure

Archaeologists during 1936 digging at the temple location found in the support structures under the ruined building a number of metallic and lapis lazuli artifacts. The objects made largely of silver were for some authorities (at some time) of unknown origin, are at least known as not being of Egyptian origin--the style of the vessels nevertheless resembling objects found in Knossos of c. 1900–1700 BC.
The initial discovery of four chests (inscribed with the name of a pharaoh called Amenemhat II ) made of copper and containing the objects had been made by F. Bisson de la Roque. Musée du Louvre, Multimedia Division, Cultural Production, Department 75058, Paris, Cedex 01,France 2011-12-13. Also see at the Louvre Museum website Some sources posit that the treasure is of Asiatic origin and that some of it, in fact, was manufactured in Iran (the latter as claimed by Roger Moorey). E. Porada, (1982)  "Remarks on the Tod Treasure in Egypt," Some gold artifacts are also part of the Treasure, and they may have originated from Anatolia. A similar conclusion is drawn on the origin of the silverware based on evidence obtained from relative analysis of the  metallic constituents. Nicholson, Ian Shaw books.co.R.Porada) JSTORA Note on the Anatolian Connections of the Tôd Treasure Anatolian Studies Vol. 45, (1995), pp. 243-250 (article consists of 8 pages) Published by: British Institute at Ankara 2011-12-13
Objects that were found as part of the Treasure seem to have originated from various parts of the world, indicating trade contacts of Egypt at that time.
The total weight of all gold items was 6.98 kg, and of the silver items 8.87 kg.



Further reading




