[[List of Palestinian rocket attacks on Israel, 2011]]

CATEGORIES: Hamas, Israel–Gaza conflict, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, Palestinian rockets, 2011 in the Palestinian territories, Terrorist incidents in Israel in 2011, Palestinian terrorism, Terrorist attacks attributed to Palestinian militant groups, Israeli–Palestinian conflict-related lists

This is a detailed list of Palestinian rocket and mortar attacks on Israel in 2011 from the Gaza Strip.
Over the course of 2011, 680 rockets, mortars and Grad missiles were fired from the Gaza Strip into Israel.IDF Spokesperson

Overview and notable developments

At the very end of 2010, Palestinian Islamic Jihad stated that it and other Palestinians militant groups in the Gaza Strip would temporarily halt rocket attacks against Israel. On 12 January, the group declared again that it would cease firing rockets.
On 2 January, it was revealed that two East Jerusalem Arabs, employees of the British Consulate General in Jerusalem, were arrested for suspected involvement in an aborted Hamas plot to fire a missile at Teddy Stadium during a soccer match. The two were charged the following day with weapons trafficking.Two arrested for Hamas plot to fire rockets at stadium, Jerusalem Post 02-01-20112 at J'lem British Consulate charged with aiding Hamas, Jerusalem Post 03-01-2011
On 15 March, Israel seized the Victoria, a ship containing concealed Iranian missiles destined for the Gaza Strip.Uncovering the missiles, Israel News 16-03-2011
On 27 March, Israel first deployed the new Iron Dome missile defense system to protect Beersheba. The city, one of Israel's largest, had recently been targeted again by Palestinian missiles after being safe since the 2008-2009 Gaza War. A week later, a second battery was deployed to protect Ashkelon.Iron Dome successfully intercepts Gaza rocket for first time, Haaretz 07-04-2011 On 31 August, Israel deployed a third battery outside Ashdod before the new school year. As of that date, Iron Dome had intercepted several dozen Gazan rockets at an estimated cost of $100,000 per interception, not including the price of the system itself.IAF deploys third Iron Dome battery outside Ashdod, Jerusalem Post 2011-08-31
On 4 April, Israel indicted alleged Hamas "rocket godfather" Dirar Abu Sisi in the Beersheba District Court. Abu Sisi had reportedly been captured by Israel in the Ukraine a month prior. He denied any wrongdoing.Shin Bet files indictment against 'rocket godfather', Jerusalem Post 04-04-2011
On 7 April, Hamas militants fired a Kornet anti-tank missile at an Israel school bus. The sole passenger on board, 16-year-old boy Daniel Viflic, was killed.
On 18 August, a series of cross-border attacks were carried out in southern Israel near the Egyptian border. The initial attacks sparked several days of clashes between Israel and Palestinian militant groups that resulted in substantial casualties to both sides.

January

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip launched 17 rockets and 26 mortar shells were towards Israel in 25 separate attacks. This represented a decline in number of projectiles fired from December 2010, which saw 15 rockets and 38 mortar shells launched in 30 separate attacks.Monthly Summary - January 2011, Israel Security Agency 
In the evening, a mortar shell fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip landed near a kibbutz in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. A woman suffered from shock, but no physical injuries or damage were reported. The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility for mortar attacks that day, saying that it had fired four mortars at two military posts in Israel and adding that it would "cling to the option of resistance and confront the Israeli occupation". That night, Israel responded to the attack and to a separate attack two days earlier with airstrikes on two targets in the Gaza Strip, described by the Israel Defense Forces as a Hamas terrorist activity center in the north and a weapons manufacturing facility in the center of the territory. Palestinians said that two people were injured.IAF strikes in Gaza after mortar fire, Israel News 02-01-2011PFLP wing: 4 shells fired at army posts, Ma'an News Agency 02-01-2011
A projectile fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip hit the Eshkol Regional Council. However, an Israeli military spokeswoman said she was not aware of any shells launched from Gaza at that time.PFLP, NRB say projectiles fired toward Israel, Ma'an News 03-01-2011
In the afternoon, a Qassam rocket fired by Palestinians in the northern Gaza Strip exploded near a kibbutz in the Ashkelon Coast Regional Council. No injuries were reported, but several greenhouses sustained damage. No militant group claimed responsibility. Israel responded that day with airstrikes on a Hamas militant training facility in the central part of the Gaza Strip and a smuggling tunnel in the south. No injuries were reported.Kassam from Gaza hits greenhouse in Ashkelon area; none hurt, Jerusalem Post 04-01-2011Qassam hits Israel; IDF attacks Gaza targets, Israel News 05-01-2011IAF strikes Gaza Strip in response to earlier Kassam fire, Jerusalem Post 05-01-2011Terror sites hit in Gaza after rocket fire, UPI 05-01-2011Israeli warplanes hit Gaza: Palestinians, AFP 05-01-2011 
Two mortar shells fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip landed in open areas in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.2 mortar shells fired from Gaza Strip into Israel, Jerusalem Post 05-01-2011 Five additional mortars hit the Eshkol Regional Council that day, according to the IDF website.Within First Week of 2011: Over Ten Rockets Launched from Gaza Strip into Israel, IDF Website 06-01-2011
After nightfall, a Qassam rocket hit an open area in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Kassam rocket hits Eshkol area; no injuries or damage, Jerusalem Post 05-01-2011
In the morning, a mortar shell fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fell in the Sdot Negev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. However, an Israeli military spokeswoman said she was not aware of any attacks in that area. No injuries were reported.IDF arrests Hamas men in Hebron, strikes Gaza, Jerusalem Post 07-01-2011Israeli army carries out three airstrikes on Gaza, Ma'an News Agency 07-01-2011
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a projectile at Israel. No injuries or damage were reported.Gaza projectile hits Israel, no casualties, AFP (published in the Khaleej Times 07-01-2011
At about 2:20 pm, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired four 181-millimeter mortar shells at Israel, all of which landed in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. One of the shells hit a residential area within an agricultural community in the area. Three Thai foreign agricultural workers were injured, one seriously, one moderately and one lightly, all by shrapnel. A number of other people suffered from shock. The shell also killed a cat nearby. Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility, saying that it had fired six mortar shells at an Israeli military post near Nahal Oz.Gaza mortar shell wounds two men at Israeli farm, Reuters 08-01-20114 mortar shells land in Sha'ar Hanegev area, 3 injured, Jerusalem Post 08-01-20113 Thai workers hurt by mortar shell, Israel News 08-01-2011Three foreign workers wounded in mortar attack near Gaza border, Haaretz 08-01-2011Israel: 2 injured by projectiles launched from Gaza, Ma'an News Agency 08-01-2011
Towards the evening, an additional Palestinian mortar shell landed in an open area in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.
After nightfall, Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket which landed in an open area in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Peretz: IDF needs to step up its attacks on Hamas, Jerusalem Post 08-01-2011Gaza violence escalates claiming victims, UPI 09-01-2011
Within an hour, Palestinians fired a second Qassam rocket into the Eshkol Regional Council. Truck driver Yitzhak Zaafrani was lightly wounded in the face and his truck was damaged.
In the morning, Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket into the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. No injuries were reported.Israel targets new Iran-built Hamas command centers in Gaza, DEBKAfile 13-01-2011
In the evening, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired three rockets at Israel. One hit an industrial area in Ashkelon, while the other two fell in the Ashkelon Coast Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Rockets from Gaza hit Israeli city; no one hurt, AP 10-01-2011
Later, Palestinians fired another Qassam rocket which landed in an open area in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries were reported.4 Gaza rockets hit south Israel, Israel News 10-01-2011
In the morning, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a rocket which exploded south of Ashkelon. No injuries or damage were reported.Israel bombs three militant sites in Gaza in response to rocket attacks, The Guardian 12-01-2011
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired three mortar shells at Israel, all of which exploded in an open area near a kibbutz in the Sha'ar HaNegev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. The Color Red siren did not sound.3 Mortar shells fired at Negev; no injuries, damage, Jerusalem Post 16-01-2011
In the morning, a Qassam rocket fired by Palestinians in the northern Gaza Strip exploded in an orchard near a community in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Qassam explodes in western Negev, Israel News 17-01-2011
In the early afternoon, four mortar shells fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip landed in open areas in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.4 mortar shells from Gaza hit Eshkol region; none hurt, Jerusalem Post 18-01-2011
A mortar fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip landed in an unspecified location in the western Negev. No injuries or damage were reported.Gaza explosion kills Palestinian; IDF: We didn't attack, Ynet News 22-01-2011
In the evening, a Qassam rocket fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fell in an open area in the Sdot Negev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Kassam falls in Negev; no injuries reported, Jerusalem Post 25-01-2011
Later in the evening, a second rocket exploded in an open area in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Kassam explodes in Eshkol Regional Council; no injuries, Jerusalem Post 25-01-2011
A Qassam rocket fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip exploded in an open area in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.
A Grad rocket landed near a residential neighborhood in the city of Netivot. The explosion disrupted a wedding in the vicinity of the landing site; four people suffered from shock, and damage was caused to a road and a parked car. Another Grad rocket exploded near the city of Ofakim a few minutes later, but no injuries or damage were reported.Grad rockets hit near Netivot, Ofakim, Israel News 31-01-2011
Israel responded on 2 February with an airstrike on a smuggling tunnel under the Gaza-Egypt border. No injuries were reported.IDF strikes Gaza smuggling tunnel in response to rocket attacks, Israel News 02-02-2011

February

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians fired 6 rockets and 19 mortar shells at Israel in 14 separate attacks.Monthly Summary – February 2011, Israel Security Agency 
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Qassam rocket into the Sdot Negev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. The Color Red alarm did not sound.Gaza militants fire Qassam rocket into southern Israel, Haaretz 04-02-2011
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired two mortar shells into the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council.2 mortars fired from Gaza Strip into Israel, Jerusalem Post 06-02-2011 
After nightfall, two additional mortar shells landed in open areas in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported in either incident.
At around 11 am, two mortar shells launched by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip landed in a kibbutz in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. One projectile landed in a parking lot, damaging a car. A second landed in a nearby field and damaged a hose. No injuries were reported. 
Shortly after 2 pm, two more mortars were fired at the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council from the northern Gaza Strip. No injuries or damage were reported. The Color Red rocket alert system sounded during both attacks and residents of the area were asked to temporarily remain in their homes. Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility, saying the attacks were directed at a military post east of Khan Younis.Four rockets fired at western Negev from Gaza, Jerusalem Post 08-02-20114 mortars hit south; car damaged, Israel News 08-02-2011Islamic Jihad says it is behind rocket attack on South, Jerusalem Post 08-02-2011
Israel responded to the attacks with airstrikes on an infiltration tunnel in the northern Gaza Strip, a rocket manufacturing facility, and a third target near Jabaliya. Palestinian sources said that eight people were lightly injured.IDF strikes in Gaza after mortar fire, Israel News 09-02-2011
The Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine said that its militants fired a projectile at an Israeli military jeep in the morning. The Israel Defense Forces said they were not familiar with the incident.PFLP wing says shelled Israeli military jeep, Ma'an News Agency 09-02-2011
Around noon, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Qassam rocket into the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. Ilana Curiel of Israel News speculated that the attack was a signal by Palestinian terror groups that they would not "make life easy" for him.Qassam hits western Negev; none injured, Israel News 14-02-2011
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired three mortar shells at a kibbutz in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. One of the projectiles exploded near a soccer field, another near a pool and the third outside the border fence. No injuries were reported. The Color Red alarm did not sound. Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility for mortars fired that day, saying it launched two shells at IDF forces which crossed the fence into the Gaza Strip.3 mortar shells hit southern kibbutz, no injuries reported, Israel News 23-02-2011
Around 9:30 pm, Palestinians fired three Grad missiles at Beersheba, one of Israel's largest cities. One of the missiles hit the backyard of a home in a residential area, causing extensive damage to surrounding houses and vehicles. Four residents - two adults and two children - were treated for shock. No physical injuries were reported. The Color Red alarm sounded through the city mere seconds before the explosion. This marked the first time Beersheba was hit by Palestinian rockets since the 2009 Gaza War.Grad rocket hits Beersheba, Israel News 23-02-2011Two Grad missiles explode in Beersheba, Jerusalem Post 23-02-2011Grad rockets fired at Be'er Sheva for first time since Gaza war, Haaretz 23-02-2011 
Israel responded that day with an airstrike on a Palestinian Islamic Jihad cell in eastern Gaza City, wounding three militants. This was followed by several airstrikes on military targets throughout the Gaza Strip, which caused heavy damage to buildings. The following day, a further airstrike on a Hamas vehicle in the Al Salaam area of Rafah killed one person and wounded several others.IDF targets Hamas in Gaza after rocket strike on Be'er Sheva, Haaretz 24-02-2011IAF aircraft strike terrorists in Gaza; 1 dead, 3 injured, Jerusalem Post 24-02-2011
A mortar shell fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip landed in an open area in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. Four Palestinians were lightly injured.Qassam hits western Negev; no injuries, Israel News 27-02-2011Rocket fired from Gaza hits Israel, no casualties, AFP 27-02-2011
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Qassam rocket at the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. The Color Red alarm did not sound.
A mortar shell was fired from the northern Gaza Strip Israel but landed in Palestinian territory near the Erez border crossing. No injuries or damage were reported. Residents of three towns in the Shaar HaNegev and Ashkelon Coast regional councils were requested to remain in their protected spaces for fear of additional attacks.Mortar shell fired from Gaza explodes in Palestinian territory, Israel News 27-02-2011

March

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired 38 rockets and 87 mortar shells at Israel in 47 separate attacks.Monthly summary – March 2011, Israel Security Agency  
During the night, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a projectile at the Sdot Negev Regional Council. The Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility for the attack, saying its militants had fired a C5K rocket at an Israeli military tower near Kissufim. "We choose the option of resistance as the means to attain our national rights, and promise the Palestinian people that we will continue resistance against Israeli forces," a statement from the group said.Gaza fighters: Projectile fired at Israeli military tower, Ma'an News Agency 03-03-2011
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired two Qassam rockets at Israel. One exploded in the Sdot Negev Regional Council and the other apparently landed within Palestinian territory. No injuries or damage were reported. 
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a rocket at an unspecified site in the western Negev. No injuries or damage were reported. Israel responded with airstrikes on Hamas militant posts in Zeitoun, Deir al-Balah and Khan Younis. No injuries were reported.IDF bombs Gaza Strip targets, Israel News 06-03-2011Israeli warplanes raid Gaza City: witnesses, AFP 05-03-2011
After nightfall, a Qassam rocket fired by Palestinians in the Gaza Strip landed in an open area in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Kassam falls in Eshkol, no injuries or damage, Jerusalem Post 09-03-2011
Palestinians fired a rocket into Sderot. No injuries or damage were reported.Two killed in IAF attack on Hamas compound in Gaza, Jerusalem Post 16-03-2011
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired four mortar shells at Israel. Some fell in unspecified locations in the western Negev, and some fell within the Gaza Strip.10 mortars fired at Negev; no injuries, Israel News 18-03-2011
Around 4 pm, Palestinian terrorists fired six additional mortar shells into the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.6 mortar shells fired from Gaza hit western Negev, Jerusalem Post 18-03-2011
In the early morning, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired 54 mortars on Israeli communities within a period of 15 minutes. A man and his wife were wounded by shrapnel as they fled toward a safe zone. Several homes on a kibbutz were badly damaged. One mortar shell landed on the rooftop of a kindergarten, but the building was empty because it was Shabbat, the Jewish day of rest. Hamas claimed responsibility for the attack, saying it was a response to the death of two of the group's militants in an Israeli airstrike several days earlier.Israel facing upsurge in rocket attacks from Gaza, The Telegraph 23-03-2011
Israel responded with airstrikes and tank fire, killing one Hamas official and injuring four others.
On the Jewish holiday of Purim, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a mortar and two Qassam rockets at Israel.Palestinian rocket slams into Ashkelon, Jerusalem Post 21-03-2011
Later in the day, Palestinians fired a Grad missile at southern Ashkelon. One elderly woman was lightly injured, and several other people suffered from shock. Sirens were heard in the city. The indiscriminate targeting of Israeli citizens, as they celebrated the Jewish festival of Purim, is unacceptable."British minister condemns Hamas mortar attacks, Israel News 21-03-2011
After nightfall, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Qassam rocket at the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Qassam dud found in Negev, IsraelNews 22-03-2011 
Around 4 pm, Palestinians fired four mortar shells at Alumim and Sa'ad. No injuries or damage were reported.IDF fire in Gaza kills 4; Jihad vows response to 'massacre', Israel News 22-03-2011Two Grad rockets hit Be'er Sheva; IAF strikes Gaza launching squad, Haaretz 23-03-2011
In the evening, Palestinians fired a Grad missile from the northern Gaza Strip and several mortar shells at Ashkelon; the Grad landed south of the city. No injuries or damage were reported.Qassam explodes south of Ashkelon, Israel News 22-03-2011
In the evening, the Israel Defense Forces attacked a Palestinian terror cell in the midst of preparing to fire a long-range rocket into Israel, killing four terrorists. Israeli military sources said the same terrorists were behind the Grad missile attack on Beersheba on 23 February.Grad rocket lands near Ashdod; sirens heard throughout city, Jerusalem Post 23-03-2011
During the night, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Grad missile at Ashdod, which landed in an open area south of the city. This was the first time Ashdod, one of Israel's largest cities and relatively far from the Gaza Strip, was targeted since the Gaza War. Sirens were heard in the city and in nearby Gedera and Kiryat Malachi. No injuries or damage were reported. Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility.Grad fired from Gaza lands near Ashdod, Israel News 23-03-2011
At 5:30 am, Palestinians launched another Grad missile at Beersheba. The rocket hit a street in the midst of a residential area. A 56-year-old man was injured by shrapnel that penetrated his third-floor apartment, and three other people suffered from shock. Several buildings, including a synagogue, were damaged. Fearing additional attacks, the city closed schools and universities for the day. Palestinian Islamic Jihad claimed responsibility, saying, "This is an initial reaction to the Zionist crimes against our people in Gaza."Rocket threat: Southern schools cancel classes, Israel News 23-03-2011Grad rocket injures man in Beersheba, Israel News 3-03-2011
Four hours later, Palestinians fired a third Grad missile at Beersheba, hitting an open area within the city.
Later, Palestinians fired seven mortar shells at the Eshkol Regional Council and one at the Shaar Hanegev Regional Council. Some of the shells contained white phosphorus.Phosphorus shells hit southern Israel, Israel News 23-03-2011
US President Barack Obama condemned the attacks as well as a recent Palestinian terrorist bombing in Jerusalem "in the strongest possible terms", saying that "there is never any possible justification for terrorism". No injuries were reported in the airstrikes. 
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired twelve projectiles at Israeli towns throughout the day, reaching deep into the country. The Israeli cities of Beersheba, Ashdod and Kiryat Gat kept schools closed for the day, fearing additional attacks. The Ashkelon municipality held classes as usual, but the local Parents' Committee urged residents to keep their children at home. Details of some of the attacks:
Israel responded during the day with airstrikes on Hamas buildings in the Gaza Strip.
Early in the morning, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired two rockets into Israel. One landed in the Eshkol Regional Council, exploding three yards from a home in one of the area's communities. The house was severely damaged but the eight family members who were sleeping inside were unharmed. Another home was moderately damaged. The second rocket landed in an open area in an unspecified location. No injuries were reported.Qassam rocket hits Eshkol Regional council, Israel News 26-03-2011Two rockets fired into Israel from Gaza, AFP 26-03-2011
In the evening, a third rocket hit the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Kassam rocket explodes in Eshkol; none hurt, Jerusalem Post 26-03-2011
A Palestinian Islamic Jihad cell near Jabaliya was attempting to launch a projectile into Israel when it was targeted by an Israeli airstrike. Two PIJ militants were killed and three PIJ militants were wounded.Palestinians: Two Jihad militants killed in Israeli strike on Gaza, Haaretz 27-03-2011
Palestinians fired an unspecified number of Qassam rockets at Sderot, but all the projectiles fell within the Gaza strip. The Color Red alarm sounded in the Israeli city.IAF kills Islamic Jihad militant, strikes tunnel, Jerusalem Post 30-03-2011
Around 7:30 pm, Palestinian terrorists in the northern Gaza Strip fired a Qassam rocket that landed in an open area south of Ashkelon. No injuries or damage were reported. The Color Red alarm sounded in nearby communities.Rocket hits south of Ashkelon; no injuries, Israel News 31-03-2011

April

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired 87 rockets and 57 mortar shells at Israel in 63 separate attacks.Monthly Summary – April 2011, Israel Security Agency 
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Qassam rocket at the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. Israel responded with airstrikes on two militant infiltration tunnels in the northern Gaza Strip. Palestinians said that four people were lightly to moderately injured. No injuries were reported.IAF targets Gaza terror tunnels; 4 injured, Israel News 07-04-2011
Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Kornet anti-tank missile at a school bus in the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council, outside Sa'ad. In the explosion, 16-year-old boy Daniel Viflic was critically injured with a shrapnel wound to the head, and the driver was moderately injured. Hamas issued a press release that evening claiming responsibility, calling the incident a retaliation for a previous Israeli strike that killed three Hamas leaders and vowing further attacks.School bus attack may spark Gaza war, The Australian 09-04-2011 The attack opened a several-day stretch of violence in which Palestinians launched over 100 projectiles at Israel and Israeli responses left 19 Hamas militants and two civilians dead.IDF refrains from response to Gaza rocket fire as border violence cools, Haaretz 11-04-2011
Israeli President Shimon Peres said the attack showed that Gaza had turned into a terror state... in the strongest possible terms, saying "there is no justification for the targeting of innocent civilians and those responsible for these terrorist attacks should be held accountable."US condemns anti-tank missile attack on school bus, Jerusalem Post 07-04-2011 British Foreign Secretary William Hague "unreservedly" condemned the attack as "despicable" and "cowardly", and said reports suggested that the school bus was deliberately targeted.Ashton calls for a 'cessation of violence' in Gaza, Jerusalem Post 08-04-2011
Over the next three hours, at least 45 additional Palestinian projectiles hit Israel. Residents were instructed to stay inside their homes, children were ordered to stay inside schools, and police sealed roads in the area for fear of additional attacks. European Union foreign policy chief Catherine Ashton "strongly" condemned the attacks. Details of some of the incidents:
Israel responded with airstrikes on terror cells and smuggling tunnels.
Despite the announcement by Gazan terror organizations of a unilateral ceasefire at 11 pm the previous night, Palestinians fired at least 24 mortar shells and 6 rockets at Israel, causing serious damage to a factory and to chicken coops. Hamas, Fatah, Palestinian Islamic Jihad, the Popular Resistance Committees, the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, the Democratic Front for the Liberation of Palestine and the little-known Abu Al-Qumsan Brigades all claimed responsibility for various attacks. 450 schoolchildren at the "Nitzanei Eshkol" school were evacuated with a security forces escort. No injuries were reported.Kibbutz building damaged as 2 mortar shells land in Negev, Jerusalem Post 08-04-2011 Details of some of the attacks:
Israel responded with airstrikes, killing four Hamas militants and one Popular Resistance Committees militant.
Palestinians fired over 65 projectiles at Israel. Five people were injured while running to bomb shelters.Rockets fired from Gaza bombard Ashkelon, western Negev, Jerusalem Post 09-04-2011 Details of some of the attacks:
Israel responded with airstrikes, killing two senior Hamas militants and one Popular Resistance Committees militant.Both Israel and Hamas say open to truce if other side stops firing, Haaretz 10-04-2011
Palestinians fired about 20 rockets and mortars at Israel.IDF conditionally ceases air strikes on Hamas targets, Jerusalem Post 10-04-2011Qassam follows ceasefire declaration, Israel News 10-04-2011 Details of some of the attacks:
Israel refrained from responding to the attacks.
According to the Palestinian Ma'an News Agency, al-Qaeda-affiliated Gazan militant group Tawhid and Jihad claimed to have launched two missiles at Nirim at 7:50 pm. The group said its claimed attack was "a response to Israeli aggression on the Gaza Strip", without clarifying further. However, the Israel Defense Forces said they were not aware of a rocket attack taking place at that time.Group claims launch of 2 missiles, Ma'an News Agency 13-04-2011
Palestinians fired two Grad missiles at Ashdod from the Beit Lahiya neighborhood of al-Atatra in the northern Gaza Strip. Alarms sounded in Ashdod and nearby Ashkelon. One rocket exploded in a residential area and the second landed outside the city.2 Grad rockets fired at Israel, Israel News 15-04-2011 No injuries or damage were reported. Israel responded several hours later with airstrikes on militant targets. No injuries were reported.IAF strikes 2 targets in Gaza following Ashdod Grads, Jerusalem Post 16-04-2011
On Passover eve, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Qassam rocket at the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. It exploded in an open area near a kibbutz, and no injuries or damage were reported. The Color Red alert sounded in the area and in Sderot.Qassam rocket hits western Negev, Israel News 18-04-2011

May

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip perpetrated only one rocket attack on Israel during this month.Monthly Summary – May 2011, Israel Security Agency
Overnight, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a rocket at the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. This was the first such attack in six weeks.Rocket fired from Gaza into Israel: army, AFP 28-05-2011GAZA ROCKET LAUNCHED, FIRST IN ALMOST SEVEN WEEKS, AGI 28-05-2011

June

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired four rockets and one mortar shell at Israel.Monthly summary – June 2011, Israel Security Agency
At about 9:30 pm, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a Qasssam rocket at the Eshkol Regional Council. The projectile landed in an open area, and no injuries or damage were reported. The Color Red siren sounded in the region.Lull ends, rocket fired from Gaza, Israel News 16-06-2011
After nightfall, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a mortar shell at the Eshkol Regional Council, followed half an hour later by a Qassam rocket fired at the same area. No injuries or damage were reported in either attack. The incident affected an Israeli national civil defense drill the following day. Israel responded with an airstrike on an infiltration tunnel in the central Gaza Strip, causing no injuries.IAF strikes Gaza tunnel, Israel News 22-06-2011IAF strikes Gaza tunnel after mortar and Qassam land in Israel, Haaretz 22-06-2011

July

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired 20 rockets and 2 mortar shells at Israel in 18 separate attacks.Monthly summary – July 2011, Israel Security Agency
In the morning, Palestinians in the Gaza Strip fired a rocket at the Eshkol Regional Council, causing no injuries or damage.
Mohammed Said and Kamal Abu Moamer, two members of the al-Qaeda-affiliated group Tawhid al-Jihad based in the southern Gaza Strip, were killed in an Israeli airstrike as they were preparing to launch a rocket into Israel from the central part of the Strip.IAF aircraft attack terror tunnel in northern Gaza, Jerusalem Post 06-07-2011Two Palestinians killed in IDF strike on Gaza militant group, Haaretz 05-07-2011
In the evening, Palestinians fired three Qassam rockets at Israel. Two rockets hit open areas in the Ashkelon Coast Regional Council; a third landed within the Gaza Strip. No injuries or damage were reported. Israel responded with an airstrike on an infiltration tunnel in the northern Gaza Strip, causing no injuries.IAF aircraft strikes terror tunnel in northern Gaza, Jerusalem Post 2011-07-103 Gaza rockets fired at Israel, Israel News 2011-07-10
Around 10:15 pm, Palestinians fired two Qassam rockets at Israel. One of the rockets exploded several feet from a home in the Sdot Negev Regional Council, damaging it, while the other hit an open area in the Shaar Hanegev Regional Council. No injuries were reported. The Color Red siren sounded, and residents also received text messages asking them to enter fortified spaces. Israel responded with airstrikes on two Gazan sites identified as weapons manufacturing facilities, causing no injuries.Qassam rocket damages house, Israel News 2011-07-12IDF strikes Gaza targets, Israel News 2011-07-13IAF strikes targets in Gaza in response to rocket attacks, Haaretz 2011-07-13
In the morning, Palestinians fired a rocket at the Shaar Hanegev Regional Council. No injuries were reported.More rockets fired from Gaza, Israel News 2011-07-14
In the morning, Palestinians fired a rocket at the Shaar Hanegev Regional Council. In the afternoon, Palestinians fired three more rockets at unspecified areas in Israel. In the evening, two more rockets were fired at the Shaar Hanegev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported in any of the attacks. Palestinian sources said that two children were lightly injured.IAF strikes various Hamas targets the Gaza Strip, Reuters and Jerusalem Post 2011-07-15
Palestinians fired a mortar shell at the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Mortar shell from Gaza lands in Negev; no hurt, no damage, Jerusalem Post 2011-07-15
Overnight, Palestinians fired a rocket at the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.Rocket hits western Negev, Israel News 2011-07-16
Starting about 1 am, Palestinians fired three Qassam rockets at Israel. The first rocket hit the Ashkelon Coast Regional Council. Two additional rockets exploded later in the Shaar Hanegev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. The Color Red alarm did not sound.Three rockets from Gaza Strip fired into Israel overnight, Jerusalem Post 2011-07-173 rockets hit western Negev overnight, Israel News 2011-07-17
After nightfall, Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket at the Sdot Negev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported. Israel responded with airstrikes on terror targets in the Gaza Strip, causing no reported injuries.IAF strikes terror targets in Gaza after Kassam attack, Jerusalem Post 2011-07-20Kassam explodes in field in Sedot Negev; no injuries, Jerusalem Post 2011-07-20
In the morning, Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket at the Ashkelon Coast Regional Council. The Color red alarm sounded in the area. No injuries or damage were reported.Qassam explodes south of Ashkelon, Israel News 2011-07-28

August

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians fired 145 rockets and 46 mortar shells at Israel in 134 separate attacks.Monthly summary – August 2011, Israel Security Agency
Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket at the Ashkelon Coast Regional Council. It exploded near a Bedouin tent, injuring 55-year-old shepherdess Fatma Saria in the lower limbs. The Color Red alarm sounded in the region.Qassam hits Hof Ashkelon; 1 wounded, Israel News 01-08-2011Kassam Lands Near Ashkelon Wounding Bedouin Woman, INN 01-08-2011
At about 10:30pm, Palestinians fired a rocket at the Lakhish Regional Council, between Sderot and Kiryat Gat.2 rockets fired from Gaza, Israel News 04-08-2011 The Abdullah Azzam Brigades claimed responsibility for the attack.'Armed group' claims Gaza rocket attacks, Maan News Agency 04-08-2011
Shortly after midnight, Palestinians fired a rocket that exploded at the entrance to Ashkelon. Five people were lightly injured seeking shelter after the Color Red alarm sounded.
In the evening, Palestinians fired two rockets at Kiryat Gat. No physical injuries were reported, but two people were treated for shock. The Color Red alarm sounded in the city.Attacks continue; rocket hits Kiryat Gat, Israel News 04-08-2011
After nightfall, Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket at the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. The rocket landed near a kibbutz, triggering the Color Red alarm.Southern farming community hit by mortar shells, Jerusalem Post 08-08-2011
Later, Palestinians fired three mortar shells at the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council, damaging a fence.Fire from Gaza intensifies as three mortars hit southern Israel, Haaretz 08-08-2011
Palestinians fired a Grad rocket into Beersheba. Israel responded with airstrikes on five targets in the Gaza Strip, killing one armed Hamas terrorist and wounding several others. In a separate incident, several Palestinians were scattered by the Israeli Air Force as they were attempting to fire a rocket into Israel.Air force strikes Gaza targets after rocket hits Beersheba, Jerusalem Post 2011-08-17Israeli strikes kill one gunman, wound five others, Jerusalem Post 08-16-2011
Palestinians fired two rockets at Ashkelon; at least one of them was intercepted by the Iron Dome defense system. The Popular Resistance Committees claimed responsibility. Later, two more rockets fired at Ashkelon were intercepted by Iron Dome.Iron Dome intercepts two more rockets fired from Gaza, Israel News 2011-08-18
Palestinians terrorists fired 17 rockets and several mortars at Israel. Responsibility for various attacks was claimed by the Popular Resistance Committees and Fatah's Al Aqsa Brigades and al-Mujahideen Brigades. Details of some of the attacks:
Israel responded with airstrikes on four targets in the Gaza Strip, killing senior Popular Resistance Committees commander Samed Abdul Mu'ty Abed as he was on his motorcycle.'Senior PRC commander killed in IDF strike in Gaza Strip', Jerusalem Post 2011-08-19
As Hamas announced it would renew attacks on Israelis, Palestinians fired 64 rockets at Israel. The projectiles reached Ashdod, Ashkelon, Beersheba and Ofakim, forcing more than half a million Israelis into bomb shelters. A Grad rocket fired at Beersheba killed 38-year-old Yossi Shoshan of Ofakim, who was on his way to ensure the safety of his 9-month pregnant wife. Many others were injured in Beersheba, Ashdod and Ofakim, including a 4-month-old baby.Hamas' military wing: Gaza lull over, Israel News 2011-08-20Reports: Barrage of rockets from Gaza strike Israel, Egypt, CNN 2011-08-21Man killed by Beersheba rocket named: Yossi Shoshan, 38, Jerusalem Post 2011-08-21 Details of some of the attacks:
Qassam hits western Negev, Ynetnews 2011-08-21[/ref]
Another rocket fired at western Negev, Ynetnews 2011-08-21[/ref]Another Qassam hits Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council, Ynetnews 2011-08-21
Iron Dome intercepts rocket fired at Ashkelon, Ynetnews 2011-08-22[/ref]
Rocket hits Eshkol Regional Council; no injuries, Ynetnews 2011-08-22[/ref]
Qassam rocket hits south, Ynetnews 2011-08-22[/ref]
Hof Ashkelon: Fire caused by rocket under control, Ynetnews 2011-08-22[/ref]
Rocket hits Hof Ashkelon Regional council, Ynetnews 2011-08-22[/ref]
Palestinians fired more than 20 rockets on Israeli communities. Grad rockets fell on the cities of Beersheba, Ashkelon and Ofakim, injuring a 9-month-old baby. Israel responded with airstrikes, killing a senior Palestinian Islamic Jihad operative invlolved in a recent terrorist shooting attack on Israel.Rocket salvo hits south; IAF strikes Gaza, Israel News 2011-08-25Rockets, missiles hit southern Israel, UPI 2011-08-25
Palestinians fired at least 15 rockets and mortars at Israel. Details of the attacks:
Israel responded with airstrikes on several targets in the Gaza Strip, killing two Palestinian Islamic Jihad militants involved in the attack against the Erez Crossing Terminal.Palestinos dispararon 16 cohetes; Israel abatió a lanzadores de mortero, Aurora 2011-08-26IAF targets terrorist squad that fired a rocket at the Erez Crossing, IDF Spokesman 2011-08-25
At about 3 pm, Palestinians fired a Grad rocket at Ashkelon, despite a ceasefire announced by Palestinian Islamic Jihad the previous day. Shortly after 10 pm, two Qassam rockets were fired at the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. No injuries were reported in either incident. The leftist Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine claimed responsibility for two attacks on Ashkelon.Despite ceasefire: Rockets hit western Negev, Israel News 2011-08-26PFLP armed wing claims 2 Ashkelon rockets, Ma'an News Agency 2011-08-27
A Qassam rocket fell in the Negev. No injuries or damage were reported.Fourth Rocket Strikes Israel Sunday during Second Gaza Ceasefire, The Israel Project 2011-08-28
A Grad rocket fired was fired at Hatzerim in the Bnei Shimon Regional Council, near Beersheba. After nightfall, a Qassam rocket was fired at the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council. No injures were reported in either attack. Tawhid wal-Jihad claimed responsibility for both.Grad rocket fired from Gaza lands near Beersheba, Jerusalem Post 2011-08-28Rocket fire on southern Israel continues, Israel News 2011-08-29Gaza rocket hits southern Israel, AFP 28-08-0211
A Qassam rocket was fired at the Eshkol Regional Council. No injures or damage were reported. Tawhid wal-Jihad claimed responsibility.Qassam rocket hits Eshkol Regional Council; no injuries, Ynetnews 2011-08-29
Two Qassam rockets hit the Eshkol Regional Council. No injures or damage were reported.2 Qassam rockets hit Eshkol Regional Council; no injuries, Ynetnews 2011-08-31

September

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians fired 8 rockets and 2 mortar shells at Israel in 9 separate attacks.Monthly Summary – September 2011, Israel Security Agency
A rocket fell in an open area in the western Negev. There were no casualties or damage.Palestinian ceasefire violations since the end of Operation Cast Lead, Israeli Ministry of Foreign Affairs
A rocket fired from the Gaza Strip hit the Sha'ar Hanegev Regional Council, causing damage to an abandoned building. In response, an IAF aircraft targeted a terror activity site in the central Gaza Strip overnight. A direct hit was confirmed.In Response to Rocket Fire, IAF Targets Terror Activity Site, Israel Defense Forces blog
IAF aircraft identified a squad of terrorists preparing to launch rockets at Israel from the northern Gaza Strip, and thwarted the attempt by firing at them. A hit was confirmed.Gaza terrorist squad responsible for several rocket-launching attacks at Israel was targeted, IDF Spokesman 2011-10-01

October

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians fired 52 rockets and 6 mortar shells at Israel in 43 separate attacks during October.Monthly Summary – October 2011, Israel Security Agency
Two Grad rockets were fired from northern Gaza towards Israel. One rocket exploded in an open field in the Ashkelon Coast Regional Council while the second one fell in Palestinian territory. No injuries or damage were reported.2 rockets fired from northern Gaza, Ynet News 04-10-2011
A Qassam rocket was fired from the northern Gaza Strip and exploded near the Ashkelon Coast Regional Council. No injuries were reported but a few green houses sustained damages.Qassam rocket explodes near Ashkelon Coast Regional Council, Ynet News 11-10-2011
A Grad rocket fired from Gaza landed in an open territory in the Be'er Tuvia Regional Council on Wednesday night. There were no casualties or damage, but several people suffered shock. A Color Red siren was heard in several communities including Ashdod, Kiryat Malachi, Rehovot, Ness Ziona and Gan Yavne. Direct hits were confirmed.In response to Gaza rocket fire, IAF targets terror sites, IDF Website 27-10-2011
On Saturday, an Israeli aircraft targeted a terrorist squad in southern Gaza Strip that was preparing to launch long-range rockets. Five Islamic Jihad militants were killed, including a senior commander of the al-Quds Brigades. The squad was responsible for the firing of the Grad rocket on Wednesday.Gaza: 5 terrorists killed in IDF strike, Ynet News 29-10-2011
In response, more than 24 rockets were fired at Israel:
Israel carried out additional airstrikes, hitting another squad preparing to fire rockets.Israeli Drone Strike Kills Militants in Southern Gaza, The New York Times 29-10-2011Outbreak of Israel-Palestinian Violence Continues Despite Reports of Cease-Fire, Fox News 30-10-2011
Twelve rockets were fired into Israel since midnight. None of them caused casualties. Israel responded with airstrikes on several terror activity sites in Gaza, including at least three rocket-launching platforms, tunnels and a terrorist squad prepared to launch rockets, killing one DFLP militant.Israel strikes back after attacks, The Australian 31-10-2011Israel Airstrikes on Gaza Strip Kill 10, Bloomberg 30-10-2011One killed in Israeli strike on southern Gaza: medics, Ahram Online 30-10-2011
A terrorist squad that fired a Qassam rocket at Israel from southern Gaza Strip was targeted by an IAF aircraft. A direct hit was confirmed.Israel aircraft hit Gaza, 2 found dead, AJS 31-10-2011 In the evening, Gazan militants fired five rockets at southern Israel.Iron Dome intercepts Grad rocket above Be'er Sheba, IDF Spokesperson 31-10-2011 No casualties were reported.Rockets from Gaza hit Beersheba, Sderot, Sha'ar Hanegev, Jerusalem Post 31-10-2011

November

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians fired 11 rockets and 1 mortar shell at Israel in 10 separate attacks.Monthly Summary – November 2011, Israel Security Agency
In the evening, a rocket launched from Gaza fell in the Eshkol Regional Council, without causing injuries or damage.Israel holds off on Gaza operation at Egypt's request, Jerusalem Post 01-11-2011
Palestinian militants fired a rocket into southern Israel, causing no injuries or damage.
An Israeli aircraft attacked Palestinian gunmen who were preparing to fire a rocket into Israel, killing one Islamic Jihad militant and injuring two.Israeli air strike kills Palestinian militant in Gaza, Reuters 05-11-2011
Two rockets fired from Gaza exploded in open areas in the Hof Ashkelon Regional Council. The first rocket didn't cause injuries or damage, while the second one caused shrapnel wounds to a Thai foreign worker.2 rockets hit Hof Ashkelon; 1 hurt, Ynet News 06-11-2011
Palestinian militants fired two rockets which landed in the Sha'ar HaNegev Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.
A rocket was fired at night against southern Israel, causing no injuries. Israel retaliated with an airstrike against a training post belonging to Gaza militants north of Khan Yunis.Gaza militants hit southern Israel with rockets, Israeli war jets retaliate, Philstar 09-11-2011
Gaza militants fired a Qassam rocket at the Sha'ar HaNegev Regional Council, causing no injuries or damage. In response, Israeli Air Force struck a naval police post in the northern part of Gaza City, leaving one Palestinian dead and four wounded.IAF strikes Gaza target; 1 killed, Ynet News 14-11-2011
Gaza terrorists launched two Qassam rockets at Israeli communities in the western Negev. One rocket hit a local kindergarten. There were no physical injuries in the attack, but the kindergarten was badly damaged. The other rocket exploded in an open area, causing no injuries or property damage. Direct hits were recorded on a terror tunnel and on an additional center of terrorist activity.IAF strikes tunnel, terror center in northern Gaza, Jerusalem Post 16-11-2011
A rocket fired from Gaza hit the Eshkol Regional Council, causing no injuries or damage. In response, Israeli aircraft struck two terror activity sites in southern and central Gaza Strip.IDF strikes two Gaza sites in response to rocket fire, Haaretz 27-11-2011

December

According to the Israel Security Agency's monthly summary, Palestinians fired 30 rockets and 11 mortar shells at Israel in 30 separate attacks.Monthly Summary – December 2011, Israel Security Agency 
Israeli aircraft targeted two Palestinian squads that were preparing to fire rockets into southern Israel, killing one Islamic Jihad militant and wounding two others.Gaza militant killed in clash with Israel, Taiwan News 07-12-2011
An Israeli aircraft killed a senior operative of the al-Aqsa Martyrs' Brigades and another terrorist in Gaza who intended to execute a terrorist attack against Israeli civilians and IDF soldiers. A Grad missile exploded in an open field near the southern city of Beersheba and a Qassam landed in an open field in the Sdot Negev Regional Council. No injuries or damages were reported in either incident.Gaza Official: Israeli Airstrike Kills 1 Civilian, Associated Press 08-12-2011 Other nine rockets were fired at Israel, causing no injuries or damage:
Six rockets fired from the Gaza Strip exploded in southern Israel:
No injuries or damage were reported in either incident.IAF strikes Gaza targets following spike in rocket attacks, Jerusalem Post 10-12-2011
In response to ongoing rocket fire, Israeli aircraft targeted a weapon manufacturing site in northern Gaza.IAF targets weapons manufacturing site in Gaza, IDF Spokesperson 11-12-2011
A rocket fired from the northern Gaza Strip exploded in an open field in the Hof Ashkelon Regional Council. A short while later a mortar shell hit an open field in the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported in either incident.Rockets fired at south; no injuries, Ynet News 24-12-2011
After an Israeli airstrike killed three Islamic militants and injured ten, Palestinians fired a Qassam rocket from inside Gaza but it exploded inside the Strip.IDF strikes two Gaza targets, at least three dead, Jerusalem Post 28-12-2011
Four Qassam rockets fired from the Gaza Strip exploded in open areas in the Western Negev. Hours later, Israeli jets bombed a smuggling tunnel in northern Gaza and a terrorist center in central Gaza.
A rocket launched from the Gaza Strip exploded in an open area of the Eshkol Regional Council. No injuries or damage were reported.IAF hits Gaza targets overnight after Kassams, Jerusalem Post 29-12-2011
An Air Force jet carried out a strike against a rocket cell in northern Gaza seconds before it fired rockets at Israel, killing one terrorist and injuring five.IDF thwarts Gaza rocket launch, Ynet News 30-12-2011






