[[Kleptocracy]]

CATEGORIES: Economic problems, Forms of government, Political terminology, Political corruption

Kleptocracy, alternatively cleptocracy or kleptarchy, (from  - kleptēs, "thief"κλέπτης, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus and κράτος - kratos, "power, rule",κράτος, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus hence "rule by thieves") is a form of political and government corruption where the government exists to increase the personal wealth and political power of its officials and the ruling class at the expense of the wider population, often with pretense of honest service.  This type of government corruption is often achieved by the embezzlement of state funds.

Characteristics

Effects

The effects of a kleptocratic regime or government on a nation are typically adverse in regards to the faring of the state's economy, political affairs and civil rights. Kleptocracy in government often vitiates prospects of foreign investment and drastically weakens the domestic market and cross-border trade. As the kleptocracy normally embezzles money from its citizens by misusing funds derived from tax payments, or money laundering schemes, a kleptocratically structured political system tends to degrade nearly everyone's quality of life.
In addition, the money that kleptocrats steal is often taken from funds that were earmarked for public amenities, such as the building of hospitals, schools, roads, parks and the like – which has further adverse effects on the quality of life of the citizens living under a kleptocracy.

Examples

In early 2004, the anti-corruption Germany-based NGO Transparency International released a list of what it believes to be the ten most self-enriching leaders in recent years.
In order of amount allegedly stolen (in USD), they were:
In addition, other sources have listed former PLO Chairman Yasser Arafat as having stolen $1 billion to $10 billion; and Pakistani President Asif Ali Zardari to have received kickbacks on contracts and misappropriating public funds, siphoning over $2 billion to his Swiss accounts.
Former Argentine president Nestor Kirchner (deceased) never fully accounted for an estimated US$ 1 billion that went missing from the public purse of Santa Cruz province during his tenure as provincial governor."Argentina under the Kirchners: Socialism for foes, capitalism for friends". The Economist.  February 25, 2010
The newly formed Republic of Kosovo is also reported to be run by a kleptocratic regime, mainly formed of members from one of the country's largest political parties, Democratic Party of Kosovo. A report on the wealth of Kosovan politicians showed that despite their relatively low incomes as civil servants, a significant number had amassed personal wealth sometimes amounting to sums exceeding several million euros.
Sources have also shown that Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak stole up to $70 billion.

Other terms

Narcokleptocracy

A narcokleptocracy is a society ruled by "thieves" involved in the trade of narcotics. The term has its origin in a report prepared by a subcommittee of the United States Senate Foreign Relations Committee, chaired by Massachusetts Senator John Kerry. The term narcostate has the same meaning.

Raubwirtschaft

Raubwirtschaft (German for "plunder economy," "robber economy," or "rapine") is a form of economy where the goal is to plunder the wealth and resources of a country or geographical area. The term is also used in a non-geographical sense, somewhat similar to the term "rapine." The term Raubwirtschaft is often used to describe some late 19th-century colonial and post-colonial practices during the Scramble for Africa.  The Congo Free State of Leopold II of Belgium is frequently described as a Raubwirtschaft. One form of Raubwirtschaft is to start war against one's neighbours and then either plunder their national property and assets, or extort them as war reparations. The term is also used to describe the rainforest destruction. However, the economic and political power of the Western Empire lasted some four centuries after the establishment of the Pax. Corruption and the decline of Rome. ISBN 0-300-04799-1 Yale University Press, 1988. Pp On the other hand, the Roman Empire continued to expand until its territorial zenith in A.D. 117. The Crisis of the Third Century which followed in A.D. 235 was a major threat to Roman political unity, and impacted its future prospects - lending credence to the theory.

Others

Referring to Russia, Daniel Kimmage used the terms: "kerdocracy" ("rule based on the desire for material gain") or "khrematisamenocracy" ("rule by those who transact business for their own profit"). Fareed Zakaria also described Russia as a kleptocracy on a July 23, 2012 airing of The Daily Show.





Further reading


