[[SpangaS]]

CATEGORIES: Dutch television series, 2000s Dutch television series, 2010s Dutch television series

SpangaS is a Dutch youth series, created by the NCRV and the makers of ZOOP.
The television series revolves around the lives of a group of students on the Spangalis College. They make everything, everything on the secondary education can happen. They do an internship in a riding school, help disabled, fall in love, arguing, are uncertain, come out of the closet and try to make the best.
On September 30, 2009 a SpangaS movie came out, entitled SpangaS op Survival. The students go in this week to film on the Belgian Ardennes.
From April to June 2011 there was a theater of SpangaS, SpangaS Live!.''

Story

Every student has their own story, stories mainly in and around the school and the schoolyard, but sometimes at home. They come in contact with love, friendship, homosexuality, death, loneliness, sadness, school, teacher / teachers, parents, divorce, belonging to, bullying, discrimination, and future dreams. In SpangaS taboos are broken, there are issues that were not previously treated often treated in childhood series. So Flip struggling with his sexuality and love for Mick and later Koen, both boys in his class.
The public broadcasting is satisfied with the number of viewers that SpangaS drew in the first season. In the Viewers group 9 to 12 years the series drew the first months a 20% market share. At the end of the season was the market share grew to 45%. Already on February 20, 2008 NRC newspaper reported that an average of 200,000 viewers. The new Zoops are very successful:. 'Spangas' and 'Het huis Anubis' attract more than 200,000 daily viewers "] NRC, February 20, 2008  From the first season, 52 episodes sold to the German Super RTL, where the series SpangaS - Das ist das Leben called. There will also be a Swiss version of SpangaS be made, with a full cast Swiss. The location scenes are filmed in Switzerland and the scenes in and around the school in Amsterdam.
From September 2010 SpangaS was broadcast at 19:00 and fill the "hole" that arose after stopping the soap opera ONM. Also, a new target control.

Intro

The intro of SpangaS all seasons is already used with a self-written song. In the intro you saw the teachers first and then two portraits of the students.
But in Season 7 that changed when first came two portraits of the students and then the teachers In the table below you can see the order of the characters in the intro.

Current intro

Cast

Episodes

SpangaS-specials

SpangaS: Nablijven!

SpangaS: Nablijven! was a special series of two weeks (10 episodes) in which all the secret information of the school were gone. In every episode was one of the students center. It was a kind of spin-off which were the secrets and characters of each student displayed using flash back from previous episodes and previews of new episodes of the remainder of the season. This series was aired on December 8, 2008 to December 19, 2008. These episodes are not on the DVD of the second season of SpangaS.

SpangaS: Leergeld

Spangas: Leergeld is a special educational series of five short episodes in which the use of money is central. To celebrate the fiftieth anniversary of the concierge Aldert the children collected money. To their horror they hit the money lost. However SpangaS: Leergeld'' broadcast from September 13, 2010 to October 11, 2010, every Monday from 10:30 to 10:40am on Nederland 3 and is in the time of SchoolTV. The series will be repeated. Of May 26, 2011 t / m June 30, 2011 every Thursday at 10.50 on NL3
This series, which was commissioned by Teleac SchoolTV, was jointly produced by NL Film, TVBV and NCRV. In the production were also the Nibud and the Platform Guide in finance 'involved.

SpangaS: Mediawhizz

The students of the Spangalis College  discover in the series that the digital world both your friend and your enemy can be. The students are all to do with the pros and cons of new media. Their own way
The five special episodes were, immediately after the end of season 5, from 28 May / 1 June aired on Zapp.

Books

The series are published eleven books, written by Wendy Buenen and Ed van Eeden.
There are also 17 magazines published so far.

SpangaS the Game

In this online game kids in the classroom with their favorite SpangaS the Spangalis College. Players of the game can first self walking around the school and reach places where they could never come, such as the canteen, the creative local bike shed before. Also, the players of the game all their heroes in the school meet and help with troubleshooting. The themes, also levels, which are discussed in the game his love, bullying, environment, appearance and party and connect this to the themes in the television series.
SpangaS to Game consists of five levels, where the player with the SpangaS characters solve a problem and perform various tasks. By performing these tasks, players earn points which they can win prizes. Additionally sit in each level mini-games that can be played after completion of the relevant level indefinitely. In the game and in the mini-games are to be achieved. Different medals Also in SpangaS on television and via the newsletter SpangaS secret codes given away that extras for players to earn in the game.

Price


