[[De Havilland Mosquito]]

CATEGORIES: British bomber aircraft 1940–1949, De Havilland aircraft, De Havilland Canada aircraft, World War II British bombers, World War II night fighter aircraft, Twin-engined tractor aircraft, De Havilland Mosquito, Reconnaissance aircraft

The de Havilland DH.98 Mosquito was a British multi-role combat aircraft with a two-man crew that served during and after the Second World War. It was one of few operational front-line aircraft of the era constructed almost entirely of wood and was nicknamed "The Wooden Wonder". 3.  The Mosquito was also known affectionately as the "Mossie" to its crews. "deHavilland DH 98 Mosquito." warbirdalley. Retrieved: 21 August 2011. Originally conceived as an unarmed fast bomber, the Mosquito was adapted to roles including low to medium-altitude daytime tactical bomber, high-altitude night bomber, pathfinder, day or night fighter, fighter-bomber, intruder, maritime strike aircraft, and fast photo-reconnaissance aircraft. It was also used by the British Overseas Airways Corporation (BOAC) as a fast transport to of carry small high-value cargoes to, and from, neutral countries, through enemy-controlled airspace. 338.
When the Mosquito began production in 1941, it was one of the fastest operational aircraft in the world. 21. Entering widespread service in 1942, the Mosquito was a high-speed, high-altitude photo-reconnaissance aircraft, continuing in this role throughout the war. From mid-1942 to mid-1943 Mosquito bombers flew high-speed, medium or low-altitude missions against factories, railways and other pinpoint targets in Germany and German-occupied Europe. From late 1943, Mosquito bombers were formed into the Light Night Strike Force and used as pathfinders for RAF Bomber Command's heavy-bomber raids. They were also used as "nuisance" bombers, often dropping Blockbuster bombs - 4,000 lb (1,812 kg) "cookies" - in high-altitude, high-speed raids that German night fighters were almost powerless to intercept.
As a night fighter, from mid-1942, the Mosquito intercepted Luftwaffe raids on the United Kingdom, notably defeating Operation Steinbock in 1944. Starting in July 1942, Mosquito night-fighter units raided Luftwaffe airfields. As part of 100 Group, it was a night fighter and intruder supporting RAF Bomber Command's heavy bombers and reduced bomber losses during 1944 and 1945. 240. As a fighter-bomber in the Second Tactical Air Force, the Mosquito took part in "special raids", such as the attack on Amiens Prison in early 1944, and in precision attacks against Gestapo or German intelligence and security forces. Second Tactical Air Force Mosquitos supported the British Army during the 1944 Normandy Campaign. From 1943 Mosquitos with RAF Coastal Command strike squadrons attacked Kriegsmarine U-boats (particularly in the 1943 Bay of Biscay, where significant numbers were sunk or damaged) and intercepting transport ship concentrations.
The Mosquito flew with the Royal Air Force (RAF) and other air forces in the European theatre, and the Mediterranean and Italian theatres. The Mosquito was also used by the RAF in the South East Asian theatre, and by the Royal Australian Air Force (RAAF) based in the Halmaheras and Borneo during the Pacific War.

Development

By the early-mid-1930s, de Havilland had a reputation for innovative high-speed aircraft with the DH.88 Comet racer. The later DH.91 Albatross airliner pioneered the composite wood construction that the Mosquito used. The 22-passenger Albatross could cruise at  The wooden monocoque construction not only saved weight and compensated for the low power of the de Havilland Gipsy Twelve engines used by this aircraft, but simplified production and reduced construction time. 9.

Air Ministry bomber requirements and concepts

On 8 September 1936, the British Air Ministry issued Specification P.13/36 which called for a twin-engined medium bomber capable of carrying a bomb load of  which could be carried over shorter ranges was also specified. 30.  Aviation firms entered heavy designs with new high-powered engines and multiple defensive turrets, leading to the production of the Avro Manchester and Handley Page Halifax. 31.
In May 1937, as a comparison to P.13/36, George Volkert, the chief designer of Handley Page, put forward the concept of a fast unarmed bomber. In 20 pages, Volkert planned an aerodynamically clean medium bomber to carry . There was support in the RAF and Air Ministry;  Captain R N Liptrot, Research Director Aircraft 3 (RDA3), appraised Volkert's design, calculating that its top speed would exceed the new Supermarine Spitfire. There were, however, counter-arguments that, although such a design had merit, it would not necessarily be faster than enemy fighters for long. 76–77. The ministry was also considering using non-strategic materials for aircraft production, which, in 1938, had led to specification B.9/38 and the Armstrong Whitworth Albemarle medium bomber, largely constructed from spruce and plywood attached to a steel-tube frame. The idea of a small, fast bomber gained support at a much earlier stage than sometimes acknowledged though it was unlikely that the Air Ministry envisaged it not using light alloy components. 74, 77.

Inception of the de Havilland fast bomber

Geoffrey de Havilland also believed a bomber with an aerodynamic design, with minimal skin area, was better than the P.13/36 specification. He thought that adapting the Albatross to meet the RAF's requirements could save time. In April 1938, performance estimates were produced of a twin Rolls-Royce Merlin-powered DH.91, with the Bristol Hercules (radial engine) and Napier Sabre (H-engine) as alternatives. On 7 July 1938, Geoffrey de Havilland wrote to Air Marshal Wilfrid Freeman, the Air Council's member for Research and Development, discussing the specification and arguing that in war there would be shortages of duralumin and steel but should be plenty of wood. Although inferior torsionally, the strength to weight ratio of wood was as good as duralumin or steel, and a different approach to a high-speed bomber was possible.
A follow-up letter to Freeman on 27 July said that the P.13/36 specification could not be met by a twin Merlin-powered aircraft and either the top speed or load capacity would be compromised, depending on which was paramount. For example, a larger, slower, turret armed aircraft would have a range of .
Still believing this could be improved, and after examining more concepts based on the Albatross and the new all-metal DH.95 Flamingo, de Havilland settled on designing a new aircraft that would be aerodynamically clean, wooden and powered by the Merlin, which offered substantial future development. The new design would be faster than foreseeable enemy fighter aircraft, and could dispense with a defensive armament, which would slow it and make interception or losses to anti-aircraft guns more likely. Instead, high speed and good manoeuvrability would make it easier to evade fighters and ground fire. The lack of turrets simplified production and reduced production time, with a delivery rate far in advance of competing designs. Without armament, the crew could be reduced to a pilot and navigator. Contemporary RAF design philosophy required well-armed heavy bombers more akin to the German schnellbomber. 5. At a meeting in early October 1938 with Geoffrey de Havilland, Charles Walker (de Havilland's chief engineer), the Air Ministry showed little interest and, instead, asked de Havilland to build wings for other bombers as a sub-contractor. 6.
By September 1939 de Havilland had produced preliminary estimates for single- and twin-engined variations of light-bomber designs using different engines, speculating on the effects of defensive armament on their designs. 78. One design, completed on 6 September, was for an aircraft powered by a single , and powered by Merlin or Griffon engines, the Merlin favoured because of availability.
On 7 October 1939, with war a month old, the nucleus of a design team under Eric Bishop moved to the security and secrecy of Salisbury Hall and started on what was now known as the DH.98. 34. To make the DH.98 more versatile, Bishop made provision for four 20 mm cannon in the forward half of the bomb bay, under the cockpit, firing via blast tubes and troughs under the fuselage. 11.
The DH.98 was too radical for the Ministry, which wanted a heavily armed, multi-role aircraft, combining medium bomber, reconnaissance and general purpose roles, as well as capable of carrying torpedos.  With outbreak of war, the Ministry became more receptive, but still sceptical about an unarmed bomber. It thought the Germans would produce fighters faster than expected. 31–32. It suggested two forward and two rear-firing machine guns for defence. 10. The Ministry also opposed a two-man bomber, wanting at least a third crewman to reduce the work of the others on long flights. The Air Council added further requirements, such as remotely controlled guns, a top speed of  bomb load. To appease the Ministry, de Havilland built mock-ups with a gun turret just aft of the cockpit but, apart from this compromise, de Havilland made no changes.
On 12 November, at a meeting considering fast bomber ideas put forward by de Havilland, Blackburn, and Bristol, Marshal Freeman directed de Havilland to produce a fast aircraft, powered initially by Merlin engines, with options of using progressively more powerful engines, including the Rolls-Royce Griffon and the Napier Sabre. Although estimates were presented for a slightly larger Griffon-powered aircraft, armed with a four-gun tail turret, Freeman got the requirement for defensive weapons dropped, and a draft requirement was raised calling for a high-speed light reconnaissance bomber capable of . 79.
On 12 December, the Vice-Chief of the Air Staff, Director General of Research and Development, Air Officer Commanding-in-Chief (AOC-in-C) of RAF Bomber Command met to finalise the design and decide how to fit it in the RAF's aims. The AOC-in-C would not accept an unarmed bomber, but insisted it would be suitable for reconnaissance missions with F8 or F24 cameras. 12. After representatives of the company, the Ministry and the RAF's operational commands examined a full scale mock-up at Hatfield on 29 December 1939, the project received backing. 80.  This was confirmed on 1 January 1940, when Air Marshal Freeman chaired another meeting with Geoffrey de Havilland, John Buchanan, (Deputy of Aircraft Production) and John Connolly, who was Buchanan's chief of staff. Claiming the DH.98 was the "fastest bomber in the world", de Havilland added "it must be useful". Freeman supported its production for RAF service and ordered a single prototype for an unarmed bomber variant to specification B.1/40/dh, which called for a light bomber/reconnaissance aircraft powered by two .
On 1 March 1940, Air Marshal Roderic Hill issued a contract under Specification B.1/40, for 50 bomber-reconnaissance variants of the DH.98: this contract included the prototype, which was given the factory serial E0234. 35. 51. In May 1940, specification F.21/40 was issued, calling for a long-range fighter armed with four 20 mm cannon and four .303 machine guns in the nose, after which de Havilland were authorised to build a prototype of a fighter version of the DH.98. It was decided after debate that this prototype, given the military serial number W4052, would carry Airborne Interception (AI) Mk. By June 1940, the DH.98 had been named "Mosquito". Having the fighter variant kept the Mosquito project alive because there was still criticism within the government and Air Ministry of the usefulness of an unarmed bomber, even after the prototype had shown its capabilities.

Project Mosquito

Once design of the DH.98 had started, de Havilland built mock-ups, the most detailed at Salisbury Hall, in the hangar where E0234 was being built. Initially, this was designed with the crew enclosed in the fuselage behind a transparent nose (similar to the Bristol Blenheim or Heinkel He 111H), but this was quickly altered to a more solid nose with a more conventional canopy. 18.
The construction of the prototype began in March 1940, but work was cancelled again after the Battle of Dunkirk, when Lord Beaverbrook, as Minister of Aircraft Production decided there was no production capacity for aircraft like the DH.98, which was not expected to be in service until early 1941. Although Lord Beaverbrook told Air Vice-Marshal Freeman that work on the project had better stop, he did not issue a specific instruction, and Freeman ignored the request. 37. In June 1940, however, Lord Beaverbrook and the Air Staff ordered that production was to focus on five existing types, namely the Supermarine Spitfire, Hawker Hurricane, Vickers Wellington, Armstrong-Whitworth Whitley and the Bristol Blenheim. Work on the DH.98 prototype stopped, and it seemed that the project would be shut down when the design team were denied the materials with which to build their prototype. 7.
The Mosquito was only reinstated as a priority in July 1940, after de Havilland's General Manager L.C.L Murray, promised Lord Beaverbrook 50 Mosquitoes by December 1941, and this, only after Beaverbrook was satisfied that Mosquito production would not hinder de Havilland's primary work of producing Tiger Moth and Oxford trainers and repairing Hurricanes as well as the licence manufacture of Merlin engines. In promising Beaverbrook 50 Mosquitoes by the end of 1941, de Havilland was taking a gamble, because it was unlikely that 50 Mosquitos could be built in such a limited time; as it transpired only 20 Mosquitos were built in 1941, but the other 30 were delivered by mid-March 1942. 35–36, 82.
During the Battle of Britain, nearly a third of de Havilland's factory time was lost because the workers took cover in the factory's bomb shelters. 38. Nevertheless, work on the prototype went quickly, such that E0234 was rolled out on 19 November 1940. 19.
In the aftermath of the Battle of Britain, the original order was changed to 20 bomber variants and 30 fighters. It was still uncertain whether the fighter version should have dual or single controls, or should carry a turret, so three prototypes were eventually built: W4052, W4053 and W4073. The latter, both turret armed, were later disarmed, to become the prototypes for the T.Thirsk 2006, p. 178. This caused some delays as half-built wing components had to be strengthened for the expected higher combat load requirements. The nose sections also had to be altered, omitting the clear perspex bomb-aimer's position, to solid noses designed to house four .303 machine guns and their ammunition.

Prototypes and test flights

On 3 November 1940, the aircraft, still coded E0234, was transported by road to Hatfield, and placed in a small blast-proof assembly building, where successful engine runs were made on 19 November. Two Merlin 21 two-speed single-stage supercharged engines were installed driving three-bladed de Havilland Hydromatic constant-speed, controllable-pitch propellers. E0234 had a wingspan of  and was the only Mosquito to be built with Handley Page slats on the outer leading edges of the wings. Test flights showed that these were not needed and they were disconnected and faired over with doped fabric (these slats can still be seen on W4050). 33, 269. On 24 November 1940, taxiing trials were carried out by Geoffrey de Havilland, Jr., who was the company's chief test pilot and responsible for maiden flights. The tests were successful and the prototype was subsequently readied for flight testing, making its first flight piloted by Geoffrey de Havilland, on 25 November. The flight was made 11 months after the start of detailed design work, a remarkable achievement considering the conditions of the time.
For this maiden flight, E0234, weighing  at that speed. This problem persisted for some time. The left wing of E0234 also had a tendency to drag to port slightly, so a rigging adjustment was carried out before further flights. 18.
On 5 December 1940, the prototype experienced tail buffeting at speeds between 
By January 1941, the prototype was carrying the military serial number W4050.  With the buffeting problems largely resolved, John Cunningham flew W4050 on 9 February 1941. He was greatly impressed by the "lightness of the controls and generally pleasant handling characteristics". Cunningham concluded that when the type was fitted with AI equipment, it would be a perfect replacement for the Bristol Beaufighter.
During its trials on 16 January 1941, W4050 outpaced a Spitfire at .
W4050 continued to be used for long and varied testing programs, being essentially the experimental "workhorse" for the Mosquito family. 15–16. In late October 1941, it was taken back to the factory to be fitted with Merlin 61s, the first production Merlins fitted with a two-speed, two-stage supercharger. The first flight with the new engines was on 20 June 1942. 47. W4050 recorded a maximum speed of  in December 1943. Soon after these flights,W4050 was grounded and was scheduled to be scrapped, but instead continued to serve as an instructional airframe at Hatfield. In September 1958, W4050 was returned to the Salisbury Hall hangar in which it had been built, was restored to its original configuration and is now one of the primary exhibits of the de Havilland Aircraft Heritage Centre.Time-lapse footage of restoration work on W4050, 9 January 2011. Retrieved: 3 January 2012.
W4051, which was designed from the outset to be the prototype for the photo-reconnaissance versions of the Mosquito, was slated to make its first flight in early 1941. However, the fuselage fracture in W4050 meant that W4051's fuselage was used as a replacement; W4051 was then rebuilt using a production standard fuselage and first flew on 10 June 1941. This prototype continued to use the short engine nacelles, single-piece trailing edge flaps and the  wings and, thus configured, became the only Mosquito prototype to fly operationally. 269.
Construction of the fighter prototype, W4052 was also carried out at the secret Salisbury Hall facility. The new prototype differed from its bomber brethren in a number of ways. It was powered by  It was also the first prototype constructed with the extended engine nacelles. 126.
W4052 was later tested with other modifications including bomb racks, drop tanks, barrage balloon cable cutters in the leading edge of the wings, Hamilton airscrews and braking propellers, as well as drooping aileron systems which enabled steep approaches, and a larger rudder tab. The prototype continued to serve as a test machine until it was scrapped on 28 January 1946. W4055 flew the first operational Mosquito flight on 17 September 1941.
During flight testing, the Mosquito prototypes were modified to test a number of experimental configurations. W4050 was fitted with a turret behind the cockpit for drag tests, after which the idea was abandoned in July 1941. W4052 had the first version of the Youngman Frill airbrake fitted to the fighter prototype. The frill was opened by bellows and venturi effect to provide rapid deceleration during interceptions and was tested between January - August 1942, but was also abandoned when it was discovered that lowering the undercarriage had the same effect with less buffeting.
Early on in the Mosquito's operational life, the cooling intake shrouds that were to cool the exhausts on production aircraft overheated after a while. Flame dampers prevented exhaust glow on night operations, but they had an effect on performance. Multiple ejector and open-ended exhaust stubs helped solve the problem and were used in the PR.IX and B. This increased speed performance in the B.

Production plans and American interest

The Air Ministry had authorised mass production plans to be drawn up on 21 June 1941, by which time the Mosquito had become one of the world's fastest operational aircraft. The Air Ministry ordered 19 photo-reconnaissance (PR) models and 176 fighters. A further 50 were unspecified; in July 1941, the Air Ministry confirmed these would be unarmed fast bombers.   By the end of January 1942, contracts had been awarded for 1,378 Mosquitos of all variants, including 20 T.VI bombers. Another 400 were to be built by de Havilland Canada. 24.
On 20 April 1941, W4050 was demonstrated to Lord Beaverbrook, the Minister of Aircraft Production. The Mosquito made a series of flights, including one rolling climb on one engine. Also present were US General Henry H. Arnold and his aide Major Elwood Quesada, who wrote "I ... recall the first time I saw the Mosquito as being impressed by its performance, which we were aware of. We were impressed by the appearance of the airplane that looks fast usually is fast, and the Mosquito was, by the standards of the time, an extremely well streamlined airplane, and it was highly regarded, highly respected.""WWII US Film on Mosquito." youtube. Retrieved: 3 January 2012.
The trials set up future production plans between Britain, Australia and Canada. The Americans did not pursue their interest. It was thought the Lockheed P-38 Lightning could handle the same duties just as easily. Arnold felt the design was being overlooked, and urged the strategic personalities in the United States Army Air Forces to learn from the design if they chose not to adopt it. Several days after the attack on Pearl Harbor, the USAAF then requested one airframe to evaluate on 12 December 1941, signifying that the USAAF realised that they had entered the war without a fast dual-purpose reconnaissance aircraft. 20.

Design

Overview

The Mosquito was a fast, twin-engined aircraft with shoulder-mounted wings. 13. (NF 38 notes) The most-produced variant, designated the FB Mk VI (Fighter-bomber Mark 6), was powered by two Merlin Mk 23 or Mk 25 engines driving three-bladed de Havilland hydromatic propellers. The typical fixed armament for an FB Mk VI was four Browning .303 machine guns and four 20 mm Hispano cannon while the offensive load consisted of up to  of bombs, or eight RP-3 unguided rockets. 17.

Construction

The oval-section fuselage was a frameless monocoque shell built in two halves being formed to shape by band clamps over a mahogany or concrete mould, each holding one half of the fuselage, split vertically. The shell halves were made of sheets of Ecuadorean balsawood sandwiched between sheets of Canadian birch, but in areas needing extra strength— such as along cut-outs— stronger woods replaced the balsa filler; the overall thickness of the birch and balsa sandwich skin was only  Many other types of screws and flanges (made of various woods) also held the structure together.
The fuselage construction joints were made from balsa wood and plywood strips with the spruce multi-ply being connected by a balsa V joint, along with the interior frame. The spruce would be reinforced by plywood strips at the point where the two halves joined to form the V-joint. Located on top of the joint the plywood formed the outer skin. During the joining of the two halves ("boxing up"), two laminated wooden clamps would be used in the after portion of the fuselage to act as support. 8. A covering of doped Madapolam (a fine plain woven cotton) fabric was stretched tightly over the shell and a coat of silver dope was applied, after which the exterior camouflage was applied. 42. The fuselage had a large ventral section cut-out, which was braced during construction, to allow it to be lowered onto the wing centre-section. Once the wing was secured the lower panels were replaced, and the bomb bay or armament doors fitted. 41–42.
The all-wood wing was built as a one-piece structure and was not divided into separate construction sections. It was made up of two main spars, spruce and plywood compression ribs, stringers, and a plywood covering. The outer plywood skin was covered and doped like the fuselage. The wing was installed into the roots by means of four large attachment points. The engine radiators were fitted in the inner wing, just outboard of the fuselage on either side. These gave less drag. The radiators themselves were split into three sections: an oil cooler section outboard, the middle section forming the coolant radiator and the inboard section serving the cabin heater. 87. The wing contained metal framed and skinned ailerons, but the flaps were made of wood and were hydraulically controlled. The nacelles were mostly wood, although, for strength, the engine mounts were all metal as were the undercarriage parts. 9. Engine mounts of welded steel tube were added, along with simple landing gear oleos filled with rubber blocks. Wood was used to carry only in-plane loads, with metal fittings used for all triaxially loaded components such as landing gear, engine mounts, control surface mounting brackets, and the wing-to-fuselage junction. 870. The outer leading wing edge had to be brought ."History of the de Havilland Mosquito." RAAF Museum Point Cook, 2007. Retrieved: 13 August 2009.
In November 1944, several crashes occurred in the Far East. At first, it was thought these were as a result of wing structure failures. The casein glue, it was said, cracked when exposed to extreme heat and/or monsoon conditions. This caused the upper surfaces to "lift" from the main spar. An investigating team led by Major Hereward de Havilland travelled to India and produced a report in early December 1944 stating that "the accidents were not caused by the deterioration of the glue but by shrinkage of the airframe during the wet monsoon season". However a later inquiry by Cabot & Myers definitely attributed the accidents to faulty manufacture and this was confirmed by a further investigation team by the Ministry of Aircraft Production at Defford which found faults in six different Marks of Mosquito (all built at de Havilland's Hatfield and Leavesden plants) which showed similar defects, and none of the aircraft had been exposed to monsoon conditions or termite attack; thus it was concluded that there were construction defects found at the two plants. It was found that the "Standard of glueing...Bowman 2005, pp. 15–16. 306 Records at the time showed that accidents caused by "loss of control" were three times more frequent on Mosquitoes than on any other type of aircraft. The Air Ministry forestalled any loss of confidence in the Mosquito by holding to Major de Havilland's initial investigation in India that the accidents were caused "largely by climate"Bowman 2012, p. 266

To solve the problem, a sheet of plywood was set along the span of the wing to seal the entire length of the skin joint along the main spar.

Systems

The fuel systems allowed the Mosquito to have a good range and endurance, using up to nine fuel tanks. Two outer wing tanks each contained .
Drop tanks of .
In order to reduce fuel vaporisation at the high altitudes at which the photographic reconnaissance variants flew, the central and inner wing tanks were pressurised. The pressure venting cock located behind the pilot's seat controlled the pressure valve; as the altitude increased, the valve increased the volume applied by a pump. This system was extended to include field modifications of the fuel tank system. 13–14. (FB 6 Notes)
The engine oil tanks were in the engine nacelles. Each nacelle contained a  air space. The oil tanks themselves had no separate coolant controlling systems. The coolant header tank was in the forward nacelle, behind the propeller. The remaining coolant systems were controlled by the coolant radiators shutters in the forward inner wing compartment, between the nacelle and the fuselage and behind the main engine cooling radiators which were fitted in the leading edge. Electric-pneumatic operated radiator shutters directed and controlled airflow through the ducts and into the coolant valves, to predetermined temperatures. 14. (FB 6 notes).
Electrical power came from a 24 volt DC generator on the starboard (No. 2) engine and an alternator on the port engine which supplied AC power for radios. The radio shutters, superchargers, gun camera, bomb bay, bomb/rocket release and all the other crew controlled instruments were powered by a 24 volt battery. The radio communication devices included VHF and HF communications, GEE navigation, and IFF and G.P. devices.
The electric generators also powered the fire extinguishers. Located on the starboard side of the cockpit, the switches would operate automatically in the event of a crash. In flight, a warning light would flash to indicate a fire, should the pilot not already be aware of it. In later models, to save liquids and engine clean up time in case of belly landing, the fire extinguisher was changed to semi-automatic triggers. 44. (FB 6 notes).
The design of the Mark VI allowed for a provisional long-range fuel tank to increase range for action over enemy territory, for the installation of bomb release equipment specific for depth charges for strikes against enemy shipping, or for the simultaneous use of rocket projectiles along with a . 16–17.
The main landing gear were housed in the nacelles behind the engines. These were raised and lowered hydraulically. The main landing gear shock absorbers were de Havilland manufactured and used a system of rubber in compression, rather than hydraulic oleos, with twin pneumatic brakes for each wheel.

Flight characteristics

The design was noted for having light and effective control surfaces which allowed for good manoeuvrability. It was noted that the rudder should not be used aggressively at high speeds, and the poor aileron control at low speeds when landing and taking off was also a problem for inexperienced crews. 28–29. (FB 6 notes) For flying at low speeds, the flaps had to be set at 15°, speed reduced to  weight.
The Mosquito had a low stall speed of  before stall was reached. The conditions and impact of the stall were not severe. The wing did not drop unless the control column was pulled back. The nose drooped gently and recovery was easy. 29. (FB 6 notes).

Variants

Until the end of 1942 the RAF always used Roman numerals (I, II, ...) for mark numbers; 1943-1948 was a transition period during which new aircraft entering service were given Arabic numerals (1, 2, ...) for mark numbers, but older aircraft retained their Roman numerals. From 1948 onwards, Arabic numerals were used exclusively.

Prototypes

Three prototypes were built, each with a different configuration. The first to fly was W4050 on 25 November 1940, followed by the fighter W4052 on 15 May 1941 and the photo-reconnaissance prototype W4051 on 10 June 1941. W4051 later flew operationally with  1 Photographic Reconnaissance Unit (1 PRU).

Photo-reconnaissance

 

A total of 10 Mosquito PR Mk Is were built, four of them "long range" versions equipped with a  per minute.
Over 30 Mosquito B Mk IV bombers were converted into the PR Mk IV photo-reconnaissance aircraft. 268. The first operational flight by a PR Mk IV was made by DK284 in April 1942. 164.
The Mosquito PR Mk VIII, built as a stopgap pending the introduction of the refined PR Mk IX, was the next photo-reconnaissance version. The five VIIIs were converted from B Mk IVs and became the first operational Mosquito version to be powered by two-stage, two-speed supercharged engines, using , and a climb rate of 2,500 ft per minute (760 m). 25.
The Mosquito PR Mk IX, 90 of which were built, was the first Mosquito variant with two-stage, two-speed engines to be produced in quantity; the first of these, LR405, first flew in April 1943. The PR Mk IX was based on the Mosquito B Mk IX bomber and was powered by two  droppable fuel tanks.
The Mosquito PR Mk XVI had a pressurised cockpit and, like the Mk IX, was powered by two Rolls-Royce Merlin 72/73 or 76/77 piston engines. This version was equipped with three overload fuel tanks, totalling , and a climb rate of 2,900 feet per minute (884 m).
The Mosquito PR Mk 32 was a long-range, high-altitude, pressurised photo-reconnaissance version. It was powered by a pair of two-stage supercharged  Rolls-Royce Merlin 113 and Merlin 114 piston engines, the Merlin 113 on the starboard side and the Merlin 114 on the port. First flown in August 1944, only five were built and all were conversions from PR.Bowman 2005, p. 165.
The Mosquito PR Mk 34 and PR Mk 34A was a very long-range unarmed high altitude photo-reconnaissance version. The fuel tank and cockpit protection armour were removed. Additional fuel was carried in a bulged bomb bay: 1,192 gallons which was the equivalent of ."The latest Mosquitoes." Flight, 28 February 1946 via flightglobal. Retrieved: 17 August 2010.
All PR.34s were installed with four split F52 vertical cameras, two forward, two aft of the fuselage tank and one F24 oblique camera. Sometimes a K-17 camera was used for air surveys. In August 1945, the PR.34A was the final photo-reconnaissance variant with one Merlin 113A and 114A each delivering . 166.
Colonel Roy M. Stanley II, USAF (RET) wrote: "I consider the Mosquito the best photo-reconnaissance aircraft of the war". 35.
After the end of World War II Spartan Air Services used ten ex-RAF Mosquitoes, mostly B.35's plus one of only six PR.35's built, for high-altitude photographic survey work in Canada.flightglobal.html

Bombers

 
On 21 June 1941 the Air Ministry ordered that the last 10 Mosquitoes, ordered as photo-reconnaissance aircraft, should be converted to bombers. These 10 aircraft were part of the original 1 March 1940 production order and became the B Mk IV Series 1. W4052 was to be the prototype and flew for the first time on 8 September 1941. 22–23.
The bomber prototype led to the B Mk IV, of which 273 were built: apart from the 10 Series 1s, all of the rest were built as Series 2s with extended nacelles, revised exhaust manifolds, with integrated flame dampers, and larger tailplanes. 15. Series 2 bombers also differed from the Series 1 in having a larger bomb bay to increase the payload to four  bomb so that these four larger weapons could be carried (or a 2,000 lb (920;kg) total load). The B Mk IV entered service in May 1942 with 105 Squadron.
In April 1943 it was decided to convert a B Mk IV to carry a 4,000 lb (1,812 kg), thin-cased high explosive bomb (nicknamed "Cookie"). The conversion, including modified bomb bay suspension arrangements, bulged bomb bay doors and fairings, was relatively straightforward, and 54 B.Sharp and Bowyer 1971, pp. 306–307 27 B Mk IVs were later converted for special operations with the Highball anti-shipping weapon, and were used by 618 Squadron, formed in April 1943 specifically to use this weapon. 74, 76-78. A B Mk IV, DK290 was initially used as a trials aircraft for the bomb, followed by DZ471,530 and 533. 74–75. The B Mk IV had a maximum speed of , and a climb rate of 2,500 ft per minute (762 m).
Other bomber variants of the Mosquito included the Merlin 21 powered B Mk V high-altitude version. Trials with this configuration were made with W4057 which had the wings strengthened and an addition of two fuel tanks, or alternatively two  bombs. This design was not produced in Britain, but formed the basic design of the Canadian-built B. Only W4057 was built in prototype form. 16. The Merlin 31 powered B Mk VII was built by de Havilland Canada. It was based on the B.V. and first flown on 24 September 1942. It only saw service in Canada and only 25 were built. Six were handed over to the United States Army Air Forces.
B Mk IX (54 built) was powered by the Merlin 72,73, 76 or 77. The two-stage Merlin variant was based on the PR.IX. The prototype DK 324 was converted from a PR.Jackson 2003, p. 17. In October 1943 it was decided that all B Mk IVs and all B Mk IXs then in service would be converted to carry the  of bombs. A Mosquito B Mk IX holds the record for the most combat operations flown by an Allied bomber in the Second World War. LR503, known as "F for Freddie" (from its squadron code letters, GB*F), first served with No. 109 and subsequently, No. 105 RAF squadrons. It flew 213 sorties during the war, only to crash at Calgary airport during the Eighth Victory Loan Bond Drive on 10 May 1945, two days after Victory in Europe Day, killing both the pilot, Flt. Lt. Maurice Briggs, DSO, DFC, DFM and navigator Fl. Off. John Baker, DFC and Bar. 70.
The B Mk XVI was powered by the same variations as the B.IX. All B Mk XVIs were capable of being converted to carry the  of bombs.
The B.35 was powered by Merlin 113 and 114As. Some were converted to TT.35s (Target Tugs) and others were used as PR.35s (photo-reconnaissance).  The B.35 had a maximum speed of 

Fighters

 
Developed during 1940, the first prototype of the Mosquito F Mk II  was completed on 15 May 1941. These Mosquitos were fitted with four  Hispano cannon in the fuselage belly and four .303 (7.7 mm) Browning machine guns mounted in the nose. On production Mk IIs the machine guns and ammunition tanks were accessed via two centrally hinged, sideways opening doors in the upper nose section. To arm and service the cannon the bomb bay doors were replaced by manually operated bay doors: the F and NF Mk IIs could not carry bombs. The type was also fitted with a gun camera in a compartment above the machine guns in the nose and was fitted with exhaust flame dampers to reduce the glare from the Merlin XXs. 13.
In August 1942 Britain experienced several incursions of high-altitude Luftwaffe bombers, including the Junkers Ju-86P. As a result of these raids, starting in September 1942, five Mosquito B Mk IV bombers were quickly converted into F Mk XV high-altitude, pressurised fighters, powered by two-stage Merlin 73s and 77s fitted with four-bladed propellers. 62–63.
The first of these conversions was MP469, which was wheeled into the experimental shop on 7 September and first flew on 14 September. The bomber nose forward of the cockpit was cut off and a standard fighter nose, complete with four .303 Brownings, grafted on in its place. The pressurised crew cabin retained the bomber's canopy structure, with a vee-shaped, two-piece windscreen, while the bomber's control wheel was replaced by the fighter's control stick. Extended, pointed, wingtips increased the wingspan to . Four more B Mk IVs were converted into F Mk XVs, and, in late 1942, were further modified to become NF MK XVs. 63–67.
All fighters and fighter bombers, apart from the F Mk XV, featured a modified canopy structure incorporating a flat, single piece armoured windscreen, and the crew entry/exit door was moved from the bottom of the forward fuselage to the right side of the nose, just forward of the wing leading edge. 4–5.  The pilot was provided with a fighter-style control stick rather than a wheel.

Night fighters

 
At the end of 1940, the Air Staff's preferred night fighter design was the Gloster F.18/40 (derived from their F.9/37). However, although in agreement as to the quality of the Gloster company's design, the Ministry of Aircraft Production was concerned that Gloster would not be able to work on the F.18/40 and also the jet fighter design, considered the greater priority. Consequently in mid-1941 the Air Staff and MAP agreed that the Gloster aircraft would be dropped and the Mosquito considered for the night fighter requirement instead. 61–62
The first production night fighter Mosquitos were designated NF Mk II. A total of 466 were built with the first entering service with No. 157 Squadron in January 1942, replacing the Douglas Havoc. These aircraft were similar to the F Mk II, but were fitted with the AI Mk IV metric wavelength radar. The herring-bone transmitting antenna was mounted on the nose and the dipole receiving antennae were carried under the outer wings. 7. A number of NF IIs had their radar equipment removed and additional fuel tanks installed in the bay behind the cannon for use as night intruders. These aircraft, designated NF II (Special) were first used by 23 Squadron in operations over Europe in 1942. 338–339. 23 Squadron was then deployed to Malta on 20 December 1942, and operated against targets in Italy. 8.
Ninety-seven NF Mk IIs were upgraded with centimetric AI Mk VIII radar and these were designated NF Mk XII. The NF Mk XIII, of which 270 were built, was the production equivalent of the Mk XII conversions. The centimetric radar sets were mounted in a solid "thimble" (Mk XII / XIII) or universal "bull nose" (Mk XVII / XIX) radome, which required the machine guns to be dispensed with.
Four F Mk XVs were converted to the NF Mk XV. These were fitted with AI Mk VIII in a "thimble" radome, and the .303 Brownings were moved into a gun pack fitted under the forward fuselage. 65–67.
 NF Mk XVII was the designation for 99 NF Mk II conversions, with single-stage Merlin 21, 22, or 23 engines, but British AI.X (US SCR-720) radar.
The NF Mk XIX was an improved version of the NF XIII. It could be fitted with American or British AI radars; 220 were built.
The NF Mk 30 was the final wartime variant and was a high-altitude version, powered by two . 434. It also carried early electronic countermeasures equipment. 526 were built.
Other Mosquito night fighter variants which were planned for, but never built, included the NF Mk X and NF Mk XIV (the latter based on the NF Mk XIII), both of which were to have two-stage Merlins. The NF Mk 31 was a variant of the NF Mk 30, but powered by Packard Merlins. 396, 398.
Mosquito night intruders of 100 Group, Bomber Command, were also fitted with a device called "Serrate" to allow them to track down German night fighters from their Lichtenstein B/C and SN-2 radar emissions, as well as a device named "Perfectos" that tracked German IFF signals.
After the war, two more night fighter versions were developed:
The NF Mk 36 was similar to the Mosquito NF Mk 30, but fitted with the American-built AI. Powered by two .
The NF Mk 38, 101 of which were built, was also similar to the Mosquito NF Mk 30, but fitted with the British-built AI Mk IX radar. This variant suffered from stability problems and did not enter RAF service: 60 were eventually sold to Yugoslavia. 61. According to the Pilot's Notes and Air Ministry 'Special Flying Instruction TF/487', which posted limits on the Mosquito's maximum speeds, the NF Mk 38 had a VNE of 370 knots (425 mph), without under-wing stores, and within the altitude range of sea level to . 38–39. (NF 38 Notes)

Fighter-bombers

The FB Mk VI, which first flew on 1 June 1942, was powered by two  Unlike the F Mk II, the ventral bay doors were split into two pairs, with the forward pair being used to access the cannon, while the rear pair acted as bomb bay doors. 50, 208, 216.
The maximum fuel load which could be carried was , in line with expectations."Mosquito FB. Mk. VI HJ.679 - Brief performance trials, A. & A.E.E. Boscombe Down " via wwiiaircraftperformance. Retrieved: 17 August 2010. 2,298 FB Mk VIs were built, nearly one-third of Mosquito production. 18 built by Airspeed Ltd were eventually modified to become FB. Two were converted to TR.33 carrier-borne, maritime strike prototypes.
The FB Mk VI proved capable of holding its own with single-engine fighter aircraft in addition to bombing. For example, on 15 January 1945 Mosquito FB Mk VIs of 143 Squadron were engaged by 30 Focke-Wulf Fw 190s from Jagdgeschwader 5: nonetheless, the Mosquitos sank an armed trawler and two merchant ships, losing five Mosquitos (two to flak)Bird 2003, pp. 94 - 98. but shooting down five Fw 190s. 112.
Another fighter-bomber variant was the Mosquito FB Mk XVIII (sometimes known as the Tsetse) of which 18 were purpose-built and 27 converted from Mk VIs. The Mk XVIII was armed with a Molins "6-pounder Class M" cannon: this was a modified QF 6-pounder (57 mm) anti-tank gun fitted with an auto-loader to allow both semi- or fully automatic fire. of armour was added within the engine cowlings, around the nose and under the cockpit floor to protect the engines and crew from the heavily armed U-boats which were intended to be the primary target of the Mk XVIII. 271. Two or four .303 (7.7 mm) Browning machine guns were retained in the nose and were used to "sight" the main weapon onto the target.
The Air Ministry initially suspected that this variant would not work, but tests proved otherwise. Although the gun provided the Mosquito with yet more anti-shipping firepower for use against U-boats, it required a steady approach run to aim and fire the gun, making it vulnerable to anti-aircraft fire. The gun had a muzzle velocity of  at a 30° angle with the turn and bank indicator on centre. A move during the dive could jam the gun. 105. The prototype HJ732 was converted from a FB.
The effect of the new weapon was demonstrated on 10 March 1944 when Mk XVIIIs from 248 Squadron (escorted by four Mk VIs) engaged a German convoy of one U-boat and four destroyers, protected by 10 Ju 88s. Three of the Ju 88s were shot down. Pilot Tony Phillips destroyed one Ju 88 with four shells, one of which tore an engine off the Ju 88. The U-boat was damaged. On 25 March, U-976 was sunk by Molins-equipped Mosquitos. 106–106. On 10 June, U-821 was abandoned in the face of intense air attack from No. 248 Squadron, and was later sunk by a Liberator of No. 206 Squadron. 108. On 5 April 1945 Mosquitos with Molins attacked five German surface ships in the Kattegat and again demonstrated their value by setting them all on fire and sinking them. 115. 77. A German Sperrbrecher ("minefield breaker") was lost with all hands, with some 200 bodies being recovered by Swedish vessels. Some 900 German soldiers died in total. On 9 April, German U-boats U-804, U-843 and U-1065 were spotted in formation heading for Norway. All were sunk. 78. U-251 and U-2359 followed on 19 April and 2 May 1945. 117, 119.
Despite the preference for rockets, a further development of the large gun idea was carried out using the even larger QF 32-pounder, a gun based on the QF 3.7 inch AA gun designed for tank use, the airborne version using a novel form of muzzle brake. Developed to prove the feasibility of using such a large weapon in the Mosquito, this installation was not completed until after the war, when it was flown and fired in a single aircraft without problems, then scrapped.
Designs based on the Mk VI were the FB Mk 26, built in Canada, and the FB Mk 40, built in Australia, powered by Packard Merlins. The FB.26 improved from the FB.21 using  single stage Packard Merlin 225s. Some 300 were built and another 37 converted to T.29 standard. 212 FB.40s were built by de Havilland Australia. Six were converted to PR.40; 28 to PR.41s, one to FB.42 and 22 to T.43s tactical assault aircraft. Most were powered by Packard-built Merlin 31 or 33s.

Trainers

The Mosquito was also built as the Mosquito T Mk III two-seat trainer. This version, powered by two Rolls-Royce Merlin 21s, was unarmed and had a modified cockpit fitted with dual control arrangements. A total of 348 of the T Mk III were built for the RAF and Fleet Air Arm. de Havilland Australia built 11 T Mk 43 trainers, similar to the Mk III.

Torpedo-bombers

To meet specification N.15/44 for a navalised Mosquito for Royal Navy use as a torpedo bomber, de Havilland produced a carrier-borne variant. A Mosquito FB. Initial carrier tests of the Sea Mosquito were carried out by Eric "Winkle" Brown aboard HMS Indefatigable, the first landing-on taking place on 25 March 1944. An order for 100 TR.33s was placed although only 50 were built at Leavesden. Armament was four 20 mm cannon, two 500 lb bombs in the bomb bay (another two could be fitted under the wings), eight 60 lb rockets (four under each wing) and a standard torpedo under the fuselage. The first production TR.33 flew on 10 November 1945. This series was followed by six Sea Mosquito TR Mk 37s, which differed in having ASV Mk XIII radar instead of the TR.33's AN/APS-6.

Target tugs

The Royal Navy also operated the Mosquito TT Mk 39 for target towing. A number of B Mk XVIs bombers were converted into TT Mk 39 target tug aircraft. The RAF's target tug version was the Mosquito TT Mk 35 which were the last aircraft to remain in operational service, with No 3 CAACU at Exeter, finally being retired in 1963 (these aircraft were then featured in the film 633 Squadron). Two ex-RAF FB.6s were converted to TT.6 standard at Manchester (Ringway) Airport by Fairey Aviation in 1953–1954, being delivered to the Belgian Air Force for use as towing aircraft from the Sylt firing ranges.

Canadian-built

A total of 1,133Banigan, Richard. "Mosquito Aircraft Production at Downview." virtualmuseum.ca. Retrieved: 17 August 2010. (to 1945) Mosquitos were built by De Havilland Canada at Downsview Airfield in Downsview Ontario (now Downsview Park in Toronto Ontario).

Australian-built

Highball

A number of Mosquito IVs were modified by Vickers-Armstrongs to carry Highball "bouncing bombs" and were allocated Vickers Type numbers:

Production

Details

In England, fuselage shells were mainly made by furniture companies, including Ronson, E. Gomme, Parker Knoll and Styles & Mealing. Some of the specialized wood veneer used in the construction of the Mosquito was made by Roddis Manufacturing in Marshfield, Wisconsin, United States. Hamilton Roddis had teams of young women ironing the (unusually thin) strong wood veneer before shipping to the UK. 65-66 Retrieved: 30 July 2013.marshfieldnewsherald.B. Heath and Dancer & Hearne. Many of the other parts, including flaps, flap shrouds, fins, leading edge assemblies and bomb doors were also produced in High Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, which was well suited to these tasks because of a well-established furniture manufacturing industry. Dancer & Hearne processed much of the wood from start to finish, receiving timber and transforming it into finished wing spars at their High Wycombe factory.
About 5,000 of the 7,781 Mosquitos made contained parts made in High Wycombe. In Canada, fuselages were built in the Oshawa, Ontario plant of General Motors of Canada Limited. These were shipped to De Havilland Canada in Toronto for mating to fuselages and completion. As a secondary manufacturer, de Havilland Australia started construction in Sydney. These production lines added 1,133Thirsk 2006, p. 52. from Canada and 212 from Australia.
Total Mosquito production was 7,781 of which 6,710 were built during the war. The ferry operation of the Mosquito from Canada to the war front was problematic, as a small fraction of the aircraft mysteriously disappeared over mid-Atlantic. The theory of "auto-explosion" was offered, and, although a considerable effort by de Havilland Canada to resolve production problems with engine and oil systems reduced the number of aircraft lost, the actual cause of the losses was never established. The company introduced an additional five hours flight testing to clear production aircraft before the ferry flight. By the end of the war, nearly 500 Mosquito bombers and fighter-bombers had been delivered successfully by the Canadian operation. 77–87.
In total, both during the war and after, de Havilland exported 46 FB. XVIs to Australia, two FB.30s to Belgium, approximately 205 FB.26, T.29 and T.27s to Nationalist China (5 of these were captured by the People's Liberation Army during the Chinese Civil War), 19 FB.VIs to Dominica, a few B.VIs, 29 PR.XXXs to France. Some T.VIs, and at least five PR. Four T.VIs, one FB.40 and four T.43s were exported to New Zealand. Three T.VIs which were later converted to night fighter standard. South Africa received two F.XVI/XIs and Sweden received 46 NF. Turkey received 96 FB.IIIs, and Yugoslavia had 60 NF.38s, 80 FB.IIIs delivered.

Sites

