[[Round Hill, Brighton]]

CATEGORIES: Areas of Brighton and Hove

Round Hill (sometimes spelt Roundhill) part of the coastal city of Brighton and Hove in England. The area contains a mix of privately owned and privately rented terraced housing, much of which has been converted for multiple occupancy, and small-scale commercial development. It was developed mostly in the late 19th century on an area of high land overlooking central Brighton, and with good views in all directions, the area became a desirable middle-class suburb—particularly the large terraced houses of Roundhill Crescent and Richmond Road, and the exclusive Park Crescent—and within a few decades the whole of the hill had been built up with smaller terraces and some large villas.
Non-residential buildings include the landmark St Martin's Church, Brighton's largest place of worship, The London Road viaduct, a distinctive, sweeping piece of railway architecture, forms the northern boundary of the area and "a literal gateway" between outer and inner suburbia. All of these buildings have been listed by English Heritage for their architectural and historical importance, and the core of Round Hill, around Roundhill Crescent, is one of 34 conservation areas in the city.  Round Hill's steep slopes and road layout encouraged the introduction of another feature which gives the area its character: the "cat's-creep" staircase. The area has good tree cover, and increasingly heavy traffic along the three main roads which run through the area.
Past features of Round Hill include a windmill, which took advantage of the windy conditions on the  hilltop until 1913; 19th-century laundries, which sought the same advantage; early 19th-century pleasure gardens, now occupied by the houses of Park Crescent; the landmark Cox's Pill Factory, demolished in the 1980s; glasshouses and smallholdings, some of which survived until after the Second World War despite being surrounded by houses; and the Kemp Town branch line, a passenger and freight railway which cut through the area and had a short-lived station serving Round Hill.  The former St Saviour's Church survived until 1983, and a Congregational church elsewhere in the suburb closed but retained its façade after its conversion into housing.

Location

Round Hill is an approximately triangular area directly north of Brighton city centre.
Round Hill's elevated, fairly central position gives excellent inward and outward views. can be seen. Crescent and Wakefield Roads have long southward views towards the city centre, as do the small blocks of flats which replaced some large villas in the middle of the suburb. The tall viaduct is the main landmark to the west and north. There are clear views into Round Hill from many parts of Brighton, especially areas to the east and southeast such as Race Hill.
When the railway line was built between Brighton and Lewes in 1846, Residents of Round Hill, especially those who owned laundries, often complained about the smell and soot from the incinerators.

History

Early history

In 1800, Round Hill was a steep-sided, round-topped hill rising to  (an ancestor of Charles Thomas-Stanford of the Thomas-Stanford Baronetcy of Preston Manor), owned most of the land between them.  In the late 19th century, the Stanford family sold some of their land—which almost completely encircled Brighton, Preston and Hove to the north—for housing development, and retained much of it to develop themselves.
The earliest development in the Round Hill area was Ireland's Pleasure Gardens on the southern slope in 1823.  Also known as the Royal Pleasure Gardens, this venture by James Ireland was intended to be a profitable speculation, attracting the increasing number of visitors and short-term residents who had doubled Brighton's population in the previous decade. Only its south boundary wall and gate piers, decorated with copies of their original stone lions, survive.
Another development of the 1820s, on Thomas Read Kemp's landholding, was the Jewish cemetery and its chapel.  Its location on Florence Place, off Ditchling Road just north of the railway line, places it marginally outside Brighton and Hove City Council's definition of the Round Hill area, but the site has always been associated with Round Hill. In 1826, Kemp, who at the time was a member of parliament, donated a parcel of land on the north slope of the hill to the congregation of Brighton's synagogue. The cemetery chapel and its surrounding walls and gates are Grade II listed buildings.
In 1838, a windmill was built at the top of the hill, where the northern end of the present-day Belton Road stands.  Although it was demolished in the early 20th century, it has been called "probably the most well-known feature of the Round Hill area".
In 1854, the Diocese of Chichester selected an area of open land on the west side of Ditchling Road as the site of their Training College for Anglican Schoolmistresses, which had outgrown its premises in Black Lion Street in the old town. Viaduct Road was built in front of the Gothic Revival building's south façade around the same time, and was built up with terraced houses by the early 1860s.

Residential development in the 19th century

Between 1838 and 1840, the local Colbatch family built four large detached villas in the former Rose Hill Park on a southwest-facing part of the hill.
The site of the failed Pleasure Gardens then became one of Brighton's most exclusive residential developments in the 1850s, when prominent and influential local architect Amon Henry Wilds of his long career was also one of his last: construction lasted from 1849 until 1854, and he died in 1857.
Contemporary housing developments included the southeast side of Upper Lewes Road, the west side of Lewes Road, and a series of impressive semi-detached villas on Ditchling Road, but Round Hill's most intensive period of growth began in the mid-1860s.  "Fine curving terraces of Regency-style houses" appeared on the newly built Roundhill Crescent, which curved away from the northwest side of Upper Lewes Road, and semi-detached houses were laid out on Richmond Road behind and at a higher level. The first parts of Roundhill Crescent, still with a post-Regency character despite their late date,
Another period of rapid residential development occurred in the 1880s.  The gaps in Roundhill Crescent were filled with houses in a more contemporary style than the old-fashioned Regency-style houses of the 1860s. Several streets around Prince's Road were built between 1880 and 1884. Also in the 1880s, The Salvation Army founded a place of worship in the area.  The citadel could hold 1,400 people, and was located on Park Crescent Terrace behind the west side of Park Crescent. Nearby, the Royal Hippodrome (unrelated to the Hippodrome in Brighton's old town) had opened on 31 October 1876.  The 1,600-capacity building hosted a circus until 1889, then reopened under new ownership on 28 July 1890 as the Gaiety Theatre and cinema.  Never a success, it closed permanently in 1900 and passed into commercial use until its demolition for flats in 1930.

Smallholdings and cat's-creeps

Despite this intensive building work, there were many gaps between houses and streets, and smallholdings and plant nurseries were common.  Two existed in 1838, including one where grapes were cultivated, and more were planted in the 1850s.  When the houses of Prince's Road were laid out, there were already two nurseries on it.

Employment and industry in the 19th and 20th centuries

With its sunny, breezy slopes, wide open spaces and distance from the polluted town centre, Round Hill was ideally placed for the development of 19th-century laundries.  In many cases, these were small, home-based businesses, but some larger premises also existed.
Another important 20th-century industry was Cox's Pill Factory, which took over the Brighton and Sussex Laundry Works premises when that company moved to Hove in 1910. Founded by Arthur Cox in 1839 at Ship Street in the old town, the manufacturing division moved to premises at St Martin's Place in 1871.  Cox's speciality was coating pills with a layer of sugar-based material

Health

In 1905, Round Hill became a national leader in the field of mental healthcare when the first hospital for the treatment of mental illness was opened in the large house at 101 Roundhill Crescent. It evolved from a dispensary founded in 1899 by Dr Helen Boyle in the nearby suburb of Hanover.  Dr Boyle rented the house at Roundhill Crescent, moved the dispensary there and added a 12-bed hospital for the treatment of what were then termed "nervous disorders".  The Lewes Road Hospital for Women and Children was the first such facility in England: until then, people regarded as suffering from such disorders were sent to lunatic asylums.
Round Hill was at the centre of a health scare in 1950–51.  A smallpox epidemic broke out in Brighton in late December 1950; the family of the first sufferer were regular users of the Tivoli Laundry on Crescent Road, and many employees were infected by the soiled linen.  Two died, but rapid work by Brighton Corporation's health department prevented the outbreak spreading beyond Brighton.

Roundhill in the postwar era

The villas erected by the Colbatch family were demolished after the Second World War.  The family, which still owned the buildings and the land, drew up plans to replace the four villas and the gatekeepers' cottages with flats.  These were intended for private ownership; but council housing was so scarce in Brighton at the time (1945) that Brighton Borough Council bought the land using a compulsory purchase order and redeveloped it with council flats based on the family's designs. The new flats, built in the early 1950s, were large and well-built, and the old gardens were retained.  At first, no young children were allowed to live there, and only higher earning council tenants could apply.
The closure of Cox's Pill Factory, the Kemp Town branch line and the nearby Vogue cinema in the 1970s and early 1980s prompted large-scale redevelopment.  Between 1983 and 1985, a large area around the junction of Lewes and Upper Lewes Roads was cleared in favour of the Vogue Gyratory system and a Sainsbury's supermarket.  The Vogue Gyratory, a major road junction connecting Upper Lewes Road, Lewes Road, Bear Road and Hollingdean Road, opened in mid-1984. Sainsbury's was completed and opened on 23 April 1985; its design featured round-arched exterior arcades which recalled the recently demolished viaduct, and the clock was retrieved from the demolished pill factory and reset on the exterior of the new building.  It won Brighton Council's design award in 1985.
On the Lewes Road station site at the junction of Richmond Road and D'Aubigny Road stands Richmond House, a disused office block.  In February 2013, a developer applied for planning permission to demolish the building and replace it with student housing consisting of 144 flats.

Buildings

Many buildings in the Round Hill area have been listed by English Heritage.  A building or structure is defined as "listed" when it is placed on a statutory register of buildings of "special architectural or historic interest" by the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport, a Government department.

Religious buildings

Vicar of Brighton Rev. Arthur Wagner, who established a mission chapel in an old school building in 1867, planned to build a permanent church to serve the Round Hill area.
A small chapel, opened by the Railway Mission in 1876 but now with an Evangelical congregation, is adjacent to the fire station on Viaduct Road.  James Barnes's Gothic Revival building has three lancet windows on the façade and projecting entrances which resemble porches.  There is decorative machicolation on the parapet.
Catherine Booth, wife of the founder of The Salvation Army William Booth, opened a large Salvation Army citadel behind Park Crescent in March 1884.  Designed and built of red brick and terracotta in 1883 by E.J. Hamilton, it could hold 1,400 people and had castellated towers at the corners.  It was extended in 1925, but in 2000 it was demolished and replaced with a smaller octagonal Congress Hall designed by David Greenwood.  Its design recalls some of the features of the Park Crescent houses opposite.
St Saviour's Church served the southwestern part of Round Hill The architects were Edmund Scott and F.T. Cawthorn. An extension was built in 1889, and in 1904 a large reredos designed by Richard Herbert Carpenter and W. Slater was moved to the church from Chichester Cathedral. Congregations declined, and the church was demolished in 1983; flats called St Saviour's Court and a rear archway in Vere Road recall its existence.
At the north end of the suburb, the Lewes Road Congregational Church was built in 1872.  A. Harford's design has been described as Italianate Gothic.  The congregation joined the United Reformed Church, but the church closed in 1993 and the building was sold for redevelopment.  The congregation moved to a new building, and the flats of Stanley Court were built behind the old façade.
The cemetery chapel (Ohel) at the Jewish burial ground is Grade II-listed.

Other buildings

The building now called Brighton Forum, at the junction of Ditchling and Viaduct Roads, forms a local landmark. The Grade II-listed It was extended to the north in 1886, and was used as a training college until the Second World War, when the Royal Engineers requisitioned it and used it to store their records and archives. After its closure in 1987, it was briefly threatened with demolition, but in 1988 it was converted into serviced offices under the name Brighton Business Centre (later Brighton Forum).
Standing next to each other at Preston Circus, at the northwest edge of the suburb, are the Duke of York's Picture House and Brighton's main fire station.  The cinema opened on 22 September 1910, making it one of the first in the world, and it is still operational as England's oldest working cinema.
The former Tower Mill stood at the top of Round Hill between 1838 and 1913. Built of about 50,000 bricks, and with walls with a maximum thickness of  long and were attached to a walnut wood rotating roof.

Transport

The East Coastway Line, a railway line currently operated by Southern, forms Round Hill's northern boundary.  London Road station, situated in a cutting between London Road and Ditchling Road, serves the area.  Situated  tunnel then takes the line under Ditchling Road.
Immediately beyond the tunnel was Kemp Town Junction, where the Kemp Town branch line diverged.  The first station to serve Round Hill was on this route, which "cut through the area and created a new artery" and the Lewes Road viaduct was demolished in part in 1976 and completely in 1983.
The main reason for the Kemp Town branch line's decline was the increasing popularity of buses. The three main roads running through Round Hill—London Road, Ditchling Road and Lewes Road—are used by many regular routes, mainly operated by the Brighton & Hove Bus and Coach Company.  Routes 26, 46 and 50, which serve Hollingbury and Hollingdean northbound and Brighton city centre, Hove and Southwick southbound, run via Ditchling Road.  Routes along London Road include the 5 (Patcham to Hangleton) and 56 (Patcham to the Knoll Estate in Hove).  Along Lewes Road, regular routes include 23, 24, 25, 28, 29, 38, 49 and 81 and their variants, serving places such as Sussex and Brighton Universities, Lewes, Uckfield, Tunbridge Wells, Moulsecoomb, Bevendean and Queen's Park.  Several other routes use Union Road, the southern boundary of the Round Hill area.
Some bus services are based on old tram routes operated by Brighton Corporation Tramways between 1901 and 1939, and their trolleybus successors.
The three main roads—and Upper Lewes Road, which runs between the Ditchling and Lewes Roads—experience heavy traffic, but little through traffic uses the smaller residential streets such as Roundhill Crescent.  Traffic calming measures installed in 2003 have acted as a deterrent. There are high levels of on-street car parking, though. Union Road and the Vogue Gyratory are also high-traffic routes. The Gyratory, "a fiendish maze of one-way systems, roundabouts and crossings", is the point at which Upper Lewes Road and Lewes Road meet two other routes. Named after the Vogue—latterly a pornographic cinema—it was built in 1983–84 on the site of the former Lewes Road viaduct, Cox's Pill Factory and surrounding buildings in connection with a Sainsbury's supermarket development. Demolition of the entire complex of roads was already being advocated in 2007.

Conservation area

On 6 January 1977, 
The area's character derives from its "tight urban form" and lack of 20th-century redevelopment, resulting in a homogeneous streetscape of mostly residential buildings in long terraces; its steeply sloping land; and the swathes of trees and gardens which can be seen in long views into the area, which help to "define the unaltered Victorian streetplan" when seen from a distance. Roundhill Crescent "both curves and changes height dramatically along its length".  The houses, which on the northwest side of the road are not a continuous terrace and which date from the 1860s to the 1880s, vary in height and the extent of their architectural detailing; canted bay windows and original cast-iron balconies feature prominently. Some pairs of semi-detached villas of the 1860s survive on Richmond Road.
Building materials vary greatly. Bungaroosh was often faced with render or stucco to make it weatherproof. Some flint buildings survive on Prince's Crescent. When built, most windows in the conservation area's houses were sashes, and roofs were of Welsh slate.
The area retains many original boundary walls, often in brick and flint or cast iron. Some pavements were laid with blue-brick paving slabs, and a few survive.  Elsewhere, granite kerbstones, stone-dressed gutters and road crossing points laid with limestone and brick remain from the 19th-century development of the area, and some cast-iron lamp-posts have survived.

Gallery





Notes

Bibliography




