[[Red River Gorge]]

CATEGORIES: Canyons and gorges of Kentucky, Protected areas of Menifee County, Kentucky, National Natural Landmarks in Kentucky, Natural arches of Kentucky, Climbing areas of the United States, Protected areas of Powell County, Kentucky, Protected areas of Wolfe County, Kentucky, Daniel Boone National Forest

The Red River Gorge is a canyon system on the Red River in east-central Kentucky.  Geologically, it is part of the Pottsville Escarpment.
Much of the Gorge is located inside the Daniel Boone National Forest and has been subsequently reserved as the Red River Gorge Geological Area, an area of around  Clifty Wilderness Area lies entirely within the geological area in the Red River Gorge.
This intricate canyon system features an abundance of high sandstone cliffs, rock shelters, waterfalls, and natural bridges.  There are more than 100 natural sandstone arches in the Red River Gorge Geological Area. The multitude of sandstone and cliff-lines have helped this area become one of the world's top rock climbing destinations and is home to the Red River Gorge Climbers' Coalition.
Kentucky's Natural Bridge State Park is immediately adjacent to this area, featuring one of the largest natural bridges in the Red River Gorge.
Because of its unusual and rugged nature, the Red River Gorge features a remarkable variety of ecological zones.  It is home to many plants, such as Canadian yew, which are far from their main range.

History

Nada Tunnel

Nada Tunnel is a 
The tunnel has often been described as the "Gateway to Red River Gorge" for the shortcut it now provides motorists.

History of the proposed Red River Gorge Dam

Decades of flooding by the Red River offered downstream residents much misery. In 1962 the "Great Flood of Clay City," the worst seen in 102 years, moved both government officials and local communities to lobby the Kentucky State Legislature and the Kennedy administration for immediate construction of a flood control dam. The United States Congress would ultimately approve the measure and provide funding. The Army Corps of Engineers set about their business of making the structure a reality; however, many felt that such actions would destroy the unique ecosystem residing there. Spearheaded by the Sierra Club, an opposition to the dam was formed. It was this group that obtained the help of Supreme Court Justice William O. Douglas by participating in a Dam Protest Hike which drew local and national attention to the situation. The Dam Protest Hike took place on November 18, 1967 at the Clifty Wilderness area, junction of Swift Camp Creek and the Red River, Highway 715.
In 1971, the University of Kentucky commissioned Wendell Berry, a Kentucky native farmer and author, to write a book entitled The Unforeseen Wilderness advocating the preservation of the gorge in its natural state.
The struggle of wills lasted several decades, involved two proposed dam sites and finally concluded with Red River's entry into the National Wild and Scenic River system on December 3, 1993. President Bill Clinton signed the declaration into law which provides federal protection for a  section of the river. This effectively eliminated any further possibility of a dam being constructed and preserved the Red River and its Gorge as they exist today.RRS: History of the Red River Valley Dam

Motion pictures

The Red River Gorge's Sky Bridge appears in the 1955 film The Kentuckian, starring and directed by Burt Lancaster.

Biology and ecology

The Red River Gorge geological area including Clifty Wilderness has a very diverse amount of biology.

Archaeology

Rock shelters and other sites in the Red River Gorge Geological Area contain artifacts of prehistoric occupancy by indigenous peoples, beginning with the Paleoindian period. Rock shelters are particularly valuable as archeological sites because they are protected from precipitation. Plant materials and other relics, such as woven mats and leather moccasins, that would decompose in more typical sites are well-preserved in the dry, nitrate-rich soils found in rock shelters. Sites in the area have yielded some of the earliest evidence of the domestication of plants found in the eastern United States.
The Red River Gorge, Clifty Wilderness, and the Indian Creek area were designated as a National Archaeological District and placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2003. The National Register district covers 

Clifty Wilderness

Clifty Wilderness is a  wilderness area contained entirely within the Red River Gorge Geological Area.

Recreation

Rock climbing

The Red River Gorge is also known as a popular destination for rock climbers, with numerous cliffs in the gorge itself and in the surrounding areas. The vast number of bolted routes in overhanging, pocketed sandstone draws climbers from all over the world to "the Red" as it is known. Climbing in the region tends to be done at large number of separate small cliffs. Most climbs are a single pitch and most cliffs are less than  tall. There are numerous traditional and sport climbing routes in region;, although the latter seems to be more dominant. Many cliffs lay within Daniel Boone National Forest; however numerous important cliffs are located on private land and in two privately owned preserves created to allow climbing access:

Hiking and camping

The Red River Gorge is also known for its numerous hiking trails that range in difficulty from beginner to advanced. Over 60 miles of trails, open only to hiking, are maintained by the Forest Service and are located throughout the park (some trails are designated for horses).
Many campgrounds are located in the area. Primitive camping, also known as backpack camping, is permitted in the gorge if an overnight permit is obtained. 
WARNING: Camping is not permitted within 300 feet of any road or designated trail. No camping in rock shelters or within 100 feet of the base of any cliff.

Gallery

File:Creation falls.JPG|Creation Falls
File:RRG Rock Bridge.JPG|Rock Bridge
File:Skybridge_arch_-Red_River_Gorge.jpg|Sky Bridge






