[[Jeffrey Oppenheim]]

CATEGORIES: Neurosurgeons, Living people, 1962 births

Jeffrey Sable Oppenheim, MD  (born January 31, 1962) is an American physician and politician.
He is known for being a neurosurgeon in the state of New York as well as the second Mayor of the Village of Montebello, New York. He is the current President of the Rockland County Board of Health.

Education

Oppenheim received his undergraduate degree in Neuroscience from Princeton University in 1984, finishing his thesis under the mentorship of George Armitage Miller, graduating Summa Cum Laude. He graduated from Cornell University Medical College in 1988 with an M.D. with Honors in Research.  From 1988 to 1994 he trained as a neurosurgeon at the Mount Sinai Hospital in New York, serving as Chief Resident from 1993 to 1994.  He became Board Certified by the American Board of Neurological Surgeons in 1996.

Awards and distinctions

Distinguished Service Award, from the Legislature of Rockland County, September, 2010.co.ny.pdf
Chief, Section of Neurosurgery, Good Samaritan Hospital, Suffern, York. HealthGrades recognized the spine program at Good Samaritan Hospital, under Oppenheim's leadership, with its highest rating: 5 stars.
Oppenheim's publications have included a case report describing the first case of a spinal cord bypass that facilitated partial recovery from a spinal cord transection, using a peripheral nerve transfer.org/doi/full/10.3171/FOC.2009.26.2.E6
Oppenheim's account of the history of neurosurgery at Mt. Sinai Hospital has been adapted by several authors.mssm.edu/departments-and-institutes/neurosurgery/about-us/history

Political interest

Oppenheim was elected to the Board of Trustees in the Village of Montebello in 2003.  The grass roots local political party he founded, Preserve Montebello, took majority control of the Board of Trustees in 2005.  In 2007 he was elected Mayor of the Village.  He is the second Mayor in the history of the Village, which was incorporated in 1986.
Under the Mayor's leadership the Village has become active and engaged in historic preservation, open space acquisition, tree preservation, and has encouraged the use of renewable energy sources.  The Village was the first municipality in Rockland County to be recognized as a "Climate Smart Community" by the NYS DEC., 
He has led the Village in the acquisition of a Community Center, the dedication of several parks, the installation of solar electric panels to serve municipal facilities, a review of the Village's Comprehensive Plan, the renovation of Village Hall, and a reduction in the size of the budget. He instituted a regular newsletter, broadcast of Board meetings on television, and open public comment at the beginning and end of every meeting.  Mayor Oppenheim instituted the first of its kind traffic calming program which allows citizens to petition the Board for the installation of speed humps on public roads.villageofmontebello.pdf  In the first 4 years of this program, speed humps were installed on 3 streets.  Taxes in the Village of Montebello, having the lowest rate of any Village in the Town of Ramapo, were not raised in either 2010, 2011 or 2013.
Oppenheim serves as the President of the Rockland County Board of Health.  In this capacity, he lobbied the County Legislature for a local law prohibiting cigarette smoking in cars when children are present.  The law was unanimously passed by the legislature and signed into law by the County Executive in 2007.
Oppenheim was a delegate to the Republican National Convention in 2012 
In 2013 he was named "Businessman of the Year" by the Rockland County Republican Party.

Philanthropic interest

From 2004–2009, Oppenheim served on the Board of Trustees of Good Samaritan Hospital.  During his tenure the hospital established an open heart surgical program.
Oppenheim serves on the Board of Trustees of the American Jewish Historical Society.

Personal life

Oppenheim has been married to Ann Oppenheim (née Harrisburg) since 1992. Ann was a Managing Director and a Distressed Private Claims Trader/Salesperson at M.J. Whitman Senior Debt Corporation, an investment banking concern in New York City until 1994. Ann received her undergraduate degree cum laudé in economics and government from Bowdoin College. She serves on the Board of Trustees for the Suffern Free Library and the Development Committee for the Edward Hopper House Art Center in Nyack, NY. Currently, Ann is an artist. They have three children, Samuel, Gabrielle, and Julius. The eldest, Samuel (b. 1994) is studying at Massachusetts Institute of Technology, class of 2016. Gabrielle (b. 1996) and Julius (b. 1997) are both studying at Hackley School in Tarrytown, New York, classes of 2014 and 2015, respectively.






