[[South Ossetian presidential election, 2011]]

CATEGORIES: Elections in South Ossetia, 2011 elections in Europe, 2011 in Georgia (country), 2011 in South Ossetia

Presidential elections were held in South Ossetia on 13 November 2011.mherrera.htm A referendum was held on the same day.

Candidates

Incumbent president Eduard Kokoity was constitutionally barred from serving a third term in office. Attempts were made to call a referendum to change the constitution, but this was blocked by the Supreme Court. Another attempt to change the constitution by a two-thirds majority in parliament was blocked by parliamentary chairman and Communist Party of South Ossetia leader Stanislav Kochiev. 
Kokoity himself stated he had no intention in seeking a third term,
In the end, 17 candidates were registered by the electoral commission, including former Prime minister Merab Chigoev, former education minister Alla Dzhioyeva and incumbent Emergencies Minister Anatoly Bibilov.
Anatoly Bibilov claimed to be backed by Russia., Kremlin favorite faces run-off in South Ossetia elections, Deutsche Welle, 14 November 2011 A letter in his support from Vladimir Putin was read in an election meeting, several United Russia members of parliament visited the republic and expressed their support for Bibilov, the ruling Unity party's candidate.Retrieved: 22 April 2012. Alla Dzhioyeva received support from Dzambolat Tedeev, the Russian freestyle wrestling team's coach, who was on 13 October expelled from South Ossetia on October 14 after being denied registration,Djambolat Tedeev expelled from South Ossetia,Caucasian Knot, 13 October 2011. and Anatoly Barankevich, former minister of defence of South Ossetia, who both opposed incumbent president Eduard Kokoity, a former member of the Soviet Union's national wrestling team. Dzhioyeva campaigned on the deficit of fuel, lack of cellular network in parts of the republic and misappropriated funds provided for the post-war reconstruction of South Ossetia by Russia.Кандидатка против всех (Candidate Against All), Gazeta.ru, 14 November 2011

Election day

Polling stations were open from 8:00 until 20:00. There were 86 such stations, located all over the country, as well as in Moscow and Sukhumi. Special polling stations were opened for South Ossetian citizens living in North Ossetia–Alania. In South Ossetia, a turnout of 50% + 1 vote is required for an election to be valid. This threshold was reached around 16:00.

Results

First round

The two most successful participants were Bibilov, with 25.44% of votes cast, and Dzhioyeva, with a 25.37% share of the vote. They went through to a runoff on 27 November, which was needed as no candidate had achieved a majority in the first round.

Second round

Preliminary results released on 27 November show Dzhioyeva in the lead, with 8955 votes to Bibilov's 6205. A new election date was agreed upon for 25 March 2012.




