[[Football in the Philippines]]

CATEGORIES: Football in the Philippines, Sports in the Philippines

Association football is an emerging sport in the Philippines, played by amateur and professional Filipino football clubs. The Philippine Football Federation (PFF) is the governing body of international football in the country.
Football is a popular sport among the country's Southeast Asian neighbors, yet it is overshadowed by basketball, which is the most popular sport in the Philippines.  However, football has a long history in the archipelago, dating back to more than 100 years ago when Paulino Alcántara became the first Filipino and Asian player to play for a European club.  He made his debut as a striker at the age of 15 at Barcelona, which made him the club's youngest and second highest goalscorer behind Lionel Messi.
To promote and revive the sport, some international and local football clubs helped the Philippines. FIFA also assisted the country by building and upgrading facilities including the creation of the PFF headquarters in 2009. As well, the establishment of the United Football League (UFL) and the National Men's Club Championship to provide more local competitions.
The Philippines national football team is the representative of men's international football for the Philippines. They won the Far Eastern Games once (in 1913) and became a two-time Philippine Peace Cup champion (in 2012 and 2013). The Philippines women's national football team, representing women's international football in the Philippines, achieved a third-place (bronze) finish at the 1985 Southeast Asian Games.
There are many stadiums that can be found in the Philippines like the Rizal Memorial Stadium in Manila which is the national stadium of the country. It is also the home stadium of the Philippine football team. Meanwhile, the Panaad Stadium in Bacolod is the secondary venue for the Philippines.

History

Introduction

Around 1895, When the war broke out, those football teams disbanded and abandoned the city, either to save themselves and their families from the bombardment they expected at any moment, or to cast their lot with the Filipino troops outside the city limits.  After the war when peace reigned again, six football teams were formed, among them the Manila Sporting Club, the Paris Club, and the Manila Jockey Club. In 1906, the Sandow football team was established (further developed as Sandow Athletic Club in 1909).
On 15 October 1907, the first official football match was held in Manila, with the celebration of the opening of the Philippine Assembly. The trophy, a silver cup donated by 27th President of the United States William Howard Taft, was won by the Sandow Athletic Club.  Soon, more clubs were formed.  In 1910, the Bohemian Sporting Club was organized and began to train football players. In 1920, the Circulo Social Deportivo was established and produced a football team. To further propagate the love of the sport and to regulate soccer championship contests, all football teams within the city banded themselves together and organized the Philippine Amateur Football Association in 1907 (now the Philippine Football Federation), and held its first championship in 1921 with Bohemian Sporting Club as champions.
On 25 February 1912, Paulino Alcántara was the first Filipino and Asian footballer to play for a European club. Alcántara made his debut for Barcelona at the age of 15 against Català Sporting Club, where he scored his first hat-trick.
However, the popularity of "The Beautiful Game"

Revival

=Help from foreign countries and clubs=

There have been four projects accepted by the Fédération Internationale de Football Association (FIFA),
A number of foreign countries and clubs have offered to help promote and popularise the sport within the country. In 2010, the German Football Association (DFB) recommended the services of former Rwanda U-17 coach Michael Weiß as coach of the "Azkals", a nickname for the national team, after Dan Palami's three-day visit in Frankfurt. The DFB gave the Philippine Football Federation a grant of € 
On 18 October 2011, officials from the Real Madrid Foundation visited the Philippines to sign an agreement with local non-governmental organizations (NGO) to open a social and sports academy for youths in Mindanao to 70 poor children with under age 14.
Another Spanish club, Barcelona, conducted a camp in Muntinlupa named "Barcelona Escola Camp 2013". It began on 17 April and ended on 21 April 2013. Two coaches from Barcelona Escola, Joseph Moratalla and Jordi Blanco, came to the Philippines. The camp was organized by Team Socceroo.
After the destruction of Typhoon Haiyan in the country, FIFA gave the PFF $ 1 million to rebuild and rehabilitate damaged football facilities.
On 3 December 2011, the Philippines faced U.S. club LA Galaxy as a part of their Asia-Pacific Tour in the Rizal Memorial Stadium, which Galaxy won 6–1.
Manchester United with its sponsor, a shampoo brand Clear made a "multi-year partnership" as they will hold training camps facilitated by coaches in the sport. The Manchester United Soccer School will teach 32 amateur footballers in an "intense and rigorous" program. Tryouts will be held in March 2014.

=Development of international and local competitions=

In 2008, the Filipino Premier League (FPL) was established as the top-flight competition in the Philippines. It featured eight clubs from the National Capital Region. The PFF also planned a Visayas and Mindanao FPL tournament in 2009, which never materialized. The first and only champion of the league, which was cancelled at the season's conclusion, was the Philippine Army.
Shortly after the dissolution of the Filipino Premier League, the Football Alliance sought to renew the interest of Filipinos in football. The Alliance entered into discussions with the United Football Clubs Association for the possibility of establishing another top-flight football competition in the Philippines. Instead of creating a whole system and competition, the United Football Clubs Association agreed to partner with the Football Alliance in operating the United Football League (UFL), a semi-professional league.
By 2015 or 2016, the PFF seeks to establish a professional national football league, which would be supported by the Asian Football Confederation (AFC) and FIFA. It was proposed that the league will have at least 10 clubs—four clubs in Luzon, four in Visayas, and two in Mindanao. The United Football League is currently the de facto top tier national league in the country. As the league is under the National Capital Region Football Association, the league cannot be officially defined as a national league.
The Philippine Football Federation has not been able to organize a national tournament since 2007, when they staged the PFF Centennial Men's Open Championship due to "variety of reasons". In January 2011, Smart Communications approached the PFF with an offer to finance a new local football cup competition, the PFF National Men's Club Championship. The proposed partnership was set to last 10 years, with Smart releasing ₱ 80 million in funds with the aim of providing more playing opportunities for football players, and the eventual creation of a national cup.
Since 2012, the Chinese Taipei Football Association (CTFA) requested if the PFF can host the third staging of the Long Teng Cup in the Philippines.

=National team performance=

The inaugural season of the Far Eastern Games (FEG) in 1913 was the first championship held in Manila.  The tournament provided the first matches in international football for all three nations, including the Republic of China and Japan. In 1938, the FEG was cancelled due to the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War.
The Philippine team competed in the Asian Games numerous times, making their debut in 1954 when the Philippines hosted the tournament.  The Filipinos were in Group A with South Vietnam and Chinese Taipei.  All games was held in Rizal Memorial Stadium.  Their matches were both losses, resulting in early elimination. Beginning in 2002, an age division of under-23 was approved for men, which is the same as in football competitions in the Olympic Games.  The Philippines U-23 has never yet made an appearance at the Asian Games since 2002.
The Philippine team is yet to qualify at the AFC Asian Cup.  They have played at the AFC Challenge Cup, which serves as a qualifier for the Asian Cup.
The Philippine team has participated in minor tournaments such as the Merdeka Tournament in 1962, 1971 and 1972, where each was finished in the group stages.
The Philippines has not made an appearance in the World Cup.  However, in 2011, the Philippines made history in the FIFA World Cup qualification – AFC First round when they defeated Sri Lanka in the second leg 4–0 (5–1 agg.), advancing to the next round for the first time.
In the national team's 2013 season, they capped off the year by finishing 127th in the FIFA World Rankings as their new all-time high.

United Football League

In the 2014 season, the United Football League is divided into two divisions, with nine teams in Division I and 12 teams in Division II. The 2009 UFL Cup was created to determine the composition of teams that will be playing in the league.
Division I clubs will face their opponents three times (formerly twice) for league play, which it will run a month longer than the previous year's league. Meanwhile, the rule will not apply for Division II teams, as they retain the double round robin format.  After the home and away fixtures are concluded, a league table will be used to determine which teams will be champions, relegated, or promoted.
When a club places first in the standings in Division I, they will become champions. However, if they rank first in the standings in Division II, they will be the winners and will receive promotion to Division I.  If the team places last in the table in Division I, they will be automatically relegated to Division II.  Every season, the UFL regularly organizes a promotion-relegation playoff match, in which the second rank team in Division II and the eighth-placed team in Division I will face off in a two legged match. The winning team will be determined by an aggregate score.  If the Division I team wins the series, they will retain their place in Division I. If the Division II team wins, they will receive a promotion to Division I and the losing team will be relegated.

Qualification for men's Asian competitions

In the AFC President's Cup,

National teams

The Philippine national men's football team represents the Philippines in men's international football.
The women's team, also known as the "Malditas," represents the country in women's international football and in the Olympics.

Stadiums

The Rizal Memorial Stadium in Manila is the national stadium of the Philippines, as well as the home venue of the national team. It has served as the main stadium of the 1954 Asian Games and a former venue for the United Football League.  Established in 1934, the stadium has a capacity of 12,873.
The Emperador Stadium in Taguig, the main stadium of the UFL, has an all-weather football pitch made of artificial turf, developed by real estate developer Megaworld Corporation and constructed by All Asia Structures, Inc.

Notes




