[[Reginald Applin]]

CATEGORIES: 1869 births, 1957 deaths, Conservative Party (UK) MPs, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, UK MPs 1924–29, UK MPs 1931–35, Lancashire Fusiliers officers, 14th King's Hussars officers, Machine Gun Corps officers, People educated at Sherborne School, People from Exeter, North Borneo Chartered Company administrators

Lieutenant-Colonel Reginald Vincent Kempenfelt Applin DSO, OBE (11 April 1869 – 5 April 1957) was a British military officer who took a prominent part in the development of machine gun tactics in the British Army. He later entered politics, initially in two minor right wing parties before becoming a Conservative Party member of parliament.

British North Borneo Company

He was the eldest son of Captain Vincent Jesson Applin, Military Train, of "Exeview", Alphington, near Exeter. After eight years service Applin had reached the rank of Captain Superintendent in the British North Borneo Armed Constabulary, but was forced to resign due to ill health and returned to England. He wrote an account of his years in North Borneo entitled Across the Seven Seas.

Military service

Second Boer War

In November 1898 Applin obtained a commission as a captain in the 6th (Militia) Battalion, Lancashire Fusiliers.

Development of machine gun tactics

In July 1905 he transferred to the 14th (King's) Hussars.

First World War

During the First World War Applin became an instructor in the use of the machine gun, and was attached to the Machine Gun Corps Training Centre in July 1916.
In January 1919 Applin was given the brevet rank of lieutenant-colonel and in February was made commanding officer of the 14th Hussars. He retired from the army in January 1921.

Politics

With the ending of his military career, Applin entered politics. After making two unsuccessful attempts to enter parliament with minor parties, he became the Conservative MP for Enfield.

Dartford by-election 1920

Applin was originally a member of the National Party, a xenophobic party that broke away from the Conservatives in 1917. He stood at the parliamentary by-election at Dartford in April 1920. The party came in a poor fourth place, with Applin losing his deposit. The intervention of the National Party and an Independent candidate split the Conservative vote and allowed John Edmund Mills of the Labour Party to secure an unexpected victory.

Abbey by-election 1921

In August 1921 a parliamentary byelection was held for the constituency of Westminster Abbey. Applin stood as the candidate of Anti-Waste League, a right-wing party formed by Lord Rothermere in opposition to the spending plans of the Lloyd George Coalition government. Such was the unpopularity of the government that all three candidates, including the winner Brigadier-General John Nicholson of the Conservative Party (who formed part of the coalition), claimed to be "anti-waste". Applin finished in second place, receiving 34.9% of the votes cast.

Member of Parliament for Enfield

In September 1924 Applin was chosen as the Conservative Party's candidate to contest the north London seat of Enfield. He retired from parliament at the 1935 general election.

Later life

In 1935 he emigrated to South Africa. He died at his home in Howick, Natal in April 1957 aged 87. His medals were auctioned in 2009.






