[[AMA Grand National Championship]]

CATEGORIES: Motorcycle racing series, American Motorcyclist Association, Dirt track racing in the United States

The AMA Grand National Championship is an American motorcycle racing series. The race series, founded and sanctioned by the American Motorcyclist Association (AMA) in 1954, originally encompassed five distinct forms of competitions including; mile dirt track races, half-mile, short-track, TT steeplechase and road races.

History

In 1932, the AMA sanctioned a racing class called the Class A Dirt Track championship allowing for motorcycle manufacturers to enter prototype machinery. During the Second World War, there were no championships held between 1942 and 1945. 
From 1946 to 1953, the AMA Grand National Champion was crowned based on the results of a single race, the Springfield Mile held at the Illinois State Fairgrounds Racetrack. In 1954, the Grand National Championship series was introduced featuring five different types of competitions. Four of the competitions were held on dirt tracks while, the fifth was held on asphalt paved courses. With the demise of the Indian motorcycle company in 1953, the Harley Davidson factory was left to dominate the series. Harley Davidson rider Joe Leonard won the first Grand National Championship in 1954 and won the title two more times before moving on to a career in auto racing. Carroll Resweber became the first four-time champion, winning four consecutive championships for Harley Davidson from 1958 to 1961. In the 1960s, British manufacturers seeking to bolster sales in the burgeoning American motorcycle market, began to compete in the championship. Dick Mann won the national title for BSA in 1963, marking the first victory for a foreign manufacturer.
When the Yamaha team withdrew from the Grand National championship after the 1977 season, Harley Davidson was left once again to dominate the series. By 1983, the Grand National Championship had become the best attended form of dirt track racing in America, either on two wheels or four wheels.
In the 1970s and on into the 1980s, the Grand National Championship proved to be a fertile training ground for world champion road racers as, AMA dirt track racers such as Kenny Roberts, Freddie Spencer, Eddie Lawson and Wayne Rainey all went on to win the 500cc road racing world championship. The motorcycle road racing technology of the late 1970s featured engines with power in excess of what the frames and tires of the day could handle.50 Years Of Moto Grand Prix (1st edition). Hazelton Publishing Ltd, 1999. ISBN 1-874557-83-7 The resulting tire spin created a style of riding more reminiscent of dirt track riding, where sliding the rear tire to one side is used as a method to steer the motorcycle around a corner. This proved to be a great advantage to American dirt track racers who were accustomed to sliding their motorcycles. As Grand Prix motorcycle racing evolved into its current MotoGP formula with electronic traction control limiting rear wheel sliding, the advantage once held by former dirt trackers has been diminished.
After the departure of the Honda team in 1987, the Harley Davidson factory racing team dominated the series with rider Scott Parker winning nine national championships within an eleven-year period. While the Grand National Championship is no longer the premier racing series in the United States, it continues to have a loyal following.

Events

List of champions






