[[Fasliyev]]

CATEGORIES: Racehorses bred in the United States, Racehorses trained in Ireland, Cartier Award winners, Undefeated racehorses, 1997 racehorse births, 2013 racehorse deaths

Fasliyev (9 February 1997 –9 July 2013) was a retired Thoroughbred racehorse and active sire who was bred in the United States and trained in Ireland. He was the highest-rated European two-year-old of 1999 and was named European Champion Two-Year-Old at the Cartier Racing Awards. He retired undefeated in five races after suffering a training injury when being prepared for the Dewhurst Stakes. He died in Japan at sixteen years.

Background

Fasliyev was bred in Kentucky by Harold Harrison. Harrison is based in Winder, Georgia, but sends his mares to breed at the Dixiana Farm, near Lexington, Kentucky. She also produced Butterfly Cove, the dam of the 2010 European Champion Two-year old Filly Misty for Me.
Fasliyev was sent by Harrison to the Keeneland sales as a yearling in July 1998. He was bought for $450,000 by the bloodstock agent Dermot "Demi" O'Byrne, acting on behalf of Michael Tabor and the Coolmore organisation.
He was sent into training with Aidan O'Brien at Ballydoyle. He was ridden in all of his races by Michael Kinane.

Racing career

Fasliyev made his debut in a five furlong maiden race at Leopardstown in April. He led from the start, and went clear in the final furlong to win by three lengths from Desert Sky in "impressive" style at odds of 4/7.
His first real test came at Royal Ascot where he faced several previous winners in an eighteen runner field for the Group Three Coventry Stakes. The result, however, was much the same, with Fasliyev being sent into the lead by Kinane in the early stages and pulling clear inside the final furlong to win by two and a half lengths from the future Hong Kong Champions Mile winner Red Pepper.
In August, Fasliyev established himself as Europe's leading two-year-old with two Group One wins. At Leopardstown he started at odds of 2/7 for the Phoenix Stakes and led from the start to win easily, despite hanging to the left in the closing stages.
Three weeks later he was sent to France for the Prix Morny at Deauville. Only two French colts, including the Prix de Cabourg winner Harbour Island, opposed him, but the challenge was provided by a strong English-trained Godolphin entry including the Group race winners Bachir (Richmond Stakes), Warm Heart (Norfolk Stakes), and City On A Hill (July Stakes). In  the early stages, Fasliyev had to dispute the lead with Harbour Island, but took control after a quarter of a mile and in the closing stages he pulled clear. Although Kinane eased the colt down in the final stages he crossed the line four lengths ahead of Warm Heart.
Fasliyev's final start of the season was scheduled to be the Dewhurst Stakes at Newmarket in October. Two days before the race, Fasliyev suffered a fractured pastern when cantering in the paddock at Ballydoyle. Surgery, which involved the insertion of five metal pins into the leg,

Race record

Assessment

When the International Classifiaction for the two-year-old on 1999 was released in January 2000, Fasliyev was rated the best of his generation in Europe with a rating of 125, five pounds clear of Distant View and Giant's Causeway.
He had previously been named European Champion Two-year-old Colt at the Cartier Racing Awards.

Stud career

Fasliyev was retired to the Coolmore Stud at Fethard, County Tipperary. In 2007 he was sold to Japanese interests and stood at the Yushun Stallion Station.
Fasliyev has sired the winners of more than four hundred races. His only Group One winner has been Carry On Katie (Cheveley Park Stakes), but his best product has probably been the sprinter Chineur who won the King's Stand Stakes when it was still a Group Two race.

Pedigree




