[[That Darn Priest]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 television episodes, Two and a Half Men episodes

"That Darn Priest" is the de facto season finale of the eighth season of the American sitcom Two and a Half Men and the final appearance of Charlie Sheen as Charlie Harper. The episode is the 16th and final episode of the season, though it was meant to be the ninth to last episode, but the season was cut short due to Sheen's problems related to drug and alcohol abuse. CBS and Warner Bros. later announced that Ashton Kutcher would join the show's cast as Sheen's replacement.

Plot

Alan (Jon Cryer) goes to a church to attempt to have his sins forgiven, after scamming Charlie (Charlie Sheen), Herb (Ryan Stiles), Evelyn (Holland Taylor), and Berta (Conchata Ferrell) out of thousands of dollars. However, when Father Shaunassey (Dakin Matthews) suggests he tell his family, Alan rejects the offer. Meanwhile, Charlie has grown tired of having to sneak around during his controversial affair with his stalker, Rose (Melanie Lynskey), despite the fact that her husband, Manny, will arrive home that evening. Charlie suggests that he can take a weekend away with Rose, much to her delight. Alan continues to see his evil side which encourages him to continue collecting money from his relatives. Alan attempts to admit the truth to Charlie, but Charlie reveals that Rose is willing to invest and Alan decides to continue lying.
Alan allows Rose to invest, but is surprised when Rose shows up at his office and realizes the scam. Alan fears that Rose will tell on him and decides to blackmail her about her cheating on Manny. While at Rose's house attempting to blackmail her, Alan discovers that Manny is a mannequin and that Rose is playing Charlie along. Rose offers to give Alan enough money to pay everyone back, but Alan refuses to betray Charlie and leaves. Alan returns home, only to find Berta wanting her money back. While Alan ponders whether to take Rose's money with his evil side, Charlie arrives announcing his intention to propose to Rose in Paris. Charlie insults Alan about moving out after Alan tells Charlie it is a bad idea. Alan decides to take Rose's money and keeps the truth to himself. Despite a close call with Charlie finding Manny in Rose's closet, Charlie fails to realize that Manny is Rose's husband. The episode ends when Charlie departs for Paris with Rose, while Alan pays back the money that he scammed after he received payment from Rose. While talking with his dark side again, Alan is outraged when his light side, a version of himself wearing women's clothes, appears in the toaster and starts criticizing his dress sense. When Alan asks his light side if there are anymore versions of himself, the light side asks: "What more do you need?".

Production

On January 27, 2011, Sheen was taken to Cedars-Sinai Medical Center by paramedics. Sheen's representative said he was suffering from "severe abdominal pains.""Charlie Sheen Rushed to Hospital for Stomach Pains", People, January 27, 2011 On January 28, Sheen began undergoing a substance rehabilitation program in his home"Charlie Sheen Gets Personalized Rehab Program", People, January 31, 2011 and CBS announced that the show would go on hiatus."Charlie Sheen Goes to Rehab", People, January 28, 2011 The network subsequently announced that the current season, already under way and due to shoot its last four episodes, had been canceled after Sheen made derogatory comments about the series' creator Chuck Lorre on the February 24 edition of a radio broadcast hosted by Alex Jones."Two and a Half Men axed after rant leaves Sheen looking a proper Charlie", The Guardian, February 25, 2011 On February 28, it was reported that Warner Bros. officially banned Sheen from entering the studio production lot.
On February 28, 2011, during a national television interview in his home, Sheen publicly demanded a 50% raise for the show. "Sheen demands 50 percent raise for 'Two and a Half Men'," Today (February 28, 2011). Accessed March 1, 2011. Already the highest-paid actor on television, Sheen demanded $3 million per episode, claiming that in comparison to the amount that the series was making, he was "underpaid." He later retracted that demand. A March 3, 2011, telephone survey of 1,000 people found that 71% of them had an unfavorable impression of Sheen and 16% had a positive opinion of him.

Reception

The episode saw relatively low ratings in comparison to others in the season, with 14.51 tuning in. "Three Hookers and a Philly Cheesesteak" which had aired the previous week, had scored nearly a million more with 15.15 viewers.
The episode received positive reviews upon airing, with viewers unaware it was to be the final episode of the season. Eric Hochberger of TV Fanatic enjoyed the episode and noted that Cryer's portrayal of Alan's dark side as a highlight.




