[[Jeffrey A. Parker]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, Living people, People from Indianapolis, Indiana, American chief executives

Jeffrey A. "Jeff" Parker  is a non-profit CEO and education philanthropist who serves as the Chief Executive Officer of DentaQuest Healthcare Delivery Group.

Early life and education

Jeffrey Parker was born in Indianapolis, Indiana to William and Patricia Parker. He graduated from Sycamore High School (Cincinnati, Ohio). His father, William, was a division president for Kroger Foods. He went on to receive a bachelor's degree in Political Science and a Masters in Public Administration from Jacksonville State University (JSU) in Jacksonville, Alabama. In addition to his studies at JSU, he earned an additional 18 graduate hours in Marketing from Mercer University in Georgia.

Corporate career

After graduation, Parker worked in management in the consumer packaged goods industry for General Foods Corporation, Schering-Plough, and Con-Agra. He then worked in Executive Management positions at Sara Lee, Foster Farms and Crider Foods. "Health Care, Meet Business 101", Business Alabama. July 2011. "Sarrell Dental: Beyond The Operatory", KDA Today. July/August 2012.
In 2000, he accepted a position as Executive in Residence at Jacksonville State University's College of Commerce and Business Administration (A position he held through December 2013). 
In 2005, Parker was asked to take over a small community dental center run by The Calhoun County Community Foundation. Upon Parker's arrival as CEO, the clinic separated from the foundation and was named after its founder, Dr. Warren Sarrell, as "Sarrell Regional Dental Centers for Public Health". "Town and Gown", The Jacksonville News. May 6, 2005.
As CEO, Parker oversaw the clinic's growth from serving a few thousand children in its first year to treating 105,000 patient visits in 2011.  By March 2013, Sarrell operated 14 dental clinics and a mobile dental bus, employing 56 dentists and 45 hygienists.

PBS Frontline

In the June 26, 2012 episode of PBS's Frontline series titled "Dollars and Dentists," Frontline correspondent Miles O'Brien examined different models of dental services that were attempting to address the access to care issue faced by the majority of Medicaid recipients in America. 
Jeffrey Parker was interviewed to discuss how Sarrell Dental had become one of the few working models nationwide to see growing success. Parker offered the Sarrell Dental model as a replicable system that could offer a critical component to national oral healthcare reform, while also inviting other dentists to learn from their success: "Who can be against a model that is eliminating decay? ... they need to come see it, they need to adopt it, it works."

Education philanthropy

In 1995, Parker established the Jeffrey A. Parker Scholarship at Jacksonville State University. This scholarship provides college tuition and selection is based on academic merit, university involvement, and financial need. To qualify, candidates must hold senior status in the JSU College of Business. As of March 2013, more than 70 students had received financial aid from the fund.

Oral Healthcare Reform

Parker's push for oral healthcare reform brought national attention to the innovations at Sarrell. In an article on Forbes, Changemakers' Kristie Wang explained: "Sarrell Dental & Eye Centers has done something that many in the U.S. health industry thought was impossible—providing dental care to children covered by Medicaid, while running a sustainable business and lowering the cost of care to the government." Parker was asked to speak in a number of national forums as an expert on operational efficiency and effectiveness. Since achieving national recognition, Parker has been asked to address The Kentucky Dental Association, The National Academy for State Health Policy, The Pew Center For The States, The California Dental Association, The California HealthCare Foundation, and The National Institute For Oral Health.

DentaQuest Affiliation

As of September 2013 Sarrell Dental and DentaQuest Care Group of Massachusetts have announced they are forming an affiliation to advance their shared mission to improve oral health. Parker will now hold the title of Chief Executive Officer of DentaQuest Healthcare Delivery. As Parker states, "this affiliation represents a validation of our model of care and demonstrates an alignment between our two organizations. Through this affiliation, DentaQuest and Sarrell Dental will seek to ensure more people have access to the dental care they need.""DentaQuest Care Group and Sarrell Dental Form Affiliation". Sarrell Dental Center. September 19, 2013. 

HealthLeaders 20

In the December 2013 issue of HealthLeaders Magazine titled "HealthLeaders20," Jeffrey Parker was selected as one of the twenty individuals who are changing healthcare for the better. Parker is the first ever to be selected from the dental field. The only other Alabama resident who has ever been named in the HealthLeaders20 is the famed orthopedic surgeon Dr. James Andrews (physician). "Making Margin While Serving the Poor". HealthLeaders Magazine. December 2013 Issue. 

Ashoka Fellow

Parker was recognized by Ashoka: Innovators for the Public as an Ashoka Fellow in February 2014, for his work as a "social entrepreneur". He is the first person in the USA to be honored from the oral health field.  Ashoka: Innovators for the Public 

Forbes.com

Jeff Parker was interviewed on February 26, 2014 by Forbes.  The Gaps Left By Business And Government To Ensure Healthcare Delivery

Family

In addition to two sisters, Parker has one brother, William Douglas Parker, who is the current Chief Executive Officer of American Airlines.

Publications





 


