[[Festival]]

CATEGORIES: Festivals, Social events

A festival or gala is an event ordinarily staged by a community, centering on and celebrating some unique aspect of that community and its traditions, often marked as a local or national holiday, mela or eid.
Festivals often serve to meet specific purposes, especially in regards to commemoration and/or thanksgiving. They are associated with celebration and may also provide entertainment, which was particularly important to local communities before the advent of mass-produced entertainment. These celebrations offered a sense of belonging for religious, social, or geographical groups. Festivals that focus on cultural or specifically ethnic topics also seek to inform members of their traditions and the involvement of community elders sharing stories and experience provides a means for unity among families.
A festival is a special occasion of feasting or celebration, usually with a religious focus. Aside from religion, and sometimes folklore, another significant origin is agricultural. Food (and consequently agriculture) is so vital that many festivals are associated with harvest time. Religious commemoration and thanksgiving for good harvests are blended in events that take place in autumn such as Halloween in the northern hemisphere and Easter in the southern.
In Ancient Greece and Rome, festivals such as Saturnalia were closely associated with social organisation and political processes as well as religion.

Etymology

The word "festival" was originally used as an adjective from the late fourteenth century, deriving from Latin via Old French."festival, adj. and n.". OED Online. March 2014. Oxford University Press. Accessed April 16, 2014. In Middle English, a "festival dai" was a religious holiday.) at the Middle English Dictionary. Accessed April 16, 2014. Its first recorded used as a noun was in 1589 (as "Festifall"). Feast first came into usage as a noun circa 1200,"feast, n.". OED Online. March 2014. Oxford University Press. Accessed April 16, 2014. and its first recorded use as a verb was circa 1300."feast, v.". OED Online. March 2014. Oxford University Press. Accessed April 16, 2014. The term "feast" is also used in common secular parlance as a synonym for any large or elaborate meal. When used as in the meaning of a festival, most often refers to a religious festival rather than a film or art festival. In the Philippines and many other former Spanish colonies, the Spanish word fiesta is used to denote a communal religious feast to honor a patron saint.

Traditions

Many festivals have religious origins and entwine cultural and religious significance in traditional activities. The most important religious festivals such as Christmas, Hanukkah, Diwali and Eid al-Adha serve to mark out the year. Others, such as harvest festivals, celebrate seasonal change. Events of historical significance, such as important military victories or other nation-building events also provide the impetus for a festival. An early example is the festival established by Ancient Egyptian Pharaoh Rameses III celebrating his victory over the Libyans.  In many countries, royal holidays commemorate dynastic events just as agricultural holidays are about harvests. Festivals are often commemorated annually.
There are numerous types of festivals in the world and most countries celebrate important events or traditions with traditional cultural events and activities. Most culminate in the consumption of specially prepared food (showing the connection to "feasting") and they bring people together. Festivals are also strongly associated with national holidays. Lists of national festivals are published to make participation easier.
[/ref]

Types of festivals

Religious festivals

Among many religions, a feast is a set of celebrations in honour of God or gods.
In the Christian liturgical calendar there are two principal feasts, properly known as the Feast of the Nativity of our Lord (Christmas) and the Feast of the Resurrection, (Easter). In the Catholic, Eastern Orthodox, and Anglican liturgical calendars there are a great number of lesser feasts throughout the year commemorating saints, sacred events or doctrines.
Buddhist religious festivals, such as Esala Perahera are held in Sri Lanka and Thailand.

Arts festivals

Among the many offspring of general arts festivals are also more specific types of festivals, including ones that showcase intellectual or creative achievement such as science festivals, literary festivals and music festivals.  Sub-categories include comedy festivals, rock festivals, jazz festivals and buskers festivals; poetry festivals,Some such as such as Cúirt International Festival of Literature started as a poetry festival and then broadened in scope. theatre festivals, and storytelling festivals; and re-enactment festivals such as Renaissance fairs.
Film festivals involve the screenings of several different films, and are usually held annually. Some of the most significant film festivals include the Berlin International Film Festival, the Venice Film Festival and the Cannes Film Festival.

Food and drink festivals

A food festival is an event celebrating food or drink. These often highlight the output of producers from a certain region. Some food festivals are focused on a particular item of food, such as the National Peanut Festival in the United States, or the Galway International Oyster Festival in Ireland. There are also specific beverage festivals, such as the famous Oktoberfest in Germany for beer. Many countries hold festivals to celebrate wine. One example is the global celebration of the arrival of Beaujolais nouveau, which involves shipping the new wine around the world for its release date on the third Thursday of November each year. Both Beaujolais nouveau and the Japanese rice wine sake are associated with harvest time.

Seasonal and harvest festivals

Seasonal festivals, such as Beltane are determined by the solar and the lunar calendars and by the cycle of the seasons, especially because of its affect food effect on food supply, as a result of which there is a wide range of ancient and modern harvest festivals. Ancient Egyptians relied upon the seasonal inundation caused by the Nile River, a form of irrigation, which provided fertile land for crops.
Midsummer or St John's Day, is an example of a seasonal festival, related to the feast day of a Christian saint as well as a celebration of the time of the summer solstice in the northern hemisphere, where it is particularly important in Sweden. Winter carnivals also provide the opportunity to utilise to celebrate creative or sporting activities requiring snow and ice.





Further reading




