[[Born This Way (song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 singles, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs number-one singles, Billboard Dance/Mix Show Airplay number-one singles, Billboard Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) number-one singles, Canadian Hot 100 number-one singles, Dutch Top 40 number-one singles, Irish Singles Chart number-one singles, Japan Hot 100 number-one singles, Lady Gaga songs, LGBT-related songs, Monitor Latino Top Inglés number-one singles, Number-one singles in Australia, Number-one singles in Austria, Ultratop 50 Singles (Flanders) number-one singles, Number-one singles in Finland, Number-one singles in Germany, Number-one singles in New Zealand, Number-one singles in Poland, Number-one singles in Spain, Number-one singles in Sweden, Number-one singles in Switzerland, Singles certified quadruple platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association, Singles certified platinum by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry, Singles certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan, Singles certified gold by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry of Sweden, Singles certified platinum by the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry of Switzerland, Singles certified platinum by Recorded Music NZ, Singles certified gold by the Productores de Música de España, Songs against racism and xenophobia, Songs written by Lady Gaga, Singles certified gold by the Belgian Entertainment Association, Interscope Records singles, Song recordings produced by Lady Gaga, MTV Video Music Award for Best Female Video, NHK Kōhaku Uta Gassen songs

"Born This Way" is a song by American recording artist Lady Gaga, from her second studio album of the same name. Written by Gaga and Jeppe Laursen, who produced along with Fernando Garibay and DJ White Shadow, it was developed while Gaga was on the road with The Monster Ball Tour. Inspired by the 1990s empowering music for women and the gay community, Gaga explained that "Born This Way" was her freedom song. She sang part of the chorus at the 2010 MTV Video Music Awards in 2010 and announced the song as the lead single from the album. The single was released on February 11, 2011.
The song is backed by rumbling synth sounds, a humming bass and additional chorus percussion, with sole organ toward the end. The lyrics discuss the self-empowerment of minorities including the LGBT community as well as racial minorities, referring to "cholas" and "orients", which drew criticism from Latino and Asian communities. Critics positively reviewed the song, calling it a "club-ready anthem", though it faced criticism for having similarities with Madonna's 1989 single "Express Yourself". The song reached number one in over 25 countries and was her third single to top the US Billboard Hot 100 chart and the 1000th song in history to reach number one. "Born This Way" has sold 8.2 million copies worldwide, becoming one of the best-selling singles of all time.
Nick Knight directed the accompanying music video, which was inspired by painters like Salvador Dalí and Francis Bacon and their  surrealistic images. Gaga is depicted as giving birth to a new race during a prologue. A series of dance sequences later, the video concludes with the view of a city populated by this race. Critics noted cultural references to the work of Madonna, Michael Jackson, Björk, late fashion designer Alexander McQueen, as well as to Greek mythology and surrealism.
Gaga performed the song at the 53rd Grammy Awards after coming out of an incubating vessel. It was also performed during the last leg of The Monster Ball Tour and in television shows such as Saturday Night Live, Dick Clark's New Year's Rockin' Eve and Good Morning America. The song was treated with different remixes, including a Country Road version recorded by Gaga herself and another by Indian production duo Salim and Sulaiman Merchant. Alice Cooper, Madonna, Katy Perry, Maria Aragon, and the cast of the TV series Glee have covered the song.

Background

In 2010, Lady Gaga was touring for her second world tour, The Monster Ball. At that time she started developing ideas for her second studio album, Born This Way. Gaga wanted to record her own freedom song, and explained with Billboard her inspiration behind the song:
 
 "I want to write my this-is-who-the-fuck-I-am anthem, but I don't want it to be hidden in poetic wizardry and metaphors. I want it to be an attack, an assault on the issue because I think, especially in today's music, everything gets kind of washy sometimes and the message gets hidden in the lyrical play. Harkening back to the early '90s, when Madonna, En Vogue, Whitney Houston and TLC were making very empowering music for women and the gay community and all kind of disenfranchised communities, the lyrics and the melodies were very poignant and very gospel and very spiritual and I said, 'That's the kind of record I need to make. That's the record that's going to shake up the industry.' It's not about the track. It's not about the production. It's about the song. Anyone could sing 'Born This Way'. It could've been anyone."

On the  43rd episode of her web video series, Transmission Gagavision, Gaga told the interviewer that the greatest challenge she faced while writing "Born This Way" was how she could leave her insecurities behind her, and become confident. "'Born This Way' is who I am. An artist in a constant state of half-fantasy/half-reality at all times," she added.

Artwork and release

On February 8, 2011, Gaga tweeted the words "Trois Jours" ("Three Days"), along with a picture of the official single artwork, via TwitPic. Gaga is shown topless in the black-and-white cover art and displays the tattoos on her back. Her hair is air-blown and she wears heavy make-up while sharp edges protrude from her face and shoulders.
Gaga had sung a few lines from the song while accepting the 2010 MTV Video Music Award for Video of the Year, for "Bad Romance".

Composition

"Born This Way" was written by Gaga and Jeppe Laursen (formerly of the band Junior Senior), and produced with Paul Blair (a.k.a. DJ White Shadow) and Fernando Garibay,

The lyrics during the verses talk about empowerment, while the chorus talks about making no apologies and accepting one as themselves. It features the names of LGBT and other minority communities, which was due to the support Gaga had received from the community over the years. She also explained that since The Fame and The Fame Monster did not directly address those communities, "Born This Way" was her chance to create something that not only supported her political and social beliefs, but also empowered her to artistically say, "'I'm not being safe with this record.' I'm not trying to gain new fans. I love the fans I already have, and this is for them."
After the early release of the lyrics, it had garnered criticism from some Asian

Remixes

A number of remixes were commissioned by Interscope Records, to accompany the song. The first set of remixes were done by LA Riots, Chew Fu and DJ White Shadow. Titled Born This Way – The Remixes Part 1, the remixes were released as CD single and digital download on March 15, 2011.

A Bollywood version of the song was done by Indian music producer duo Salim and Sulaiman Merchant. The remix was released on DesiHits. The Merchants were discussing music projects with Anjula Acharia-Bath of DesiHits. The Merchants were contacted by Gaga's manager, Troy Carter, and the remix was finalized. Sulaiman explained that they received Gaga's raw vocals from "Born This Way", and using it as a base, they designed the remix. "We sent her a rough cut of our composition for initial feedback on whether we were giving it the right groove. She loved it and that's how we went about it," he added. The Merchants used a number of Indian musical instruments like the dugi, sitar by Sunil Das, and the dhol and dholak in the chorus. Sulaiman told MTV News' Jocelyn Vena:
 
 "It's been such a big track, it's been very popular, and when you consider the style, it's very aggressive. It's got all the stuff that's required to make it a nice clubby track, so for us, the most important thing was: How do you get it into a zone where it's palpable to the Indian flavor? And the first thing we did was bring in a sitar, and that changed the flavor a little bit. We kept the aggression but changed the style and made it a little more four on the floor, a little more house."

Salim said that he sang a little bit of alaap to give the remix a Sufi touch, "as that's the kind of music we do and it was also about adding our signature." Gaga's management team were satisfied with their remix and wanted them to do another remix of her next song, "Judas". The Bollywood remixes were a part of the Indian tracklist of Born This Way.

Critical reception

"Born This Way" received generally positive reviews from music critics upon its release. Michael Cragg from The Guardian called the song a "disco anthem", and said the chorus "crashes in with the weight of a discarded meat dress". He also felt that the "campness" of the music made the lyrics sound less serious than it is.
left|thumb|upright|"Born This Way" was compared by some critics to Madonna's 1989 single "Express Yourself", which Gaga said was completely unintentional.|alt=A blond woman standing in front of a black and red wall, wearing a black dress, and with her hands on her waist. 
Many critics noted similarities between "Born This Way" and Madonna's 1989 song, "Express Yourself".  Popjustice website pointed out the influence of other Madonna songs like "Deeper and Deeper" (1992) and "Vogue" (1990).
Ann Powers of the Los Angeles Times concluded that "Born This Way" had an entirely different message from the Madonna songs it was being compared to and further defended it by saying, "Whether its sound comes too close to one or another Madonna song seems beside the point; what current pop hit doesn't go green by recycling something familiar?". Two months later, while getting interviewed by NME magazine, Gaga further addressed the comparisons to "Express Yourself":
 
 "Why would I try to put out a song and think I'm getting one over everybody? That's retarded. I will look in your eyes and tell you that I'm not dumb enough or moronic enough to think that you are dumb or moronic enough not to see that I would have stolen a melody. If you put the songs next to each other, side by side, the only similarities are the chord progression. It's the same one that has been in disco music for the last 50 years. Just because I'm the first fucking artist in 25 years to think of putting it on Top 40 radio, it doesn't mean I'm a plagiarist, it means I'm fucking smart. Sorry."

When interviewed by ABC News in 2012, Madonna was asked about the similarities between "Born This Way" and "Express Yourself", stating: "When I heard This Way' on the radio ... I said, 'that sounds very familiar' ... It felt reductive." She also came to report to The Newsweek Daily Beast Company what she had in mind when she heard "Born This Way": "I thought, 'What a wonderful way to redo my song'. I mean, I recognised the chord changes. I thought it was… interesting."

Recognition

At the end of 2011, Slant Magazine listed "Born This Way" as the fifth best song of the year, with Ed Gonzalez from the website commenting that the song is an "unmistakable landmark pop-cultural moment, a post-irony, post-metaphor, pansexual celebration, aimed squarely at the audience that probably needs it the most."

Chart performance

In the United States, "Born This Way" debuted at number one on the Billboard Hot 100 chart, for the issue dated February 26, 2011, as well as becoming Gaga's third number one single. "Born This Way" became the nineteenth song to debut at number one on the Hot 100, and the 1000th number one single in the chart's history. The song sold 448,000 digital downloads in three days, the most downloads in a first week by a female artist, beating the previous record held by Britney Spears' "Hold It Against Me".
"Born This Way" debuted at number 14 on the  Billboard Pop Songs chart with 4,602 plays after three days of availability, the highest detections total by a debuting song in the chart's history. It was the second-highest debut on that chart, behind Mariah Carey's "Dreamlover" (1993) which debuted at number 12.
On February 20, 2011, the single debuted at number one in Australia on the official ARIA Singles Chart, becoming Gaga's third number-one single there, and the highest selling song to debut at the top.[ref]Debut positions for "Born This Way" in European nations:

Music video

Development

The music video was shot the weekend of January 22–24, 2011 in New York City, and was described by Gaga's team as a "profound, so inspiring and so incredibly beautiful" video. Gibson explained the inspiration behind the video to MTV News:
 
 "When she played it for me, it took me a while to find out the visual interpretation that I could give back to her. And so I woke up one night and I got it, and I said, 'I got it: We have to birth a new race.' From the gate, Gaga was like, 'I want Nick Knight for this video. I want a visual.' She was always birthing something visual in her head, and Nick Knight is just, well, he's prolific but he's so genius. It was about pushing the bar of what a music video should be and can be. ... It's a different time; it's a different era; there are no limits. It is a viral message. I think that there's something in there for everyone, and that's what's so amazing about the video and so specific about the message."

Gibson recalled having to work with Gaga on her dancing in the video, and to make her a better dancer she wanted Gaga to be confident.
The video featured full-bodied tattooed model Rick Genest (Rico), better known by his stage name Zombie Boy.

Synopsis

Released on Monday, February 28, 2011, the video begins with a brief shot of a unicorn's silhouette in a steam-filled alley, inside a pink triangle frame. The triangle transitions to a shot of Gaga, with two opposite facing heads, inspired by Janus, the Roman god of transition and beginnings, sitting in an ornate glass throne amidst a star-filled space. As Bernard Herrmann's prelude to the movie Vertigo plays, Gaga tells the story of the creation of an extraterrestrial race that "bears no prejudice, no judgment, but boundless freedom." Gaga sits in the throne, giving birth to a "new race within the race of humanity." She explains that this was followed by the birth of evil, due to which Gaga splits into two opposing forces of good and evil. Her new half gives birth to a machine gun and fires it. The prologue concludes with Gaga questioning, "How can I protect something so perfect, without evil?"
Gaga, with shoulder and facial protrusions (prosthetic makeup mimicking subdermal implants) walks in a seemingly endless black space, where people are on their hands and knees in an organized pattern. She raises her hand and crouches down to join them. When the first verse begins, everyone dances to choreography. The scenes alternate between the dance, and Gaga singing on her throne in space. In the second verse, Gaga and Rico are in tuxedos, with her face painted to mirror his. Alternating clips show Gaga caressing and attempting to dance with him while he stays expressionless and motionless for the most part. When the chorus plays for the second time, Gaga sings in a room of mirrors, with her head displayed in a glass box among oddly distorted mannequin heads. In the succeeding shots, she is once again shown on her throne giving birth to more members of the new race. After choreographed routines by Gaga and her dancers, they all gather in a circle and embrace in a hug.
In the video's conclusion, Gaga's silhouette struts in an alley in a tribute to Jackson's "The Way You Make Me Feel" video. Her face is misconstrued, with sharp horns protruding from her face, glowing eyes, uneven hair, and a distinct Madonna-esque gap between her front teeth. She sheds a single tear as the pink triangle frame appears again, and inside it, a silhouette of Gaga sitting atop the unicorn. A city and a rainbow appear in the background, and Gaga is seen in her zombie makeup, chewing bubble gum and blowing it, as the pink triangle zooms away.

Reception

The music video for "Born This Way" was met with generally positive reception among music critics. James Montgomery of MTV praised the overall creationism concept of the music video, adding that it "sort of makes sense, it sort of doesn't, but that 100 percent doesn't really matter much. This is Gaga at her most fabulous, her most out-there, her most, well, Gaga."
Oscar Moralde from Slant Magazine noted that in the video, "Gaga fully embraces the monstrous as a part of her." Moralde further explained that previously the singer had acknowledged her role as "Mother Monster", but never to the visceral, fully embodied extent that she does in the video. "The things that are monstrous, the things that are different—for Gaga, those are the things that are beautiful," he concluded.
The video won two awards at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, in the categories of Best Female Video and Best Video With a Message.

Live performances

2011 Grammys

On the February 9, 2011, episode of The Ellen DeGeneres Show, singers Justin Bieber and James Blunt performed their own rendition of the song along with DeGeneres, improvising the music, while singing the chorus. Gaga played the music on the organ, which was surrounded by mannequin heads submerged in gel, before belting out the rest of the bridge as her dancers surrounded her. Before leaving the stage, Gaga put on her trench and hat as the song faded out and Gaga and her dancers ended the performance with their hands put up in paws.
According to Gaga the Grammy performance was inspired by many things, including Gregorian music, Alvin Ailey dance moves and Martha Graham's dance energy. On The Tonight Show with Jay Leno she explained that Smith inspired her to "whip my hair back and forth on stage," referring to Smith's similar named song. Gaga continued that the incubating vessel was meant to signify an artistic statement of birthing a new race with no prejudice.

Other performances

At the February 19, 2011, date of The Monster Ball Tour, Gaga performed "Born This Way" as a second encore, using the same general attire and choreography as the Grammy performance, however the incubation vessel was not present and slight alterations were made in the outfits of her dancers.
At The Graham Norton Show in May 2011, Gaga performed "Born This Way" as the closing song of the show,
A medley of "Judas" and "Born This Way" was the closing performance on the Paul O'Grady Live show in London. Ryan Love of Digital Spy had a preview of the show's recording, and felt that this was the best performance of the two songs by the singer.

Other versions

On March 3, 2011, during her concert in Toronto (Canada), Gaga performed an acoustic version of the song with ten-year old Maria Aragon. Gaga had been impressed by Aragon's singing abilities when the ten-year old uploaded her own version of "Born This Way" to YouTube. Aragon was subsequently invited on stage to sing with Gaga.
The Glee cast covered the song during a thematic episode of their second season.
American singer-songwriter and parodist "Weird Al" Yankovic had sought permission from Gaga to parody "Born This Way", providing a brief description of the concept for his song. Her management responded that she must hear the song before providing approval. Yankovic obliged with the lyrics of "Perform This Way", which was released on April 25, 2011, as the first single from his thirteenth studio album, Alpocalypse, on iTunes Store.
BBC Radio 1's Alex Full a.k.a. the Cornish Fairy and singer Kirsten Joy Gill recorded a cover of the song called "Cornish This Way" in August 2011 as a modern Cornish anthem. The song was recorded at the Maida Vale Studios in London, and the music video was shot in Newquay, Cornwall at the Boardmasters Festival.

Track listing and formats

Credits and personnel

Credits adapted from Born This Way album liner notes.

Charts and certifications

Charts

Certifications

Year-end charts

Release history








