[[Tropical Storm Lidia (1981)]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 Pacific hurricane season, Eastern Pacific tropical storms, Pacific hurricanes in Mexico

Tropical Storm Lidia was a deadly, destructive tropical cyclone that occurred during the 1981 Pacific hurricane season. It resulted in more casualties and caused greater damage than Hurricane Norma, which took place later that season. On October 6, a tropical depression formed and strengthened into a tropical storm six hours later. Lidia brushed the Gulf of California coast of Baja California Sur and made landfall just south of Los Mochis in Sinaloa on October 8. Tropical Storm Lidia rapidly weakened and dissipated the same day. Lidia killed at least 73 people and caused at least $80 million (1981 USD) which is equivalent to $193 million (2010 USD) in damage. It inflicted heavy rain and flooding throughout parts of northwestern Mexico, especially Sinaloa.

Meteorological history

A tropical depression formed on October 6 northeast of that same place. The remnants of Lidia continued their northeast track, moving over Mexico, and ultimately emerging into the Southern United States, spurring a new frontal wave.

Impact and Aftermath

Tropical Storm Lidia caused flash flooding, with highest point point maxima was  In Culiacán, eleven people were killed.  Losses to cattle, crops, and fishing vessels were more than $80 million (1981 USD), equivalent to $193 million (2010 USD).
Electricity was cut off to two settlements, Guamúchil and Guasave. Telephone service was also cut off to Culiacán.  Heavy rain caused flooding that cut off seven towns in Sinaloa from the outside world. It also contaminated the water supply in Culiacán, leaving many without clean drinking water. Almost a hundred villages were flooded,
as were two dams. The Rio Fuerte burst its banks and flooded sixty settlements. It also forced evacuations, which were enforced by the Mexican Army. Mexican Federal Highway 15 was closed due to the storm, as was the Pacific Railroad. The highway was reopened shortly after the storm passed. The total death toll from Tropical Storm Lidia was determined to exceed 73. This was enough to make it the deadliest tropical cyclone of its season, which mostly occurred in rural areas. A few days later, Hurricane Norma struck similar areas as Lidia, also causing devastation.
The remnants of Lidia brought moisture to extreme southeastern Arizona.
During the aftermath of the storm, food and clothing was brought to towns isolated by the storm. In Culiacán, churches, schools, and a baseball stadium served as temporary shelters for displaced persons. Rescue workers also searched for bodies of victims of both Lidia and the subsequent Hurricane Norma, which hit the same area a few days later. Due to the damage wrought by both Lidia and Norma, the Governor of Sinaloa, Antonio Toledo Corro, declared his state a disaster area. He also asked the Mexican Federal Government for aid.



Notes and references


