[[Chymosin]]

Chymosin as alternative resource.

Occurrence

Chymosin is produced by ruminant animals in the lining of the abomasum. Chymosin is produced by gastric chief cells in young ruminants and some other newborn animals to curdle the milk they ingest, allowing a longer residence in the bowels and better absorption.
Some other non-ruminant species, including pigs, cats, and seals, produce it.  Last updated February 21, 1997 Chymosin pseudogene; CYMP prochymosin, included, in the OMIM
Humans have a pseudogene for chymosin that does not generate a protein, found on chromosome 1). F. Google books. Cheese: Chemistry, Physics and Microbiology: Volume 1: General Aspects.  Humans have other proteases to digest milk, such as pepsin and lipase. Sanderson M.D. and W. Allan Walker Development of the Gastrointestinal Tract  pmph usa 1999. ISBN 155009081X

Enzymatic reaction

Chymosin causes cleavage of a specific linkage — the peptide bond between 105 and 106, phenylalanine and methionine, in K-casein, the native substrate of this enzyme. Preceding the uneven cleavage of kappa-casein, the opposite charges on the substrate can interact with the enzyme; histidines on the kappa-casein are attracted to glutamates and aspartate on chymosin.  When chymosin is not binding substrate, a beta-hairpin, sometimes referred to as "the flap," can hydrogen bond with the active site, therefore covering it and not allowing further binding of substrate.
When chymosin acts on milk, the specific linkage between the hydrophobic (para-casein) and hydrophilic (acidic glycopeptide) groups of casein is broken, since they are joined by phenylalanine and methionine. The hydrophobic group unites and forms a 3D network that traps the aqueous phase of the milk. The resultant product is calcium phosphocaseinate. Due to this reaction, rennin is used to bring about the extensive precipitation and curd formation in cheese-making.

Examples

Listed below are the ruminant Cym gene and corresponding human pseudogene:

Recombinant Chymosin

Because of the imperfections and scarcity of microbial and animal rennets, producers sought replacements. With the development of genetic engineering, it became possible to extract rennet-producing genes from animal stomach and insert them into certain bacteria, fungi or yeasts to make them produce chymosin during fermentation.
FPC was the first artificially produced enzyme to be registered and allowed by the US Food and Drug Administration. In 1999, about 60% of US hard cheese was made with FPC
By 2008, approximately 80% to 90% of commercially made cheeses in the US and Britain were made using FPC. Today, the most widely used Fermentation-Produced Chymosin (FPC) is produced either by the fungus Aspergillus niger and commercialized under the trademark CHY-MAX® Hansen, or produced by Kluyveromyces lactis and commercialized under the trademark MAXIREN®
FPC contains only chymosin B, achieving a high degree of purity compared with animal rennet. FPC can deliver several benefits to the cheese producer compared with animal or microbial rennet, such as higher production yield, better curd texture and reduced bitterness.



Further reading




