[[Gente Nueva]]

CATEGORIES: Gangs in Mexico, Sinaloa Cartel, Sinaloa Cartel traffickers, Mexican Drug War

Gente Nueva (English: New People), also known as Los Chapos,  in reference to their drug lord Joaquín Guzmán Loera, is a group of hitmen that works as the armed wing of the Sinaloa Cartel. 
Since its foundation in 2007, Gente Nueva has served as the main branch of the organization in Ciudad Juárez and in the rest of the state, where they have engaged in a four-year war with the Juárez Cartel and its enforcer wing, La Línea, for the control of the smuggling routes to the United States. 
By 2012, U.S. intelligence indicated that the Sinaloa cartel and Gente Nueva have emerged victorious and successfully relegated the Juárez cartel to the sidelines.

History

Battle for Ciudad Juárez

The war between the Juárez Cartel and the Sinaloa Cartel for the control of the smuggling routes in Ciudad Juárez broke out on 5 January 2008, when five men were shot dead with AR-15s in a matter of hours; within a few days, several policemen and nearly two dozen civilians lay dead. 
When Joaquín "El Chapo" Guzmán, the leader of the Sinaloa Cartel, jumped into the territory of the Juárez organization in 2007, he attempted to split his rival organization and recruit the dissidents into his own invasion force – Gente Nueva.
Gente Nueva is responsible for a number of crimes, including but not limited to extortions, kidnappings, tortures, and assassinations. 

=Ciudad Juárez rehab center attack=

Masked gunmen stormed the El Aliviane drug rehabilitation center in Ciudad Juárez, Chihuahua on 3 September 2009, gathered all of the patients together against a wall at a central patio, and then opened fire at them with AK-47 rifles.
The attack was materialized within sight of the U.S.-Mexico border and is one of the worst single mass shootings in the history of Ciudad Juárez.
The Mexican authorities stated that the drug trafficking organizations use rehabilitation clinics to recruit foot soldiers and smugglers, and often kill those who do not cooperate. Others are killed for failing to pay for their drugs or for ripping off a dealer. Some cartel members even check themselves in the facility and pose as addicts. Once they gain information of why the facility works, they co-opt with workers or threaten to kill them. Some of the addicts sell candy and gum at the city's stop lights to raise money for those struggling in their rehab center, but the cartels have taken this opportunity to force them to sell drugs too. The drug cartels have also created and managed pseudo-clinics, and once their patients are off drugs, they gIve them the choice to work as a drug trafficker or get killed. The cartels usually "dispose" of their young addicts by killing them, since the criminal organizations quickly recruit young men and prefer to minimize their risk by eliminating the others.

=Decline of the Juárez Cartel=

The decline of the Juárez Cartel began in 1997 after the death of Amado Carrillo Fuentes, but worsened in mid-2000 when the Sinaloa Cartel sought to take over the assets of the criminal organization and move into the city. Nonetheless, counterarguments from security experts were also included. 
The reported victory of the Sinaloa cartel may possibly not halt the forces of the Juárez cartel; as long as Vicente Carrillo Fuentes is alive and free, the warfare in the area will possibly continue. And although the rise of the New Juárez Cartel has yet to materialize, the threat still remains.

Cartel infighting in Durango

On mid-2011, the Mexican authorities said that the hundreds of corpses found in several mass graves in the northern state of Durango were victims of an infighting within the Sinaloa Cartel. The message warned their rivals that they had only 24 hours to leave the area before they were killed. The banner was followed by a pair of videos uploaded on March that showed several armed men in military grabs interrogating two men allegedly working for a rival faction. In the video, the two men said that they had been sent to Durango to disrupt cartel operatives. The dispute indicated that two leaders in Gente Nueva, Noel Salgeiro and Felipe Cabrera, had lost the support of the upper-leaders in Gente Nueva and the rest of the Sinaloa organization.
Initially, the massacre was overshadowed by the other mass graves in the northeastern state of Tamaulipas. But when Bernabé Monje Silva, alias M14 was arrested by the Federal police, he led them to the exact location of the bodies.

Veracruz incursion and massacre

The tit-for-tat fighting between Los Zetas and the Sinaloa cartel started in the Mexican state of Veracruz, a strategic smuggling region with a giant gulf port.
On 20 September 2011 at around 5:00p.m., several vehicles blocked a major avenue in Boca del Río, Veracruz.  
The two trucks that were left at an underpass near a shopping mall contained 35 dead bodies. The message left behind stated the following:

The banner's reference to "G.N." was a clear reference to Gente Nueva,

Present-day

In the year of 2013 big hits were done to them. In Cuidad Juarez they arrested Mario Nuñez Meza also known as M-100, M-10 or El Mayito.

Known leaders of Gente Nueva





Bibliography


