[[It Will Rain]]

CATEGORIES: Bruno Mars songs, Atlantic Records singles, 2011 singles, 2010s ballads, Soul ballads, Rock ballads, Rhythm and blues ballads, Pop ballads, Record Report Pop Rock General number-one singles, Song recordings produced by The Smeezingtons, Billboard Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) number-one singles, Songs written by Ari Levine, Songs written by Philip Lawrence (songwriter), Songs written by Bruno Mars, 2011 songs, Elektra Records singles

"It Will Rain" is a song by American artist Bruno Mars. The song was released on iTunes for purchase on September 27, 2011. The track appears on the soundtrack to the film ''The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1.
In his live tour in Europe, Skylar Grey was with him singing the song.

Writing and production

"It Will Rain" is a love ballad co-written and produced by Bruno Mars and his songwriting and production team, The Smeezingtons. The soundtrack disc hit stores on November 8, 2011. Bruno described the new song as "think of the darker side of love". the song was highly popular and successful. Mars and his label Elektra Records celebrated the singer's fourth #1 single on the Billboard Top 40 chart with this song.com
"It Will Rain" is featured in the end credits of The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part 1. Mars said the tune was halfway done before he viewed an early cut of the film and, inspired by its characters, put together the finishing touches. Alexandra Patsavas, music supervisor for the "Twilight" films, said she picked Mars because the latest film centered on a wedding and, "Who more appropriate than Bruno Mars to write a timeless, classic wedding song?"
The singer recalls having to literally turn off the radio when hearing his song "It Will Rain" (written for 2011's Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn - Part 1) because of his displeasure with the track's final mix. "I felt like I was a mosquito singing," Mars says with noticeable agitation. "I don't want that to happen again."

Composition and lyrical interpretation

The agony and torment of heartbreak in the lyrics describe the universal emotional pain of relationship bonds like oxytocin relationships, sexual arousal, bonding and romantic attachment and behavioral addiction, being ripped apart that results in depression.  Although some reviews were mixed, for example Rolling Stone, which gave the song three stars out of five, saying it "sounds a little bit like "Wild Horses," and "a lot like Mars' next radio juggernaut".

Music video

The music video for "It Will Rain" premiered on November 10, 2011 on MTV. Mars falls for a girl in the clip and it shows the pair going through different emotions like love and anger. It also features footage from the film Breaking Dawn: Part 1, the fourth film in the Twilight saga. The video for the song was then uploaded on YouTube by Mars' label Elektra Records.

Cover versions

In 2012 Austin Mahone released a cover of the song with a music video online.ryanseacrest.com/2012/01/30/bruno-mars-it-will-rain-covered-by-austin-mahone-video/

Track listing

Credits and personnel

Charts and certifications

Weekly charts

Certifications



Year-end charts

Release history






