[[The Perks of Being a Wallflower (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2010s comedy-drama films, 2010s LGBT-related films, 2010s romance films, 2010s teen films, American comedy-drama films, American coming-of-age films, American LGBT-related films, American independent films, American romantic drama films, American teen drama films, American teen LGBT-related films, American teen romance films, Film adaptations directed by writers of original works, Films about psychiatry, Films about rape, Films about suicide, Films based on American novels, Films set in 1991, Films set in 1992, Films set in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Films shot in Pennsylvania, American high school films, Incest in film, LGBT-related comedy films, Summit Entertainment films, Films about child abuse

The Perks of Being a Wallflower is a 2012 American coming-of-age comedy-drama and is a film adaptation of the 1999 epistolary novel of the same name. The film was directed by the author of the novel, Stephen Chbosky. Filmed in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, the film was released on September 21, 2012 to positive critical response and commercial success earning $33 million worldwide. The film stars Logan Lerman, Emma Watson and Ezra Miller. This is one of the three films from John Malkovich, Lianne Halfon and Russell Smith's Mr. Mudd Productions that feature struggling teenagers; the other two are Ghost World and Juno.

Plot

Charlie (Logan Lerman) is nervous about beginning his freshman year of high school. Shy and unable to make friends, he connects only with his English teacher, Mr. Anderson (Paul Rudd).
Charlie is befriended by two seniors, Sam (Emma Watson) and her stepbrother Patrick (Ezra Miller). After a football game, they take him to a dinner. Later on, Charlie gains enough courage, during a high school dance, and dances with Sam and Patrick. After the dance, they bring him to a house party where Charlie unwittingly eats a cannabis brownie and becomes high. He admits to Sam that his best friend committed suicide the year before. He also discovers Patrick and Brad (Johnny Simmons), a popular athlete, kissing in a room. Sam realizes that Charlie has no other friends, and makes Charlie part of their group. Charlie agrees to help Sam prepare for her SAT exams so she may enter Pennsylvania State University. On the way home from the party, the three drive through a tunnel and Sam stands up in the back of the pickup truck while listening to a song they call "The Tunnel Song".
During Christmas, the group organizes a Secret Santa. Though Sam was not Charlie's Santa, she gives him a vintage typewriter. While discussing relationships, Charlie reveals he has never been kissed. Sam reveals that her first kiss was from her father's boss when she was 11 years old. She adds that, even though there is a boy she likes, she wants Charlie's first kiss to be from someone who loves him. Then she kisses him and says that she loves him. Sam has a boyfriend but Charlie still prepares to ask Sam out on New Year's Eve.
Sam, Patrick and their friends regularly take part in acting out The Rocky Horror Show. Charlie is asked to take part in the show when Sam's college boyfriend, Craig, is unavailable. An impressed Mary Elizabeth (Mae Whitman), one of their friends, asks Charlie to the Sadie Hawkins dance. After the dance, Mary Elizabeth takes Charlie to her house and they kiss. She declares how glad she is to have him as her boyfriend.
Mary Elizabeth dominates the relationship, and Charlie grows irritated by her. At a party, they break up during a game of Truth or Dare when Charlie, without thinking, kisses Sam after being dared to kiss the most beautiful girl in the room. Sam is furious at Charlie. Charlie returns to isolation after Patrick tells him to stay away while things cool down. Charlie has flashbacks of the death of his Aunt Helen (Melanie Lynskey), who died in a car accident when he was seven years old.
Patrick breaks up with Brad after Brad's father catches them having sex and beats Brad in front of Patrick. In the school cafeteria, Brad calls Patrick a "faggot" because Brad does not want his friends believing they are friends. Patrick attacks Brad, but Brad's friends beat him up. Charlie intervenes, lunging at Brad's friends, but blacks out. When he comes to, he finds he has bruised knuckles and the boys are on the floor in pain. Charlie helps Patrick to his feet and coldly warns Brad, "Touch my friends again, and I'll blind you". Patrick, Sam and Charlie reconcile. Patrick takes Charlie to a park and discusses how he witnessed Brad's father beat him when he found Brad with Patrick. Patrick then states his wish that he could meet a nice guy, and kisses Charlie, but immediately apologizes. He hugs Charlie and Charlie hugs him back.
Sam receives her college acceptance letter from Pennsylvania State University, which states that she must leave immediately after graduation for a summer introductory program. Sam breaks up with Craig on prom night after learning he has been cheating on her. The night before she departs, Sam brings Charlie to her room, she asks him "Why do I and everyone I love pick people who treat us like we're nothing?" to which he replies "We accept the love we think we deserve". After several confessions to each other, they kiss. When she starts touching Charlie on his thigh, he pulls away. The next morning, Charlie says goodbye to Sam and Patrick. Charlie is left emotionally shaken as this incident triggers his childhood memories.
Charlie goes to his empty home, having severe flashbacks of his Aunt Helen and her death. Charlie calls his sister and blames himself for Helen's death. His sister realises that Charlie is suicidal and calls the police. Charlie passes out as they burst through the door and wakes up in a hospital. Dr. Burton (Joan Cusack), the hospital psychiatrist, tells Charlie's parents that he was sexually abused by his aunt. Charlie repressed the memories because he loved her.
Charlie undergoes therapy with Dr. Burton, recovers and returns home where he is visited by Sam and Patrick. Sam explains what college life is like, and how she has found "The Tunnel Song"{–}"Heroes" by David Bowie. The three revisit the tunnel, where Charlie kisses Sam again and stands up in the back of the truck. Charlie acknowledges that he feels alive and in that moment: "We are infinite".

Cast

Production

Development

John Hughes wanted to write a screenplay to the book after reading the novel; he did get the rights from Chbosky but never finished the screenplay. Perks was originally going to be more of a dark comedy with dramatic elements and Hughes' directorial comeback. While writing the screenplay, Hughes thought of Shia LaBeouf to play the lead role as Charlie. He also thought of The Virgin Suicides star Kirsten Dunst to play as Sam and Almost Famous star Patrick Fugit to play as Patrick.
Mr. Mudd Productions (producers of Juno) sought to hire Stephen Chbosky{–}author of the novel{–}to adapt the film. The producers{–}John Malkovich, Lianne Halfon, and Russell Smith{–}then hired Chbosky to write an adapted screenplay and to direct the film. Chbosky used half of Hughes screenplay (to which he got the rights from Hughes' family) mixed with his. In May 2010, actors Logan Lerman and Emma Watson were reported to be in talks for the film.
In January 2011, Summit acquired distribution rights.

Filming

The film was shot in the Pittsburgh metropolitan area from May 9 to June 29, 2011.
Scenes of the film's characters in costume at The Rocky Horror Picture Show were filmed at The Hollywood Theater in Dormont.
The film also has scenes within Pittsburgh city limits inside the Fort Pitt Tunnel and Fort Pitt Bridge on Interstate 376, as well as on Mount Washington.

Soundtrack

Original Motion Picture Soundtrack

Score

Release

The film was scheduled to be released on September 14, 2012, but it was announced in August 2012 that it would be released a week later, on September 21, 2012, in selected cities. at the Cambridge Film Festival.

Rating

The film originally received an R rating for "teen drug and alcohol use, and some sexual references". The filmmakers appealed and the MPAA changed it to PG-13 for "mature thematic material, drug and alcohol use, sexual content including references, and a fight{–}all involving teens".

Box office

The Perks of Being a Wallflower received a limited release of four theaters in the United States on September 21, 2012, and grossed $228,359 on its limited opening weekend, averaging $57,089 per theater. The film earned $17,742,948 in North America and $15,641,179 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $33,384,127.

Reception

Critical response

The film received mainly positive reviews. Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 85% of critics gave the film a positive review based on 151 reviews with a "Certified Fresh" rating, with an average score of 7.4/10. The site's consensus states: "The Perks of Being a Wallflower is a heartfelt and sincere adaptation that's bolstered by strong lead performances."
The lead cast also received positive notices. Ian Buckwalter of The Atlantic said "The primary trio of actors delivers outstanding performances, starting with Watson, who sheds the memory of a decade playing Hermione in the Harry Potter series with an about-face as a flirtatious but insecure free spirit. Miller also plays against his most recent performance, which was as the tightly wound eponymous teenage psychopath in We Need to Talk About Kevin, to deliver a giddy, scene-stealing turn as Patrick. Lerman, best known from the Percy Jackson series, shines as Charlie, a role that demands he be immediately likeable while still holding onto some deep darkness that can't be fully revealed until the end."
John Anderson of Newsday also praised the cast saying "As Sam, the quasi-bad girl trying to reinvent herself before college, she (Emma Watson) brings honesty and a lack of cliche to a character who might have been a standard-issue student. But equally fine are her co-stars: Ezra Miller, who plays the gay character Patrick as something messy and unusual; Paul Rudd, as their English teacher, is refreshingly thoughtful. And Charlie is portrayed by Lerman as quietly observant, yearning and delicate in a way that will click with audiences regardless of age".
Some critics had a less positive response to the film, with the main criticism being that the portrayal of teenage issues is idealized and the casting uninspired. The Miami Herald critic Connie Ogle notes that "the suicide of Charlie's best friend, which takes place before the film opens, seems glossed over too quickly" despite the event being Charlie's main character motivation in the film. 
Jack Wilson of The Age writes, "the script is transparently fake at almost every moment, congratulating the gang on their non-conformity while soft-pedalling any aspect of adolescent behaviour{–}drug use, sex, profanity{–}that might upset the American mainstream." 
Richard Corliss of Time criticizes the casting of actors in their twenties to play teenagers, unlike the film Heathers where the cast were actually teenagers.
MTV, Us Weekly and Complex named The Perks of Being a Wallflower one of the best films of the year.

Accolades






