[[Jake and the Never Land Pirates]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 American television series debuts, Disney Channel shows, American children's television series, Preschool education television series, 2010s American television series, 2010s American animated television series, English-language television programming, Television series by Disney, Peter Pan television series

Jake and the Never Land Pirates is an Annie Award-winning musical  interactive animated Disney Junior show based on the successful Disney franchise Peter Pan that was in turn based on the famous book and play by British author J.M. Barrie. It is the first Disney Junior original show following the switch from Playhouse Disney. It stars Cameron Boyce,  Madison Pettis, Jonathan Morgan Heit, David Arquette, Corey Burton, Jeff Bennett and Loren Hoskins. Colin Ford voiced the titular character Jake until season 2 episodes 11, 13 – 15, 20 and 32. The series is co-developed by Bobs Gannaway, who is also responsible for Mickey Mouse Clubhouse.
The series focuses on a band of young pirates consisting of Jake, Izzy, Cubby and their parrot Skully, who continuously spend their days competing against Captain Hook and Mr. Smee for treasure. They are often accompanied by several characters including their living pirate ship, Bucky, and their mermaid friend, Marina. It also takes place after the events of the Peter Pan saga sequel.
The series is a critical and commercial success, receiving high praise from critics and fans for its educational, yet entertaining format. The series is currently in its third season which premiered on January 3, 2014.'Jake and the Never Land Pirates' Season Three to Debut January 3 on Disney Channel On January 8, 2014, Disney recently ordered a fourth season of Jake and the Never Land Pirates.'Sofia the First', 'Doc McStiffins' and 'Jake and the Never Land Pirates' Renewed By Disney Channel
At the American International Toy Fair in New York City, Disney announced a film based on the series, premiered on September 19, 2012, entitled Jake and the Never Land Pirates: Bucky's Great Race. The film was later downgraded to a special episode renamed ''Jake and the Never Land Pirates: Jake Saves Bucky.

Premise

The show revolves around a group of three children; Jake, Izzy and Cubby (two boys and a girl) who are pirates in Never Land (vs. Peter Pan's Neverland), looking for treasure. Their main obstacles are Captain Hook, Smee, and Tick-Tock the Crocodile from Disney's Peter Pan franchise. Captain Hook usually sees Jake and his crew doing something fun and steals it from them, and Jake and his crew have to get it back. After they succeed, Jake and his crew count their gold doubloons (which they receive after solving puzzles, or "pirate problems") and put them in their treasure chest known as the "Team Treasure Chest".
The first season of the series followed more "playful" conflicts, such as Jake and the crew getting their basketball back from Captain Hook, or Jake and the crew taking back their stolen skateboard. The second season gave a larger scale to the adventure in the show, now having the characters find a lost city of gold, and an ancient pirate pyramid.
Almost every episode contains two eleven-minute animated segments, followed by a live-action song by the Never Land Pirate Band. The singing characters "Sharky" and "Bones" appear in both animated and live action forms.

Cast/Characters

Primary characters

Recurring characters

Episodes

Music

The show's musical elements are handled by Loren Hoskins and Kevin Hendrickson, who were emailed by the show's creators Bobs and Carol Gannaway, asking if they would be interested in creating songs for the show.

Reception

The series has gained critical acclaim among critics and fans.  A review in Variety called it "part video game, part interactive cartoon, part advertisement for 'Peter Pan' merchandise".
The character Jake has too received positive reviews. The character has been thought of as a "classic Disney character", lovable and entertaining addition. He has quickly become an icon at Disney's Hollywood Studios from the popular Disney Junior Live as well as being added on the park's entrance drawings. The atmosphere character can be seen at the Hollywood And Vine character breakfast and the Animation courtyard, while at Disney California Adventure, Jake can be found on Hollywood Boulevard in the Hollywood Studios backlot.

Awards

Broadcast

The series airs worldwide on Disney Junior. It premiered on May 6, 2011 in Canada, on May 7, 2011 in the United Kingdom and Ireland, on May 29, 2011 in Australia and New Zealand, on June 1, 2011 in South Africa, on July 4, 2011 in India, on July 11, 2011 in Southeast Asia, and on April 29, 2013 in Zimbabwe.

Merchandise

Upon the initial release of the series onwards, there has been a high demand for toys, games, and other merchandise from the show. At the American International Toy Fair in New York City, Disney announced a line of toys to be released in the summer of 2012. On May 24, 2012, app Jake's Never Land Pirate School is released on the iPad and other Android devices.

DVD releases

The first DVD Jake and the Never Land Pirates: Yo Ho, Mateys Away!, was released on September 27, 2011. A second DVD featuring the special Jake and the Never Land Pirates: Peter Pan Returns, was released April 3, 2012. The fourth DVD entitled Jake and the Never Land Pirates: Never Land Rescue was released on November 19, 2013.

Spin-offs

On July 27, 2012, Disney announced a spin-off series of the show centering Skully. The show is entitled Playing With Skully, and is a collection of short cartoons that aired on September 19, 2012. The third spin-off, Mama Hook Knows Best! premiered on September 29, 2013 starring Sharon Osbourne as Mama Hook.



Notes




