[[Palm City, San Diego]]

CATEGORIES: Neighborhoods in San Diego, California

Palm City is a neighborhood in the southern section of San Diego. It neighbors Otay Mesa West to the south and east, Egger Highlands and Nestor to the west, and Chula Vista to the north. It also serves as a gateway to the beach cities of Imperial Beach, and Coronado, by way of the Silver Strand isthmus, due to it being where California State Route 75 meets Interstate 5. Major thoroughfares include Coronado Avenue, Hollister Street, Beyer Boulevard, and Palm Avenue.

History

Prior to the Mexican-American War the area that is today Palm City was part of Rancho La Punta, sometimes referred to as Rancho Milijo, granted to Santiago Emilio Arguello in 1834. The U.S. Land Commission rejected his claim, opening up the area to settlement; which in turn led to the creation of communities in the area.
In the 1880s, John J. Montgomery built and designed his own ornithopters and manned glider designs at the Montgomery family Fruitland Ranch near what would become Palm City. His gliders were tested on the surrounding hillsides of Otay Mesa. These flights represented the first of their kind in the nation. and Fogel, Gary B. Quest for Flight: John J. Montgomery and the Dawn of Aviation in the West, University of Oklahoma Press 2012.
Palm City was established in 1914, and named for the palms lining Palm Avenue.
During the 1916 Hatfield flood,
In 1926, the community was all of 250 persons.
In 1983, the community experienced damage due to an earthquake, 4.6  on the Richter scale, that occurred ten miles off the coast, in the Pacific Ocean.

Camp Lawrence J. Hearn

Beginning in 1916,

Facilities and landmarks

Palm City is home to two shopping centers, as well as Sunnyslope Park. Several landmarks to John J. Montgomery are in the area including Silverwing Park, and the John J. Montgomery Freeway, a portion of Interstate 5.

Education

Sunnyslope Elementary School, of the South Bay Union School District,
[/ref]




