[[Suicide of Jamey Rodemeyer]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 deaths, 2011 in LGBT history, 2011 in New York, Bullycide, Deaths by person, High school students who committed suicide, LGBT history in New York, LGBT people from New York, Male suicides, Suicides by hanging in New York, Victims of cyber-bullying, Lady Gaga

Jamey Rodemeyer (March 21, 1997 – September 18, 2011) was an openly gay teenager, known for his activism against homophobia and his videos on YouTube to help victims of homophobic bullying. He committed suicide as a result of constant bullying.

Personal life

Jamey Rodemeyer He had attended Heim Middle School in the past and was a freshman at Williamsville North High School at the time of his death.
He was open about his sexuality, and faced severe bullying as a result of it.
Rodemeyer's inspiration to help others came from Lady Gaga, whom he admired most. He often referred to her in his videos, and quoted her lyrics to provide guidance to others.

Activism

Rodemeyer encountered bullying throughout middle school because of his homosexuality. Anonymously posted comments on his Formspring account included hate messages such as, "I wouldn't care if you died. No one would. So just do it :) It would make everyone WAY more happier!". Despite this, he used his experiences to make videos on YouTube under the username xgothemo99xx to help others who were experiencing similar situations. He also made a video for the "It Gets Better" project, a website dedicated to preventing teen suicide.

Death

Rodemeyer was found dead by his sister on the morning of September 18, 2011, in an apparent suicide by hanging. Before his death, he posted a final update on Twitter directed to Lady Gaga. The tweet read, "@ladygaga bye mother monster, thank you for all you have done, paws up forever".

Aftermath

The Amherst, New York police department launched a criminal investigation after Jamey Rodemeyer's death, assisted by Erie County district attorney Frank Sedita. The investigation lasted nine weeks, and included analysis of Jamey's home computer and mobile phone records. Although possible evidence of criminal harassment was found, these incidents either had insufficient evidence to prosecute or were expired beyond the statute of limitations. The investigation concluded with no charges filed.
News of Jamey's death resulted in outrage by supporters worldwide. Following his death, Tim and Tracy Rodemeyer were interviewed by news media about their son and his struggles against bullying. Both parents took the opportunity to promote peace and equality in the hope of preventing occurrences similar to this.
In an interview with Ann Curry on The Today Show Jamey's parents said that they, their daughter and son were still being bullied, even after his suicide. When his sister attended a school homecoming dance, Jamey's friends began chanting his name in support when a Lady Gaga song began playing. As a result, the very same bullies at the dance began chanting that they were glad he was dead.
Upon learning of his death, Lady Gaga stated that she was extremely upset, spending her days "reflecting, crying and yelling." She went on to dedicate her song "Hair" to Jamey during a performance at the iHeartRadio music festival at the MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas,  saying, "I wrote this record about how your identity is really all you've got when you're in school... You're a lesson to all of us. I know it's a bit of a downer, but sometimes the right thing is more important than the music." Lady Gaga later met with President Barack Obama to discuss what his administration would do to prevent bullying in schools.
Also in response to his death, reigning Miss New York Kaitlin Monte founded an online petition to bring the issue of cyberbullying (known as "Jamey's Law") to New York legislators.
In October 2011 actor Zachary Quinto noted Rodemeyer's death as the genesis of his decision to come out publicly as gay, saying on his website "...Zachary Quinto (October 16, 2011). "10.16.11. nyc...". Zachary Quinto Official Website.
In response to Quinto's coming out (and in reaction to gay suicides caused by bullying), Dan Kloeffler of ABC News Now also came out.
That same month another teenager, Jamie Hubley, was reported to have committed suicide for the same reason. While he never explicitly talked about Rodemeyer, comparisons have been drawn.
The Fox TV show Glee referred to Jamey, when Finn (Cory Monteith) talked to Santana (Naya Rivera) about gay suicide in the episode I Kissed a Girl.
In 2012 the American metalcore band, The Bella Donna, produced a song based on the death of Jamey called "Don't Jump." The song has clips of one of Jamey's friends speaking on his behalf. The video has been posted at online video platform YouTube.youtube.com/watch?v=16VZrO8WquM
On March 27, 2013, The Gay, Lesbian and Straight Student Alliance (GLASS) of Niagara County Community College (NCCC) sponsored a performance of "Bullying is a Drag" as a tribute to Jamey.  The performance was free, open to the public, and featured entertainment by a number of drag queen entertainers from Buffalo area clubs.






