[[Fools and Worthless Liars]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 albums

Fools and Worthless Liars is the second album from English band Deaf Havana and the first since the departure of founding member Ryan Mellor. The album marks a departure from the band's earlier post-hardcore style of music in favour of a song orientated power pop approach heavily influenced by bands such as Jimmy Eat World as well as the modern British wave of pop punk, largely due to the band's decision not to replace Mellor, who was a screamer. Critics were generally very supportive of this development.
Fools And Worthless Liars was produced by Matt O'Grady (who has previously worked with You Me at Six) and was released on 7 November 2011. The band's frontman, James Veck-Gilodi, has been quoted as saying he struggled to write the album. Much of the album's lyrics are centred on the themes of youth and nostalgia.
The album charted at #49 on the UK album charts; this is Deaf Havana's most successful release to date. As a result of the album's success, the band played at larger venues than they had previously and performed at Reading and Leeds Festivals. A deluxe edition of the album is scheduled for release on 22 October 2012, which will include each song performed in a different style alongside the original tracks.

Background

Deaf Havana were originally a five-piece band, incorporating screaming vocals in their music, as demonstrated on their previous work Meet Me Halfway, At Least. Shortly after the release of this album, vocalist and founding member Ryan Mellor left the band, citing personal reasons, leaving the group without a screamer.
Deaf Havana released a number of other tracks in the period between Meet Me Halfway, At Least and Fools and Worthless Liars, including "Smiles All Round", which was released as a single on 1 November 2010  It was the first song from Fools and Worthless Liars (although the album title had not yet been announced at the time) to be officially released, although it was not released as a single.
The title of the album was made public on 23 September 2011.

Writing, Recording and Production

Despite an 18 month struggle to write the album, the majority of Fools and Worthless Liars was written and demoed in a ten-day period at some point in 2010. Veck-Gilodi has revealed that he initially wrote all the songs on an acoustic guitar before playing them with the full band. Recording began on 19 February 2011 and lasted until the album was completed in late summer 2011. 18 songs were recorded for the album.

Themes

Frontman James Veck-Gilodi has spoken at length about the themes of each song on the album, describing them as 'very personal and each is a small story that depicts a part of my life'. Much of the album is about nostalgia, underachievement and anxiety, which are all topics which are personal to him as he wrote all the lyrics for the album. The opening track "The Past Six Years", from whose lyrics the album takes its title, is described as 'an ode to... not really achieving as much as we'd have liked'. The lyrics make reference to friends and fellow bands Lower Than Atlantis and Young Guns and how James feels 'a perpetual bitterness and jealousy towards them in terms of their achievements, despite the fact that they are close friends'. "I'm a Bore, Mostly" also deals with the topic of underachievement, with James explaining that the song is about 'the mundane daily routine I had when I was living in London. ...I couldn't deal with city life, I rarely left the house and found myself sinking into this terrible routine. I didn't really appreciate anything at the time and I had no enthusiasm'. He has claimed he wrote the song "Filty Rotten Scoundrel" about himself; 'I need to learn to be grateful and appreciate the opportunities that I have been given. It's also about my fear of living, dying and never really achieving anything'. "The World or Nothing" continues this trend, with James describing the theme as 'the vicious cycle of feeling lost and resorting to the aid of alcohol while also feeling lost because of alcohol. It talks about how self-destructive a lot of us are and how we enjoy abusing our bodies'. Of "Nelson's County", Veck-Gilodi has said: 'This song is about the county of Norfolk and how a lot of the people who reside there seem to have no real ambition other than working a 9-5, raising a family and living a normal life'.
Norfolk is the home county of Deaf Havana and many of the songs on Fools and Worthless Liars focus on the members childhoods' in the area. "Hunstanton Pier" is about the town of Hunstanton, where James Veck-Gilodi and bassist Lee Wilson went to school. 'It brings me back to the only place I ever really felt at home, and how much I miss it. It's hard for me to sing sometimes because it leads my mind to wander off and think about all the people I used to be so close to and what they are doing now'. "Youth In Retrospect" also deals with nostalgia and is again particularly personal to Veck-Gilodi and Lee Wilson. James has revealed that he is 'constantly battling with the fact that I'm constantly growing older' and how the pair 'wish we could go back to the days where... our biggest worry was whether our maths homework would be in on time'. "Times Change, Friends Leave and Life Doesn't Stop For Anybody" is about former member Ryan Mellor, with whom James has been friends since they were 14. 'This song is just, I suppose, about how much we miss him'.
"I Will Try" is about having a positive outlook on life. James has explained that he has 'a very negative outlook on the world' and that he can 'never really appreciate anything' so the song is a reminder to himself to try and look on the bright side. He continued; 'the line "I've got friends who have lost their fathers and they're much stronger men than me" refers mainly to Chris (Pennells, guitar), Jamie (manager) and my dear friend David Rice who have lost family members and yet still find a smile and appreciate all the upsides of life'. "Little White Lies" is about dishonesty. The song 'covers the way that lies eat away at my brain and cause me to almost lose my mind, yet I still keep making mistakes and bad decisions', according to James. He revealed little about the background of "Leeches", saying only that 'Leeches is about something terrible and unspeakable that happened to someone who once made me very happy'. Speaking about "Anemophobia", he said; 'the title of this song means a fear of wind, which I have, but the song on the whole though is about anxiety. ... ... "Fifty Four" is about James' girlfriend. 'She is my only real sense of normality and I owe her more than I can write down in words for that'.

Critical Reception

Fools and Worthless Liars was generally very well received by critics, with many noting that the band had progressed significantly. Ian Winwood, writing for Kerrang! magazine expressed some reservations about the 'generic' nature of some of the choruses, but also remarked that 'there are also moments when Fools and Worthless Liars is quite superb, and represents a stark stride forward for its creators'. ... He commended the band for writing a 'confident and precise rock record'.com, lauded the band for producing 'one of the best albums from a UK band this year' and noted that the 'most endearing quality isn't the strength of the standout tracks, it's that it doesn't really seem to have any trouble staying consistent until the end'. He, too, highlighted the progress the band had made, expressing his opinion that the album was 'mature'.

Accolades

Touring

Deaf Havana began playing their new songs live several months before the release of the album. Prior to Slam Dunk Festival, an event which took place in May 2011, vocalist James Veck-Gilodi announced that the band were 'going to play four or five new songs this weekend'.
Leading up to the release of the album, Deaf Havana played two specially arranged shows. On 6 November, the day before the album was due to be released, they played Fools and Worthless Liars in its entirety at the Barfly, a small venue in London, alongside an acoustic set. Included in the price of a ticket was a copy of the album and a signed poster.
After the release of the album, Deaf Havana spent a lot of time touring as a support band; they would not play a headline tour until April 2012, 5 months after the release of Fools and Worthless Liars. They began by supporting Skindred on their headline tour across Europe, followed by acting as support, alongside Tek-One, to Architects on their UK tour.
Deaf Havana also played slots at a variety of festivals in support of the album; among them were Reading and Leeds, Pukkelpop, Hevy Festival and Takedown Festival. They are scheduled to play at Soundwave Festival, in Australia, in 2013.

Singles

The first single to be taken from the album was "I'm A Bore, Mostly"; it was released on 9 October 2011 featuring the B-Side "We Used To Talk". The music video was released on 6 February 2012. "Little White Lies" was the next single; it was released on 27 May 2012.apple.-portia/id528541353 The music video was released on 2 May 2012. The fourth, and final, single from the album is "Hunstanton Pier". The music video for this track was released on 22 August 2012.

Tracklisting

Chart Performance

"I'm a Bore, Mostly"

Deluxe Edition

The album was re-released as a 2-disc 'Deluxe Edition' on 22 October 2012. The release will feature banjo, mandolin and piano.

Track listing

All songs written by James Veck Gilodi and Tom Ogden. All Lyrics written by James Veck Gilodi unless specified.

Personnel

The following personnel contributed to Fools And Worthless Liars:

Deaf Havana

Regular lead guitarist Chris Pennells and bassist Lee Wilson did not perform on the album due to work commitments.

Other musicians

Technical personnel

Chart Performance






