[[Kenneth Volentine]]

CATEGORIES: 1941 births, Living people, People from Claiborne Parish, Louisiana, Members of the Louisiana House of Representatives, Louisiana sheriffs, Louisiana Democrats, American Methodists, American farmers

Kenneth Lee Volentine, Sr. (born January 9, 1941) is a livestock and dairy farmer who previously served as a state representative and  sheriff of his native Claiborne Parish in north Louisiana.

Background

Volentine is the son of Fred Volentine (1921–2011) and the former Sudie Bernice Lee, also deceased. His paternal grandparents were Daniel Bell Volentine, Jr. (1892–1968)Daniel and Cleo Volentine died the same month, July 1968. Volentine graduated in 1960 as the class president at Athens High School in Athens, Louisiana, in the building now occupied by Mt. Olive Christian School.Mt. Olive Christian School, former Athens High School class photographs by year He and his wife, the former Beverly Ann Pixley (born 1940), reside in Athens, a rural community in  southern Claiborne Parish. They have a son, Kenneth Volentine, Jr., of Athens.com Volentine also has two brothers, Edwin "Bo" Volentine (born 1942) and Dan Volentine, both of Athens, and a sister, Wanda V. Head of Shreveport, Louisiana.
Volentine is member of the Athens Masonic Lodge F.&A.M. and one of seven members of the Claiborne Industrial Development Board.

State representative

From 1988-1992, during the administration of Governor Buddy Roemer, Volentine served a single term in the state House of Representatives.

Sheriff Volentine

In 1995, as Wilkerson won easy reelection to the legislature, Volentine secured the first of his two terms as Claiborne Parish sheriff. The office is based in the parish seat of Homer. Incumbent James R. "Snap" Oakes (1929-2014) retired, and in a two-candidate race Volentine defeated fellow Democrat Donald Ray "Chic" Ceccarelli (born 1965) of Homer, 3,760 (61.5 percent) to 2,350 votes (38.5 percent).
In July 2003, the Baton Rouge firm Utopia Entertainment, Inc., sued Claiborne Parish, through Sheriff Volentine, and LaSalle Management Company, under contract to manage the men's division of the parish jail. The company claimed copyright-infringement because inmates and visitors to the Claiborne Parish Detention Center for a $3 fee could purchase pirated copies of recordings by such performers as Eminem, John Tesh, and George Strait. An inmate named Bo Fain was specifically cited for having made the recordings.
In July 2003, Volentine joined another former state representative from the area, Virgil Orr of Ruston, in supporting the unsuccessful Democratic gubernatorial contender Randy Ewing of Jackson Parish, a former member of the Louisiana State Senate. The position ultimately went to another Democrat, Kathleen Blanco of Lafayette.
In 2003, Volentine did not seek a third term as sheriff and was succeeded by Kenneth R. Bailey of Homer (born 1958), runaway victor in the nonpartisan blanket primary held that fall.




