[[Feodor Chin]]

CATEGORIES: University of California, Los Angeles alumni, American male film actors, American male television actors, Living people, 1974 births

Feodor Chin (born August 18, 1974) is an American actor, writer and director. Chin starred as the antagonist "Benny" in Juwan Chung's Baby opposite David Huynh, the protagonist. Baby won a Special Jury Award for Best Feature Length Film, Narrative at the 2007 Los Angeles Asian Pacific Film Festival, among other awards. He also starred as Keye Luke in Timothy Tau's short film bio-pic about actor and artist Keye Luke, titled Keye Luke, which premiered at the 2012 Los Angeles Asian Pacific Film Festival and which was also Closing Night Film of the inaugural 2013 Seattle Asian American Film Festival.festpro.com/html/movies/2020207886_atatheater25columnxml.html
Chin was born and raised in San Francisco, California, and is a graduate of the University of California, Los Angeles. He has also trained at the American Conservatory Theater in San Francisco and the Upright Citizens Brigade Theater.

Film, Television & Writing

Under his banner Iron Oxide Productions, Chin also wrote, directed and starred in the short film "Spice It Up", which won an Audience Choice Award at the 2011 HollyShorts Film Festival. Chin wrote, produced and starred in the TV Pilot "Golden Boy" (directed by William Lu), which has screened at film festivals such as the Los Angeles Asian Pacific Film Festival and the DisOrient Film Festival. Chin has also written a pilot, along with Will Henning, for a TV series tentatively titled Chinatown Squad, about a police squad responsible for cleaning up corruption in 1890 San Francisco Chinatown and which Stephane Gauger directed and produced.channelapa.html In it, he stars as Pistol Pete, a Chinatown mob boss who dons European clothes, a character who is also based on the real-life historical figure of Little Pete.com/45424453Chinatown Squad - Behind The Scenes, Tony Toka,  Chin played the antagonist "Benny" in Juwan Chung's Baby opposite the protagonist "Baby," played by David Huynh - the film won a Special Jury Award for Best Feature Length Film, Narrative at the 2007 Los Angeles Asian Pacific Film Festival, among other accolades. He also starred as Keye Luke in Timothy Tau's short film bio-pic about actor and artist Keye Luke, titled Keye Luke, which screened at the 2012 and 2013 Los Angeles Asian Pacific Film Festival, the DisOrient Film Festival, the Asian American International Film Festival, and which was also Closing Night Film of the inaugural 2013 Seattle Asian American Film Festival. Chin has also appeared in independent films such as Byron Q's Raskal Love (as Vanna Fut's father), Dominic Mah's What If People Died and Phil Gorn's S.F., short films such as William Lu's ATF: Asian Task Force, and web Series such as Timothy Tau's Quantum Cops (as "Bronson Law") and Andrea Lwin's Slanted (playing "Truman", Andrea's brother).
As a writer, and in addition to writing Chinatown Squad, Golden Boy and Spice It Up!, Chin has also written, along with Jolene Kim, a pilot script for the TV project "Diamond Head", which won 1st Runner Up in the "Hawaii" category of the 12th Annual CAPE (Coalition for Asian Pacifics in Entertainment) New Writer Awards in 2012.org/the-12th-annual-cape-new-writers-awards/
Chin has also appeared on TV Shows such as The Mindy Project (as The Karate Guy), Bunheads (as Jason), The Bold and the Beautiful (as the International Buyer), Nash Bridges (as Jay), and General Hospital.

Voicework

Chin has done voicework for video and computer games, most notably voicing Splinter in Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles: Out of the Shadows. He has also done voices for games such as Square Enix's Sleeping Dogs (as Tran), Blizzard Entertainment's World of Warcraft: Mists of Pandaria (as Mudmug), 2K Games' XCOM: Enemy Unknown (as Shaojie Zhang), the 2013 game based on the Alien franchise, Aliens: Colonial Marines (as Weyland Yutani), The Bureau: XCOM Declassified and THQ's New Legends. He also has performed voicework for audiobooks such as Timothy Dalrymple's Jeremy Lin: The Reason for the Linsanity and received an Earphones Award from AudioFile for his narration of Snakehead by Patrick Raden Keefe and for his narration of Richard C. Morais' "Buddhaland Brooklyn"Audiobook Reviews, Buddhaland Brooklyn, Richard C. Morais, Read by Feodor Chin, 

Theatrical and Stage Work

Chin has also appeared on stage at The Colony Theater as "Jinwu" in Climbing Everest,

Filmography

Selected Voicework






