[[Kintoor]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Barabanki district, Battles of the Indian Rebellion of 1857, Indian Rebellion of 1857, British East India Company, 1858 in India, Resistance to the British Empire, History of Uttar Pradesh

Kintoor or Kintur is a village distant 10 miles north-east of Badosarai in Barabanki district famous for battle of Kintoor of 1858 during Indian Mutiny.nic.htm

History

Kintoor is named after Kunti, the mother of Pandav, as per the ancient sayings. Initially its name was Kuntapur.org.in/places

Mahabahrat era

Parijaat tree a sacred baobab tree in the village of Kintoor on the banks of Ghaghra.

Battle of Kintoor

Battle of Kintoor was a conflict between rebel sepoys and troops East India Company and Kapurthala State on October 6, 1858 during Indian Mutiny. Parliament. House of CommonsBulletins and Other State Intelligence Compiled and Arranged from the Official Documents Published in the London Gazette

British Raj

During 1869 census of Oudh, Kintoor was designated as one of the total thirteen large towns or kasbahs and Inspector of Police of Ram Nagar was appointed here on the night of census.The report on the census of OUDH, OUDH Government Press, 1869

Nishapuri Sada'at of Kintoor

Many of the early Sufi saints that came to North India belonged to Sayyid families. Most of these Sayyid families came from Central Asia and Iran, but some also originate from Yemen, Oman, Iraq and Bahrain. Perhaps the most famous Sufi was Syed Salar Masud, from whom many of the Sayyid families of Awadh claim their descent.King Wajid Ali Shah of Awadh, Volume 1 by Mirza Ali Azhar, Royal Book Co., 1982
The Nishapuri Sada'at (Sayeds) of Barabanki (adjoining areas of Kintoor, Fatehpur, Jarwal and Lucknow) are Kazmi or Musavi Sayeds; that is they claim descent from the Prophet through his daughter's line and the line of the seventh Imam of the Shi'a Muslims, Musa al-Kazem. They came in India originally from Nishapur a town near Mashhad in northeastern Iran. Lapidus Two brothers Sayed Sharafu'd-Din Abu Talib (who was the ancestor of Waris 'Ali) and Sayed Muhammed in thirteenth century forsaked Nishapur, Iran (via Khorasan and Mashhad) for Awadh, India in the time of Hulagu Khan (1256-1265) the Il-Khanid Mongol ruler. 420.A Socio-intellectual History of the Isnā ʾAsharī Shīʾīs in India: 16th to 19th century A.D, Saiyid Athar Abbas Rizvi, Munshiram Manoharlal Publishers, 1986 After their arrival in Kintoor the Saiyids were givena large jagir by Sultan Muhammad Tughluq, where they continued to hold the land in different tenures until twentieth century at the turn of which they held two-thirds of the village land of Kintoor. The grave of Sayed Alauddin Kazmi is situated in Kintoor. The Kazmis of Fatehpur are his descendants. These Nishapuri Sayeds of Kintoor spread to adjoining localities of Barabanki e.g. Fatehpur, and even to neighbouring districts e.g. Jarwal in Bahraich district and in Lucknow. These Nishapuri Sayeds produced several outstanding Shia Muslim religious scholars in 18th, 19th and 20th centuries.Sufi cults and the evolution of medieval Indian culture, Anup Taneja, Indian Council of Historical Researchh in association with Northern Book Centre, 2003Shi'a Islam in Colonial India: Religion, Community and Sectarianism By Justin Jones
Zayn al-'Abidin al-Musavi who was progenitor of sayeds of Kintoor was great-great-grandfather of Sayed Ahmed.e. Abaqati (that of Sayed Hamid Hussain) and Khomeini (that of Sayed Ahmed).

Abaqati family

One branch of the Nishapuri Kintoori Sayeds took root in Lucknow. The most famous of Kintoori Sayeds is  Ayatollah Syed Mir Hamid Hussain Musavi, author of work entitled Abaqat al Anwar; the first word in the title of this work provided his descendantswith the nisba (title) they still bear, Abaqati. Syed Ali Nasir Saeed Abaqati Agha Roohi, a Lucknow based cleric is from the family of Nishapuri Kintoori Sayeds and uses title Abaqati.

Khomeini family

Towards the end of the 18th century the ancestors of the Supreme Leader of the Iranian Revolution, Ruhollah Khomeini had migrated from their original home in Nishapur, Iran to the kingdom of Oudh in northern India whose rulers were Twelver Shia Muslims of Persian origin;Sacred space and holy war: the politics, culture and history of Shi'ite Islam By Juan Ricardo ColeArt and culture: endeavours in interpretation By Ahsan Jan Qaisar,Som Prakash Verma,Mohammad Habib they settled in the town of Kintoor. He left Lucknow in the middle of 19th century on pilgrimage to the tomb of Imam Ali in Najaf, Iraq and never returned. According to Moin this movement was to escape colonial rule of British Raj in India. He visited Iran in 1834 and settled down in Khomein in 1839. Although he stayed and settled in Iran, he continued to be known as Hindi, even Ruhollah Khomeini used Hindi as pen name in some of his ghazals. Also Ruhollah's brother was known by name Nureddin Hindi.

Personalities

Royalty

Literary

=Urdu/Persian (19th century)=

=Urdu/Persian (20th century)=

Others

Attractions






