[[Dolly (sheep)]]

CATEGORIES: 1996 animal births, 2003 animal deaths, 1996 in Scotland, Cloned sheep, Cloning, Collections of the National Museums of Scotland, History of Midlothian, Dolly Parton



Dolly (5 July 1996 – 14 February 2003) was a female domestic sheep, and the first mammal to be cloned from an adult somatic cell, using the process of nuclear transfer.
The cell used as the donor for the cloning of Dolly was taken from a mammary gland, and the production of a healthy clone therefore proved that a cell taken from a specific part of the body could recreate a whole individual. On Dolly's name, Wilmut stated "Dolly is derived from a mammary gland cell and we couldn't think of a more impressive pair of glands than Dolly Parton's".

Birth

Dolly was born on 5 July 1996 and had three mothers (one provided the egg, another the DNA and a third carried the cloned embryo to term).

Life

Dolly lived her entire life at the Roslin Institute in Edinburgh. There she was bred with a Welsh Mountain ram and produced six lambs in total. Her first lamb, named Bonnie, was born in April 1998. The next year Dolly produced twin lambs Sally and Rosie, and she gave birth to triplets Lucy, Darcy and Cotton in the year after that.Dolly's family

Death

On 14 February 2003, Dolly was euthanised because she had a progressive lung disease and severe arthritis. Such lung diseases are a particular danger for sheep kept indoors, and Dolly had to sleep inside for security reasons.
Some in the press speculated that a contributing factor to Dolly's death was that she could have been born with a genetic age of six years, the same age as the sheep from which she was cloned. One basis for this idea was the finding that Dolly's telomeres were short, which is typically a result of the ageing process. The Roslin Institute have stated that intensive health screening did not reveal any abnormalities in Dolly that could have come from advanced aging.Was Dolly already 'old' at birth? Roslin Institute, Accessed 4 April 2010

Legacy

After cloning was successfully demonstrated through the production of Dolly, many other large mammals were cloned, including pigs, Making cloned mammals was highly inefficient (Dolly was the only lamb that survived to adulthood from 277 attempts - although by 2014 Chinese scientists were reported to have 70-80% success rates cloning pigs) Wilmut, who led the team that created Dolly, announced in 2007 that the nuclear transfer technique may never be sufficiently efficient for use in humans.Roger Highfield Dolly creator Prof Ian Wilmut shuns cloning Daily Telegraph 16 November 2007
Cloning may have uses in preserving endangered species and may become a viable tool for reviving extinct species.Jabr, Ferris (11 March 2013) Will Cloning Ever Save Endangered Animals? Scientific American, Retrieved 15 January 2014






