[[Palais Garnier]]

CATEGORIES: Music venues completed in 1874, 9th arrondissement of Paris, Opera houses in Paris, Buildings and structures in Paris, Second Empire architecture, Beaux-Arts architecture, Baroque Revival architecture, Ballet venues, Terminating vistas in Paris, The Phantom of the Opera, Theatres completed in 1875

The Palais Garnier () is a 1,979-seat opera house, which was built from 1861 to 1875 for the Paris Opera. It was originally called the Salle des Capucines because of its location on the Boulevard des Capucines in the 9th arrondissement of Paris, but soon became known as the Palais Garnier in recognition of its opulence and its architect, Charles Garnier. The theatre is also often referred to as the Opéra Garnier, and historically was known as the Opéra de Paris or simply the Opéra,Beauvert 1996, pp. 102–109 (capacity, theatre names); Hanser 2006, pp. 172 (dates of construction). as it was the primary home of the Paris Opera and its associated Paris Opera Ballet until 1989, when the Opéra Bastille opened at the Place de la Bastille. 188. The Paris Opera now mainly uses the Palais Garnier for ballet.
The Palais Garnier is "probably the most famous opera house in the world, a symbol of Paris like Notre Dame Cathedral, the Louvre, or the Sacré Coeur Basilica."Hanser 2006, pp. 172–179. This is at least partly due to its use as the setting for Gaston Leroux's 1910 novel The Phantom of the Opera and, especially, the novel's subsequent adaptations in films and Andrew Lloyd Webber's popular 1986 musical. Another contributing factor is that among the buildings constructed in Paris during the Second Empire, besides being the most expensive,Simeone 2000, p. 177. it has been described as the only one that is "unquestionably a masterpiece of the first rank."Watkin 1996, pp. 391–392.
This opinion is far from unanimous however: the 20th-century French architect Le Corbusier once described it as "a lying art" and contended that the "Garnier movement is a décor of the grave". 220, 233. From Le Corbusier, Almanach d'Architecture Moderne, Collection de 'L'Esprit Nouveau, Charles Eliot Norton Lectures 1938–9 (Paris, 1955), p. 120 ("art de mensonge", "événement Garnier est un décor d'enterrement").
The Palais Garnier also houses the Bibliothèque-Musée de l'Opéra de Paris (Paris Opera Library-Museum). Although the Library-Museum is no longer managed by the Opera and is part of the Bibliothèque nationale de France,"Bibliothèque-Musée de l'Opéra" (in French) at the BnF website. Retrieved 3 August 2011. the museum is included in unaccompanied tours of the Palais Garnier."Palais Garnier" at the Paris Opera website. Retrieved 3 August 2011.

History

Since 1821 the Opéra de Paris had been housed in the temporary building known as the Salle Le Peletier on the  which had been constructed after the previous opera house had been destroyed by fire. Since then a new permanent building had been desired and by 1847 Perfect Rambuteau had selected a site on the east side of the Place du Palais-Royal as part of an extension of the Rue de Rivoli. However this site was later sued for the Grand Hôtel du Louvre. In 1846 Charles Rohault de Fleury was appointed as the opera's official architect and began undertaking various studies in suitable sites and designs. He eventually settled on a site off the Boulevard des Capucines.  A new building would help resolve the awkward convergence of streets at this location. 
The attempted assassination of Emperor Napoleon III at the entrance to the Salle Le Peletier on 14 January 1858, whose constricted street access highlighted the need for a separate, more secure entrance for the head of state, together with the inadequate facilities and temporary nature of the Salle Le Peletier gave urgency to the building of a new state-funded opera house. 48–50, 54–55. Rohault de Fleury produced a number of designs for the new site and gained the support of Baron Haussmann who was overseeing the great reconstruction of Paris during the Second Empire as well as that of Achille Fould the minster who had responsibility for the Opéra de Paris.
On 29 September 1860 an imperial decree designated . 102–109.Kirkland. Page 190.
By November 1860  Rohault de Fleury had completed the design for what he thought would be the crowning work of his career and was also working on a commission from the city to design the facades of the other buildings lining the new square to ensure they were in harmony. However that same month Achille Fould was replaced as minster of state by Count Alexandre Colonna-Walewski.  His wife Marie Anne de Ricci Poniatowska had used her position as mistress of Napoleon III to obtain her husband's appointment. 185—186 Aware of completing designs and under pressure to give the commission to Viollet-le-Duc who had the support of Empress Eugénie Colonna-Walewski escaped the need to make a decision by proposing to use a architectural design competition to select the architect. 191.

Design Competition

On 30 December 1860 the Second Empire of Emperor Napoleon III officially announced a architectural design competition for the design of the new opera house. 
Applicants were given a month to submit entries. There were two phases to the competition. Charles Garnier (1825–1898) was one of 171 entrants in the first phase. 192 Each of the entrants were required to submit a motto that summarised their design. Garnier's was the quote "Bramo assai, poco spero" ( meaning "desire for much, hope for little") from the Italian poet Torquato Tasso
Garnier was awarded the fifth-place prize and became one of five finalists selected for the second phase. 60–62.  In addition to Garnier, the others were his friend Leon Ginain, Alphonse-Nicolas Crépinet and Joseph-Louis Duc (who subsequently withdrew due to other commitments). 192 To the surprise of many, both Viollet-le-Duc and Charles Rohault de Fleury missed out. The second phase required the contestants to revise their original projects and was more rigorous, with a 58-page program, written by the director of the Opéra, Alphonse Royer, which the contestants received on 18 April. The new submissions were sent to the jury in the middle of May, and on 29 May 1861 Garnier's project was selected for its "rare and superior qualities in the beautiful distribution of the plans, the monumental and characteristic aspect of the facades and sections". 76, 290. 
Garnier's wife Louise later wrote that the French architect Alphonse de Gisors, who was on the jury, had commented to them that Garnier's project was "remarkable in its simplicity, clarity, logic, grandeur, and because of the exterior dispositions which distinguish the plan in three distinct parts—the public spaces, auditorium, and stage ... 'you have greatly improved your project since the first competition; whereas Ginain first-place winner in the first phase has ruined his.'"
Legend has it that the Emperor's wife, the Empress Eugénie, who was likely irritated that her own favored candidate, Viollet-le-Duc, had not been selected, asked the relatively unknown Garnier: "What is this? It's not a style; it's neither Louis Quatorze, nor Louis Quinze, nor Louis Seize!" "Why Ma'am, it's Napoléon Trois" replied Garnier "and you're complaining!"Translated and quoted by Ayers 2004, pp. 172–174. The architectural styles mentioned by the empress were those which prevailed during the reigns of Louis XIV, XV, and XVI. For more information, see the sections on Baroque, Rococo, and Neoclassicism in French architecture. Andrew Ayers has written that Garnier's definition "remains undisputed, so much does the Palais Garnier seem emblematic of its time and of the Second Empire that created it. A giddy mixture of up-to-the-minute technology, rather prescriptive rationalism, exuberant eclecticism and astonishing opulence, Garnier's opera encapsulated the divergent tendencies and political and social ambitions of its era." Ayers goes on to say that the judges of the competition in particular admired Garnier's design for "the clarity of his plan, which was a brilliant example of the beaux-arts design methods in which both he and they were thoroughly versed."

Laying of the foundation

Upon winning the commission Garnier established an office on the construction site and hired a team of nine architects and draftsmen. He selected as his deputy, Victor Louvet.
Initial funds to begin construction were voted on 2 July 1861,Mead 1991, p. 137. and the site was excavated between 27 August and 31 December. On 13 January 1862 the first concrete foundations were poured, starting at the front and progressing sequentially toward the back, with the laying of the substructure masonry beginning as soon as each section of concrete was cast. The opera house needed a much deeper basement in the substage area than other building types, but the level of the groundwater was unexpectedly high. Wells were sunk in February 1862 and eight steam pumps installed in March, but despite operating continuously 24 hours a day until October the site would not dry up. To deal with this problem Garnier designed a double foundation to protect the superstructure from moisture. It incorporated a water course and an enormous concrete cistern (cuve) which would both relieve the pressure of the external groundwater on the basement walls and serve as a reservoir in case of fire. A contract for its construction was signed on 20 June. Soon a persistent legend arose that the opera house was built over a subterranean lake, inspiring Gaston Leroux to incorporate the idea into his novel The Phantom of the Opera. On 21 July the cornerstone was laid at the southeast angle of the building's facade. The brick vault of the cuve was finished by 8 November, and the substructure was essentially complete by the end of the year. 147; Hanser 2006, p. 174; Ayers 2004, p. 174.

Model

The emperor expressed an interest in seeing a model of the building, and a plaster scale model (2 cm per meter) was constructed by Louis Villeminot between April 1862 and April 1863 at a cost of more than 8,000 francs. After previewing it, the emperor requested several changes to the design of the building, the most important of which was the suppression of a balustraded terrace with corner groups at the top of the facade and its replacement with a massive attic story fronted by a continuous frieze surmounted by imperial quadrigae over the end bays. 149–151.
With the incorporated changes, the model was transported over specially installed rails to the Palais de l'Industrie for public display at the 1863 exhibition. Théophile Gautier wrote of the model (Le Moniteur Universel, 13 May 1863) that "the general arrangement becomes intelligible to all  eyes and already acquires a sort of reality that better permits one to prejudge the final effect ... it attracts the crowd's curiosity; it is, in effect, the new Opéra seen through reversed opera glasses."Mead 1991, p. 303. The model is now lost, but it was photographed by J. B. Donas in 1863.
The emperor's quadrigae were never added, although they can be seen in the model. Instead Charles-Alphonse Guméry's gilded bronze sculptural groups Harmony and Poetry were installed in 1869.  The linear frieze seen in the model was also redesigned with alternating low- and high-relief decorative medallions bearing the gilded letters from the imperial monogram ("N" for Napoléon, "E" for Empereur). The custom-designed letters were not ready in time for the unveiling and were replaced with commercially available substitutes. After the fall of the empire in 1870, Garnier was relieved to be able to remove them from the medallions. Letters in Garnier's original design were finally installed during the restoration of the building in 2000. 91–92.

Change in name

The scaffolding concealing the facade was removed on 15 August 1867 in time for the Paris Exposition of 1867. The official title of the Paris Opera was prominently displayed on the entablature of the giant Corinthian order of coupled columns fronting the main-floor loggia:  "ACADEMIE IMPERIALE DE MUSIQUE". 185. When the emperor was deposed on 4 September 1870 as a result of the disastrous Franco-Prussian War, the government was replaced by the Third Republic, and almost immediately, on 17 September 1870, the Opera was renamed Théâtre National de l'Opéra, a name it kept until 1939. "A documentary overview of musical theaters in Paris, 1830–1900" in Fauser (2009), p. 382. In spite of this, when it came time to change the name on the new opera house, only the first six letters of the word IMPERIALE were replaced, giving the now famous "ACADEMIE NATIONALE DE MUSIQUE", an official title which had actually only been used during the approximately two-year period of the Second Republic which had preceded the Second Empire.

1870–1871

All work on the building came to a halt during the Franco-Prussian War due to the siege of Paris (September 1870 – January 1871). Construction had so advanced that parts of the building could be used as a food warehouse and a hospital. After France's defeat Garnier became seriously ill from the deprivations of the siege and left Paris from March to June to recover on the Ligurian coast of Italy, while his assistant Louis Louvet remained behind during the turmoil of the Paris Commune which followed. Louvet wrote several letters to Garnier, which document events relating to the building. Because of the theatre's proximity to the fighting at the Place Vendôme, troops of the National Guard bivouacked there and were in charge of its defense and distributing food to soldiers and civilians. The Commune authorities planned to replace Garnier with another architect, but this unnamed man had not yet appeared when Republican troops ousted the National Guard and gained control over the building on 23 May. By the end of the month the Commune had been severely defeated. The Third Republic had become sufficiently well established by the fall, that on 30 September construction work recommenced, and by late October a small amount of funds were voted by the new legislature for further construction. 142–143, 168–170.

1872–1873

The political leaders of the new government maintained an intense dislike of all things associated with the Second Empire, and many of them regarded the essentially apolitical Garnier as a holdover from that regime. This was especially true during the presidency of Adolphe Thiers who remained in office until May 1873, but also persisted under his successor Marshal MacMahon. Economies were demanded, and Garnier was forced to suppress the completion of sections of the building, in particular the Pavillon de l'Empereur (which later became the home of the Opera Library Museum). However, on 28–29 October an overwhelming incentive to complete the new theatre came when the Salle Le Peletier, was destroyed by a fire which raged the entire night. 143–145. 170–172.  Garnier was immediately instructed to complete the building as soon as possible.

Completion

During 1874 Garnier and his construction team worked feverishly to complete the new house, and by 17 October the orchestra was able to conduct an acoustical test of the new auditorium, followed by another on 2 December which was attended by officials, guests, and members of the press. The Paris Opera Ballet danced on the stage on 12 December, and six days later the famous chandelier was lit for the first time. 177–180. 
