[[The Sons (band)]]

CATEGORIES: English rock music groups, English alternative rock groups, People from Derbyshire, Musical groups established in 1994, Alumni of the University of Derby

The Sons are a Derbyshire-based alternative rock band, though their music incorporates sounds from various other genres, including rhythm and blues, folk and country, with a heavy emphasis on intricately layered musical composition and lyrical complexity. Currently, The Sons are composed of lead singer/main songwriter and guitarist/pianist Paul Herron, multi-instrumentalist and vocalist Steven Herron, guitarist and vocalist Stewart English, bassist Lee Blades, and percussionist Roger Millichamp. 
The band runs their own record label Cannon Fodder Recordings.

History

Early days

The Sons' origins trace back to 1994, when Paul Herron met Ken Reeves while attending the University of Derby and the two of them, both aspiring singer/songwriters and guitarists, decided to form a band. Herron and Reeves soon recruited a bass player, Lee Blades, and a drummer, Matt Dewsnap, by hanging up posters around campus.  When Herron and Reeves discovered that Blades lived only two doors down from their house on Uttoxeter New Road, Derby, the quartet adopted the name "New Road" as their band name.bbc.co.shtml
New Road continued to play local venues like The Garrick in and around Derby until Reeves left for southern England in 1996. 
Before Reeves' departure, New Road connected with Stewart English, the owner of Clostrophobia Recording Studios on Agard Street in Derby, and began recording one of the first of the band's many demos. Unfortunately, English was later forced to close his studio, but quickly joined New Road – though, soon after the addition of English, Dewsnap left the group due to friendly but creative differences, and was replaced by Matthew Paton. 
The change in line-up inspired a change in name – from New Road to Sub-marine – and the band continued to hone their skills by playing shows in their native Derby, London and France.

The Sons

In 2003, the band self-financed and released their first single One Man Floats, followed by the four track EP1 in 2004.  The release of One Man Floats required the band to settle on a permanent name, and after drawing up a list of possibilities, they settled on The Sons. 
Following the recording of EP1 but prior to its release, Matthew Paton left the group and was replaced by drummer Roger Millichamp, whom Herron and English met while working together at a local bank. For the next three years the group continued to play live, performing more widely in London, Manchester and Leeds.

Visiting Hours and Popup-Records

After promoting several demos without being signed by a label, the band decided to produce and distribute their first full-length album, Visiting Hours in 2007, followed by a seven-date British tour in the summer of 2008.
In 2008, Herron received an enthusiastic e-mail regarding Visiting Hours from Hamburg-based Popup-Records label head Jan Kopke. The Sons flew to Hamburg to meet with Kopke and negotiate a record deal.  This led to the European release of their first single from Visiting Hours, "Kids With Knives," in Nov. 2008, followed by the album release in March 2009.  
Visiting Hours received positive reviews from the German music press and the band began the first of three tours of continental Europe in March 2009, making stops in Germany, Switzerland, Belgium and Holland. 
In order to enhance the band's live sound and more accurately  reflect the musical arrangements on Visiting Hours, the group expanded to a five-piece in January 2009 with the addition of Steven Herron, a fellow musician and, coincidentally, Paul Herron's brother, on keyboards, guitar and vocals.
The Sons released three more singles from Visiting Hours throughout 2009: "Trying So Hard," "Safe" and "Worry."  Following an appearance in Hamburg at the legendary Kaiserkeller for the 2009 Reiperbahn Festival, the band returned to Europe for their second tour in November, playing in Germany, Switzerland and Belgium
The group returned to Europe for the final leg of their Visiting Hours promotional tour in March 2010, performing in Germany, France, Belgium and Italy and. At the end of the tour, they went home to Derby to begin work on their second album.

The Prime Words Committee and American release

The Prime Words Committee was recorded at Snug Recording Co. in Derby between May 2010 and Feb. 2011.  The thirteen tracks on the album were selected from nineteen completed tracks and the remaining six were set aside for future B-sides.  As part of their promotion for the album, the band prepared videos for all thirteen tracks and developed a new version of their website, (www.com) reflecting the album themes and graphics.
During June 2011, The Sons connected with California-based manager Kristi Carlson and signed an exclusive contract for North American representation.  Over the next few months, Carlson worked with the band on strategies for worldwide promotion, including releases in both physical and downloadable formats, and the band started attracting the attention of several radio stations in the United States.
The Sons announced via Twitter that they formed their own independent record label, Cannon Fodder Recordings, on the July 4, 2011. The Prime Words Committee was released worldwide as the inaugural release on Cannon Fodder Recordings on July 6, 2011.   
Popup-Records will release the album in continental Europe in October 2011, having preceded its release with two singles, "Two Minds" and "New Obsession." Cannon Fodder Recordings released an expanded version of Visiting Hours worldwide on Sept. 4, 2011, featuring previously unreleased recordings and European B-sides. The Sons premiered material from The Prime Words Committee live during an appearance at the YNot Festival in the Derbyshire Dales on Aug. 7, 2011.  
At the special request of a Swiss fan that had previously seen the band at Gaswerk, The Sons flew into Zurich and played a private party at Portier in Winterthur on Sept. 10, 2011.thisisderbyshire.co.html

Style

In a 2011 interview with the Derby Telegraph, The Sons' main songwriter, Paul Herron, said of his writing style:

Touring

The Sons first European tour dates (2009)

March 6 - Rockhouse, Derby, England
 March 15 - Golden Fleece, Nottingham, England
 March 20 - Ms Treue, Bremen, Germany
 March 21 - Michelle Records, Hamburg, Germany
 March 21 - Gruner Jager, Hamburg, Germany
 March 22 - De Cantine, Amsterdam
 March 23 - Kaltscha Club, Dortmund, Germany 
 March 24 - Damen und Herren, Düsseldorf, Germany
 March 25 - Subway to Peter, Chemnitz, Germany
 March 26 - Riff, Magdeburg, Germany
 March 27 - Unikum, Halle, Germany
 March 28 - Sparte 4, Saarbrücken, Germany
 March 29 - Dimensione, Winterthur, Switzerland
 March 30 - L Club, Wurzburg, Germany
 March 31 - Cord, Munchen, Germany
 April 2 - Mokka, Thun, Switzerland
 April 3 - Cafe Pfeiffer Buchen, Germany
 April 4 - Club Im Park, Furstenwalde, Germany
 April 5 - Virgin Records, Berlin, Germany
 April 5 - Intersoup, Berlin, Germany
 April 6 - Blauer Engel, Kiel, Germany
 April 7 - Kinky Star Club, Gent, Belgium
 April 10 – Rockhouse, Derby

Paul Herron solo acoustic (2009)

June 10 - Ms Treue, Bremen, Germany
 June 11 - Karo, Bremen, Germany
 June 12 - Irish Pub, Buxtehude, Germany
 June 12 - Indra, Hamburg, Germany

The Reiperbahn Festival (2009)

Sept. 25 - Kaiserkeller, Hamburg, Germany

The Sons second European tour (2009)

Oct. 16 - Rockhouse, Derby
 Nov. 26 - Musigbistrot, Bern, Switzerland
 Nov. 27 - Kellerclub, Stuttgart, Germany
 Nov. 28 - Gaswerk, Winterthur, Switzerland
 Nov. 30 - Pretty Vacant, Düsseldorf, Germany
 Dec. 1- Cafe Video, Gent, Belgium
 Dec. 2 - Pools, Göttingen, Germany
 Dec. 3 - Astra Strube, Hamburg, Germany
 Dec. 4 - Cafe Momo, Rostock, Germany 
 Dec. 5 - Riff, Magdeburg, Germany
 Dec. 12 - Bar One, Derby, England

The Sons third European tour (2010)

March 22 - La Tana delle Rane, Reggio Emilia, Italy
 March 23 - La Salumeria del Rock, Arceto, Italy
 March 25 - MMB Club, Naples, Italy
 March 26 - Zena, Salerno, Italy
 March 27 - Contestaccio, Rome, Italy
 March 28 - Lofficina Della Musica, Lecco, Italy
 March 30 - Dimensione, Winterthur, Switzerland
 March 31 - Scopitone, Paris, France
 April 1 - De Rots, Antwerp, Belgium
 April 3 - Magnet, Berlin, Germany

Additional Performances

Sept. 26, 2010 – Market Place, Derby, England
 Aug. 7, 2011 – Ynot Festival, Derbyshire, England
 Oct. 21, 2011 – The Old Bell, Derby, England

Discography

Singles and EPs

One Man Floats (2003)
 EP1 (2004)

Albums

Visiting Hours (2007)
 The Prime Words Committee (2011)
 Heading Into Land (2014)






