[[Art Pope]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American chief executives, American libertarians, Members of the North Carolina House of Representatives, North Carolina lawyers, North Carolina Republicans, United States presidential electors, 1956 births, Duke University School of Law alumni, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni

James Arthur "Art" Pope (born May 5, 1956) is a North Carolina politician, businessman, attorney and philanthropist. In January 2013, he became Budget Director for North Carolina Governor Pat McCrory (who officially calls Pope his "deputy budget director" because, he said, the governor himself is the state's budget director).
According to the News and Observer, Pope "has invested millions in a network of foundations and think tanks, and advocacy groups, both in North Carolina and nationally, that are designed to further conservative and free market ideas."Art Pope subject of New Yorker profile | newsobserver.

Early life and education

Pope was born May 5, 1956 in Fayetteville, North Carolina, to John W. and Joyce Wilkins Pope. He spent his early childhood in the town of Fuquay-Varina, North Carolina. He moved with his family to the capital city of Raleigh, North Carolina in the early 1960s.  Pope graduated from the  University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill in 1978 with a B.A. with honors in political science, and went on to earn his J.D. from the Duke University School of Law in 1981.

Professional life

Pope was engaged in a general law practice as an associate attorney with the firm of Skvarla, Boles, Wyrick and From in Raleigh, from 1982 through 1984.
In 1984, Pope took a leave of absence from the firm to work as the director of organization for the North Carolina gubernatorial campaign of Jim Martin. Pope served as special counsel to Governor Jim Martin in 1985.
In 1986, Pope joined the family business, the retail discount chain Variety Wholesalers. Pope has held several positions with Variety Wholesalers Inc., first as general counsel, then vice-president of administration and information systems, chief financial officer, executive vice-president. Beginning in 2006, Pope began serving as president, CEO, and chairman of the board.

Public service

Pope co-founded the Libertarian Party of North Carolina as a college student in 1976. He has been active with the Republican Party since the late 1970s, serving in a variety of roles ranging from precinct chairman to chairman of the North Carolina GOP State Convention. Pope has also served as a delegate to the Republican National Convention on three occasions. Pope was appointed to serve on the North Carolina State Goals and Policy Board from 1985-1989. He also served on the North Carolina Capital Planning Commission.
Pope was first elected to the North Carolina House of Representatives in 1988 to represent House District 61. He served four complete or partial terms in office, winning elections in 1988 and 1990, being appointed to fill a vacancy in 1999, and winning another election in 2000. He was elected Republican Joint Caucus Leader during the 1991-1992 session.
Pope vacated his House seat to run for the office of Lieutenant Governor in 1992. After winning a three-way Republican primary in May 1992, Pope lost the general election to Democrat Dennis Wicker.
In June 2011, Pope was appointed to the board of directors for Golden LEAF (Long-term Economic Advancement Foundation), a nonprofit grant-making organization whose mission is to spur economic development in tobacco-dependent areas of North Carolina. Pope had previously criticized some Golden LEAF funding decisions. The News and Observer, June 15, 2011, by Lynn Bonner, Rob Christensen and Eden Stiffman.
Pope was among several business leaders appointed in September 2012 to serve on a UNC system advisory group tasked with helping to shape the future of the state's public universities. Pope was also a member of the Electoral College in 2012, casting one of North Carolina's electoral votes for Mitt Romney.News & Observer: Romney awarded NC's 15 electoral college votes
In November 2012, it was announced that Pope would serve as a co-chair on North Carolina Governor-Elect Pat McCrory's transition team, and in December Pope was announced as the state's chief budget writer in the McCrory administration.

Funding and activism for conservative causes

In 2005, Pope was a founding member of the NC Coalition for Lobbying & Government Reform.nclobbyreform.php NC Coalition for Lobbying & Government Reform: Coalition Members He joined former Democratic state Senator Wib Gulley from Durham, NC, in calling for reform of the state's lobbying laws.
Pope co-founded Real Jobs NC, a 527 organization that ran attack ads against 20 state Democratic legislators in the North Carolina 2010 general elections.C. Republican wins - Local - TheSunNews. Tillis may seek House speaker role. Charlotte Observer, The (NC) - Wednesday, November 3, 2010 Author: Lynn Bonner and Michael Biesecker Real Jobs NC is funded primarily by the Republican State Leadership Committee, though Pope provided it with an initial $200,000 donation.C. Republican wins - Local - TheSunNews.com
Civitas Action Inc, a 501(c)(4) non-profit organized by the John W. Pope Civitas Institute think tank, also sent out mailings against Democratic candidates in the North Carolina 2010 general elections, and is funded primarily by Variety Stores, which is owned by Pope.
Pope also played an active role in the 2010 redistricting of North Carolina's electoral map as a pro bono legal adviser during the process. The redistricting effort assisted in shifting the state's U.S. House delegation from 7-6 Democratic to 9-4 in favor of Republicans. He has advocated doing away with the public financing of judicial elections in North Carolina, and he has been a major donor to state legislative races.
Through personal campaign donations and corporate donations to independent expenditure efforts, Pope supported Republican candidates in the 2010 elections for the North Carolina General Assembly in 2010. it was reported that Art Pope's company donated approximately $425,000 as independent expenditures that favored Republicans, and groups tied to Pope spent $2.1 million to influence the campaign.
After his selection as Governor Pat McCrory's budget director, Pope resigned his positions as co-director of Americans for Prosperity and as a board member of Civitas Institute and Civitas Action in North Carolina.

Donations and philanthropy through the John William Pope Foundation

Pope is chairman and president of the John William Pope Foundation, which he founded with his father, John W. Pope, in 1986.
As of June 30, 2010, the Pope Foundation had nearly $136.8 million in assets. It has made over $89 million in grants since 1986, including over $9 million in grants made during the fiscal year ending June 30, 2010. Over the last 25 years, half of the Pope Foundation's grants have gone to support public policy, conservative organizations and think tanks in North Carolina, with the largest single recipient being the John Locke Foundation.  The Pope foundation has donated more than $28.7 million to the think tanks, including $17 million to the John Locke Foundation, for which Art Pope was the founding chairman. Seventeen percent has supported national conservative and libertarian public policy groups, including The Heritage Foundation and the Cato Institute.  Ten percent of the Pope Foundation's grants support community philanthropy, including the Habitat for Humanity in Wake County and Food Bank of Eastern & Central North Carolina.  The Foundation's support for the arts includes grants to the North Carolina Symphony, Carolina Ballet, North Carolina Theater and North Carolina Opera.
In 2011 Indy Week reported that the Pope Foundation failed to file tax returns for the years 1996-2004 until 2005. The foundation reported to the IRS that they were unable to file timely returns due to complications from a hurricane, lack of staff, and personal circumstances of Art Pope.
In 2005, the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill asked the John William Pope Foundation for a $4.8 million grant to enhance its curriculum in Western civilization. In 2006, after wrangling between the university administration and some faculty and students who opposed the proposal,The Daily Tar Heel :: Pope funds prompt uproar the Pope Foundation declined to fund the proposal. Instead, the Pope Foundation donated $100,000 a year for a visiting scholars program and student fellowships for the study of Western civilization, as well as $2 million for an endowment for salary enhancements for assistant football coaches.
In December 2012, the Pope Foundation announced $810,500 in grants to community charities, schools, churches, and the arts. To counter the effects of the federal government shutdown in October 2013, the Pope Foundation gave $185,000 in grants to "13 food bank-type groups" in central, eastern, and western North Carolina., including three charities in Vance County.




