[[Tamil Nadu Legislative Assembly election, 2011]]

CATEGORIES: State Assembly elections in Tamil Nadu, State Assembly elections in India, 2011

The fourteenth legislative assembly election was held on 13 April 2011 to elect members from 234 constituencies in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. Results were released on 13 May 2011. Two major parties Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) and All India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) faced the election as coalitions of multiple political parties: DMK front consisted of 8 parties and the AIADMK of 11 parties. Vijayakanth's Desiya Murpokku Dravida Kazhagam (DMDK), which had contested the previous elections independently, allied with AIADMK coalition. Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam boycotted the election following disagreement with Jayalalithaa over seat-sharing. Tamil film actor Vijay was openly involved in Tamil Nadu politics for the first time by extending his support for ADMK.
The outgoing Karunanidhi government was noted for the construction of new assembly building in Chennai, execution of various developmental projects and implementation of new entitlement programs including free health care for the poor and issuance of a range of freebies such as colour television to all. However, these numerous achievements were overshadowed by other major issues such as increasing prices of essential items, 2G spectrum scam and undue influence of Karunanidhi's extended family in various aspects of Tamil politics and business.
The election commission enforced stringent measures to curb the widespread abuse of power to bribe voters that was common in previous elections; it also imposed strict campaign descipline by imposing the 10 PM curfew. The commission headed by the chief election officer Praveen Kumar was commended for conducting the election in a strict and fair manner. The election recorded the highest polling ever in the state - 77.8% of the total electorate voted in the election surpassing 76.57% polled in 1967 election.
AIADMK front won the election winning in 203 constituencies; the AIADMK party alone secured a simple majority by carrying 150 seats and became eligible to form the government without requiring the support of its coalition partners. DMDK won 29 seats, more than the 23 seats won by DMK and opted to serve as the official opposition party. Political analysts concluded that the election was a referendum on the outgoing DMK government and the powerful anti-incumbency sentiment helped the ADMK colaition. J. Jayalalithaa along with 33 ministers was sworn-in as the Chief minister of Tamil Nadu for the third time on 16 May 2011 by governor Surjit Singh Barnala.

Background

The Karunanidhi administration was noted for various developmental projects and generous spending of the tax money for the implementation of various free schemes and issuance of freebies: The government provided 1 kg rice for 1 rupee, free health insurance for poor, free colour television and gas stove for all. It also provided job for over 500,000 people in various departments of the government and introduced free concrete house scheme for the poor. It also implemented various road, bridge and drinking water projects in Chennai and all over Tamil Nadu. However, the election was dominated by three major issues, increase in price of essential commodities, 2G Spectrum scandal and nepotism. Inflation was high during late 2010 to early 2011; The price of food and other essential commodities had increased exponentially affecting middle class and poor people: Onions were sold for Rs. 100, tomatoes for Rs. 80 and Jasmine flower for Rs. 1200 per kilo gram. This historical rise in price of essential food items was believed to be due to increased rainfall in North Indian states. which Communist Party of India (Marxist) (CPI (M)) general secretary Prakash Karat characterised as,

Parties and coalitions

Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam coalition

Electoral alliances began to take shape in late 2010. J. Jayalalitha, the leader of All-India Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (AIADMK) characterised the election as a turning point in Tamil Nadu history similar to 1967 election. She was alluding to the major political changes that took place in Tamil Nadu after 1967 election in which Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam defeated Indian National Congress for the first time and subsequently, Congress never won an election in the state.
Manithaneya Makkal Katchi, political wing of Tamil Nadu Muslim Munnetra Kazhagam (TMMK) constituted a five-member committee to hold consultations with Anna Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (ADMK) for seat sharing. The party had decided to support ADMK in a resolution adopted at a high level meeting citing deteriorating law and order and corruption.
Despite the strained relationship between Indian National Congress (INC) and Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK),
DMDK officially announced their alliance with AIADMK and started their negotiations. This brought to an end the possibilities of 3rd Front and DMDK contesting the elections on their own.
Vijay's Makkal Iyakkam supported AADMK Front. He delivered a speech in a rally attended by an estimated 20,000 to 30,000 people in Nagapattinam on 22 February condemning the actions of Sri Lankan military against Tamil Nadu fishermen.

=Seat allotment=

In the middle of March, amidst discussion to finalise the allocation of constituencies, ADMK surprised its allies by unilaterally deciding the 160 constituencies in which it will field candidates. The list included constituencies won by the CPI, CPM, Forward Bloc and Pudhiya Thamizhagam in the previous election. Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (MDMK) was not allotted any constituency.
The final seat allotment was:

Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam coalition

Tamil Nadu Congress Committee president K. V. Thankabalu confirmed the continuation of his party's alliance with DMK on 21 January.

=Seat allotment=

Upset over the tough posture adopted by the Congress during the seat-sharing negotiations, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam on 5 March decided to pull out its Ministers from the Union government and provide only issue-based support. A resolution to this effect was adopted at a meeting of the high-level committee of the party at Anna Arivalayam, the party headquarters.
But after days of intense bargaining, Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (DMK) and the Congress on 9 March struck a deal, under which the Congress would contest 63 seats.
The final seat allotment was:

Other parties and associations

Marumalarchi Dravida Munnetra Kazhagam (MDMK) boycotted the election following its withdrawal from the ADMK alliance as ADMK did not award the party any coalition constituency.

Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) although a major force in North India had struggled to make a foothold in Tamil Nadu . BJP leader L.
Tamil film actor Karthik's Ahila India Naadalum Makkal Katchi entered the election as a member of ADMK coalition. When no seat was allocated to his party by ADMK, he decided to contest the election alone in 25 to 40 seats.
Educationist-turned-politician T. R. Pachamuthu's Indiya Jananayaka Katchi (IJK) leads the third front. It comprises Tamizhaga Munnetra Kazhagam of John Pandian, Samooka Samathuva Padai of retired IAS officer, P Sivakami, Tamil Nadu Vanigar Peravai and VOC Peravai. The front is fielding candidates in more than 150 constituencies .

Political observers feel that the IJK could poll 3,000 to 5,000 votes in many constituencies in Cuddalore, Villupuram, Perambalur, Ariyalur and Salem districts where Pachamuthu's Udayar community has sizeable presence. The Samooka Samathuva Padai will mobilise significant dalit votes in constituencies like Tindivanam, Krishnarayapuram, Haroor and Gangavalli. Sivakami herself is contesting from Gangavalli . John Pandian has some influence in Virudhunagar, Ramanathapuram, Thoothukudi, Dindigul and Tirunelveli districts.
Bahujan Samaj Party which is ruling in Uttar Pradesh has decided to field candidates for all 234 seats and will be contesting alone . The party announced its candidate list on 18 March. Arundhathiar (a section of dalits) outfit headed by R Adhiyaman has fielded candidates in 20 segments in western Tamil Nadu .

Campaign

AIADMK front

DMDK launched a vigorous campaign to defeat DMK; It made a resolution to call all parties to come together to defeat the ruling DMK in a conference held in Salem on 8 January presided over by its leader Vijayakanth.
AIADMK chief Jayalalithaa campaigned supporting the candidates of her alliance across the entire state from 24 March till on 11 April.

DMK front

S. Ramadoss, leader of Pattali Makkal Katchi expressed his dissatisfaction with people from film industry ruling Tamil Nadu since 1967. He also urged voters not to vote for Vijayakanth with long career as a Tamil actor.
Kongunadu Munnetra Kazhagam (KMK), a political party in the western districts of Tamil Nadu, complained about the neglect of Kongu region by the successive governments in a conference held at Karur. Er. Eswaran, general secretary of KMK, urged the government to focus more on infrastructure development in the Kongu region.

Manifestoes

The manifesto of the two largest in the legislative assembly were:

DMK

DMK president and CM Karunanidhi released election manifesto for the election that mentioned it would give:

AIADMK

AIADMK's manifesto promised:

Election Commission actions

The election commission was commended for conducting the election in a strict and fair manner. It enforced stringent measures to curb use of money power to bribe voters by paying them cash. It also strictly enforced 10 PM curfew on campaigning. DMK chief M Karunanidhi and his ally PMK founder S Ramadoss accused the EC of bringing about an emergency like situation in the State while such a situation was not prevalent in the other poll-bound States. CEC has said the people were happy about the conduct of elections, the CEC displayed an SMS from Chennai which read "earlier EC just announced elections. Only now they are conducting them. This is just one sample of people's response".
Some of the actions taken by Returning officers in the State
|publisher=DNA|date=8 April 2011|accessdate=8 April 2011}}[/ref]

Cases registered

|work=The Hindu|date=5 April 2011|accessdate=8 April 2011|first=L.|last=Srikrishna}}[/ref]

Opinion polls

Pre-poll surveys

Most non-partisan pre-polls found AIADMK+ winning comfortably in this election. The pre-polls indicated a great deal of anger towards the incumbent government, due to corruption allegations and recent food price rises. Also AIADMK was aided by including DMDK and its leader Vijaykanth, which has had on average a 10% vote share in recent elections in Tamil Nadu.

Post-poll surveys

Since exit polls are banned by ECI, Headlines Today-ORG Poll, conducted a post-poll survey, where they polled voters after they voted in their houses.youtube. The exit poll particularly noted a late swing towards the incumbent in the rural communities of Tamil Nadu, which allowed the DMK and its alliance to increase its overall vote share percentage from 45% in the pre-poll survey to 50% post-poll. A couple of weeks after the Headlines today post poll, a few post polls showed the exact opposite result, with CNN-IBN and Asianet post poll giving AIADMK+, the majority of the same margin.

Polling

Source: Tamil Nadu Election WebsiteTamil Nadu Votes Polled Results
Poll notification was issued on 19 March. The last date of filing nominations was 26 March and candidates were allowed to withdraw their nominations until 30 March. The state election commission scrutinised the nominations on 28 March. Election was held in a single phase on 13 April 2011.

Result

Results by pre-poll alliance

Reactions

M. Karunanidhi submitted his resignation to Governor Surjit Singh Barnala, thus paving way for Jayalalithaa to swear-in on 16 May. After the election, Jayalalithaa thanked her supporters and said "this is not a victory for me, but a victory for the state and the country". She further stated that she wants to "rebuild the state, from the havoc created by the previous government" and insisted that she does not plan to share power with her allies.

Analysis

