[[Wal-Mart v. Dukes]]

CATEGORIES: United States Supreme Court cases, 2011 in United States case law, United States class action case law, Walmart, Class action lawsuits

Wal-Mart v. Dukes, , was a United States Supreme Court case. The case was an appeal from the Ninth Circuit's decision in Dukes v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., in which that court, eventually by a narrow 5-4 decision, reversed the district court's decision to certify a class action lawsuit in which the plaintiff class included 1.6 million women who currently work or have worked for Wal-Mart stores, including lead plaintiff Betty Dukes. Dukes, a current Wal-Mart employee, and others have alleged gender discrimination in pay and promotion policies and practices in Wal-Mart stores.S. Supreme Court Hearing, American Association of University Women.
The Court agreed to hear argument on whether a Federal Rule of Civil Procedure, Rule 23(b)(2) that provides for class-actions where the defendant's actions make injunctive relief appropriate can also be used to file a class-action that demands monetary damages. The Court also asked the parties to argue whether the class meets the traditional requirements of numerosity, commonality, typicality, and adequacy of representation.10-277 Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Dukes, Questions Presented, Supreme Court of the United States.
The Supreme Court ruled unanimously that the class should not be certified in its current form, although they disagreed 5-4 on the reason and on allowing it to continue in a different form.

Background

In 2000 Betty Dukes, a 54-year-old Wal-Mart worker in California, claimed sex discrimination. Despite six years of work and positive performance reviews, she was denied the training she needed to advance to a higher salaried position. Wal-Mart argued Dukes clashed with a female Wal-Mart supervisor and was disciplined for admittedly returning late from lunch breaks.
In June 2001, the lawsuit began in U.S. District Court in San Francisco. The plaintiffs sought to represent 1.6 million women, including women who were currently working or who had previously worked in a Wal-Mart store since December 26, 1998. Form 10-Q for the Quarterly Period Ended October 31, 2005

Judgment

Federal District Court

In June 2004, the federal district judge, Martin Jenkins, ruled in favor of class certification under FRCP 23(b)(2).walmartclass.pdf Wal-Mart appealed the decision.

Court of Appeals

On February 6, 2007, a three-judge panel of the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's class certification. Judge Harry Pregerson wrote for the majority, which also included Judge Michael Daly Hawkins, while Judge Andrew J. Kleinfeld dissented, criticizing the majority's view of the class certification standards.
On December 11, 2007, the same Ninth Circuit panel withdrew its initial opinion and issued a subsequent, superseding opinion that still permitted the class certification. Among other changes to its original opinion, the Ninth Circuit altered its opinion with respect to the admissibility of expert testimony and the use of Daubert challenges during a motion for class certification. Wal-Mart again filed for a rehearing en banc.
On February 13, 2009, the Ninth Circuit granted Wal-Mart's petition for rehearing en banc on the class action certification. 14, 2009, p. D-2. As a result, the December 2007 Ninth Circuit opinion was no longer effective.Order for Rehearing En Banc
On March 24, 2009 a panel of eleven Ninth Circuit judges, led by Chief Judge Alex Kozinski, heard oral arguments for the En Banc appeal.(audio of the en banc hearing) On April 26, 2010, the en banc court affirmed the district court's class certification on a 6-5 vote, with Judge Michael Daly Hawkins writing for the majority and Judge Sandra Segal Ikuta writing for the dissent. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 603 F.3d 571 (9th Cir. 2010) (en banc). Text. Wal-Mart's lead appellate counsel, Theodore Boutrous, Jr., said in a statement that the decision violates "both due process and federal class action rules, contradicting numerous decisions of other federal appellate courts and the Supreme Court itself," and indicated that Wal-Mart would appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.

Supreme Court

On December 6, 2009, the Supreme Court agreed to hear Wal-Mart's appeal as Wal-Mart v. Dukes.supremecourt.aspx?FileName=/docketfiles/10-277.
On June 20, 2011, the Supreme Court ruled in Wal-Mart's favor, saying the plaintiffs did not have enough in common to constitute a class. Critics of the opinion allege that the decision makes it incredibly difficult to certify a class without a prohibitive amount of work on the part of plaintiff attorneys. The requirement to look through the class to the merits requires an immense amount of discovery that has not previously been required.

Subsequent developments

In 2004, journalist Liza Featherstone published a book about the case, Selling Women Short: The Landmark Battle for Workers' Rights at Wal-Mart in which she contends that Wal-Mart's success is based not only on its inexpensive merchandise or its popularity but also on bad labor practices, a charge she repeated in an article about the case for The Nation. 16, 2004. Featherstone compared Dukes to Rosa Parks. Wal-Mart, Salon. 24, 2004.
Conservative commentators have criticized the lawsuit as an abuse of the class action mechanism.Article | These actions have no class



Notes




