[[Miracles (Jefferson Starship song)]]

CATEGORIES: Jefferson Starship songs, 1975 singles, Songs written by Marty Balin

"Miracles" is a song written by Marty Balin and originally recorded by Jefferson Starship, appearing on their 1975 album Red Octopus.
"Miracles" peaked at #3 for three weeks on the Billboard Hot 100, making it the highest-charting single the band ever recorded under the name "Jefferson Starship," and also charting higher than any single the band had recorded in its previous incarnation as "Jefferson Airplane". (However, the band went on to have three #1 hits under its later incarnation as "Starship".)

Background and writing

The song was inspired in part by the Indian guru Sathya Sai Baba, whose followers believe him to have been a miracle worker. It was also inspired in part by a woman Balin was in love with at the time. According to Jeff Tamarkin's book Got a Revolution! The Turbulent Flight of Jefferson Airplane, Balin labored over the song "for some time" and "slowly but deliberately crafted" it. However, author Robert Yehling has written that Balin wrote the song in 30 minutes or wrote the lyrics in 45 minutes. According to Balin, when he presented the song to the rest of the band members, "Everybody went, 'I don't know about that, that's pretty weird, man.' I was really worried; nobody liked it. But I told myself, after about five days, Maybe they're wrong."
In order to secure more radio airplay for the song, the full-length album version of "Miracles" (6 minutes, 52 seconds long) was cut by more than half its length for the single, which was released at a length of 3 minutes, 25 seconds. This edit was done not only for length, but to remove the sexual reference in the line "I had a taste of the real world when I went down on you, girl."

Critical reception

Commenting on the band's recording of "Miracles", Jeff Tamarkin wrote: "Larry Cox nailed the production -- there isn't a wasted, out of place note. Strings glisten, the keyboard sound is contemporary and Grace Slick and Paul Kantner's harmonies are relatively traditional. David Freiberg came up with the memorable signature organ riff that opens the song and Craig Chaquico with a fresh supply of delicious guitar sounds. Marty is at his most open, crooning his words of love like he hasn't in years -- without a hint of irony or awkwardness he uses the word 'baby' at least 25 times ...."
Upon the single's release, Billboard magazine listed "Miracles" among its Top Single Picks, indicating that the review panel predicted it to reach the top 30 of the Hot 100. The magazine commented, "With a top 10 LP under their belts, the rejuvenated Starship (with Marty Balin back as a full fledged member) come up with the kind of easy rocker that highlighted the early Airplane days. Vocal interchanges between Balin and Grace Slick the high point of the record."
Reviewing a Balin solo concert in 1981, New York Times critic Stephen Holden referred to "Miracles" as Balin's "little masterpiece of pop pillow talk".
Dave Marsh and James Bernard listed "Miracles" among the "Best Songs to Pass the Censor" in The New Book of Rock Lists. (although "Miracles" did not, in fact, hit #1).
In 1998, Balin received a plaque from Broadcast Music Incorporated, a performing rights organization which monitors music performances on radio and elsewhere, recognizing that "Miracles" had achieved 2 million performances.
William Ruhlmann, writing in All Music Guide Required Listening: Classic Rock, commented, "There can be little doubt that it was Balin's irresistible ballad 'Miracles,' the biggest hit single in the Jefferson Whatever catalog, that propelled Red Octopus to the top of the charts .... This must have been sweet vindication for Balin, who founded Jefferson Airplane but then drifted away from the group as it veered away from his musical vision. Now, the collective was incorporating his taste without quite integrating it -- 'Miracles,' with its strings and sax solo by nonband member Irv Cox, was hardly a characteristic Airplane/Starship track."
The New Rolling Stone Album Guide, published in 2004, stated that "with Marty Balin's 'Miracles,' Octopus′s massive hit, the band began shifting toward schmaltz. Balin now sounded like a lounge singer ...."
Philip Dodd, in The Book of Rock: From the 1950s to Today, described "Miracles" as "magnificent".

Soundtracks

2005 movie: "The Family Stone" (along with "Count on Me").
2006 movie: "Crank." It was used in the last 45 seconds, in the scene where main character Chev Chelios (Jason Statham) is falling to his apparent death.
2011 TV series Supernatural (S06E19: "Mommy Dearest")

Charts






