[[Hurricane Hilary (2011)]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 Pacific hurricane season, Category 4 Pacific hurricanes

Hurricane Hilary was a very powerful and intense hurricane that developed during the 2011 Pacific hurricane season. The fourth Category 4 and major hurricane, seventh hurricane, and eighth tropical storm of the season, Hilary developed from an area of low pressure off the Pacific coast of Central America in mid-September. Organizing quickly, the system became a tropical depression on September 21, after gaining enough organization to be declared as such. While moving towards the west-northwest, the depression continued to gather strength, and was subsequently upgraded to a tropical storm just several hours later. On September 21, Hilary was declared as a Category 1 hurricane, while located close to the Mexican coastline, where the storm brought heavy rainfall and flooding. Undergoing rapid intensification, Hilary strengthened into a Category 4 hurricane on September 22, recognized with a distinct eye feature. Beginning to enter cooler Ocean temperatures, Hilary began to weaken by September 25, but briefly restrengthened into a Category 4 the following day. Atmospheric conditions became increasingly unfavorable late on September 26, and the system began to weaken. During the afternoon hours of September 30, Hilary became a remnant low, while located several hundred miles away from any landmasses.

Meteorological history

On September 7, a tropical wave moved off the coast of Africa.
On September 22, while quickly strengthening, Hilary was upgraded to a Category 1 hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale. It was noted by the National Hurricane Center that strengthening into a major hurricane, defined by a hurricane with winds that exceed  to the west of the southern tip of Baja California.

Preparations and impact

The NHC noted the possibility of up to 
The storm's outer bands produced torrential rains over Chiapas and Tabasco, with 24-hour accumulations of up to 






