[[Wedgwood scale]]

CATEGORIES: Obsolete units of measurement, Units of temperature, Science and technology in England

The Wedgwood scale is an obsolete temperature scale, which was used to measure temperatures above the boiling point of mercury of . Both the origin and the step were later found inaccurate.

History

The boiling point of mercury limits the mercury-in-glass thermometer to temperatures below 350 °C, which is too low for many industrial applications such as pottery, glass making and metallurgy. To solve this problem, the English potter Josiah Wedgwood proposed, in the 18th century, a method to measure temperatures in his kilns.

Method

A 0.5-inch-diameter cylinder made from pipe clay was dried at the temperature of boiling water. This would prepare it for heating in the oven in which the temperature was to be measured. During the annealing, sintering (merging) of fine particles resulted in contraction of clay. After cooling, the temperature was evaluated from the diameter difference before and after heating assuming that the contraction is linear with temperature.
To facilitate the temperature calculation, Wedgwood built a device which would directly read the temperature. Two metal bars with scales on them were fixed one above another on a metal plate and inclined at a small angle. The spacing between the bars was 0.5 inches at one end and 0.3 inches at the lower end. The scale was divided into 240 equidistant parts. The unheated piece of clay would fit the 0.5-inch gap giving the zero temperature reading. After annealing, the clay cylinder would shrink and fit somewhere in between the left and right ends of the bars, and the temperature could be read from the scales on the bars.

Scale

The origin (0°) on Wedgwood scale was set at the onset temperature of red heat, 

Corrections

Louis-Bernard Guyton de Morveau used his pyrometer to evaluate the temperature scale of Wedgwood and came to the conclusion that the starting point should be significantly lower, at . However, even after this revision the Wedgwood measurements overestimated the melting points of elements.

Notes and references


