[[Winter (dolphin)]]

CATEGORIES: Individual dolphins, Clearwater, Florida, Animal amputees, Wildlife rehabilitation, 2005 animal births

Winter (born 2005) is a bottlenose dolphin at the Clearwater Marine Aquarium in Clearwater, Florida, USA, widely known for having a prosthetic tail. She is the subject of the film Dolphin Tale, a dramatization of her story, and the upcoming sequel Dolphin Tale 2. Winter was found in the coastal waters of Florida in December 2005, caught in a crab trap, which resulted in the loss of her tail. She was found and taken to Clearwater Marine Aquarium.  The loss of her tail caused her to swim unnaturally with her tail moving side to side instead of up and down. As a result, she was fitted with a silicone and plastic tail that enabled her to swim normally. She has since become a highly popular attraction at the aquarium, which led to the film's making. She lives in her pool with another dolphin, Hope, who will be the subject of the 2014 sequel to Dolphin Tale, Dolphin Tale 2.

Injury and discovery

Winter was entangled in the ropes of a crab trap on December 10, 2005,

Prosthetic tail

Irish prosthetist Kevin Carroll and a team of experts took a year and a half designing and testing a tail for Winter, eventually settling on a simple silicone and plastic tail. In Winter's case however, both the flukes and the caudal peduncle had been severed, making the task much more difficult.
Lessons learned from Winter also have been applied to human amputees. Carroll used the same gel sleeve concept to ease painful prosthetic limbs for US Air Force Senior Airman Brian Kolfage, who lost both legs and his right hand in a 2004 mortar attack in Iraq.

Influence

Winter has become the most popular attraction at the Clearwater Marine Aquarium. She is often thought of as an inspiration to children and adults with medical conditions and disabilities. Brock Mealer (brother of Michigan Wolverines player Eliot Mealer), who was paralyzed in a car accident and overcame large odds against him, met Winter in December 2010 to significant press coverage.

In popular culture

2009 book

In 2009 Winter's story was told by Craig Hatkoff in Winter's Tail: How One Little Dolphin Learned to Swim Again. The book was published by Turtle Pond Publications and Scholastic.

2009 video game

Craig Hatkoff's short book was adapted into an interactive storybook on the Nintendo DS, under the same title.

2011 film

A film based on Winter's story, titled Dolphin Tale, was released September 23, 2011.
The movie was filmed in Clearwater, at the Clearwater Marine Aquarium, and other locations in Pinellas County, Florida.

2014 film

A sequel, Dolphin Tale 2, is currently filming and will be released in theaters on September 19, 2014. This sequel will focus on the dolphin who lives with Winter, Hope.






