[[Thomcord]]

CATEGORIES: Table grape varieties, Hybrid grape varieties

Thomcord is a seedless table grape variety and a hybrid of the popular Thompson Seedless or Sultanina grape (a Vitis vinifera variety) and Concord grape (a Vitis labrusca variety).  Thomcord was developed in 1983 by Californian grape breeders working for the Agricultural Research Service (ARS), an agency of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), as part of a test to better understand a new seedless grape breeding procedure.
Its aromatic, "labrusca" flavor is similar to that of Concord, but mellowed by the mild, sweet taste from Thompson Seedless.  Thomcord grows well in hot, dry climates, ripens between late July and mid-August, and tolerates powdery mildew.  It is a productive variety, yielding an average of  and have a medium-thick, blue-black skin that adheres to the fruit, unlike Concord, which has a thick skin that can slip off the pulp easily.  The aborted seeds in the fruit body are relatively small, but larger than those in Thompson Seedless.
The plant is not restricted for propagation and distribution.  Virus-free propagation material is available from the Foundation Plant Services (FPS) at the University of California, Davis, and its genetic material is archived at the National Plant Germplasm System.  After 17 years of testing, it was declared ready for use in 2003.  It is expected to appear in supermarkets, possibly as a specialty item.

Description

Thomcord grape is a hybrid of Thompson Seedless grape (Vitis vinifera, or Sultanina), which is popular in supermarkets during the summer, and seeded Concord grape (Vitis labrusca), commonly used to make grape juice and jelly.
Thomcord is suitable for hot, dry growing conditions, more so than Concord and other Concord seedless types.  Its adaptability to hot dry climates was derived from Thompson Seedless.  It grows well in California's vineyards, particularly the San Joaquin Valley,

Production details

Thomcord is a productive variety, with a yield comparable to Thompson Seedless.  When two cordons (arms) of the vines are trained horizontally on wires ("bilateral-trained") and are pruned to remove most of the previous year's growth ("spur-pruned") during the winter, it can produce up to 
Compared with Thompson Seedless, the berry weight and diameter of Thomcord are larger, but cluster tightness is similar.  The berry length ranged between 
The aborted seeds of Thomcord are small, but in some years they can become sclerified (a thickening and lignification of the walls of plant cells and the subsequent dying off of the protoplasts), making them more noticeable inside the medium-soft flesh.  There are usually two aborted seeds per berry, which averaged between 14 and 22.3 mg in 2001 and 2002.  This varied in comparison to Venus depending on the year and location, was comparable to the Sovereign Coronation, and was significantly smaller than the Sovereign Rose and Saturn varieties.  However, as with the other cultivars, it was consistently larger than Thompson Seedless, which had the smallest aborted seeds.

Vegetative description

The mature leaves on the vine have three lobes with open upper lateral sinuses (spaces between the lobes) of medium depth.  The main vein is slightly longer than the petiole (stalk attaching the leaf blade to the stem), and the petiole sinus opens widely.  Between the veins on the underside of both the mature and young leaf there are dense hairs that lie flat against the surface.  The teeth on the edge of the leaf blade are convex on both sides, medium in size, and short relative to their width.  Young leaf blades are dark copper red on the upper surface.
The shoots have at least three consecutive tendrils. Young shoots are fully open and have very dense hairs of medium anthocyanin coloration that lie flat against the tip.  The internode of the young shoot is green with red stripes on the front (dorsal) side and solid green on the back (ventral) side.

History

In 1983,
The new hybrid was tested and scrutinized for 17 years before it was declared ready for growers and gardeners and was released on 
Although it has been called a "sentimental favorite" at farmers' markets, it is not expected to become a major commercial variety because its flavor is not as neutral as more popular grapes, such as Thompson Seedless, Crimson Seedless, or Flame Seedless.  However, Ramming predicted that it would become a specialty item, much like the Muscat varieties, due to its distinctive, Concord-like flavor.

Availability

The Foundation Plant Services (FPS) at the University of California, Davis indexed Thomcord and found it to be free of known viruses.  The FPS offers certified virus-free propagation material.  The FPS also deposited genetic material in the National Plant Germplasm System, which offers material for research, including development and commercialization of new cultivars.  The ARS does not offer Thomcord plants for distribution.
Thomcord is a public variety and is not restricted in its propagation and distribution.






