[[Jews for Jesus]]

CATEGORIES: Religious organizations established in 1973, Christian missions, Christian missionary societies, Supersessionism, Judaism-related controversies

Jews for Jesus is a conservative, Christian evangelical organization that focuses on the conversion of Jews to Christianity."Their doctrinal statement is basically indistinguishable from Evangelical and other conservative Christian groups."Is "Jews for Jesus" Jewish or Christian? Jews for Jesus defines Jewish in terms of parentage and as a birthright, regardless of religious belief[ref]"We believe that Jewishness is a birthright. It is inherited from our parents.
Our people are not of one culture; we have diverse cultural expressions (Ashkenazi/Sephardi, Georgian/Russian, Ethiopian, Persian, etc.). Our people are not of one religion. While Judaism might be the traditional religion for many Jewish people, Jews are still considered Jewish even though they might be atheists or even if they embrace other beliefs.
Those who say that Jews who believe in Jesus are errant Jews or misguided Jews are entitled to their opinions. But they are not entitled to negate our Jewishness. We are Jews by birth and that cannot change."Jews for Jesus Q&A: Can you explain how one can be a Jew and a Christian at the same time? That seems like a contradiction in terms[/ref] and its members consider themselves to be Jews – either as defined by Jewish law, or according to the view of Jews for Jesus. 
The identification of Jews for Jesus as a Jewish organization is rejected by Jewish religious denominations"There is virtual unanimity across all denominations Judaism that Jews for Jesus are not Jewish." (Kaplan, Dana Evan. The Cambridge Companion to American Judaism, Cambridge University Press, August 15, 2005, pp. 139–140). The one exception is Christianity, which is perceived to be incompatible with any form of Jewishness. Jews for Jesus and other Messianic Jewish groups are thus seen as antithetical to Judaism and are completely rejected by the majority of Jews". (Kaplan, Dana Evan. The Cambridge Companion to American Judaism, Cambridge University Press, August 15, 2005, p. 9).
[/ref] and secular Jewish groups[ref]
|url=
|title=Messiah Truth. Messianic Judaism: A Christian Missionary Movement
}}[/ref]Meeting the Challenge: Hebrew Christians and the Jewish Community due to the Christian beliefs of its members. The group's evangelical activities have garnered mixed reactions from other Christian individuals and organizations, largely divided between liberal and conservative lines. Messianic Judaism. Jews for Jesus, Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance, October 29, 2001.[ref]Others who oppose the evangelism related activities of Jews for Jesus:
Founded in 1973, Jews for Jesus employs more than 200 people,ministrywatch.Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability

History

The organization was founded by Moishe Rosen an ordained Baptist minister (who was born Jewish and converted to Christianity at the age of 17)The Real Jews for Jesus. The Leaders by Jason Levinson (Torah Atlanta) and Jhan Moskowitz an ordained Christian and Missionary Alliance minister and son of a Holocaust survivor. Methods (Anti-Defamation League) Rosen was the head of the San Francisco arm of the American Board of Missions to the Jews (an organization now known as Chosen People Ministries). In 1973, Rosen broke off from that organization,

Aims and organization

Jews for Jesus official mission statement is "to make the Messiahship of Jesus an unavoidable issue to our Jewish people worldwide." Through media advertisements, production and distribution of literature, producing music and organizing person-to-person evangelism, the organization asserts that "a specifically Jewish mission" is necessary, saying, "Jewish people tend to dismiss evangelistic methods and materials that are couched in Christian lingo, because they reinforce the assumption that Jesus is for 'them' not 'us'." (Jews for Jesus)
Jews for Jesus claims to promote awareness of the Jewish heritage of the Christian faith. Their website contains brief descriptions of Jewish festivals.

Beliefs

A summary of Jews for Jesus' beliefs:Statement of Faith (Jews for Jesus) written January 1, 2005
 
 
Jews for Jesus takes the mainstream Christian positions that Jesus is the Messiah, that his coming was prophesied in the Hebrew Bible, and that Jesus is the son of God, the second person of the Trinity. Jews for Jesus believes that their views of the Messiah are entirely compatible with the view of God presented in Jewish scriptures,Don't Christians Believe in Three Gods? (Jews for Jesus) January 1, 2005 and that the doctrine of the Trinity, fundamental to the Christian faith, is not entirely alien to Judaism."
The Trinity in the Old Testament by Catherine Damato. (Jews for Jesus) June 1, 1987[/ref]
According to an article on Jews for Jesus by B. Robinson of Ontario Consultants on Religious Tolerance,  
 Their doctrinal statement is basically indistinguishable from Evangelical and other conservative Christian groups. ... They differ from some Evangelical Christian groups in their belief that Israel continues to exist as a "covenant people." They also integrate some Jewish customs and use Hebrew and Yiddish in some literature.

Stated core values

Jews for Jesus describes its core values in the following way:
They commit to:
Understanding that they:

Leadership, funding and outreach

Jews for Jesus is funded by donations from Messianic Jews and like-minded Christians. Christian Dollars at Work by Jason Levinson (Torah Atlanta) It has a full-time staff of more than 200 employees running branch offices in nine cities across the United States. There are also branch offices in Australia, Brazil, Canada (in Montreal and Toronto), France, Germany (in Essen), Hungary, Israel, Russia, South Africa, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and Ukraine (in Dnepropetrovsk, Kharkov, Kiev and Odessa). In addition to its English-language website, the group has websites in Hebrew, Portuguese, Polish, Persian, Italian, Spanish and Korean."About Jews for Jesus: Branches
According to the Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability, the group's total income in FY 2010 was US$20,728,530. Financial information for FY2010 (Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability)

Evangelizing

The majority of evangelism used by Jews for Jesus consists of handing out literature on the streets, one-on-one Bible studies, full-page ads in leading newspapers and magazines, ISSUES (an eight-page evangelistic publication for Jewish seekers) and internet evangelism."What We Do" The organization uses colorful pamphlets and T-shirts to get their message across and is known for targeting populations of Jews which they see as receptive to their message,[ref]Targeting vulnerable population groups:
(Messianic congregations target Jews by Rabbi Tovia Singer)
such as recent immigrants, college students, senior citizens and interfaith couples. Regarding "targeting," Jews for Jesus says this on its website: "The term 'targeting' brings to mind darts or firearms. We can't imagine throwing the gospel at people or aiming to harm them with it. Actually, targeting is a propaganda term that has been misappropriated from the marketing profession. . . . Those who are not Christians use it to disparage evangelism. To scoffers and unbelievers it has a negative connotation. We avoid the term 'targeting' because we see the gospel as something to be presented freely rather than something to be sold. We don't throw our tracts at people; we hand them to those who want to take them."Jews for Jesus FAQ 
Stephanie Persin writes, "Evangelists in the organization have been trained to recite phrases from the Old Testament and to use Yiddish words so as to convince potential converts that Jews for Jesus maintain Jewish traditions."Jews for Jesus by Stephanie Persin (Jewish Virtual Library) Regarding Jewish traditions, Jews for Jesus says on its website: "As for the accusation that we 'fraudulently use Jewish symbols and Jewish holidays,' we have a right to use Jewish symbols by virtue of our ancestry, and we have a right to celebrate Passover and other Jewish holidays and interpret them according to the teachings of Scripture. The accusation would only be valid if the New Testament were false."Jews for Jesus FAQ On their official website, Jews for Jesus says that they give out 8 million pamphlets a year."Get Involved" Each July they send a team of 20 to 30 to New York City, which they say has the world's largest and most diverse Jewish population.SWC New York

Affiliations and support

On the Christian counter-cult site Apologetics Index, Jews for Jesus is listed as an orthodox member of the Christianity family.Messianic Jews | Apologetics Index Jews for Jesus is a member of numerous evangelical Christian groups, including The World Evangelical Alliance,Associations (Jews for Jesus)Members (Interdenominational Foreign Mission Association)
the Evangelical Council for Financial Accountability,
the World Evangelical Fellowship,
the Evangelical Fellowship of Canada,Affiliates (Evangelical Fellowship of Canada)
the Canadian Council for Christian Charities, the Evangelical Alliance of Great Britain, the Evangelical Alliance of South Africa, the Fédération Evangélique de France (Evangelical Federation of France), and the Lausanne Consultation on Jewish Evangelism.Associations and Memberships
Here is what some prominent evangelical Christians have said about Jews for Jesus:
J.I. Packer, Board of Governors' Professor of Theology at Regent College in Vancouver, British Columbia: "Jews for Jesus is a worldwide Christian mission that was born against the background of California's Jesus movement and has grown steadily ever since. Holding that Jesus of Nazareth -- God incarnate, crucified, risen, and now reigning -- is the true Messiah foretold in the Old Testament and the true fulfillment of Jewish hopes, the mission exists to press his claims on Jewish people everywhere. It is based on two principles.
First, Jews who receive Jesus Christ as their Lord and Savior and who are 'completed' and 'fulfilled' thereby do not need to leave behind their Jewish identity or break with Jewish ways. As Judaizing was not a theological requirement for the first gentile Christians, so gentilizing is not a cultural requirement for today's Jewish believers. Though they belong in the Christian church, which has been mainly gentile -- non-Jewish, that is -- for most of its life, within the church they are free to be as Jewish as they like.
Second, up-front, in-your-face challenge, with as much humor, chutzpah, and goodwill as possible, is the way to approach Jews evangelistically.""Letter from J.I. Packer"
Dr. Joseph M. Stowell III, past president of Moody Bible Institute, current president of Cornerstone University in Grand Rapids, Michigan, and author of over 20 Christian books: "Since Moishe Rosen founded Jews for Jesus in the early 1970s, thousands of Jewish people have come to experience living faith in Jesus as their Messiah through this strategic ministry. And just as important, thousands of Gentiles have as well. We are proud that David Brickner, the executive director, and many others at Jews for Jesus are graduates of Moody Bible Institute. I'm privileged to be associated with them and I encourage you in your association with Jews for Jesus now and in the future.""Letter from Joseph Stowell"
Mark Bailey, President of Dallas Theological Seminary: "I have watched the ministry of Jews for Jesus for twenty-five years. I have known their chairman of the board, Byron Spradlin, for the same period. Susan Perlman now serves on the board of Dallas Theological Seminary, and I am pleased to call Moishe Rosen and David Brickner my friends. All are committed followers of Messiah Jesus. I have always found the ministry of Jews for Jesus and their traveling musicians to be evangelical in their doctrine and appropriately evangelistic in their presentation. They are both creative and biblical in their communication of the gospel. They help lead the way in Jewish evangelism."Letter from Mark Bailey"
John Stephen Piper, Senior Pastor, Bethlehem Baptist Church, Minneapolis, Minnesota: "For almost two decades I have followed with joy the ministry of Jews for Jesus. I say with joy" because I love the gospel of the glory of Jesus the Messiah, and I love Jewish people, and I love bold, compassionate ways of connecting Jews and Jesus. All I have seen and all I know of Jews for Jesus makes me happy to say a rousing YES to their ministry. From Moshe Rosen to David Brickner I have admired the leadership. I have seen them up close and in action. I have been a partner in the Behold Your God mission in Minneapolis and have spoken to the band of bold witnesses before they hit the streets. I encourage my people to give support, and I have wished I had a fraction of the dedication and courage I see in the missionaries who put themselves at risk week in and week out. The risk is mainly from misunderstanding. It is inevitable. Bold, loving summons to believe on Jesus as the Messiah will be seen by some as arrogant,by others as abusive, by others as controlling, by others as ethnic assault, by others as the most precious gift ever given. I see it as obedience to Jesus and as the very embodiment of the love of Christ for lost sinners like me. 'Whoever has the Son has life; whoever does not have the Son of God does not have life.' (1 John 5:12) May God give Jews for Jesus faithfulness to offer the Son to all who need him—to the Jew first and also to the gentile.""Letter from John Piper"
Torkild Masvie, International Director, Caspari Center, Jerusalem: "I have known the Jews for Jesus organization and senior staff for years. They are an organization with fundamental integrity, i.e. they live up to their stated goals with no hidden agenda. They are characterized by their clear, sober, biblical theology which is in line with the principles of the reformation. They represent a clear voice against the separation of Jewish and Gentile believers in Messiah and encourage active membership of Jewish believers in Jesus in local churches.""Letter from Torkild Masvie"

Opposition and criticism

One of the criticisms of Jews for Jesus surrounds the tactics they employ in their missionary and outreach programs. Critics say that the organization uses vague and misleading language along with deceptive tactics in its attempt to convert Jews to Christianity.Judaism Teaches... or Does It? by Moishe Rosen (Jews for Jesus) March 1, 1997 To this end, critics say that Jews for Jesus uses the ambiguity in the definition of "Jew" and "Jewish" to confuse their prospective converts into believing there is a possibility of one being a follower of both Christianity and Judaism simultaneously.Jews for Judaism, The Challenge of Missionaries and Cults
On its website in answer to a frequently asked question,"How can I respond to the accusation that Jews for Jesus distorts Jewish religious symbols?," Jews for Jesus says, "Regardless of what anyone says, we are Jews in that we are physically descended from Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. At the same time we are also Christians—those who believe in and follow Jesus, the Jewish Messiah. One classification does not cancel out the other, even though rabbis like to teach that Judaism and Christianity are mutually exclusive categories and hence are antithetical to one another."
In 2014, Jews for Jesus published a three-minute Youtube video called That Jew Died for You, to coincide with Passover, Holy Week and Holocaust Remembrance Day on 28 April. Fox News and the History Channel refused to play an advert for the film.

Mainstream Judaism

Belief in Jesus as deity, son of God, or even a non-divine Christ/Messiah or Prophet (as in Islam), is held as incompatible with Judaism by all Jewish religious movements.[ref]A belief in the divinity of Jesus is incompatible with Judaism:
In 1993 the Task Force on Missionaries and Cults of the Jewish Community Relations Council of New York (JCRCNY) issued a statement which has been endorsed by the four major Jewish denominations: Orthodox Judaism, Conservative Judaism, Reform Judaism, and Reconstructionist Judaism, as well as national Jewish organizations. Based on this statement, the Spiritual Deception Prevention Project at the JCRCNY stated:
 
 On several occasions leaders of the four major Jewish movements have signed on to joint statements opposing Hebrew-Christian theology and tactics. In part they said: "Though Hebrew Christianity claims to be a form of Judaism, it is not ... It deceptively uses the sacred symbols of Jewish observance ... as a cover to convert Jews to Christianity, a belief system antithetical to Judaism ... Hebrew Christians are in radical conflict with the communal interests and the destiny of the Jewish people. They have crossed an unbridgeable chasm by accepting another religion. Despite this separation, they continue to attempt to convert their former co-religionists." Jewish Community Relations Council of New York. Spiritual Deception Prevention Project
The director of a counter-missionary group Torah Atlanta, Rabbi Efraim Davidson, stated that "the Jews for Jesus use aggressive proselytizing to target disenfranchised or unaffiliated Jews, Russian immigrants and college students" and that "their techniques are manipulative, deceptive and anti-Semitic."Portland Jews Brace for Assault by 'Jews for Jesus' By Paul Haist (Jewish Review) May 15, 2002
In his 1997 book The Vanishing American Jew: In Search of Jewish Identity for the Next Century, Alan Dershowitz wrote: "In America, and in other nations that separate church from state, one's Jewishness is a matter of self-definition ..." but notes: "I do not mean to include former Jews who practice Christianity under the deliberately misleading name Jews for Jesus. A Jew for Jesus already has a name: a Christian."
In an interview for Beliefnet, Orthodox Rabbi Irving Greenberg, the author of For the Sake of Heaven and Earth, said:

Outreach Judaism

Outreach Judaism, a Jewish counter-missionary organization founded by Rabbi Tovia Singer, aims to provide educational resources to individuals targeted by organizations such as Jews for Jesus. See Flash Video for information on how to play this recording.

Jews for Judaism

Jews for Judaism, established by Rabbi Bentzion Kravitz in 1986, is a Jewish organization aiming "to strengthen and preserve Jewish identity through education and counseling that counteracts deceptive proselytizing targeting Jews for conversion".

Christian

Some Western Christians object to evangelizing Jews because they see Jewish religious practice as valid in and of itself.[ref]Pluralistic opposition:
In 2003, the sponsorship of Jews for Jesus by All Souls Church, Langham Place, a Conservative Evangelical Church in London, with a launch event on Rosh Hashanah launching a UK mission targeting the Jewish community led to the Interfaith Alliance UK, a coalition of Jewish, Christian and Islamic religious leaders, issuing a letter of protest to the Archbishop of Canterbury.The Guardian Imams join plea for gay tolerance 26 September 2003

Islamic interfaith conference

The Interfaith Conference of Metropolitan Washington includes Muslims, Jews, and liberal church groups.
An opposition has emerged from Muslim imams and leaders in the light of the emergence of "Messianic Muslim" Evangelical missions directed at the Muslim community modeled on Jews for Jesus, with the presentation of Evangelical beliefs in Arabicised terms and encouragement of Muslims to become "followers for 'Isa",See for example Messianic Muslim Followers of Isa and on 10 December 2003, a joint Jewish-Muslim Delegation supported by the Office of the Chief Rabbi in Great Britain together with Muslim imams presented a protest to the Bishop of London, Richard Chartres.

Other

America's Religions. An Educator's Guide to Beliefs and Practices contains "a note about Jews for Jesus, Messianic Jews, Hebrew Christians, and similar groups: Jews in these groups who have converted to Christianity but continue to observe various Jewish practices are no longer considered part of the Jewish community in the usual sense."
There are several other organizations that oppose identification of Jews for Jesus as a Jewish group. Encyclopedia of Evangelicalism, Baylor University Press, November 2004, p. 448

Litigation

1987 – freedom of speech

In the case of Board of Airport Commissioners of Los Angeles v. Jews for Jesus, Inc., 482 U.S. 569 (1987), The Supreme Court held that a law which banned "First Amendment activities" within the Central Terminal Area at L.A. International Airport to be invalid as substantially "over broad," and therefore, invalid on its face. As Justice O'Connor stated, in her opinion, such a law could even be construed to prohibit a traveler from approaching a ticketing booth and asking when the flight from Des Moines was scheduled to arrive. The municipal agency in charge of Los Angeles International Airport had barred the group from distributing leaflets at the airport "as part of a larger ban on what they described as First Amendment activities. Jews for Jesus challenged the airport's right to institute such a sweeping ban."Legal Cases Involving Jews for Jesus (ADL)Airport Comm'rs v. Jews for Jesus, Inc. 

1992 – civil rights violations

In 1992 the New York Court of Appeals ruled against Jews for Jesus in a suit the organization brought against the Jewish Community Relations Council of New York (JCRCNY), an umbrella group representing 60 Jewish agencies in the metropolitan New York area. The case addressed the JCRCNY's 1985 warning to Long Island rabbis that Jews for Jesus was seeking a venue to conduct a Passover seder. Jews for Jesus sued the JCRCNY for violating its civil rights; the decision upheld a lower court ruling that the JCRCNY communication did not "go beyond the proposal stage" and that there was no evidence that any of the Long Island rabbis had actually contacted establishments for the purpose of discriminating against Jews for Jesus., Et Al., Appellants, V. Jewish Community Relations Council Of New York, Inc., Et Al., Respondents
In a 1992 lawsuit brought by Jews for Jesus against the JCRCNY, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit ruled that the efforts of the JCRCNY urging Jewish organizations not to patronize a New York country club because it allowed Jews for Jesus to hold its annual convention on its premises were not protected as an exercise of the JCRC's First Amendment rights.

1993 – refusal of automatic citizenship in Israel

In 1993 the Supreme Court of Israel, in a case involving a couple affiliated with Jews for Jesus, ruled that Jews who adhere to Christian beliefs are regarded by Israeli law as "members of a different faith," and are not eligible for the automatic citizenship that Israel grants Jews. This is done not to try to change Jewish Law, but to preserve the Jewish character of the State of Israel – i.e., that allowing in people whose sole mission is to get Jews to become Christians is inimical to one of the core ethics of the country (to be a haven for Jews; see Israeli Declaration of Independence). In its summary of the ruling, the Israel Ministry of Foreign Affairs stated that the belief that Jesus is the Messiah "cannot be reconciled with Judaism" and "marks the clear separation between Judaism and Christianity."

1998 and 2005–2006 – online name

Jews for Jesus has been involved in litigation regarding Internet use of its name. In 1998 they successfully sued Steven Brodsky for cybersquatting — registering the domain name jewsforjesus. The domain now belongs to Jews for Jesus and is used for their main site.
In 2005 Jews for Jesus suedGoogle Sued for Trademark Infringement Based on Third-Level Subdomain by Eric Goldman (CircleID) December 30, 2005 Google for allowing a Blogspot user to put up a site at the third-level subdomain jewsforjesus.com. In September 2006 Christianity Today reported that "Jews for Jesus settled out of court with a critical blogger identified as 'Whistle Blower' on jewsforjesus.com. The evangelistic ministry assumed control of the site."Christianity Today News Briefs September 1, 2006

2006 – misuse of Jackie Mason name

In 2006 comedian and actor Jackie Mason filed a lawsuit against Jews for Jesus, alleging that they unlawfully distributed a pamphlet which used his name and likeness in a way that suggested he was a member of the group. In fact, Mason is Jewish and not associated with Jews for Jesus.Press Release: Jews for Jesus and Jackie Mason (Jews for Jesus) August 25, 2006
A judge of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York denied a preliminary injunction against Jews for Jesus over the pamphlet, finding the distribution of the pamphlet to be protected by the First Amendment, and also stated that the pamphlet did not suggest that Mason was a Christian.S. District Court, November 8, 2006
In December 2006, Jackie Mason dropped the lawsuit against Jews for Jesus after they issued a letter of apology to Mason. The group's executive director, David Brickner, stated in the letter to Mason that he wanted "to convey my sincere apologies for any distress that you felt over our tract." Brickner continued that he believed its publication was protected by the Constitution, but the group was willing in the interest of peace and love for Israel to retire the pamphlet. Mason replied in front of the federal court in Manhattan where he accepted the apology, "There's no such thing as a Jew for Jesus. It's like saying a black man is for the KKK. You can't be a table and a chair. You're either a Jew or a Gentile."USA Today, nymag.





Further reading




