[[Henry Wadsworth Longfellow]]

CATEGORIES: 1807 births, 1882 deaths, Bowdoin College alumni, Deaths from peritonitis, Harvard University faculty, People from Cambridge, Massachusetts, People from Portland, Maine, Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class), Spanish–English translators, Translators of Dante Alighieri, Writers from Maine, Writers from Massachusetts, Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, Burials at Mount Auburn Cemetery, 19th-century American novelists, 19th-century American poets

Henry Wadsworth Longfellow (February 27, 1807 – March 24, 1882) was an American poet and educator whose works include "Paul Revere's Ride", The Song of Hiawatha, and Evangeline. He was also the first American to translate Dante Alighieri's The Divine Comedy and was one of the five Fireside Poets.
Longfellow was born in Portland, Maine, which was then a part of Massachusetts. He studied at Bowdoin College. After spending time in Europe he became a professor at Bowdoin and, later, at Harvard College. His first major poetry collections were Voices of the Night (1839) and Ballads and Other Poems (1841). Longfellow retired from teaching in 1854 to focus on his writing, living the remainder of his life in Cambridge, Massachusetts, in a former headquarters of George Washington. His first wife Mary Potter died in 1835 after a miscarriage. His second wife Frances Appleton died in 1861 after sustaining burns when her dress caught fire. After her death, Longfellow had difficulty writing poetry for a time and focused on his translation. He died in 1882.
Longfellow wrote predominantly lyric poems, known for their musicality and often presenting stories of mythology and legend. He became the most popular American poet of his day and also had success overseas. He has been criticized, however, for imitating European styles and writing specifically for the masses.

Life and work

Early life and education

Longfellow was born on February 27, 1807, to Stephen Longfellow and Zilpah (Wadsworth) Longfellow in Portland, Maine,Calhoun, 5 then a district of Massachusetts,Sullivan, 180 and he grew up in what is now known as the Wadsworth-Longfellow House. His father was a lawyer, and his maternal grandfather, Peleg Wadsworth, was a general in the American Revolutionary War and a Member of Congress.Arvin, 7 Young Longfellow was the second of eight children;Thompson, 16 his siblings were Stephen (1805), Elizabeth (1808), Anne (1810), Alexander (1814), Mary (1816), Ellen (1818), and Samuel (1819).
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was enrolled in a dame school at the age of three and by age six was enrolled at the private Portland Academy. In his years there, he earned a reputation as being very studious and became fluent in Latin. His mother encouraged his enthusiasm for reading and learning, introducing him to Robinson Crusoe and Don Quixote.Calhoun, 24 He stayed at the Portland Academy until the age of fourteen. He spent much of his summers as a child at his grandfather Peleg's farm in the western Maine town of Hiram.
In the fall of 1822, the 15-year old Longfellow enrolled at Bowdoin College in Brunswick, Maine, alongside his brother Stephen. There, Longfellow met Nathaniel Hawthorne, who would later become his lifelong friend.Calhoun, 33 He joined the Peucinian Society, a group of students with Federalist leanings.Calhoun, 37 In his senior year, Longfellow wrote to his father about his aspirations:
 I will not disguise it in the least... the fact is, I most eagerly aspire after future eminence in literature, my whole soul burns most ardently after it, and every earthly thought centres in it... I am almost confident in believing, that if I can ever rise in the world it must be by the exercise of my talents in the wide field of literature.Arvin, 13 
He pursued his literary goals by submitting poetry and prose to various newspapers and magazines, partly due to encouragement from a professor named Thomas Cogswell Upham.Arvin, 14 About 24 of them appeared in the short-lived Boston periodical The United States Literary Gazette. When Longfellow graduated from Bowdoin, he was ranked fourth in the class, and had been elected to Phi Beta Kappa.

European tours and professorships

After graduating in 1825, he was offered a job as professor of modern languages at his alma mater. The story, possibly apocryphal, is that an influential trustee, Benjamin Orr, had been so impressed by Longfellow's translation of Horace that he was hired under the condition that he travel to Europe to study French, Spanish, and Italian.Arvin, 22 His time abroad would last three years and cost his father $2,604.24.Arvin, 26 While overseas, he learned French, Spanish, Portuguese, and German, mostly without formal instruction.Jones, Brian Jay. Washington Irving: An American Original. New York: Arcade Publishing, 2008: 242. ISBN 978-1-55970-836-4 Irving encouraged the young Longfellow to pursue writing. The Original Knickerbocker: The Life of Washington Irving. New York: Basic Books, 2007: 195. ISBN 978-0-465-00853-7. While in Spain, Longfellow was saddened to learn that his favorite sister, Elizabeth, had died of tuberculosis at the age of 20 that May while he was abroad.Calhoun, 67
On August 27, 1829, he wrote to the president of Bowdoin that he was turning down the professorship because he considered the $600 salary "disproportionate to the duties required". The trustees raised his salary to $800 with an additional $100 to serve as the college's librarian, a post which required one hour of work per day.Irmscher, 225 He also published a travel book, Outre-Mer: A Pilgrimage Beyond the Sea, first published in serial form before a book edition was released in 1835. Shortly after the book's publication, Longfellow attempted to join the literary circle in New York and asked George Pope Morris for an editorial role at one of Morris's publications. Longfellow considered moving to New York after New York University considered offering him a newly created professorship of modern languages, though there would be no salary. The professorship was not created and Longfellow agreed to continue teaching at Bowdoin. He wrote, "I hate the sight of pen, ink, and paper... I do not believe that I was born for such a lot. I have aimed higher than this".Sullivan, 187
On September 14, 1831, Longfellow married Mary Storer Potter, a childhood friend from Portland.Arvin, 28 Longfellow published several nonfiction and fiction prose pieces inspired by Irving, including "The Indian Summer" and "The Bald Eagle" in 1833.Williams, 108
In December 1834, Longfellow received a letter from Josiah Quincy III, president of Harvard College, offering him the Smith Professorship of Modern Languages with the stipulation that he spend a year or so abroad.Sullivan, 189 In October 1835, during the trip, his wife Mary had a miscarriage about six months into her pregnancy. Longfellow had her body embalmed immediately and placed into a lead coffin inside an oak coffin which was then shipped to Mount Auburn Cemetery near Boston... She is dead — She is dead! All day I am weary and sad". Several years later, he wrote the poem "Mezzo Cammin" expressed his personal struggles in his middle years.Arvin, 305
When he returned to the United States in 1836, Longfellow took up the professorship at Harvard. He was required to live in Cambridge to be close to the campus and rented rooms at the Craigie House in the spring of 1837,Calhoun, 124 now preserved as the Longfellow House–Washington's Headquarters National Historic Site. The home, built in 1759, had once been the headquarters of George Washington during the Siege of Boston beginning in July 1775.Brooks, 153 Longfellow began publishing his poetry, including the collection Voices of the Night in 1839.Gioia, 75 Ballads and Other Poems was published shortly thereafter in 1841Williams, 75 and included "The Village Blacksmith" and "The Wreck of the Hesperus", which were instantly popular. Members included Cornelius Conway Felton, George Stillman Hillard, and Charles Sumner, the latter of whom would become Longfellow's closest friend over the next 30 years."Sullivan, 191

Courtship of Frances Appleton

Longfellow met Boston industrialist Nathan Appleton and his family, including his son Thomas Gold Appleton, in the town of Thun, Switzerland. There, he began courting Appleton's daughter, Frances "Fanny" Appleton. At first, the independent-minded Appleton was not interested in marriage but Longfellow was determined. In July 1839, he wrote to a friend: "Victory hangs doubtful. The lady says she will not! I say she shall! It is not pride, but the madness of passion".Thompson, 258 During the courtship, Longfellow frequently walked from Cambridge to the Appleton home in Beacon Hill in Boston by crossing the Boston Bridge. That bridge was replaced in 1906 by a new bridge which was later renamed the Longfellow Bridge.
In late 1839, Longfellow published Hyperion, a book in prose inspired by his trips abroad and his unsuccessful courtship of Fanny Appleton. After returning, Longfellow published a play in 1842, The Spanish Student, reflecting his memories from his time in Spain in the 1820s. After being printed in Graham's Magazine, its editor Rufus Wilmot Griswold saved the manuscript from the trash. Longfellow was surprised to hear that it had been saved, unusual for a printing office, and asked to borrow it so that he could revise it, forgetting to return it to Griswold. The often vindictive Griswold wrote an angry letter in response.Bayless, 130–131
A small collection, Poems on Slavery, was published in 1842 as Longfellow's first public support of abolitionism. However, as Longfellow himself wrote, the poems were "so mild that even a Slaveholder might read them without losing his appetite for breakfast". Longfellow's thin books; spirited and polished like its forerunners; but the topic would warrant a deeper tone".Wagenknecht, 56
On May 10, 1843, after seven years, Longfellow received a letter from Fanny Appleton agreeing to marry him and, too restless to take a carriage, walked 90 minutes to meet her at her house. Nathan Appleton bought the Craigie House as a wedding present to the pair. Longfellow lived there for the rest of his life."Sullivan, 193
He and Fanny had six children: Charles Appleton (1844–1893), Ernest Wadsworth (1845–1921), Fanny (1847–1848), Alice Mary (1850–1928), Edith (1853–1915), and Anne Allegra (1855–1934). Their second-youngest daughter, Edith, married Richard Henry Dana III, son of the popular writer Richard Henry Dana, Jr., author of Two Years Before the Mast. Nathan Cooley Keep administered ether as the first obstetric anesthetic in the United States to Fanny Longfellow. His literary income was increasing considerably: in 1840, he had made $219 from his work but the year 1850 brought him $1,900.Williams, 19
On June 14, 1853, Longfellow held a farewell dinner party at his Cambridge home for his friend Nathaniel Hawthorne, who was preparing to move overseas. He was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws from Harvard in 1859.Calhoun, 198

Death of Frances

On July 9, 1861,Miller, 91 a hot day, Fanny was putting locks of her children's hair into an envelope and attempting to seal it with hot sealing wax while Longfellow took a nap.Arvin, 138 Longfellow, awakened from his nap, rushed to help her and threw a rug over her, though it was too small. He stifled the flames with his body as best he could, but she was already badly burned. Over a half a century later, Longfellow's youngest daughter Annie explained the story differently, claiming that there had been no candle or wax but that the fire had started from a self-lighting match that had fallen on the floor. In both versions of the story, however, Fanny was taken to her room to recover and a doctor was called. She was in and out of consciousness throughout the night and was administered ether. The next morning, July 10, 1861, she died shortly after 10 o'clock after requesting a cup of coffee.Arvin, 139 His facial injuries led him to stop shaving, thereafter wearing the beard which became his trademark.
Devastated by her death, he never fully recovered and occasionally resorted to laudanum and ether to deal with it.Sullivan, 197 He expressed his grief in the sonnet "The Cross of Snow" (1879), which he wrote eighteen years later to commemorate her death:

Later life and death

Longfellow spent several years translating Dante Alighieri's Divine Comedy. To aid him in perfecting the translation and reviewing proofs, he invited friends to weekly meetings every Wednesday starting in 1864.Calhoun, 236 The full three-volume translation was published in the spring of 1867, though Longfellow would continue to revise it,Irmscher, 263 and went through four printings in its first year.Williams, 100 In 1874, Samuel Cutler Ward helped him sell the poem "The Hanging of the Crane" to the New York Ledger for $3,000; it was the highest price ever paid for a poem. King of the Lobby: The Life and Times of Sam Ward, Man-About-Washington in the Gilded Age. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2010: 98. ISBN 978-0-8018-9397-1
During the 1860s, Longfellow supported abolitionism and especially hoped for reconciliation between the northern and southern states after the American Civil War. He wrote in his journal in 1878: "I have only one desire; and that is for harmony, and a frank and honest understanding between North and South".Calhoun, 240–241 The next year, 1876, he declined an offer to be nominated for the Board of Overseers at Harvard "for reasons very conclusive to my own mind".Wagenknecht, 40
On August 22, 1879, a female admirer traveled to Longfellow's house in Cambridge and, unaware to whom she was speaking, asked Longfellow: "Is this the house where Longfellow was born?" Longfellow told her it was not. The visitor then asked if he had died here. "Not yet", he replied. He endured the pain for several days with the help of opium before he died surrounded by family on Friday, March 24, 1882.Wagenknecht, 11 At the time of his death, his estate was worth an estimated $356,320. He is buried with both of his wives at Mount Auburn Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts. His last few years were spent translating the poetry of Michelangelo; though Longfellow never considered it complete enough to be published during his lifetime, a posthumous edition was collected in 1883. Scholars generally regard the work as autobiographical, reflecting the translator as an aging artist facing his impending death.Irmscher, 137–139

Writing

Style

Though much of his work is categorized as lyric poetry, Longfellow experimented with many forms, including hexameter and free verse.Williams, 130 Typically, Longfellow would carefully consider the subject of his poetic ideas for a long time before deciding on the right metrical form for it.Brooks, 174 As he says, "what a writer asks of his reader is not so much to like as to listen".Wagenknecht, 145
As a very private man, Longfellow did not often add autobiographical elements to his poetry. Two notable exceptions are dedicated to the death of members of his family. "Resignation", written as a response to the death of his daughter Fanny in 1848, does not use first-person pronouns and is instead a generalized poem of mourning.Calhoun, 229 His memorial poem to her, a sonnet called "The Cross of Snow", was not published in his lifetime.
Longfellow often used didacticism in his poetry, though he focused on it less in his later years.Howe, Daniel Walker. What Hath God Wrought: The Transformation of America, 1815–1848. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007: 630–631. ISBN 978-0-19-507894-7 Longfellow also often used allegory in his work. In "Nature", for example, death is depicted as bedtime for a cranky child. Walt Whitman: The Song of Himself. University of California Press, 1999: 52. ISBN 0-520-22687-9. Many of the metaphors he used in his poetry as well as subject matter came from legends, mythology, and literature.Brooks, 175–176 In fact, Longfellow rarely wrote on current subjects and seemed detached from contemporary American concerns. In Kavanagh, a character says:
 We want a national literature commensurate with our mountains and rivers... We want a national epic that shall correspond to the size of the country... We want a national drama in which scope shall be given to our gigantic ideas and to the unparalleled activity of our people... In a word, we want a national literature altogether shaggy and unshorn, that shall shake the earth, like a herd of buffaloes thundering over the prairies. W. B. The American Adam: Innocence, Tragedy, and Tradition in the Nineteenth Century. Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1955: 79. 
He was also important as a translator; his translation of Dante became a required possession for those who wanted to be a part of high culture. In 1845, he published The Poets and Poetry of Europe, an 800-page compilation of translations made by other writers, including many by his friend and colleague Cornelius Conway Felton. Longfellow intended the anthology "to bring together, into a compact and convenient form, as large an amount as possible of those English translations which are scattered through many volumes, and are not accessible to the general reader".Irmscher, 21
In 1874, Longfellow oversaw a 31-volume anthology called Poems of Places, which collected poems representing several geographical locations, including European, Asian, and Arabian countries... You are wasting time that should be bestowed upon original production".Wagenknecht, 185

Critical response

Longfellow's early collections, Voices of the Night and Ballads and Other Poems, made him instantly popular. The New-Yorker called him "one of the very few in our time who has successfully aimed in putting poetry to its best and sweetest uses". The Southern Literary Messenger immediately put Longfellow "among the first of our American poets". Poet John Greenleaf Whittier said that Longfellow's poetry illustrated "the careful moulding by which art attains the graceful ease and chaste simplicity of nature". John Greenleaf Whittier: A Portrait in Paradox. New York: Oxford University Press, 1967: 113. Longfellow's friend Oliver Wendell Holmes, Sr. wrote of him as "our chief singer" and one who "wins and warms... kindles, softens, cheers and calms the wildest woe and stays the bitterest tears!"Sullivan, 177
The rapidity with which American readers embraced Longfellow was unparalleled in publishing history in the United States;Calhoun, 139 by 1874, he was earning $3,000 per poem. A Guide to Writers' Homes in New England. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Apple-wood Books, 1984: 127. ISBN 0-918222-51-6 His popularity spread throughout Europe as well and his poetry was translated during his lifetime into Italian, French, German, and other languages.Sullivan, 178 In the last two decades of his life, he often received requests for autographs from strangers, which he always sent.Irmscher, 36
Contemporary writer Edgar Allan Poe wrote to Longfellow in May 1841 of his "fervent admiration which your genius has inspired in me" and later called him "unquestionably the best poet in America". Edgar Allan Poe: His Life and Legacy. New York: Cooper Square Press, 1992: 171. ISBN 0-8154-1038-7. However, after Poe's reputation as a critic increased, he publicly accused Longfellow of plagiarism in what has been since termed by Poe biographers as "The Longfellow War".Silverman, 251 His accusations may have been a publicity stunt to boost readership of the Broadway Journal, for which he was the editor at the time.Wagenknecht, 144
Margaret Fuller judged him "artificial and imitative" and lacking force.Reynolds, David S. Walt Whitman's America: A Cultural Biography. New York: Vintage Books, 1995: 353. ISBN 0-679-76709-6. He added, "Longfellow was no revolutionarie: never traveled new paths: of course never broke new paths."Blake, David Haven. Walt Whitman and the Culture of American Celebrity. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006: 74. ISBN 0-300-11017-0 Lewis Mumford said that Longfellow could be completely removed from the history of literature without much effect. Towards the end of his life, contemporaries considered him more of a children's poetCalhoun, 246 as many of his readers were children... slipshod, sentimental stories told in the style of the nursery, beginning in nothing and ending in nothing". The Feminization of American Culture. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1977: 235. ISBN 0-394-40532-3 A more modern critic said, "Who, except wretched schoolchildren, now reads Longfellow?" A London critic in the London Quarterly Review, however, condemned all American poetry, saying, "with two or three exceptions, there is not a poet of mark in the whole union" but singled out Longfellow as one of those exceptions.Irmscher, 20

Legacy

Longfellow was the most popular poet of his day.Gioia, 65 Many of his works helped shape the American character and its legacy, particularly with the poem "Paul Revere's Ride". He was such an admired figure in the United States during his life that his 70th birthday in 1877 took on the air of a national holiday, with parades, speeches, and the reading of his poetry.
Over the years, Longfellow's personality has become part of his reputation. He has been presented as a gentle, placid, poetic soul: an image perpetuated by his brother Samuel Longfellow, who wrote an early biography which specifically emphasized these points. At Longfellow's funeral, his friend Ralph Waldo Emerson called him "a sweet and beautiful soul". He suffered from neuralgia, which caused him constant pain, and he also had poor eyesight. He wrote to friend Charles Sumner: "I do not believe anyone can be perfectly well, who has a brain and a heart". Longfellow was very quiet, reserved, and private; in later years, he was known for being unsocial and avoided leaving home.Wagenknecht, 34
He had become one of the first American celebrities and was also popular in Europe. It was reported that 10,000 copies of The Courtship of Miles Standish sold in London in a single day.Sullivan, 198 In 1884, Longfellow became the first non-British writer for whom a commemorative sculpted bust was placed in Poet's Corner of Westminster Abbey in London; he remains the only American poet represented with a bust. C.
More recently, he was honored in March 2007 when the United States Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating him. A number of schools are named after him in various states as well. Neil Diamond's 1974 hit song, "Longfellow Serenade", is a reference to the poet. The Billboard Book of #1 Adult Contemporary Hits (Billboard Publications), page 150. He is a protagonist in Matthew Pearl's murder mystery The Dante Club (2003).Calhoun, 258
Longfellow's popularity rapidly declined, beginning shortly after his death and into the twentieth century as academics began to appreciate poets like Walt Whitman, Edwin Arlington Robinson, and Robert Frost."Gioia, 68 20th-century poet Lewis Putnam Turco concluded "Longfellow was minor and derivative in every way throughout his career... nothing more than a hack imitator of the English Romantics."Turco, Lewis Putnam. Visions and Revisions of American Poetry. Fayetteville, AK: University of Arkansas Press, 1986: 33. ISBN 0-938626-49-3

List of works




Citations

Sources



Sources
Other


