[[Keith Boanas]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Living people, English footballers, English football managers, Tooting & Mitcham United F.C. players, Charlton Athletic F.C. non-playing staff, UEFA Pro Licence holders, Expatriate football managers in Estonia, Women's national association football team managers

Keith Robert Boanas (Born 22 April 1959) is an international English football manager , UEFA pro-license holder and a senior coach educator. Boanas has been involved in grass roots football and academy player development for over 25  years in the UK, Europe, USA and SE Asia. He has served as the head coach of the Estonia women's national football team since 2009.

Playing career

A player and coach on the semi-professional circuit, Boanas made three substitute appearances for Tooting & Mitcham United after being appointed manager in 1998–99.Tooting & Mitcham United FC Archive

Coaching career

Currently Keith Boanas is the president of Surrey Coaches Association UK replacing the late and great Sir Bobby Robson. Vice presidents of Surrey Coaches Association include Roy Hodgson the current England national manager and Dario Gradi MBE.
Prior to taking the Tooting & Mitcham United head coach position in 1998, Boanas had become The County Coach in England's largest county  Surrey County Football Association one of the oldest and most respected football associations in England and also served as director of Margate FC's centre of excellence.
Boanas has worked with and assisted in the development of many senior England women internationals such as current captain Casey Stoney and Enila Aluko  and also his wife, Hall of Fame member Pauline Cope/Boanas, Marieanne Spacey the assistant England national coach whom he tutored for the English FA Level 2, UEFA B and introducing Spacey to her first senior coaching opportunity with Charlton Athletic FC.
He has also worked with many figures from the men's game including Chris Powell, the current head coach at Charlton Athletic and former PFA president. His career has included working with Dean Kiely Premier league GK now GK coach at West Bromwich Albion and he  tutored Simon Mcmenmy, who had a very successful spell as the national manager of Philippines national team. In player development, Boanas achieved great success in developing professional players such as, Marlon King who went on to play for  Birmingham City, Leroy Lita played for Swansea City, and Jason Euel who played for Charlton Athletic.
In November 2000,Boanas decided to enter womens professional football in a challenging role with a professional premiere league club. He worked hard to help develop the growing women's game and was at the forefront of women's soccer during this opportune period of time and took over as manager of Charlton Athletic Ladies, as opportunities at the professional men's level were few and far between at a time in English football where chairman of clubs favored mostly ex-professional players despite being unqualified.
Boanas took on this role while still managing to manage Tooting & Mitcham United FC. In August 2001, with the full consent of the club, Boanas furthered his role with Charlton Athletic Ladies. To this day, Boanas is highly respected by the club and its supporters and is revered as somewhat as a cult figure and is referred to as "God" 
With Charlton Ladies, Boanas reached three successive FA Women's Cup finals, winning the 2005 trophy after defeats to much more established clubs with larger budgets Fulham and Arsenal in 2003, 2004 and reached the final once again in 2007. Boanas had ended the dominance of the bigger clubs with more pulling power. He also guided Charlton Ladies to further cup success, the FA Women's Premier League Cup in 2004 2006.
Ironically despite the huge success of Charlton Ladies team, 2007 Charlton Athletic saw the mens team  relegated from the Premier League and scrapped their entire women's section as a result, leaving Boanas "devastated".
Boanas then continued his work with the Surrey FA as The County Coach and coach educator, and was head hunted for the position of assistant director of the David Beckham Academy. 
Whilst at the David Beckham Academy Boanas was offered the honorary position as the English national university and colleges head coach a position bestowed upon him in recognition of not only  his coaching ability and success at club level but his commitment, success and dedication to coach education. 
Boanas held this position for three years before returning to the women's game in June 2008, being appointed manager of Millwall Lionesses. 
However, in January 2009, Boanas was appointed as manager of the Estonia women's national football team and further tasked with re-structuring youth development and coach education in a developing football nation. In doing so, he expressed disappointment at being overlooked for  working with his native country England women's national team despite his huge success at club level with limited resources and was possibly the most successful English club manager at the time.
In September 2012 after achieving all his senior coaching qualifications in the UK, Boanas elected to achieve his  UEFA Pro Licence in Europe – the highest coaching award available in Europe, under Dutch tutor Arno Pijpers.
In November 2012, Boanas reportedly agreed a three year contract to take over as manager of Lincoln Ladies, to begin in January 2013. Should Boanas have opted to put pen to paper at Lincoln, he was to be reunited with Casey Stoney, his captain at Charlton.  "It was clear early on in my discussions with Lincoln that they hold similar ambitions, to be challenging at the very top of the game and to take women's football on to the next level." However Boanas decided not to take up the position offered at Lincoln.
In 2013 Boanas sat on UEFA seminar panels and in the same year delivered a specialist coach education session for the Danish FA by  invitation on English training methodology and tactics a session at which Brian Laudrup was present.
Boanas is the author of three youth development manuals for coaches under Green Star Media Publications UK and delivers coach education courses and clinics world wide and also academy training work shops for Surrey coaches with Fulham FC youth academy players.

Personal life

Boanas is married to former England and Charlton Athletic goalkeeper Pauline Cope.

Honours

UK
2003-2004
Nationwide Coach of the Year
2004-2005
Ryman League Coach Of The Year
Europe
Estonia
2009, 2010, 2012, 2013 Seniors 4 x Winners Annual Baltic Cup Tournament
2009, 2012 U19s 2 x Winners Youth Baltic Cup
2010, 2012, 2013 U17s 3 x Winners Youth Baltic Cup
2010 Voted Estonian FA JALKA Magazine Coach of the year
2010 Seniors Winners UEFA Mini Tournament Armenia






