[[Beyond Grey Pinstripes]]

CATEGORIES: Business education

Beyond Grey Pinstripes is a ranking of full-time MBA programs which assesses and scores schools based on the integration of social, ethical, and environmental content into the curricula and faculty research.
The survey results and ranking are published biennially. The first instance of the Beyond Grey Pinstripes survey and ranking was published in October 1999 by the World Resources Institute in partnership with the Aspen Institute.
Data collected through the survey process are made public, and may be accessed and downloaded via an online database hosted on the ranking's website. School profiles typically include course listings and syllabi submitted by universities as part of the scoring process, and - although not part of the ranking calculation - activities such as internship programs, student clubs, institutes or centers run within the university, speaker series, conferences and competition events. A searchable database of faculty research relevant to topics in sustainability and social impact is also available.

2011-2012 MBA rankings

149 schools submitted information to the Beyond Grey Pinstripes survey, and after being analyzed and scored, 100 were ranked in the Aspen Global 100. The top ten schools of this ranking are displayed below.

Ranking methodology

Rankings published in Beyond Grey Pinstripes are based entirely on MBA coursework and research published by business school faculty. The data on which the rankings are based are provided by participating schools.
Schools participating in the ranking provide information about their demographics, curricular offerings and faculty research. Demographic data includes campus and class enrollment statistics, number of faculty, and required credit hours needed to earn a degree. Data collected on a school's curriculum include course descriptions that explain what social, environmental, and ethical content is in each course; a syllabus; a count on the number of full-time students enrolled in the course; the amount of credits or credit hours allotted to the course, and whether the course is required or elective. Submitters must also estimate what percent of the course material is relevant to social, ethical, or environmental topics.  The schools are also asked to provide abstracts for all articles on business-related social, ethical and environmental issues published by their business school faculty in peer-reviewed, business journals over the past 2 years. Participating schools are also given an option to submit a narrative on their efforts to prepare students for social and environmental stewardship. To ensure data accuracy, participating schools are required to sign a pledge stating that submissions are honest and accurate.
As of 2011, rankings are calculated using a weighted average formula:
Scoring is done by fourteen Ph.D. fellows who work in pairs to review school submissions and score coursework and faculty research. Scoring is further reviewed by the Aspen Institute Center for Business Education to maintain consistency and accuracy across schools and areas of study.

Criticisms

The ranking has at times have received critiques. The United Nations Global Compact criticized the ranking in 2002 for not putting greater weight on core courses when compared to elective courses.








