[[Crimson (wrestler)]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, United States Army soldiers, American male film actors, American military personnel of the Iraq War, American male professional wrestlers, Living people, Professional wrestlers from Ohio, Sportspeople from Cleveland, Ohio

Tommy Mercer (born February 21, 1985) is an American professional wrestler, best known for his work with Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA) under the ring name Crimson. He has also worked for TNA's developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), where he is a former one-time OVW Heavyweight Champion and a two-time OVW Southern Tag Team Champion with Jason Wayne. Prior to signing with TNA, Mercer worked under his real name for various promotions on the independent circuit, including Absolute Intense Wrestling (AIW), NWA Main Event and Showtime All-Star Wrestling (SAW). Mercer served five years in the United States Army, which included two tours of Iraq as part of Operation Iraqi Freedom.

Early life

Mercer was born and raised by a single mother in Cleveland, Ohio. He attended North Ridgeville High School, where he played football and basketball, but wasn't able to continue to pursue a career in either of them without an athletic scholarship. After graduation Mercer joined the United States Army in order to fund his college studies. He ended up serving for five years, which included two tours of Iraq in the 101st Airborne Division as part of Operation Iraqi Freedom.

Professional wrestling career

During his second tour of Iraq, Mercer decided to pursue a career in professional wrestling and upon his return to the United States, entered the NWA Main Event wrestling school in Clarksville, Tennessee, where he was trained by Jeff Daniels. He would make his professional wrestling debut in 2007, working for independent promotions in Nashville, Tennessee. He would eventually make his debut also for NWA Main Event, starting a storyline rivalry with his trainer Jeff Daniels. On June 3, 2010, Mercer won his first professional wrestling championship, when he defeated Matt Boyce for the NWA Mid-American Television Championship.
On October 10, 2009, Mercer wrestled in a six–way pre-show match at a Ring of Honor (ROH) event in Indianapolis, Indiana.

United States Wrestling Organization (2009–2010)

Mercer made his debut for United States Wrestling Organization (USWO) on July 7, 2009, defeating Matt Burns. Following the match, Mercer was attacked by Jeff Daniels and Dominique. This led to Mercer's second match in USWO, a tag team match on August 7, where Daniels and The Convict defeated Mercer and Scott Hayes, following interference from Dominique. Mercer's rivalry with Daniels culminated in two singles matches in September, which were both won by Mercer. On November 6, Mercer defeated Chris Michaels to win the ATL Southern Championship. On November 20, Mercer wrestled SAW International Champion Kid Kash in a title vs. title match, which ended in a disqualification; as a result, both men kept their respective titles. Mercer would lost his title to Chrisjen Hayme on February 5, 2010, in his final USWO appearance.

Absolute Intense Wrestling (2009–2010, 2014)

Mercer debuted for Absolute Intense Wrestling (AIW) on December 19, 2009, defeating Corvis Fear. On April 9, Mercer formed Team No Mercy with Chris Dickinson and Toby Klein to take part in the Jack of All Trios tournament; the team was eliminated in the quarterfinals by The Young Studs (Bobby Beverly, Eric Ryan and TJ Dynamite). On June 27, Mercer was defeated by Johnny Gargano in the four-way decision match for the AIW Absolute Championship. Mercer made his final AIW appearance on December 17, unsuccessfully challenging Gargano for the AIW Absolute Championship.
Mercer returned to AIW on April 25, 2014, when he, B.J. Whitmer and Jimmy Jacobs formed a stable named The Forgotten and attacked the AIW Tag Team Champions, the Jollyville Fuck-Its (Nasty Russ and T-Money).

Showtime / NWA Southern All-Star Wrestling (2010–2011, 2013)

Mercer debuted for Showtime All-Star Wrestling (SAW) on July 24, 2010, defeating Jesse Emerson.
Mercer returned to SAW, now known as NWA Southern All-Star Wrestling, on September 6, 2013, defeating Hot Rod Biggs to become the new NWA Southern Heavyweight Champion. Crimson vacated the title on October 11 due to an injury.

Total Nonstop Action Wrestling

=Undefeated streak (2010–2012)=

On September 8, 2010, Mercer wrestled in a tryout dark match for Total Nonstop Action Wrestling (TNA), in a losing effort against Jay Lethal.
On the February 24 episode of Impact!, Crimson made his singles match debut in a win against the returning Magnus.
Crimson returned via satellite on the September 15 episode of Impact Wrestling, announcing that he would return to the Impact Wrestling Zone in two weeks.

=Sporadic appearances (2012–2013)=

Crimson returned on the July 5 episode of Impact Wrestling, unsuccessfully challenging Devon for the TNA Television Championship.

=Ohio Valley Wrestling (2012–2013)=

After not appearing on Impact Wrestling for over a month, Crimson asked Al Snow to improve in TNA's developmental territory Ohio Valley Wrestling (OVW), making his debut on August 15, 2012.

Other media

In 2011, Mercer made his acting debut, playing the role of Sherman in the film Chained: Code 207.

Personal life

Outside of his career in professional wrestling, Mercer works as a personal trainer and attends classes in business management at Austin Peay State University.

In wrestling

Championships and accomplishments






