[[Makers of Memories]]

CATEGORIES: Charities based in New York, Organizations established in 2007, Domestic violence-related organizations

History

The Makers of Memories Foundation was established in 2007 by marketing and media entrepreneur Brian F. Martin.  Martin was raised in a family with chronic, serious abuse and created the Foundation to help families and children overcome the trauma of domestic violence they experienced and to pursue more positive possibilities in their lives.  In 2007 and 2008 the Foundation hosted journeys for families which combined a restorative experience along with educational and therapeutic services.  Financial author David Bach
In 2011, the Foundation announced the launch of a national, comprehensive Action Plan with five elements: research, education, support services, intervention programs and shelter support.  The Foundation continues to work with key leaders from the Department of Justice, like Mary Lou Leary, in October, 2011 on Capitol Hill to educate American policy makers about the problem of domestic violence on children.
In late 2012 the organization was renamed "Children of Domestic Violence" 

Leadership

Brian F. Martin, founder, serves as Chairman of the Board of Directors.  Martin is the Chairman and Founder of Brand Connections.  The Advisory Committee includes a number of leading domestic violence experts, including Jeffrey Edleson, Professor of Psychology at the University of Minnesota, Sandra Graham–Bermann, Professor of Psychology at the University of Michigan, and Renee McDonald, Associate Professor of Psychology at Southern Methodist University.  The Advisory Committee also includes author and authority on leadership psychology Tony Robbins and Brand Connections CEO Sherry Orel.
Bill Livermore was appointed Executive Director in 2011.

Programs

The Foundation's Action Plan includes
The Makers of Memories Foundation began production on a documentary film, 43 Million Secrets in April 2011.  The film profiles a family that has been devastated by domestic violence and includes interviews with experts in the field of domestic violence, law enforcement officials and adults and children who have experienced violence in their homes.  The Foundation plans to use the film as an educational tool to inform the public about the effects of domestic violence on children, adults and society.  Release of the film is scheduled for Spring 2012.
The Foundation convened a summit of scholars and interventionists in April 2010 in New York to identify the most promising existing intervention programs to help children impacted by domestic violence and to develop a new intervention program model focused on prevention.  That research led to a partnership will partner with MINCAVA, of the University of Minnesota School of Social Work to launch a pilot program in 2012 that uses informal family protective networks to provide assistance and support to children who have experienced domestic violence and are at risk.
Congressman John Conyers, as the ranking member of the House Judiciary Committee, works with Makers of Memories and recently called for an oversight hearing to assess where the government is in their work on the impact of domestic violence on children, and what more can and should be done.
On January 16, 2012, Brian F. Martin appeared on the "Dr. Phil" TV Show to discuss childhood exposure to domestic violence.

On October 1, 2012, Makers of Memories renamed itself as CDV.

On October 5, 2012, The documentary 43 million secrets was re-titled "The Children Next Door", funded by the Children of Domestic Violence, it was released on the independent film festival circuit where it won 25 awards from different festivals.






