[[Statue of Winston Churchill, Parliament Square]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures completed in 1973, Monuments and memorials in London, Buildings and structures in the City of Westminster, Outdoor sculptures in London, Winston Churchill, 1973 sculptures, Bronze sculptures in the United Kingdom, Statues in the United Kingdom, Parliament Square

The statue of Winston Churchill in Parliament Square, London, is a bronze sculpture of the former British Prime Minister Sir Winston Churchill, created by Ivor Roberts-Jones.
It is located on a spot referred to in the 1950s by Churchill as "where my statue will go". Unveiled by his widow Lady Clementine Spencer-Churchill in 1973, the unveiling was attended by the serving Prime Minister and four former Prime Ministers, while Queen Elizabeth II gave a speech.
The statue is one of eight on the central green of Parliament Square, all of well-known statesmen.

Description

The statue is  high with "Churchill" inscribed on it in large capital letters. A proposal to insert pins standing out of the statue's head was turned down in the 1970s – the pins were intended to stop wild birds from sitting on its head.
The Churchill Statue Committee had concerns during the statue's development process that it looked "a little too much" like the Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini. Whilst the head was still only cast in plaster, a report on it stated that, "At the moment the head is undoubtedly like Churchill, but perhaps not quite right of him at the pinnacle of his career. The cheeks, the eyes, the forehead and the top of the head require improvement. I told Mr. Roberts-Jones that above the eyes I thought I was looking at Mussolini." Roberts-Jones agreed to modify the sculpture to reduce the dome of the head in order to lower the forehead.

History

In the 1950s, David Eccles, then Minister of Works, showed Churchill plans for the redevelopment of Parliament Square. Churchill drew a circle in the north-east corner and declared: "That is where my statue will go." The statue that was eventually installed was first suggested by John Tilney, Member of Parliament for Liverpool Wavertree, in a parliamentary question in 1968. Initial estimates by the sponsors of the Winston Churchill Statue Appeal put the cost of the statue at £30,000. The sponsors of the appeal included Edward Heath, Lord Mountbatten, Lord Portal, and Baroness Elliot. The sum of £32,000 was raised by 4,500 individuals who are listed in a book which was deposited in the library at Chartwell on Churchill's birthday, 30 November 1973.
The statue was unveiled on 1 November 1973 by Clementine, Baroness Spencer-Churchill, Winston Churchill's widow. Queen Elizabeth II had declined to unveil the statue herself, indicating that she thought it right that Lady Spencer-Churchill should do so, although the Queen did attend the ceremony, and gave a speech in which she mentioned that Churchill had turned down a dukedom because he wanted to spend his remaining years in the House of Commons. Union Flags covered the statue, which were removed as a cord was pulled. Others present at the unveiling included The Queen Mother, members of the Churchill family across four generations, Edward Heath (then Prime Minister), and four former Prime Ministers. The Band of the Royal Marines played several of Churchill's favourite pieces of music.
The statue has been defaced on a number of occasions during protests held in Parliament Square. In 2000, at the May Day protest the statue was sprayed with red paint to give the appearance of blood dripping from its mouth An electrical current is passed through the statue to deter pigeons.
In 2008, the statue was grade II listed.

Replicas

Replicas of the statue stand in Oslo, Norway, on Solli plass in the "English Quarter"; in Canberra, Australia at the Australian National University; and in Halifax and Toronto, Canada.
Another was unveiled in 1999 in Winston Churchill Square in Prague, Czech Republic, outside the University of Economics in the Žižkov area.Virtual Prague: Winston Churchill Square








