[[Mel Pearson]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, Canadian ice hockey coaches, Canadian ice hockey forwards, Ice hockey people from British Columbia, Ice hockey people from Minnesota, Living people, Michigan Tech Huskies men's ice hockey coaches, Michigan Tech Huskies men's ice hockey players

Melvin K. Pearson (born February 8, 1959) is a former college ice hockey player and is the head coach of the Michigan Tech Huskies men's ice hockey team. Pearson played for Michigan Tech from 1977 to 1981, then served as an assistant coach for the team from 1982 to 1988. He then spent 23 years as an assistant coach and associate head coach for the Michigan Wolverines men's ice hockey team under Red Berenson before accepting the head coaching position at Michigan Tech in 2011.

Early years and playing career

Mel Pearson was born in Vancouver on February 8, 1959, the son of Vancouver Canucks player George "Mel" Pearson. His father's playing career ended in 1973 as a member of the Minnesota Fighting Saints, and Mel, who had been playing since the age of six, played hockey in suburban Minneapolis at Edina East High School under coach Willard Ikola. Pearson graduated from Michigan Tech in 1981 with a degree in business administration.

Coaching career

Michigan Tech (1982–88)

In 1982, Michigan Tech promoted assistant coach Jim Nahrgang to head coach following MacInnes's retirement. Nahrgang and assistant coach Herb Boxer, who had both served on MacInnes's coaching staff during Pearson's time as a player, sought out Pearson to fill the other coaching position. "They were the ones that really got me into coaching. I hadn't really thought about being a coach until they approached me", Pearson said. In addition to his on-ice responsibilities, Pearson recruited players including eventual National Hockey League (NHL) regulars Randy McKay and Damian Rhodes, and Michigan Tech's first Western Collegiate Hockey Association (WCHA) scoring champion, Shawn Harrison. Pearson retained his assistant coach position when Boxer replaced Nahrgang, who resigned in February 1985, as head coach. During Pearson's tenure as assistant coach, Michigan Tech accumulated a record of 97–136–9. The team neither advanced beyond the first round of the WCHA playoffs nor qualified for the NCAA tournament.

Michigan (1988–2011)

After the 1987–88 season, Pearson accepted the position of assistant coach with the Michigan Wolverines under Red Berenson, who had just completed his fourth season as head coach. Pearson and fellow assistant Larry Pedrie focused heavily on recruiting, describing their typical schedule thusly: "We'd practice, get in the car, go see a game somewhere, play our games on the weekend, then get back in the car to see a prospect play on Sunday night."
In 1996, Pearson was a candidate for the head coaching position at Michigan Tech, but his former teammate Tim Watters was appointed instead. After Michigan's loss to Minnesota–Duluth in the 2011 National Championship game, however, Michigan Tech pursued Pearson for its vacant head coaching position.

Michigan Tech (2011–present)

Michigan Tech athletic director Suzanne Sanregret had been given the authority and resources to "go after the best coach" following Jamie Russell's resignation in March 2011, Pearson's interview took place four days after the loss to Minnesota–Duluth, and when Sanregret gave him 48 hours to decide whether to accept the position, he ultimately could not say yes. "With everything going on, it was just a tough time to make ... a life-changing decision", Pearson said. "So I just think I went with the safe way and said no".[ref]
</ref>
Sanregret continued the search after Pearson turned down the job, but she met with Pearson again in early May at the AHCA convention in Naples, Florida, and this time he was ready to accept an offer and become the twenty-first head coach in the Huskies' 91 years of college hockey.

Notes






