[[Capital (radio network)]]

CATEGORIES: Capital (radio network), British radio networks

Capital is a radio network of nine independent contemporary hit radio stations in the United Kingdom which are owned and operated by Global Radio, launching on 3 January 2011. The stations were formerly owned by GCap Media and Chrysalis Radio prior to their respective takeovers by Global Radio and, with the exception of Capital London, were all part of Galaxy or Hit Music prior to January 2011.
The stations serve an audience of 7.1 million listeners and target a core audience in the 15-34 age groupthisisglobal.com

History

Capital Radio, GWR and GCap Media

Throughout the 1990s, Capital became one of the UK's major radio groups by acquiring a number of additional local radio stations including Red Dragon FM, BRMB and Wyvern FM. Rival GWR Group also acquired a number of local radio stations in the 1990s, including Leicester Sound, Ram FM, GWR FM, Chiltern FM, Hereward FM, Marcher Sound  and Trent FM, which operated as part of the 33 station Mix network.
Capital Radio and GWR Group's merger in 2005 resulted in the stations being amalgamated into One which existed until June 2009 when most of the stations, now in the ownership of Global Radio, who purchased GCap in 2008, were rebranded as part of The Heart Network. This left Leicester Sound, Ram FM, Red Dragon FM and Trent FM which formed Hit Music with network content produced in Nottingham. In January 2011 these stations were rebranded as part of Capital.

Galaxy

The first Galaxy radio station, Galaxy 97.2, was launched in 1990 in South West England initially broadcasting solely from Bristol and operated under the Chiltern Radio Group. In 1994 the station won the first regional FM licence and moved frequency to 101.0 MHz, rebranded as Galaxy 101 and expanded coverage to include South Wales. At the same time a second studio was opened in Cardiff to provide some programming alongside the existing Bristol studio. Chrysalis Radio purchased the station in 1996 and a year later, expanded the network by buying Faze FM's stations - Kiss 102 in Manchester and Kiss 105 in Yorkshire. In 1998, black community station Choice FM was acquired in Birmingham. Chrysalis Radio won the North East regional licence in 1999 and sold the original station, Galaxy 101, to the GWR Group in 2002 (now Kiss 101).
In 2007, Chrysalis Radio was sold to Global Radio and following their subsequent acquisition of GCap in 2008, XFM Scotland and Power FM were rebranded under the Galaxy moniker in November 2008. Another rebrand followed in January 2011 when all Galaxy stations were rebranded as Capital.

Capital

On 12 May 2011 it was announced Capital London returned to the most listened to commercial station in London, however Capital Manchester, Capital North East and Capital Yorkshire numbers were down, contrasting to Capital Birmingham, Capital Scotland and Capital South Coast where numbers are up.GLOBAL: Capital FM back at #1 Radio Today, 12 May 2011
On 1 July 2011, Global Radio requested to change the formats of Capital Birmingham and Capital Scotland which have obligations from previous owners - this is to enable all nine Capital stations to be inline.Ofcom approves Capital format change Radio Today, 17 November 2011
On 6 February 2014, Global Radio announced it would be selling Capital Scotland and Capital South Wales to Communicorp. Capital's network programming and brand name will remain and be used under contract.
Two Heart stations will be added to the network on Tuesday 6 May 2014 - Capital Cymru and Capital North West and Wales, broadcasting from Wrexham.

List of Capital stations

Production/programming

The vast majority of network programming is broadcast from the existing 95.8 Capital studios in Leicester Square, London. Local output comprises weekday breakfast & drivetime and weekend mornings.Media Week: Global radio takes Capital national
Capital stations based in Central Scotland and Birmingham produced and transmitted specialist output for the network on Saturday and Sunday overnights respectively. However in July 2012 this was replaced with content from 95.8 Capital studios in Leicester Square, London.
Prior to January 2011, Leicester Sound, Ram FM and Trent FM shared off-peak programming from Trent's studios in Nottingham, whilst Galaxy programming came from studios in Leeds, Yorkshire. Red Dragon FM and Capital were entirely autonomous, producing all of their own output.
The Capital radio network production and station sound was created by former Capital producer Arden HanleyArden Hanley at Radio Talent and is now overseen by Chris Nicoll,Chris Nicoll at Radio Talent Arden's successor as Capital head of production. Howard RitchieHoward Ritchie at Radio Talent and Helen Austin Helen Austin are the voice over artists for 96-106 Capital.
Virgin Media became the first sponsor of 95-106 Capital. The six-figure deal begun on 4 January 2011, with weekday drivetime shows branded as The Virgin Media Home Run across all nine stations for a six-month period.Virgin to sponsor nationwide Capital Digital Spy, 24 December 2010

Capital TV

On 3 July 2012, Global Radio announced it would launch a TV channel of the same name, Capital.
The channel is not related to the former Restricted Service Licence television channel of the same name, which ran in Cardiff between 2002 and 2009.

Capital Xtra

On 3 October 2013, Global Radio announced that the Capital brand will be extended to form a new nationwide digital radio station by rebranding Choice FM as Capital Xtra. The rebrand took place at 6:00am on 7 October. Capital Xtra is available on FM in London on 96.9 and 107.1 MHz and nationally on the Digital One DAB multiplex.

Capital FM Arena

The Capital FM Arena is in Nottingham, and is sponsored as part of a deal which began with the predecessor brand Trent FM.

Events

Every year, Capital holds a Jingle Bell Ball every December at the O2 Arena and a Summertime Ball. Headliners at these concerts have included Akon, The Black Eyed Peas, Coldplay, Cheryl Cole, Girls Aloud, Janet Jackson, Jennifer Lopez, Jessie J, Katy Perry, Kelly Clarkson, Kylie Minogue, Lady Gaga, Leona Lewis, Rihanna, Usher, with other major performers including Bruno Mars, Enrique Iglesias, JLS, Justin Bieber, Ke$ha, Lionel Richie, Miley Cyrus, Ne-Yo, Olly Murs, The Pussycat Dolls, Shakira, Taio Cruz & Tinie Tempah.
Starbucks sponsored Summertime Ball in 2011 which for the first time is rolled out across the Capital nine stations despite it being the third event for 95.8 Capital listeners. Confirmed performers are J Lo, Jessie J, LMFAO, Nicole Scherzinger, Example, Mike Posner, Ne-Yo, The Wanted, Far East Movement, JLS, Katy B, Cee Lo Green, Enrique and Wretch 32.Mann joins Summertime Ball Capital, 2 June 2011 Capital entertained 75,000 at Wembley.Capital entertains 75,000 at Wembley Radio Today, 12 June 2011

Help a Capital Child

The Capital London charity Help a London Child was founded in 1975 by Richard Attenborough CBE. It is a grant giving charity which means that twice a year, the charity provides practical and lasting support to groups working with thousands of youngsters aged 18 and under.
In the first year £8,000 was raised and grants given to 10 charities in Camden. Help a London Child has come a long way since and now 36 years on the charity has raised in excess of £22 million and awarded grants to areas of great need, directly helping over 1.4 million children and young people.
Grants are awarded to refuge and homelessness projects, support groups for children and young people with a disability, special need or an illness, as well as a range of sports, music, drama and leisure activities, holiday play schemes and residential breaks in the UK, cultural activities, supplementary schools, literacy programmes and much more.
It was the winner of Outstanding Contribution to London Lifestyle at the London Lifestyle Awards in 2010.6 million), supporting 84,000 children and young people across London where "you're never more than one mile away from a project supported by Help a Capital Child".
Help a Capital Child launched ahead of the Capital Network as the main charity, the first event took place from with 14–16 October 2011; LBC 97.3 also adopting the charity appeal.






