[[Insatiable (Warehouse 13)]]

CATEGORIES: Warehouse 13, 2011 television episodes

"Insatiable" is the 10th episode of the third season of the SyFy television series Warehouse 13. Its original airdate was September 19, 2011.

Plot

In a forest in Ithaca, a young couple is attacked by an unseen creature, putting them into a hospital. Pete and Myka discover from the bite marks that the attacker was human. Returning to the forest, they find the attacker, Kevin Monroe, feasting on a deer. Kevin's complexion appears to be pale blue, he is shivering heavily, and is described as looking like a zombie. Pete and Myka take him to recover at the hospital. When investigating his house they learn that he has a son, whom they take to his father at the hospital. At the hospital, Artie looks after the boy and sends Pete and Myka to investigate a call received by the police concerning an individual who has eaten a squirrel. Pete and Myka manage to apprehend the squirrel eater, who like Kevin is suffering from a zombie appearance, but not before Pete is bitten by him. However, it is Myka instead who appears to suffer from the effects of the zombie affliction, as she begins shivering uncontrollably. Noting that all the victims display cannibalistic traits, Pete furthers his theory that they are all zombies. Artie then discovers from Kevin Monroe's son that the artifact causing this problem is from a taco truck that all the victims had visited. As Pete and Myka reach the truck they are attacked by more of the zombies. Myka begins to turn on Pete so he runs to take cover in the taco truck. Inside he realizes that the artifact is a tip jar, which he then smashes destroying its effects. He learns that the tip jar is from the Donner Party's ill-fated journey and gives those who deposit tips in the jar the same experiences that the Donner Party had had.
Meanwhile, Claudia has been taking some time off to deal with Steve's firing. She is offered a role in a band by a local guitarist, Dwayne Maddox, and tentatively accepts. When she tries to talk to Steve about it he tells her to leave him alone. Sallah the Soothsaying Sultan Fortune-Telling Booth, another artifact, tells Claudia that "Death comes for you this night," and promptly a statue nearly falls on her head. Throughout the night further accidents occur around her, including a falling chandelier that nearly crushes her and Dwayne. Claudia tries to end the accidents by neutralizing the artifact. However, another artifact, the Eau de Vie Faucet, nearly drowns her. Leena rescues her, explaining that the Fortune-Telling Booth artifact overwhelms the user with dread and that Claudia will be fine if she just ignores it. Claudia then goes to Dwayne, confirming that she wants to join his band and they embrace.
The Episode concludes with Steve Jinks in a bar, unable to pay his tab after Mrs. Fredric has his credit cut off. Marcus Diamond then approaches and offers to pay his bill, asking Jinks to join with his team against the Warehouse. Steve accepts Marcus's offer.

Cultural references

Artifacts

Mentioned but not seen

Other

Critical Reception

Though the episode was mainly rated average, it received mixed reviews. IGN gave it the highest rating of 9/10 and raved about the "pitch-perfect plots". They also praised Saul Rubinek for his performance and Allison Scagliotti for hers.






