[[Motifs in the James Bond film series]]

CATEGORIES: British films, James Bond films, Science fiction films by series, Techno-thriller films

The James Bond series of films contain a number of repeating, distinctive motifs which date from the series' inception with Dr. No in 1962. The series consists of twenty three films produced by Eon Productions featuring the James Bond character, a fictional British Secret Service agent. The most recent instalment is the 2012 film Skyfall, which was released in UK cinemas on 26 October 2012. There have also been two independently made features, the satirical Casino Royale, released in 1967, and the 1983 film Never Say Never Again.
Whilst each element has not appeared in every Bond film, they are common threads that run through most of the films. These motifs vary from integral plot points, such as the assignment briefing sessions or the attempts to kill Bond, to enhancements of the dramatic narrative, such as music, or aspects of the visual style, such as the title sequences. These motifs may also serve to enhance excitement in the plot, through a chase sequence or for the climax of the film. A number of the elements were altered or removed in 2006 with the reboot of the series, Casino Royale.
Some of the elements involved are a result of the production crew used in the earliest films in the series, with the work of  Ken Adam, the original production designer, Maurice Binder, title designer, and John Barry, composer, continually updated and adapted as the series progressed.

Opening sequences

Gun barrel sequence

All of the Eon Bond films feature the unique gun barrel sequence, created by graphic artist Maurice Binder, which has been called by British media historian James Chapman  "the trademark motif of the series".
After Maurice Binder's death in 1991, Daniel Kleinman was responsible for the gun barrel sequence up to and including Casino Royale.
The sequence was traditionally placed at the start of each film until the 2006 instalment Casino Royale, where it appears after the cold open and is incorporated into the plot;

Pre-title sequence

In the first film of the series, Dr. No, the gun barrel sequence is followed by the main titles, but starting with From Russia with Love
From Thunderball through to Die Another Day, the gun barrel sequence segues into the pre-title sequence by having the opening shot be sighted through the barrel.

Title sequence

The main title sequences incorporate visual elements that often reflect each film's theme, often showing silhouettes of nude or provocatively clad women set against swirling images.
The concept for the titles came from designer Robert Brownjohn, who worked on From Russia with Love and Goldfinger, before he fell out with producer Harry Saltzman and left the series.
A contemporary artist usually sings during the title sequence and an instrumental version of the main track may also be featured as a leitmotif during the film, which repeats in various moods. eventually winning the award.

Plot elements

Flirting with Moneypenny

With the exception of the first two Daniel Craig films, Casino Royale and Quantum of Solace, every Bond film has a sequence in which Bond interacts with Miss Moneypenny, the personal assistant to M, Bond's superior. 
A running joke throughout the film series is Moneypenny's unrequited love for Bond and his playful flirting with her. She flirts back, jokes and sometimes pouts, hoping to wrangle a proposal and a wedding ring out of him.

Receiving assignment from M

Early in most plots Bond is called in to see M, the head of the UK's Secret Intelligence Service (also known as MI6) in his or her office to receive his assignment.
The first actor to portray M was Bernard Lee, who appeared in all eleven Bond films from Dr. No in 1962 to Moonraker in 1979.
Lee was replaced for four films between 1983 and 1989, by Robert Brown Judi Dench took over the role of M from 1995's GoldenEye until 2012's Skyfall. In Skyfall, Gareth Mallory, played by Ralph Fiennes, takes over as M at the end of the film after the death of Dench's character.
The code name for the British Secret Service in both the books and the films was "Universal Exports".

Technical briefing with Q

After getting his assignment, Bond is often sent to Q Branch for the technical briefing in which he receives special equipment to be used in his mission. The pre-mission briefings quickly became one of the motifs that ran through the Bond series.
Starting with From Russia with Love, the briefings with Q branch involve various gadgets and technology, although Boothroyd is not referred to in the credits as Q until the third film, Goldfinger.
Q is sometimes shown joining Bond in the field, taking with him a portable workshop and his staff.  These workshops are established in unusual locations, such as an Egyptian tomb in The Spy Who Loved Me
There are several running jokes throughout the series. Established in Goldfinger is Q's continuing disgust at how his equipment is often lost, damaged or destroyed by Bond during missions.
Desmond Llewelyn played Q in seventeen Bond films, appearing in more Bond films than any other actor,

Guns, cars and aircraft

The first Bond film, Dr. No, saw M ordering Bond to leave his Beretta behind and take up the Walther PPK,
Bond has driven a number of cars, including the Aston Martin V8 Vantage
Bond's most famous car is the silver grey Aston Martin DB5, first seen in Goldfinger;
Bond also shows his taste for aircraft: a gyrocopter—Little Nellie—features in You Only Live Twice,

Meeting allies

Once in the field, Bond frequently meets up with a local ally upon arrival. These can be his foreign counterparts like Tiger Tanaka in Japan or CIA operatives like Felix Leiter, or his own staff in a secret location. Such characters can also be female, some of whom succumb to Bond's charms.

=Felix Leiter=

One of Bond's closest allies in both the novels and films is CIA operative Felix Leiter. Fleming wrote twelve novels, of which Leiter appears in six;
In total Leiter appears in nine Eon Bond films: four out of the six Connery films, one film with Moore, both Dalton instalments and none with Brosnan (where Bond's CIA contact is Jack Wade), but returned for Craig's; he is also not in George Lazenby's sole Bond film. In the Eon series, there were no Leiter film appearances between 1973 and 1987 and no Leiter appearances between 1989 and 2006.
Although other recurring characters in the Eon series, such as M, Q and Moneypenny, had continuity within the actors, the character of Leiter has not. Wright's first appearances also made him the first African-American actor to play the part in the Eon series, although Leiter was also played by Afro-American actor Bernie Casey in one of the non-Eon films, Never Say Never Again.

Chase scenes

Keeping with the greater Hollywood tradition, every Bond film features chase scenes, usually more than one per film.
Among the more unusual chase sequences include the gondola sequence from Moonraker, which leaves the canals of Venice to continue on land, and the cello case chase in The Living Daylights,

International locations

Bond's adventures have taken him to over sixty countries, as well as outer space,
The locations used for filming have often altered because of the effects of Bond's presence: Scaramanga's hideout on Ko Tapu (
Klaus Dodds has noted that there is a geopolitical aspect to the locations used, although this is often a pre-emption of an issue by the film. For example, in the first film, Dr. No, the title villain's disruption of the American Project Mercury space launch from Cape Canaveral with his atomic-powered radio beam mirrored claims that American rocket testing at Cape Canaveral had problems with rockets going astray. Similarly Bond's anti-heroin mission in Live and Let Die coincided with President Nixon's 1972 declaration of a War on Drugs, whilst GoldenEye played against the backdrop of Ronald Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative.

Characters

Larger-than-life villains

For the series of Bond novels, Fleming realised that without threatening villains Bond seemed less heroic: this tradition of strong literary villain was brought across to the screen in the Eon series.
Whilst Bond scholar Glenn Yeffeth argues that there are only three Bond villains of note—Dr. No, Auric Goldfinger and Ernst Stavro Blofeld,
Many of Bond's adversaries are characterised by an unusual physical deformity; for example, Le Chiffre suffered haemolacria, causing his tear ducts to weep blood.
Many of the henchmen employed by the villains may have unique weapons; Oddjob, Auric Goldfinger's enforcer, carries a bowler hat with a razor-sharp blade concealed in the rim,
Many of Bond's adversaries meet their deaths at the hands of Bond who often uses his environment or equipment to kill his opponent. Mr. Big was killed when Bond force-fed him a pellet of compressed gas, causing him to inflate and explode

Bond girls

At some point on the mission, Bond meets the principal Bond girl, a character portraying Bond's love interest or one of his main sex objects.
Roald Dahl, a screenwriter of You Only Live Twice, said he was given a formula to work to for the film: "you put in three girls ... Girl number one is pro-Bond. She stays around roughly through the first reel of the picture. Then she is bumped off by the enemy, preferably in Bond's arms."
Academic  Kimberly A. Neuendorf notes that James Bond promotes stereotypical, sex-typed male attitudes, especially when interacting with women and in doing so demonstrates Western society's patriarchal, individualistic culture.
Bond girls often have highly suggestive names, including Goldfinger's Pussy Galore, which the American censor refused to allow on promotional materials and for the US market she was subsequently referred to as "Miss Galore" or "Goldfinger's personal pilot"; however Honor Blackman took delight in embarrassing interviewers by repeatedly mentioning her character's name.

Humour

One of the elements used throughout the Bond series is humour, particularly 'one-liners', delivered by Bond, either when killing an enemy, or at the end of the film when with a woman.
During Sean Connery's Bond films, the humour was delivered by Connery to soften a violent situation, such as the electrification, or his shooting a villain with a spear gun and saying "I think he got the point". The humour returned for the Brosnan films, 
with Bond admitting between kisses that he "always enjoyed studying a new tongue".
The films often include a one-liner, often of a sexual nature, at the dénouement.
The films also contain elements of visual humour: when Jaws is dropped into a shark pool in The Spy Who Loved Me, it is Jaws who bites the shark.

Dénouement

Protracted attempt to kill Bond

In most of the films, the main villain often captures Bond and, rather than kill him quickly, attempts a slow and protracted death, from which Bond will always escape.

Climax

The climax of most Bond films is the final confrontation with the villain and his henchmen, sometimes an entire army of cohorts, often in his hard-to-reach lair.

Ending

In the first twenty two films of the Eon Bond series, only On Her Majesty's Secret Service and Casino Royale, have ended with the central Bond girl deceased. In all other films, except Quantum of Solace, Bond  is kissing her, making love, or implying that he will do so.
Until Octopussy, the title of the next film to be produced was also usually named, in the format "James Bond will return..." or "James Bond will be back", although these were sometimes incorrect: The Spy Who Loved Me promised James Bond would return in For Your Eyes Only, but after the success of Star Wars, the producers decided to make Moonraker instead and For Your Eyes Only followed in 1981.

Quotations

The first Bond film, Dr. No, included the introduction of the character of James Bond. Bond was introduced towards, but not at, the beginning of the film in a "now-famous nightclub sequence featuring Sylvia Trench", It was Sean Connery's second line in the film.
 

Following the release of Dr. No, the quote "Bond ... James Bond", became a catch phrase that entered the lexicon of Western popular culture: writers Cork and Scivally said of the introduction in Dr. No that the "signature introduction would become the most famous and loved film line ever".
Not all the films contain the introduction, Quantum of Solace, for example
Bond usually evinces a preference for vodka martinis and his instruction on how it must be prepared quickly became another catchphrase. 

The instruction "Shaken, not stirred" was honoured by the AFI as the 90th most-memorable cinema quotation. In order to distance his version of Bond from Sean Connery's, Roger Moore did not order a martini.





Bibliography




