[[Charley Chase (pornographic actress)]]

CATEGORIES: 1987 births, American female pornographic film actors, American people of Italian descent, American people of Puerto Rican descent, Hispanic and Latino American pornographic film actors, Living people, People from Louisville, Kentucky, Pornographic film actors from Kentucky

Charley Chase (born August 6, 1987 in Louisville, Kentucky) is the stage name of an American former pornographic actress. as well.

Early life

Charley Chase was born on August 6, 1987 in Louisville, Kentucky, and she is of Puerto Rican and Italian descent. At the age of 19, she moved to Atlanta, Georgia to attend Bauder College.

Career

Chase is a member of PUBA (an adult network) alongside other porn actresses such as Asa Akira, Avy Scott, Jayden Jaymes, Natasha Nice, Shyla Stylez, London Keyes and Mason Moore. She has her own blog, updated regularly with personal information about her life, both on and off screen.
Her filmography includes titles like Oral Olympics: Blo For The Gold, The Sex Files 2 – A Dark XXX Parody, Tristan Taormino's Expert Guide to Advanced Fellatio (2011 AVN Award - Best Educational Release), Party of Feet 2 (2011 AVN Award - Best Foot/Leg Fetish Release), Tori Black is Pretty Filthy 2 and Slutty & Sluttier 11. 
In 2008, she was crowned "the Queen of Cumming" at Kink. 
Chase performed her first anal scene in Elegant Angel's Big Wet Asses 21.

Controversy

In September 2011, Chase was involved in a porn scandal alongside some Los Angeles City firefighters. During one of her scenes for Assesinpublic. An internal investigation started by the LAFD suggested that the firefighters from Engine 263 (the fire truck) were aware of what was going on, and that the whole scene was premeditated.
As a response, Chase stated on her blog: "I just want to say that I am soooo sorry to the fire fighters involved. it was not my intentions for any one to get hurt or fired or whatever. I am not sure why news reporters are resorting to porn to make there stories these days, but shit… it was a fun day! The Fire Fighters watched me stroll the beach from a distance, but were NOT involved in us invading the truck. I love how news people bend and twist the stories they report to better suit their point. As I said before… there was no set up to that day at all and I tried everything I could to let that be known. That was almost three years ago and it is crazy stupid that this is a problem now."
Later on, being invited on FOX 11's Studio 11 LA, she denied again that there was any premeditation to the scene, adding that the fire truck was there by chance when the film crew showed up, and that the firefighters had no involvement in it at all.

Awards






