[[Yeshiva University]]

CATEGORIES: Yeshiva University, Orthodox Jewish universities and colleges, Universities and colleges in New York City, Washington Heights, Manhattan, Educational institutions established in 1886, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools

Yeshiva University is a private university in New York City, with six campuses in New York and one in Israel. Founded in 1886, it is a research university.
The University's undergraduate schools—Yeshiva College, Stern College for Women, and Syms School of Business— offer a dual curriculum inspired by Modern-Centrist-Orthodox Judaism's hashkafa (philosophy) of Torah Umadda ("Torah and secular knowledge") combining academic education with the study of Torah. Yeshiva is perhaps best known for its secular, highly selective graduate schools, the Albert Einstein College of Medicine and the Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law.
Yeshiva University is an independent institution chartered by New York State.A brief overview of the History of Yeshiva UniversityHistory of YUYeshiva University Undergraduate women's catalogYeshiva University Overview It is accredited by the Commission on Higher Education of the Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools and by several professional agencies.This is Yeshiva University: 2007–2008

History

The University is the oldest institution of higher learning in the United States that combines Jewish scholarship with studies in the liberal arts, sciences, medicine, law, business, social work, Jewish studies and education, and psychology.
It has its roots in the Etz Chaim Yeshiva founded in 1886 on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, a cheder-style elementary school founded by Eastern European immigrants that offered study of Talmud along with some secular education, including instruction in English.
As of August 2012, Yeshiva University enrolls approximately 6,400 undergraduate students, 3,500 graduate students, and 1,000 students at its affiliated high schools and Rabbi Isaac Elchanan Theological Seminary. It conferred 1,822 degrees in 2007 and offers community service projects serving New York, Jewish communities, the United States and Canada.
Richard M. Joel is Yeshiva University's president, while Rabbi Dr. Norman Lamm served as chancellor until 2013. Joel is the first president of YU who is not a rabbi. The university's past leaders include Dr. Bernard Revel, Dr. Samuel Belkin, and "The Rav," Rabbi Joseph B. Soloveitchik.
In December 2012, the President of the University apologized over allegations that two rabbis at the college's high school campus abused boys there in the late 1970s and early '80s.

Campus

The University's main campus, Wilf Campus, is located in Washington Heights. A 1928 plan to build a spacious Moorish Revival campus around several gardens and courtyards was cancelled by the Great Depression of 1929 after only one building had been erected. Building continued after the Depression in modern style and by the acquisition of existing neighborhood buildings.[ref]
