[[Island of stability]]

CATEGORIES: Isotopes, Periodic table, Radioactivity

In nuclear physics, the island of stability is a set of as-yet undiscovered heavier isotopes of transuranium elements which are theorized to be much more stable than some of those closer in atomic number to uranium. Specifically, they are expected to have radioactive decay half-lives of minutes or days, with "some optimists" expecting half-lives of millions of years.
Klaus Blaum expects the island of stability to occur in the region near 300Ubn. Excerpt: It has taken decades, but the picture of the inner structure of heavy atomic nuclei is now finally becoming clearer. Armed with this knowledge, the physicists can now look more specifically for the famous island of stability. "We expect it at around element 120," says Blaum, "and to be more precise, in a nucleus with around 180 neutrons."

Theory and origin

The possibility of an "island of stability" was first proposed by Glenn T. Seaborg in the late 1960s.
A filled shell would have "magic numbers" of neutrons and protons. One possible magic number of neutrons for spherical nuclei is 184, and some possible matching proton numbers are 114, 120 and 126 – which would mean that the most stable spherical isotopes would be flerovium-298, unbinilium-304 and unbihexium-310. Of particular note is Ubh-310, which would be "doubly magic" (both its proton number of 126 and neutron number of 184 are thought to be magic) and thus the most likely to have a very long half-life. (The next lighter doubly magic spherical nucleus is lead-208, the heaviest known stable nucleus and most stable heavy metal.)
Recent research indicates that large nuclei are deformed, causing magic numbers to shift. Hassium-270 is now believed to be a doubly magic deformed nucleus, with deformed magic numbers 108 and 162. However, it has a half-life of only 3.6 seconds.
Isotopes have been produced with enough protons to plant them upon an island of stability but with too few neutrons to even place them upon the island's outer "shores". It is possible that these elements possess unusual chemical properties and, if they have isotopes with adequate lifespans, would be available for various practical applications (such as particle accelerator targets and as neutron sources as well). In particular, the very small critical masses of transplutonic elements (possibly as small as grams) implies that if stable elements could be found, they would enable small and compact nuclear bombs either directly or by serving as primaries to help ignite fission/fusion secondaries; this possibility motivated much of the early research and multiple nuclear tests by the United States (including Operation Plowshare) and the Soviet Union aimed at producing such elements.pp. 129–133, The physical principles of thermonuclear explosives, inertial confinement fusion, and the quest for fourth generation nuclear weapons (Andre Gsponer and Jean-Pierre Hurni 2009)

Half-lives of the highest-numbered elements

All elements with an atomic number above 82 (lead) are unstable, and the "stability" (half-life of the longest-lived known isotope) of elements generally decreases with rising atomic numbers from the relatively stable uranium (92) upwards to the heaviest known element: 118. It increases in the range of elements 103 to 105, then decreases at element 106, and increases very slightly in the range of elements 110 to 114, hypothesized to be at the beginning of the island of stability. The longest-lived observed isotopes of each of the heaviest elements are shown in the following table.
For comparison, the shortest-lived element with atomic number below 100 is francium (element 87) with a half-life of 22 minutes.
The half-lives of nuclei in the island of stability itself are unknown since none of the isotopes that would be "on the island" have been observed. Many physicists think they are relatively short, on the order of minutes or days. Some theoretical calculations indicate that their half-lives may be long, on the order of 109 years.
The alpha-decay half-lives of 1700 nuclei with 100 ≤ Z ≤ 130 have been calculated in a quantum tunneling model with both experimental and theoretical alpha-decay Q-values.
A possible stronger decay mode for the heaviest superheavies was shown to be cluster decay by Dorin N Poenaru, R.A. Gherghescu, Walter Greiner.
