[[Malibeyli and Gushchular Massacre]]

CATEGORIES: Conflicts in 1992, Nagorno-Karabakh War, Massacres in Azerbaijan, Mass murder in 1992, 1992 in Azerbaijan

Malibeyli and Gushchular Massacre ( and according to Azerbaijani sources, 15-50 (exact number unknown) ethnic Azerbaijani civilians, by Armenian irregular armed units in simultaneous attacks on the villages of Malibeyli, Ashaghi Gushchular, and Yukhari Gushchular of Shusha district of Azerbaijan, on 10–12 February 1992 during the Nagorno-Karabakh War.[ref]


Overview and massacre

According to the Memorial, the villages of Malibeyli and Gushchular were attacked by Armenian irregular armed units where the houses were burned and dozens of civilians were killed. Both sides accused the other that the villages were being used as strategic gathering points, covering the artillery positions."Доклад правозащитного центра «Мемориал» о массовых нарушениях прав человека, связанных с занятием населенного пункта Ходжалы в ночь с 25 на 26 февраля 1992 г. вооружёнными формированиями." Memorial. According to several eyewitnesses, the Azerbaijani self-defense forces were mixed in with civilians as they fled.
Azerbaijani populated villages of Malibeyli and Gushchular (administratively separated as Ashaghi Gushchular and Yukhari Gushchular) of Shusha district of Azerbaijan are located in the highlands of Karabakh region, close to the regional center of Shusha. The villages had a population of nearly 4,000 people and shared the same village administration. Like Khojaly in 1988, Gushchular and Malibeyli received Azerbaijani refugees from Armenia. The figure ranged from 580 to 1500. When the Nagorno-Karabakh conflict started, the villages became one of the main targets of Armenian armed units. Since October 1991, Malibeyli was in complete blockade.
[ref]

A report in the newspaper Express Chronicle asserted that on February 5, a helicopter distributed warning leaflets telling villagers they had two days to leave the village before it "would cease to exist", however, no interviews confirmed this report. By the beginning of February 1992, these villages were virtually under siege and frequently shelled by Armenians. According to Human Rights Watch, the villages had a joint self-defense unit of about 80 people, including 17 policemen serving in Gushchular. By February, the Azerbaijani self-defense had only 5 or 6 automatic rifles.
Malibeyli and Gushchular were attacked by Armenian armored personnel carriers and heavy artillery after large-scale Azerbaijani ground assault against Stepanakert and with the aim to end the shelling of neighboring Armenian villages by Azerbaijani forces.

Consequences

The massacre at Malibeyli and Gushchular was followed by Garadaghly, Agdaban and Khojaly massacres. 






