[[Dale Chihuly]]

CATEGORIES: 1941 births, American people of Slovak descent, American people with disabilities, American sculptors, Glass artists, Glassblowers, Living people, Pacific Northwest artists, People from Seattle, Washington, People from Tacoma, Washington, Rhode Island School of Design alumni, Rhode Island School of Design faculty, University of Washington alumni, University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni

Dale Chihuly (born September 20, 1941), is an American glass sculptor and entrepreneur.  His works are considered unique to the field of blown glass, "moving it into the realm of large-scale sculpture," (Museum of Fine Arts, Boston).  The technical difficulties of working with glass forms are considerable,  yet Chihuly uses it as the primary medium for installations and environmental artwork.  Museum of Fine Arts Boston.  Accessed April 20213.(

Life and career

Chihuly was born in Tacoma, Washington, where he graduated from Woodrow Wilson High School. He enrolled at the College of the Puget Sound in 1959. A year later, he transferred to the University of Washington in Seattle, where in 1965 he received a bachelor of arts degree in interior design. While at the University of Washington, he was a member of Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity (Kappa Epsilon chapter).Dale Chihuly - Chronology, from Chihuly's personal website
In the year 1967, he received a Master of Science in sculpture from the University of Wisconsin–Madison, where he studied under Harvey Littleton. In 1968, he studied glass in Venice on a Fulbright Fellowship and received a Master of Fine Arts at the Rhode Island School of Design. In 1971, with the support of John Hauberg and Anne Gould Hauberg, Chihuly cofounded the Pilchuck Glass School near Stanwood, Washington. Chihuly also founded the HillTop Artists program in Tacoma, Washington at  Jason Lee Middle School and Wilson High School. In 1976, while Chihuly was in England, he was involved in a head-on car accident during which he flew through the windshield... About Dale Chihuly, The Stranger, February 2006 His face was severely cut by glass and he was blinded in his left eye. After recovering, he continued to blow glass until he dislocated his right shoulder in a 1979 bodysurfing accident. No longer able to hold the glass blowing pipe, he hired others to do the work. Chihuly explained the change in a 2006 interview, saying "Once I stepped back, I liked the view" and pointed out that it allowed him to see the work from more perspectives and enabled him to anticipate problems faster. Chihuly describes his role as "more choreographer than dancer, more supervisor than participant, more director than actor." San Diego Union-Tribune reporter Erin Glass wrote that she "wonders at the vision of not just the artist Chihuly, but the wildly successful entrepreneur Chihuly, whose estimated sales by 2004 was reported by The Seattle Times as $29 million."'Chihuly' a site-specific explosion of art at Salk, by Erin Glass, San Diego Union-Tribune, 22 April 2010 Chihuly and his team of artists were the subjects of the documentary Chihuly Over Venice. They were also featured in the documentary Chihuly in the Hotshop, syndicated to public television stations by American Public Television starting on November 1, 2008.Chihuly Over Venice, from Chihuly's Portland Press website

About his work

Regina Hackett, as the Seattle Post-Intelligencer art critic, provided a chronology of his work during the 1970s, 1980s, and 1990s:
For his exhibition in Jerusalem in 2000, in addition to the glass pieces, he had enormous blocks of transparent ice brought in from an Alaskan artesian well and formed a wall, echoing the stones of the nearby Citadel. Lights with color gels were set up behind them for illumination. Chihuly said the melting wall represented the "dissolution of barriers" between people.

Galleries

Chihuly's largest permanent exhibit can be found at the Oklahoma City Museum of Art. Chihuly maintains two retail stores in partnership with MGM Resorts International. One is located at the Bellagio on the Las Vegas Strip,

2006 lawsuit

In 2006, Chihuly filed a lawsuit against his former longtime employee, glassblower Bryan Rubino, and businessman Robert Kaindl, under accusations of copyright and trademark infringement. Kaindl's pieces used titles Chihuly used for his own works, such as Seaforms and Ikebana, and resembled the construction of Chihuly's pieces. Arguments made by legal experts stated influence on art style is not copyright infringement.

Permanent collections

United States

Canada

England

Singapore

United Arab Emirates

Kuwait

Exhibitions



Bibliography




