[[Enzo Martinelli]]

CATEGORIES: 1911 births, 1999 deaths, People from Pescia, 20th-century Italian mathematicians, Geometers, Mathematical analysts

Enzo Martinelli (11 November 1911 – 27 August 1999, but it is probably a typographical error.) was an Italian mathematician, working in the theory of functions of several complex variables: he is best known for his work on the theory of integral representations for holomorphic functions of several variables, notably for discovering the Bochner–Martinelli formula in 1938, and for his work in the theory of multi-dimensional residues.

Biography

Life

He was born in Pescia on 11 November 1911, where his father was the Director of the local agricultural school.

Academic career

In 1933 he earned his laurea from the Sapienza University of Rome: the title of his thesis was "Sulle funzioni poligene di una e di due variabili complesse",An English translation reads as "Polygenic functions of one and of two complex variables". and his thesis supervisor was Francesco Severi. as  associate professor. In 1954 He went back in Rome to the chair of Geometry at the university, holding that chair up to his retirement, in 1982: he also taught courses on topology, higher mathematics, higher geometry upon charge. In the years 1968-1969, during a very difficult period for the Sapienza University of Rome,It was the season of the protests of 1968: a few more detail about Martinelli's work during this season can be find in the section describing his personality. he served the university as the director of the Guido Castelnuovo Institute of Mathematics.
He attended to various conferences and meetings. In 1943 and in 1946 he was invited in Zurich by Rudolf Fueter, in order to present his researches: later and during all his career he lectured in almost all Italian and foreign universities.
He was also a member of the UMI Scientific Commission (from 1967 to 1972), of the editorial boards of the Rendiconti di Matematica e delle Sue Applicazioni (from 1955 to 1992) and of the Annali di Matematica Pura ed Applicata (from 1965 to 1999).

Honours

According to : this reference lists and briefly describes the contents of the documents of fascicle 207 of box (Busta) 104 of section VII, titled "Premi di Incoraggiamento e Sussidi (Encouragement Prizes and Grants)".
In 1948 he was elected Corresponding Member of the Accademia Ligure di Scienze e Lettere:There is a discrepancy in the date of election reported by : the "Professore linceo" is a professor which is in charge to the Accademia dei Lincei as a distinguished lecturer. Finally, in 1980 he was elected Corresponding Member of the Accademia delle Scienze di Torino and then, in 1994, Full Member. Also, in 1986, the Sapienza University of Rome, to which Enzo Martinelli was particularly tied for all his life, awarded him the title of professor emeritus.

Personality Traits

He is unanimously remembered as a real gentleman,See  himself. told him that the idea was already been developed by Élie Cartan and Georges de Rham.
An excellent teacher himself, capable to arose curiosity and enthusiasm by his lessons,Some information on his teaching commitment can be found in the "Teaching activity" section of this entry. he admired and respected much his own:According to .
Another central aspect of his personality was a deep sense of justice and legality: Martinelli was very careful in performing his citizen and university professor duties, and he was also ready to fight for his own rights and for the needs of higher education. Concerned by the growing interference of bureaucracy in university education, already in the 1950s he was heard by .

Work

Research activity

He is the author of more than 50 research works, the first of which was published when Martinelli still was an undergraduate student:According to  states the words "entusiasmo" e "insoddisfazione". enthusiasm is meant as his steady interest in mathematics at all levels, while dissatisfaction is meant as the desire to going deeper into all mathematical problems investigated, without stopping at first success and expressing all the results in a simple, elegant and essential form.

Teaching activity

The aspects of his personality described before and his deep professional commitment also made him a great teacher:See references  particularly praises this way the various geometry lecture notes redacted by Martinelli himself. and also offer insights on more complex theories and problems to the clever student: indeed, it was one of Martinelli's concerns to teach mathematics showing its lively development and its attractiveness in term of interesting difficult problems offered, in order that no gifted student would abandon the idea to do mathematical research.

Publications

 | last1=Martinelli 
 | first1=Enzo 
 | author-link= 
 | title=Alcuni teoremi integrali per le funzioni analitiche di più variabili complesse 
 | language = Italian
 | year=1938 
