[[Mike Tyson vs. Michael Spinks]]

CATEGORIES: Boxing fights, 1988 in boxing, Boxing in New Jersey, Sports in Atlantic City, New Jersey, 1988 in New Jersey, Mike Tyson

Mike Tyson vs. Michael Spinks was a boxing match which took place on Monday June 27, 1988. Both men were undefeated and each had a claim to being the legitimate heavyweight champion. At the time, Tyson held the belts of all three of the major sanctioning organizations (World Boxing Council, World Boxing Association, and International Boxing Federation) while Spinks was the Ring champion and was considered the lineal champion.
Held at the Atlantic City Convention Hall in Atlantic City, New Jersey and promoted as "once and for all",

History

Michael Spinks became a professional boxer shortly after he won the gold medal at middleweight in the 1976 Summer Olympics. Initially Spinks was more concerned with assisting his brother Leon's rise to the heavyweight championship, but was later convinced to turn pro himself. In 1981 Spinks fought Eddie Mustafa Muhammad for the WBA light heavyweight championship and defeated him by decision to win his first world title. The next year Spinks won the lineal championship from Mustafa Wassaja and then took the WBC title from Dwight Braxton the year after that. In 1984, Spinks won the IBF title to become the undisputed champion of the division. In 1985, after having defended his titles a combined total of ten times, Spinks moved up to the heavyweight class to challenge reigning IBF, Ring, and lineal champion Larry Holmes, who had been champion since 1978, in September of 1985. Spinks defeated Holmes in a fifteen round decision to become the first reigning light heavyweight champion to win the heavyweight championship.
Mike Tyson turned professional in 1985 and won his first 19 fights by knockout, quickly garnering media attention and establishing an "aura of invincibility". In November 1986 Tyson knocked out Trevor Berbick to win the WBC heavyweight title; at 20 years old, Tyson was the youngest heavyweight champion in history. In his very next fight Tyson faced James "Bonecrusher" Smith, who had won the WBA title in an upset over Tim Witherspoon earlier in 1986, and defeated him by unanimous decision. Tyson then took a tuneup fight against former world champion Pinklon Thomas after defeating Smith and knocked him out in six rounds, then waited for the result of a fight between Tucker and Buster Douglas for the vacant IBF title that had been stripped from Spinks. Tyson faced Tucker, the winner, in August 1987 in a title unification bout and became the first fighter to unify all three major titles by winning a decision. Tyson then defended his unified title three times, by knocking out Olympic gold medalist Tyrell Biggs in October 1987 in seven rounds, facing a returning Larry Holmes in January 1988 and knocking him out by flooring him three times in the fourth round, and finally by knocking out Tony Tubbs two months after Holmes in two rounds. By 1988 Tyson had become "the most talked about – and marketable – heavyweight champion since Muhammad Ali".

Build up

Interest in a showdown between Tyson and Spinks grew to settle the issue of who the real champion was, but negotiations were protracted because Tyson's co-managers Bill Cayton and Jimmy Jacobs and Spinks' manager Butch Lewis struggled to agree on terms.
By April an agreement had been reached, although another problem arose when the IBF threatened to strip Tyson of their title if the fight was not scheduled for 15 rounds. IBF president Bob Lee then relented, not wanting his organisation to be absent from the biggest fight of the year, and agreed to a 12 round limit.
Billed as "Once and for All", the fight was highly anticipated and earned comparisons with the 1971 Fight of the Century between Joe Frazier and Muhammad Ali, who were also undefeated heavyweight champions when they met to decide the undisputed title.
The bout represented a contrast of styles, with Tyson's "speed and devastating power" up against "the unorthodox style of Spinks... who rarely looks impressive but has always found a way to win." Opinions on the fight were mixed, although in general more pundits favoured Tyson. Larry Holmes, the only man to have faced both fighters, predicted a Tyson win. James Smith, who had lost a decision to Tyson the previous year, said that for Spinks to win he would "need to take me in the ring with him." Another former heavyweight champion, George Foreman, also predicted a Tyson win.
Muhammad Ali, former middleweight champion Tony Zale and sportswriter Bert Sugar all backed Spinks to out-box Tyson.

The fight

Minutes before the fighters were due to enter the ring, there was a commotion in Tyson's dressing room when Butch Lewis noticed a bump in Tyson's gloves and demanded his hands be re-wrapped. The commotion continued with Lewis insistent that he would not let the fight start until the bump was smoothed out. The matter was only resolved when Spinks' trainer Eddie Futch was called in, and he accepted that Tyson's gloves were fine. Instead, Tyson had just been angered by the delay. When Lewis had left and Tyson once again prepared to leave his dressing room, he told his trainer Kevin Rooney: "you know, I'm gonna hurt this guy."
Tyson attacked Spinks from the opening bell, landing a solid left hook in the first ten seconds and forcing Spinks to cover up. Spinks clinched and was driven back to the ropes by another Tyson attack. He moved off the ropes but Tyson trapped him again; a left uppercut and a right hand to the body forced Spinks to take a knee after a minute, the first time Spinks had been knocked down in his professional career. The round was named round of the year for 1988 by Ring Magazine.
Afterwards Spinks said: "I came to fight like I said I would. I just tried to do what I knew I had to do, and that was fight. Not that I stood toe to toe with him, but I tried to take the shot and I came up short." Futch opined that Spinks was undone because he abandoned his gameplan of boxing and moving early on and instead tried to win Tyson's respect.

Aftermath

Tyson vs. Spinks was the richest fight in boxing history up to that point, grossing around $70 million, $10 million more than the previous record holder, the Marvin Hagler vs. Sugar Ray Leonard bout in 1987. 600,000 households bought the fight on pay per view, The Trump Plaza casino achieved a record drop of $11.5 million on the day of the fight.
Spinks never boxed again and announced his retirement from the sport a month later. The Tyson fight was the only loss of his professional career. Tyson also spoke of retiring, hinting that "this may be my last fight." The win over Spinks has been described as the pinnacle of Tyson's boxing career. It was also his last fight under longtime trainer Kevin Rooney, who was dismissed by Tyson in December. Tyson made two more successful title defences before losing to James 'Buster' Douglas in a major upset in 1990. He continued fighting until 2005, but was unable to replicate his earlier achievements. Tyson and Spinks have both been inducted into the International Boxing Hall of Fame and the World Boxing Hall of Fame.

Undercard






