[[The City Harmonic]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 2006, Musical groups from Hamilton, Ontario, Canadian Christian rock groups

The City Harmonic is a Juno Award winning Canadian Christian rock band formed in 2009 after having served together as the house worship band for an inter-denominational "worship and mission" event for students  in Hamilton, Ontario. Elias Dummer (vocals, keyboards, guitar), Eric Fusilier (bass), Aaron Powell (guitar), and Josh Vanderlaan (drums) collectively make up The City Harmonic. Their music has been described as "nostalgic Brit-pop meets campfire sing-along mix that features raucous gang vocals along with agile, soaring anthems crafted to include the listener"  Musically, their sound is often compared to artists like Coldplay, Keane, Aqualung, The Fray, or Arcade Fire. In 2011 they won three Covenant Awards from GMA Canada for New Artist of the Year, Recorded Song of the Year and Modern Worship Song of the Year. In 2013 they won Covenant Awards for Group of the Year and Praise and Worship Song of the Year. They also won a Juno Award for the 2013 Christian/Contemporary Gospel Album of the Year.

Career

2010-2011: Introducing the City Harmonic

The band released their debut EP, Introducing the City Harmonic, on November 23, 2010 in Canada and the United States,The City Harmonic, "Introducing The City Harmonic" Review Jesus Freak Hideout. Their début single, "Manifesto" appeared in the charts in several categories. was recently played at a San Diego Padres game, and was selected as the anthem for the National Day of Prayer celebrations in Nashville.
The EP was also released in January 2011 in Britain.

2011-2013: I Have a Dream (It Feels Like Home)

The band released their first full-length album titled I Have a Dream (It Feels Like Home) on October 18, 2011.
The group was nominated for a 2012 GMA Dove Award for "New Artist of the Year."
On April 20, 2013, the band won a Juno award for Christian/Contemporary Gospel Album of the Year.

2013-present: Heart

The band released their second full-length album titled Heart on September 3, 2013. In the week of release in Canada it reached No. 1 on the Inspirational Albums Charts. For the Billboard charting week of September 21, 2013, Heart was the No. 20 most sold album in the breaking and entry chart of the United States by the Top Heatseekers and it was the No. 24 Top Christian Album as well. Critically speaking, Heart appears to be the most critically well-received of the band's releases to date. The album artwork features an adaptation of Leonardo DaVinci's Vitruvian Man, with Jesus on the cross in the center.

Lineup

Discography

Albums

Singles

Awards






