[[Javier Patiño]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 births, Living people, People from San Sebastián de los Reyes, Spanish people of Filipino descent, Filipino people of Spanish descent, Madrilenian sportspeople, Spanish footballers, Filipino footballers, Madrilenian footballers, Association football forwards, Segunda División footballers, Tercera División footballers, Córdoba CF footballers, Xerez CD players, Buriram United F.C. players, Philippines international footballers, Spanish expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Thailand

Javier Patiño Lachica (born 14 February 1988) is a Spanish-Filipino professional footballer who plays for Buriram United F.C. in Thailand, as a striker. He represents the Philippines at international level.

Early life

Patiño was born in San Sebastián de los Reyes, Community of Madrid, Spain, to a Filipina mother.

Club career

Patiño played his first four seasons as a senior in amateur football, representing local sides Alcobendas CF and UD San Sebastián de los Reyes. In the 2011 summer he moved straight to the second division, signing a three-year contract with Córdoba CF.
In his first year with the Andalusians Patiño scored eight goals in 35 games, notably netting the games' only goal against SD Huesca (away),
Patiño marked his debut for Buriram with a brace, in their 6–1 thrashing of Songkhla United FC.

International career


The Philippine Football Federation were reportedly notified of Patiño through Juan Luis Guirado, who was also born in Spain and an international footballer for the Philippines. In late 2012 he was reported to be applying for citizenship of the Philippines, to open the possibility of playing international football for that country. also receiving compliments from national team head coach Michael Weiß, who stated, "Patiño is definitely a top player but it is a team sport and it takes time to connect with the other player. We should give him time, we know that we can expect something but perhaps not the best yet".
On 24 March 2013 Patiño scored twice in his debut for the Philippines, an 8–0 win against Cambodia.

International goals

Honours

Club






