[[Drive (2011 film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2010s thriller films, 2011 films, American films, American crime thriller films, Chase films, English-language films, FilmDistrict films, Films based on American novels, Films directed by Nicolas Winding Refn, Films set in Los Angeles, California, Films shot in Los Angeles, California, Independent films

Drive is a 2011 American neo-noir arthouse action crime thriller film directed by Nicolas Winding Refn, starring Ryan Gosling, Carey Mulligan, Bryan Cranston, Oscar Isaac, and Albert Brooks. It is adapted from the 2005 James Sallis novel of the same name, with a screenplay by Hossein Amini.
Like the book, the film is about an unnamed Hollywood stunt performer (played by Gosling) who moonlights as a getaway driver. Prior to its September 2011 release, it had been shown at a number of film festivals. At the 2011 Cannes Film Festival, Drive was praised and received a standing ovation. Winding Refn won the festival's Best Director Award for the film. Reviews from critics have been positive, with many drawing comparisons to work from previous eras. The film was nominated for Best Film and Best Director at the 2012 British Academy Film Awards (BAFTA).

Plot

The unnamed Driver (Ryan Gosling), who lives in an Echo Park, Los Angeles apartment, works repairing cars and as a part-time movie double. Managed in both jobs by auto shop owner Shannon (Bryan Cranston), the duo also provide a getaway driver service. With Shannon organizing jobs, the Driver gives criminals only five minutes to perpetrate robberies and reach his car.
Meeting his new neighbor, Irene (Carey Mulligan), the Driver soon becomes close to her and befriends her young son, Benicio (Kaden Leos). This is undone when Irene's husband, Standard Gabriel (Oscar Isaac), is released from prison, but Standard, initially hostile toward the Driver, soon warms to him.
Shannon persuades Jewish mobsters Bernie Rose (Albert Brooks) and Nino (Ron Perlman) to purchase a stock car chassis and to build it for the Driver to race. Irene's husband, owing protection money from his time in prison, is beaten up by Albanian gangster Cook (James Biberi). Cook demands that Standard rob a pawnshop for $40,000 to pay the debt off. The Driver, concerned for the safety of Irene and Benicio, steals a Ford Mustang and offers to act as the getaway driver for the pawnshop job.
While waiting for Standard and Cook's accomplice Blanche (Christina Hendricks) to complete the heist, the Driver sees a Chrysler pull into the lot. As Blanche returns with a large bag, Standard is shot several times and killed by the pawnshop owner. The Driver flees with Blanche and the money. They are pursued by the Chrysler, which tries to force them off the road.
Eluding the other vehicle, the Driver hides with Blanche in a motel. Learning the bag contains more than a million dollars, the Driver interrogates Blanche, who admits she and Cook planned to double-cross him and Standard. Minutes later, two of Cook's men attack them in the motel room, killing Blanche and injuring the Driver before he manages to kill them both.
Cook is tracked down by the Driver to a strip club. The Driver smashes his fingers with a hammer and threatens to kill him before Cook reveals that Nino was behind the robbery. The Driver decides to return the million, but Nino dismisses the offer and instead sends a hitman (Jeff Wolfe) to the Driver's apartment building. Entering the elevator with Irene, the Driver encounters the hitman and spots his pistol. The Driver kisses Irene before violently beating the hitman to death.
In his pizzeria, Nino reveals to Bernie that the money is property of dangerous mobsters in New York and, since anyone tied to the robbery could lead the Mafia to them, they need to kill everyone involved. Bernie proceeds to murder Cook with cutlery from the restaurant. He then kills Shannon when he refuses to divulge the whereabouts of the Driver.
The Driver, disguising himself with a rubber mask from his stuntman job, follows Nino from the pizzeria to the Pacific Coast Highway and T-bones Nino's car onto a beach, then takes him to the Pacific Ocean and drowns him. The Driver goes to meet Bernie at a Chinese restaurant. He makes a phone call to Irene to tell her he is leaving, saying that meeting her and Benicio was the best thing that ever happened to him.
At the restaurant, Bernie promises that Irene and Benicio are going to be safe in exchange for the million. But Bernie tells the Driver he can't offer the same for him. Outside the restaurant, the Driver gives Bernie the money, only to have Bernie stab him. The Driver retaliates by fatally stabbing Bernie in the neck. He departs in his car, leaving the bag with the million over Bernie's dead body. Irene goes to the Driver's apartment, but he is not there anymore. He is shown driving away for the last time. It is left unclear whether the Driver ultimately survives the apparently serious wound or not.

Cast

Production

Development

The novel Drive by James Sallis was published in 2005. The Driver intrigued Siegel because he was "the kind of character you rarely see anymore – he was a man with a purpose; he was very good at one thing and made no apologies for it." The character interested Platt because he reminded him of movie heroes he looked up to as a child, characters typically portrayed by Steve McQueen or Clint Eastwood.
Academy Award-nominated screenwriter Hossein Amini adapted the novel for the screen. He felt it was a rare book to receive from a studio because it was short, gloomy and like a poem. Because the novel does not present a linear story but has many flashbacks and jumps around in time, Amini found the adaptation challenging. He felt the non-linear structure made it "a very tricky structure" for a feature film.
A film adaptation of Drive was first announced in early 2008, with Neil Marshall set to direct what was then being described as "an L.A.-set action mystery" that would be a starring vehicle for Hugh Jackman. Universal Studios, who had been trying to make a film version for years, was also on board.

Casting

Producer Marc E. Platt contacted actor Ryan Gosling regarding Drive early on. Platt explained: "I have this list that I've created of very talented individuals whose work inspire me – writers, directors, actors whom I have to work with before I go onto another career or do something else with my life." Near the top of Platt's list was Gosling, who, despite having starred in several films of diverse genres, had never starred in anything like Drive. He had always been interested in doing an action-oriented project; Gosling claimed that he was simply put off from the genre, believing that the action films of today put more focus on stunts instead of characters. Despite this, Platt heard back from the actor around 48 hours later. Gosling has stated that his strong attraction to the plot led him to take on the leading role of the unnamed driver, saying that he was drawn to the "very strong character" at its core, as well as the "powerful" romance. Believing that the director might be intimidated by the script as it was unlike anything he had done before, Gosling had concerns about Refn's desire to participate. Refn took on the project without hesitation.
When casting roles in his movies, Refn doesn't watch casting tapes or have his actors audition for him. He meets with them and casts them on the spot if he feels they're right. Drive was the first film Carey Mulligan signed on to after being nominated for an Academy Award for her role in An Education, which was directed by another Danish filmmaker Lone Scherfig. Scherfig is a good friend of Refn and she used to babysit him when he was a child.
Bryan Cranston plays the role of Shannon. Cranston was one of the first actors Winding Refn looked to cast, as he was a fan of Breaking Bad. Knowing Cranston had other opportunities, Winding Refn tried to interest him by asking how he would like to develop the role. After not hearing back, Winding Refn called him, at the very same time that Cranston was writing on a piece of paper the pros and cons of doing Drive. Moved by Winding Refn's interest, he accepted the part. Christina Hendricks plays the small role of Blanche. "Trying to work in a more reality arena for a character like that," Winding Refn originally auditioned porn stars for Blanche. He was unable to find anyone with the necessary acting talent. After meeting with Hendricks, he decided to cast her, feeling her "powerhouse" persona would click with the character.
Albert Brooks plays the foul-mouthed, morose Bernie Rose. When Winding Refn suggested him, Gosling agreed but thought the actor would not be up for playing a character who is violent and sullen, or for appearing in a film that he did not work on himself. Brooks accepted the role to go against typecasting and because he loved that Bernie was not a cliché. "There are six people you could always get to play this kind of part, and I like that the director was thinking outside of the box. For me, it was an opportunity to act outside the box. I liked that this mobster had real style. Also, he doesn't get up in the morning thinking about killing people. He's sad about it. Upset about it. It's a case of, 'Look what you made me do.'"
Nino, a key villain, is portrayed by Ron Perlman, one of the last actors to join the cast. Regarding the casting of Perlman, Winding Refn said, "The character of Nino was originally not particularly interesting, so I asked Ron why he wanted to be in my movie when he's done so many great films. When Ron said, 'I always wanted to play a Jewish man who wants to be an Italian gangster', and I asked why, and he said, 'because that's what I am – a Jewish boy from New York', well, that automatically cemented it for me." Oscar Isaac portrays a Latino convict named Standard who is married to Irene and is just released from prison a week after Irene meets The Driver. He found the role to be a bit unappealing and chose to turn the archetypal character into something more. He said of the role,  "As soon as I sat down with Nicolas, he explained this universe and world of the story, so we made the character into someone interested in owning a restaurant, someone who made some wrong decisions in his life, ending up in a bad place. By making 'Standard' more specific and more interesting, we found that it made the story that more compelling." 

Filming and cinematography

The film was made on a production budget of about $13 million and shot in various parts of Los Angeles, California, beginning on September 25, 2010. Locations were picked by Winding Refn while Gosling drove him around the city at night. Under the director's request, Los Angeles was picked as the shooting site due to budget concerns. With a shooting script of 81 pages, Winding Refn and Gosling continued to trim down dialog during filming.
Its opening chase scene involving Gosling's character was primarily filmed by Winding Refn within the car's interior. In an interview, Winding Refn revealed the idea for this scene was to emulate the feeling of a "diver in an ocean of sharks", never leaving the vehicle during a car chase so that the audience can see what's happening from the character's point of view. Tight on money and time, he shot the scene in two days. With two different set-ups prepared in the car, the director found it difficult to have mobility with the camera, so he would then switch the camera to two additional set-ups nearby. As downtown Los Angeles had changed for the better, Refn avoided certain areas to preserve the gloomy atmosphere. Additionally, the scene was shot at low-angles with minimal light.
One scene in the film that has no dialog is the elevator sequence, "a series of stunning visuals and graphic imagery that's a prime example of how the film conveys so many ideas and emotions through images rather than words." For this, he spoke to Gaspar Noé and asked him how he did the head-smashing scene in Noé's Irréversible (2002). Crossing the line from romance to violence, the scene starts off with The Driver and Irene tenderly kissing. What they share is really a goodbye kiss, In March 2012, Interiors, an online journal that is concerned with the relationship between architecture and film, released an issue that discussed how space is used in this scene. The issue highlights Nicolas Winding Refn's use of constricted space and his way of creating a balance between romance and violence.Mehruss Jon Ahi and Armen Karaoghlanian "Drive" Interiors Journal (March 15, 2012)
Car scenes were filmed with a "biscuit rig", a camera car rig developed for the film Seabiscuit (2003), which allowed stunt driver Robert Nagle to steer the car, freeing Gosling to concentrate on acting.
Beth Mickle was hired as Drive The crew built The Driver's apartment building, which included a hallway and elevator that linked his unit to Irene's. Mickle also built a strip club set and Bernie Rose's apartment in an abandoned building. Turning a "run-of-the-mill" Los Angeles auto body shop into a grandiose dealership was one of the most challenging. Painting the walls an electric blue color, she brought in a showroom full of vintage cars.
Using an Arri Alexa camera, the film was shot digitally.s executive producer Lancaster, the film contains abundant, evocative, intense images of Los Angeles that are not often seen. "From the little seen back streets of downtown LA to the dry arid outposts on the peaks of the desert landscape surrounding it, Siegel has re-imagined an LA all the way down to the rocky cliffs by the sea." Drab background settings include the Southern California commercial strip. As the Los Angeles Times pointed out, whenever gleaming buildings are shown, it is because they are being seen from a far distance. Refn shot those scenes from a helicopter at night in Bunker Hill, Los Angeles.
While Drive is set in the present day, it carries a heavy 1980s atmosphere that is cautiously set from beginning to end and is underlined not only by the vehicles or music and clothes, but also by its architecture. The parts of the city seen in the Valley and by downtown Los Angeles are actually cheap stucco and mirrored glass, which has been carefully edited to largely leave out more contemporary buildings.

Style and inspiration


Journalists and reviewers have called Drive a "classic Los Angeles heist-gone-wrong story" that is a "tribute to the genre of car films" in the vein of movies like Bullitt (1968). A character study, Other comparisons have been to the works of Walter Hill, John Carpenter, Michael Mann, Nathanael West, J.G. Ballard and Mike Davis. According to Refn, Drive is dedicated to filmmaker Alejandro Jodorowsky and includes some of Jodorowsky's existentialism.
Drive has been called a tough, hard-edged neo-noir art house feature, extremely violent and very stylish, with European art and grindhouse influences.
Winding Refn's inspiration for Drive came partly from reading Grimm's Fairy Tales, and his goal was to make "a fairy tale that takes Los Angeles as the background," with the Driver as the hero. To play with the common theme of fairy tales, The Driver protects what is good while at the same time killing degenerate people in violent ways. Refn was also inspired by films such as Point Blank (1967), Two-Lane Blacktop (1971), The Driver (1978) and Thief (1981). Jean-Pierre Melville's crime productions influenced the cinematography. Amini's script propensity imposes "a kind of sideways moral code," where even those who comply with it are almost never rewarded for their efforts, as seen when The Driver helps Standard with Irene and her son's best interests in mind. Within their vehicles, the characters not only make escapes or commit murder, but try to obtain peace and search for romance.
The film's main character, The Driver, has been compared to the Man With No Name, a character Clint Eastwood portrayed in the Sergio Leone westerns, because he almost never speaks, communicating mostly non-verbally. The Driver's meager dialogue is not designed to present him as tough, but to soften him. Winding Refn chose to give The Driver very little dialogue and instead have him drive around listening to synthpop music, taking control when it counts. One reviewer noted that what The Driver lacks in psychology, he makes up through action and stylish costuming. The Driver's wardrobe, in particular the satin jacket with the logo of a golden scorpion on the back, was inspired by the band KISS and Kenneth Anger's 1964 experimental film Scorpio Rising. Refn sees the former as the character's armor and the logo a sign of protection.

Music and soundtrack

Most of its ethereal electronic-pop score was composed by Cliff Martinez.
Winding Refn wanted a score by Johnny Jewel of Desire and Chromatics, whose music was used in the film, but the studio had other plans. They instead hired Martinez at the last minute to imitate the style and feel of Jewel's bands Chromatics and Glass Candy.
As Winding Refn was going through mixer Johnny Jewel's catalog, he picked out "Under Your Spell" and "Tick of the Clock" because he thought of Drive being a fairytale. During Drive At first, Jewel worried that "Under Your Spell" might be too literal but soon realized it is used in Drive "in the exact same way that I was feeling it when I wrote it. He definitely got the nuance of the song, and understood what it was supposed to mean, and he wanted to give that emotion to the viewer, that same feeling."
Thinking of music in terms of basic elements, Jewel would tell the director that for certain scenes, it should not have bass since, as an earth tone, it usually is used for a more emotional or ominous part. Jewel thought the music should be upper register and relaxing for the "dreamlike" scene. To help himself with the writing process and conjure up melodies, the producer would perform a procedure where he highlighted many phrases from the novel, then printed those words in large font and hung them on his walls or drew pictures during viewings of Drive.
Drive (Original Motion Picture Soundtrack) was released in CD format to stores on September 27, 2011 by Lakeshore Records, Digital Spy's Mayer Nissim gave it a four out of five star rating, finding it to be as important as the film itself. She stated the album beginning with non-Martinez songs instead of mixing it up for a more enjoyable listening experience cost it a star.

=Track listing=

=Charts=

Release

Originally planned as a blockbuster, Drive was eventually re-labeled as an independent film. Prior to principal photography, Refn went to the 2010 Cannes Film Festival in an effort to sell the rights to Drive and released promotional posters for the film.
The film premiered on May 20, in competition at the 2011 Cannes Film Festival.
Drive was also screened at the Los Angeles Time

Home media

Drive was released on DVD and Blu-ray on January 30, 2012; and it was released early on iTunes, the PlayStation Store, and Xbox Live on January 17, 2012.

Reception

Critical response

Drive received critical acclaim upon its release in 2011. To date, the film has a 93% "fresh" rating and an 8.3 average rating on Rotten Tomatoes, based on 234 reviews. From the Rotten Tomatoes' consensus: "With its hyper-stylized blend of violence, music, and striking imagery, Drive represents a fully realized vision of arthouse action."
The writers for the film magazine Empire listed Drive as their number one film of 2011.
Stephanie Zachereck of Movieline complimented the film's action and wrote that it "defies all the current trends in mainstream action filmmaking. The driving sequences are shot and edited with a surgeon's clarity and precision. Refn doesn't chop up the action to fool us into thinking it's more exciting than it is." She also admired Refn's skill in handling the film's violence and the understated romance between Gosling and Mulligan. Her score for the film was 9.5/10
The Wall Street Journal's Joe Morgenstern called Albert Brooks' villainous performance "sensational".
Joshua Rothkoff, writing for Time Out New York, stated that "Danish director Nicolas Winding Refn (Bronson) has taken the opportunity to work in America and pushed it to delirious limits; his effort, a foreigner's impassioned take on '80s-synth-scored romance and highway mayhem, plays like the work of a student graduating with highest honors." Drive was Rothkoff's choice for film of the year.
The violence of the film was off-putting for some reviewers. In a negative review by Anthony Lane in The New Yorker, he complained that Drive's violence was far too graphic, and it ultimately was a detriment to the film. Referring to the graphic nature of the violence he said, "In grabbing our attention, he diverts it from what matters. The horror lingers and seeps; the feelings are sponged away."
Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film a score of C-, this was attributed to audiences feeling tricked, having expected more driving and more action based on the marketing.

Box office

Drive grossed $77,560,689 worldwide, making nearly six times its 13 million dollar budget.
In the international marketplace, Drive grossed $42,500,000. Drive had its highest-grossing box office in France, where it earned a total of  €10,346,427.87 ($13,264,311).

Accolades

Drive was nominated for four British Academy Film Awards, which included Best Film, Best Director, Best Supporting Actress, and Best Editing. It was one of the most-nominated films by critics' groups in 2011.

Sequel

James Sallis, author of the original Drive novel, wrote a sequel titled Driven, which was published in April 2012. Refn further says that he intends the sequel to feature two drivers, one of them a villain counterpart to Ryan Gosling's character, comparing the new driver to Lex Luthor and Professor Moriarty. Gosling also expressed interest in starring in a sequel, saying that he would "love to make a Drive 2" but that he "doesn't want to make the same movie" again. In May 2013, Nicolas Winding Refn said, "It's never gonna happen. The movie's not gonna get made, because they don't have the key elements," apparently referring to Refn and Gosling's later decision not to participate in a sequel.Interview: Nicolas Winding Refn Compares 'Only God Forgives' To A Rembrandt, Responds To Critics & More



Further reading






