[[Humberto Millán Salazar]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, 1958 births, 2011 deaths, Mexican journalists, Murdered journalists, Journalists killed in Mexico, Murder in 2011, Deaths by firearm in Mexico

 Humberto Millán Salazar  (6 February 1958 – 24 August 2011), a Mexican journalist, was a radio host of "Sin Ambages" (Translated: Plain Language) on Radio Fórmula and the founder, editor, and columnist for the online newspaper A Discusión in Culiacan, Mexico. Salazar was abducted on 24 August 2011. His body was discovered by authorities the next day. 
At the time of his abduction, 13 Mexican journalists had disappeared since 2003. 2011. "Mexican journalist Humberto Millan Salazar found dead." Retrieved September 12, 2011  2011. "Abducted journalist found shot dead, second murder in past month." Retrieved September 10, 2011  2011. "Humberto Millán Salazar." Retrieved September 10, 2011 CPJ and one of over 70 journalists killed in Mexico since 2000. 2011. "Sinaloa, Gulf and Juárez cartels." Retrieved September 20, 2011 

Death

Humberto Millán Salazar was on his way to Radio Fórmula to broadcast his program "Sin Ambages" at approximately 5:56 a.m., Wednesday, 24 August 2011.A-Discusión. 2011. "Armed command kidnaps Humberto Millán." Retrieved September 20, 2011 A-Discusión. As he neared the radio station, two SUVs pulled into his path. Four or five men armed with handguns exited the vehicles and ordered Millán into the back of one of the trucks. It is estimated that the exchange took no more than 10 seconds, which authorities said suggested prolonged and meticulous planning. Millán was abducted with his brother, who was  developmentally disabled and later released at Millán's request. Authorities discovered Millán's body the very next day at Campo Morelia, a field about 10 km north of Culiacan. He had suffered a gunshot wound to the head.
Fellow journalist and friend Osuna Encino said  he believed Millán's death was related to his political reporting in which he compared the administration to the previous government and that Millán had complained against the intimidation of the press.
Just before his death, Millán had printed a sensitive political story about the debt ceiling. A Discusion. 2011. "Without Hesitation." Retrieved September 15, 2011 
On 2 September, Millán's family gave officials a CD. The CD was left in a safe by Millán with instructions to publicize if something had happened to him. Details of the disc are still unrevealed.

Context

Mexico is the 4th most dangerous country for journalists. 2011. "27 Journalists killed in Mexico Motive Confirmed." Retrieved November 1, 2011 CPJ. It is suspected that Millán's murder is connected to his political opponents. However, the prevalent drug cartel could also be responsible for his death. Crime organizations account for 76 percent of suspected murders while government officials account for 4 percent. Mexico is considered by the CIA to be a major drug producing nation, generating 15,800 metric tons of marijuana and 68 metric tons of heroin per year. 2011. "Mexico" The World Factbook. Retrieved September 20, 2011  In Sinaloa--the state in Mexico where Millán was murdered—operates one of the largest, most dangerous drug cartels: The Sinaloa Cartel. It is suspected, however, that Millán was not kidnapped by this group. Instead, it has been speculated that—due to his critical writing and analysis of local authorities, government, and political infighting—Millán's death may be connected to his political opponents.

Impact

Mexico is considered one of the most dangerous countries for media in the western hemisphere. Millán is one of nearly 80 journalists murdered in Mexico since 2000. His murder occurred just one month after the decapitation of crime reporter Yolanda Ordaz de la Cruz, of Notiver in Veracruz.

Reactions

Irina Bokova, who is the director-general of UNESCO, condemned the murder of Millán on 30 August 2011. Bokova said, "It is essential that the impunity enjoyed by those responsible for such crimes in Mexico be brought to an end, for the sake of the basic human right of freedom of expression, freedom of the press, good governance and rule of law." United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization. 2011. "Director-General condemns murder of Mexican journalist Humberto Millán Salazar" UNESCO Press. August 30. Retrieved September 22, 2011 
Reporters Without Borders also condemned the murder of Millán. They urged authorities to not rule out the possibility that he was murdered in connection with his work.
The Mexican journalist group Asociación de Periodistas 7 de Junio immediately protested outside the state capital of Culiacan and demanded the state do something about attacks on journalists.

Career

In 1996 Millán founded the online newspaper A Discusión. He also hosted a daily radio broadcast entitled "Sin Ambages" on Radio Fórmula. He also broadcast on Radio UAS, which is a station operated by the Autonomous University of Sinaloa. Millán has also worked for many local newspapers including El Debate and El Sol de Sinaloa.

Personal

Humberto attended high school at Escuela Técnica Agropecuaria. After graduating, he went on to attend college at Facultad de Derecho. Millán is survived by his wife and daughter.








