[[Jordan Nolan]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 births, Canadian ice hockey centres, Erie Otters players, Ice hockey people from Ontario, Living people, Los Angeles Kings draft picks, Los Angeles Kings players, Manchester Monarchs players, Ojibwe people, Ontario Reign players, People from St. Catharines, Sault Ste. Marie Greyhounds players, Stanley Cup champions, Windsor Spitfires players

Jordan Nolan (born June 23, 1989) is a Canadian professional ice hockey player who is currently playing for the Los Angeles Kings of the National Hockey League (NHL). He was selected by Los Angeles in the 7th round (186th overall) of the 2009 NHL Entry Draft.Jordan Nolan taken in 7th round of NHL draft

Junior career

Nolan began his career with the Erie Otters of the Ontario Hockey League (OHL) in 2005–06, scoring just three goals in 33 games. He then spent two seasons with the Windsor Spitfires from 2006-2008, followed by two seasons with the Sault Ste. Marie Greyhounds from 2008-2010.

Professional career

Nolan was selected by the Los Angeles Kings in the seventh round (186th overall) in the 2009 NHL Entry Draft. After the Greyhounds' season ended in 2010, Nolan was sent to the Ontario Reign of the ECHL. He only played three games with the team. On October 5, 2010, Nolan was signed by the Los Angeles Kings to a three-year, entry-level contract.Deadline day arrives; Wings waive Maltby - NHL - Sporting News
He spent the next two seasons with the Manchester Monarchs of the American Hockey League (AHL), where he totaled 14 goals  and 39 points in 115 games. On February 11, 2012, Nolan was recalled to join the Los Angeles Kings, and was assigned uniform number 71. He played his first NHL game that same day, a loss to the New York Islanders. He scored his first NHL goal the following day in a victory over the Dallas Stars.
On May 6, 2012, Nolan scored his first career NHL playoff goal, helping the Kings sweep the St. Louis Blues in the Western Conference Semifinals of the 2012 Stanley Cup playoffs. He would later win the Stanley Cup with the Kings during the 2012 Stanley Cup Finals.

Disciplinary issues

While with the Sault Ste. Marie Greyhounds as a nineteen year old, Nolan was involved in an altercation with R.J. Mahalak of the Plymouth Whalers in March, 2009. In an unprovoked attack, Nolan punched Mahalak twice in the face, giving him a concussion as he fell to the ice and struck his head. As a result, Nolan received a 20-game suspension by the OHL. "They believed it was vicious enough for a 20-game suspension and they felt it was fortunate the player (Mahalak) wasn't hurt more severely", said Greyhounds' general manager Dave Torrie. "(But) that was one of the scariest things I've ever seen. He (Nolan) went after a player who wasn't going to fight. You have to pay consequences," said Whalers' head coach and general manager Mike Vellucci of the incident.
In the NHL, Nolan has faced disciplinary action from the league on multiple occasions. On March 24, 2013, Nolan was fined $1,436.94 by the league for a cross-check to the head of Vancouver Canucks' forward Henrik Sedin. The fine was the maximum allowed under the league's Collective Bargaining Agreement.
In a game against the Edmonton Oilers on March 9, 2014, Nolan sucker punched unsuspecting Oilers' forward Jesse Joensuu after a scrum near the end of the second period. At the time of the punch, Joensuu's hands were being held by a linesman.  On March 10, the NHL announced a one-game suspension for Nolan as a result of the incident.

Personal

Both Jordan's father, Head Coach of the Sabres Ted Nolan,and his brother, Brandon Nolan, have played in the National Hockey League.
The Morning Skate: Sedins' Plight, Sens' Dilemma and a Family Affair - NYTimes.com
He is First Nation Ojibwe on his fathers side of the family.nativeamericanmusicawards.cfm Nolan is also a First Nation Maliseet on his mother's side from St. Mary's First Nation in Fredericton, NB.

Career statistics






