[[Tatarstan]]

CATEGORIES: Tatarstan, States and territories established in 1920, Autonomous Turkic states, Members of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization

The Republic of Tatarstan (
The state has strong ties with its eastern neighbor the Republic of Bashkortostan.

Terminology

"Tatarstan" derives from the name of the ethnic group—the Tatars—and the Persian suffix -stan (an ending common to many Eurasian countries). Another version of the Russian name is "" (Tatariya), which was official along with "Tatar ASSR" during the Soviet rule.

Geography

The republic is located in the center of the East European Plain, approximately  east of Moscow.  It lies between the Volga River and the Kama River (a tributary of the Volga), and extends east to the Ural mountains.

Rivers

Major rivers include (Tatar names are given in parentheses):

Lakes

Major reservoirs of the republic include (Tatar names are given in parentheses):
The biggest lake is Qaban. The biggest swamp is Kulyagash.

Hills

Natural resources

Major natural resources of Tatarstan include oil, natural gas, gypsum, and more.  It is estimated that the Republic has over one billion tons of oil deposits.

Climate

Administrative divisions

History

Middle Ages

The earliest known organized state within the boundaries of Tatarstan was Volga Bulgaria (c. 700–1238 CE). The Volga Bulgars had an advanced mercantile state with trade contacts throughout Inner Eurasia, the Middle East and the Baltic, which maintained its independence despite pressure by such nations as the Khazars, the Kievan Rus and the Cuman-Kipchaks. Islam was introduced by missionaries from Baghdad around the time of ibn Fadlan's journey in 922.
Volga Bulgaria finally fell to the armies of the Mongol prince Batu Khan in the late 1230s (see Mongol invasion of Volga Bulgaria.) The inhabitants, mixing with the Golden Horde's Kipchak-speaking people, became known as the "Volga Tatars." Another theory postulates that there were no ethnic changes in that period, and Bulgars simply switched to the Kipchak-based Tatar language. In the 1430s, the region again became independent as the base of the Khanate of Kazan, a capital having been established in Kazan, 170 km up the Volga from the ruined capital of the Bulgars.
The Khanate of Kazan was conquered by the troops of Tsar Ivan the Terrible in the 1550s, with Kazan being taken in 1552. A large number of Tatars were killed and forcibly converted to Christianity and were culturally Russified. Cathedrals were built in Kazan; by 1593 all mosques in the area were destroyed. The Russian government forbade the construction of mosques, a prohibition that was not lifted until the 18th century by Catherine the Great. The first mosque to be rebuilt under Catherine's auspices was constructed in 1766-1770.

19th century

In the 19th century Tatarstan became a center of Jadidism, an Islamic movement that preached tolerance of other religions. Under the influence of local Jadidist theologians, the Tatars were renowned for their friendly relations with other peoples of the Russian Empire. However, after the October Revolution religion was largely outlawed and all theologians were repressed.
During the Civil War of 1918–1920 Tatar nationalists attempted to establish an independent republic (the Idel-Ural State). They were, however, put down by the Bolsheviks and the Tatar Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic was established on May 27, 1920. 3 There was a famine in the Tatar Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic in 1921 to 1922 as a result of war communist policy. The boundaries of the republic did not include majority of the Volga Tatars. The Tatar Union of the Godless were persecuted in Stalin's 1928 purges.

1921–1922 famine

The famine deaths of 2 million Tatars in Tatar ASSR and in Volga-Ural region in 1921-1922 was catastrophic as half of Volga Tatar population in USSR died. This famine is also known as "terror-famine" and "famine-genocide" in Tatarstan. All-Russian Tatar Social Center (VTOTs) has asked the United Nations to condemn the 1921 Tatarstan famine as Genocide of Muslim Tatars.Seven million died in the 'forgotten' holocaust

Modern times

On August 30, 1990, Tatarstan announced its sovereignty with the Declaration on the State Sovereignty of the Tatar Soviet Socialist RepublicDeclaration on the State Sovereignty of the Tatar Soviet Socialist Republic and in 1992 Tatarstan held a referendum on the new constitution,(In Russian)Конституция Республики Татарстан and 62 percent of those who took part voted in favor of the constitution. In the 1992 Tatarstan Constitution, Tatarstan is defined as a Sovereign State.  However the referendum and constitution were declared unconstitutional by the Russian Constitutional Court.rbcdaily.
On February 15, 1994, the Treaty On Delimitation of Jurisdictional Subjects and Mutual Delegation of Authority between the State Bodies of the Russian Federation and the State Bodies of the Republic of TatarstanTreaty on Delimitation of Jurisdictional Subjects and Powers between Bodies of Public Authority of the Russian Federation and Bodies of Public Authority of the Republic of Tatarstan and Agreement between the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of the Republic of Tatarstan (On Delimitation of Authority in the Sphere of Foreign Economic Relations) were signed.
On December 20, 2008, in response to Russia recognizing Abkhazia and South Ossetia, the Milli Mejlis of the Tatar People declared Tatarstan independent and asked for United Nations recognition.cnn.com/docs/DOC-183351

Demographics

Population: 

Vital statistics

Note: TFR source.gks.ru/wps/wcm/connect/rosstat_main/rosstat/ru/statistics/publications/catalog/doc_1137674209312

Ethnic groups

There are about two million ethnic Tatars and a million and a half ethnic Russians, along with significant numbers of Chuvash, Mari, and Udmurts, some of whom are Tatar-speaking. The Ukrainian, Mordvin, and Bashkir minorities are also significant. Most Tatars are Sunni Muslims, but a small minority known as Keräşen Tatars are Orthodox and some of them regard themselves as being different from other Tatars even though most Keräşen dialects differ only slightly from the Central Dialect of the Tatar language. Although listed separately below, the Keräşen are still included in the grand total for the Tatars. Another unique ethnic group, living in Tatarstan only are the Qaratay Mordvins. When it comes to religion, Sunni Islam is the most common faith in Tatarstan, as 55% of the estimated 3.8 million population is Muslim while remaining population is mostly Russian Orthodox Christian.google.lib.edu/indexablecontent?id%3Duuid:01e41212-73fc-4660-b184-57c1c9a65c95%26ds%3DDATA_FILE%26dl%3Dtrue+&hl=en&gl=ca&pid=bl&srcid=ADGEESjtsxkT3NrB5cPfb-Id0HL0gXHtvTjgZOuVljoHZ5YP9BfEHZAqObnmYbMKzx9CXy6HWN4a0vPqimhFDS_J5EaDxlAVQA1CRysS556fLYsOMAIHb3NzRtl_At8J7Ab-Yt7pZqk1&sig=AHIEtbRBE3CjBwjR7skCZ63Qaw4PD8uFaw&pli=1

Languages

In accordance with the Constitution of the Republic of Tatarstan the two state languages of the republic are Tatar and Russian. According to the 2002 Russian Federal Law (On Languages of Peoples of the Russian Federation), the official script is Cyrillic.

Religion

Established in 922, the first Muslim state within the boundaries of modern Russia was Volga Bulgaria from which the Tatars inherited Islam. Islam was introduced by missionariesTatarstan Parliament Introduces New Islam Holiday from Baghdad around the time of Ibn Fadlan's journey in 922. Islam's long presence in Russia also extends at least as far back as the conquest of the Khanate of Kazan in 1552, which brought the Tatars and Bashkirs on the Middle Volga into Russia.
In the 1430s, the region became independent as the base of the Khanate of Kazan, a capital having been established in Kazan, 170 km up the Volga from the ruined capital of the Bulgars. The Khanate of Kazan was conquered by the troops of Tsar Ivan IV the Terrible in the 1550s, with Kazan being taken in 1552. Some Tatars were forcibly converted to Christianity and cathedrals were built in Kazan; by 1593, mosques in the area were destroyed. The Russian government forbade the construction of mosques, a prohibition that was not lifted until the 18th century by Catherine II.
In 1990, there were only 100 mosques but the number, as of 2004, rose to well over 1,000. As of January 1, 2008, as many as 1,398 religious organizations were registered in Tatarstan, of which 1,055 were Muslim. Today, Sunni Islam is the most common faith in Tatarstan, as 55% of the population is Muslim. Krindatch. Patterns of Religious Change in Postsoviet Russia: Major Trends from 1998 to 2003. Religion, State & Society, Vol. 32, No. 2, June 2004. Published by BiblicalStudies.uk, p. 123. In September 2010, Eid al fitr as well May 21, the day the Volga Bulgars embraced Islam, were made public holidays.Tatarstan's Muslim filmfest kicks off
The Russian Orthodox Church is the second largest active religion in Tatarstan, and has been so for more than 150 years, with an estimated 1.6 million followers made up of ethnic Russians, Mordvins, Armenians, Belarusians, Mari people, Georgians, Chuvash and a number of Orthodox Tatars which together constitute 45% of the 3.8 million population of Tatarstan. On the 23rd of August 2010 the "Orthodox monuments of Tatarstan" exhibition was held in Kazan by the Tatarstan Ministry of Culture and the Kazan Eparchy."Orthodox monuments of Tatarstan" exhibition to be held in Kazan At all public events an Orthodox Priest is called upon along with an Islamic Mufti.Today's Tatarstan in brief
The Muslim Religious Board of Tatarstan frequently organizes activities, like the 'Islamic graffiti Contest' which was held on November 20, 2011.Islamic Graffiti Contest Held In Kazan | KazanTimes

Politics

The head of the government in Tatarstan is the President.  Since March 2010, the President has been Rustam Minnikhanov.Accessed: 14 January 2012. Tatarstan's unicameral State Council has 100 seats: fifty are for representatives of the parties, and the other fifty are for deputies from the republic's localities.  The Chairman of the State Council is Farit Mukhametshin from May 27, 1998.
According to the Constitution of the Republic of Tatarstan, the President can be elected only by the people of Tatarstan, but due to Russian federal law this law was suspended for an indefinite term. The Russian law about election of governors says they should be elected by regional parliaments and that the candidate can be presented only by the president of Russia.
On March 25, 2005 Shaymiyev was re-elected for his fourth term by the State Council. This election was held after changes in electoral law and does not contradict the Constitutions of Tatarstan and Russia.

Political status

The Republic of Tatarstan is a constituent republic of the Russian Federation. Most of the Russian federal subjects are tied with the Russian federal government by the uniform Federal Treaty, but relations between the government of Tatarstan and the Russian federal government are more complex, and are precisely defined in the Constitution.  The following passage from the Constitution defines the republic's status without contradicting the Constitution of the Russian Federation:


Economy

Tatarstan is one of the most economically developed regions of Russia. The republic is highly industrialized, and ranks second only to Samara Oblast in terms of industrial production per km2.Economy: The Republic of Dagestan
The region's main source of wealth is oil. Tatarstan produces 32 million tonnes of crude oil per year and has estimated oil reserves of more than 1 billion tons. The most developed manufacturing industries are petrochemical industry and machine building. The truck-maker KamAZ is the region's largest enterprise and employs about 1/5 of Tatarstan's work force. Kazanorgsintez, based in Kazan, is one of Russia's largest chemical companies. The Kazan Helicopter Plant is one of the largest helicopter manufacturers in the world.
Tatarstan consists of three distinguished industrial regions. The northwestern part is an old industrial region where engineering, chemical and light industry dominate. In the new industrial Northeast region with its core in the Naberezhnye Chelny-Nizhnekamsk agglomeration, major industries are automobile construction, chemical industry, and power engineering. The Southeast region has oil production with engineering under development. The North, Central, South, and Southwest parts of the Republic are rural regions. m. Soils are very diverse, the best fertile soils covering 1/3 of the territory. Due to high development of agriculture in Tatarstan(it contributes 5,1% of total revenue of republic), forests occupy only 16% of its territory. The agricultural sector of economy are represented mostly by large companies as "Ak Bars Holding" and "Krasniy Vostok Agro".
The republic has a highly developed transport network. It mainly comprises highways, railway lines, four navigable rivers — Volga (İdel), Kama (Çulman), Vyatka (Noqrat) and Belaya (Ağidel), and oil pipelines and airlines. The territory of Tatarstan is crossed by the main gas pipelines carrying natural gas from Urengoy and Yamburg to the west and the major oil pipelines supplying oil to various cities in the European part of Russia.

Culture

Major libraries include the Science Library of Kazan State University and the National Library of the Republic of Tatarstan.  There are two museums of republican significance, as well as 90 museums of local importance.  In the past several years new museums appeared throughout the Republic.
There are twelve theatrical institutions in Tatarstan.

Sports

Tatarstan has Rubin Kazan, a major European football team which has played in the Champions League and the Europa League.
It also has two KHL teams, the successful Ak Bars Kazan, which is based in the capital city of Kazan, and the Neftekhimik Nizhnekamsk, who play in the city of Nizhnekamsk. The state also has a Russian Major League team (the second highest hockey league in Russia), Neftyanik Almetyevsk, who play in the city of Almetyevsk. There are also two Minor Hockey League teams which serve as affiliates for the two KHL teams. A team also exists in the Russian Hockey League, the HC Chelny, who are based in the city of Naberezhnye Chelny. Another team plays in the MHL-B (the second level of junior ice hockey in Russia).
Twice Russian champions, Rubin Kazan play in the Russian Premier League.
Former ATP No.1 Marat Safin and former WTA No.1 Dinara Safina are of Tatar descent.
Kazan is set to host the XXVII Summer Universiade in 2013.

Education

The most important facilities of higher education include Kazan State University, Kazan State Medical University, Kazan State Technological University, World Information Distributed University, Kazan State Technical University, Kazan State Finance and Economics Institute and Russian Islamic University, all located in the capital Kazan.





Notes

Sources

|ru_entity=
|ru_type=Закон
|ru_number=2284
|ru_date=14 июля 1999 г.
|ru_title=О государственных символах Республики Татарстан
|ru_effective_date=со дня опубликования (28 августа 1999 г.)
|ru_published_in="Республика Татарстан", №174
|ru_published_date=28 августа 1999 г
|ru_url=
|ru_amendment_type=Закона
|ru_amendment_number=23-ЗРТ
|ru_amendment_date=18 марта 2013 г
|ru_amendment_title=О внесении изменений в Закон Республики Татарстан "О государственных символах Республики Татарстан" в части утверждения текста Государственного гимна Республики Татарстан"
|en_entity=
|en_type=Law
|en_number=2284
|en_date=July 14, 1999
|en_title=On the Symbols of State of the Republic of Tatarstan
|en_effective_date=the day of publication (August 28, 1999)
|en_url=
|en_amendment_type=Law
|en_amendment_number=23-ZRT
|en_amendment_date=March 18, 2013
|en_amendment_title=On Amending the Part of the Law of the Republic of Tatarstan "On the Symbols of State of the Republic of Tatarstan" Adopting the Text of the State Anthem of the Republic of Tatarstan
}}

Further reading




