[[LGBT]]

CATEGORIES: LGBT, Acronyms, Bisexuality, Initialisms, Lesbianism, LGBT terms, Male homosexuality, Same-sex sexuality, Transgender, Words coined in the 1990s

LGBT is an initialism that stands for lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender. In use since the 1990s, the term is an adaptation of the initialism LGB, which itself started replacing the term gay when in reference to the LGBT community beginning in the mid-to-late 1980s,[ref]Acronyms, initialisms & abbreviations dictionary, Volume 1, Part 1uu
Gale Research Co., 1985,  ISBN 978-0-8103-0683-7.
Factsheet five, Issues 32–36, Mike Gunderloy, 1989[/ref] as many felt the term gay community did not accurately represent all those to whom it referred. The initialism has become mainstream as a self-designation and has been adopted by the majority of sexuality and gender identity-based community centers and media in the United States and some other English-speaking countries.Report link(2012 Report link)National Lesbian & Gay Journalists Association: Stylebook Supplement on LGBT Terminology, NLGJA 2008. Stylebook Supplement It is also used in some other countries in whose languages the initialism is meaningful, such as France.
The initialism LGBT is intended to emphasize a diversity of sexuality and gender identity-based cultures and is sometimes used to refer to anyone who is non-heterosexual or non-cisgender instead of exclusively to people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, or transgender.
To recognize this inclusion, a popular variant adds the letter Q for those who identify as queer and/or are questioning their sexual identity as LGBTQ, recorded since 1996.
On the one hand, some intersex people who want to be included in LGBT groups suggest an extended initialism LGBTI (recorded since 1999William L. Maurice, Marjorie A. Bowman, Sexual medicine in primary care, Mosby Year Book, 1999, ISBN 978-0-8151-2797-0).
This initialism "LGBTI" is used in all parts of "The Activist's Guide" of the Yogyakarta Principles in Action. Furthermore, the initialism LGBTIH has seen use in India to encompass the hijra third gender identity and the related subculture.Organisation proposes replacing the 'limiting' term LGBT with 'more inclusive' GSD, February 25, 2013
Whether or not LGBT people openly identify themselves may depend on whether they live in a discriminatory environment, as well as on the status of LGBT rights where they live.betterhealth.gov.nsf/pages/Gay_and_lesbian_issues_discrimination

History

Before the sexual revolution of the 1960s, there was no common non-derogatory vocabulary for non-heterosexuality; the closest such term, "third gender", traces back to the 1860s but never gained wide acceptance in the United States. (1980) The "third sex" theory of Karl Heinrich Ulrichs, Journal of Homosexuality. 1980–1981 Fall–Winter; 6(1–2): pp. 103–1Hirschfeld, Magnus, 1904. Berlins Drittes Geschlecht ("Berlin's Third Sex")Ellis, Havelock and Symonds, J. A., 1897. Sexual Inversion. The Intermediate Sex: A Study of Some Transitional Types of Men and Women. Sind es Frauen? Roman über das dritte Geschlecht ("Are These Women? Novel about the Third Sex")
The first widely used term, homosexual, was thought to carry negative connotations and tended to be replaced by homophile in the 1950s and 1960s, It was thought that transgender people were acting out stereotypes and bisexuals were simply gay men or lesbian women who were afraid to come out and be honest about their identity. Each community that is collectively included has struggled to develop its own identity including whether, and how, to align with other gender and sexuality-based communities at times excluding other subgroups; these conflicts continue to this day.
The initialism LGBT saw occasional use in the United States from about 1988.
Not until the 1990s did it become common to speak of gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people with equal respect within the movement.
Although the LGBT community has seen much controversy regarding universal acceptance of different member groups (bisexual and transgender individuals, in particular, have sometimes been marginalized by the larger LGBT community), the term LGBT has been a positive symbol of inclusion.[ref]
</ref><ref name="Bisexuality and Transgend"/> Despite the fact that LGBT does not nominally encompass all individuals in smaller communities (see Variants below), the term is generally accepted to include those not identified in the four-letter acronym.<ref name="The Handbook of Lesb"/><ref name="Bisexuality and Transgend"/> Overall, the use of the term LGBT has, over time, largely aided in bringing otherwise marginalized individuals into the general community.<ref name="The Handbook of Lesb"/><ref name="Bisexuality and Transgend"/>
Transgender actress Candis Cayne in 2009 called the LGBT community "the last great minority", noting that "We can still be harassed openly" and be "called out on television."

Variants

Many variants exist including variations that merely change the order of the letters; LGBT or GLBT are the most common terms and the ones most frequently seen in current usage. Although identical in meaning, "LGBT" may have a more feminist connotation than "GLBT" as it places the "L" (for "lesbian") first. When not inclusive of transgender people it is sometimes shortened to LGB.
Other variants may add a "U" for "unsure"; a "C" for "curious"; an "I" for "intersex"; another "T" for "transsexual" or "transvestite"; another "T", "TS", or "2" for "Two‐Spirit" persons; an "A" or "SA" for "straight allies"; or an "A" for "asexual".
The order of the letters has not been standardized; in addition to the variations between the positions of the initial "L" or "G", the mentioned, less‐common letters, if used, may appear in almost any order. Variant terms do not typically represent political differences within the community, but arise simply from the preferences of individuals and groups. The terms pansexual, omnisexual, fluid and queer-identified are regarded as falling under the umbrella term "bisexual". . . . April 20, 2009 BiNet USA News and Opinions Likewise, the terms transsexual and intersex are regarded by some people as falling under the umbrella term transgender though many transsexual and intersex people object to this (both for different reasons).
"SGL" ("same gender loving") is sometimes favored among black Americans as a way of distinguishing themselves from what they regard as white-dominated LGBT communities. "MSM" ("men who have sex with men") is clinically used to describe men who have sex with other men without referring to their sexual orientation. 95 No. 7. 393–397.
A phrase introduced in the 2000s, "minority sexual and gender identities" ("MSGI"), and the similar "gender and sexual minorities" ("GSM"), are intended as more inclusive identifiers, but have yet to find their way into common usage.

Criticism of the term

The initialisms LGBT or GLBT are not agreeable to everyone that they literally encompass. For example, some argue that transgender and transsexual causes are not the same as that of lesbian, gay, and bisexual (LGB) people.[ref]
