[[Mesoporous organosilica]]

CATEGORIES: Porous media, Silicon dioxide

Mesoporous organosilicas are a class of silica based mesoporous materials containing organic groups as integral part of their structures.

Background and significance

Since zeolites, an older group of porous materials, could only be synthesized with pore sizes less than a nanometer, they were not very useful for surface interactions with larger structures. It was considered a huge breakthrough when the first periodic mesoporous silicas (PMS) were developed in 1992 with pores larger that of zeolites. These materials allowed for better host-guest chemistry with larger structures such as polymers, nanoscale clusters and wires, and enhanced diffusion rates of the structures within the pores.
The early mesoporous materials designed were pure silicates and aluminosilicates. However, their noncrystalline nature, lower thermal and mechanical stability, and broader pore-size distributions compared to zeolites were the major shortcomings. Very quickly there was a surge of interest in making such porous materials with organic groups attached to their surfaces, as this kind of functionalization would confer them useful and tunable properties. The initial mesoporous organosilicas developed had organic groups attached terminally to the silica surface. They were prepared either by grafting of organic group onto the channel walls or by template-directed co-condensation.
Later in 1999, three independent research groups, Ozin et al., Stein et al., and Inagaki et al. reported the synthesis of a new class of mesoporous materials. These were mesoporous organosilicas with organic groups located within the pore channel walls as "bridges" between Si centers.,. Since these materials had both organic and inorganic groups as integral part of the porous framework, they were considered as composites of organic and inorganic material and designated as periodic mesoporous organosilicas (PMOs). This family of porous materials had high degree of order and uniformity of pores compared to those with terminal organic groups.

Structure of PMOs

The framework of PMOs consists of inorganic components uniformly bridged by organic components. The term silsesquioxane meaning one silicon and one and a half oxygen; a stoichiometric condition that arises when every oxygen atom is shared between two silicon atoms, (Si-O-Si). Most of the bridged polysilsesquioxane can be generically represented by the formula O1.5Si-R-SiO1.5. where R represents the organic bridging group. Each individual organic group is covalently bonded to two or more silicon atoms in the framework.
Depending on the synthetic conditions used to make mesoporous organosilicas, the mesoscale structure can either be amorphous or crystalline.

Synthesis

The primary methods used to make mesoporous organosilicas are evaporation-induced self-assembly, surfactant-mediated synthesis, post-synthetic grafting, and co-condensation.  Organosilicas with amorphous structures are typically made by functionalizing organic groups rather than directly integrating the functional groups in the framework, which produces a periodic structure.  Furthermore, basic hydrolytic conditions typically produce a periodic structure because of hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions between hydrolyzed precursors that then self-assemble.
Evaporation-induced self-assembly usually causes random alignment of the material pores.  This method of synthesis uses the difference in vapor pressure of solvents to vary the rate of evaporation and therefore the assembly of the organosilica framework.
Surfactant-mediated synthesis has been widely used for the production of mesoporous materials in general, and PMOs specifically,.  During surfactant-mediated synthesis, hydrolysis and polycondensation, or co-condensation, are used to fuse precursor molecules in a framework.  Acidic or basic conditions are used for the hydrolysis depending on the precursor being introduced.
The other two synthesis methods used for these materials are post-synthetic grafting and co-condensation.  In the case of post-synthetic grafting, organic functional groups, typically organosilanes or alkoxyorganosilanes, are reacted with the assembled silicon mesostructure with or without the surfactant template present.  If the template is still present, the grafting process will involve simultaneously removing the template and attaching the functional group.  However, the pores of the material can be blocked during this process so a one-pot synthesis using the necessary components is more advantageous.  This one-pot synthesis is known as co-condensation, in which the desired organosilyl functional groups are combined with the surfactant or other structure-directing agent.  In this method, the material becomes structured and functionalized.  Co-condensation gives rise to periodicity with the mesostructure, and it accommodates larger organic groups as well as larger pore sizes because of the one-step assembly process.  Most PMOs have been made using the co-condensation method.  The most recent method developed builds on co-condensation by combining multiple reactive organic precursors to form a new functional group, which is still combined with the framework molecule and copolymer. 
Mesoporous organosilicate materials have been made using bridged organic precursors, in which an organic fragment is positioned between silicon-containing fragments. Single precursor syntheses are typically done with bridged organosilane groups.  When only one bridged organic precursor is used, there is a homogeneous distribution of the molecule in the framework.  This phenomenon is referred to as molecular-scale periodicity.  Chiral precursors can also be introduced into the material framework, and using acidic conditions in the hydrolysis and condensation process proves better for chiral precursors because no racemization occurs. Co-condensation of multiple organosilane precursors can create multi-functional organosilica materials.  Tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) is a common silicon precursor used in co-condensation reactions.

Applications

The obvious applications of high-surface area, highly porous compounds are catalysis,

Catalysis

To effect catalytic transformations using mesoporous organosilicas, it is necessary to functionalize them. The two major methods  are to add a group or heteroatom, such as a metal center, to the organic framework, and to anchor  an organic or organometallic group to the pore surface.
Incorporating catalytically active sites into the pore framework has the advantage that it does not block the pores, so guest molecules travel more freely. However, the active sites that can be incorporated this way  have low specificity. The major applications of this type of catalytically active mesoporous organosilicas are for acid catalysis and oxidation catalysis. Acid catalysis is very industrially important. Many reactions (such as Friedel-Crafts) are still carried out using conventional acids, a less environmentally friendly reaction condition than a heterogeneous catalyst.
Anchoring a homogeneous catalyst onto a mesoporous organosilicas framework has two primary disadvantages: the bulky group in the pore can block travel of guest molecules through it, and preparation of candidate molecules for anchoring to the framework is difficult. However, anchoring can create heterogeneous catalysts for a wide variety of chemical transformations: acid catalysis, base catalysis,
Anchored functional groups often have higher catalytic activity than does the bulk material, as one study showed for Nafion, or even than groups incorporated into the organosilica framework, as with sulfonic acid.

Adsorption

Mesoporous organosilicas can be functionalized to remove specific contaminants from air and water; adsorbants for heavy metals, radioactive material, and various organic pollutants have been synthesized. This makes mesoporous organosilicas valuable for environmental remediation.

Sensing

Mesoporous organosilicas which have been functionalized with fluorescent or other types of probes have been employed as sensors. The advantage of this material as a sensor is its high surface area combined with the high specificity achievable by careful functionalization. Mesoporous organosilicas have been used to sense a wide variety of analytes: metals, industrial pollutants, small organic molecules, and large biological molecues.

Separation

Mesoporous organosilicas have been tested as potential materials for separation using HPLC. Froba et al. have shown that by using benzene PMO microspheres as stationary phases better separation can be achieved in the HPLC system. The theory was that the π-π interaction between the aromatic analytes and the phenylene bridge of the PMO framework leads to stronger retention and hence better separation.

Drug delivery

Controlled drug release is another aspect in which PMOs have been shown to have advantages. Lu et al. showed that hollow ethane PMO spheres they have the highest loading capacity of tetracycline compared to periodic mesoporous silica spheres. In simulated body fluid conditions, the PMOs also showed the most desirable drug release pattern. The hydrophobic nature of the PMO walls allow for better control in drug release. In this respect, it is not just the mesoporosity of the PMOs make them advantageous, the tunability of the organic groups also play an important role.

Future directions

It has been proposed that the periodicity of PMOs may produce anisotropic mechanical, electrical and optical responses, in the same manner that periodicity magnifies anisotropy in the unit cell of conventional crystals. Also, studies that have shown that dendrimers, are suggestive of possible applications of PMOs in areas as such as heterojunction solar cells, photodetectors and light emitting diodes. More exciting applications can emerge by combining these materials with biological molecules such as lipids and  proteins.








