[[Metal acetylacetonates]]

CATEGORIES: Chelating agents, Acetylacetonate complexes, Ligands

Metal acetylacetonates are coordination complexes derived from the acetylacetonate anion and metal ions, usually transition metals.  The ligand acetylacetonate is often abbreviated acac.  Typically both oxygen atoms bind to the metal to form a six-membered chelate ring. The simplest complexes have the formula M(acac)3 and M(acac)2.  Mixed-ligand complexes, e.g. VO(acac)2, are also numerous.  Variations of acetylacetonate have also been developed with myriad substituents in place of methyl. Many such complexes are soluble in organic solvents, in contrast to the related metal halides. Because of these properties, acac complexes are sometimes used as catalyst precursors and reagents. Applications include their use as NMR "shift reagents" and as catalysts for organic synthesis, and precursors to industrial hydroformylation catalysts. C5H7O2− in some cases also binds to metals through the central carbon atom; this bonding mode is more common for the third-row transition metals such as platinum(II) and iridium(III).

Synthesis

A general method of synthesis is to treat a metal salt with acetylacetone, acacH:R.C. Mehrotra "Metal Beta-diketonates and Allied Derivatives" Academic Press, 1978. ISBN 0-12-488150-5 
Addition of base assists the removal of a proton from acetylacetone and shifts the equilibrium in favour of the complex. Both oxygen centres bind to the metal to form a six-membered chelate ring. In some cases the chelate effect is so strong that no added base is needed to form the complex.  Some complexes are prepared by metathesis using Tlacac.

Classification by metal

Titanium bis(acetylacetonate)dichloride

Treatment of TiCl4 with acetylacetone gives cis-TiCl2(acac)2, a red-coloured, octahedral complex with C2-symmetry:
This reaction requires no base.  The complex TiCl2(acac)2 is fluxional in solution, the NMR spectrum exhibiting a single methyl resonance at room temperature.C. A. Wilkie, G. Lin, D. T. Haworth "Cis-Dihalobis(2,4-Pentaedionato)Titanium(IV) Complexes" Inorganic Syntheses, 1979, Volume 19, pages 145–148. 

Vanadyl acetylacetonate

Vanadyl acetylacetonate is a blue complex with the formula V(O)(acac)2. This complex features the vanadyl group, and many related compounds are known.  The molecule is square pyramidal, with idealized C2v symmetry.  The complex catalyzes epoxidation of allylic alcohols by peroxides.

Chromium acetylacetonates

Cr(acac)3 is a typical octahedral complex containing three acac- ligands.  Like most such compounds, it is highly soluble in nonpolar organic solvents.  This particular complex, which has a three unpaired electrons, is used as a spin relaxation agent to improve the sensitivity in quantitative Carbon-13 NMR spectroscopy.[ref]
</ref>  Chromous acetylacetonate is a highly oxygen-sensitive, light brown compound. The complex adopts a square planar structure, weakly associated into stacks.  It is isomorphous with Pd(acac)<sub>2</sub> and Cu(acac)<sub>2</sub>.<ref>F.A. Cotton, C.E. Rice, G.W. Rice "The Crystal and Molecular Structures of Bis(2,4-pentanedionato)chromium" Inorganica Chimica Acta 1977, volume 24, pp. 231–234.	</ref>

Manganese(III) acetylacetonate

It is prepared by the direct reaction of acetylacetone and potassium permanganate.
Mn(acac)3, a one-electron oxidant, is used for coupling phenols.B. B. Snider, "Manganese(III) Acetylacetonate" in Encyclopedia of Reagents for Organic Synthesis (Ed: L. Paquette) 2004, J. Wiley & Sons, New York.  

Iron acetylacetonates

Ferric acetylacetonate, Fe(acac)3, is a red high-spin complex that is highly soluble in organic solvents. It is configurationationally labile, high-spin complex with five unpaired electrons. It is occasionally used as a catalyst precursor. A., Tsang, P. K. S., Sawyer, D. T., (1989) "Ligand-centered redox processes for manganese, iron and cobalt, MnL3, FeL3, and CoL3, complexes (L = acetylacetonate, 8-quinolinate, picolinate, 2,2'-bipyridyl, 1,10-phenanthroline) and for their tetrakis(2,6-dichlorophenyl)porphinato complexes M(Por)" Inorganic Chemistry, 28, 2471-2475.  Although configurationationally labile, Fe(acac)3 has been partially resolved.  The ferrous complex Fe(acac)2 is oligomeric.

Ruthenium acetylacetonates

Like iron, Ru forms a very stable tris(acetylacetonate).  Reduction of this Ru(III) derivative in the presence of other ligands affords mixed ligand complexes, e.g. Ru(acac)2(alkene)2.

Cobalt acetylacetonates

Co(acac)3 is low-spin, diamagnetic complex.  Like other compounds of the type M(acac)3, this complex is chiral (has a non-superimposable mirror image). Many such complexes have been resolved, but the premier example is Co(acac)3.Anders Lennartson "Optical resolution and racemisation of Fe(acac)3" Inorganica Chimica Acta 2011, Volume 365, Pages 451-453  
The complex Co(acac)2, like the related nickel complex, exists octahedral complexes with two additional ligands. The anhydrous form exists as the tetramer Co(acac)24. Like the trimeric nickel complex, this tetramer shows ferromagnetic interactions at low temperatures. D. Vreshch, J.-H. Yang, H. Zhang, A. S. Filatov, E. V. Dikarev "Monomeric Square-Planar Cobalt(II) Acetylacetonate: Mystery or Mistake?"
Inorg. Chem., 2010, volume 49, pp 8430–8434. [/ref]
The synthesis of Co(acac)3 is as follows:
2CoCO3 + 6(acac) + H2O2 → 2Co(acac)3 + 4H2O + 2CO2

Iridium acetylacetonates

Ir(acac)3 is the formula for two isomers, trans-Ir(acac)2(CH(COMe)2)(H2O) and the more conventional D3-symmetric Ir(acac)3.  The C-bonded derivative is a precursor to homogeneous catalysts for C-H activation and related chemistries. 
 
[/ref]  Iridium(I) derivatives include square-planar Ir(acac)(CO)2 (C2v-symmetry).

Nickel(II) acetylacetonate

Nickel(II) complexes are generally 6-coordinate, octahedral. Monomeric Ni(acac)2 is therefore coordinatively unsaturated and behaves as a Lewis acid. Water can serve as a Lewis base to give the octahedral adduct Ni(acac)2(H2O)2. Dehydration of this complex causes trimerization to give Ni(acac)23 to be, in which some oxygen centres bridge two nickel ions. This complex is a benzene-soluble, emerald green solid, which is widely employed in the preparation of Ni(0) complexes, e.g. bis(cyclooctadiene)nickel(0). Upon exposure to the atmosphere, Ni(acac)23 converts back to the chalky green monomeric dihydrate.  Bulky beta-diketonates give red, monomeric, square-planar complexes.
Ni(acac)23 has interesting magnetic properties. Down to about 80K it exhibits normal paramagnetism with an effective magnetic moment of 3.2 μB, close to the spin-only moment expected of a d8 ion with two unpaired electrons. The effective moment rises to 4.1μB at 4.3K, due to ferromagnetic exchange interactions involving all three nickel ions.

Copper acetylacetonate

Cu(acac)2 is prepared by treating acetylacetone with aqueous Cu(NH3)42+. It is available commercially, catalyzes coupling and carbene transfer reactions. 
Unlike the copper(II) derivative, copper(I) acetylacetonate is an air sensitive oligomeric species. It is employed to catalyze Michael additions.E. J. Parish, S. Li "Copper(I) Acetylacetonate" in Encyclopedia of Reagents for Organic Synthesis (Ed: L. Paquette) 2004, J. Wiley & Sons, New York. 

Zinc acetylacetonate

The monoaquo complex Zn(acac)2H2O  (m.p. 138–140 °C) is pentacoordinate, adopting a square pyramidal structure.  This more volatile derivative has been used as a precursor to films of ZnO.

Acetylacetonates of the other elements

Colourless, diamagnetic Al(acac)3 is structurally similar to other tris complexes, e.g. Fe(acac)3.  The trisacetylacetonates of the lanthanides often adopt coordination numbers >8.  In such cases, derivatives of acac- are more common.  One example is the NMR shift reagent Eufod, Eu(OCC(CH3)3CHCOC3F7)3.  This complex is a Lewis acid and forming adducts with a variety of hard bases.

C-bonded acetylacetonates

C5H7O2− in some cases also binds to metals through the central carbon atom (C3); this bonding mode is more common for the third-row transition metals such as platinum(II) and iridium(III). The complexes Ir(acac)3 and corresponding Lewis-base adducts Ir(acac)3L (L = an amine) contain one carbon-bonded acac ligand. The IR spectra of O-bonded acetylacetonates are characterized by relatively low-energy νCO bands of 1535 cm−1, whereas in carbon-bonded acetylacetonates, the carbonyl vibration occurs closer to the normal range for ketonic C=O, i.e. 1655 cm−1.




