[[Sternum]]

CATEGORIES: Bones of the torso, Flat bones

The sternum (from Greek στέρνον, sternon, "chest"; plural "sternums" or "sterna") or breastbone is a long flat bony plate shaped like a capital "T" located anteriorly to the heart in the center of the thorax (chest). It connects to the rib bones via cartilage, forming the anterior section of the rib cage with them, and thus helps to protect the lungs, heart and major blood vessels from physical trauma.  Although it is fused, the sternum can be sub-divided into three regions: the manubrium, the body, and the xiphoid process.

Structure

The sternum  is an elongated, flattened bone, forming the middle portion of the anterior wall of the thorax. The superior end supports the clavicles (collarbones), and its margins articulate with the cartilages of the first seven pairs of ribs. Its top is also connected to the sternocleidomastoid muscle.  It consists of three main parts, listed superior to inferior:
In its natural position, the inclination of the bone is oblique from above, downward and forward. It is slightly convex in front and concave behind; broad above, shaped like a "T", becoming narrowed at the point where the manubrium joins the body, after which it again widens a little to below the middle of the body, and then narrows to its lower extremity. Its average length in the adult is about 17 cm, and is rather longer in the male than in the female.
In early life its body is divided in four segments, called sternebrœ (singular: sternebra).

Manubrium

The manubrium, (Latin handle), or manubrium sterni is the broad upper part of the sternum. It has a quadrangular shape, narrowing from the top, which gives it four borders. The suprasternal (jugular) notch is medially located at the upper broadest part of the manubrium. This notch can be felt between the two clavicles (collarbones).  On other side of this notch are the right and left clavicular notches.
The manubrium articulates with the body of the sternum, the clavicles and the cartilages of the first pair of ribs. The inferior border, oval and rough, is covered in a fresh state with a thin layer of cartilage for articulation with the body. The lateral borders are each marked above by a depression for the first costal cartilage, and below by a small facet, which, with a similar facet on the upper angle of the body, forms a notch for the reception of the costal cartilage of the second rib. Between the depression for the first costal cartilage and the demi-facet for the second is a narrow, curved edge, which slopes from above downward towards the middle.

Body of sternum

The body, or gladiolus, is the longest part. It is flattened from from to back, giving two surfaces: an anterior (front) and a posterior (back). The anterior surface is nearly flat, directed upward and forward, and marked by three transverse ridges which cross the bone opposite the third, fourth, and fifth articular depressions. It affords attachment on either side to the sternal origin of the pectoralis major. At the junction of the third and fourth parts of the body, is occasionally seen an orifice, the sternal foramen, of varying size and form. The posterior surface, slightly concave, is also marked by three transverse lines, less distinct, however, than those in front; from its lower part, on either side, the transversus thoracis takes origin.
The sternal angle is located at the point where the body joins the manubrium.  The sternal angle can be felt at the point where the sternum projects farthest forward.  However, in some people the sternal angle is concave or rounded.  During physical examinations, the sternal angle is a useful landmark because the second rib attaches here.
Each lateral border, at its superior angle, has a small facet, which with a similar facet on the manubrium, forms a cavity for the cartilage of the second rib; below this are four angular depressions which receive the cartilages of the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth ribs. The inferior angle has a small facet, which, with a corresponding one on the xiphoid process, forms a notch for the cartilage of the seventh rib. These articular depressions are separated by a series of curved interarticular intervals, which diminish in length from above downward, and correspond to the intercostal spaces. Most of the cartilages belonging to the true ribs, articulate with the sternum at the lines of junction of its primitive component segments. This is well seen in many of the lower animals, where the parts of the bone remain ununited longer than in man.
The superior border is oval and articulates with the manubrium, at the sternal angle (angulus Ludovici). The inferior border is narrow, and articulates with the xiphoid process.

Xiphoid process

Located at the inferior end of the sternum is the pointed xiphoid process.  Improperly performed chest compressions during cardiopulmonary resuscitation can cause the xiphoid process to snap off, driving it into the liver which can cause a fatal hemorrhage.
The sternum is composed of highly vascular tissue, covered by a thin layer of compact bone which is thickest in the manubrium between the articular facets for the clavicles.

Articulations

The superior seven costal cartilages articulate with the sternum forming the costal margin anteriorly.  The right and left clavicular notches articulate with the right and left clavicles, respectively.  The costal cartilage of the second rib articulates with the sternum at the sternal angle making it easy to locate.
The transversus thoracis muscle is innervated by the intercostal nerve and superiorly attaches at the posterior surface of the lower sternum.  Its inferior attachment is the internal surface of costal cartilages two through six and works to depress the ribs.

Development

Clinical significance

Fractures

Fractures of the sternum are rather uncommon. They may result from trauma, such as when a driver's chest is forced into the steering column of a car in a car accident.  A fracture of the sternum is usually a comminuted fracture. The most common site of sternal fractures is at the sternal angle.  
Some studies reveal that repeated punches or continual beatings, sometimes called "sternum punches", to the sternum area have also caused fractured sternums. Those are known to have occurred in contact sports such as rugby and football.
Sternum fractures are frequently associated with underlying injuries such as pulmonary contusions, or bruised lung tissue.
A somewhat rare congenital condition of the sternum is a sternal foramen, a single round hole in the sternum that is present from birth and usually is off-centered to the right or left, commonly forming in the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th segments of the sternum body. Congenital sternal foramens can often be mistaken for bullet holes.N. (2008). Introduction to Forensic Anthropology. Toronto: Pearson. 

Sternotomy

The sternum is sometimes cut open (a median sternotomy) to gain access to the thoracic contents when performing cardiothoracic surgery or other thoracic surgery.

Other animals

The sternum or breastbone, in vertebrate anatomy, is a flat bone that lies in the middle front part of the rib cage. It is endochondral in origin. Only in mammals does the sternum take on the elongated, segmented form seen in humans. In some mammals, such as opossums, the individual segments (sternebrae) never fuse and remain separated by cartilagenous plates throughout life.

Insects

In arachnids, the sternum is the ventral (lower) portion of the cephalothorax. It consists of a single sclerite situated between the coxa, opposite the carapace.

Etymology

English sternum is a translation of Ancient Greek στέρνον. (1910). Die anatomischen Namen. Ihre Ableitung und Aussprache. Mit einem Anhang: Biographische Notizen.(Dritte Auflage). Wiesbaden: Verlag J.F. Bergmann. The Greek writer Homer used the term στέρνον to refer to the male chest. (1880). Onomatologia Anatomica. Geschichte und Kritik der anatomischen Sprache der Gegenwart. Wien: Wilhelm Braumüller. K.K. Hof- und Unversitätsbuchhändler.G. & Scott, R. (1940). A Greek-English Lexicon. revised and augmented throughout by Sir Henry Stuart Jones. with the assistance of. Roderick McKenzie. Oxford: Clarendon Press. The term στῆθος was used by Homer to refer to the chest of both sexes. The Greek physician Hippocrates used στέρνον to refer to the chest, and στῆθος to the breastbone. The Greek physican Galen was the first to use στέρνον in the present meaning of breastbone.
The στέρνον can be considered as the solid bony part of the chest.A. (1844). Kritisch-etymologisches medicinisches Lexikon (Dritte Auflage). Göttingen: Verlag der Deuerlich- und Dieterichschen Buchhandlung. From that perspective, στέρνον can be related to Ancient Greek στερεός/στερρός, firm/solid. English breastbone is actually more akin to Latin os pectoris,Schreger, C.H.Th.(1805). Synonymia anatomica. Synonymik der anatomischen Nomenclatur. Fürth: im Bureau für Literatur.J. (1850). Terminologisches Wörterbuch der medicinischen Wissenschaften. (Zweite Auflage). Leipzig: Arnoldische Buchhandlung. derived from classical Latin os, boneLewis, C.T. & Short, C. (1879). A Latin dictionary founded on Andrews' edition of Freund's Latin dictionary. Oxford: Clarendon Press. and pectus, chest/breast. Confusingly, pectus is also used in classical Latin as breastbone.

Additional Images

File:Sternum animation3. Animation.
File:Sternum - close-up - animation. Animation.
File:Sobo 1909 31.
File:Sobo 1909 181.
File:Gray117.
File:Sobo 1909 32.
File:Sternum location.
File:Sobo 1909 36. 
File:Sobo 1909 34.






