[[1877 Iquique earthquake]]

CATEGORIES: Megathrust earthquakes in Chile, 1877 earthquakes, 1877 in Chile, Megathrust earthquakes in Peru, 1877 in Peru, Earthquakes in Bolivia, 1877 in Bolivia, Tsunamis in Japan, History of Antofagasta Region, History of Tarapacá Region

The 1877 Iquique earthquake occurred at 21:16 local time on 9 May (0:59 on 10 May UTC). It had a magnitude of 8.5 on the surface wave magnitude scale. and triggered a devastating tsunami. A total of 2,541 people died, mainly in Peru and what is now northernmost Chile, with some deaths also reported from Hawaii and Japan.

Historical context

Affected areas in what is now the Antofagasta region of Chile had during this period been subject to the Atacama border dispute between Bolivia and Chile.  Under the 1874 boundary treaty between Bolivia and Chile, the border between Bolivia and Chile in 1877 followed the 24th parallel south.  The terms of that treaty required that Bolivia not levy 
taxes on Chilean companies mining nitrates between the 23rd and 24th parallels (including the city of Antofagasta) for 25 years, except for agreed duties to be shared between the two countries. Farcau, 2000.  Accessed 17 July 2011
Following extensive damage in the 1877 earthquake and tsunami, the municipal authorities in Antofagasta voted for a tax of 10 centavos per quintal (approximately ) of nitrates exported to fund reconstruction of the town. Farcau, 2000.  Accessed 17 July 2011  The Chilean Antofagasta Nitrate & Railway Company, a major nitrate mining company in the region, refused to pay, backed by the Chilean government.  This dispute resulted in the War of the Pacific, fought from 1879–84, by which Chile gained control of territory as far north as Tacna, including Bolivia's entire coastline.

Tectonic setting

Coastal regions of Peru and Chile lie above the convergent boundary, where the Nazca Plate is being subducted beneath the South American Plate along the line of the Peru-Chile Trench. The rate of convergence across this boundary is measured at about  per year. This boundary has been the site of many great megathrust earthquakes, in addition to events caused by faulting within both the subducting and over-riding plates.

Damage

The earthquake shaking caused significant damage over most of the coastal parts of the Tarapacá and Antofagasta Regions. The tsunami caused a  The tsunami caused 5 deaths in Hilo, Hawaii, where 37 houses were destroyed. In Japan, on the Boso Peninsula, many deaths were recorded.

Characteristics

Earthquake

The shaking lasted for five minutes at Caleta Pabellón de Pica, a coastal town 

Tsunami

The tsunami affected the coasts of Peru and northern Chile and was observed across the Pacific Ocean, in Australia, New Zealand, Samoa, Tonga, Fiji, Hawaii, Mexico, California and Japan.

Future earthquake hazard

The rupture area of the 1877 earthquake has been recognised as one of the major seismic gaps on the plate boundary, known as the "Northern Chile Seismic Gap". The Mw = 7.7 2007 Tocopilla earthquake occurred at the southern edge of the gap, but is not considered to have necessarily reduced the risk of a great megathrust earthquake within this area. The 2014 Iquique earthquake struck in the same seismic gap with a magnitude of Mw = 8.2.






