[[National Museum of the American People]]

CATEGORIES: Proposed museums, Proposed museums in the United States, Proposed buildings and structures in the United States, History of immigration to the United States, Immigrants to the United States

The National Museum of the American People is a proposed museum to be built in Washington, D.C. On July 7, 2011, Rep. Jim Moran (Democrat-Virginia), with the support of Rep. John Duncan (Republican-Tennessee) and others, introduced into the United States House of Representatives a concurrent resolution calling for a presidential commission to study the creation of this museum.(1) 



Proposed by the Coalition for the National Museum of the American People, composed in 2012 of more than 150 ethnic, national and genealogical private non-profit organizations,

History

The Coalition for the National Museum of the American People was created by Sam Eskenazi, former Director of Public Information for the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.  According to Eskenazi, the concept for the museum originated when he was passing the Jamie L. Whitten Building, the only office building on the National Mall.  According to Eskenazi:
 I asked myself, "If this were a museum, what kind of museum could it be?" The answer: a museum that would tell the stories of all of the peoples coming to this land. I came up with a name for the museum on the spot - the National Museum of the American People. It is a testament to the need for the museum that many people, when told about the proposal, were surprised that such a museum doesn't already exist.'' 
On September 11, 2008, Congressman Maurice Hinchey introduced a bill, H.R. 6883, into the 110th United States Congress to "establish a commission to study the establishment of the National Museum of the American People, ....".
In May 2011, Congressman Jim Moran agreed to be the originating sponsor of a resolution calling for a study group, expressing concerns about balkanization of the National Mall.  On March 19, 2013, Moran reintroduced the resolution (H. Con. Res. 27) into the 113th Congress.
One site proposed for the museum is an overlook at the south end of L'Enfant Promenade that now contains the National Park Service's Benjamin Banneker Park, a half mile (800 m) south of the Smithsonian Institution's "Castle" on the National Mall.(1) 

Museum contents and exhibitions

The Museum project creators have proposed a number of components to be considered for a final institution.  Among these are a permanent exhibition (tentatively called The Story of the American People), a Center for Advanced Studies drawing upon a group of over 50 scholars who have offered their support to the project,
In addition the permanent collection is intended to be presented in a narrative manner, told as four chapters:(1)  
Chapter I, The First Peoples Come, 20,000 before present (est.)-1607 
Chapter II, The Nation Takes Form, 1607-1820 
Chapter III, The Great In-Gathering, 1820-1924 
Chapter IV, And Still They Come, 1924–Present 






