[[Frank Stalletto]]

CATEGORIES: American male professional wrestlers, Sportspeople from Cleveland, Ohio, Year of birth missing (living people), Living people

Frank Stalletto (born November 5) is an American professional wrestler. He was a mainstay of the East Coast and Mid-Atlantic independent circuit for much of the 1990s and early 2000s.
One of the most popular stars of Pittsburgh's Steel City Wrestling, he had successful stints in T. Rantunla's American Commonwealth Wrestling, Cueball Carmichael's Independent Pro Wrestling Alliance and Doug Flex's International Pro Wrestling as well; he also formed notable tag teams with Adam Flash, Axl Rotten, Brick Bronsky, Stevie Richards, Futureshock, and "Beef Stew" Lou Marconi winning the SCW Tag Team Championship with the latter three.
In recent years, he has been affiliated with Marconi as part of his 216 Clique in NWA: East and in GOUGE Wrestling where he is currently holds the tag team championship as one-half of Bad Romance with Mickey Gambino.

Professional wrestling career

Early career

A former amateur wrestler, Frank Stiletto made his pro debut in 1992. Calling himself the "most handsome man in professional wrestling", hence his nickname "Handsome Frank", Stiletto often claimed to be a look-alike for country music star Billy Ray Cyrus."The PWI 500." Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Fort Washington, Pennsylvania: London Publishing Company. (Holiday 1998): pg. 60. After nearly two years on the local independent circuit, he won his first major singles title in Mike Collins and Charlie Fulton's All-Star Wrestling Alliance by pinning then ASWA Light Heavyweight Champion Kid Collins at the ASWA supercard "Rumble On The River" in Belpre, Ohio, on August 12, 1994. He lost the title back to Collins a month later at the Dallas Nightclub in Parkersburg, West Virginia. That same month, Stalletto also made his first appearance in the World Wrestling Federation, now known as WWE, as a preliminary wrestler. He wrestled Jim Neidhart at the Civic Center in Wheeling, West Virginia and, in front of 2,800 fans, Yokozuna at the Bradley Center in Milwaukee, Wisconsin; these matches later aired on WWF Superstars

Steel City Wrestling (1994–1998)

The following month, Stiletto began wrestling for promoter Norm Connors in Steel City Wrestling where he would eventually become one of its top stars; he appeared on its first show against "Beef Stew" Lou Marconi in Connellsville, Pennsylvania on October 8, 1994. and would continue to perform at the shows over the next decade.
The following month, he made an appearance for Al Snow's Global Wrestling Alliance to wrestle Osamu Nishimura, during his debut tour of the United States, in Kalamazoo, Michigan on May 19, 1995. In July 1995, he teamed with longtime rival Lou Marconi in All-Star Wrestling Alliance to win the promotion's tag team titles.
Later that year, he enjoyed a brief partnership with Extreme Championship Wrestling's Stevie Richards and regained the SCW Tag Team titles from "Black & Blue" in Connellsville on October 21, however, he was attacked by Richards immediately after winning the belts. With the titles held up due to the team's breakup, Stiletto joined together with Lou Marconi to defeat Richards and Brian Rollins for the titles in St. Marys, Pennsylvania on November 11, 1995, a record third time. They dropped the titles back to Stevie Richards and The Blue Meanie"The PWI 500." Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Fort Washington, Pennsylvania: London Publishing Company. (Winter 1996): pg. 46. at Deaf Wrestlefest 1996 on April 21, 1996.
In September 1996, he had a series of matches with Cody Michaels wrestling him in Buckhannon, West Virginia, Dover, Ohio and Mt. Washington, Pennsylvania on three consecutive nights; his second match with Michaels was an outdoor event held in the rain and attended by 4,800 fans. Stalletto and Marconi would continue battling the duo until the tag titles were declared vacant in January 1998 due to an injury suffered by Richards. Stiletto and Marconi made one last attempt to regain the titles but lost to Cactus Jack and The Blue Meanie in Irwin, Pennsylvania on February 8, 1998.

International Pro Wrestling (1996–1998)

While still in SCW, Stalletto also began feuding with Brick Bronsky in American Commonwealth Wrestling and International Pro Wrestling after Stiletto was attacked by Bronsky after being persuaded to tag with him. After Bronsky won the IPW Heavyweight Championship, Stiletto was among one of several independent wrestlers to challenge for the title.
Stalletto made a return to WWF television on April 7, 1997, wrestling Vader (with manager Paul Bearer) at John E. Worthen Arena in Muncie, Indiana; the match was aired live on WWF Monday Night Raw. until leaving IPW later that year.
Prior to returning independent circuit, Stalletto made two more appearances in the WWF for WWF Shotgun Saturday Night. On March 31, 1998, he and Roy Raymond wrestled L.O.D. 2000 (Hawk and Animal) (with Sunny) in Syracuse, New York

Independent circuit (1998–2009)

Stalletto briefly returned to SCW in the summer of 1998. He was scheduled to team with Lord Zoltan against High Society (Cueball Carmichael & "Wiseguy" Jimmy Cicero) on August 28, 1998, however, he was unable to make the show. His partner attempted to take on both men by himself but the match ended in a disqualification. In December 1998, he wrestled Preston Steele (with Bobcat) at a TEAM L.A.W. show in Cleveland, Ohio.
In early-1999, Stalletto started wrestling for Cueball Carmichael's Independent Pro Wrestling Alliance."The PWI 500." Pro Wrestling Illustrated. Fort Washington, Pennsylvania: London Publishing Company. (Holiday 1999): pg. 59. One of his earliest matches for the promotion was against Mark "the Shark" Shrader, a one-time MEWF Heavyweight Champion, in Woodbridge, Virginia on January 23, 1999; their match went for nearly 15 min. before Stalletto was pinned following a powerbomb off the top rope.
The International Wrestling Cartel was another promotion which Stalletto visited. On January 25, 2003, he lost to T. Rantula in a "retro" match at Northgate High School in Bellevue, Pennsylvania.
Stalletto made his NWA East return at its 14th Anniversary Show on September 20, 2008, with he and Lou Marconi teaming up against Lord Zoltan and a mystery partner in what was billed as a NWA East Throwback match.
He and Marconi, this time teaming with Lord Zoltan, appeared in a special "Steel City Wrestling retro match" at IWC's A Call To Arms 2009: Full Circle supercard held in the Court Time Sports Center in Elizabeth, Pennsylvania where they lost to Shane Douglas and the Blue World Order (Da Blue Guy & Hollywood Nova). Both men were acknowledged by Conners in his farewell speech to the fans.
On March 19, 2010, Stalletto and Marconi participated in Firestorm Pro Wrestling's 30-man intergender battle royal to crown the first "King of Cleveland". Other battle royal participants included Ares, J-Rocc, Shiima Xion, and M-Dogg 20.

GOUGE Wrestling and NWA East (2010–)

=2010=

In early-2010, Stalletto began wrestling semi-regularly for Count Grog's GOUGE Wrestling (Gimmicks Only Underground Grappling Entertainment) in North Carolina following its May 15 supercard Cincon De Mayhem in Stem, North Carolina where pinned "Boogie Woogie Man" Rob McBride after using brass knuckles.
A month later, Stalletto made a surprise return to NWA East as Lou Marconi announced the formation of a new "heel" stable, the 216 Clique, with his then recent proteges Dan Graham and Will Esquire at a house show on June 5. The group immediately began feuding with Mad Mike, and later, NWA East Three Rivers Champion Ryan Mitchell. At NWA East's July 16 supercard Summer Assault 4, held at Renzie Park in McKeesport, Pennsylvania, he and the rest of the 216 Clique (Lou Marconi, Frank Staletto, Will Esquire, and Dan Lennox) helped Lou Marconi defeat Mitchell in a gauntlet match to win the NWA East Three Rivers Championship. That same month at GOUGE's Too Hot to Handle, he lost Otto Schwanz.
On October 9, at Dead Calm 4, he and Marconi lost to Stryder & Patrick Hayes allowing Stryder a shot at the NWA East "216" Title held by Marconi.
Staletto and the 216 Clique continued feuding with Ryan Mitchell in NWA East. A six-man tag team match between the 216 Clique (Lou Marconi, Frank Staletto, and Dan Arkham) and Chris Taylor, Ryan Mitchell, & Jon Burton ended in a no-contest at Overdrive 2010 on November 6. A larger ten-man match pitting The 216 Clique (Frank Staletto, Kenny Hendrix, Dan Arkham, Chris Marx, & JJ DeVille) against Jon Burton, Patrick Hayes, Matt Barnett, & the Bunkhouse Boys (Bandit & Big Willie Blackheart) was two weeks later at Do Or Die 4

=2011=

Managed by Count Grog, Bad Romance successfully defended the GOUGE Tag Team titles during the first half of 2011. The team beat Rob McBride & Robert Royal at Redneck Rumble in Wake Forest, North Carolina on January 8, and both the Krazy Killer Klowns and The Rat Pack (Jimmy Cicero & Brian Perry) in a Three-Way Dance at Winter Wars on February 19. Meanwhile in NWA East, at February Fury 4, The 216 Clique (Frank Staletto & Dan Arkham) lost to The Hansen Brothers (Crusher & Tony Hansen).
A week later Stalletto and Mickey Gambino nearly lost the GOUGE Tag Team Championship to The Rat Pack at GOUGE's 5th Anniversary Show. The interference of Lou Marconi in the final moments of the match, however, allowed them to retain the titles despite the team's disqualification. After the match, North Carolina Heavyweight Champion Vordell Walker ran into the ring on behalf of The Rat Pack causing a brawl between all six men.
Spending the summer in GOUGE, took part in several singles matches defeating Seymour Snott at MAYHEM on May 21.

In wrestling

Championships and accomplishments






