[[Nanka]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Anambra State

Nanka (pronounced as Nan-ka by the natives), is an Igbo speaking town in south eastern Nigeria. It is in the Orumba North Local Government Area of Anambra State. Its geographic coordinates are 6" 03' 00 North, 7" 05' 00 East.
Its neighbors are Oko, Agulụ, Ekwulọbia, AguluzỌigbo, Isuọfia, Umuọna,Awgbụ. Nanka is regarded as a citadel of learning due to the early embrace of western education. Nanka comprises seven villages including Agbiligba, Enugwu, Ifite, Amako, Umudala, Ubahu, and Etti, in that order. Agbiligba is the head village in Nanka with three major kinderds (ebe n'ato);Obu Ezekeiri, Umuduno,Oka. The town boasts several well educated people, over 92 professors/Ph. The town has produced one time Vice Chancellor of the University of Nigeria, Nsukka, Dr. Jonathan Onyemelukwe, the emeritus Archbishop of Province II, Anglican Communion, Rt. Rev. Paulinus Ezeokafor, the present Bishop of Awka Roman Catholic Diocese, and 2006 Ebonyi State winner and NAFT international representative of the annual OPEC French competition, and Olympiad Physics finalist, Michael Onyemelukwe.

Nanka Erosion

The Agulu-Nanka gully erosion has the potential for an ecological disaster, because the erosion causes frequent landslides. In the Nanka Community, Eke-Ntai in Amako Village, was reported to be a flourishing Slave Market during the period of the trafficking in human cargo and popularized by Ezenwenwe. The menacing erosion in Nanka today is said to have its origin in the notorious market. A Soil Erosion Management Expert- Benneth Obele- in 2009 wrote that 
" erosion disaster in Nanka Ududo dates back to early 1920s when the gully sites were first observed near Eketai Market in Amako village as well as near Ududonka Shrine. The lucrative and hidden business in human trafficking or slave trade conducted within those two sites led to development of hidden bush foot pathways that were heavily flooded from neighbouring communities precipitating gully erosion"{Nanka Patriotic Union at 801,by Patrick Okeke Emezue} On the heels of 19/6/2008 landslide which cut off Amako village from the rest of Nanka the Nanka Patriotic Union, NPU, social-political-cultural organization of Nanka People, set up measures for capacity building of inhabitants on application of control measures. The effort is yielding fruit as patriots of the community had donated nearly 10,000 cashew seedlings for planting in the 20 erosion sites scattered in the town. Nanka has two main markets that trade on specific days of the Igbo calendar (Nkwo-Agu which trades on the Nkwo market day, Afor-Udo which trades on the Afor market day).
The current traditional ruler of Nanka is Igwe Ofomata who has a royal palace situated in Enugwu-Nanka village.
Nanka has two government secondary schools namely;Community secondary school located at Enugu Nanka village and Community secondary school also located at Agbiligba village.Micheal Primary school at Agbiligba village,Nkwo-Agu Primary also at Agbiligba village,Enugu Nanka Primary school etc.
On 26 May 2012, Nanka witnessed a landmark event. That was the day the NEROS Sports Stadium, founded by an illustrious son, Chief Poly Ike Emenike, MON, Odenigbo Nanka, was commissioned and put to use. That was followed on 23 July 2012, with the commissioning, by His Excellency, Mr Peter Obi, CON, Governor of Anambra State, of the Ofu Obi Comprehensive Health Center, Nanka. The Hospital was initiated, in 1992, by Ofu Obi Age Grade Agbiligba Nanka. The Esso Exploration and Production Nigeria Limited, EEPPNL, as part of her public social responsibility, modernized and furnished the Facility. The Facility was handed over to Center for Population Research and Development, CEPRED, who was contracted the running it for a year.




