[[Hippogriff]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional hybrid life forms, Griffins, Heraldic beasts, Matter of France, Mythological hybrids, Mythological horses, Mythological birds of prey

The hippogriff is a legendary creature which resembles a winged horse with the head and upper body of an eagle.
The first recorded mention of the hippogriff was made by the Latin poet Virgil in his Eclogues.  Though sometimes depicted during the Classical Era and during the rule of the Merovingians, it was first named and defined by Ludovico Ariosto in his Orlando Furioso, at the beginning of the 16th century.  Within the poem, the hippogriff is a steed born of a mare and a griffin - it is extremely fast and is presented as being able to fly around the world and to the moon.  It is ridden by magicians and the wandering knight Roger, who, from the creature's back, frees the beautiful Angelica.
Sometimes depicted on heraldic coats of arms, the Hippogriff became a subject of visual art in the 19th Century, when it was often drawn by Gustave Doré.

Etymology

The word Hippogriff, also spelled Hippogryph and Hippogryphe

Early references

Ludovico Ariosto's poem, Orlando furioso (1516) contains an early description (canto IV):
According to Thomas Bulfinch's Legends of Charlemagne:

Beliefs and symbolism

According to Vidal, a Catalan historian, this creature was supposed to live near Céret, in the County of Roussillon of modern-day France, during the Middle Ages. Claw marks were found on a rock near Mas Carol. The belief in the existence of the hippogriff, such as Ariosto describes, is fiercely attacked in a scientific essay on religion in 1862, which argues that such an animal can neither be a divine creation, nor truly exist. The hippogriff is supposed to be a mixture of several animals and the author notes that in order to support its weight, the wings would be so heavy that flight would be impossible, which proves—without question—that it does not exist.
According to the traditions, the hippogriff is said to be the symbol of love, as its parents, the mare and griffin, are natural enemies.

Modern representations

In a hoax perpetrated in 1904, tricksters used a fake "monster" with the head of a bird of prey, teeth, and two large horse ears, which could be controlled from below,  in Lake George,  New York State, which became known as "The Hippogriff". The pranks and sightings faded until 1999 when several people staying at the Island Harbour House Hotel stated they had seen a sea monster at night. The old hoax was uncovered by the Daily News and the Lake George Historical Association Museum, which created a copy of the original wooden monster to display to the public in August 2002.
The fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons includes a version of the creature, which is described as having a horse's "ears, neck, mane, torso, and hind legs" and an eagle's "wings, forelegs, and face".  According to the game's rules, the creatures are closely related to griffins and pegasi.
A hippogriff named Buckbeak features prominently in Harry Potter.








