[[Mutual Core]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 songs, Björk songs, Breakbeat songs, Song recordings produced by Björk, Songs written by Björk

"Mutual Core" is a song recorded by Icelandic singer-songwriter Björk for her seventh studio album Biophilia (2011). It was written and produced by Björk herself, while programming and beats were made in collaboration with Matthew Herbert and the English dubstep band 16bit. "Mutual Core" is an uptempo experimental song. Its music includes Pipe organ, electronica-tinged sounds and features the Choir Graduale Nobili, the choir featured on Biophilia. The song's lyrics are a metaphor for human relationships, compared to the structure of the Earth and Plate tectonics. The song was well received by contemporary music critics, who compared its sound to the work of The Chemical Brothers and praised its production and beats, moreover appreciating Björk's voice on the track.
As with all the songs on Biophilia, an app was made for the song, which features a video game in which the player have to move geological layers as an accordion to play chords. Though the song wasn't released as a single, a music video was produced, directed by Andrew Thomas Huang. The video was critically applauded and received further attention when it got projected for one month in Times Square in 2013, and then across the 7 continents. Björk promoted the song by performing it throughout her Biophilia Tour.
Three remixes by Matthew Herbert, 16bit and These New Puritans were released as part of Biophilia Remix Series. The Matthew Herbert's and the These New Puritans remixes were later included on bastards (2012). On July 2012, the online music store Beatport announced a fan contest in which "Mutual Core" had to be remixed, to be released afterwards on a remix package.

Background

At the end of 2010, Björk confirmed she was working on a new album. and to be including a series of workshops for children in collaboration with local schools. The first details about "Mutual Core" came regarding its app, which was described to allow users to "arrange geological layers to form chords".

"Mutual Core" was written and produced by Björk, while the beat of the song was made in collaboration with Matthew Herbert and 16bit. The song was engineered by Damian Taylor and Sveinn Kjartansson, with mixing provided by Taylor and Björk. "Mutual Core"'s lyrics were inspired by human relationships
Three official remixes of the song have been released. The first one was released on Biophilia Remix Series VI on 25 June 2012, and it is a remix by long time-collaborator Matthew Herbert. Björk stated about Herbert's remixes: "He has taken it full on and made it into his version but still true to the heart of the song and, more than once, improved it". RJ Cubarrubia of Rolling Stone commented that the remix "builds slowly with background bleeps and opaque textures before erupting into a cacophonous rumble".
The second one is a remix by 16bit, which was released as part of Biophilia Remix Series VII on July 9, 2012. This version had already been released as part of a promo for Icelandair flights, playing the song in flights to Iceland during Björk's concert residency in Reykjavik in Summer 2011. Other two remixes of "Crystalline" and "Sacrifice" were played.
The last remix by These New Puritans has been on November 12, 2012 on Biophilia Remix Series VIII. The remix includes samples from the Traditional composition "Funeral Song (Solomon Islands 1978)", as extracted from the album Spirit of Melanesia by David Fanshawe. On October 8, 2012, the tracklist for bastards was announced, and the Matthew Herbert's and the These New Puritans remixes were included.

Composition

"Mutual Core" is an uptempo and includes also a choral part during the chorus. The rhythm of the song can be roughly divided into two distinct parts: the verses, which feature moderately sparse electronic beats and a time signature of 5/4, and the choruses, which display more upbeat sounds and a 2/4 time signature. According to Mark Diver of BBC Music during the shift from the verse and the chorus the song "slips from blissful ambience into bombastic electronic percussion, leaving the senses reeling, only to fade back into a comforting lilt".
The instrumentation of the verses includes a pipe organ. Sound designer David Paterson described the way Björk wanted the music on "Mutual Core": "Bjork described the sounds she wanted in a way that left it very open to interpretation. With the track "Mutual Core", for example, she described how it was about magnetic attraction – which doesn't really have a sound that springs to mind".
The musical shift occurs when the singer pronounces the words "Core", during which, as described by Nikki Debben in her essay included in the Manual Edition of Biophilia, the "modality switches from minor to major". The lecturer noted that "the close, dark sound of the verse is partly due to the minor mode which has a flattened third degree, compared to the brighter sound of the chorus in the major mode which has the "normal" third degree of the chord". This part of the song uses a Plagal cadence, which involves a movement "from a chord built on the fourth degree of the scale to one built on the first degree of the scale". The chorus of the song features a vocal crescendo performed by the choir, which juxtaposes with breakcore-influenced beats, which display elements from dub. Chris Chafin of Capital compared the sound of the chorus to the work of The Chemical Brothers and stated that tracks like "Crystalline" and "Mutual Core" recall previous works from Björk's discography, especially Post (1995) and Homogenic (1997).

Critical reception

The song was generally well received by music critics, who cited it as a highlight of the album. According to Mark Pytlik of Pitchfork, the song "may be the album's best track overall", citing "its satisfyingly filthy electro skronk",
"Mutual Core" was described as "best" and "climactic" by Helen Brown of The Daily Telegraph, which elected Biophilia as the CD of the Week, Möhammed Choudhery of Consequence of Sound analysed the use of Björk's voice in the album, stating:
 Her unique utility of the English language gives her words a quirky, idiosyncratic edge, allowing lines like "if you forget my name, you'll go astray/ like a killer whale" to ring somehow striking. Said masterstrokes and quirks are well intact here, as is evident in the asteroid-bass volley of "Mutual Core" and lead single "Crystalline"'s apocalyptical breakbeat coda.
 Biophilia's finest moments are its most subtly captivating, many of which are (admittedly) almost forgettable on first listen. The aforementioned "Mutual Core" and "Crystalline" can be assured a spot on any and all future Best of Björk compilations, compelling in how they blend archaic instrumentation with blistering electronica.
Despite this, some critics dubbed the song as "tedious"

App

As with all the songs on Biophilia, "Mutual Core" was released as an app for iPhone or iPad. On January 17, 2012, Björk uploaded a video tutorial explaining the app on her official Youtube channel, commented also by Biophilia app designer Scott Snibbe. As Björk explains on the video:
 This app is called 'Mutual Core' and it's about taking the tectonic plates and pushing them together with effort until you create a mutual core beneath them. In musicology-wise this is to teach you about chords, and you can use .. the tectonic plates, the strata inside them, and it sorta operates like accordion so you can change the chords and push them together and ... create a mutual core. 

Credits

Credits taken from "Mutual Core" app.

Music video

Background and development

A music video for the song was commissioned by the director of Los Angeles' Museum of Contemporary Art (MOCA), Jeffrey Deitch. Huang was revealed to be chosen as the director for the video by Björk herself. Huang said about the making process:
 "There's a lot of volcanic and earthy stuff in the video, we put Björk in quite a few uncomfortable set-ups when we were filming, but she was game for anything. She was a lot of fun and just very warm and trusting." 
The director also hinted at a parallelism between the video and its short film Solipsist, which was released weeks before the shooting of "Mutual Core" video: "song is a metaphor between earth's crust and two people converging, and the effort that it takes, that was also what Solipsist was about, so working together made sense". The video was shot in Reykjavík in over two days. The director wrote the initial treatment for the video after visiting museums in London. The video features a mix of CG pictures and real natural elements, gathered by the team from different location in Iceland. The floating rocks in the video are made from foam and covered in plaster, fossilized barnacles and various textiles, the rock's tongues and the sand are computer animated; for this reason, the post-production lasted two months. Björk's face motion was tracked in CG for the video, in which it appears to be melt in the rocks. Her costumes were inspired by Thai and Indonesian costumes, while the substance which resembles magma that she appears to spit in the video was a computer-modified mixture of ketchup and cake batter.
A teaser trailer has been released on 5 November 2012. The teaser shows Björk stuck in a bed of quicksand, wearing a blue wig. The channel also posted a behind-the-scenes video on the same day. The video features glimpses of filming and an interview with the director of the video, who explains the filming process.

Synopsis

In the beginning of the video, soil crumbles down, as Björk appears, buried to her waist in the sand, wearing a golden dress (by Michael van der Ham), a brooch on her shoulder designed by the singer herself and a blue wig, holding a rock. As she starts singing, she divides the rock into two pieces. As she waves the pieces, the sand around her stirs. She then lays the two pieces on the sand, and they become part of two rock sprites, that come out of the sand and start writhing around Björk, while strata emerges from them. In the end of the first verse, the strata of the two rocky sprites try to unite, as Björk grabs the sand and let it slips out from her fingers. During the second verse other rocks emerge from the sand and revolve around Björk, who dances in the sand. Other rocky sprites spring out of the new rocks and link to the main two, which are still spinning around the singer's head. The two parts are irresistibly attracted to each other and try to unite as they are stroked by Björk. The strata of the rocks morph to form a face, similar to that of the singer. As the chorus begins, Björk disappears in the darkness. The two rocky parts, now united, start to bestir themself, whilst various rocks on the sand start to erupt. Lava, magma, smoke and fire storm while Björk's face appears in the lava. Every rock erupts noisily, causing a rain of volcanic ash.
The video shifts again to Björk buried in the sand under the rain of ashes. The two pieces of rock appear again, this time each one with a Björk-shaped strata. The strata also sing parts of the song, and two arms come out from the floating rocks and their hands barely brush against each other. The rocks unite once again as the chorus begins for the second time. During this part of the video, images of Björk singing in a smoky setting alternate with more rocks uniting to the main two, while their Björk-shaped strata secrete a substance similar to lava from their mouth. All the rocks are now united, forming a big volcano, whose crater is shaped like two opposite Björk-shaped rocks. The volcano finally erupts in an explosion of magma, while a thunderstorm occurs in the background. The video ends as the volcano fades out and all that remains visible is ash and smoke.

Reception and accolades

The video was heavily praised by critics. Bob Boilen of What Matters commented that the video is "a bit weird and smartly done".
Judy Berman from Flavorwire found the video "a precise yet still poetic evocation of the track", Abdullah Saeed of The Atlantic compared the video to her previous works and commented:
 Back when she first began experimenting with electronic producer Mark Bell on Homogenic, Cunningham style complemented her music perfectly for videos like "All is Full of Love" Now, a decade and a half later, her music explores biology, a discipline naturally interpreted by Huang's visual sense. Core" represents a new level of quality and ingenuity from Huang, who seems to be building on his now established visual style. 
On 24 December 2012, the video received two nominations at the 2012 Antville Music Video Awards in the categories of Best Art Direction and Best Visual Effects. However, Huang was nominated for his work in the video as Best New Director and went on to win the award.

Global projections

In March 2013, an edited version of the video was shown every night as part of a synchronized program on over 15 of the largest digital signs in Times Square, three minutes before midnight, as part of the Midnight Moment, a presentation of the Times Square Advertising Coalition (TSAC) and Times Square Arts. This Midnight Moment presentation is part of the New York City launch of Streaming Museum's Nordic Outbreak, an internationally touring exhibition of leading contemporary Nordic artists. Also on tour is a film by David Bates, Jr. that show the projection of the video across the billboards in Times Square. Commenting on the choice of bringing Björk's video projection worldwide, Nina Colosi, founder and creative director of Streaming Museum, stated:
 In the music video Mutual Core directed by Andrew Thomas Huang, Björk is organically part of nature and universe. The human connection to nature is a theme that underpins most of her artistic output. It's particularly meaningful to bring Björk's vision to 7 continents because of its relevance to all cultures. 

Credits

Credits taken from the official music video on Youtube.

Live performances

Björk premiered Biophilia's songs during the Manchester International Festival with a residency commissioned by the Festival itself.

Credits and personnel

Credits adapted from Biophilia album liner notes.

Official versions

Digital download
Biophilia Remix Series VI
Biophilia Remix Series VII
Biophilia Remix Series VIII
Mutual Core (Waxx Crooks Remix) 






