[[Liseberg]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Gothenburg, Amusement parks in Sweden, Visitor attractions in Gothenburg, Liseberg, 1923 establishments in Sweden

Liseberg is an amusement park located in Gothenburg, Sweden, that opened in 1923. It is one of the most visited amusement parks in Scandinavia, attracting about 3 million visitors annually. Among the noteworthy attractions is the wooden roller coaster Balder, twice (2003 and 2005) voted as the Best Wooden Tracked Roller Coaster in the world in a major international poll.Forbes.com
Additional to the summer season, the park is also open during November and December, albeit with fewer rides operating, hosting a Christmas market with traditional Swedish cuisine such as mulled wine and specialties such as döner kebab made from  reindeer meat.
The official colors of Liseberg are pink and green as can be seen on the entrance and the older houses in the park, the colors were also adopted for the logo, which was introduced in the 1980s.

History

In 1752, the landowner Anders Lamberg named his property "Lisa's Mountain" (in Swedish: Lisas berg) after his wife Elisabeth Söderberg. The area eventually became Liseberg.
In 1908, Gothenburg City bought the property including the on-site buildings for 225,000 Swedish kronor.
In 1923, Gothenburg celebrated its 300-year anniversary with the Exhibition (1923), which included a Leisure Park and the Congress Park; the area was opened on 8 May and included fun slides and the 980 ft long wooden Kanneworffska Funicular, designed by the Danish amusement builder Waldemar Lebech (originally there were 5 trains with 3 cars each that accommodated 10 people in each car, the ride lasted 2 and half minute; the ride was demolished in 1987 after having served over 41 million visitors). The fun park was originally intended as a temporary attraction for the Exhibition, but it became such a success with over 800,000 visitors in just over a month, that it was kept open. With an area of 1,500,000 m² the park had cost 2.6 million kronors to build.
On 24 November 1924, the Gothenburg City Council decided to purchase the Liseberg amusement park for 1 million kronors. In 1925, the amusement park was taken over by the municipal company Liseberg AB. The park's first director and one of its initiators was the legendary "carpenter from Skåne" Herman Lindholm, who managed it 1923–42.
On 13 August 1935, the functional-inspired Liseberg Bath was inaugurated, created by engineer KI Schön Anderson. The pool was 15 meters wide and 36 meters long and sported underwater Lights and artificial waves. The Pool was able to receive 800 people at a time, entrance fee with a cabin was 50 cents. The Swedish Olympic hopeful champion from 1920, Arvid Wallman, inaugurated the facilities. The pool was closed in 1956 and the building was demolished in 1962 for the forthcoming 40th anniversary in 1963.
Rotundan was one of the largest dancehalls when it opened on 10 January 1940. Its architect was Axel Jonson, and the construction lasted for one year at a cost of approximately 500,000 SEK. The dance floor held 1,200 persons and on the second floor a bar with the name Uggleklubben was opened. In 1956, the  facility was renovated and its name changed to the Rondo. The architect Gunnar Aspe was behind the work, which cost 1 million dollars.
In 1947, Liseberg AB opened hotel facilities; Hotell Liseberg Heden. Right from the start one of the objectives of Liseberg was that it would be an opportunity for Gothenburg dwellers to experience recreation and enjoy the beautiful scenery, and in 1959 it opened the Princess Birgitta, a flower exhibition. During the opening ceremony, 15,000 roses were strewn over the park by helicopter. In 1977, Honor Place was founded, a collection of many of the world's largest celebrity hand impressions. At the time, there were 50 imprints; today, there are more than can fit the area, so an annual selection is made as to who should get the honor to appear.
In 1991, the Liseberg Guest AB was formed to oversee the running of Gothenburg campsites and harbor. In the 1990s the park was expanded by 35 000 square meters and a host of new attractions was inaugurated.

The park

In addition to the park's more than 30 different rides, Liseberg has many venues (stages, dance hall, restaurants and arcade halls). The park has two entrances / exits (one at Örgrytevagen, the other at Getebergsled). Much of the park is forested.
In 1983, the green-pink bunny, Liseberg Rabbit, became the park's symbol and mascot.
In 1998, That year's Julkalendern När Karusellerna Sover was filmed there.
The park is noted for its Lisebergs Lustgarten (botanical garden) that is beautifully landscaped and has many waterfalls, artworks and a variety of plants.
Liseberg Main Stage (Stora Scenen) was built in 1923 and was originally designed as a big music pavilion for the Gothenburg Symphony Orchestra and other large-scale concerts (over the years the design of the venue has been modified). Many famous bands such as Abba and the Rolling Stones have performed here. Right next to the Stora Scenen is the Small Stage (Lilla Scenen) and it plays host to various smaller events, in particular children's theater.
Polka (Polketten) is the dance hall that was built in 1925 but has since been moved to its current location. Tauba Scene was inaugurated in 2008 and is named after Evert Taube; this venue is used for different types of music such as jazz, and the Liseberg Orchestra plays here as well.
Adjacent to Liseberg Park are more venues: Lisebergshallen is an entertainment and sports arena, home to the local hockey team and team handball team. Rondo is the name of an exhibition hall and Liseberg Theater is a local theater.
Multifarious Swedish performers have performed at Liseberg since its opening. Among them, Zarah Leander, Maurice Chevalier, Marlene Dietrich, Evert Taube, ABBA, Lasse Dahlquist, Birgit Nilsson, Pernilla Wahlgren and Carola Häggkvist. Sten-Åke Cederhök played in 25 years' own perceptions of the "Week Revy". Other artists like Sonya Heden Bratt, Hagge Geigert and Laila Westersund have appeared countless times at Liseberg. Olof Palme gave a speech on the main stage during his last election in 1985.
Foreign artists who have performed at Liseberg include Bob Marley, Led Zeppelin, The Rolling Stones, Cliff Richard, Nightwish, Delta Rhythm Boys, The Jimi Hendrix Experience, Cat Stevens, The Beach Boys, The Kinks, The Who, PJ Proby, Frank Zappa with The Mothers Of Invention, Bill Haley & His Comets, Procol Harum, and Toto, among others.
Since 2004 a sing-along show called Lotta på Liseberg (Lotta at Liseberg), hosted by Lotta Engberg, is held at Stora scenen in Liseberg.

Rides and attractions

Roller coasters

Water rides

Other rides

Kiddie rides

Other attractions

Former rides

Visitors








