[[Global Warfare]]

CATEGORIES: First-person shooters, Half-Life mods, Multiplayer online games, Multiplayer-only video games, Windows games, GoldSrc engine mods

Global Warfare (GW) is a multiplayer modification for Half-Life. The project was the brain child of Aggro_Boy, Sasquatch and alX, who formed the original GW team.
It uses the GoldSrc engine, but has some unique gimmicks added to it that cannot (or rarely) be found in other modifications. Such additions include: Lens flare effect, weather effects (rain and snow), its own particle engine for debris, and 3D muzzle flashes.

Gameplay

Global Warfare is set in a fictional conflict in the Middle East where an extremist group, the Arab Liberation Force (ALF), fights against the United Nations / Coalition Forces. Offering very detailed models and maps, a lot of effort was put in creating a seemingly realistic environment. However, as far as the gameplay is concerned, the game was never meant to be a combat simulator, and was thus kept uncomplicated and fast-paced similar to the Half-Life team deathmatch.
The game lets the player choose from five different player classes, some of which are needed to complete map objectives:
The latest release includes ten maps. Maps in Global Warfare can have four different map objectives:
The game also features an in-game 2D map where the location of the objectives, your team mates, the landing zones, and important paths are marked.
Further additions to the regular Half-Life team deathmatch include: Prone position (enabling players to make up less of a target while increasing accuracy) and timed grenades (allowing players to pull the pin and wait a few seconds before actually throwing the grenade).

Troop transports

Once the player has selected their class and weapons, they spawn at the team base. In order to get to the combat area, the player boards a transport: an APC or a Black Hawk helicopter, where the player actually sits visibly with their team mates. These periodically transport troops into battle. Killed players re-spawn at their base. The first person to enter the transport gains control of the transport's gun.
Transports can be destroyed by the enemy team with a LAW or Stinger missile, which can be found at their base. With their transport destroyed, there are no more reinforcements coming, thus making it much easier for the enemy team to complete objectives, although a new transport will arrive after a period of time (default time is one minute). Should a team destroy the enemy transport and then kill all enemy troops in the battlezone before their new transport arrives, they win the round.
However, when carrying those heavy rocket launchers, the player becomes very slow and cannot use other weapons; therefore, teamplay plays a big part in reaching the enemies LZ in order to destroy their transport.

Weapons

Overall, there are 28 weapons available in the game. Every player gets to choose a pistol and a primary weapon, and is furthermore equipped with a knife and various explosives (depending on the player class). There are three different basic assault rifles available for each team, including such famous guns as the M16A2 for the U.N., or the AK-47 for the Arab Liberation Forces. Additionally, each player class is offered a special weapon that can also be chosen as the player's primary weapon.

Campaign system

The game features a campaign system, grouping similar maps together and allowing a team not only to win a map, but to win an entire campaign. Despite the game's name "Global" Warfare, it only includes one campaign, the desert campaign. This is because further campaigns were originally meant to be added with later releases (such as a winter campaign for Beta 2). Unfortunately, due to a lack of team members, those campaigns could never be realized, even though most winter maps and all U.N. player models had already been created. Therefore, Beta 2 was never released; instead, to still release some of what had been worked on over all the years, Beta 1.5 was released.






