[[Neil B. Shulman]]

CATEGORIES: Emory University faculty, Medical writers, Jews and Judaism in Georgia (U.S. state), Writers from Georgia (U.S. state), Living people

Neil Barnett Shulman is an Associate Professor in the School of Medicine at Emory University. He has conducted and published clinical research on hypertension and is the co-founder of the International Society of Hypertension in Blacks. He is the author of many books promoting medical literacy for both adults and children, as well as humor and children's books. He is the associate producer of the 1991 film Doc Hollywood, based on one of his books.

Medical career

Shulman graduated from Emory University School of Medicine in 1971, after which he began teaching at the same institution. He has conducted research and published a variety of papers on the field of hypertension, funded at the level of around $8 million by the National Institutes of Health.
In 1986 Shulman co-founded the International Society of Hypertension in Blacks (ISHIB) together with Wilbur Dallas Hall and Elijah Sanders. Through its annual research conference, this society brings the latest approaches to cardiovascular disease prevention and treatment to health care professionals in the West and the Third World. and the Heart to Heart Program which brought children from developing countries to the United States for life-saving heart surgery.
Shulman is chairman of the board of Patch Adams' Gesundheit! Institute, and an advisory board member of Global H.E.E.D., a non-profit organization founded by former students of Emory University, Zain Ahmed '08C and Sonny Bandyopadhyay '07C to promote development, medicine, and public health in Guatemala.

Healthcare activist

Shulman is a patient advocate who has taken an active role on behalf of healtcare consumers and patients with limited access to care.com on October 19, 2011. Shulman founded the Medical Volunteerism Conference in 2010 which met at Emory University with over 2,000 international attendants in that year."News Release: Emory Co-Hosts Medical Volunteerism Conference", Atlanta Journal Constitution, April 2, 2010, accessed at ajc. In 2011 the summit was held again, this time called the Global Health and Humanitarian Summit.: ""Glorbal Health and Humanitarian Summit at Emory", March 31, 2011, accessed October 19, 2011. He played an active role on behalf of patients affected by the closing of the dialysis clinic at Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta, GA, which ultimately led to a favorable outcome for the affected patients. He was a key contributor to the 2013 Global Health and Humanitarian Summit. held at Emory University on April 12,2013 - April 14,2013.

Author, filmmaker, website developer

Shulman has authored and co-authored many books on medical topics, as well as consumer medical primers for adults and children, and children's books. He self-publishes children's and humor books through his own company, Rx Humor.
In 1991 his book What? Dead…Again? was made into a feature film called Doc Hollywood, starring Michael J. Fox; Shulman was an associate producer on the film. He also produced, co-directed, co-wrote and co-starred in the independent feature film Who Nose? (Wet Sock Productions, 2006).
In 1999 he developed his book Your Body's Red Light Warning Signals: Medical tips that may save your life into an interactive consumer website (www.com). In 2007 he developed his children's book What's in a Doctor's Bag? into an interactive website (www.com).
Shulman is also a comic performer on the subjects of humor and medical literacy. He often performs in fundraisers for free clinics and other charitable ventures.

Personal

Shulman married actress Zoe Haugo in October 2008. They have one son, Miles, born September 2006.

Selected bibliography

Books

Articles

Book chapters






