[[El Salvador national football team season 2011]]

CATEGORIES: El Salvador national football team seasons

The 2011 season is the 90th season in El Salvador's history, their 73rd in FIFA and 49th in CONCACAF.  The team was managed by José Luis Rugamas from January 2010.  Rubén Israel took over as manager in April 2011.
Most of January 2011 was spent playing in the 2011 Copa Centroamericana. El Salvador reached the semi-finals but lost, so had to take part in the third-place finals. They finished in fourth place but were able to qualify for the 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup. Forward Rafael Burgos received the Golden Boot with three goals. The national team has won three games and lost one game and two more have been scheduled to play in 2011.
El Salvador took part in the 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup in June and they will start their 2014 FIFA World Cup qualification campaign in September, starting out in the Second Round.

Season overview

January

On 2 January the issue of an official manager was under examination by the Federación Salvadoreña de Fútbol (FESFUT) and had been discussed by them. Fernando Palomo stated in his ESPN blog that discussions had possibly taken place with a potential Spanish manager and FESFUT.
According to Carlos Méndez Cabezas, FESFUT president and Comisión Ejecutiva de Selecciones Nacionales (CESEN) coordinator, Lillo would arrive in El Salvador on 10 January to view a better perspective of Salvadoran football. He would be accompanied by Iñigo Dominguez, his assistant, who contributed to Real Sociedad, UD Almería, and UD Almería's women's team.
Central defence player Álexander Mendoza, from C.D. Universidad de El Salvador, lost the chance to represent his country in the 2011 Copa Centroamericana when he suffered a knee injury and could not recover in time. El Salvador qualified for the 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup earning 2 wins, 1 draw (p.s.o.) and 2 losses from 5 matches, finishing in 4th place. Rafael Burgos was the top goalscorer of the tournament, with 3 goals, drawing with Marco Ureña of Costa Rica.

February

On 9 February El Salvador were scheduled to play a FIFA international friendly against Haiti. The match team was coached by Rugamas after FESFUT had awarded him a 6 month renewal of his interim contract. The match was won by El Salvador with a goal in the 15th minute by Rafael Burgos, the season's top goalscorer.
FESFUT presented an economic budget to Lillo of US$300,000 per year (5 person deal). After days of speculation the Spanish coach turned down the offer of coaching La Azul y Blanco. The main reason of his rejection was that he could not commit to something without the right tools and infrastructure to do so, "within all this, there is dis-proportionality between what they intend and what you can give. You can not build a pool with a beach shovel."
As announced on 18 February El Salvador would continue its preparation for the 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup with a friendly match against Syria on the 25th of March. There was still no definite coach, with interim coach José Luis Rugamas taking care of the friendly matches while he still had a valid contract with FESFUT.

March

On 3 March the tense situations in North African and Arab countries forced Syria to cancel the match with the Salvadoran national team. The Salvadoran football federation turned to the First Division and the preliminary list of 23 players with who Rugamas, the interim coach, attempted to play the friendly games for 25 and 29 March – the second and third year's FIFA date. From the original 23 players only 18 could participate in the matches. The representative Promotora Figueroa ("Figueroa Promoter") has indicated that they are making arrangements to play against El Salvador, Iraq or Jordan on the agreed date.
On 9 March it was announced that the international friendlies scheduled for March in Dubai were canceled; reasons for the cancellation could be due to tense situations in North African and Arab countries. Although new friendlies for March were confirmed: on March 24 in La Habana, against Cuba; and on March 27 in San Salvador, against Jamaica. These games would be fundamental in order to reach the CONCACAF top eight places.
On 21 March José Luis Rugamas released the list of 18 players to face Cuba. Henry Hernandez, Milton Molina, Edwin Sanchez, Gilberto Baires, Henry Escobar and Reynaldo Hernandez were discarded, but were eligible for the next preliminary squad against Jamaica.
The game against Jamaica was rescheduled from the 27 to the 29 due to flight problems in Miami.
On the last day of March the Federación Hondureña de Fútbol and the Federación Salvadoreña de Fútbol came to an agreement to settle an international friendly between the two countries. This match, scheduled for 29 May 2011 at the Robertson Stadium, will commemorate the debut of Honduras' new coach Luis Fernando Suárez. Alfredo Hawit, secretary of the FENAFUTH (Honduran football federation), said "we have reached a satisfactory agreement between the two federations, now everything is up to the coach to begin to prepare this blank to serve as a prelude to our participation in the Gold Cup.

April

On 6 April the new head coach, Rubén Israel, was presented in a press conference. "First of all thanks to the executive committee for welcoming me in this country and give me such a huge responsibility and so pretty, as is leading a national team", said the Uruguayan coach. The technical director explained that, "we have come here with our coaching staff to honor the work, beyond the mistakes and successes, the healthy intention is to work on Salvadoran football as a whole, working with major selections, but have a chronogram of action for youth teams, who are the future of the country."
During a press conference on 28 April Rubén Israel announced the coaching staff that will coach the pre-Olympic U-23 and national team. The individuals that will form the coaching staff are assistant managers Mauricio Alfaro and José Luis Rugamas, physical trainers Esteban Coppia (Argentina) and Nicolás Dos Santos (Uruguay) and the goalkeeping coach Carlos Cañadas.

May

On 2 May the coaching staff started training a 11-man preliminary squad that would eventually take part in the 2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup. Also, the head coach gave the players know their work system and objectives set out, "We will work to qualify for the 2014 World Cup. We know there are prior commitments such as the Gold Cup but we must never lose sight that our goal will be the playoffs", said Israel. They started off with a strong physical training. As intense that surprised even the players themselves. The idea was that they had spent several days without any activity thus would regain the rhythm as the members in the semifinals of the Clausura 2011, which will be added in coming weeks. One certanty was Israel's commands which were strong. And one fact was that he well knew the names of the players. He closed off by saying: "Good job, guys."
The trainings for that week would be of double shift, Monday through Friday (2 May — 6 May), and will not be a resting day to players on Wednesday as it was handled at first.
After Isidro Metapán and Luis Ángel Firpo were eliminated from the semifinals of the Clausura 2011, Rubén Israel called-up some of these players to add up to the eleven players active in the training ground. From the new twelve players, Diego Chavarría and Ricardo Orellana did not participate in the semifinals of the Clausura 2011 but were chosen by the head coach for their performance in the El Salvador U–23.
In a press conference on 10 May Israel expressed his consideration that it would be necessary to face strong rivals. He said that he has asked for strong rivals in preparation for the qualifying stages for the 2014 FIFA World Cup. He also noted that Dustin Corea, a stricker currently training in FESA, may incorporate for he had received him Salvadoran passport.
The members of El Salvador did not train on Friday, May 13, 2011, morning, because they did not have a financial arrangement with the FESFUT for the period in which they attended to the training camps. This would be the last day of the second week of the trainings. The players issued a statement for which was signed by the group and released by Marvin González, central defender and captain. The document proposed that they would assist the concentration but would not train until there were an agreement. The preliminary squad asked to cancel salaries that they earned on their club and to not receive a bonus. The FESFUT also sent a statement in which Rafael Villacorta, a member, proposed a meeting for 16 May. Villacorta mentioned that they have not talked about the economical part because the rest of the members have been out of the country and because the financial structure of the federation does not allow them to.

Players

These players have been capped during the 2011 season (listed alphabetically):

Debutants

Retirees

Player statistics

=Goal scorers=

=Goal assists=

=Bookings=

Competitions

Overall

=Results summary=

2011 Central American Cup

Friendly

2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup

World Cup Qualifiers

2014 FIFA World Cup qualification – CONCACAF Second Round

Group A

Coaching staff









Ranking




