[[Orion (spacecraft)]]

CATEGORIES: Manned spacecraft, Proposed spacecraft, Deep Space Habitat, Orion program


Orion Multi-Purpose Crew Vehicle (MPCV) is a planned, beyond-low Earth orbit (LEO) manned spacecraft that is being built by Lockheed Martin for NASA, and Astrium for the European Space Agency for crewed missions to the Moon, asteroids and Mars. It is planned to be launched by the Space Launch System. Each Orion spacecraft is projected to carry a crew of 2–6 astronauts. It is also planned as a backup for ISS cargo and crew delivery.Orion – NASA
The MPCV was announced by NASA on May 24, 2011, aided by designs and tests already completed for a spacecraft of the cancelled Constellation program, development for which began in 2005 as the Crew Exploration Vehicle. It was formerly going to be launched by the tested-but-cancelled Ares I launch vehicle.
The MPCV's debut unmanned multi-hour test flight, known as Exploration Flight Test 1 (EFT-1), is scheduled for a launch aboard a Delta IV Heavy rocket in December 2014.

Mission

The MPCV is  developed for crewed missions to the Moon, to an asteroid, and Mars. It is also a backup vehicle for cargo and crewed missions to the International Space Station. It is intended to be launched by the Space Launch System. A modified Advanced Crew Escape Suit is planned to be worn by the crew during the launch and re-entry of the mission.
The spacecraft is named for the Orion constellation.Aerospace Guide – Orion

History

On January 14, 2004, U.S. President George W. Bush announced the Orion spacecraft, known then as the Crew Exploration Vehicle (CEV), as part of the Vision for Space Exploration:

The proposal to create the Orion spacecraft was partly a reaction to the Space Shuttle Columbia accident, the subsequent findings and report by the Columbia Accident Investigation Board (CAIB), and the White House's review of the American space program. The Orion spacecraft effectively replaced the conceptual Orbital Space Plane (OSP), which itself was proposed after the failure of the Lockheed Martin X-33 program to produce a replacement for the space shuttle.
The name is derived from the constellation of Orion, and was also used on the Apollo 16 Lunar Module that carried astronauts John W. Young and Charlie Duke to the lunar surface in April 1972.
After the replacement of Sean O'Keefe, NASA's procurement schedule and strategy changed, as described above. In July 2004, before he was named NASA administrator, Michael Griffin participated in a study called "Extending Human Presence Into the Solar System" for The Planetary Society, as a co-team leader. The study offers a strategy for carrying out Project Constellation in an affordable and achievable manner. Griffin's actions as administrator supported the goals of the plan.
According to the executive summary, the study was built around "a staged approach to human exploration beyond low Earth orbit (LEO)." It recommends that Project Constellation be carried out in three distinct stages. These are:
Several changes to the original CEV acquisition strategy were explained in a NASA study called the Exploration Systems Architecture Study. The results were presented at a news conference held on September 19, 2005. The ESAS recommends strategies for flying the manned Orion by 2014, and endorses a Lunar Orbit Rendezvous approach to the Moon. The LEO versions of Orion were intended carry crews of four to six to the ISS. Cargo would also be carried aboard an unmanned version of Orion, similar to the Russian Progress cargo ships. The contractor for the Orion is Lockheed Martin, which was selected by NASA in September, 2006 and is the current contractor for the Space Shuttle's External Tank and the Atlas V EELV.
Orion is Apollo-like, not a lifting body or winged vehicle like the now retired Shuttle. Like the Apollo Command Module, Orion would be attached to a service module for life support and propulsion. It is intended to land in water but past versions had included plans for it to land on land. Landing on the west coast would allow the majority of the reentry path to be flown over the Pacific Ocean rather than populated areas. Orion will have an AVCOAT ablative heat shield that would be discarded after each use.
The Orion spacecraft (CEV) will weigh about 25 tons (23 tonnes), less than the mass of the Apollo Command/Service Module at 33 tons (30 tonnes). The Orion Crew Module will weigh about 9.8 tons (8.9 tonnes), greater than the equivalent Apollo Command Module at 6.4 tons (5.8 tonnes). With a diameter of 16.5 feet (5 metres) as opposed to 12.8 feet (3.9 metres), it will provide 2.5 times greater volume.[ref]
</ref>
Accelerated lunar mission development was slated to start by 2010, once the Shuttle was retired. The Lunar Surface Access Module (LSAM) and heavy-lift boosters were to be developed in parallel and would both be ready for flight by 2018. However, these developments were cancelled in 2010 as part of the Constellation program cancellation.

Design revisions and updates

In late July 2006, NASA's second design review resulted in major changes to the spacecraft design.
On April 20, 2007, NASA and Lockheed-Martin signed a modification to the Orion contract. The updated contract adds two years to the Orion project design phase, adds two test flights of Orion's launch abort system, and deletes from the initial design phase production of a pressurized cargo carrier for the International Space Station.[ref]
[/ref]
An article in "Aerospace Daily & Defense Report" indicates that in the latest Orion design revision, called configuration "606" by Lockheed Martin, the service module will have exterior panels that are jettisoned shortly after the second stage engine of the Ares I ignites. This configuration will save 1,000 pounds of the mass compared with the prior "605" configuration.
On 5 August, a report surfaced stating that the airbag landing system was removed from the next Orion design cycle ("607") in a weight saving measure, opting to return to an Apollo-style splashdown for the vehicle's end of mission.

2009 Human Space Flight Plans Committee

On September 8, 2009, the Human Space Flight Plans Committee was scheduled to release a report proposing a short list of different long term plans for the US Government's human space flight program. The review was commissioned by the Obama Administration to take into account several objectives. These include support for the International Space Station, development of missions beyond low Earth orbit (including the Moon) and use of commercial space industry. These objectives must fit within a defined budget profile.
Among the parameters to be considered in the course of the review are "crew and mission safety, life-cycle costs, development time, national space industrial base impacts, potential to spur innovation and encourage competition, and the implications and impacts of transitioning from current human space flight systems". The review considered the appropriate amounts of research and development and "complementary robotic activity necessary to support various human space flight activities". It also "explores options for extending International Space Station operations beyond 2016".

2010

On October 11, 2010, with the cancellation of the Constellation Program, the Ares program ended and development of the original Orion vehicle was renamed as the MPCV, planned to be launched on top of an alternative Space Launch System. Following cost overruns and schedule delays caused by insufficient funding, the Obama Administration proposed cancellation of the Constellation program in February 2010 which was signed into law 11 October. However, the Orion spacecraft continued to be developed because it supported new presidential goals.

2012

An inflatable seal between the clean room and the Orion space capsule which is superior to the ones used on Apollo and the shuttle
was tested on December 3, 2012.space-travel.html/

Design

The Orion Crew and Service Module (CSM) stack consists of two main parts: a conical Crew Module (CM), and a cylindrical Service Module (SM) holding the spacecraft's propulsion system and expendable supplies. Both are based substantially on the Apollo Command and Service Modules (Apollo CSM) flown between 1967 and 1975, but include advances derived from the space shuttle program. "Going with known technology and known solutions lowers the risk," according to Neil Woodward, director of the integration office in the Exploration Systems Mission Directorate.
The MPCV resembles its Apollo-era predecessors, but its technology and capability are more advanced. It is designed to support long-duration deep space missions of up to 21 days maximum active crew time plus 6 months quiescent. During the quiescent period crew life support would be provided by another module such as a Deep Space Habitat. The spacecraft's life support, propulsion, thermal protection and avionics systems are designed to be upgradeable as new technologies become available.
The MPCV spacecraft includes both crew and service modules, and a spacecraft adaptor.
The MPCV's crew module is larger than Apollo's and can support more crew members for short or long-duration spaceflight missions. The service module fuels and propels the spacecraft as well as storing oxygen and water for astronauts. The service module's structure is also being designed to provide locations to mount scientific experiments and cargo.

Crew Module

The Orion CM will hold four crew members, compared to a maximum of three in the smaller Apollo CM or seven in the larger space shuttle. Despite its conceptual resemblance to the 1960s-era Apollo, Orion's CM will use several improved technologies, including:
Another feature will be the partial reusability of the Orion CM.
To allow Orion to mate with other vehicles it will be equipped with the NASA Docking System, which is somewhat similar to the APAS-95 docking mechanism used on the Shuttle fleet. Both the spacecraft and docking adapter will employ a Launch Escape System (LES) like that used in Mercury and Apollo, along with an Apollo-derived "Boost Protective Cover" (made of fiberglass), to protect the Orion CM from aerodynamic and impact stresses during the first  minutes of ascent.
The Orion Crew Module (CM) is a 57.5° frustum shape, similar to that of the Apollo Command Module. As projected, the CM will be 
The crew module is the transportation capsule that provides a habitat for the crew, provides storage for consumables and research instruments, and serves as the docking port for crew transfers. The crew module is the only part of the MPCV that returns to Earth after each mission.
The crew module will have  and capabilities of carrying four astronauts for 21 day flights itself which could be expanded through additional service modules. Its designers claim that the MPCV is designed to be 10 times safer during ascent and reentry than the Space Shuttle.

Image:Orion Ground Test Article (GTA).
Image:Final wield of first space bound Orion.
Image:Orion Prepares for Next Round of Acoustic Testing.
Image:Orion ground test vehicle.

Service Module

Orion Service Module serves as the primary power and propulsion component of the spacecraft system, but is discarded at the end of each mission. In January 2013, the European ATV based service module was announced.

ATV-based Service module

In May 2011 the ESA director general announced a possible collaboration with NASA to work on a successor to the ATV.
On November 21, 2012, the ESA decided they will construct an ATV derived Service Module ready to support the Orion capsule on the maiden flight of the Space Launch System in 2017.nasaspaceflight.
NASA announced on January 16, 2013, that ESA will construct the service module for Exploration Mission-1 in 2017. The European Space Agency will use hardware from their current Automated Transfer Vehicle to construct a compatible service module to the spacecraft.

Launch Abort System

In the event of an emergency on the launch pad or during ascent, a launch escape system called the Launch Abort System (LAS) will separate the Crew Module from the launch vehicle using a solid rocket-powered launch abort motor (AM), which is more powerful than the Atlas 109-D booster that launched astronaut John Glenn into orbit in 1962. Another long-time space motor contractor, Aerojet, was awarded the jettison motor design and development contract for the LAS. As of September 2008, Aerojet has, along with team members Orbital Sciences, Lockheed Martin and NASA, successfully demonstrated two full-scale test firings of the jettison motor. This motor is important to every flight in that it functions to pull the LAS tower away from the vehicle after a successful launch. The motor also functions in the same manner for an abort scenario.

Testing

Environmental testing

NASA performed environmental testing of Orion from 2007 to 2011 at the Glenn Research Center Plum Brook Station in Sandusky, Ohio. The Center's Space Power Facility is the world's largest thermal vacuum chamber.

Pathfinder

On March 2, 2009, the LAS Pathfinder began its transfer from the Langley Research Center to the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, for launch tests. The Pathfinder is a combination of the Orion Boilerplate and LAS module. The 

Abort flight testing

=Test plans=


, NASA plans to launch the Orion Multi Purpose Crew Vehicle Ascent Abort 2 test flight (AA‑2) from Spaceport Florida Launch Complex 46 in 2018.[ref]
[/ref]

=Actual testing=

The actual Orion testing accomplished to date has been rather more limited and is running well behind the original plans.
ATK successfully completed the first Orion launch-abort test on November 20, 2008. The abort motor will provide  of the rocket's climb to orbit. The test firing was the first time a motor with reverse flow propulsion technology at this scale has been tested.
This abort test firing brought together a series of motor and component tests conducted in 2008 as a preparation for the next major milestone, a full-size mock-up or boilerplate test scheduled for the spring of 2009.
On May 10, 2010, NASA successfully executed the PAD-Abort-1 test at White Sands New Mexico, launching a boilerplate Orion capsule to an altitude of approximately 6000 feet. The test used three solid-fuel rocket motors

Orion Recovery Testing

Under the Constellation program the Post-landing Orion Recovery Test (PORT) was designed to determine and evaluate methods of crew rescue and what kind of motions the astronaut crew can expect after landing. This will include conditions outside the capsule for the recovery team. The evaluation process will support NASA's design of landing recovery operations including equipment, ship and crew necessities.
The Port Test used full-scale boilerplate of NASA's Orion crew module and will be tested in water under simulated and real weather conditions. Tests began March 23, 2009 with a Navy-built, 18,000-pound boilerplate when it was placed in a test pool at the Naval Surface Warfare Center's Carderock Division in West Bethesda, Md. Full sea testing ran April 6–30, 2009, at various locations off the coast of NASA's Kennedy Space Center with media coverage.
Under the Orion program testing a series of tests was implemented to evaluate hardware and procedures used to recover the Orion Crew Module at the end of the mission.  Orion continued the "crawl, walk, run" approach used in PORT testing.  The "crawl" phase was performed August 12–16, 2013 with the Stationary Recovery Test (SRT).
The SRT demonstrated the recovery hardware and techniques that will be employed for the recovery of the Orion Crew Module in the protected waters of Naval Station Norfolk utilizing the USS ARLINGTON as the recovery ship.  The USS ARLINGTON is a LPD 17 Amphibious Assault ship.  The recovery of the Orion Crew Module utilizes unique features of the LPD 17 class ship to safely and economically recovery the Orion Crew Module and eventually its astronaut crew.universetoday.com/104065/nasa-us-navy-test-demonstrates-water-recovery-of-orion-crew-capsule/
The "walk" and "run" phases will be performed with the Underway Recovery Test (URT).  Also Utilizing the LPD 17 class ship, the URT will be performed in more realistic sea conditions off the coast of California in early 2014 to prepare the US Navy / NASA team for recovering the uncrewed Exploration Flight Test 1 (EFT-1) Orion Crew Module.

Missions

List only includes relatively near missions, more missions are planned than are listed below.

Existing craft and mockups

Ongoing debates over EM-3 and beyond

Debates over Orion's destination in the near future are ongoing.House Subcommittee on Space Recent Activities  In particular, the United States House Science Subcommittee on Space is exploring the merits of an Apollo-like return to the Moon as compared with an asteroid rendezvous mission.
The crux of ongoing debates hinges upon answers to these following questions:
Presently, the United States House Science Subcommittee on Space is debating two possible paths, whether to first:
prior to launching a manned mission to Mars.
Regardless of which of the following alternatives is selected, "the ultimate goal of human exploration is to chart a path for human expansion into the solar system."

Return to the Moon

These are the primary reasons for returning to the Moon: 

Explore an asteroid in lunar orbit

The reasons provided for exploring an asteroid, as follows, versus returning to the Moon, above, appear to revolve around reduced cost

Orion Lite

Orion Lite was an unofficial name used in the media for a lightweight crew capsule proposed by Bigelow Aerospace in collaboration with Lockheed Martin. It was to be based on the Orion spacecraft that Lockheed Martin was developing for NASA. It would be a lighter, less capable and cheaper version of the full Orion.



MPCV Related:
CCDev 1 and 2 and CCiCap (formerly CCDev 3) Related:
COTS Related:
Other countries:

Notes






