[[The College of Medicine]]

CATEGORIES: Alternative medicine, Medical and health organisations based in the United Kingdom, Pseudoscience

The College of Medicine (CoM) is a United Kingdom based organisation founded in 2010 for patients and healthcare professionals. It originated from the collapse of the Prince of Wales' controversial Foundation for Integrated Health, which was widely criticised for promoting integrated medicine and alternative medicine.
It argues that a greater focus on compassionate caring is necessary because of the frequency of National Health Service scandals about care, such as the Stafford Hospital scandal.

Officers and Directors

Its officers and associates include former senior NHS staff. Its President is Graeme Catto, former President of the General Medical Council, and its officers and advisory council include Nigel Crisp former Chief Executive of the NHS, Muir Gray Chief knowledge officer to the NHS, and Baroness Ilora Finlay a past president of the Royal Society of Medicine.
Its Directors are George Lewith, a Professor of Health Research at Southampton University, Michael Dixon, Christine Glover, former head of the Royal Pharmaceutical Society and Professor David Peters, a Clinical Director at the University of Westminster's School of Life Sciences.

Membership

Membership is open to any registered healthcare or social care professional.|url= It is possible for some students/trainees to join as members, so long as the student or trainee is studying for a degree-level qualification that will lead to professional registration within one of the following health and social care fields;
Medicine, Nursing/Midwifery, Dentistry, Pharmacy, Psychology, Social Work, Allied Health Professions  (including Arts therapies, Chiropody or Podiatry, Dietetics, Operating department practice, Orthoptics, Occupational therapy, Physiotherapy, Prosthetics and orthotics, Radiography, Speech and language therapy), A statutory regulated Complementary and Alternative Medicine (CAM) discipline (Chiropractic and Osteopathy) or a voluntary regulated CAM discipline recognised by the Complementary and Natural Healthcare Council.

Links to the Prince's Foundation for Integrated Health

One director of the College, Michael Dixon, is a former director of the Foundation for Integrated Health. A second director of the College, George Lewith, was a council member of the foundation describing it as "Hamlet without the Prince".
In support of this connection with Prince Charles, alternative medicine critic and pharmacologist David Colquhoun has argued that the College (originally called "The College of Integrated Health") is extremely well-funded
These claims have been contested by the College.

Criticism

The College of Medicine has been criticised by Edzard Ernst in an article for the Guardian








