[[Murder of Jeff Hall]]

CATEGORIES: People murdered in California, History of Riverside, California, Murder committed by minors, American neo-Nazis, American murder victims, Deaths by person, Patricides

Jeffrey Russell Hall was a plumber in Riverside, California, and the regional leader of the National Socialist Movement. On May 1, 2011, he was shot to death, with his own gun, by his own 10-year-old son Joseph. The murder took place at 4 a.m. as Hall slept on his couch. 
Hall was a neo-Nazi, who believed in fighting for an all-white society and had said that he would die for the cause.
According to the boy, the motive for the murder was that he was tired of his father hitting him and his stepmother.
On Sunday, September 25, 2011, the story of the murder was broadcast on 60 Minutes.
In October 2013, when the boy was 13, he was sentenced to seven more years in juvenile prison, despite defense attorney portrayed him as a victim of both his father's racist beliefs and of his violent upbringing.

Political activity

For three years, 32-year-old Hall had been having difficulty finding work because of the economic downturn in the construction industry. Blaming his problems on Jews and non-whites, he became a local leader in the Neo-Nazi movement.
In October 2009, Hall lead a group from the National Socialist Movement (NSM) in a rally near a day-laborer site in Riverside. They wore World War II-era Nazi garb. In a November 2009 interview, about the rallies in Riverside, Arizona, and Minnesota, Hall said, "They're proud of who they are, tired of white guilt being shoved on their kids and multiculturalism. They can't see any reason for it."
In 2010, he ran for election against an incumbent for the Western Municipal Water District board as a white supremacist, and he received about a third of the vote.
In March 2011, Hall and his group of about two dozen white supremacists took to the streets in  the affluent, primarily residential Claremont, Los Angeles County, sometimes called "The City of Trees and Ph.D.s". They had a screaming confrontation with counter-protesters of more than 200 immigrant rights activists, who decried the group as racist. Hall said, "We patrol the borders, we see the devastation, we see the drugs, we know the reality." Dozens of officers from several police agencies were on hand.
Just 12 hours before Hall's death, a reporter from The New York Times was in Hall's home, interviewing him and members of his group. She also spoke to the ten-year-old, who showed off a leather belt bearing a silver insignia of the Nazi SS that his father had given him.

Death

Hall bragged that he was teaching his eldest son Joseph to use night-vision equipment and to shoot a gun. 
Eventually, the ten-year-old child told police how he took a .357 revolver from a shelf in the closet, pulled the hammer back, aimed the gun at his father's ear while he was asleep on the couch, and shot him.
Joseph admitted to police that he was tired of his dad hitting him and his mother. His 26-year-old stepmother, Krista, also said that Hall had been violent with her and the son, sometimes losing self-control and kicking his son in the back. He punished his children in varying extremes on a daily basis. The police report said that the house was filthy, with the floor littered with clothes, and the odor of urine. Many weapons were accessible to the children.
The son was arrested and taken to Juvenile Hall. The other four children were taken into protective custody. Krista was later arrested and charged with Criminal Storage of Firearms and Child Neglect. Joann Patterson (Hall's mother and Joseph's grandmother) was given temporary custody of the other four children. On a 60 Minutes interview, she said that her grandson had been misbehaving by starting fires. She was not surprised that he killed his father, but she had expected it would not happen until her grandson was older.
The son stated his motivation for the killing was an episode of Criminal Minds, where he claimed he saw a kid shoot his abusive father and did not face any consequences for it.  He also believed his father would recover from being shot and that the two of them could reconcile.

Family history

Jeffrey Hall was the son of Joann Patterson.
Jeffrey Hall's first marriage was to Leticia Neal, now of Spokane, Washington. 
They had two children—Joseph Hall and his younger sister.
After divorcing Jeffrey Hall, Neal had twins by another father. 
In 2003, the twins were hospitalized for failing to thrive, resulting in Child Protective Services removing Hall's two children. 
Social workers reported that Neal's home had no electricity or gas, that there were maggots on dishes, and that the children were dirty, hungry, and thirsty, and had bruises.
At the time, Hall was on probation for Driving under the influence, so his two children were temporarily placed with their grandmother Joann Patterson. In 2004, Hall was granted full custody of his two children.
After divorcing Neal, Hall married Krista McCary, and had three more daughters.  
At the time of his death, he had five children, ages 10, 9, 7, and 3 years and a 2-month-old infant.
According to his grandmother, Joseph was a volatile and violent child, who had been expelled from several schools for attacking students and staff, once nearly choking a teacher with a phone cord. She said he had no understanding of cause and effect. Joseph and his sisters had been educated at home by their parents under the guidance of River Springs Charter School.

Prosecution of son

The boy's attorneys first moved to seek a defense of Not Guilty By Reason of Insanity.
On January 14, 2013 the BBC News reported that the younger Hall, although 10 at the time of the murder, was responsible for Jeff Hall's death and could be sent to a juvenile detention facility.  Joseph was sentenced to juvenile detention until he reaches age 23 with parole possible at 20.[ref]
 He has appealed the conviction and sentence.[/ref]





[ref]
[ref]
Declaration in Support of Arrest Warrant for Krista Faye McCary, May 17, 2011, Case RIF1101077
[/ref]






