[[Occupy Los Angeles]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 in California, Occupy movement in the United States, History of Los Angeles, California

Occupy Los Angeles (also referred to as Occupy L.A.) is one of the many occupy movements in the United States, following the original Occupy Wall Street (OWS) protest. Participants of Occupy L.A. first met at Pershing Square on September 23, 2011. Occupiers first marched in Los Angeles on September 24, 2011.mov - YouTube They next protested a fundraiser being held in Hollywood at the House of Blues for President Obama.mov - YouTube Participants met at Pershing Square every subsequent night to plan out the logistics of an occupation set to begin on October 1, 2011.ON Los Angeles City Hall as a location: | Occupy Los Angeles Tents first manifested on October 1, 2011 on the grounds of Los Angeles City Hall.
The camp experienced a relatively uncontentious relationship with the city through its duration.
On November 17, Occupy Los Angeles joined with a permitted organized labor march through downtown Los Angeles. The parade was generally orderly, though a circle of about twenty protesters surrounded three tents in the middle of a street in deliberate disobedient behavior and were arrested. Later in the day, an unpermitted march went to a plaza at the base of the Bank of America tower, when police brought the march to a halt. More protesters were arrested for trespassing, 73 total for the day.
As of June 2012, Occupy Los Angeles had continued to engage in organized meetings, events and actions.



Goals

Occupy is a social movement, not a political party, concerned with bringing equality back to the American system and then the world.
OLA's goals include the following, all approved by OLA GA in the past:

Supporters

The movement had several celebrity appearances including NOFX, Jesse Jackson,
Some of these visitors were interviewed by InsightOut News, a grassroots journalism website that emerged from Occupy LA. These interviews were sometimes critical, raising the issue of whether wealthy celebrities could really be aligned with the working class.

City Hall eviction

Antonio Villaraigosa, mayor of Los Angeles, announced an eviction order deadline of Monday morning, November 28, at 12:01 a.m., giving the reason that "It is time to close the park and repair the grounds so that we can restore public access to the park."
Early Monday morning protesters and the encampment remained after the city ordered an end their protest. Four people were arrested for unlawful assembly.
On Tuesday, November 29, 1,350 police raided Occupy Los Angeles. Five hundred armed police officers quickly entered the park out of City Hall doors. At 12:30 a.m. LAPD declared the Occupy L.A. site an unlawful assembly, and told demonstrators they had 10 minutes to clear the area or be arrested. A total of 292 people were arrested.

=Report of Patrick Meighan=

Patrick Meighan, writer for the Fox animated sitcom Family Guy, was one of the 292 arrests made on November 29. He posted an account
Patrick Meighan's account alleges police destruction of personal property, use of excessive force, and use of force to produce reactions that then were cited as resistance for justification of further use of force. Police destroyed tents providing shelter or medical service, which news outlets reported as garbage left behind by protesters. The officer who arrested Meighan had forced him into a painful wrist lock; when Meighan recoiled, he was thrown to the ground on his face, and then had his face ground into the pavement until he bled. In Meighan's report, he also alleges that police set high bail and then refused to accept payment of the bail or allow access to legal counsel. In his interview, he mentions a unique Los Angeles law that allegedly allows jailers to refuse bail, or refuse to process bail, at their own discretion.

May Day

On May 1, 2012, Occupy Los Angeles resurfaced publicly joining general May Day protests all around Los Angeles.  The Occupy supporters organized as "four winds" coming in to downtown Los Angeles from the four directions, starting in Van Nuys in the north, Santa Monica in the west, Cal State Dominguez Hills in the south and East Los Angeles College in the east.








