[[Anil Khandelwal]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, Living people, People from Agra, University of Rajasthan alumni, Indian bankers, Writers from Uttar Pradesh

Anil Khandelwal is an Author,
Earlier he retired as Chairman and Managing Director of Bank of Baroda, a leading Public Sector Bank and  later was Chairman of   Baroda Pioneer Asset Management Company (2008-2011)

Early life

Anil Khandelwal was born in Agra, Uttar Pradesh. He completed his Bachelor of Science from Agra College in 1966, Agra. He then pursued Chemical Engineering degree from Harcourt Butler Technological Institute, Kanpur in 1970. Later, he pursued his MBA with specialization in HR from University of Rajasthan, Jaipur and received first position. He also completed Post Graduate Diploma in Labor Laws and Personnel Management from University of Rajasthan and received first position. He also did Post Graduate Diploma in Training and Development from Indian Society for Training and Development. He also completed his PhD in Management, under Dr N R Sheth, Director, IIM Ahmedabad

Career

Anil K. Khandelwal started his career as a Probationary Officer in Bank of Baroda in 1971. From 1980 to 1992 he worked as Senior Core Faculty (HR) in Banks Apex Staff College at Ahmedabad.  In the year 1993 he was appointed Principal of the college and after a short tenure he moved to banks corporate office, Mumbai.  After working as Deputy General Manager HRM, he shifted to banking operations and rose to the position of General  Manager,  incharge of Banks operation in West Bengal and north East, Kolkata.   Based on Dr. Khandelwal's extraordinary turnaround of this difficult territory, he was appointed by Govt. of India as Executive Director (A board level position), Bank of Baroda in September 2000. In the year 2004 He was appointed as chairman and MD, Dena Bank and after a brief stint of one year he was appointed as chairman and MD of Bank of Baroda, one of the largest public sector bank in India.
Dr. He has also worked as UNDP Consultant to banking Commission, Govt. of Tanzania (1989). He has also worked as Visiting Professor, at Asian Institute of Management, Manila, Philippines(2008)

Awards and recognition

Anil Khandelwal  is a Multi Awarded Professional. He received:
The Only Indian receiving this award so far. This is the highest award available for lifetime achievement in the banking industry in the Asia Pacific & Gulf Region. Award given for Anil Khandelwal's contribution to financial services recognized with The Asian Banker award for Lifetime Achievement in financial Services. 
Anil Khandelwal's reinvigoration of Bank of baroda and his passionate appeal to staff and unions to help him turn the bank around from the back office up has made him a globally admired icon within the financial services industry
Rigorous selection process chaired by Mr David Eldon, Chairman, Board of Directors, Dubai International Financial Centre Authority and former Chairman of HSBC Asia Pacific.

Transformation of BoB

Dr. Khandelwal holds the special distinction of transforming one of the largest public sector bank, Bank of Baroda, in the shortest possible time. He introduced many reforms that included introduction of modern technology, re-branding, establishing Gen-Next branches, retail revolution by introducing retail loan factories (one-stop-shop for retail loans) and SME loan factories.  He totally rehashed the human resource system and introduced many employee centric programmes like employee conclaves, Sampark (hotline to CMD), Samadhan (providing counseling services in metro centers) and Khoj (talent hunting exercise). He engaged staff by face to face interactions at several large and small centers and valued their ideas. He introduced idea-online at bankofbaroda. The bank doubled its business in just three years and simultaneously successfully completed technological upgradation providing any-time, anywhere banking through online banking and expanding the ATM facility across the bank. The Bank of Baroda transformation story finds a mention in Harvard Business Review article Leadership Lessons from India, March 2010 and in the book The India Way by Wharton faculty. Based on the transformation of BoB, Anil Khandelwal has authored Dare to Lead( Sage 2011)

Khandelwal Committee

Khandelwal has been a crusader for introduction of modern HR policies and systems and public sector banks. In the year 2009, Government of India appointed a committee to look at the HR issues of the public sector banks under the chairmanship of Dr. Anil Khandelwal. The committee made seminal recommendations to improve the HR in public sector banks. The committee is popularly known as The Khandelwal Committee and is often quoted for initiating reforms in PSBs. Later in the year 2011-12, he was appointed chairman of advisory group on HRD by the ministry of Finance, Government of India.

Books and Articles




