[[Peter Liversidge]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 births, Living people, British artists

Peter Liversidge (born 1973, Lincoln, England) is a British contemporary artist notable for his diverse artistic practice and use of proposals.

Personal

Peter Liversidge studied Fine Art in Exeter at the University of Plymouth and film and photography at Montana State University-Bozeman. He moved to London in 1996 where he now lives with his wife and two children.

Work

Over the course of the last 12 years, using an Olivetti 
He draws inspiration not just from artists such as On Kawara, Fischli and Weiss and Keith Arnatt, but also from artists such as Joseph Cornell and the Reverend Howard Finster, as well as inveterate tinkerers like his own grandfathers.   Liversidge is driven by the generative notion of creativity and the idea that art is most successful when it exists slightly outside of formalist notions of fine art. The physical objects Liversidge produces often include banal, everyday materials that are repurposed or co-opted for his use. His work, as seen in a lot of his proposals, requires the presence of the viewer and their interpretation of the proposals to complete the aesthetic experience. 
Liversidge has worked with, and exhibited at, numerous institutions, such as Tate Liverpool in 2008, the Centre d'Art Santa Mònica, Barcelona in 2008, Bloomberg SPACE, London in 2009 and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art in 2010. He has also developed projects for Cab Gallery, the Frieze Art Fair, (with Ingleby Gallery), the Europalia Festival in 2007, Art Basel, Miami, in 2009 and Edinburgh's Sculpture Park, Jupiter Artland, also in 2009.
While Liversidge's work is in numerous public and private collections, his performances, such as Gin Stand, Plum Bread and Embossing Bank Notes present the viewers with a unique piece of work to take away with them.
He has also created video projections for the bands Wires Under Tension
Peter Liversidge is represented by Ingleby Gallery in Edinburgh and Sean Kelly Gallery in New York City.

Selected exhibitions

Selected published proposals

Selected publications

Selected public collections






