[[Weeds (season 6)]]

CATEGORIES: Weeds (TV series), 2010 television seasons

The sixth season of Weeds premiered on Monday, August 16, 2010 at 10ET/PT on the television cable network Showtime, and consisted of 13 episodes.

Plot

After Shane kills Pilar, the Botwin family flees north. Andy joins them after Audra breaks off their relationship. Unable to cross the Canadian border without the baby's birth certificate, Nancy, Andy, Silas, Shane, and Stevie assume new identities as "The Newmans" (as Nathalie, Randy, Mike, Shawn, and Avi, respectively) and settle in Seattle, Washington. Silas and Shane remain the same age this season while Stevie is three months old.
Nancy, Andy, and Silas take menial jobs as scab labor at a local hotel, where Nancy discovers the resident drug dealer is also on strike. Sensing an opportunity, Nancy seeks out a local distributor (Linda Hamilton) and, lacking enough money to buy much marijuana, instead buys the seller's trimmings and produces hashish using the hotel's laundry equipment. While the rest of the family works, Shane babysits Stevie. Back in southern California, Esteban tasks Cesar and Ignacio with finding Nancy and bringing back his son. While looking for clues at the Ren Mar house, they encounter Doug and coerce him into helping find the Botwins.
As Nancy and Andy leave the weed dealer's house, they are confronted by two police officers and questioned about unpaid parking tickets linked to the (stolen) license plates on Andy's minivan. The family flees again. Cesar and Ignacio receive a phone call from Dodge about the location of the van (which blew a tire when Andy tried to remove a police boot with a blowtorch). Cesar, Ignacio, and Doug travel to Seattle and search for clues in the van. Nancy convinces Silas to steal his girlfriend's car. She spots Doug tied up in the back of Cesar's car at the motel, while Cesar argues with the manager. Nancy panics and attempts to gather the family, a series of events transpires, culminating with Shane calling his mother to tell her he has been kidnapped by Cesar and Ignacio.
Cesar negotiates a trade with Nancy: Shane for Stevie. Despite agreeing, Nancy meets Cesar with Gayle's crossbow hidden in a bassinet, then shoots Cesar in the leg. She receives a phone call from Ignacio, who unintentionally tells her about his run in with her three sons, Andy, and Doug at the local diner. When Nancy arrives there, she joins the group at the table and attempts to negotiate with Ignacio by holding a gun under the table. Ignacio calls her bluff – Shane then takes the gun. Ignacio reluctantly folds to Shane. Now the Botwin family and Doug continue what Andy refers to as off-the-grid living. During their flight, they stop at a carnival, despite Andy's disapproval. They end up winning an RV, but are unable to claim it without proper identification. Liking the idea of RV travel, they purchase an older used RV and travel to an out-of-the-way trailer park. Andy and Doug pose as a preacher and assistant, taking appropriate donations. A frustrated Nancy goes to a bar and has sex with the bartender. The next day she finds out the bartender has a wife who is also her neighbor and they are subsequently chased out of town.
As the Botwins continue their nomadic lifestyle on the lam in their RV, they stop in Colorado. They continue to bargain for the trimmings of other dealers' weed. In Aspen, Colorado, Nancy and Andy drop off Silas and Shane to sell hash at a concert. When Stevie's feces are an abnormal color, Nancy decides he needs a pediatrician. Shane discovers Silas wants to apply for college, and Silas in turn learns Shane doesn't have any of his own back up plans. At the pediatrician's office, Nancy sees herself on TV listed as a missing person. The doctor says Stevie is fine, but suggests the baby may not be bonding with her, and that the baby's lifestyle could be a factor, making her rethink their way of life. Andy suggests moving to Denmark. Nancy agrees.
The group travels to Nancy's hometown, Dearborn, Michigan, where they stay with Nancy's former high school teacher Mr. Schiff (Richard Dreyfuss), with whom she had a sexual relationship from the age of 14. Silas discovers that Judah is not his biological father; in fact, his father is Nancy's former boyfriend Lars. The Botwins are found by an investigative journalist named Vaughn, who is writing an article about Nancy. She gives him the information he needs to write the story in exchange for cash to buy passports. Doug returns to Agrestic, retitled Regrestic after the fire, where he tries to win back his wife. Mr. Schiff steals money from a post office for plane tickets to Copenhagen for the family, himself included. Silas says goodbye to Nancy, intending to stay behind with Lars. Nancy goes to meet Vaughn a final time before leaving, only to find his room has been ransacked, and Esteban and Guillermo are waiting for her.
Esteban and Guillermo take Nancy to the airport to find Stevie. Nancy manages to contact Andy, telling him to use "Plan C".  Esteban threatens Silas and takes Stevie; Nancy agrees to leave the airport with them, and they tell her they are going to kill her. Andy, Silas, Shane and Mr. Schiff board the plane to Copenhagen (via Paris), but Mr. Schiff is arrested for robbing the post office. As Nancy leaves the airport, the FBI confront her outside. As part of "Plan C", she confesses to the murder of Pilar, simultaneously saving her own life, ensuring the safety of her family, and covering for Shane.

Cast

Main cast

Special guests

Recurring

Episodes

{| class="wikitable plainrowheaders" style="width: 100%; margin-right: 0;"
|-
! style="background: #83675B; color: #ffffff;"| No.
! style="background: #83675B; color: #ffffff;"| #
! style="background: #83675B; color: #ffffff;"| Title
! style="background: #83675B; color: #ffffff;"| Directed by
! style="background: #83675B; color: #ffffff;"| Written by
! style="background-color: #83675B; color: #ffffff;"| Intertitle
! style="background-color: #83675B; color: #ffffff;"| U.S. viewers
(million)
! style="background: #83675B; color: #ffffff;"| Original air date
|-

|}






