[[Ruby Amanfu]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, People from Accra, Ghanaian emigrants to the United States, People from Nashville, Tennessee, American singer-songwriters

Ruby Amanfu is a Grammy award nominated singer-songwriter and performer residing in Nashville, Tennessee. She is best known for recording and touring with  Jack White, and  a captivating and controversial performance at the 2013 Grammy Awards. She is currently releasing new music, with a double single release as of October 15th 2013 consisting of the songs "Bluff" and "Love Out Loud". 

Early life and education

Ruby Amanfu was born in Accra, Ghana to a musical family of five. When she was three years old, her father moved the family to Nashville, TN, where early on she began to flourish around the sights and sounds of Music City. She started writing songs at a young age and entered a school talent show in third grade where she took home the first place prize: a pack of 10 gumballs.
More talent shows followed, as well as a knack for literary competitions wherein she discovered her passion for writing song lyrics. She was educated in the private and magnet school systems and attended high school at the prestigious Hume-Fogg Academic Magnet High School, whose premiere Fine Arts program afforded her the opportunity to write and record songs in the school's studio. In her sophomore year of high school, Amanfu was chosen for The Nashville Symphony Chorus, becoming the youngest member of the group at age 15. She performed with the group for one season.

Career

In her junior year of high school, Amanfu was introduced by a classmate to a local philanthropic couple, Dave and Becky Matthews. The Matthews' took interest in Amanfu's songwriting and offered to fund her first full-length album, So Now The Whole World Knows, with Dave at the helm as engineer and co-producer with Amanfu. The LP was recorded at The Matthews' well-appointed home studio during her junior and senior years. She attended Berklee College of Music in Boston, Massachusetts and transferred to Belmont University in Nashville, Tennessee when music critics such as Robert K. Oermann began to praise Amanfu's debut. Once Amanfu returned to Nashville to promote So Now The Whole World Knows, she signed to independent record label Spongebath Records in 1999. She began working with Grammy nominated singer/songwriter, Tommy Sims, co-author of Eric Clapton's Change the World. Sims produced and co-wrote Amanfu's song, "Sugah." 
Amanfu was being courted by record labels across the country in 2001 when the prestigious UK A&R publication, The Tip Sheet, named Amanfu's song "Sugah" as their "Tip of the Week." UK record label Polydor Records and Scandinavian music house Murlyn Music Group both became interested in "Sugah" and signed her to a co-venture between their companies as well as Interscope Records in the U.S. Amanfu's album, Smoke & Honey (Polydor 2003) and its single, "Sugah,"
Amanfu asked out of the co-venture in late 2003 after the companies faced problems, causing her album's promotion to be halted in its prime. She was released from the record deal by year's end.

Meeting Sam Brooker

Amanfu met fellow musician Sam Brooker at a writer's round in Nashville in 1999. The two became fast friends. In 2002, the pair penned their first song, "The Here and The Now," for which Amanfu wrote the lyrics and melody and Brooker the music. Amanfu and Brooker began to co-write another set of songs in 2004. The pair was invited by friend and musician, Dan Dyer, to open for him at Saxon Pub in Austin, TX during South by Southwest. Amanfu and Brooker became Sam & Ruby, Amanfu and Brooker went on to release an EP entitled Press On in February 2010.

The Sing-Off

Amanfu appeared on NBC's vocal competition, The Sing Off Season 3,

Jack White

Amanfu recorded on the Grammy nominated Jack White solo album "Blunderbuss", and recently received gold record for over 500,000 sales. Amanfu is the vocalist in Jack White's all female band "The Peakocks" and together have toured the world extensively throughout 2011-2012. Amanfu performed with Jack White at the 2013 Grammys, singing "Love Interruption".

Solo accolades

Amanfu has had songs cut by such artists as Kelly Clarkson and Justin Guarini, Lene Nystrøm, Sanne Salomonsen and Rachael Lampa. Amanfu co-wrote the song "Heaven's My Home" with Katie Herzig, which was performed by the Duhks and nominated for a 2007 Grammy award for Best Country Performance. 
In 2008, Amanfu sang a duet with Patti LaBelle at the Essence Music Festival in New Orleans, Louisiana.
Amanfu sang backup on Wanda Jackson's 2011 promotional tour for her album, The Party Ain't Over, produced by Jack White. Together, they performed "Shakin' All Over" on the Late Show with David Letterman
Amanfu lent her voice to Jack White for his new single "Love Interruption" from his first ever solo effort, Blunderbuss. The song premiered on January 30, 2012, the same day that Amanfu's EP, "The Simple Sessions," was released. Amanfu's four-song EP was produced by Charlie Peacock. 
Amanfu's other musical colleagues and collaborators include Trent Dabbs, Ben Folds, Bloodshy & Avant, Dan Wilson, Tommy Sims, Seasick Steve,

Double Single Release 2013

On the 15th of October, Ruby Amanfu released a double single consisting of two new stand out tracks, "Bluff" and "Love Out Loud". Bluff was written by Ruby Amanfu and Katie Herzig and produced by Butterfly Boucher and Katie Herzig. "Love Out Loud" was written by Ruby Amanfu/Shannon Sanders/Drew Ramsey and produced by Thom Donovan with additional production by Ruby Amanfu.

Film/TV placements

Charity work

Amanfu has a heart for charities, including the Nashville Rescue Mission, Hands On Nashville, Nashville Public Television, Second Harvest Food Bank, Soles 4 Souls, Vanderbilt Children's Hospital, and eXile International.


Discography







