[[Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court]]

CATEGORIES: International Criminal Court, Human rights instruments, Genocide, Crimes against humanity, War crimes, Crime of aggression, 1998 in Italy, 20th century in Rome, Treaties concluded in 1998, Treaties entered into force in 2002, Treaties of the Afghan Transitional Administration, Treaties of Albania, Treaties of Andorra, Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda, Treaties of Argentina, Treaties of Australia, Treaties of Austria, Treaties of Bangladesh, Treaties of Barbados, Treaties of Belgium, Treaties of Belize, Treaties of Benin, Treaties of Bolivia, Treaties of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Treaties of Botswana, Treaties of Brazil, Treaties of Bulgaria, Treaties of Burkina Faso, Treaties of Burundi, Treaties of Cape Verde, Treaties of Cambodia, Treaties of Canada, Treaties of the Central African Republic, Treaties of Chad, Treaties of Chile, Treaties of Colombia, Treaties of Comoros, Treaties of the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Treaties of the Republic of the Congo, Treaties of the Cook Islands, Treaties of Costa Rica, Treaties of Croatia, Treaties of Cyprus, Treaties of the Czech Republic, Treaties of Denmark, Treaties of Djibouti, Treaties of Dominica, Treaties of the Dominican Republic, Treaties of East Timor, Treaties of Ecuador, Treaties of Estonia, Treaties of Fiji, Treaties of Finland, Treaties of France, Treaties of Gabon, Treaties of the Gambia, Treaties of Georgia (country), Treaties of Germany, Treaties of Ghana, Treaties of Grenada, Treaties of Greece, Treaties of Guinea, Treaties of Honduras, Treaties of Hungary, Treaties of Iceland, Treaties of Ireland, Treaties of Italy, Treaties of Japan, Treaties of Jordan, Treaties of Kenya, Treaties of South Korea, Treaties of Kuwait, Treaties of Kyrgyzstan, Treaties of Latvia, Treaties of Lesotho, Treaties of Liberia, Treaties of Liechtenstein, Treaties of Lithuania, Treaties of Luxembourg, Treaties of the Republic of Macedonia, Treaties of Madagascar, Treaties of Malawi, Treaties of the Maldives, Treaties of Mali, Treaties of Malta, Treaties of the Marshall Islands, Treaties of Mauritius, Treaties of Mexico, Treaties of Moldova, Treaties of Mongolia, Treaties of Montenegro, Treaties of Namibia, Treaties of Nauru, Treaties of the Netherlands, Treaties of New Zealand, Treaties of Niger, Treaties of Nigeria, Treaties of Norway, Treaties of Panama, Treaties of Paraguay, Treaties of Peru, Treaties of the Philippines, Treaties of Poland, Treaties of Portugal, Treaties of Romania, Treaties of Saint Kitts and Nevis, Treaties of Saint Lucia, Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Treaties of Samoa, Treaties of San Marino, Treaties of Senegal, Treaties of Serbia, Treaties of Serbia and Montenegro, Treaties of Seychelles, Treaties of Sierra Leone, Treaties of Slovakia, Treaties of Slovenia, Treaties of South Africa, Treaties of Spain, Treaties of Suriname, Treaties of Sweden, Treaties of Switzerland, Treaties of Tajikistan, Treaties of Tanzania, Treaties of Trinidad and Tobago, Treaties of Uganda, Treaties of the United Kingdom, Treaties of Uruguay, Treaties of Venezuela, Treaties of Yemen, Treaties of Zambia, Treaties of Vanuatu, Treaties of Tunisia, Treaties of Guatemala, Treaties of Ivory Coast, Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, Treaties establishing intergovernmental organizations, Treaties extended to Greenland, Treaties extended to the Faroe Islands, Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles, Treaties extended to Aruba, Treaties extended to Anguilla, Treaties extended to Bermuda, Treaties extended to the British Virgin Islands, Treaties extended to the Cayman Islands, Treaties extended to the Falkland Islands, Treaties extended to Montserrat, Treaties extended to the Pitcairn Islands, Treaties extended to Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha, Treaties extended to the Turks and Caicos Islands, Treaties extended to Akrotiri and Dhekelia, Treaties extended to the Isle of Man

The Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (often referred to as the International Criminal Court Statute or the Rome Statute) is the treaty that established the International Criminal Court (ICC). It was adopted at a diplomatic conference in Rome on 17 July 1998Michael P. Scharf (August 1998). Results of the Rome Conference for an International Criminal Court. The American Society of International Law. Retrieved on 31 January 2008. See Amnesty International USA (2005).  International Justice Day 2005. Retrieved on 31 January 2008. and it entered into force on 1 July 2002. As of 1 May 2013, 122 states will be party to the statute. Among other things, the statute establishes the court's functions, jurisdiction and structure.
The Rome Statute established four core international crimes: genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and the crime of aggression. Under the Rome Statute, the ICC can only investigate and prosecute the four core international crimes in situations where states are "unable" or "unwilling" to do so themselves. The court has jurisdiction over crimes only if they are committed in the territory of a state party or if they are committed by a national of a state party; an exception to this rule is that the ICC may also have jurisdiction over crimes if its jurisdiction is authorized by the United Nations Security Council.

History

The Rome Statute established four core international crimes: genocide, crimes against humanity, war crimes and the crime of aggression. However throughout the negotiations, other crimes were considered for inclusion, including ecocide. Following years of negotiation, aimed at establishing a permanent international tribunal to prosecute individuals accused of genocide and other serious international crimes, such as crimes against humanity, war crimes and the recently defined crimes of aggression, the United Nations General Assembly convened a five-week diplomatic conference in Rome in June 1998 "to finalize and adopt a convention on the establishment of an international criminal court". Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court — Overview. Retrieved on 31 January 2008. Rome Conference — 1998. Retrieved on 31 January 2008. On 17 July 1998, the Rome Statute was adopted by a vote of 120 to 7, with 21 countries abstaining. Scharf (August 1998). Results of the Rome Conference for an International Criminal Court. The American Society of International Law. Retrieved on 31 January 2008.[/ref] Because the way each delegation voted was officially unrecorded, there is some dispute over the identity of the seven countries that voted against the treaty.S. Relations with the International Criminal Court During the Obama Administration", Florida Journal of International Law, 22:155 at 160, n. 38. It is certain that the People's Republic of China, Israel, and the United States were three of the seven because they have publicly confirmed their negative votes; India, Indonesia, Iraq, Libya, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Sudan, and Yemen have been identified by various observers and commentators as possible sources for the other four negative votes, with Iraq, Libya, Qatar, and Yemen being the four most commonly identified.
On 11 April 2002, ten countries ratified the statute at the same time at a special ceremony held at the United Nations headquarters in New York City,Amnesty International (11 April 2002).  The International Criminal Court — a historic development in the fight for justice. Retrieved on 31 January 2008. bringing the total number of signatories to sixty, which was the minimum number required to bring the statute into force, as defined in Article 126. The treaty entered into force on 1 July 2002; the ICC can only prosecute crimes committed on or after that date. Retrieved on 18 October 2013. The statute was modified in 2010 after the Review Conference in Kampala, Uganda, but the amendments to the statute that were adopted at that time are not effective yet.
The Rome Statute is the result of multiple attempts for the creation of a supranational and international tribunal. At the end of 19th century, the international community took the first steps towards the institution of permanent courts with supranational jurisdiction. With the Hague International Peace Conferences, representatives of the most powerful nations made an attempt to harmonize laws of war and to limit the use of technologically advanced weapons. After World War I and even more after the heinous crimes committed during World War II, it became a priority to prosecute individuals responsible for crimes so serious that needed to be called "against humanity". In order to re-affirm basic principles of democratic civilisation, the alleged criminals were not executed in public squares or sent to torture camps, but instead treated as criminals: with a regular trial, the right to defense and the presumption of innocence. The Nuremberg trials marked a crucial moment in legal history, and after that, some treaties that led to the drafting of the Rome Statute were signed.
UN General Assembly Resolution n. 260 9 December 1948, the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide, was the first step towards the establishment of an international permanent criminal tribunal with jurisdiction on crimes yet to be defined in international treaties. In the resolution there was a hope for an effort from the Legal UN commission in that direction. The General Assembly, after the considerations expressed from the commission, established a committee to draft a statute and study the related legal issues. In 1951 a first draft was presented; a second followed in 195] but there were a number of delays, officially due to the difficulties in the definition of the crime of aggression, that were only solved with diplomatic assemblies in the years following the statute's coming into force. The geopolitical tensions of the Cold War also contributed to the delays.
Trinidad and Tobago asked the General Assembly in December 1989 to re-open the talks for the establishment of an international criminal court and in 1994 presented a draft Statute. The General Assembly created an ad hoc committee for the International Criminal Court and, after hearing the conclusions, a Preparatory Committee that worked for two years (1996–1998) on the draft. Meanwhile, the United Nations created the ad hoc tribunals for the former Yugoslavia (ICTY) and for Rwanda (ICTR) using statutes—and amendments due to issues raised during pre-trial or trial stages of the proceedings—that are quite similar to the Rome Statute.
During its 52nd session the UN General Assembly decided to convene a diplomatic conference for the establishment of the International Criminal Court, held in Rome 15 June–17 July 1998 to define the treaty, entered into force on 1 July 2002. This Rome Conference was attended by representatives from 161 member states, along with observers from various other organizations, intergovernmental organizations and agencies, and non-governmental organizations (including many human rights groups) and was held at the headquarters of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, located about 4 km away from the Vatican (one of the states represented).Final Act of the International Criminal CourtRome Conference list of attendees and meeting notes

Ratification status

Review and amendment

Any amendment to the Rome Statute requires the support of a two-thirds majority of the states parties, and an amendment (except those amending the list of crimes) will not enter into force until it has been ratified by seven-eighths of the states parties. A state party which has not ratified such an amendment may withdraw with immediate effect. Retrieved on 18 October 2013.
Any amendment to the list of crimes within the jurisdiction of the court will only apply to those states parties that have ratified it. It does not need a seven-eighths majority of ratifications.
The states parties held a Review Conference in Kampala, Uganda from 31 May to 11 June 2010.  . Retrieved on 31 January 2008. The Review Conference adopted a definition of the crime of aggression, thereby allowing the ICC to exercise jurisdiction over the crime for the first time. It also adopted an expansion of the list of war crimes. Retrieved 3 March 2011.



Notes and references

Further reading




