[[Cyber-utopianism]]

CATEGORIES: Cyberspace, Social theories, Philosophy of technology

Cyber-utopianism – the belief that online communication is in itself emancipatory, and that the Internet favors the oppressed rather than the oppressor – has accompanied the Internet from its beginnings; and was the subject of critique by the Critical Art Ensemble as early as 1995. 477 While the romantic view of cyberspace was partially dented by the bursting of the Dot-com bubble, utopian views of the internet continued to re-invent themselves through the Noughties.P. Buckley/D. Clark, The Rough Guide to the Internet (2009) p. 312-5
In 2011, cyber-utopianism, particularly in global politics, was powerfully critiqued by Evgeny Morozov in his 2011 book The Net Delusion: The Dark Side of Internet Freedom. R. Sassower, Digital Exposure: Postmodern Capitalism (2013) p. ix and p. 16 Acknowledging his own past as a cyber-utopian, Morozov calls the belief naive and stubborn for its refusal to acknowledge the downside – the opportunities for authoritarian monitoring and control - of cyber-space.
He goes on to blame the "former hippies" in the 1990s, for causing this utopian belief.

Origins: Californian ideology

The Californian Ideology is a set of beliefs combining bohemian and anti-authoritarian attitudes from the counterculture of the 1960s with techno-utopianism and support for neoliberal economic policies. These beliefs are thought by some to have been characteristic of the culture of the IT industry in Silicon Valley and the West Coast of the United States during the dot-com boom of the 1990s. Adam Curtis connects it to Ayn Rand's Objectivist philosophy. 
Such an ideology of digital utopianism fuelled the first generation of Internet pioneers.J.M Reagle jr, Good Faith Collaboration (2010) p. 162

Further criticisms

Critical reservations about popular positivist readings of the Internet have surfaced repeatedly over the decades:
In an article from The New Yorker from 2010, Malcolm Gladwell argues his doubts about the emancipatory and empowering qualities of social media in general. In the article he criticizes Clay Shirky for propagating and overestimating the revolutionary potential of social media. In the conclusion he says: "Shirky considers this model of activism an upgrade. But it is simply a form of organizing which favors the weak-tie connections that give us access to information over the strong-tie connections that help us persevere in the face of danger." 

Cognate utopias

Cyber-utopianism is somewhat derivative of the views espoused by the Extropians, whose ultimate goal is to upload human consciousness to the Internet.
Additionally, Ray Kurweil's books, especially The Age of Spiritual Machines, espouses a kind of cyber-utopianism, in that he views an event, the Singularity, where advances in technology will be so rapid as to represent a barrier after which life will be experientially different, incomprehensible, and advanced.

Cyber-dystopia

In August 2007, David Nye presented the idea of cyber-dystopia, which envisions a world made worse by technological advancements.





Further Reading

Margaret Wertheim, The Pearly Gates of Cyberspace (2000)
Evgeny Morozov, To Save Everything, Click Here (2013)




