[[Breakfast]]

CATEGORIES: Breakfasts, Meals

Breakfast is the first meal taken after rising from a night's sleep, most often eaten in the early morning before undertaking the day's work.
Breakfast foods vary widely from place to place, but often include a carbohydrate such as grains or cereals, fruit and/or vegetables, a protein food such as eggs, meat or fish, and a beverage such as tea, coffee, milk or fruit juice. Coffee, milk, tea, juice, breakfast cereals, pancakes, sausages, French toast, bacon, sweet breads, fresh fruit, vegetables, eggs, mushrooms, baked beans, muffins, crumpets and toast with butter or margarine and/or jam or marmalade are common examples of breakfast foods, though a large range of preparations and ingredients are associated with breakfast globally.

Effect on health

Some nutritional experts have long referred to breakfast as the most important meal of the day, citing studies that find that people who skip breakfast are disproportionately likely to have problems with concentration, metabolism, weight, and cardiac health. Some say that skipping breakfast may even lead to diabetes as well as coronary disease.yahoo.html

Africa

Breakfast in Africa varies greatly from region to region.

Morocco

For breakfast, many Moroccans eat bread with olive oil, tea, and different kinds of Moroccan crepes.com/come-cook-with-us/the-art-of-moroccan-cuisine

Nigeria

Nigeria has over 250 different ethnic groups,

Senegal

Breakfast typically consists of café Touba,The World Bank wrote that a progressive elimination of imported coffee seems common in poorer areas of Senegal as a result of the global recession of 2009: a Senegalese a restaurant owner stated, "We weren't used to , Prepared Foods, May, 2008 with various spreads: Chocoleca, a Nutella equivalent made from peanuts; butter; or processed mild cheese.

Somalia

Breakfast (quraac) is an important meal for Somalis, who often start the day with some style of tea (shaah). The main dish is typically a pancake-like bread (canjeero or canjeelo) similar to Ethiopian injera, but smaller and thinner. It might also be eaten with a stew (maraq) or soup.111-114. Lahoh, is a pancake-like bread originating in Somalia, Djibouti and Yemen. 113. During lunch, lahoh is sometimes consumed with curry, soup or stew.

Uganda

In Uganda, most tribes have different cuisine but the most popular breakfast dishes are Porridge and Katogo. Porridge is made by mixing maize flour or millet flour with water and bringing the mixture to a boil. Both dishes are popular in all regions of Uganda.

Asia

Burma

In Burma, the traditional breakfast is htamin jaw, fried rice with boiled peas (pè byouk), and yei nway jan (green tea) especially among the poor.
Glutinous rice or kao hnyin is steamed and wrapped in banana leaf often served with peas as kao hnyin baung with a sprinkle of crushed and salted toasted sesame.
 Equally popular is the purple variety of rice known as nga cheik which is cooked the same way and called nga cheik paung. Si damin is sticky rice cooked with turmeric and onions in peanut oil and served with crushed and salted toasted sesame and crisp fried onions. Assorted fritters such as baya jaw (urad dal)is often served as a compliment.
Nan bya or naan (Indian-style flatbreads) again with pè byouk or simply buttered, is served with Indian tea or coffee. It goes well with hseiksoup (mutton soup).
Fried chapati, blistered like nan bya but crispy, with pè byouk and crispy fried onions is a popular alternative.
Htat ta ya, lit. "a hundred layers", is flaky multi-layered fried paratha served with either pè byouk or a sprinkle of sugar.
Eeja gway (Chinese-style fried breadsticks or youtiao) with Indian tea or coffee is another favourite.
Mohinga, perhaps the most popular of all, now available as an "all-day breakfast" in many towns and cities, is rice vermicelli in fish broth kept on the boil with chickpea flour and/or crushed toasted rice, lemon grass, sliced banana stem, onions, garlic, ginger, pepper and fish paste and served with crispy fried onions, crushed dried chilli, coriander, fish sauce and lime. Add fritters such as split chickpea (pè jan jaw), urad dal (baya jaw) or gourd (bu jaw), boiled egg and fried fish cake (nga hpè jaw).

China

As China is made up of many distinct provinces each with their own unique cuisine, breakfast in China can vary significantly from province to province. In general, basic choices include sweet or salty pancakes, soup, deep fried bread sticks or doughnuts (youtiao), buns (mantou), porridge (congee), and fried or soup-based noodles. These options are often accompanied by tea or sweetened soy bean milk. However, condiments for porridge and the soup base tend to vary between provinces and regions. The types of teas that are served and spices that are used can also differ significantly between the provinces.

Hong Kong

Due to its near two centuries history as a British colony and proximity to China's Canton region, both English and traditional Cantonese style breakfasts are of somewhat equal popularity in Hong Kong, as well as the hybrid form of breakfast commonly offered in Cha chaan teng. Cha Chaan Teng breakfasts often include Hong Kong style milk tea, pan fried egg, bread, Cantonese noodles and/or Hong Kong style macaroni in soup.
Traditional Cantonese breakfast may include dim sum, which include a variety of different ingredients and are prepared in numerous different forms from delicately wrapped baby shrimp steamed dumplings to sweet water chestnut cake. Each dish is designed to be sampled and diners can go through a large selection of dim sum quickly accompanied by a generous amount of good tea. Iron Buddha tea is the most common accompaniment, but other teas such as pu'er and oolong are also common. Fried and rice-based noodles and cakes are also popular. In modern times, dim sum is commonly prepared and served in Yum Cha restaurants rather than home because of the skill and efforts involved in the preparation.

Japan

Breakfast in modern Japanese households comes in two major variations: Japanese-style and Western-style. Japanese-style breakfasts are eaten widely in Japan, but are often eaten only on weekends and non-working days. Younger Japanese couples may prefer Western-style breakfasts because they are generally less time-consuming to prepare.
The standard Japanese breakfast consists of steamed white rice, a bowl of miso soup, and Japanese styled pickles (like takuan or umeboshi). A raw egg and nori are often served; the raw egg is beaten in a small bowl and poured on the hot rice to make golden colored tamago kake gohan, whilst the nori (sheets of dried seaweed) is used to wrap rice. Grilled fish and Japanese green tea is often served as well.
Western-style breakfasts in Japanese households are similar to those in the United States. Japanese children often eat cornflakes and drink milk, hot chocolate or fruit juice. Japanese adults (especially younger ones) tend to have toast with butter or jam, eggs, and slices of vegetables. They often drink coffee or orange juice.
Traditional Japanese inns (like ryokan) serve complete traditional breakfast. Western-style hotels and restaurants in Japan generally offer a mix of the Western and Japanese-styles.

Korea

Traditionally, Korean breakfasts consist mainly of rice and soup dishes.  These can include small amounts of fish or beef, and some form of broth, stew or porridge.  Like all Korean meals, breakfast is usually served with banchan, or side dishes consisting of kimchi, steamed eggs and tofu.

India

There is no standard Indian breakfast menu as almost each state in India has different specialties.
However, one can broadly classify breakfast varieties in India into 2 types; North Indian and South Indian.
The eastern and western parts of India also have individual breakfast items unique to their culture or state.

A typical south Indian breakfast consists of idli, vada and/or dosa  coupled with chutney and sambar.
Many variations of these dishes exist such as Rava idli, Thayir Vadai (Yoghurt vada), Sambar vada and Masala Dosa.
Other popular south Indian breakfast items are Pongal, Bisibelebath (Sambar Rice), Upma, and Poori. The state of Kerala has some special breakfast items such as appam, puttu, idiyappam and palappam.
A typical north Indian breakfast may either be a type of Paratha or Roti served with a vegetable curry, curd and pickles.
There are several varieties of parathas available depending on the type of stuffing such as Aloo (potato) Paratha, Paneer (cottage cheese) Paratha, Mooli (radish) Paratha etc.
Other popular breakfast items in the north are Poori Bhaji, Poha and Bhindi Bhujia.
In Western India, a Gujarati household may serve Dhoklas, Khakhras or Theplas for breakfast, the most popular of which being Methi Thepla.

File:Dosa-chutney-sambhar.
File:Idly Wada.
File:Aloo paratha.jpg|Aloo Paratha
File:Farsaan Food.jpg|Dhoklas being sold in the market

In Maharashtra typical breakfast (Nashta) consists of 'Kande Pohe','Upma, 'Ukkad', 'Thalipeeth','Spiced Puree'. Sometimes 'Chapati Bhaji' or 'Chapati roll with tea' becomes breakfast.

Philippines

A traditional Filipino breakfast might include pandesal (small bread rolls), kesong puti (white cheese), champorado (chocolate rice porridge), sinangag (garlic fried rice), and meat—such as tapa, longganisa, tocino, karne norte (corned beef), or fish such as daing na bangus  (salted and dried milkfish)—or itlog na pula (salted duck eggs).  Coffee is also commonly served particularly kapeng barako, a variety of coffee produced in the mountains of Batangas noted for having a strong flavor.
Certain portmanteaus in Filipino have come into use to describe popular combinations of items in a Filipino breakfast.  An example of such a combination order is kankamtuy:  an order of kan'''in'' (rice), kamatis'' (tomatoes) and tuy'o (dried fish).  Another is tapsi: an order of tapa and sinangág.  Other examples include variations using a silog suffix, usually some kind of meat served with sinangág and itlog (egg).  The three most commonly seen silogs are tapsilog (having tapa as the meat portion), tocilog (having tocino as the meat portion), and longsilog (having longganisa as the meat portion). Other silogs include hotsilog (with a hot dog), bangsilog (with bangus (milkfish)), dangsilog (with danggit (rabbitfish)), spamsilog (with spam), adosilog (with adobo), chosilog (with chorizo), chiksilog (with chicken), cornsilog (with corned beef), and litsilog (with lechon/litson). Pankaplog is a slang term referring to a breakfast consisting of pandesal, kape (coffee), and itlog (egg). An establishment that specializes in such meals is called a tapsihan'' or "tapsilugan".

Middle East

Arab countries

Breakfast is often a quick meal, consisting of bread and dairy products, with tea and sometimes jam. Flat bread with olive oil and za'tar is also popular.

Israel

The Israeli breakfast is an egg dish, served with vegetables and bread, with spreads like butter, jam or honey. The egges are usually Fried egg or omelet . The breakfast is also served with cheeses, hard or soft, such as Tfatit and Gouda cheese ,where in Israel a different version of it is called "Emek cheese". Coffee and orange juice are the more common beverages. Sometimes fish is also served, such as Herring or canned tuna.
At hotels in Israel, the Israeli breakfast is commonly presented as a self-service buffet.[ref]
