[[Tim Weaver (author)]]

CATEGORIES: 21st-century English writers, English thriller writers, 1977 births, Living people

Tim Weaver (born 1977) is an English writer primarily known for his crime thrillers featuring missing persons investigator David Raker.

Career

Journalism

Prior to publication of his first book, Weaver was a videogames journalist. He was editor of cult gaming title, N64 Magazine and spent six years as Editor of Xbox World, leaving the magazine in 2011.

Novels

Weaver's debut crime thriller Chasing the Dead – which took ten years to get published
His follow-up The Dead Tracks – which went to number one on the Amazon Kindle charts in March 2013
The third novel in the series, Vanished, saw Raker looking into the case of a man disappearing on a London Underground train. The Guardian claimed Weaver's books were getting "better each time – tense, complex, sometimes horrific, written with flair as well as care.".
His fourth book, Never Coming Back, is the first in the series to move entirely away from London, and is set in Devon and Las Vegas. On 28 August 2013 it was announced that Never Coming Back had been selected for the Richard and Judy Autumn 2013 Book Club.
On his decision to have David Raker specialise in missing persons cases, Weaver has said: "I just became very interested in the idea of a person going missing in an age where we have CCTV on every street, 24-hour rolling news channels, and constant access to cameras through our phones. It seemed like an intriguing starting point for a book. It sounds trite, but I was also struck by the human cost. Can you imagine how many stories must go untold when a person vanishes?"
In October 2013, Weaver contributed a short story entitled Disconnection to #YouDunnit, a joint venture between Penguin and Specsavers. The major themes of the story – including the victim, crime scene location, and central character – were crowdsourced on Twitter.

Personal life

Weaver attended Norton Hill School and supports Arsenal and Bath City F.C.

Bibliography

David Raker novels

Short stories






