[[Lana Del Rey]]

CATEGORIES: Lana Del Rey, 1986 births, Living people, 21st-century American singers, American contraltos, American female models, American people of Scottish descent, American pop guitarists, American female pop singer-songwriters, American rock guitarists, American Roman Catholics, Blue-eyed soul musicians, Brit Award winners, Fordham University alumni, Interscope Records artists, Ivor Novello Award winners, Kent School alumni, People from Lake Placid, New York, Polydor Records artists, Singers from Los Angeles, California, Singers from New York City, Torch singers, Trip hop musicians, American hip hop singers

Elizabeth Woolridge Grant (born June 21, 1986), She signed a joint contract with Interscope, Polydor, and Stranger Records in July 2011.
After she released her debut single "Video Games" in June 2011, a music video created by Del Rey for the song was posted on YouTube in August 2011. Her second album, Born to Die, was released in January 2012. The album has sold over 5 million copies worldwide to date, and was the fifth best-selling album of 2012. Charting across Europe, this album spawned numerous top ten hits, including the title track "Born to Die", "Blue Jeans", and "Summertime Sadness".
With the release of her third EP, Paradise, Del Rey spawned her second top ten album in the United States, debuting at number 10 on the Billboard 200 with 67,000 copies sold in its first week.
Del Rey's music has been noted for its cinematic sound and its references to various aspects of pop culture, particularly that of the 1950s and 1960s Americana. The singer has described herself as a "self-styled gangsta Nancy Sinatra". Musically, she draws influence from what she deems to be the masters of each genre, including Elvis Presley, Amy Winehouse, Janis Joplin, Nirvana, as well as from poetry and film noir. (February 2, 2012) Lana Del Rey 'Compelled' By Britney Spears - Music, Celebrity, Artist News. MTV.

Early life

Lana Del Rey was born Elizabeth Woolridge Grant in New York City on June 21, 1986,
She began singing in the church choir when she was a child. "I was always singing, but didn't plan on pursuing it seriously. When I got to New York City when I was 18, I started playing in clubs in Brooklyn—I have good friends and devoted fans on the underground scene, but we were playing for each other at that point—and that was it."

Career

2005–10: Career beginnings


On April 25, 2005, a seven-track compact disc was registered under Elizabeth Woolridge Grant with the United States Copyright Office. The application title was "Rock Me Stable" with another title "Young Like Me" also listed.

At her first performance in 2006 for the Williamsburg Live Songwriting Competition, Del Rey met Van Wilson, an A&R rep for 5 Points Records, Her father, Robert Grant, helped with the marketing of the album, which was available for purchase on iTunes for a brief period before being withdrawn.
David Kahne, who produced Grant and previous label owner David Nichtern have both stated that Grant bought the rights back from her label, 5 Points, as she wanted it out of circulation to "... About choosing her stage name, she has said: "I wanted a name I could shape the music towards. I was going to Miami quite a lot at the time, speaking a lot of Spanish with my friends from Cuba - Lana Del Rey reminded us of the glamour of the seaside. It sounded gorgeous coming off the tip of the tongue.
On September 1, 2010, Del Rey was featured by Mando Diao in their MTV Unplugged concert at Union Film-Studios in Berlin."INTERVIEW MIT MANDO DIAO". hitparade.ch. Retrieved August 27, 2012

2011–13: Born to Die, Paradise, and Tropico

After uploading a few of her tracks to her YouTube channel, Del Rey was discovered and signed by Stranger Records to release her debut single "Video Games".
Del Rey also performed two songs from the album on Saturday Night Live on January 14, 2012 and received a negative response from critics and the general public. Del Rey's performance was defended by the evening program's guest host, actor Daniel Radcliffe, despite not having seen her performance.
Born to Die was officially released on January 31, 2012 worldwide, and reached number one in 11 countries, though critical reaction was divided.
In an interview with RTVE on June 15, 2012, Del Rey announced she has been working on a new album due in November, in an interview with Tim Blackwell for Nova FM in Melbourne, Australia, Del Rey added that her upcoming November release would not be a new album, but more like an EP.
Mid-September saw the official announcement of Paradise lead single, "Ride".
Del Rey's Paradise Edition of Born to Die was set to be released on November 12. With the release of her third EP, Paradise, Del Rey spawned her second top 10 album in the United States, debuting at number 10 on the Billboard 200 with 67,000 copies sold in its first week.
At the 2012 MTV Europe Music Awards, Del Rey received nominations in the categories Best Alternative, Best Push, and Best New Act. Winning Best Alternative, Del Rey presented the award for Best Female to Taylor Swift.
At the 2013 BRIT Awards, she won the award for International Female Solo Artist, making it her second BRIT Award to date.
Del Rey's seventh single, "Dark Paradise", was released as a single in Germany, Austria, and Switzerland on March 1, 2013.
Together with the film's director, co-writer, and co-producer Baz Luhrmann, Del Rey penned the original song "Young and Beautiful" for the soundtrack of the 2013 film adaptation of The Great Gatsby.
Alongside Paradise, Del Rey announced plans to launch a short film titled Tropico.

2014: Ultraviolence

On January 23, 2014, it was announced that Del Rey would be covering the song "Once Upon a Dream" (from the 1959 film Sleeping Beauty) for the 2014 dark fantasy film Maleficent. The single was released on January 26.

Artistry

Musical style

She has been described as a "self-styled gangsta Nancy Sinatra" and "Lolita lost in the hood"
Del Rey has stylized her musical sound as "Hollywood sadcore".
Del Rey has appeared numerous times in PR photo-shoots and music videos adorned in gauzy dresses and floral headdresses; she has been recognized as being less flashy than other mainstream female pop singers. Lyrically, "Born to Die" was described as sad. Del Rey elaborates: "I'm not sad, I'm happy. I feel like I'm happy because I'm at peace with the way that things are... I did have a darker filter on sometimes, but that slowly lifted through doing a lot of different things. And finding true love is something that really did inspire me, lyrically. Because I felt so much the same for so much of my life and then when you find someone exciting, you don't know that you could actually feel differently than you did before. I was inspired." Del Rey writes her own lyrics, drawing on various experiences she had while living in New York City, and she has said that her lyrics "sound like stories".

Voice and timbre

Del Rey possesses an expansive contralto vocal range, which has been described as captivating and highly emotive, being able to transcend from sounding high and girlish in her timbre, down to a low and jazzy sound with great ease, although both these areas of the voice can be conflicting in the contrast of their sound, polarizing opinion. "gravely", and reminiscent of Marilyn Monroe.
Del Rey stated the use of her lower vocals on the tracks from Born to Die, claiming that "people weren't taking me very seriously, so I lowered my voice, believing that it would help me stand out. Now I sing quite low... well, for a female anyway."
"I sing low now, but my voice used to be a lot higher. Because of the way I look, I needed something to ground the entire project. Otherwise I think people would assume I was some airhead singer. Well, I don't think... I know. I've sung one way, and sung another, and I've seen what people are drawn to", she said on the topic.

Influences

Amongst her musical influences, Del Rey cites several contemporary artists such as Elvis Presley, Antony and the Johnsons, Frank Sinatra, and Eminem. She covered Cohen's "Chelsea Hotel #2" in 2013.
Janis Joplin's live version of "Summertime" from the Cheap Thrills compilation album is one of Del Rey's favorite songs. Del Rey has also cited "Time of the Season" by The Zombies and "Hotel California" by The Eagles as favorites and inspirations. Her favorite films, The Godfather, The Godfather Part II, and American Beauty have also inspired her musical style. As a child, her father wrote country songs for personal enjoyment, while her mother was interested in singing; the former introduced her to The Beach Boys, while the latter was a fan of Carly Simon.

Other ventures

On January 4, 2012, it was reported she had signed a deal with NEXT Model Management agency.
On August 22, 2012, executives announced that Del Rey would endorse their new Jaguar F-Type which was unveiled by Del Rey at the Paris Motor Show in September 2012. Adrian Hallmark, Jaguar's global brand director, explained their choice, saying Del Rey had "a unique blend of authenticity and modernity."
The song "Burning Desire", which was initially available for immediate digital download upon pre-ordering Del Rey's third EP, Paradise, was later made available for purchase on Amazon. The song serves as the title track to a 13 minute promotional short film for the Jaguar F-Type, called Desire. The film, directed by Adam Smith, was produced by Ridley Scott and stars Damian Lewis.

Personal life

Del Rey stated that she has suffered from alcohol dependence. At the age of 15, she was sent to Kent School, a boarding school in Connecticut, for three years to get sober. In September 2012, she told GQ magazine:

Del Rey's left hand is tattooed with the letter "M", referencing her grandmother, Madeleine, and the word "paradise".

Discography

Awards and nominations

Del Rey's work has earned her numerous awards and nominations; she has won the Q Award for "Best New Thing", a GQ Award for "Woman of the Year", two BRIT Award for "International Breakthrough Act" and "International Pop Female Solo Artist", and an EMA for "Best Alternative Act".
In 2013, she received her first Grammy nominations at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards. These nominations include Best Pop Vocal Album for Paradise and Best Song Written for Visual Media for "Young and Beautiful".






