[[International People's Tribunal on Human Rights and Justice in Kashmir]]

CATEGORIES: Human rights abuses in Jammu and Kashmir

International People's Tribunal on Human Rights and Justice in Kashmir (IPTK) is an initiative formed by Indian human rights activists for the purpose of probing human right violations in the Indian-administered state of Jammu and Kashmir, and bridging the gap between Indian and Kashmiri citizens. It was first convened in 2008 by Pervez Imroz, Angana P. Chatterji, Gautam Navlakha and Zaheer-Ud-Din. Chatterji served as convener until December 2012. 

Background

The Tribunal was first envisioned in 2006 when Parvez Imroz, a human rights activist, invited Angana Chatterji to Kashmir. From 2006-2008, Chatterji studied the Kashmir issue and interviewed the locals. Mallika Kaur, a scholar of Harvard Kennedy School, while explaining the need of the Tribunal, said that there was no such mechanism for investigating the human right abuses in this hypermilitarized region.
The Tribunal's mandate does not include finding political solutions to resolve the Kashmir issue. Instead it includes recording and investigating crimes committed only in the part of Kashmir administered by India. According to Mallika Kaur the Tribunal did not include the Pakistani-administered Kashmir because it was set up by Indian citizens and access across the heavily guarded border is not possible. The Tribunal was also mandated to investigate how the violations of human rights by the militants intersect with those security forces.kashmirprocess.html

Findings

In December 2009 the International People's Tribunal released a report titled Buried Evidence. The Tribunal has criticized the United Nations and its members for failing to stop the fallout of the India's militarization in the valley.
In December 2012 IPTK along with Association of Parents of Disappeared Persons released a report Alleged Perpetrators – Stories of Impunity in Jammu and Kashmir, which alleged involvement of about 500 Indian Armed Forces officials in human rights abuses in Kashmir.

Activities

In 2008 the Tribunal officials came under attack in the valley allegedly from Indian security forces. Besides spying and harassment of the tribunal, grenades were hurled at Parvez Imroz's residence in Kashmir on 30th June. The tribunal in a memorandum submitted to the government said that the use of landmines by the Indian Security Forces in the valley imperils the lives of civilian population.

Reception

The local people of the Kashmir valley including the Hindu pandits welcomed the Tribunal and offered their help even when they were threatened. The people according to Imroz were content that this issue is being taken up internationally. The European Parliament supported the Tribunal by inviting them to testify before Parliament's Subcommittee on Human Rights at Brussels and adopting a resolution on allegations of mass graves  in 2008.








