[[Embassy (horse)]]

CATEGORIES: Cartier Award winners, 1995 racehorse births, Thoroughbred family 8

Embassy was a British champion Thoroughbred racehorse and broodmare. She won three of her four starts as a two-year-old including the Group One Cheveley Park Stakes and the Group Three Princess Margaret Stakes. She was named European Champion Two-year old Filly at the Cartier Racing Awards, and was the highest rated two-year-old filly in the International Classification. At the end of her two-year-old season she was transferred to the Godolphin Racing team, but never ran again.

Background

Embassy was bred by her owner Sheikh Mohammed. She was sired by the sprinter Cadeaux Genereux out of Pass The Peace.
Cadeaux Genereux won several major sprint races including the Nunthorpe Stakes and the July Cup. At stud he sired over 1,000 winners including Touch of the Blues (Atto Mile), Bijou d'Inde (St. James's Palace Stakes) and Toylsome (Prix de la Forêt). Pass The Peace won the Cheveley Park Stakes in 1988 and was also the dam of the Pretty Polly Stakes winner Tarfshi.
Embassy was trained for all her races by David Loder at Newmarket, Suffolk.

Racing career

1997: two-year-old season

Embassy began her career as the odds-on favourite for a maiden race at Newmarket. Pat Eddery tracked the leaders on Embassy before sending her into the lead a furlong out and winning by one and a quarter lengths from a field that included the future May Hill Stakes winner Midnight Line.
Just over two weeks later, Embasssy was stepped up to Group Three level for the Princess Margaret Stakes at Ascot, for which she was made joint-favourite with Miss Zafonic. Embassy moved into the lead inside the last quarter mile and went clear to win by two lengths.
For her next start Embassy was sent to York for the Group Two Lowther Stakes, in which she was matched against the Queen Mary Stakes winner Nadwah and the highly regarded Cape Verdi. Embassy took the lead, but drifted left inside the final furlong and was caught on the line and beaten a short head by Cape Verdi, who was receiving three pounds.
On her final start, Embassy met Cape Verdi again in the Group One Cheveley Park Stakes at Newmarket in which she was ridden by Kieren Fallon. Since the York race Cape Verdi had been bought by Godolphin, and she started the 11/8 favourite ahead of Embassy on 5/2. Fallon held his filly up in the early stages before bringing her up to challenge for the lead a furlong out. Embassy quickened well and pulled clear of the field to win by two and a half lengths from Crazee Mental, with Cape Verdi fourth.

1998: three-year-old season

Embassy was transferred by Sheikh Mohammed to the Godolphin racing team and joined the stable of Saeed Bin Suroor. She spent the winter in Dubai and was returned to England the following spring. She was identified by Godolphin's racing manager, Simon Crisford as one of Godolphin's biggest hopes for 1998, despite a "minor scare" in training in March which required veterinary attention.
Embassy never recovered her form and her retirement was announced in August 1998.

Race record

Assessment

In the International Classification for 1997, Embassy was given a rating of 118, making her officially the best two-year-old filly in Europe.
She was also named European Champion Two-year-old filly at the Cartier Racing Awards.

Stud career

At stud Emabssy has produced at least four minor winners: Diplomatic, Grosvenor Square, Felicitous and Gleneagles. She also produced Politesse, who was the dam of the Prix Maurice de Gheest winner King's Apostle.
Embassy was scheduled to be auctioned in December 2009 at Tattersalls, but was withhdrawn from sale.

Pedigree




