[[Gregory Taronites (governor of Chaldia)]]

CATEGORIES: 11th-century births, 12th-century deaths, 12th-century Byzantine people, Byzantine governors, Byzantine prisoners and detainees, Byzantine rebels, Generals of Alexios I Komnenos, Medieval Pontus, Taronites family

Gregory Taronites () was a Byzantine governor of the theme of Chaldia (modern north-eastern Black Sea coast of Turkey) who rebelled against Emperor Alexios I Komnenos in 1103/4 and governed his province as a virtually independent ruler until his defeat in battle in 1106/7. He was then imprisoned for some time in the Prison of Anemas, before obtaining an imperial pardon. Some scholars have proposed an identification with Gregory Gabras, but this is disputed.

Origin and early life

Gregory belonged to the aristocratic family of the Taronitai, a clan of princely Armenian origin from Taron.
From a series of letters by Archbishop Theophylact of Ohrid, it appears that Gregory Taronites originally held some civilian office in the Balkans, before being entrusted with a mission to the Pontus c. 1101–1103. There, according to Theophylact, he triumphed against the Seljuk Turks and the Franks, the latter probably a reference to his role in ransoming Bohemond I of Antioch, who had been a captive of the Turks at Neokaisareia since his defeat in the Battle of Melitene in 1100.

Governorship and rebellion in Chaldia

On his arrival at Trebizond, the capital of the province, Gregory resolved to rebel against Alexios, and imprisoned his predecessor, Dabatenos, and various notables of the city. Alexios at first tried to convince him to submit peacefully, offering a full pardon, but Gregory replied with poems insulting the emperor, his family and the senior military and civilian leadership. Consequently, in 1105/6 Alexios dispatched an army under Gregory's cousin John Taronites, the son of Michael, against him. Gregory marched inland to Koloneia, from where he tried to conclude an alliance with the Danishmends of Sebasteia, but John managed to reach the town, attack it and capture his uncle before this effort bore fruit.
As his earlier offers had been so rudely rejected, Alexios at first intended to have Gregory blinded—the customary punishment for rebellion

Character

In his letters, Theophylact of Ohrid, with apparent sincerity, lavished praise on Gregory and his military and administrative ability, and hoped for him to restore the Empire's lost glory. On the other hand, Anna Komnene presents a more sober picture of the man: despite his rebellion, she is not hostile towards him, but emphasizes his headstrong character.



Sources


