[[Demographics of Bahrain]]

CATEGORIES: Demographics of Bahrain, Bahraini society

This article is about the demographic features of the population of Bahrain, including population density, ethnicity, education level, health of the populace, economic status, religious affiliations and other aspects of the population.
Most of the population of Bahrain is concentrated in the two principal cities, Manama and Al Muharraq. According to the 2010 census 70.2% of the population, including non-nationals, are Muslim and most Bahrainis are Muslim. 

Ethnic groups

Regarding the ethnicity of Bahrainis, a Financial Times article published on 31 May 1983 found that "Bahrain is a polyglot state, both religiously and racially. Discounting temporary immigrants of the past ten years, there are at least eight or nine communities on the island". These may be classified as:
Non-nationals make up 50% of the population of Bahrain.  Of those, the vast majority come from South and Southeast Asia: according to various media reports and government statistics dated between 2005-2009 roughly 290,000 Indians,

Population

Population census

Population estimates on July 1Sources: Bahrain Central Informatics Organization, population estimate July 1 of each year, and for 2008, 2009

Vital statistics

UN estimates  World Population Prospects: The 2010 Revision

Registered data United nations. Demographic Yearbooks Ministry of Health Statistics

Birth registration of Bahrain is available as of 1976, death registration started in 1990. Between 1976 and 2011 the number of births roughly doubled, but the birth rate decreased from 32 to 13 per 1,000. The death rate of Bahrain (1.9 per 1,000 in 2011) is among the lowest in the world.
e=estimate

Religions

Islam is the official religion. The citizen population is 99.8% Muslim, although the Muslim proportion falls to 70.2% when the non-national population is included. Current census data doesn't differentiate between the other religions in Bahrain, but there are about 1,000 Jewish citizens.
Muslims belong to the Shi'a and Sunni branches of Islam. There are no official figures, but the Shi'a constitute 46-60% of the Bahraini Muslim population.

CIA World Factbook demographic statistics

The following demographic statistics are from the CIA World Factbook, unless otherwise indicated.Bahrain at the World Factbook

Median age

Urbanization

Sex ratio

Maternal mortality

Health expenditure

HIV/AIDS

Languages

Literacy and education

Bahrain has traditionally boasted an advanced educational system. Schooling and related costs are entirely paid for by the government, and, although not compulsory, primary and secondary attendance rates are high. Bahrain also encourages institutions of higher learning, drawing on expatriate talent and the increasing pool of Bahrainis returning from abroad with advanced degrees. University of Bahrain was established in 1986 for standard undergraduate and graduate study, and the College of Health Sciences—operating under the direction of the Ministry of Health—trains physicians, nurses, pharmacists, and paramedics.
Overall literacy is 94.6% (96.1% for men and 91.6% for women) (2010 census).

Education expenditure



Notes

Sources


