[[Michael W. Kirst]]

CATEGORIES: Education, Living people, 1939 births, Harvard University alumni

Michael (Mike) W. Kirst is the current President of the California State Board of Education and Professor Emeritus of Education and Business Administration at Stanford University.

Biography

Michael Kirst was born on August 1, 1939 in West Reading, Pennsylvania. He is married to Wendy Burdsall Kirst, with whom he has two children, Anne and Michael.
Michael received his bachelor's degree in Economics from Dartmouth College in 1961. In 1963, he received his M.P.A. in Government and Economics from Harvard University. He received his Ph.D. in Political Economy and Government from Harvard in 1964.
Dr. Kirst worked for the federal government before joining the faculty at Stanford. He held several positions, including Staff Director of the U.S. Senate Subcommittee on Manpower, Employment and Poverty, and Director of Program Planning and Evaluation for the Bureau of Elementary and Secondary Education in the U.S. Department of Education. He also held positions in the federal Office of Management and Budget, the White House Fellows, and worked as a program analyst for the Title I Elementary and Secondary Education Act Program since it began in 1965.
Dr. Kirst also participates in a variety of professional organizations. He was a fellow at the Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences. He has been a member of the National Academy of Education since 1979. He was Vice‑President of the American Educational Research Association and a commissioner of the Education Commission of the States. Kirst co-founded Policy Analysis for California Education (PACE).
Dr. Kirst publishes several entries a week in his blog, The College Puzzle.

Current Research

Dr. Kirst currently works as Co-Principal Investigator For the Gates Foundation Grant. He co-authored "Reform And Innovation In The New Ecology of American Higher Education", 2010-2013, a proposal to the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.stanford.pdf He also served as the Principal Investigator for the Community College Implementation of California Early Assessment Program from 2008-2010.

University Positions

Dr. Kirst has held a variety of university positions throughout his career. At Stanford University, he has served as:

Recent Selected Professional Experience

Dr. Kirst also has extensive professional experience outside of academia:

Publications

Dr. Kirst is the author of a variety of literature regarding school finance, curriculum politics, intergovernmental relations, and education reform policies.
Books:                
Dr. Kirst has also written and contributed to 24 monographs, 177 essays, 54 newspaper and magazine articles, and 54 web-based and working papers.

Editorial Boards

Dr. Kirst has worked on the Editorial Boards of several organizations and publications.

Honors

Many organizations and academies have recognized Dr. Kirst's contributions. Dr. Kirst's honors include:




