[[Heather Horst]]

CATEGORIES: American anthropologists, University of Minnesota alumni, University of California, Santa Barbara alumni, Alumni of University College London

Heather A. Horst is sociocultural anthropologist and author who writes on material culture, mobility, and the mediation of social relations. She is currently the Vice Chancellor's Senior Research Fellow in the School of Media and Communication at RMIT University in Melbourne, Australia and a Research Fellow in the MA program in digital anthropology at University College London. RMIT News  She has a B. A. from University of Minnesota, an M. A. from University of California, Santa Barbara, and a Ph. D. from University College, London (UCL). Horst served as an Associate Project Scientist for DML Research Hub in the Department of Humanities Research Institute at University of California, Irvine,"Heather Horst" on University of California-Irvine website Accessed: 24 September 2011 an Honorary Research Associate in Department of Anthropology and a faculty of Social & Historical Sciences at University College London."Heather Horst" on University College London website Accessed: 24 September 2011
Horst's research focuses upon the relationship between place, space and new media. Her research has been published in a range of journals, including Social Anthropology, Current Anthropology, Journal of Material Culture,Tiziano Bonini (2011). The media as 'home-making' tools: life story of a Filipino migrant in Milan. Media, Culture&Society, 33(6), 869-883. Global Networks, Identities, International Journal of Communication and the Caribbean Review of Gender Studies. She has been a guest editor for special issues of the International Journal of Communication, Journal of Material Culture, International Journal of Cultural Studies and Home Cultures.).

Research

Heather Horst's research focuses on the relationship between material culture and the role of objects and artifacts in mediating social relations, with particular attention to mobility and the global movement of people, objects, goods, media and capital in different national and transnational spaces.
The idea of starting this research came from Heather horst's 'dissertation worked in Mandeville, Jamaica, which explored the imagination, construction and transformation of the meanings of 'home' among Jamaicans who migrated to Britain after World War II and returned to Jamaica to retire in the 1990s.'  In this research, Heather Horst works on the relationship between material culture, property and personhood by understanding the materiality of the house assert, recognize and negotiate personhood in colonial and postcolonial Jamaica.research-Heather Horst Accessed: 24 September 2011
In order to examine the relationship between new media in this research, Heather Horst began to study on the 'global and transnational processes involved in the construction of the 'digital divide' as part of a multi-national comparative study funded by the British Department for International Development (DFID) to examine the implications of new information and communication technologies in Ghana, India, Jamaica and South Africa working with Daniel Miller.'

Projects

Information Society: Emergent Technologies and Development in the SouthInformation Society: Emergent Technologies and Development in the South Accessed: 24 September 2011

It is a large-scale DFID-funded project which compared the relationship between Information and communications technology (ICTs) and development in Ghana, India, Jamaica and South Africa. As a part of it, Heather Horst was examining development, new information and communication technologies and the 'digital divide'. After completing her dissertation, she began to examine development, new information and communication technologies and the 'digital divide' as part of it.

Digital YouthFinal Report Accessed: 24 September 2011

During the time at University of California, Berkley prior to joining University of California, Irvine, Heather Horst was holding a position of a research called Digital Youth which is to address the gap between in-school and out-school experience with a targeted set of ethnographic investigations into three emergent modes of informal learning that young people are practicing using new media technologies: communication, learning, and play by exploring how kids use digital media in their everyday lives. 
This study aims to understand the role of digital media in children and youths' communication, learning, knowledge, play and, in turn, how digital media may affect their relationships with their peers, siblings, parents or other household members.
Working with Laura Robinson, Heather Horst, Mizuko Ito and Lou-Anthony Limon designed this project to understand practices and participation of young people using the online gaming site, Neopets.

Mobiles, Migrants and Money: A Study of Mobility at the Haitian-Dominican Republic BorderMobiles, Migrants and Money: A Study of Mobility at the Haitian-Dominican Republic Border Accessed: 24 September 2011

Heather was working with Erin Taylor, and Espelencia Baptiste on this project which investigates the role of mobile phones in the economic and social wellbeing among some of the world's poorest people living at and moving across the border of Haiti and the Dominican Republic.

Publicationspublications-Heather Horst Accessed: 22 September 2011






