[[Research and Development Institute of Ecology and the Sustainable Use of Natural Resources]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 2005, 2005 establishments in Russia, Recycling organisations, Service companies of Russia, Privately held companies of Russia, Tyumen Oblast, Deepwater Horizon oil spill

The Research and Development Institute of Ecology and the Sustainable Use of Natural Resources, LLC (), or Research institute of Ecology, the abbreviation is the RSI — a company from Tyumen (Tyumen Oblast, Russia) specializes in development of innovation technologies in the field of environmental protection and nature conservation.
One of the first residents of the business incubator within the 

History

The founder of the RSI Julia Deneko (born in 1982) graduated the Faculty of Ecology and Geography of the 
The company was founded by Julia in 2005
In 2010, RSI took part in the aftereffects destruction of the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, the Gulf of Mexico (USA): it supplied materials and waged a field supervision.

Structure

The information about the head of the company is contradictory. According to one data, the CEO of the company is Julia Deneko,
The company has 10 affiliates in the Khanty-Mansi Autonomous Okrug and the Yamalo-Nenets Autonomous Okrug.

Activity

Technology

RSI owns 6 patented technologies and 14 certified materials. On the forum «The new technologies of the oil waste processing and the contaminated land revegetation» held in Moscow, in 2012, the participants displayed a high interest to the oil sorbent boom, the local above gas flare device for use of associated petroleum gas; and the landfill mobile plant Dekontamobil.

=The fiber oil sorbent boom=

The most known technology of the company is the fiber oil sorbent boom. The ideologist of the invention is Petr Gvozdyak – the doctor of Biological Sciences, the professor of the Colloid chemistry and the Water chemistry Institute of the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine (Kiev), who invented the method of sewage treatment by bioremediation (SU 1428713 A1 patent).
The essence of the technology is that the special fibers saturated with oil eating microbes are fastened on the floating booms. The fibers hook up the oil patches on themselves and microbes biodegrade it during several days, oil is decomposed into carbonic acid and water. The fiber attachments do not hinder the water flow. Also it has the largest absorbing surface area: 5-10 thous. m2 per 1 cubic metre of the construction. The tests on the river  show the reduction of the petroleum product concentration of water column in 4 times, the surface pellicular oil reduced in 43 times.
The project became the finalist of the «

=The pyrolysis plant by TransGlobal Remediation Group=

In the result of the partnership with TransGlobal Remediation Group in the time of the aftermath's destruction of the Gulf of Mexico accident, RSI got the exclusive right to distribute the American pyrolysis plants into Russia. The plants allow the processing of any organic compound with at a rate of from 115 kg to 8 tons per hour with the performance 99%. On the downstream the synthetic fuel, biogas, biofuel and electric energy are generated.

=The local above gas flare device=

The device allows the increasing of the combustion temperature of the associated petroleum gas; as a result, the majority of pollutants will burn down inside gas flare. It causes the reduction of pollutant emissions into the atmosphere (according to the developer – in 20-40 times). The obtained heat can be used in greenhouses.
The company obtained a grant from the Governor of the Tyumen Oblast for the realization of its technology. In October, 2011, the head of RSI was proposed by the head of the community «Futurerussia Skolkovo» Ivan Burtnik to apply for the including in the list of residents of the Skolkovo Innovation Center (Skolkovo, Moscow Oblast, Russia). The first successful tests of the plant were held in March, 2012. The technology is planned for its needs by the company ILF Consulting Engineers (Munich, Germany).

=Decontamix=

The name originates from the words «decontamination» (purification) and «mix» (mixing). This material is the type of so-called «burolit» mixture – the product of the drilled cuttings processing, it is used for the highways building. Victor Ryadinskiy built the so-called earth house of the decontamix on his own land lot, in the village of Reshetnikova, near Tyumen. He called it «burlyanka». A house from such material can be built in 2–5 days, its thermal insulation is provided by the soil layer 1,5 m thick and by grass and snow.

Burlyanka 01.jpg
Burlyanka 02.jpg
Burlyanka 03.jpg
Burlyanka 04.jpg

=The pump for viscous liquid fluid=

It is the codevelopment with the American researchers, it was presented for the first time within the exhibition «NeftGasTEK-2011» in Tyumen. It is able to pump 115 cubic meters of viscous liquid fluid per hour from the depth up to 30 meters.

=3D-Vision Space=

It exists only in the design phase. The idea is based on the technology of pattern recognition, owned by the Russian company «Papillon Systems» (Miass, Chelyabinsk Oblast), the resident of the business incubator Plug and Play Tech Center (Sunnyvale, California) in Silicon Valley (USA). RSI proposed to use this technology for the recognition of the both pollutant free and contaminated territories. From the American side, the formalization of the information on the environmental technologies is represented by the KMT International, Inc (Fremont, California).

Capacities

RSI has implemented several hundred projects for leading oil companies in northern Russia. held the revegetation of circa 1,000 hectares of disturbed and contaminated lands. 80% of offers are obtained from the Tyumen Oblast (including autonomous okrugs).

Community involvement

In 2012, the company was a partner of the III International Innovation Forum «NeftGazTEK» in Tyumen.

Awards and achievements

Corporate

Personal

Julia Deneko:



Further reading




