[[Louisiana's 5th congressional district special election, 2013]]

CATEGORIES: Special elections to the 113th United States Congress, United States House of Representatives elections, 2013, United States House of Representatives elections in Louisiana, United States House of Representatives special elections

A special election for Louisiana's 5th congressional district was held on November 16, 2013, to elect a member of the United States House of Representatives.
The primary election was held on October 19, 2013. Under Louisiana's jungle primary system, all candidates appear on the same ballot, regardless of party. As no candidate received 50 percent plus one vote during the primary election, the general election was held on November 16 between the top two candidates in the primary, Republicans Neil Riser, a State Senator from Columbia in Caldwell Parish, and Vance McAllister, a businessman from Swartz. In the general election, McAllister handily defeated Riser to win the seat.

Background

On August 6, 2013, Alexander announced that he would not seek a seventh term in the House in the 2014 congressional elections. He cited his weariness with partisanship in Washington, D.C., as the primary reason for his decision to retire.

Controversy

The day after Alexander announced his resignation, Republican State Senator Neil Riser publicly declared his candidacy and launched his website. Within days, he had hired a campaign manager and started distributing campaign material. Riser's unusually fast response to the unexpected announcement of the special election led to charges of favoritism by Alexander and Governor Jindal. Specifically, that they colluded to declare Alexander's appointment to the State Cabinet in a surprise announcement and ensure a short filing period so as to benefit Riser, who, it was alleged, knew of Alexander's plans in advance.
Riser had filed documents with the Federal Election Commission to run in the special election the day before Alexander announced his resignation, although he claimed that this was a "clerical error" on the part of the FEC.
Republican State Representative Jay Morris declared his candidacy and accused Alexander and Jindal of trying to "rig the election", adding that "it appears to me some sort of deal was made to grant an advantage to Riser. It disturbs me and should disturb everyone that an election could be manipulated like this."
The Jindal administration has responded that the election was not rigged, with press secretary Sean Lansing saying: "There is no truth to the claims." Timmy Teepell, who previously worked as a political consultant for Riser and as Jindal's Chief of Staff said: "It's a free country, and nobody is prevented from running. Is two weeks not enough time... to get to Baton Rouge to qualify to run next week?" Alexander said, "There was no deal", and Riser added, "I don't think it was any secret that I wanted to eventually run for the seat. I've been clear the past two years about my intention to run." After Riser announced that he would run for Congress, Teepell and his Virginia-based On Message, Inc., assumed management of the campaign.

Candidates

Republican Party

=Declared=

=Declined=

=Endorsements=

Democratic Party

=Declared=

=Declined=

Libertarian Party

=Declared=

Others

=Declared=

Jungle primary

Polling

Other polls that were not made public showed that Riser was a "lock" to make the runoff with Holloway "consistently" polling in second place. Morris, McAllister and Mayo also had the potential to make the runoff, with McAllister seen as the most likely to benefit from a slip in support for Holloway.

Results

General election

Candidates

Campaign

Riser was the heavy favorite to win and McAllister was thought to have little chance of pulling off an upset.

Results






