[[PBS America]]

CATEGORIES: Public Broadcasting Service, Television channels in the United Kingdom, Television channels and stations established in 2011, 2011 establishments in the United Kingdom

PBS America is a British pay-TV version of the American non-profit television network PBS. It is a joint venture between entrepreneur David Lyons and PBS Distribution, which owns the international rights to the bulk of PBS's output.

Availability

PBS America launched on 1 November 2011 (as PBS UK) via satellite on Sky and via cable on Virgin Media. On 23 August 2011, PBS UK launched a placeholder channel called Rosa on Sky channel 231,
On 19 April 2012, the channel's Sky EPG slot was put up for sale, with seven figure offers anticipated by broker Canis Media.
On 24 July 2013, PBS America moved to the Documentaries section on Sky channel 534.

Programming

The channel consists of content drawn exclusively from PBS, Children's programming such as Sesame Street does not air on the channel because the market is "well served for kids' content".

Branding and marketing

The slogan for PBS America is "Where television matters". Channel 4's Channel 4 Sales division is the exclusive advertising sales representative for the network. The general manager of PBS UK said of the pick, "In the States, PBS is well-loved and trusted for its award-winning programming, so it was essential for us to select a company capable of delivering a high quality viewing experience throughout the ad-breaks as well. There's an obvious fit between our two brands and we're delighted to be represented by Channel 4."
Branding and design agency Dunning Penney Jones was appointed to create the channel's on-air look and feel. As well as repurposing the PBS branding used in the US, they created new idents specifically for the UK channel. The agency also designed four colour themes for each of PBS America's four key programming strands for use on the channel, website and any off-air marketing.
On 4 July 2012, PBS UK was rebranded as PBS America.






