[[Vladimir Kush]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Living people, Russian sculptors, 20th-century Russian painters, 21st-century Russian painters

Vladimir Kush (born  1965) is a Russian born surrealist painter and sculptor. He studied at the Surikov Moscow Art Institute, and after several years working as an artist in Moscow, his native city, he emigrated to the United States, eventually establishing his own gallery on the island of Maui in Hawaii. His oil paintings are also sold as giclée prints which contributed to his popularity and led to the establishment of further galleries in Laguna Beach, California and Las Vegas, Nevada. In 2011 Kush won the First Prize in Painting at the Artistes du Monde international exhibition in Cannes.

Biography

Kush was born in 1965 in Moscow, Russia. After study at the Surikov Moscow Art Institute, he was conscripted into the Soviet Army for two years where he was assigned to painting murals. In 1987 he began exhibiting with the USSR Union of Artists but earned a living drawing portraits on the streets of Moscow and caricatures for a newspaper. In 1990, following his first foreign exhibition in Germany with two other Russian artists, he emigrated to the United States, initially living in Los Angeles before moving to Hawaii where he also worked as a mural painter for the Whaler's Village Museum on Maui. "Gallery Finds Russian Region Fertile Ground". Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Retrieved 27 January 2012. While based in Hawaii, his works received several exhibitions in Hong Kong galleries. Gallery shows followed in Seattle, Pittsburgh, and other American cities, and he eventually opened his own gallery, Kush Fine Art in Lahaina, Hawaii. "Vladimir Kush – Metaphorical Explorations, an artist finds his voice in Hawaii". Retrieved 27 January 2012 .
thumb|183 px|left|Kush moulding a sculpture based on his painting Pros and Cons For an image of the original painting see Kush Fine Art: Pros and Cons He later opened Kush Fine Art galleries in Las VegasGurnett, Kathleen (June 2006). "Flights of Shopping and Fantasy". San Diego Magazine, Vol. 58, No. 8, p. 20  and Laguna Beach, California. See: Clay, Joanna (12 January 2012). "Police: Galleries must be vigilant". Coastline Pilot. Retrieved 27 January 2012. Many of his original oil paintings are also sold as giclée prints which initially contributed to his popularity. In 2007 Kush sued the pop singer Pink and her record company for copyright infringement when imagery from his painting (and later giclée print), Contes Erotiques,For an image of the painting see Kush Fine Art: Contes Erotiques was used without his authorisation for her 2006 video U + Ur Hand. The case was settled the following year when the singer agreed to pay him undisclosed damages. "Pink sued by painter" 

Style and works

Kush predominantly works in the medium of oil painting on canvas or board, with many of the original paintings also sold as limited edition giclée-on-canvas prints. His bronze-colored sculptures are small-scale and usually based on imagery from his paintings, such as Walnut of Eden and Pros and Cons. Although his style is frequently described as surrealist, Kush himself refers to it as "metaphorical realism" and cites the early influence on his style of Salvador Dalí's surrealist paintings as well as landscapes by the German romantic painter Caspar David Friedrich. "Something Once Known, Something Once Dreamed". The Santa Fe New Mexican. Retrieved 27 January 2012. Another influence on his work has been the 16th century Dutch painter Hieronymus Bosch, known for his fantastic imagery and sometimes characterised as "the pre-Surrealism Surrealist". Wings, ships, and color-saturated seacapes are frequent themes in his paintings, exemplified in the companion pieces, Arrival of the Flower Ship and Departure of the Winged Ship. Flowing water is another recurrent theme, exemplified by Breach and Current. Other works such as Three Graces and African Sonata merge human and animal forms with inanimate objects.

List of paintings

Original paintings by Kush include:For images of the paintings described in this section, see Kush Fine Art: African Sonata, Arrival of the Flower Ship, Breach, Current, Departure of the Winged Ship, Family Tree, Three Graces, Wind, Winged Satellite

Publications

[/ref]






