[[Aloysius Society]]

CATEGORIES: Organisations associated with the University of Oxford, Clubs and societies of the University of Oxford, Philanthropic organisations based in the United Kingdom

The Aloysius Society is a philanthropic group of current, and former, Oxford University students dedicated to supporting those in need around the globe. Founded by Lawrence Barclay and Francesca Lamarque in 2008, Aloysius Society members organise large-scale events to raise money and awareness for their chosen charities. 
Past events have included the Sugarplum Ball (2009), the Oxford Red Dress Couture Ball (2010), the Marefat Dinner (2011), and the Mindful Gala Dinner (2011).

Events

The Sugarplum Ball

The first event organised by the Aloysius Society was the Sugarplum Ball, held at the Natural History Museum on 30 November 2009 in aid of SOS Children's Villages, Michelin-starred chef Tom Aikens designed the menu, Tracey Emin designed the invitations, and auction prizes included a picture of Kate Moss's bottom, owned by her. The ball's sponsors included Ivan the Terrible, and Martell.

The Oxford Red Dress Couture Ball

On 18 June 2010, The Oxford Red Dress Couture Ball was a three-part event organised by the Aloysius Society

The Marefat Dinner

The Society organised the Marefat Dinner with Lord Speaker Baroness D'Souza and journalist Christa D'Souza, at The Connaught on 3 February 2011. The dinner was in aid of the Marefat High School in West Kabul, Afghanistan, which champions education in one of Kabul's most devastated districts. The dinner was attended by guests including Roland Mouret, Alice Temperley, Jemima Khan, Fatima Bhutto, Edie Campbell, Vogue editor Alexandra Shulman, Tatler editor Kate Reardon, Laura Bailey, Cherie Blair, The auction included prize experiences donated by Roland Mouret, Yotam Ottolenghi and the Dorchester Collection, with Jeremy Clarkson offering an impromptu driving lesson that fetched £19,000. An Afghan-inspired feast was designed by two-Michelin-starred chef Hélène Darroze, and drinks were sponsored by Moët & Chandon.

The Mindful Gala Dinner

On 21 September 2011, the Aloysius Society organised the Mindful Gala Dinner with Mind to launch the Mindful of Art exhibition curated by artist Stuart Semple. The exhibition, held in the Old Vic Tunnels, included artworks from world-renowned artists such as Tracey Emin, Jake and Dinos Chapman, Sarah Lucas, Mat Collishaw and the late Sebastian Horsley. The dinner took place at the Imperial War Museum and was hosted by Lord Melvyn Bragg and Stephen Fry, who officially took up his role as President of the mental health charity during the evening.
Prizes auctioned off on the night by Sotheby's auctioneer Lord Dalmeny included a day in the recording studio with The Kooks. and drinks were sponsored by Veuve Cliquot.

Partner Events

The Aloysius Society also partnered with the Inca Ball, the Poppy Ball, and the Jasmine Ball. Aloysius's Lawrence Barclay and Nadeem Lalani are on the committee of the Inca Ball and Poppy Ball respectively.thepoppyball.co.php

Press

Aloysius events have been covered by a wide range of publications, including the Evening Standard, The Guardian,




