[[Australia at the 1964 Summer Paralympics]]

CATEGORIES: Nations at the 1964 Summer Paralympics, Australia at the Paralympics, 1964 in Australian sport

The 1964 Summer Paralympics, held in Tokyo, were the second of their type and ran from the 8 to 12 November. In these Games, Australia finished fourth on the medal tally, with a total of 38 medals (12 gold, 11 silver, and 7 bronze). The Australian team left Sydney for Tokyo on 5 November 1964, comprising 25 athletes, staff and others, having conducted final preparations and briefing at Prince Henry's Hospital. On 7 November, the team attended a reception hosted by the Governor of Tokyo Dr Royotaro Ayuimo.3 No. 4, December 1964, pp.7, 9 The opening ceremony was held the following day, involving 375 competitors and 144 medal events in 9 sports.
 
The games were, in general, given a glowing review by members of the Australian Paralympic team. Although timing was tight, the entire program being run in just four days, events were well organised and the athletes were treated with a sense of legitimacy and professionalism that had so far been absent from disability sport. One Australian athlete recalls, 'At the village we were halted by a magnificent entrance welcoming us with flags, banners and posters for the Paralympics. It was clear that Japan had decided to show their visitors the hospitality and efficiency that she had shown the Olympic Visitors'"With the Australian Paraplegic Team in Tokyo,"The Australian Paraplegic 3, no.4 (1964), 9

Team

Australia sent 15 athletes to the 1964 Summer Paralympics.
The team members were:
Accompanying the team were 8 escorts, all with specific roles to play within the team:  
 
– Dr George Bedbrook (Team Leader & Medical Officer)
– Johnno Johnson (Manager & Remedial Gymnast)
– Margaret Buzacott (Nurse)
– Kevin Betts (Attendant)
– Bill Gibbs (Attendant)
– K. Pinschers (Coach) 
– Tim Timmermans (Coach) 
– Cyril Thomas (Baggage Master) 
Australia's main victories were in the pool, where Roy Fowler won three gold medals and Elizabeth Edmondson also won three gold medals at the age of 14.
Elizabeth Edmondson was the youngest competitor at the games. After the 1964 games, Edmondson returned home and prepared for school exams.

Medalists

| width="78%" align="left" valign="top" |
| width="22%" align="left" valign="top" |


Events

Archery

Australia represented by: 

Men – Lionel Cousens, Roy Fowler, John Martin 

Women – Daphne Ceeney

Athletics

Australia represented by: 

Men – Gary Hooper 

Women – Daphne Ceeney, Marion O'Brien, Elaine Schreiber


Swimming

Australia represented by: 

Men –  Michael Dow, Trevor French, Roy Fowler Frank Ponta, Bruce Thwaite 

Women Daphne Ceeney, Elizabeth Edmondson 

Coach Tim Timmerman

Table Tennis

Australia represented by: 

Men – Allan McLucas 

Women – Daphne Ceeney, Marion O'Brien, Elaine Schreiber

Weightlifting

Australia represented by: 

Men – Michael Dow, Gary Hooper, Vic Renalson
 Bruce Thwaite

Wheelchair basketball

Australia did not field a wheelchair basketball team at the 1964 Summer Paralympics.

Wheelchair fencing

Australia represented by: 

Men – Gary Hooper, Bill Mather-Brown, Frank Ponta  
         Women – Daphne Ceeney  
 Coach – Mr K. Pinches.

Closing ceremony

The ceremony was held in the indoor basketball arena, "a grand amphitheatre", according to Australian ParaplegicDecember 1964, Australian Paraplegic Council, Perth, p. 15.

Return to Australia

Media coverage





Further reading

Several oral histories are available online from Australian athletes who competed at the Games.




