[[Heat Rush]]

CATEGORIES: Beyoncé fragrances

Heat Rush  is a second fragrance endorsed by American singer Beyoncé Knowles. In February 2011, Knowles released the perfume as a sister scent to Heat. While Heat is billed as an "overtly sexy" fragrance, Heat Rush is intended to be more for daytime use.
According to Steve Mormoris, Senior Vice President of Marketing, Coty Beauty, "This fragrance is inspired by the bright and subtle sensuality that transcends every aspect of Beyoncé's life." Knowles commented on the scent's "Rush" aspect stating: "I created Heat Rush to bring the feeling of warmth and sensuality to every woman who wears it. It's feminine and sexy, fresh and beautiful."

Design and conception

New fragrance project working sessions took place backstage in Newcastle upon Tyne, England in November 2009. During the new fragrance project working sessions, Knowles deciphered through different scents, later choosing a "Sunset Cocktail Mod 5" scent because it made her feel "as though a breeze were coming through the room" and seemed "like more of a risk." In an interview with Perfumer, Honorine Blanc declared that "a woman in love with Heat Rush is in control of her personality and sensuality." Blanc revealed that the orange color was very important to the fragrance's bottle design, for its vibrancy and energy that it adds to the scent, and added that Knowles' sensuality as well as sexuality inspired the perfume's re-release. Blanc also commented that the construction of the scent's bottle is very important, for it needed to find the right balance where everything works together. Blanc took on an appreciation for Knowles while working with her, stating that her drive is what inspired her to work on the fragrance more. She stated:
 
 Beyoncé, she lives her passion. She's so sensual, and she's so powerful. And she puts it out there, she's not afraid of it. She's very involved in the fragrance. She knows what she wants. I always had more feedback from her; I always had to have more signature and stronger all the time.

Heat Rush is a fruity floral fragrance that is luminous and vibrant with a dewy delicacy at the same time.s staff members.

Promotion and reception

Following the release of Heat Rush, Knowles released new candids to promote the fragrance featuring photos of the fragrance itself and of Knowles posing with the bottle.
Houston's Style Magazine

Products

The fragrance's Eau de Toilette has sparkling top notes of passion fruit, blood orange and Brazilian cherry.
The scent's accompanying Gold Shimmering Body Cream hydrates skin and leaves a light veil of sparkles. The body cream can either be sold separately or included within the scents original Eau de Toilette, available in one size—
The scent's Energizing Shower Gel was released exclusively in Europe, in one size—
Following the release of Heat Rush, the fragrance was included in a "Heat Rush Launch Gift Set" which contained a 3.4 fl. oz. Eau de Toilette Spray, a 2.5 fl. oz. Gold Shimmering Body Lotion, and a 2.5 fl. oz. Energizing Shower Gel. Additionally released, a "Chic Gold Tote Bag" was included with any $59 purchase from Knowles' fragrance collection. A "Fragrance Candy Wrapper" was also made available to the public for free at local retailers, which included a fragrance candy wrapper of Heat Rush.






