[[Badlands (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1973 films, 1970s crime drama films, Films set in the 1950s, American crime drama films, Directorial debut films, English-language films, Films based on actual events, Films directed by Terrence Malick, Films set in South Dakota, Road movies, Serial killer films, United States National Film Registry films, Warner Bros. films, Films shot in Colorado

Badlands is a 1973 American crime film written and directed by Terrence Malick, starring Martin Sheen and Sissy Spacek. Warren Oates and Ramon Bieri are also featured. Malick has a small speaking part, although he does not receive an acting credit. The story, though fictional, is loosely based on the real-life murder spree of Charles Starkweather and his girlfriend, Caril Ann Fugate, in 1958, though such a basis was not acknowledged when the film was released. It was the feature film debut of Charlie Sheen.
In 1993, five years after the United States National Film Registry was established, Badlands was selected for preservation by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

Plot

Badlands is narrated by Holly (Spacek), a teenage girl living in a dead-end South Dakota town. One day she meets Kit (Sheen), a young greaser, who charms and runs away with her. Holly's narration, describing her adventures with Kit in romantic clichés, is juxtaposed as Kit's increasingly antisocial and violent behavior is slowly revealed. The two are eventually arrested; Kit is executed for his crimes, while Holly receives probation.

Cast

Production

Malick, a protégé of Arthur Penn (whom he thanked in the film's end credits), In 1970, Malick, at age 27, began working on the screenplay during a road trip. "The start of something beautiful." (Archive) The Guardian. Thursday August 21, 2008. "I wrote and, at the same time, developed a kind of sales kit with slides and video tape of actors, all with a view to presenting investors with something that would look ready to shoot," Malick said. "To my surprise, they didn't pay too much attention to it; they invested on faith. I raised about half the money and executive producer Edward Pressman the other half." Malick paid $25,000 of his own funds. The remainder of his share was raised from professionals such as doctors and dentists. Badlands was the first feature film that Malick had written for himself to direct.
Principal photography took place in the summer of 1972, beginning in July, with a non-union crew and a considerably low budget of $300,000 (excluding some deferments to film labs and actors).
The film was edited by Robert Estrin; Billy Weber is credited as associate editor. Both he and the art designer Jack Fisk went on to work on all of Malick's features made to date.
Though Malick paid close attention to period detail, he did not want it to overwhelm the picture. "I tried to keep the 1950s to a bare minimum," he said. "Nostalgia is a powerful feeling; it can drown out anything. I wanted the picture to set up like a fairy tale, outside time." Malick, at a news conference coinciding with the film's festival debut, called Kit "so desensitized that he can regard the gun with which he shoots people as a kind of magic wand that eliminates small nuisances."  Malick also pointed out that "Kit and Holly even think of themselves as living in a fairy tale", and he felt that was very appropriate as "children's books like Treasure Island were often filled with violence." He also hoped a "fairy tale" tone would "take a little of the sharpness out of the violence but still keep its dreamy quality."
Warner Brothers eventually purchased and distributed the completed film for a sum just under a million dollars.

Score

The film's score makes repeated use of the short composition Gassenhauer from Carl Orff's Schulwerk, and also uses other pieces from the Schulwerk. The same piece was used for a scene in the film Ratcatcher and used as an influence in the film  Monster  and Finding Forrester. A cover by Hans Zimmer entitled "You're So Cool" is used throughout the film True Romance.whosampled.com/cover/view/80012/Hans%20Zimmer-You're%20So%20Cool_Carl%20Orff-Gassenhauer/

Reception

Badlands was the closing feature film at the 1973 New York Film Festival, reportedly "overshadowing even Martin Scorsese's Mean Streets." In April 1974, Jay Cocks wrote the film "might better be regarded less as a companion piece to Bonnie and Clyde than as an elaboration and reply. It is not loose and high-spirited. All its comedy has a frosty irony, and its violence, instead of being brutally balletic, is executed with a dry, remorseless drive."
Writing years later for The Chicago Reader, Dave Kehr wrote "Malick's 1973 first feature is a film so rich in ideas it hardly knows where to turn. Transcendent themes of love and death are fused with a pop-culture sensibility and played out against a midwestern background, which is breathtaking both in its sweep and in its banality."  Spacek later said that Badlands changed the whole way she thought about filmmaking. "After working with Terry Malick, I was like, 'The artist rules. Nothing else matters.' My career would have been very different if I hadn't had that experience".[ref]
