[[Evolutionary linguistics]]

CATEGORIES: Evolution of language, Linguistics, Applied linguistics, Applied Linguistics Task Force articles

Evolutionary linguistics is a cover term for the scientific study of both the origins and development of language as well as the cultural evolution of languages. The main challenge in this research is the lack of empirical data: spoken language leaves practically no traces. This led to an abandonment of the field for more than a century. Since the late 1980s, the field has been revived in the wake of progress made in the related fields of psycholinguistics, neurolinguistics, evolutionary anthropology, evolutionary psychology, and cognitive science.

History

August Schleicher (1821–1868) and his Stammbaumtheorie are often quoted Inspired by the natural sciences, especially by biology, Schleicher became the first to compare changing languages to evolving species. Evolutionary Ideas and "Empirical" Methods: The Analogy Between Language and Species in the Works of Lyell and Schleicher. British Journal for the History of Science 26, pages 171–193 (1993) He introduced the representation of language families as an evolutionary tree in articles published in 1853.
Joseph Jastrow published a gestural theory of the evolution of language in the seventh volume of Science, 1886.
The Stammbaumtheorie proved very productive for comparative linguistics, but did not solve the major problem of studying the origin of language: the lack of fossil records. Some scholars abandoned the question of the origin of language as unsolvable. Famously, the Société Linguistique de Paris in 1866 refused to admit any further papers on the subject.
The field re-appeared in 1988 in the Linguistic Bibliography as a subfield of psycholinguistics. In 1990, Steven Pinker and Paul Bloom published their paper "Natural Language and Natural Selection" and from scientific journals.

Recent developments

Evolutionary linguistics as a field is rapidly emerging as a result of developments in neighboring disciplines. To what extent language's features are determined by genes, a hotly debated dichotomy in linguistics, has had new light shed upon it by the discovery of the FOXP2 gene.
Another controversial dichotomy is the question of whether human language is solely human or on a continuum with (admittedly far removed) animal communication systems. Studies in ethology have forced researchers to reassess many claims of uniquely human abilities for language and speech. For instance, Tecumseh Fitch has argued that the descended larynx is not unique to humans. Similarly, once held uniquely human traits such as formant perception, combinatorial phonology and compositional semantics are now thought to be shared with at least some nonhuman animal species. Conversely, Derek Bickerton and others argue that the advent of abstract words provided a mental basis for analyzing higher-order relations, and that any communication system that remotely resembles human language utterly relies on cognitive architecture that co-evolved alongside language.
As it leaves no fossils, language's form and even its presence are extremely hard or impossible  to deduce from physical evidence. Computational modeling is now widely accepted as an approach to assure the internal consistency of language-evolution scenarios. Approximately one-third of all papers presented at the 2010 Evolution of Language conference rely at least in part on computer simulations.

Approaches

One original researcher in the field is Luc Steels, head of the research units of Sony CSL in Paris and the AI Lab at the Vrije Universiteit Brussel. He and his team are currently investigating ways in which artificial agents self-organize languages with natural-like properties and how meaning can co-evolve with language. Their research is based on the hypothesis that language is a complex adaptive system that emerges through adaptive interactions between agents and continues to evolve in order to remain adapted to the needs and capabilities of the agents. This research has been implemented in fluid construction grammar (FCG), a formalism for construction grammars that has been specially designed for the origins and evolution of language. The approach of computational modeling and the use of robotic agents grounded in real life is claimed to be theory independent. It enables the researcher to find out exactly what cognitive capacities are needed for certain language phenomena to emerge. It also focuses the researcher in formulating  hypotheses in a precise and exact manner, whereas theoretical models often stay very vague.
Some linguists, such as John McWhorter, have analyzed the evolution and construction of basic communication methods such as Pidginization and Creolization.
"Nativist" models of "Universal Grammar" are informed by linguistic universals such as the existence of pronouns and demonstratives, and the similarities in each languages process of nominalization (the process of verbs becoming nouns) as well as the reverse, the process of turning nouns into verbs. This is a purely descriptive approach to what we mean by "natural language" without attempting to address its emergence.
Finally there are those archaeologists and evolutionary anthropologists – among them Ian Watts,

EVOLANG Conference

The Evolution of Language International Conferences  have been held biennially since 1996.





Further reading

|title=From hand to mouth : some critical stages in the evolution of language| editors= Stevan R Harnad; Horst D Steklis; Jane Beckman Lancaster | work = Origins and Evolution of Language and Speech | date = 1976 | publisher = New York Academy of Sciences | location = New York | isbn = 978-0-89072-026-4| oclc = 2493424 | url =  }}




