[[Hunted (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 2012 British television programme debuts, 2010s British television series, 2012 British television programme endings, BBC television dramas, Cinemax network shows, Espionage television series, Television shows set in London

Hunted is a 2012 British television drama series created and written by Frank Spotnitz and produced by Kudos Film and Television and Big Light Productions for British broadcaster BBC, for its flagship channel BBC One and American premium cable broadcaster Cinemax. The series premiered on Thursday 4 October 2012 on BBC One  on Cinemax.



Samantha (Melissa George) is an espionage operative for "Byzantium", 
The first series takes place mainly in London. If the show is commissioned for a second series, each series will take place in a different European city.  The New York–based actress will move to London for six months of the year to film the show.
On 14 November, 2012, it was reported that the BBC had decided not to renew Hunted for a second series, that Spotnitz was developing a spinoff series focusing on Melissa George's character.

Main cast

Production

The series was created by Frank Spotnitz (best known as executive producer and head writer for The X-Files), who will write the majority of the episodes of season 1. Spotnitz is executive producing with Kudos' Stephen Garrett (executive producer of Law & Order: UK, Spooks/MI5), Jane Featherstone (producer behind Spooks/MI5, The Hour, Life on Mars), Alison Jackson (Ashes to Ashes, Eternal Law), and BBC's Christopher Aird (Spooks, The Inspector Lynley Mysteries). 
After Spotnitz had wrapped up The X-Files he met Stephen Garrett and Jane Featherstone of Kudos Film and Television. They asked him to come to England and work with British television. Spotnitz had lived in Europe before and was interested in returning. He claims the idea was appealing but it simply never happened. The years passed and Spotnitz was talking to The X-Files star Gillian Anderson, who was visiting Los Angeles from London where she lives, and she asked, "Would you ever consider doing a show (in England)?". Spotnitz started talking to her about doing a spy series and then the first call he made was to Stephen Garrett since the two lost touch. "You know the idea of doing a show in England? I think I may finally have it".
On 13 January 2011, the BBC announced the show — then called Morton. Gillian Anderson was no longer attached to the show; it took Spotnitz and Kudos longer than estimated to get the green light from the BBC and by then, Anderson was too busy with other projects.
Spotnitz relocated to London with his family. While trying to get Hunted off the ground, he served as co-producer and head writer for Strike Back: Project Dawn (or just Strike Back in the United States), which was also produced by HBO for Cinemax, but co-produced with another British broadcaster, BSkyB (for Sky1), not the BBC.
On 22 September 2011, reports confirmed that HBO/Cinemax would come on board as co-producers and that the name Morton had been scrapped and the new name was Nemesis.
Spotnitz spent a lot of time researching private spy agencies. He told Screen International: "It's not an area I was very aware of until I went looking for it. Most private contractors don't want to be noticed. Their websites are dry and boring and they don't want the wrong kind of attention. I talked to people who run these companies in the US, United Kingdom and Switzerland and then I researched the type of personality working at them".
Simon Allen will serve as episode writer and associate producer.
Filming started on location in Wales, Scotland, London and Morocco. "There are no sound stages. It's all location filming. It's really expensive and difficult to do, but it looks so much better and has a real feel of authenticity", Spotnitz told The Hollywood Reporter. "It's international and it looks international".
During the series, Sam has childhood memories of an oast house and in episode 5 she finds the Oast House. This is the oast house at Little Scotney Farm, Lamberhurst, Kent. It is still a working oast house owned by the National Trust, producing hops to make "Scotney Ale".

Sam Hunter spinoff

On 25 September 2012, it was reported that British screenwriter Ben Harris had joined the writing team in preparation for a second series pickup from BBC One and Cinemax. 
Melissa George has reported that the second series of Hunted would be set in Berlin. The Australian star previously said that her Hunted role "could potentially be long-term", adding that she may be playing Sam "for the next five years".
On 3 November 2012, it was reported that British screenwriter Claire Wilson had joined the writing team in preparation for a second series pickup from BBC One and Cinemax.
However, on 14 November 2012, The Guardian reported that BBC One had decided not to commission a second series of Hunted, citing ratings declines as the primary reason.
Spotnitz has revealed that the original plans for Hunted Series Two — which would have followed Sam Hunter to Germany — have been abandoned in the wake of the series shake-up. "It's going to change — that plot was when we still had the BBC as a partner", he explained. "Now it's one of those funny things where it's the same character, but it's a different series." Spotnitz added that he "would very much expect" future episodes to air in the UK, adding that he has considered other British networks as potential partners.
In June 2013 it was announced that the second season would become a four-hour miniseries called Sam Hunter.

Episode list

Season 1 (2012)


