[[Christchurch East by-election, 2013]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 elections in New Zealand, By-elections in New Zealand

A by-election was held in the New Zealand electorate of Christchurch East on 30 November 2013. The seat was vacated following the resignation of Lianne Dalziel of the Labour Party from parliament, who contested and won the Christchurch mayoralty in October 2013.
The electorate is regarded as a safe Labour seat; the party has, apart from the 50-year gap when the electorate was abolished, held the electorate since the , although significant population changes since the 2011 Christchurch earthquake had made this allegiance to Labour less certain. Prior to the election, National's top party official in Canterbury had conceded that the by-election was "very, very hard for National to win". The by-election was won by Labour's Poto Williams, who prior to her selection as Labour's candidate was virtually unknown.

Background

Following months of speculation, The Press reported on 20 April 2013 that Lianne Dalziel would challenge Bob Parker for the Christchurch mayoralty.[ref]
[/ref] On 19 June Dalziel formally confirmed that she would contest the mayoralty, also announcing that she would resign from Parliament, which would cause a by-election in the Christchurch East electorate. Dalziel's resignation took effect on 11 October, the day before the announcement of the mayoralty election-results.[ref]
[/ref]

Candidates

Ten candidates were nominated.

Poto Williams (Labour)

The Labour Party nominated Poto Williams for the by-election.

Matthew Doocey (National)

The National Party nominated political newcomer Matthew Doocey for the by-election, who is a manager for the Canterbury District Health Board.
Doocey is a member of the well-known Carter family. Family patriarch Maurice Carter, a Christchurch City Councillor for over 40 years (1956–1989), was his grandfather, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives, David Carter, is his uncle. Doocey grew up in Christchurch and attended St Bede's College for his secondary schooling. The Dooceys bought their current home in Redwood, which currently falls into the Waimakariri electorate, in April 2011.

David Moorhouse (Green)

The Green Party nominated software developer David Moorhouse for the by-election.

Other candidates

Gareth Veale is the candidate for the ACT Party. Veale is a 24-year-old earthquake claims specialist whose campaign is focusing on issues of crime and property rights.
Paula Lambert is the candidate for the Aotearoa Legalise Cannabis Party.
The Conservative Party nominated Leighton Baker.
The Democrats for Social Credit nominated Jenner Lichtwark, a novelist.
Three people are contesting the by-election as independent candidates. One, Adam Holland, previously contested the Ikaroa-Rāwhiti by-election, and says that he will be running on "a platform of donating the entirety of my parliamentary salary to the region". The other independent candidates are Ian Gaskin and Sam Park.org.nz, 5 November 2013
Blair Anderson, a former deputy leader of the Aotearoa Legalise Cannabis Party,

Results




