[[Lavabit]]

CATEGORIES: Email clients, 2004 establishments in Texas, Privacy in the United States, Privacy of telecommunications, History of cryptography, Internet properties established in 2004

Lavabit is an encrypted email service, founded in 2004, that suspended operations on August 8, 2013 after it was ordered to turn over its Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) private key to the US government. Lavabit is owned and operated by Ladar Levison. Wired

History

Lavabit was founded by Texas-based programmers who formed Nerdshack LLC, renamed Lavabit LLC the next year, allegedly prompted by privacy concerns about Gmail, Google's free, widely used email service, and their use of the content of users' email to generate advertisements and marketing data. Lavabit is a third person future of the word "to wash" in Latin, it means "he/she/it will wash"Lavabit High Scalability Writeup  Lavabit offered significant privacy protection for their users' email, including asymmetric encryption. The strength of the cryptographic methods used was of a level that is presumed impossible for even intelligence agencies to crack.  In August 2013, Lavabit had about 410,000 users and offered free and paid accounts with levels of storage ranging from 128 megabytes to 8 gigabytes. Retrieved August 13, 2013.
Before the Snowden incident, Lavabit had complied with previous search warrants.  For example, in June 2013 a search warrant was executed against a Lavabit account for suspected possession of child pornography.

Connection to Edward Snowden

Lavabit received media attention in July 2013 when it was revealed that Edward Snowden was using the Lavabit email address edsnowden@lavabit. The day after Snowden revealed his identity, the federal government served a court order, dated June 10, 2013 and issued under 18 USC 2703(d), a 1994 amendment of the Stored Communications Act, asking for metadata on a customer who was unnamed. Kevin Poulsen of Wired wrote that "that the timing and circumstances suggest" that Snowden was this customer. "Feds Targeted Snowden's Email Provider the Day After NSA Whistleblower Went Public." Wired. September 27, 2013. In July 2013 the federal government obtained a search warrant demanding that Lavabit give away the private SSL keys to its service affecting all Lavabit users. "Edward Snowden's E-Mail Provider Defied FBI Demands to Turn Over Crypto Keys, Documents Show." Wired. October 2, 2013.

Suspension and gag order

On August 8, 2013, Lavabit suspended its operations, and the email service log-in page was replaced by a message from the owner and operator Ladar Levison. The New Yorker suggested that the suspension might be related to the National Security Agency's "domestic-surveillance practices". Levison stated in an interview that he has responded to "at least two dozen subpoenas" over the lifetime of the service. He hinted that the objectionable request was for "information about all the users" of Lavabit.
Levison explained he was under gag order and that he was legally unable to explain to the public why he ended the service.
Levison said that he could be arrested for closing the site instead of releasing the information, and it was reported that the federal prosecutor's office had sent Levison's lawyer an e-mail to that effect. 
Lavabit is believed to be the first technology firm that has chosen to suspend/shut down its operation rather than comply with an order from the United States government to reveal information or grant access to information.
In September 2013 Levison appealed the order that resulted in the closing of his website. "Lavabit's Owner Appeals Secret Surveillance Order That Led Him to Shutter Site." Wired. September 11, 2013.
Levison and his lawyer made two requests to Judge Claude M. Hilton to unseal the records, both of which were denied.   They also launched an appeals case regarding legality of the original warrant. The appeals court then requested the records to be unsealed.  Judge Claude M. Hilton then granted the request to unseal the records, despite his refusal the previous two times. On October 2, 2013, the Federal District Court in Alexandria, Virginia unsealed records in this case, with only the name and detail of the target of the search order censored. Wired suggested the target was likely Snowden. The court records show that the FBI sought Lavabit's SSL private key. Levison objected saying that the key would allow the government to access communications by all 400,000 customers of Lavabit. He also offered to add code to his servers that would provide the information required just for the target of the order. The court rejected this offer since it would require the government to trust Mr. Levison and stated that just because the government could access all customers' communication did not mean they would be legally permitted to do so. Lavabit was ordered to provide the SSL key in machine readable format by noon, August 5 or face a fine of $5000 per day.org/2013/10/lavabit-orders.
On October 14, 2013, Levison announced he would allow Lavabit users to change their passwords until October 18, 2013, after which they could download an archive of their emails and personal data.
The court documents stated that on 13 July Levison sent an open letter to the assistant US attorney offering to give email metadata (without email content, usernames or passwords) to the FBI if it paid him $2,000 "to cover the cost of the development time and equipment necessary to implement my solution" and $1,500 to give data "intermittently during the collection period". "Lavabit founder offered to log users' metadata if FBI paid him $3,500." The Guardian. October 9, 2013.








