[[Bobby Laurie]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, American travel writers, 1984 births, American television personalities, People from Staten Island, Journalists from New York, Writers from New York, American bloggers

Bobby Laurie (born 22 August 1984) is a travel correspondent for various media outlets in the United States. Laurie appears bi-weekly on the nationally syndicated morning show The Daily Buzz and monthly on the syndicated talk show Daytime (US TV Series).
In addition to his regular appearances, Laurie is continuously tapped to lend his opinions on the ever changing travel industry by MSNBC,
Bobby's previous experience includes being a member of the "Panel of Experts" on the now cancelled MORE Good Day Oregon

Career & Biography

Laurie's background in the travel industry dates back to November 2005 when he was hired as a flight attendant for Republic Airlines. After a four-month stay at the company where he was based at Ronald Reagan Washington National Airport he moved to Phoenix, Arizona to work as a flight attendant for America West Airlines who had recently merged with US Airways. After flying for six months Laurie had started his move up the corporate ladder and held various positions within the company before ultimately landing as an Analyst in the airline's InFlight Policies & Procedures Department. A year and a half after being hired Laurie left his post to return to life as a flight attendant at a United States Low-Cost Carrier.
In 2009 Bobby Laurie created the travel blog Up Up & A Gay. The website was designed to collect and journal the experiences Laurie encountered while working as a flight attendant. In 2010 a collection of his most popular articles and journals were published into a book titled Planely Speaking: Inflight Insight from Thirty Thousand Feet.
Later that year, Laurie posted an article to his website about an outburst from a flight attendant at JetBlue Airways, Steven Slater, which gained national attention and sparked conversation. Laurie provided insight into the career and lifestyle of a flight attendant and also offered his sympathies to the JetBlue employee. The media immediately took notice and booked Laurie as a travel correspondent because of his insider knowledge and means of explaining the industry.

Books

Planely Speaking: Inflight Insight from Thirty Thousand Feet was published by Savvy Omnimedia on July 18, 2010. The book is a collection of Laurie's stories from his blog, an autobiography of how he began his career as a flight attendant and offers tips to getting hired in the field. The publication is available through LuLu.com.

The Savvy Stews Network

In 2011, Laurie joined forces with another flight attendant blogger and website owner Gailen David, who created and maintains the website DearSkySteward. Together, the flight attendants created The Savvy Stews Travel Network, a website designed to ease the stress of traveling by offering industry insider tips and tricks, reviews of trending travel products and also information on the newest travel destinations and venues.
Four months later, in November 2011, the website became the largest independent travel network on the Internet by traffic and they grew by adding additional bloggers and affiliates to their portfolio.

Savvy Omnimedia

Savvy Omnimedia is a joint venture between Laurie and business partner, Gailen David. The company produces television travel segments and print content for various outlets and clients. Additionally, the company owns and operates The Savvy Stews Travel Network and published Laurie's book.

Television Appearances




