[[Cottage Inn Pizza]]

CATEGORIES: Restaurants established in 1948, Companies based in Ann Arbor, Michigan, Companies based in Metro Detroit, Fast-food chains of the United States, Pizza chains of the United States, Fast-food franchises, Restaurant chains in the United States

Cottage Inn Pizza is an American regional franchise pizza delivery corporation headquartered in Ann Arbor, Michigan. The first Cottage Inn restaurant opened in Ann Arbor in 1948 

History

The Original Cottage Inn

The first Cottage Inn restaurant, opened in 1948, still stands in its original location at 512 East William, Ann Arbor. Although it started as a coffee shop, pizza was introduced in 1959.wxyz. The current owner acquired the building in 1961.
The restaurant went through renovations in 1975, 1980, and 1987. In 1993, the restaurant expanded again to include a second floor and banquet room facilities. Due to its proximity to the University of Michigan campus, the Original Cottage Inn is often frequented by students and visitors.

Cottage Inn Carryout

By 1978, Cottage Inn's continued growth required the formation of a second company to devote to delivery services. As a result, Cottage Inn Carryout & Delivery, Inc. was established. The first Cottage Inn store under this new company was founded at Packard and Hill streets in Ann Arbor. In June 1986, the first franchise opened in Ypsilanti. In 2003, the new corporate headquarters and distribution center opened in Ann Arbor.

Menu

Cottage Inn offers a variety of pizza, perhaps most well known for their specialty gourmet pizzas, along with various crust styles and toppings. Additional menu items include Italian-American entrees, salads, sandwiches, breadsticks, beverages, and desserts.

Gluten free menu

In 2009, Cottage Inn expanded its menu to include gluten free pizzas and cheese bread due to a growing demand for pizza from customers who suffer from celiac disease. The Brighton location was the first to introduce gluten free pizza, which has since spread to the rest of the Cottage Inn locations.

Sponsorships

In 2012, Cottage Inn partnered with the Michigan International Speedway to become the official pizza vendor on NASCAR weekends.




