[[2013 Kerala solar panel scam]]

CATEGORIES: Renewable energy in India, 2013 in India, History of Kerala (1947–present), Corruption in India, Political scandals in India, Crime in Kerala

2013 Kerala solar panel scam involved a fraudulent solar energy company, Team Solar, in Kerala, India, which used two women to create political contacts with links even to the Chief Minister's office, duped several influential people to the tune of 70 million Rupees, by offering to make them business partners, or by offering to install solar power units for them, and receiving advance payments for the same.

Incident

The Team Solar Energy Company (Team Solar), floated by the main accused Biju Radhakrishnan and Saritha Nair, directors of the company, allegedly collected advance amounts from large number of people and investors by offering to make them business partners, or in the guise of installing alternate sources of energy and failed to deliver the goods. The company awarded a "Virgin Earth Golden Feather Environment Award" to several prominent people of Kerala to gain media coverage and credibility.

Arrests

Five persons have been arrested in connection with this scam. The chief accused, Saritha Nair

Biju Radhakrishnan

Biju Radhakrishnan, was already an accused in a case pertaining to the murder of his wife Rashmi. However, despite having evidence of his involvement in the murder, he was not arrested
After his arrest, at Coimbatore, by the Kollam Crime Branch CID, he admitted to Rashmi's murder by giving her poisoned liquor.

Saritha Nair

Saritha Nair was a director of the Team Solar Renewable Energy Co. and an accomplice of Biju Radhakrishnan in the Solar Scam. She was arrested on the complaint of one of the persons who she had defrauded, in Ambalapuzha
She later requested the Economic Offences court where her case is being heard, that she wanted to give a secret statement,

Shalu Menon

Shalu Menon, a close associate of Biju Radhakrishnan, initially denied any knowledge or relationship with Biju Radhakrishnan. Photographs showing the two of them posing together or Biju handing over keys to a new vehicle she had purchased recently were explained away, on TV, as pictures taken at his request.

Tenny Joppan

Tenny, an aide and personal staff member of Kerala Chief Minister Oommen Chandy was arrested on charges of cheating, for aiding Biju Radhakrishnan  and Saritha Nair for defrauding a businessman, Sreedharan Nair, to the tune of 40 Lakh Indian Rupees. He was released on bail in August 2013.

A Firoze

A Firoz, a government servant, surrendered himself on 18 July, after the court rejected his plea for anticipatory bail. He was accused of helping to dupe a builder of 4 million Rupees along with Biju and Saritha, by claiming one of them was an ADB official and they could arrange a contract with the ADB. He was suspended from service after his name surfaced as one of the accomplices of Biju.

Phone Call controversy

At least four Kerala Cabinet ministers, three MLAs and hordes of government officials besides a junior Central Minister had been roped in by the women and their phone calls.

Allegations against the Chief Minister

Allegations against the Chief Minister Oommen Chandy have been raised, due to phone calls made by his personal staff and forged letters which were used by the fraudsters to defraud customers.
The issue snowballed when Sridharan Nair, a quarry owner, claimed that he had met the Chief Minister, at his office, along with Saritha Nair, during which the Chief Minister encouraged investments in renewable energy.
The allegations are being used by the opposition LDF as a reason to stall the proceedings of the Kerala Legislative Assembly and demand the resignation of the Kerala Chief Minister.

Kerala secretariat siege

Mounting pressure on Kerala Chief Minister Oommen Chandy to tender for a judicial investigation and thereby his resignation over the solar scam, the CPI (M)-led Left Democratic Front (LDF) on 12,August 2013, had conducted an indefinite siege on the state secretariat which lasted for 30 hours.




