[[Chess960]]

CATEGORIES: Chess variants, Recurring events established in 2001, 1996 in chess, Board games introduced in 1996

Chess960 (or Fischer Random Chess) is a variant of chess invented and advocated by former World Chess Champion Bobby Fischer, publicly announced on June 19, 1996 in Buenos Aires, Argentina. It employs the same board and pieces as standard chess; however, the starting position of the pieces on the players' home ranks is randomized. The random setup renders the prospect of obtaining an advantage through the memorization of opening lines impracticable, compelling players to rely on their talent and creativity.
Randomizing the main pieces had long been known as Shuffle Chess; however, Chess960 introduces restrictions on the randomization, "preserving the dynamic nature of the game by retaining bishops of opposite colours for each player and the right to castle for both sides",[ref]
</ref> resulting in 960 unique starting positions.
In 2008 FIDE added Chess960 to an appendix of the rules of chess.I.01B. Appendices



Before the game, a starting position is randomly determined and set up, subject to certain requirements. After setup, the game is played the same as standard chess in all respects, with the single exception of castling from the different possible starting positions for king and rooks.

Starting position requirements

White pawns are placed on the second rank as in standard chess.  All remaining white pieces are placed randomly on the first rank, with two restrictions:
Black's pieces are placed equal-and-opposite to White's pieces. For example, if the white king is randomly determined to start on f1, then the black king is placed on f8. (The king never starts on the a - or h -file, since this would leave no space for a rook.)

Determining a starting position

The special arrangement of pieces on the players' first ranks is selected randomly before play according to Chess960 rules, and can be generated either by a computer program, or using dice, coin, cards, etc.

Why 960

Each bishop can take one of four positions, the queen one of six, and the two knights can assume five or four possible positions respectively. This leaves three open squares which the king and rooks must occupy according to setup stipulations, without choice. This means there are 4×4×6×5×4 = 1920 possible starting positions if the two knights were different in some way. However, the two knights are indistinguishable during play (if swapped, there would be no difference), so the number of distinguishable possible positions is half of 1920, or 1920/2 = 960. (Half of the 960 are left-right mirror images of the other half, however Chess960 castling rules preserve left-right asymmetry in play.)

Castling rules

In Chess960, each player may castle once per game, the same as standard chess, moving both the king and a rook in a single move; however, the castling rules were reinterpreted in Chess960 to support the different possible initial positions of the king and rook. After castling, the king and rook final positions are exactly the same as they are in standard chess. Thus:
Castling in Chess960 has the same prerequisites as castling under standard chess rules, namely:
It is recommended that a player state "I am about to castle" before castling, to avoid potential misinterpretation.
In some starting positions, some squares can remain occupied during castling that would have to be vacant in standard chess. For example, after a-side castling (0-0-0), it is possible that a, b, and/or e are still filled; and after h-side castling (0-0), it is possible that e and/or h are filled. In some starting positions, the king or rook (but not both) do not move during castling.

Castling suggestions

When castling, it is recommended to move the king outside the playing area next to its final position, then the rook from its starting to ending square, then lastly to place the king on its final square. This technique is always unambiguous and simple to perform.
Eric van Reem, who wrote the Chess960 appendix for the FIDE handbook, suggests other ways of executing the castling move:
In the meantime, an adjustment has been made by the World New Chess Association (WNCA) that when performing a castling move it is irrelevant in which sequence the involved pieces were touched—all pieces involved in a move may be touched arbitrarily. When a clock is used, pressing the button can convey that a castling move has been completed.

Theory

The study of openings in Chess960 is in its infancy, but fundamental opening principles still apply, including: protect the king, control the central squares (directly or indirectly), and develop rapidly, starting with the less valuable pieces. Unprotected pawns may also need to be dealt with quickly. The majority of starting positions have unprotected pawns, and some starting positions have up to two unprotected pawns that can be attacked on the first move (see example diagram).
It has been argued that two games should be played from each starting position, with players alternating as White and Black, since some initial positions may offer White a bigger advantage than in standard chess.  For example, in some Chess960 starting positions White can attack an unprotected black pawn after the first move, whereas in standard chess it takes two turns for White to attack and there are no unprotected pawns.  (See First-move advantage in chess.)

History

Chess960 is a variant of Shuffle Chess, which had been suggested as early as 1792Gligorić (2002), p. 36 with games played as early as 1842.[ref]
