[[Kindle Fire]]

CATEGORIES: Amazon.com, Android (operating system) devices, Tablet computers, Products introduced in 2011, Touchscreen portable media players

The Kindle Fire is a mini tablet computer version of Amazon. Announced on September 28, 2011, the Kindle Fire has a color 7-inch multi-touch display with IPS technology and runs a custom version of Google's Android operating system called Fire OS. The device—which includes access to the Amazon Appstore, streaming movies and TV shows, and Kindle's e-books—was released to consumers in the United States on November 15, 2011. On September 7, 2012, upgrades to the device were announced with consumer availability to those European countries with a localized version of Amazon's website (United Kingdom,
The Kindle Fire's external dimensions are 
On September 6, 2012, the Kindle Fire was upgrade to the second generation, and its price was reduced to $159, RAM upgraded to 1 GB and processor clock speed upgraded to 1.2 GHz. A more powerful and video-friendly version, the Kindle Fire HD (7 and 8.9 inch versions) were also made available, initially priced at $199 and $299.com store
On September 25, 2013, the new Kindle Fire HD (7 inch), priced at $139, and the Kindle Fire HDX were introduced. The Kindle Fire HDX has a new graphics engine, double the memory, and triple the processor speed of the previous model. The 7-inch and 8.99-inch versions were introduced at $229 and $379 respectively.
As of May 2013, the Kindle Fire is the #2 best selling tablet after Apple's iPad, with about 7 million units sold according to estimates by Forrester Research.

Design

Hardware

Most Kindle Fire devices employ a 1-GHz Texas Instruments OMAP 4430 dual-core processor. The device has a multi-touch color screen with a diagonal length of 
Of the 8 GB internal storage, approximately 6.5 GB is available for content.
The first-generation Kindle Fire has a sensor on the upper left-hand corner of the screen. This is widely considered to be an ambient-light sensor, disabled since an early software upgrade.

Software

The first generation of Kindle Fire devices run a customized Android 2.3.3 Gingerbread OS. The user's Amazon digital content is given free storage in Amazon Cloud's web-storage platform, 5 GB music storage in Amazon Cloud Drive, and a built-in email application allows webmail (Gmail, Yahoo!, Hotmail, AOL Mail, etc.) to be merged into one inbox. The subscription-based Amazon Prime, which includes unlimited streaming of movies and TV shows, is available with a free 30 day trial period.
Content formats supported are Kindle Format 8 (KF8), Kindle Mobi (.
Because of Amazon's USB driver implementation, the Kindle Fire suffers from slow USB transfer speeds. For example, transferring an 800MB video file may take more than three minutes.

Reception

Analysts had projected the device to be a strong competitor to Apple's iPad,
In a review published by Project Gutenberg, the Kindle Fire was called a "huge step back in freedom from the Kindle 3"; the reviewer noted that Amazon introduced a "deliberate limitation" into the Fire that didn't exist in the previous version: it is no longer possible to download free e-books from websites such as Project Gutenberg, Internet Archive and Google Books and have them stored permanently in the same places where books from Amazon are kept.

Sales

Customers began receiving their Kindle Fires on November 15, 2011, and by the following December, customers had purchased over a million Kindle devices per week.
Recently, the Amazon Kindle Fire helped the company beat their 2012 first quarter estimates and boosted the company's stock in extended trading. As of May 2013, about 7 million units have been sold according to estimates.

Models

Gallery

File:Wikipedia Kindle Fire 1442.JPG|The Kindle Fire in horizontal position displaying web page
File:Courtbean's Kindle Fire.jpg|Kindle Fire  size relative to a hand
File:Wikipedia Kindle Fire & iPad 1439.JPG|The iPad (left) compared with the Kindle Fire (right)
File:Wikipedia Kindle Fire & iPod 1441.JPG|The Kindle Fire (left) compared with the iPod Touch (right)
File:1st gen Comparison iPad Mini & Google Nexus 7 & Kindle Fire Wikipedia screen 03 2013 6262.jpg|The Kindle Fire (left) compared with the iPad Mini (center) and the 2012 Nexus 7 (right)








