[[Sports injury]]

CATEGORIES: Injuries, Sports medicine

Sports injuries are injuries that occur in athletic activities.  They can result from acute trauma, or from overuse of a particular body part.

Classification

Traumatic injuries account for most injuries in contact sports such as Ice Hockey, Association football, rugby league, rugby union, Australian rules football, Gaelic football and American football because of the dynamic and high collision nature of these sports.  Collisions with the ground, objects, and other players are common, and unexpected dynamic forces on limbs and joints can cause injury.
Traumatic injuries can include:
In sports medicine, a catastrophic injury is defined as severe trauma to the human head, spine, or brain.
Concussions in sport became a major issue in the United States in the 2000s, as evidence connected repeated concussions and subconcussive hits with chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) and increased suicide risk.  It is most pronounced in football, and a related ailment (dementia pugilistica) afflicts boxers, but is also seen in other sports, and in females and adolescents.
Overuse and repetitive stress injury problems associated with sports include:
Some activities have particular risks; see:

Sports medicine

Injuries are a common occurrence in professional sports and most teams have a staff of athletic trainers and close connections to the medical community. Many retain team physicians.
Controversy has arisen at times when teams have made decisions that could threaten a players long-term health for short term gain.

Soft tissue injuries

When soft tissue experiences trauma, the dead and damaged cells release chemicals, which initiate an inflammatory response. Inflammation is characterized by pain, localized swelling, heat, redness and a loss of function.  Small blood vessels are damaged and opened up, producing bleeding within the tissue. In the body's normal reaction, a small blood clot is formed in order to stop this bleeding and from this clot special cells (called fibroblasts) begin the healing process by laying down scar tissue.
The inflammatory stage is therefore the first phase of healing. However, too much of an inflammatory response in the early stage can mean that the healing process takes longer and a return to activity is delayed.

Prevention

A warm-up program has been founded to decrease injuries in association football.
Risk of injury can be reduced by completing an effective warm up consisting of a heart raiser to get your pulse up, followed by sport specific dynamic stretches (stretches whilst moving).
To reduce the risk of injury:
Plan to have at least 1 day off per week from a particular sport to allow the body to recover.
Wear the right gear.  Players should wear appropriate and properly fit protective equipment such as pads (neck, shoulder, elbow, chest, knee, shin), helmets, mouthpieces, face guards, protective cups, and/or eyewear. Young athletes should not assume that protective gear will protect them from performing more dangerous or risky activities.
Strengthen muscles. Conditioning exercises before games and during practice strengthens muscles used in play.
Increase flexibility. Stretching exercises before and after games or practices can increase flexibility. 
Use the proper technique. This should be reinforced during the playing season.
Take breaks; rest periods during practice and games can reduce injuries and prevent heat illness.
Strict rules against headfirst sliding (baseball and softball), spearing (football), and body checking (ice hockey) should be enforced.
Stop the activity if there is pain.
Avoid heat injury by drinking plenty of fluids before, during and after exercise or play; decrease or stop practices or competitions during high heat/humidity periods; wear light clothing.
Sports-Related Emotional Stress
The pressure to win can cause significant emotional stress for a child. Sadly, many coaches and parents consider winning the most important aspect of sports. Young athletes should be judged on effort, sportsmanship and hard work. They should be rewarded for trying hard and for improving their skills rather than punished or criticized for losing a game or competition.
Using proper equipment is key in preventing injury.
Doctors believe fatigue can be a contributing factor in sports injuries because it is more difficult for the body to protect itself when fatigued. Stopping an activity at the first sign of fatigue can prevent sports related injuries.

Treatment

Sports injuries can be treated and managed by using the P.R.I.C.E.S... DR. ABC, and T.O.T.A.P.S regimes:
 '''P''' – Protect
 '''R''' – Rest
 '''I''' – Ice
 '''C''' – Compression
 '''E''' – Elevation
 '''S''' - Stabilize
 '''D''' – Danger
 '''R''' – Response
 '''A''' – Airway
 '''B''' – Breathing
 '''C''' – Circulation
 '''T''' – Talk
 '''O''' – Observe
 '''T''' – Touch
 '''A''' – Active movement
 '''P''' – Passive movement
 '''S''' – Skills test
The primary inflammatory stage typically lasts around 5 days and all treatment during this time is designed to address the cardinal signs of inflammation – pain, swelling, redness, heat and a loss of function.
Compression sportswear is becoming very popular with both professional and amateur athletes. These garments are thought to both reduce the risk of muscle injury and speed up muscle recovery.
Although not proven some professional athletes use hyperbaric chambers to speed healing. Hines Ward of the Steelers sent his personal hyperbaric chamber (similar to the one pictured) to his hotel to sleep in believing it would help heal his sprained medial collateral ligament he suffered in their playoff win against the Ravens. Hines went on to play in Super Bowl XLIII.





Further reading




