[[American Robin]]

CATEGORIES: Turdus, Migratory birds (Western hemisphere), Birds of North America, Birds of Canada, Birds of the United States, Native birds of Alaska, Birds of Mexico, Birds of the Greater Antilles, North American migratory birds, Symbols of Connecticut, Symbols of Michigan, Urban animals, Articles containing video clips, Animals described in 1766

The American Robin (Turdus migratorius), also known as the robin, is a migratory songbird of the thrush family. It is named after the European Robin According to some sources, the American Robin ranks behind only the Red-winged Blackbird (and just ahead of the introduced European Starling) as the most abundant, extant land bird in North America. & Brauning, Daniel W., The Birds of Pennsylvania. Comstock Publishing Associates (2000), ISBN 0801436435. It has seven subspecies, but only T. m. confinis of Baja California Sur is particularly distinctive, with pale gray-brown underparts.
The American Robin is active mostly during the day and assembles in large flocks at night. Its diet consists of invertebrates (such as beetle grubs, earthworms, and caterpillars), fruits and berries. It is one of the earliest bird species to lay eggs, beginning to breed shortly after returning to its summer range from its winter range. Its nest consists of long coarse grass, twigs, paper, and feathers, and is smeared with mud and often cushioned with grass or other soft materials. It is among the first birds to sing at dawn, and its song consists of several discrete units that are repeated.
The adult robin is preyed upon by hawks, cats and larger snakes, but when feeding in flocks, it can be vigilant and watch other birds for reactions to predators. Brown-headed Cowbirds lay eggs in robin nests (see brood parasite), but robins usually reject the cowbird eggs.

Taxonomy

This species was first described in 1766 by Carl Linnaeus in the twelfth edition of his Systema Naturae as Turdus migratorius.
Seven subspecies of American Robin are recognized. These subspecies intergrade and are only weakly defined.

Description

The nominate subspecies of the American Robin is  The throat is white with black streaks, and the belly and undertail coverts are white. The Robin has a brown back and a reddish-orange breast, varying from a rich red maroon to peachy orange. The bill is mainly yellow with a variably dark tip, the dusky area becoming more extensive in winter, and the legs and feet are brown.
The sexes are similar, but the female tends to be duller than the male, with a brown tint to the head, brown upperparts and less bright underparts. However, some birds cannot be safely sexed on plumage alone. The juvenile is paler in color than the adult male and has dark spots on its breast, and whitish wing coverts. First-year birds are not easily distinguishable from adults, but they tend to be duller, and a small percentage retains a few juvenile wing coverts or other feathers.

Distribution and habitat

This bird breeds throughout most of North America, from Alaska and Canada southward to northern Florida and Mexico. While Robins occasionally overwinter in the northern part of the United States and southern Canada, most migrate to winter south of Canada from Florida and the Gulf Coast to central Mexico, as well as along the Pacific Coast. Most depart south by the end of August and begin to return north in February and March (exact dates vary with latitude and climate).
Despite being depicted in the film Mary Poppins "feathering its nest" in London, although one was taken by a Sparrowhawk.[ref]
</ref><ref name = birdguide>
[/ref] The most recent sighting in Britain occurred in January 2007."Village braced for invasion of twitchers as rare visitor flies in", John Roberts, Yorkshire Post, 26 January 2007
This species has also occurred as a vagrant to Greenland, Jamaica, Hispaniola, Puerto Rico and Belize. Vagrants to Europe, where identified to subspecies, are nominate T. m. migratorius, but the Greenland birds also included T. m. nigrideus, and some of the southern overshots may have been T. m. achrusterus.
The American Robin's breeding habitat is woodland and more open farmland and urban areas. It becomes less common as a breeder in the southernmost part of the Deep South of the United States, and there prefers large shade trees on lawns. Its winter habitat is similar but includes more open areas.

Conservation status

The American Robin has an extensive range, estimated at , and a large population of about 320 million individuals. The species is not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criterion of the IUCN Red List (i.e., declining more than 30% in ten years or three generations), and is therefore evaluated as Least Concern. At one point, the bird was killed for its meat, but it is now protected throughout its range in the United States by the Migratory Bird Act.
Birds in central California of the subspecies propinquus are considered to be still increasing their range, and this is probably the case elsewhere in the U.S.A.

Disease

The American Robin is a known reservoir (carrier) for West Nile virus. While crows and jays are often the first noticed deaths in an area with West Nile virus, the American Robin is suspected to be a key host, and holds a larger responsibility for the transmission of the virus to humans. This is because while crows and jays die quickly from the virus, the American Robin survives the virus longer, hence spreading it to more mosquitoes, which then transmit the virus to humans and other species. Sciencedaily. Retrieved on 2012-08-23.

Behavior

The American Robin is active mostly during the day, and on its winter grounds it assembles in large flocks at night to roost in trees in secluded swamps or dense vegetation. The flocks break up during the day when the birds feed on fruits and berries in smaller groups. During the summer, the American Robin defends a breeding territory and is less social.

Diet

The American Robin's diet generally consists of around 40% invertebrates, such as earthworms, beetle grubs, caterpillars and grasshoppers, and 60 percent wild and cultivated fruits and berries. They will flock to fermented Pyracantha berries, and after eating sufficient quantities will exhibit intoxicated behavior such as falling over while walking. Robins forage primarily on the ground for soft-bodied invertebrates, and find worms by sight, pouncing on them and then pulling them up. Nestlings are fed mainly on worms and other soft-bodied animal prey. In some areas, Robins, particularly of the coastal race T. m. caurinus will feed on beaches, taking insects and small mollusks.
The Robin uses auditory, visual, olfactory and possibly vibrotactile cues to ﬁnd prey, but vision is the predominant mode of prey detection. It typically will take several short hops and then cock its head left, right or forward as a means to detect movement of its prey. In urban areas, robins will gather in numbers soon after lawns are mowed or where sprinklers are in use. They also are attracted to freshly turned earth in gardens, where worms and grubs are abundant targets.

Threats

Juvenile Robins and eggs are preyed upon by squirrels, snakes, and some birds, such as Blue Jays, Steller's Jay, Common Grackles, American Crows and Common Ravens. Adults are primarily taken by Accipiter hawks, cats and larger snakes (especially rat snakes). M. 1986. More on the bird-eating activities of the black rat snake, Elaphe obsoleta obsoleta (Say). North. Ohio Assoc. Herpetol. Notes 14:18-19. They may be taken by nearly variety of North American accipitrid, from the smallest, the Sharp-shinned Hawk, to the one of the two largest, the Golden Eagle, most every North American falcon from the smallest, the American Kestrel, to the largest, the Gyrfalcon, and almost all owl species from Northern Pygmy Owls to Snowy Owls. Overall, 28 raptorial bird species are known to hunt robins. C. 1938. Life histories of North American birds of prey, pt. 2. U.S. Natl. Mus. Bull. no. 170. J., Booms, T. L., Doolittle, T. C., Broerman, F. R. E. D., Morgart, J. R., & Sowl, K. M. (2011). The ecology of Gyrfalcons Falco rusticolus on the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta, Alaska. Gyrfalcons and Ptarmigan in a Changing World. The Peregrine Fund, Boise, Idaho, USA.  doi. org/10.4080/gpcw. W., & Leroux, L. A. (1996). Diets of northern pygmy-owls and northern saw-whet owls in west-central Montana. The Wilson Bulletin, 123-128. W., & MacColl, M. D. (1978). Winter foods of snowy owls in Southwestern British Columbia. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 42(1), 190-192. Adult robins are most vulnerable when distracted by breeding activities though may also be attacked on the ground or even in flight. However, when feeding in flocks, the American Robin is able to remain vigilant and watch other flock members for reactions to predators.
The American Robin is known to be a rejecter of cowbird eggs, so brood parasitism by the Brown-headed Cowbird is rare. Even when it occurs, the parasite's chick does not normally survive to fledging.

Breeding

The American Robin begins to breed shortly after returning to its summer range. It is one of the first North American bird species to lay eggs, and normally has two to three broods per breeding season, which lasts from April to July.
The nest is most commonly located  and will frequently construct nests under eaves or awnings on human homes when such locations provide adequate shelter. Robins are not cavity nesters, and so will generally not use a bird house, but will take advantage of artificial nesting platforms that have been provided.
A clutch consists of three to five light blue eggs, and is incubated by the female alone. The eggs hatch after 14 days, and the chicks leave the nest a further two weeks later. The altricial chicks are naked and have their eyes closed for the first few days after hatching. While the chicks are still young, the mother broods them continuously. When they are older, the mother will brood them only at night or during bad weather.
The chicks are fed worms, insects, and berries. Waste accumulation does not occur in the nest because adults collect and take it away. Chicks are fed, and then raise tails for elimination of waste, a solid white clump that is collected by a parent prior to flying off. All chicks in the brood leave the nest within two days of each other. Even after leaving the nest, the juveniles will follow their parents around and beg food from them. Juveniles become capable of sustained flight two weeks after fledging.
The adult male and female both are active in protecting and feeding the fledged chicks until they learn to forage on their own. The adult Robin gives alarm calls and dive-bombs predators, including domestic cats, dogs and humans that come near the young birds. The fledglings are able to fly short distances after leaving the nest. The wings of juvenile birds develop rapidly, and it only takes a couple of weeks for them to become proficient at flying. The cryptically colored young birds perch in bushes or trees for protection from predators.
Bird banders have found that only 25% of young Robins survive the first year. The longest known lifespan in the wild of an American Robin is 14 years; the average lifespan is about 2 years.

Vocalization

The male American Robin, as with many thrushes, has a complex and almost continuous song. Its song is commonly described as a cheerily carol, made up of discrete units, often repeated, and spliced together into a string with brief pauses in between. The song varies regionally, and its style varies by time of day. The song period is from early March in California to late July or early August; some birds, particularly in the east, sing occasionally into September or later. The American Robin is often among the first songbirds singing as dawn rises or hours before, and last as evening sets in. It usually sings from a high perch in a tree. The song of T. m. confinis is weaker than that of the nominate subspecies, and lacks any clear notes.
In addition to its song, the American Robin has a number of calls used for communicating specific information such as when a ground predator approaches, and when a nest or Robin is being directly threatened. Even during nesting season, when Robins exhibit mostly competitive and territorial behavior, they may still band together to drive away a predator.

In culture

The American Robin is the state bird of Connecticut, Michigan and Wisconsin.
Robin's egg blue is a color named after the bird's eggs.
The American Robin has a place in Native American mythology. The story of how the robin got its red breast by fanning the dying flames of a campfire to save a Native American man and a boy is similar to those that surround the European Robin. One of the Houses of the Raven Tribe from the Nisga'a Nation holds the Robin as a House Crest.
The Peace Bridge robins were a family of American robins that attracted minor publicity in the mid-1930s for their prominent nest on the Canadian side of the Peace Bridge connecting Buffalo, New York to Fort Erie, Ontario. "Famous robins return to nest at Peace Bridge", The New York Times. 12 April 1936. Page 6.
The Robin is considered a symbol of spring.
American popular songs featuring this bird include "When the Red, Red Robin (Comes Bob, Bob, Bobbin' Along)", written by Harry M. Woods and a hit for Al Jolson and others, and "Rockin' Robin", written by Roger Thomas and a hit for Bobby Day and others.
Although the comic-book superhero Robin was inspired by an N. C. Wyeth illustration of Robin Hood, His red shirt suggests the bird's red breast.








