[[Until It's Gone]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 singles, Monica songs, Songs written by Missy Elliott, Music videos directed by Diane Martel

"Until It's Gone" is a song by American recording artist Monica. It was written and produced by longtime contributor Missy Elliott with additional penning from Jazmine Sullivan, Cainon "Lambo" Lamb, and Anthony "J.R. Smashh" Randolph for Monica's seventh studio album, New Life (2012), sampling both The Spinners' 1975 record "I Don't Want to Lose You" and Boogie Down Productions' 1987 song "9mm Goes Bang". A soulful, anthemic R&B ballad built upon percussion with piano chords, the song lyrically explores the breakdown of an old relationship.
The track was serviced to digital media stores on September 27, 2011 in the United States, replacing "Anything (To Find You)"  featuring Rick Ross as the album's initial leading single. Released to mixed reviews by contemporary music critics, who praised its more sophisticated and melodically complex structure but felt it formulaic, it failed to chart on the US Billboard Hot 100, but peaked at number 22 on the component Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. While it would remain the highest-charting single offering from the New Life album, it was later demoted and replaced by Rico Love-produced "It All Belongs to Me", a duet with R&B singer Brandy, as the album's leading single.
The music video for "Until It's Gone" was shot by director Diane Martel and filmed in the Harlem neighbourhood, New York City on October 3, 2011. It premiered online on October 24, 2011 to coincide with Monica's thirty-first birthday. American actor Brian J. White and actress Malinda Williams star in the clip, which centers on two characters having words in their automobile, leading to a devastating accident.

Background and recording

"Until It's Gone" was written and produced by Missy Elliott, Cainon Lamb, and Jazmine Sullivan, all of which had contributed to Monica's previous singles "Everything to Me" and "Anything (To Find You)," with additional writing by Anthony Randolph.

Critical reception

"Until It's Gone" received generally mixed to positive reviews by music critics. Allmusic editor Matt Collar called the song an "anthemic ballad", benefiting from Elliott's "slick but straightforward productions that mix a deft synth and drum program studio vibe with a warm, overall earthy vibe." 
ThatGrapeJuice." 

Music video

Background

The music video for "Until It's Gone" was directed by Diane Martel, and largely filmed in the Harlem neighborhood in the New York City borough of Manhattan on October 3, 2011. The video marked Martel and Monica's first collaboration since 1999's "Angel of Mine." It premiered online on October 24, 2011 to coincide with Monica's thirty-first birthday. 

Synopsis

American actors Malinda Williams and Brian J. White appear in the cinematic video, which centers on a couple who suffers a devastating car accident after having words in their automobile. As the video opens, the pregnant woman is being wheeled into the hospital on a gurney, while her boyfriend seems to have escaped with a gnarly facial wound only. When Monica shows up to support her best friend and her family, including their son, she reveals her contempt for the boyfriend, implying that his infidelity — confirmed later on when provocative pictures of another woman show up on his iPhone — are to blame for the misfortune. In the end of the video, the woman dies from her injuries, leaving behind a waiting room filled with grieving loved ones.

Reception

The video was generally well–received by critics. PopCrush remarked that "Monica is certainly bringing the drama with her new video. All and all, the singer is relaying a valuable life message throughout the clip — love the one you're with and don't cheat on your spouse. We can dig it."

Track listing

Credits and personnel

Charts

Release history






