[[Fuse (Keith Urban album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 albums, Keith Urban albums, Capitol Records albums

Fuse is the eighth studio album by Australian country music singer Keith Urban. It was released on 10 September 2013. The album's lead single, "Little Bit of Everything", was released on 14 May 2013. The album features duets with Miranda Lambert and Eric Church.

Background

Regarding the sound of the new album, Keith said during an interview with Rolling Stone that ""I just wanted to see how far I could go before it's not me." He also said he was inspired by U2's album Achtung Baby, saying "Bono said, Baby had to be the sound of U2 chopping down The Joshua Tree'', which I thought was great. That's where I found myself at. I can keep making the same record, but I don't want to do that."

Singles

The album's lead single "Little Bit of Everything" was released on 14 May 2013 and was written by Kevin Rudolf, Brad Warren and Brett Warren. The album cover was revealed on 1 August 2013.

Critical reception

Fuse garnered generally positive reception from music critics to critique the album. At Metacritic, they assign a weighted average score based upon selected mainstream critics reviews and ratings, which based upon four reviews, the album has a Metascore of a 74. At Country Weekly, Bob Paxman said that the release "meshes Keith's usual blend of pop and country with some R&B touches and even some New Age-y sounds." He praised the variety of sounds and thought that the vocals were more prominent than on Urban's previous albums. Will Hermes of Rolling Stone highlighted that "What is surprising, though, is how unforced and fun the record sounds", and this was because "Sometimes, leaving your zone is the best way to find yourself." At Allmusic, Thom Jurek wrote that "For all the piecemeal recording, technological obsession and sheer ambition on the Fuse, Urban manages to fashion it all into a (mostly) working whole and maintain his identity as a contemporary country artist, even as he reaches for the mainstram pop fences."
Jerry Shirver of the USA Today suggested that "Deleting generic material would have made the gems pop more, but that's minor since there are plenty of keepers". At The Oakland Press, Gary Graff told that "'Fuse' does lean a bit heavy on same-sounding arrangements (gentle verses swelling into bombastic choruses) but the songs are consistently strong, and Urban's performances on both guitar and vocals - including duets with Miranda Lambert ("We Were Us") and Eric Church ("Raise 'Em Up") - certainly help the new sonic approaches go down easy." Glenn Gamboa of Newsday found that the album was "filled with plenty of pleasant surprises. The biggest one, though, is how high Urban raised his ambitions and then delivered impressively on them." At Edmonton Journal, Amanda Ash stated that the release was "a thrill that's for sure, although the sentimental ups and downs may be hard on those with pop-sensitive stomachs."
At The New York Times, Jon Caramanica wrote a mixed review, and evoked that "The words are working hard here, and the music is, too, but Mr. Urban is gliding through, barely quaking at all." Melinda Newman at HitFix affirmed that even though Urban "plays beyond country's confines on a few tracks, most tunes hew closely to what  the faithful have come to love: mid-tempo tunes anchored by banjo or guitar and Urban's instantly recognizable vocals." Bobby Peacock of Roughstock praised the variety of production and songwriting, saying of the latter that some of the songs "have different details and/or phrasing than his usual songs." In addition, he wrote that "All of the changes are just right, fitting into his signature sound while offering something new and creative at every turn." At The Montreal Gazette, Bernard Perusse wrote that "the album is mind-numbingly predictable arena pop-rock. Every singsong chorus, every wailing guitar solo and every heartland lyric sounds so written by committee that it's almost impossible to tell one radio-friendly track from the other."

Commercial performance

In the first week of release, the album sold 98,000 copies in the US, after debuting at number one on the Billboard 200 and the US Top Country Albums chart.

Track listing

Musicians

Compiled from liner notes.
 
 

Charts and certifications

Album

Year-end charts

Certifications

Singles

Other songs

"Even the Stars Fall 4 U" has charted at number 49 on the US Hot Country Songs chart.






