[[A Nightmare on Elm Street (video game)]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 video games, A Nightmare on Elm Street franchise media, LJN games, Platform games, Rareware games, Video games based on films, Video games developed in the United Kingdom

Nightmare on Elm Street is a video game for use on the Nintendo Entertainment System and loosely based on A Nightmare on Elm Street franchise. It was developed by UK-based video game company Rare and published by LJN. It should not be confused with an unrelated game with the same title for the Commodore 64 and IBM PC released in 1989. This game was released in October 1989.

Plot

The game box and the manual contain the following synopsis:

The plot is a spin-off from the film series.

Original concept

According to the game magazines Nintendo Power and Nintendo of Europe, the original concept of this game varied greatly from what was eventually released. In the original game concept, the players would control Freddy Krueger and should kill the teenagers who were attempting to gather his scattered bones in order to rebury them.com/retro-gaming-review-a-nightmare-on-elm-street-nes/
Follows the synopsis of the prototype version of the game:

It is assumed that this version of the game had been cancelled to prevent controversy. Years earlier, a video game adaptation of the movie The Texas Chain Saw Massacre had been released for the Atari 2600, where the player controls the murderer with the objective to chase and kill victims. The game was a financial failure because many sellers refused to sell it, fearing reprisals.

Gameplay

The game can be played by up to four players, either using the NES Satellite or NES Four Score.
The game is a side-scrolling platform game in which the player fights his way through different parts of Elm Street (houses, junk yard, etc.). Players fight enemies such as snakes and bats outside of houses and ghosts and other creatures inside.
Gameplay consists of a sleep meter that goes down slowly as the player progresses through the level, or if the player stands still. The sleep meter also goes down when the player takes damage. When the sleep meter runs out, the player character falls asleep and the screen colors change to darker colors and the enemies change and become harder to defeat. Scattered throughout the game are dream tokens that allow the player to change in dream characters with special abilities. Players can boost their sleep meter by getting cups of coffee scattered throughout buildings and wake up by finding a boombox.
Throughout the levels, players collect Freddy Krueger's bones to throw into a furnace at the end, and before beating each level, players must face a boss, which is a different part of Freddy's body, such as his glove or his head. Bosses include a giant Freddy glove with a long chain arm, A chomping Freddy head on a long chain neck, a floating Freddy hand and head, a bat with a vampire head, a ghost with a Freddy head, and Freddy Kruger himself. Defeated bosses leave behind a key, which when touched transports the player character back onto Elm Street.
Controls vary between the teenager character and the dream characters in the game. For example, one of the dream characters has the ability to shoot projectiles and perform a higher jump.

Critical reception

Reviews for A Nightmare on Elm Street were mostly negative. The game is often compared to Castlevania II: Simon's Quest, due to the fact that the player moves around collecting pieces of Freddy's skeleton to revive Freddy, just like in Simon's Quest, when you revive Dracula by finding his pieces. Websites like Daily Dead.
In 2013, the National Entertainment Collectibles Association released an exclusive figurine of the video game-style Freddy with the glove-less clawed hand to go along with their other Nintendo-esque horror figurine, a video game-style Jason Voorhees based on LJN's Friday the 13th game. 






