[[Ethical Tea Partnership]]

CATEGORIES: Tea production

The Ethical Tea Partnership is a not-for-profit membership organisation that has been working with tea producers and tea companies to improve the sustainability of the tea industry since 1997. 
The ETP works in all the main tea producing regions and has a London-based Secretariat, and 5 Regional Managers based in Kenya, India, Indonesia, Sri Lanka and China. It runs three coordinated programmes to achieve its vision of a "thriving tea industry that is socially just and environmentally sustainable''.

Monitoring and Certification

The ETP monitoring programme has been running since 1997 and is free of charge to producers. The programme is based on continuous improvement and its environmental and social provisions are outlined in the ETP Global Standard. These provisions are closely aligned to the main certification programmes operating in tea (Fairtrade, Rainforest Alliance and UTZ Certified) and help producers to meet internationally recognised standards.
The social and labour provisions are based on the Ethical Trade Initiative (ETI) Base Code which covers the International Labour Organization's (ILO) core conventions. 

Social Provisions

Environmental provisions

In order to increase impact and to reduce duplication the ETP has formal relationships in place with Fairtrade, Rainforest Alliance and UTZ Certified.utzcertified. The ETP also works with certification programmes and a wide range of NGOs and development organisations through its producer support programmes.

Producer Support

In order to help producers to meet international social and environmental standards the ETP co-ordinates a series of training and improvement programmes. These are aimed at both management and workers and cover a number of issues including:
These capacity building projects are facilitated by the ETP Regional Managers who build relationships with tea producers and support them to participate effectively in the ETP programme.International Trade Centre 'Ethical Tea Partnership - At a Glance'  May 2011
ETP has been working with ETI  on a training programme focused on reducing  discrimination and harassment of workers in Africa. This type of training supplements the auditing process by offering practical support to producers and it tackles long-term problematic issues that cannot be addressed by auditing and certification alone. 
ETP has also played a valued partnership role in CARE International's long-term project to improve living and working conditions in tea communities in Sri Lanka.'The Story of Change in an Estate Community: The People Who Make Tea' by CARE International Sri Lanka, July 2011

Strategic Sustainability

As well as addressing issues that pose an immediate threat to workers and the environment, the ETP also works on those issues that threaten the long-term future sustainability of tea. For example in Kenya, the ETP is working in partnership with GIZ (the German Development Agency) to help in excess of 10,000 smallholder farmers to adapt to the effects of climate change in order to help them secure their future livelihoods from tea.
Together, ETP and GIZ are developing toolkits for good climate change adaptation practices that span from technical solutions (good practice farming) to socio-economic approaches and institutional and political options. 'Recent Developments to Respond to Climate Change in Tea & Coffee in GIZ Public Private Partnerships: The Case of Tea in Kenya ' September 2011
As well as working with NGO and development organisations, the Ethical Tea Partnership works closely with tea producers to share and develop ideas on how to improve the sustainability of tea.

Membership

Membership of the Ethical Tea Partnership is open to any company involved with sourcing, trading or packing of tea sold in Europe, North America, Australia and New Zealand.

Current Membership

The ETP currently has 29 members.

Founding Members

Originally membership to ETP was only open to UK-based tea packing companies; the founding members were:




