[[Military of Ecuador]]

CATEGORIES: Military of Ecuador, Conscript militaries

The Military of Ecuador is under civilian control. The commander-in-chief is the President of Ecuador, currently Rafael Correa. The military of Ecuador has been involved in border disputes with Peru (Ecuadorian–Peruvian War, Paquisha War, Cenepa War), and has provided Military Observers and troops to the United Nations since 1948.

Mission

The Ecuadorian Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas del Ecuador) are part of the public forces and have the stated mission of the preservation of the integrity and national sovereignty of the national territory. It also involves participation in the social and economic development of the country and the provision of assistance in the maintenance of internal order. Tasks include fighting organised crime, anti-narcotic operations and illegal immigration. One social development programme applies the provision of teachers for rural schools through an accord with the Ministry of Education. Overseas territories include also the "Pedro Vicente Maldonado" Naval Biological Research Station in the Antarctic.

Geopolitical situation

Ecuador shares a 
The new administration at the Defence Ministry launched a deep restructuring program under the name of "PATRIA I". It involves the modernisation of military equipment, improvement of planning and operations within the Ecuadorian territory. "PATRIA I" shall be completed by 2011. In 2009, the spending budget was increased by 25% and totaled $920 millions.

History

Ecuador's military history dates far back to its first attempt to secure freedom from Spain in 1811. In 1822 Ecuadorian troops, alongside other rebel forces, scored a decisive victory over the Spanish royalist army at the Battle of Pichincha. Although assisted by Peruvian troops, it would fight these only a few years later in 1828, as a member of the Confederation of Gran Colombia. Confederation forces, fewer than half of which were Ecuadorians,

Local engagements

UN peacekeeping operations

The Ecuadorian Armed Forces has provided Military Observers and troops to the United Nations since 1948. In November 2003, an Ecuadorian United Nations Training Centre was established under the name of: (La Unidad Escuela de Misiones de Paz "Ecuador"). In 2009, Ecuador was deploying over 90 peacekeepers around the globe.

Command structure

Branches

Army

The Ecuadorian Army (Ejército Ecuatoriano) is the land component of the Armed Forces. Its 24,135 soldiers are deployed in relation to its military doctrine. The contemporary Ecuadorian Army has a large component of jungle and special forces infantry units implemented within its structure. It operates around 130 Tanks, 200 IFV's and 60 aircraft, their standard rifle is the Heckler & Koch HK33. Recently acquired material include:

Air Force

The present day Ecuadorian Air Force (Fuerza Aérea Ecuatoriana) saw combat-action several times in 1981 and 1995 when it gained valuable experiences against the Peruvian Air Force. Today the FAE has a personnel of 6,055 and focuses mainly on border-control but faces also the war on drugs, guerrilla insurgency as well as humanitarian missions. Since 2009 the FAE is going through some major changes and modernisation plans are still ongoing whilst new projects are considered to bolster the country's defence capacities. Recent and ongoing orders:

Navy

The present day Ecuadorian Navy or (Armada del Ecuador) is a compact, efficient and well-balanced force. However, limited funds hinder any major acquisitions and the chances of maintaining a strong force within the Pacific Ocean. Since end 2009, the Navy's structure became simplified. The Ecuadorian Naval-Zone became one and measures,  of the Pacific Coast and 6,720 km2 of the Pacific Ocean, (including the Galápagos Islands). Most sea-going assets are based at Guayaquil. The Navy focuses mainly on the border-control and illegal immigration. The Navy operates around 20 major vessels (including two submarines) and 25 aircraft. It has a personnel of 7,258. To increase its operational capabilities it acquired recently:

Equipment sources

Historically, Ecuador depended on a wide variety of foreign suppliers for virtually all of its equipment needs. Only in the 1980s did it begin to develop a modest domestic arms industry as the Directorate of Army Industries manufactured rifle ammunition, uniforms, boots, and other consumable items.
In the 1960s and 1970s, France became a leading supplier and delivered AMX-13 tanks and various aircraft. Ecuador purchased also Type 209 submarines and Lürssen-Seawolf TNC 45 patrol boats from West Germany. Whereas various types of Infantry weapons were acquired from Belgium.
Ecuador became a substantial customer for Israeli arms in the 1970s, purchasing Arava aircraft, Gabriel missile for naval patrol crafts and Uzi submachine guns. Under technical assistance contracts, Israel serviced Israeli planes within the air force inventory as well as Boeing civilian aircraft flown by TAME and Ecuatoriana Airlines. Ecuador reportedly also employed Israeli security specialists as consultants in the fight against terrorism. In 1976 Ecuador became the first foreign country to order the Kfir, an advanced jet-fighter equipped with the General Electric J-79 engine produced in Israel under license. The transaction, which required United States government approval because of the engine technology, was rejected by the administration of President Jimmy Carter in order to discourage the proliferation of sophisticated military equipment in the Third World. The action caused an uproar in Israel where the sale was regarded as an important breakthrough in Israels efforts to develop international markets for the Kfir. In 1981, after the inauguration of President Ronald Reagan, Washington removed its objection to the sale. Although the contract called for the purchase of 12 Kfirs and an option to purchase an additional 12, Ecuador acquired only the original group, at a price estimated at US$196 million.
Ecuador became a relatively heavy importer of arms in the late 1970s and early 1980s, averaging US$150 million annually and reaching a peak of US$280 million in 1982. These imports declined sharply to an average of only US$50 million annually between 1985 and 1987, presumably as a result of a dramatic reduction in oil revenues and the precipitous drop in the value of the sucre, which made imported arms extremely expensive. Between 1983 and 1987, Ecuador imported an estimated US$460 million of arms, primarily from Italy, France, the United States and Britain. In 1995, during the Cenepa War against Peru, Argentina gave to Ecuador in a controversial move, 6.500 tons of rifles, cannons, anti-tank rockets, and ammunition.
Recent times saw changes within Ecuadors foreign policy and it decided to look for alternative weapon suppliers. These were found also, in its long-term allies Chile, which sold since 2008 Leopard 1 tanks, Leander class frigates. Israel, delivered in 2009 its unmanned aerial vehicles and Brazil, supplied additional military vehicles and Super Tucano combat-aircraft. Countries like Russia and China had already delivered a small quantity of military equipment some years earlier, but gained on importance during the past few years. Since then, Chinese radars, anti-aircraft systems and infantry weapons were purchased. In 2009 two additional Mil Mi-17 helicopters have been ordered from Russia with further deals planned.








