[[J. G. Jolly]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, Place of birth missing, Blood banks, Blood donation, Emeritus Professors in India, Indian medical doctors, Indian pathologists, People from Chandigarh, Transfusion medicine, University of Lucknow alumni, 2013 deaths, Place of death missing

Dr. J. G. Jolly (born October 1, 1926) is an Indian physician and Emeritus Professor of the Department of Transfusion Medicine at the Post Graduate Institute of Medical Education and Research, Chandigarh, India. He is an internationally known expert in the field of blood transfusion, who pioneered the voluntary blood donation movement in India, His dedicated work has contributed magnificently to the development and excellence in professional service, research and teaching in the field of Transfusion Medicine in India.
He was the founder of the Blood Bank Society, Chandigarh, founder President of Indian Society of Blood Transfusion and Immunohaematology and made significant contributions to the development of Blood programme in India. As a result of his contributions, he represented India in numerous International Delegations as well as scientific conferences. During the course of these visits he got the opportunity of studying the blood transfusion programme in different parts of the world for revamping the organisational set up in India.
On the completion of his assignment at the PGI, Chandigarh he joined SGPGI Lucknow to establish a department of excellence where he introduced postgraduate degrees in Transfusion Medicine for the first time in India. He then provided consultation to the Government Medical College, Chandiagrh.
During the recent years, he has been concentrating his activities primarily towards the academic development of transfusion medicine and to provide free factors to hemophiliacs.
Being associated with the National and State Blood Transfusion Councils of Punjab, Haryana and Chandigarh he has continued his efforts in the development of Transfusion services in the region.
As a result of his innumerable contributions in this field Dr. Jolly is recognised as the leader of blood banking in India. The fact that the speciality of blood transfusion has begun to be recognised in India can be attributed to the sustained effort of Dr. Jolly. He has been accorded recognition by the World Health Organisation, International Society of Blood Transfusion and World Federation of Hemophilia.






