[[Kyle Canning]]

CATEGORIES: Neighbours characters, Fictional characters introduced in 2008, Fictional bartenders

Kyle Eugene Canning is a fictional character from the Australian soap opera Neighbours, played by Chris Milligan. The actor successfully auditioned for the six week recurring role of Kyle and he made his first on screen appearance on 26 November 2008. Milligan was later asked back every couple of months to do a few weeks filming. After eighteen months of playing Kyle on a part-time basis, Milligan was given a full-time contract deal and he and his character were promoted to the regular cast. Milligan said he was ecstatic about his promotion and looked forward to developing his character further. In August 2011, Milligan had to be written out of Neighbours temporarily, so he could recover from an injury he sustained off screen.
Kyle was initially portrayed as an immature bad boy, whose physical presence made him fall into the role of a bully. However, his low academic intelligence made him vulnerable to people smarter than himself. A traumatic accident and his struggle to secure employment changed Kyle's ways. The character has been described as a larrikin, good hearted and laid back. Following his promotion to the regular cast, the show's writers gave Kyle some character traits similar to Henry Ramsay (Craig McLachlan). Like Henry, Kyle becomes the handyman of Ramsay Street and he later opens his own business, which brings him into contact with many of the street's residents.
Kyle's storylines have often focused on his various relationships and jobs. Kyle engaged in a brief relationship with Natasha Williams (Valentina Novakovic) and developed a crush on Kate Ramsay (Ashleigh Brewer). He later entered into a casual relationship with Jade Mitchell (Gemma Pranita), which turned serious. Following Jade's departure, Kyle began dating Georgia Brooks (Saskia Hampele). Other storylines for Kyle have seen him blackmailed by a corrupt police officer and temporarily damaging his eyesight by looking at the sun during an eclipse. The character has been well received by critics and Milligan was nominated for Best Daytime Star at the Inside Soap Awards in 2012.

Casting

On 20 October 2008, a reporter for The Courier-Mail announced Milligan had landed a recurring role on Neighbours.
On 9 August 2011, Milligan snapped his Achilles tendon while playing football and had to be written out of the soap. Of his return, Milligan said "After a month of virtually sitting on the couch, I'm rapt to be back at work. I just have to pace myself a bit."

Development

Characterisation


When Kyle first joined Neighbours, he was an immature "bad boy", who often hung around with school bullies, Justin Hunter (Chris Toohey) and Shane Gregory (Ryan Bate). Kyle is also a "good-time guy", who has developed a thirst for adventure.
Shortly before Kyle's promotion to regular character was announced, TV Soap reported the Neighbours writers were going to give Kyle some Henry Ramsay-like traits. Of this, executive producer Susan Bower explained "He was at school with the gang and he's been back and forwards quite a lot, and we certainly feel that he has a future for the show - in much the same way as Henry Ramsay was sort of the handyman around the place. We've got some good plans for him." Kyle has been employed at both Charlie's and Erinsborough Motors, but he has long dreamt of opening his own handyman business. During an interview with Digital Spy in June 2011, Milligan revealed Kyle eventually starts his handyman business, which brings him into contact with all of the Ramsay Street residents. Kyle later becomes involved in a storyline that sees his business threatened by the development of a new shopping complex. Milligan said Kyle is "pretty laid-back" and would become an unexpected friend to some of the characters. In August 2011, Bower told Daniel Kilkelly of Digital Spy, that Kyle is a guy with double standards, who "goes out and shags indiscriminately, but the girl he wants to marry has to be an angel." She revealed the writers were going to challenge this aspect of the character.

Family

In May 2011, Milligan stated that it would be fun to see some of Kyle's friends and family introduced to the soap. Following an injury in early August, Milligan was forced to take a break from filming and Luke Pegler was brought in and cast as Dane Canning, Kyle's cousin. Dane arrives in Erinsborough to take over Kyle's room at Number 26 and look after his business, while he goes to care for his sick mother. He added "Now the Canning family is expanding, hopefully that will include a cousin or two coming to stay."
In January 2012, new executive producer Richard Jasek revealed that Kyle's grandmother was being cast and it was later announced that Colette Mann had received the role of Sheila Canning. Of Kyle's relationship with his grandmother, Milligan told a What's on TV writer "The Cannings are a very close, working-class family and his gran rules the roost. He adores her, but also knows that he needs to keep a tight rein on her when it comes to him making his own decisions. She is also quick to judge people." Milligan said that Sheila does not approve of his relationship with Jade Mitchell (Gemma Pranita) as she perceives her "independence as arrogance". Susan Hill of the Daily Star reported that Sheila adores her grandson and would do anything for him, which rubs Jade up the wrong way. She added "It's going to be a very tricky time for Kyle as he tries to please them both."
The Canning family was expand again in late 2012 with the introduction of Kyle's cousin Harley (Justin Holborow). However, in a bid to show how responsible he has become, Kyle decides to take Harley in. He then learns that Harley has been in trouble with the law before and becomes determined to help him. Hill wrote "He realises someone needs to step in to straighten out Harley. But viewers will be left wondering whether Kyle has taken on too much."

Relationships

=Kate Ramsay=

In January 2010, Kyle goes on a date with Kate Ramsay (Ashleigh Brewer). Kyle asks Kate whether she accepted his offer because she is trying to make Declan Napier (James Sorensen) jealous, but Kate denies it and tells Kyle she wants to get to know him better. Declan is not happy and when he sees Kate and Kyle together and he sabotages the date. In May 2011, Milligan revealed Kyle has always liked Kate because she is nice and is unlike the other girls he has dated in the past. Milligan said while Kyle like her, he would never push Kate into liking him. When Kyle sees Kate has been hurt by her ex-boyfriend, Mark Brennan (Scott McGregor), he feels protective towards her.
Kyle worries about competing with Mark for Kate's affections, as he is not as intelligent and successful as him. Kyle also knows Kate is very smart, which further dents his confidence. When Mark learns Kyle is interested in Kate, he asks her out, but is later forced to postpone the date.

=Natasha Williams=

Following her split from Andrew Robinson (Jordan Smith), Natasha Williams (Valentina Novakovic) starts dating Kyle. The following month, she decides to dump him, but to her surprise, Kyle gets there first. TV Soap explained Natasha grows bored of Kyle's company, but Kyle also becomes bored with his younger girlfriend and he "wastes no time severing their ties." Kyle's actions embarrass Natasha and he agrees to let her pretend that she dumped him. She then lies to Andrew that "she's kicked Kyle to the curb", instead of the other way around. 

=Jade Mitchell=

When asked who she would like to see her character, Jade Mitchell, find love with, Gemma Pranita suggested Kyle. The magazine opined that while neither of them have had a relationship for more than twenty four hours, it does put them on an even playing field.
When Jade was given a chance to work in the United States, she and Kyle began a long-distance relationship. Upon her return to Erinsborough, Jade invited Kyle to accompany her back to the US. However, after learning that Jade would be away for a year, Kyle made it clear that his life was in Erinsborough. A devastated Kyle then decided to break up with Jade, even though he still loved her.

=Georgia Brooks=

When Kyle supported Georgia Brooks (Saskia Hampele) through a tough time at work, she began to question her relationship and future with Scotty Boland (Rhys Uhlich). Milligan commented that Kyle did not go out looking for Jana, but she sort of appeared and made Georgia jealous.
Georgia later ended her relationship with Scotty. When asked if Kyle would "step up to the plate", Milligan stated "I think he's almost scared by his feelings for Georgia. He's one of those guys that when he gets a girl he thinks is right, he wants to marry her." When Kyle came to Georgia's place to fix the pool, she offered to put some sunscreen on his back and TV Week's Thomas Mitchell declared that "the electricity is off the grid!". However, Georgia's aunt, Angie (Lesley Baker), interrupted them. Georgia got back together with Scotty and they became engaged. Kyle and Georgia eventually began dating when Kyle helped Georgia clear her name after she was accused of stealing drugs from the hospital. When they believed their relationship was in a good place, Kyle and Georgia had sex with each other for the first time.

Blackmail

When Kyle decides to hold a sale at the car yard to bring in extra revenue, it attracts the attention of Constable Wes Holland (Daniel Hamill). When asked if the situation would be a turning point for Kyle and Mark, Milligan said that it was. He added while they would not become best friends, they would not be enemies either.

Temporary blindness

During a solar eclipse, Kyle looked up at the sun, which caused him to go temporarily blind. Milligan explained "He needs to get out of the house. Everyone is on his case trying to help him out, but Kyle pushes them away. Chris invites him down to the car yard, and Kyle will take anything to get out of that little bubble. Chris is being a good mate and trying to offer Kyle something to do. But even Chris gets to a point where he tells Kyle he needs to rest." Realising Chris does not want him around, Kyle stormed off and put himself in danger by walking onto a busy intersection and into the path of an oncoming car. Chris managed to rescue Kyle in time and dragged him back to the pavement.

Storylines

Shortly after moving to Erinsborough, Kyle becomes friends with school bullies, Justin Hunter and Shane Gregory. Kyle invites Zeke Kinski (Matthew Werkmeister) to join them when they decide to skip school one day. Principal Andrew Simpson (Peter Flanigan) bans pranks on muck-up day, but the boys run through the school wearing balaclavas and spraying silly string, scaring several students. Andrew suspends them for a week. The students go on a rafting trip and Kyle fights with Declan Napier. Andrew suggests a raft race and Kyle joins Zeke, Justin, Bridget Parker (Eloise Mignon) and Libby Kennedy (Michala Banas). Their raft capsizes, during a prank set up by Kyle and Justin. The two boys make it to the riverbank, but Zeke goes missing and Kyle is left traumatised by the accident. A few months later, Kyle agrees to pose as Zeke's radio personality, Lost Boy, in order to keep Sunny Lee (Hany Lee) from discovering the truth. Kyle bullies Harry Ramsay (Will Moore) and later asks his sister, Kate, to the Debutant Ball. Kate turns him down and Kyle ends up going to the Ball with Donna Freedman (Margot Robbie). When Libby suspects Kyle has not written his English essays himself, Sunny reveals Kyle is blackmailing her into writing them for him.
Kyle goes to Harold's Store and enquires about a job. He also asks Kate for a date and she agrees. The date ends when Declan starts a fight with Kyle. A few months later, Andrew Robinson convinces Rebecca Robinson (Jane Hall) to give Kyle a job at Charlie's. Kyle briefly dates Natasha Williams and competes with Lucas Fitzgerald (Scott Major) for the spare room at Kate's house. Kyle applies for a job with Lou Carpenter's (Tom Oliver) second hand car business and he is given a trial run. Kyle realises Lou does not trust him to close a sale and he quits. Lou apologies and Kyle asks for a pay rise and the chance to run the car yard on his own, which Lou agrees to. Kyle continues to have financial trouble, but he manages to get a job with Jade Mitchell. While running late to meet a client, Kyle accidentally moons some onlookers as he changes in his car. Mark Brennan charges him with indecent exposure and Kyle has to pay a fine, which leaves him without money for rent. Jade fires him, but Kate helps him out by employing him at Harold's Store for the day.
After Kyle fixes a chair, Lucas suggests he starts a handyman business and Kate helps him work out a budget. Kyle asks Kate on a date and she agrees. Kyle organises a sale at the car yard and it attracts the attention of Wes Holland, a corrupt police officer who threatens Kyle for money. Kyle turns to Mark for help and when Wes comes to collect his money, Mark arrests him. Kyle moves into Lyn Scully's (Janet Andrewartha) spare room and later rents the house from her. He asks Kate out again, but she turns him down. Kyle asks Jade to move in with him and when they have trouble raising the rent, Mark also moves in. Kyle quits his job, after he loses a car selling competition with Lou. He decides to set up a handyman business and Lou invests in it. Kyle and Jade kiss at their house warming party, but Kyle tells Jade that it did not mean anything. Mark leaves and Kyle and Jade struggle to find a new housemate. Kyle asks his friend Honga to move in, but Jade objects and asks Michelle Tran (HaiHa Le) to move in instead.
Kyle and Jade soon get fed up of Michelle, but they realise they cannot kick out because she is dating Lucas. Jade and Kyle have sex and agree to be friends with benefits. Kyle and Jade's initial attempts to get Michelle to leave fail, but she eventually leaves when Rhys Lawson (Ben Barber), posing as a property inspector, tells her she needs to pay for damages to the house. Michelle exposes Kyle and Jade's arrangement to Lucas and Sonya Mitchell (Eve Morey). Kyle goes on a date with Danielle Paquette (Georgia Bolton) and invites Rhys to move in. Kyle learns a shopping complex is being built in Erinsborough and realising it could ruin his new business, he starts a petition and teams up with Paul Robinson (Stefan Dennis) to stop the development. The company behind the development offer Kyle a large amount of money for his business, but he does not want to sell up. Kyle tells Jade he has feelings for her, but she rejects him. Kyle goes to Frankston to care for his sick mother and his cousin, Dane, comes to stay.
Kyle returns a few weeks later with his leg in plaster and he reveals he fell over his mother's dog. Kyle gives Jade a handmade photo frame for Christmas and they kiss. Jade opens up to him about her abusive ex-boyfriend and why she has commitment issues, but the moment is ruined when Kyle realises she had an affair with Malcolm Kennedy (Benjamin McNair). Kyle is angry with Jade and when she tells him she loves him, Kyle walks away. When Kyle learns Jade is leaving for Sydney, he races to Federation Square to stop her. Kyle believes he has missed Jade's coach, until she appears and reveals she stayed for him. When Jade fractures her toe, Kyle tries to look after her, but Jade will not let him. He later questions her about her ex-boyfriend and Jade tells him she is trying to get used to being in a relationship with him. Kyle becomes concerned when Kate takes off without telling anyone, but initially fails to notice Jade is put out by his concern for her. He later apologises and they make up.
Kyle asks Jade to meet his grandmother and move into his room, but she tells him she is not ready. However, Jade does tell him she loves him. Kyle's grandmother, Sheila, comes to visit and she initially mistakes Kate for Jade. Sheila later tells Kyle that she does not think Jade is the right girl for him. Kyle takes part in a bachelor auction for charity and Kate places the highest bid. However, Kyle cancels their date to go to Sydney with Jade. Kyle asks Kate to pose as his girlfriend to help woo some potential clients for Dial-A-Kyle. Kyle is wins the contract and during their celebration, he and Kate kiss. Kyle goes to tell Jade about the kiss, but she reveals that Troy Miller (Dieter Brummer) is her abusive ex and opens up to him. Jade later asks Kyle to move into her bedroom. Kate tells Jade about the kiss and Jade throws Kyle out. Sheila comes to visit Kyle and he tells her about his break up with Jade. She admits that she was wrong about him being right for Kate and tells him to try and win Jade back.
Jade allows Kyle to move back in and he organises a party for her when her singles boot camp is franchised. Jade reveals that she still loves him and they get back together. Kyle's cousin, Harley, turns up in a police car and Kyle takes him in. He calls Harley's mother and learns that he has been in trouble with the police before. Kyle then decides to take care of Harley and straighten him out. Kyle learns that Jade has been offered a chance to go to Los Angeles for six months to set up her singles boot camp franchise and he encourages her to go. When Jade tells Kyle that she has been offered the chance to stay in LA for a year, Kyle breaks up with her and explains that his life is in Erinsborough. Jade decides to stay, but Kyle tells her that she has to go and she leaves for Los Angeles. Kyle begins hanging out with Connor O'Neill (Patrick Harvey) and Toadfish Rebecchi (Ryan Moloney). Harley's bad behaviour forces Kyle to contact Sheila and get her to take him back to Frankston. He later allows Chris Pappas to move in, but is surprised when Sheila also decides to stay.
Kyle develops feelings for Georgia Brooks, but she is in a relationship with Scotty Boland. Kyle briefly dates Jana Noviac. Chris tells Kyle that Scotty made sexual advances towards him and Kyle tells Georgia. Kyle is devastated when Rhys dies and he has to break the news to Rhys' mother and ex-fiancée. Georgia and Kyle begin a relationship. During an eclipse, Kyle looks at the sun and damages his eyesight. He becomes frustrated with Georgia and Sheila's attempts to help him. He breaks up with Georgia and then has a one-night stand with Kate. Kyle makes up with Georgia and his sight returns. Kate has a pregnancy scare, but learns that she has premature ovarian failure instead. Seeing that her boyfriend is not supporting her, Kyle takes it upon himself to be there for Kate. Kyle meets Gemma Reeves (Kathryn Beck) and she flirts with him. Kyle later learns that Gem is Georgia's cousin and she asks him to keep their first meeting a secret. However, she later tells Georgia, which briefly causes tension between Georgia and Kyle.
Sheila encourages Kyle to propose to Georgia and they get engaged. They also decide to move into Number 24 together. Gem learns about Kyle and Kate's one-night stand after she hacks into Kate's laptop and finds an email from Kate to Kyle. Gem adds it to the congratulatory emails at the engagement party, where Georgia reads the email out. She ends the engagement. Kate admits she is in love with Kyle and they try to start a relationship, but Kyle breaks up with her because he still loves Georgia. Kyle learns that Georgia is pregnant. When Georgia tells Kyle that she is moving back home to be with her family, he manages to get her to change her mind by proving that he is able to take care of her and the baby financially. Kyle is devastated when Georgia suffers a miscarriage and she rejects all comfort from him. When Kate dies after being shot, Georgia decides life is too short and reconciles with Kyle. He then has to fly out to Thailand when he learns his cousin Dane is in trouble.

Reception

A writer for Holy Soap said Kyle's most memorable moment was "When he thought he had killed Zeke in the raft race disaster."
In October 2011, another reporter from the Daily Record praised Kyle's promotion to regular cast member, saying "whoever decided to bring him in on a permanent basis deserves a big pat on the back."






