[[Sean Sasser]]

CATEGORIES: African-American educators, The Real World cast members, 1968 births, 2013 deaths, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Deaths from cancer, People with HIV/AIDS, LGBT African Americans

Sean Franklin Sasser (October 25, 1968 – August 7, 2013) was an American educator, pastry chef and reality television personality best known for his appearances on MTV's The Real World: San Francisco, which depicted his relationship with fellow AIDS activist Pedro Zamora. Although not one of the original cast members himself, Sasser's relationship with Zamora was one of the focal points of that season. This included a commitment ceremony in which the two exchanged vows, the first such ceremony for a same sex couple on television, which is considered a landmark event in the medium. (August 8, 2013). "Sean Sasser, whose ceremony with partner on 'Real World' was TV first, dies". CNN. "'Real World' star Sean Sasser dies at 44". USA Today.

Early life

Sean Franklin Sasser was born on October 25, 1968 in Detroit, where he grew up. When he was six, his parents divorced, after which his father, an Army sergeant, was mostly absent from his life,McGonough, Megan (August 13, 2013). "Sean Sasser, part of one of TV's first gay romances, dies at 44". The Washington Post. "Nowhere Else to Go". POZ. sending a Casio watch to him every year on his birthday. (Years later his father would call Sasser was in Minneapolis, and left a message with Sasser's boyfriend, but left no number and did not call back.) Sasser's mother, Patricia Sasser, continued to raise Sasser and his younger sister. Sasser attended a private school, which he says was probably not typical of most African-American young people in urban Detroit. He later attended Cass Technical High School, a select college-preparatory magnet school. After high school, Sasser attending the University of Chicago to study Near Eastern civilizations and become an archeologist, commenting, "I wanted to be one of the first major black archeologists to call the bluff on all this Egyptian stuff that was stolen by other cultures." However, he found himself bored and depressed, and barely completed his freshman year. Sasser dropped out of college, intending initially to take a year off, and after he came out as gay to his devoutly religious mother (the daughter of a minister mother), he attempted to enlist in the United States Navy at 19, explaining in a 1997 interview, "I didn't want to be gay anymore. I thought it would work. You know, the discipline, all that stuff." Before he could leave his home, however, a mandatory blood test revealed that the 19-year-old Sasser was HIV positive. He decided to enroll in culinary school, as he had always been fond of cooking, and wanted to open his own restaurant.
After finishing school, Sasser found jobs cooking in local Chicago restaurants, but was too fixated on the idea of dying from AIDS. Realizing that he "needed to figure out how to keep living", he moved to San Francisco, whose greater HIV awareness and diversity allowed him to find people he more easily related to, specifically HIV-positive persons closer to his own age, which raised his spirits. Sasser joined a youth HIV positive movement that advocated attention for adolescents with the disease, and began speaking to groups about his own experience with HIV. He subsequently assisted a support group called Bay Area Positives, for young people of color, for which he appeared in a number of videos, including "Not Me", which aired on PBS. He was photographed by Annie Leibovitz for a national AIDS awareness campaign.

Relationship with Pedro Zamora and The Real World

Sasser attended the 1993 Lesbian and Gay March on Washington, where he introduced himself to a fellow AIDS educator named Pedro Zamora. Although Sasser did not characterize his meeting Zamora as love at first sight (they were both involved with other people at the time), he was moved by Zamora's presence and conviction, recalling, "I was kind of like, 'Wow.' I had never run across someone who was as good at it as he was." Sasser encouraged Zamora to call him if Zamora ever visited San Francisco. Sasser subsequently learned that producers of The Real World were looking for an HIV positive person to cast in the 1994 season in San Francisco season, where Sasser had been living for a couple of years, and eventually learned that the person cast was Zamora, whom Sasser felt was ideal for the role. Pedro and Me: Friendship, Loss, and What I Learned. Henry Holt & Co. pp. 103-109.
Sasser had been living in San Francisco for a couple of years in the 1990s. When Zamora moved into The Real World San Francisco loft, he and Sasser began dating. Zamora asked the show's producers for permission to go out on the second date without cameras, so that he and Sasser could get to know one another in a more natural setting. After the producers allowed this, and the two men fell in love, and their relationship became a focal point of the season. Their relationship met with the approval of Zamora's housemates and close friends, Judd Winick and Pam Ling, the latter of whom joked that Sasser and Zamora "would become the mayors of Castro Street". Winick adds that whereas Sasser was a private person who harbored the ability to pack up and leave town on short notice, Zamora's openness led them to discuss more permanent living arrangements as a couple. Sasser proposed to Zamora, and the two exchanged vows in a commitment ceremony in the loft, the first such ceremony for a same-sex couple in television history.
After production on The Real World ceased in June 1994, Zamora visited his family in Miami before returning to San Francisco to live with Sasser. In August 1994, Zamora was diagnosed in New York City with progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML),Winick (2000). pp. 119-137. and was given three to four months to live. On September 3, Zamora was flown to Mercy Hospital in Miami, where his family could be close to him. "HIV, And Positive, Pedro Zamora of MTV's Real World Lived His Too-Brief Life To Its Limit". People. Vol. 42, No. 22A Tribute to Pedro Zamora MTV. November 1994. His family was not accepting of Sasser, however, and because the PML gradually took away Zamora's ability to speak,Winick (2000). pp. 141-161. Zamora was unable to explicitly communicate to them the importance of Sasser in his life. This led to confrontations occurred between Sasser and the Zamoras, who told him that "Pedro did not need to have a lover anymore", and mostly excluded Sasser from Zamora during his final days. Zamora died on November 11, 1994. "Years After his Death, A Young AIDS Activist's Life is Celebrated on Film: Remembering Pedro". The Miami Herald. p. 1E. Sasser returned to San Francisco two days later. Six months after Zamora's death, he resumed his speaking engagements for LGBT and HIV issues. In 1995, he spoke at the inaugural White House AIDS conference, and was appointed by President Bill Clinton to the Presidential Advisory Council on HIV/AIDS. He moved to Atlanta in late 1995, in order to be with his boyfriend, and hoped to open a café.
In 2008 Bunim-Murray Productions produced a film, Pedro, directed by Nick Oceano, dramatizing Zamora's life. In the film, Sasser is portrayed by DaJuan Johnson. Sasser, who regretted not having had an opportunity to spend more time with Zamora, says that this was not what occurred in reality, saying, "I have a lot of resentment toward dealing with his family's homophobia, as well as dealing with him dying... It's troublesome. If there had been some sort of support behind our commitment ceremony... I had a hard time dealing with his family. With Pedro's death and being allowed in the hospital... I don't know. Maybe it could have helped the family deal with my presence, you know?"

After The Real World

Sasser was a pastry chef at Ritz-Carlton hotel properties and head pastry chef at The Nines, a luxury hotel in Portland, OregonBeck, Byron (October 22, 2008). "To the Nines: Adding it all up at Portland's most luxurious new hotel." Willamette Week. "Remembering Sean Sasser". Washington Blade. before moving to Washington, D.C. in 2012, where, as a pastry chef at a restaurant called RIS, he was praised by the Washington Blade for his homemade ice cream and sorbets. "Sasser's sweet tooth". Washington Blade. Sasser said of his work, "I want to serve desserts and pastries that people recognize and love to eat, but sometimes with an unexpected twist of surprise."Gosgrove Baylis, Sheila (August 8, 2013). "Sean Sasser, of The Real World, Dies at 44". People.
In June 2013, Sasser married Michael Kaplan,"Sean Sasser, 'Real World' star, dies at 44". CBS News. August 8, 2013. whom he had dated off and on since the 1990s, and with whom he had moved in with six months prior. While living in the District, Sasser served as a board member of the AIDS Alliance for Children, Youth and Families. He was active in youth and mentoring organizations, and he and Kaplan served as foster parents to a 4-year-old girl.

Death and legacy

In July 2013, Sasser, who had also been HIV positive for 25 years, was diagnosed with mesothelioma, a rare cancer of the lungs. He died at his home on August 7, 2013, at the age of 44. As per his wishes, his body was cremated, and his ashes spread upon places he had been or wished to visit. He is survived by his mother, Patricia, and his sister, a dancer who lives in Detroit with her husband and daughter.
The Sean Sasser Memorial Endowment Fund at AIDS United was established in September 2013 to mobilize support for programs that improve the health outcomes for gay men of color. Sasser's widow, Michael Kaplan, is the CEO of AIDS United."The Sean Sasser Endowment Fund". Retrieved April 6, 2014.






