[[Weeds (season 3)]]

CATEGORIES: Weeds (TV series), 2007 television seasons

The third season of Weeds premiered on August 13, 2007, and consisted of 15 episodes.

Plot

The third season of Weeds begins with the fallout from the botched drug deal of the season 2 finale: Celia finds and destroys the entire harvest; U-Turn pays the mobsters to leave Nancy and him alone; Silas is arrested and sentenced to community service; Sanjay (Maulik Pancholy), comes out of the closet, but U-Turn forces him to have sex with a woman who becomes pregnant with his child. During season 3, Silas and Shane remain the same age, however, as the season proceeds Shane turns 12.
During the first half of the season, Nancy works to pay off her debt to U-Turn, owed because U-Turn saved her life, and because Celia destroyed an entire pot harvest.  Nancy also gets a legitimate job working for Sullivan Groff (Matthew Modine), a crooked developer from the neighboring community of Majestic, and soon becomes his lover. Celia, who has also been intimate with Groff, resents Nancy for this.
Silas begins selling pot for his mother using the alias Judah and meets Tara (Mary-Kate Olsen), an evangelical Christian who enjoys smoking pot and helps him sell it. Shane and Isabelle become outcasts at the heavily-religious Majestic summer school and form a friendship. As familial stress increases, Shane begins having conversations with his dead father and insists Judah is really there. Nancy gets called in by the DEA and is terrified her arrest is imminent. It turns out that her marriage to Peter Scottson has been discovered, a hefty life insurance payment awaits.
At U-Turn's behest, Conrad and Heylia start a grow business. U-Turn sees talent in Nancy and trains her to be his lieutenant, while simultaneously starting a war with rival Mexican dealers. When U-Turn has a heart attack while jogging, Marvin suffocates him and becomes the new boss of U-Turn's crew. Marvin then botches an attempted truce with the Mexicans, allowing Nancy to clear all debts for her and Conrad and end the gang war.
Debt-free, but feeling lonely, Nancy attempts to befriend Peter's ex-wife, Valerie. The two bond over their troubled lives. Their friendship turns sour when Valerie demands Peter's life-insurance money.  Valerie feels it is rightfully hers, due to her longer marriage to Peter and the child they had together. Nancy promises to give it to Valerie, but has to first use most of it to replace the money Doug "borrowed" from the Agrestic treasury to help Nancy get back in business, pay his divorce lawyer, and get laser eye surgery. Despite receiving several payments, Valerie believes that Nancy will never give her the full amount, and also believes Nancy knows the location of Peter's hypothetical secret stash of cash.  She hires a private investigator to trail Nancy. The investigator discovers Nancy is a drug dealer and blackmails her for most of the remaining life-insurance money, in exchange for not telling Valerie or the DEA. Nancy pays him, then ensures the investigator won't come after her again by blackmailing him for blackmailing her. Nancy confronts Valerie, telling her that she would have gotten the money, despite Nancy having no obligation to give it to her, but that now Nancy no longer has any money, thanks to the sleazy investigator Valerie hired thus ending their brief friendship.
Meanwhile, the nearby Christian community of Majestic has been attempting a hostile takeover of Agrestic, with Doug leading the charge due to the large amount of money it will bring in. But Groff's gift—a new house in Majestic—to Celia leads to jealousy, and Doug begins sabotaging the Majestic city infrastructure, although it is already too late, as Celia brings it to a public referendum. To get back at Groff, Doug steals the giant cross from Majestic's megachurch, eventually putting it inside the grow house. Meanwhile, Dean has a motorcycle accident, which forces Celia to take care of him against her will. Heylia and Conrad are forced to move the grow operation and Nancy negotiates the use of Celia's off-the-books house in Majestic. Andy has a brief excursion into the pornographic film industry, also at Celia's off-the-books house, and later befriends a group of bikers while trying to score with one of its female members; they want him to start selling their weed. Nancy and Conrad become lovers while hanging out at the grow house, but Conrad realizes he has no future with her. Nancy turns to Guillermo—the leader of the Mexican dealers—to get protection when the bikers threaten her family after she refuses to sell their low-quality "ditch weed". Guillermo decides to burn down the bikers' marijuana field, causing a huge fire which spreads to the Agrestic area. At that time, thermal cameras spot the stolen cross and the DEA moves in.
Nancy, meanwhile, takes advantage of the fire and pours gasoline throughout her house and lights it with a match, ensuring that she and her family will be leaving and moving on, and there will be no evidence of their drug activities.

Cast

Main cast

Guest Stars

Episodes

{| class="wikitable plainrowheaders" style="width: 100%; margin-right: 0;"
|-
! style="background: #AFBE31; color: #000000;"| No.
! style="background: #AFBE31; color: #000000;"| #
! style="background: #AFBE31; color: #000000;"| Title
! style="background: #AFBE31; color: #000000;"| Directed by
! style="background: #AFBE31; color: #000000;"| Written by
! style="background: #AFBE31; color: #000000;"| Theme song performance
! style="background: #AFBE31; color: #000000;"| Original air date
|-

|}






