[[Kathleen Meyer]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, Living people, American conservationists, American environmentalists, American naturalists, American nature writers, American non-fiction environmental writers, American women writers

Kathleen Meyer (born 7 December 1942) is a contemporary American nature writerBooks by Kathleen Meyer. Amazon.  whose first work, How To Shit in the Woods was published in 1989 and is frequently cited in other books, especially those aimed at long-range hikers and primitive campers.  Her writing is characterized by the use of humor and irreverence. She has only two published works in print: How to Shit in the Woods and Barefoot Hearted.

How to Shit in the Woods

How to Shit in the Woods was published by Ten Speed Press in 1989. This first book by Meyer does, indeed, revolve around the many strategies she has noticed for defecating where there is no modern toilet and running water. As one reads the book, it quickly becomes obvious that Meyer's concern is not so much for the comfort of the camper or hiker, but for the impact that human waste leaves on pristine natural ecosystems. She talks about digging "environmentally sound" holes, locating the high water line, so as not to inadvertently pollute a stream or ground water source, and what types of soil facilitate quickest decomposition without risk of environmental contamination. The damage to humans and wildlife from carelessly disposed human waste comes in many forms including giardia, diarrhea, and intestinal diseases.
In its various editions, the book has been positively reviewed by Audubon Magazine,
In 2006 Meyer wrote the introduction to a volume by Jane Wilson-Howarth on a parallel topic which also dares to use the S word.

Barefoot-Hearted

In Barefoot-Hearted, published by Random House in 2001, Meyer writes about renovating a dilapidated barn in which to live with her new boyfriend. Her book explores the many adversities of trying to live in a barn, not the least of which is how the smell of resident skunks under the floor permeates and resides in her clothes and hair and how the barn is infested with flies and mice. In the manner of nature writers who often use a small animal or plant as a symbol of an ecological principle, Meyer explains that she doesn't feel guilty about trapping and killing mice, because they are abundant and their population ever growing. By contrast, she notes the comparative frailty of bears who often stumble upon human habitations looking for food. When the humans get scared, the bear is often removed and killed. In the same book, Meyer also chronicles her adventure riding a horse and buggy across a large region of northwest America. Barefoot Hearted was widely reviewed, though not always with great affection. Kirkus Reviews found it an "annoying saga about a house full of pests."



Notes retrieved through Lexis Nexis


