[[Internet Chess Club]]

CATEGORIES: Internet chess servers, Chess websites, Companies based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Privately held companies based in Pennsylvania, Internet properties established in 1995, 1995 establishments in the United States

The Internet Chess Club (ICC) is a commercial Internet chess server devoted to the play and discussion of chess and chess variants.  ICC currently has over 30,000 subscribing members.245–253, 21st Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC'05), 2005. It was the first Internet chess server and is the first and largest pay to play chess server."The New Age of Internet Chess", Susan Polgar, ChessCafe."Meek or Masterly, A Challenger Awaits", Lisa Scheer, The New York Times, 26 July 2001."Children and chess: a guide for educators", Alexey W. Root and John D., p.110.

History

The first Internet chess server (ICS), programmed by Michael Moore and Richard Nash, was launched on 15 January 1992."Internet Chess Anniversary – History", Free Internet Chess Server, retrieved 14 September 2009. Players logged in by telnet, and the board was displayed as ASCII text. Bugs in the server software allowed illegal moves, false checkmates etc. Over time more and more features were added to ICS, such as Elo ratings and a choice of graphical interfaces. The playing pool grew steadily, many of the server bugs were fixed, and players began to have higher expectations for stability.
In 1992, Daniel Sleator (darooha) volunteered to take over as head programmer, and began a large overhaul of the server code. He addressed, among other issues, the frequent complaint that players would lose blitz games on time due to Internet lag. In 1994, he copyrighted the code, and began receiving purchase offers from companies wanting to commercialize the server. On 1 March 1995, Sleator announced his intentions to commercialize ICS, renaming it the Internet Chess Club, or ICC, and charging a yearly membership fee. The membership is free for players with a Grandmaster or International Master title.
Some programmers who had worked on the original ICS became unhappy with what they saw as the commoditization of their project. Led by Chris Petroff, they formed the Free Internet Chess Server (FICS), which to this day continues to allow everyone to access all features for free."Pawns Call King a Rook", Brad Stone, retrieved 14 September 2009.
On 29 May 2007, the World Chess Network was bought by the Internet Chess Club. It was then merged with Chess Live, another Internet chess server acquired by Internet Chess Club from GamesParlor. The result of the acquisition and merger was the formation of World Chess Live, a new Internet chess server that merged features of both services.

Software

ICC provides the proprietary Windows BlitzIn software, currently at version 3.09, There are other software front-ends which work with the ICC system including those for the Macintosh and iPad. Along with other major chess sites, ICC has sophisticated methods to detect computer cheating.

Services available

ICC's core service is the facility to play chess games against other members or computers coupled with a player rating system. Members can watch live broadcasts of tournaments with grandmaster commentary on Chess. The site also offers access to libraries of games, recorded lectures and private lessons (at additional cost).

Criticism

The commercialisation of ICC was extensively criticised by users, particularly that Daniel Sleator was charging a subscription to use a system that had been developed by others. Following complaints by students they were offered a 50% discount. The security of the system was criticised in December 2005 with claims that communications between ICC and users could easily be read and that the timestamping could be defeated.



Further reading

 | last=Burgess |first=Graham |authorlink = Graham Burgess
 | title=The Mammoth Book of Chess 
 | publisher=Running Press
 | year=2009
 | edition = 3rd
 |page=417
 | isbn= 978-0-7624-3726-9}}




