[[Paul Rose (political figure)]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 births, 2013 deaths, Canadian people convicted of kidnapping, Canadian people convicted of murder, Canadian prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment, Candidates in Quebec provincial elections, Deaths from stroke, New Democratic Party of Quebec politicians, October Crisis, People convicted of murder by Canada, People from Le Sud-Ouest, People paroled from life sentence, Prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment by Canada, Quebec sovereigntists, Quebec trade unionists

Paul Rose (October 16, 1943 – March 14, 2013) was a terrorist of the Front de libération du Québec (FLQ), an armed group which was fighting what they considered the oppression of French Quebecers.
On October 10, 1970, the cell kidnapped Quebec Labour Minister Pierre Laporte. Laporte's strangled body was found in the trunk of a car on October 17. Rose was among those convicted of the kidnapping and murder.

Biography

Rose was born in the Saint-Henri district of Montreal. At the age of eight, his family moved to Ville-Emard and later on his family moved to Ville Jacques-Cartier, now part of Longueuil, where he spent most of his teenage years.
Paul Abigal Rose was named Paul after his father, Paul Henply Rose. His second name came from his mother, Abigal, who was a very important part of his life.
A member of the Rassemblement pour l'indépendance nationale political party, Rose's involvement with radical groups began in 1968 after meeting Jacques Lanctôt, a member of the FLQ, during a rally against Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau at the Saint-Jean-Baptiste parade. The October Crisis, 1970: An Insider's View. Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press (2006)

Role in October Crisis

During what became known as the October Crisis, on October 5, 1970, members of the FLQ's Liberation Cell kidnapped the British Trade Commissioner James Cross from his Montreal home as part of a violent attempt to overthrow the elected government and to establish a socialist Quebec state independent of Canada.
On October 10, Paul Rose as leader of the FLQ's Chenier Cell joined with members Jacques Rose (brother), Bernard Lortie, and Francis Simard to kidnap Quebec Vice Premier and cabinet minister, Pierre Laporte. Believing many others would follow in an uprising, their goal was to have Quebec live up to the fate wished for it by the Lower Canada rebellions, namely to become an independent country. However, the kidnapping did not work out as planned and they killed Laporte. The FLQ said they killed him without hesitation in order to show the to population they were serious.actualites.com/crise-doctobre-la-police-et-québec-savaient-que.
In 1980, the Duchaine Report found that Rose was not present when Laporte was killed. He was released on parole in 1982.
Later evidence would prove the contrary. "A coroner's inquest soon after the murder determined that Laporte had been strangled by a gold religious medal he wore around his neck. In a conversation wiretapped by police, Rose even admitted to his lawyer that he "finished" Laporte with the gold chain."A convicted murderer and an unrepentant terrorist, pockets of Quebec still view Paul Rose as a folk hero by Tristin Hopper, National Post 13/03/14
Rose also remained unrepentant. In an interview he gave to Le Devoir, he said:

Later life and death

During the 1990s, he contributed to the monthly L'aut'journal. He was nominated the New Democratic Party of Quebec candidate in a 1992 provincial by-election. His nomination was controversial, and resulted in the federal New Democratic Party denouncing its former provincial wing (ties between the two parties had been severed in 1989) and seeking legal options in an attempt to force the provincial party to change its name.Harper, Tim, "Quebec NDP outrages McLaughlin," Toronto Star, December 12, 1991Canadian Press, "McLaughlin distances party from ex-terrorist," Hamilton Spectator, December 12, 1991
In 1996, Rose was elected leader of the NDPQ which by this time was called the Parti de la démocratie socialiste. He led the party until 2002 when it joined the Union des forces progressistes. Rose worked for the Confédération des syndicats nationaux labour union.  Rose remained a strong supporter of the Quebec sovereignty movement, which he likened to "a liberation nationalism. It's a people being denied its existence that is trying to find its place in the sun, in the same way as Palestine and Ireland."
He died of a stroke on March 14, 2013, at the Hôpital du Sacré-Cœur de Montréal at the age of 69.
Even in death, Rose was the source of controversy. Amir Khadir, one of two deputies of the sovereigntist party Quebec solidaire, proposed tabling a motion in the Quebec provincial legislature to honour his death.vancouversun.html  Khadir later withdrew the proposal, blaming anglophone media for nationalist hate-mongering, and claiming Rose had recanted and been rehabilitated.cjad.aspx?BlogEntryID=10518015




