[[Hugo Ticciati]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, British emigrants to Sweden, British violinists

Hugo Ticciati is a young British-born violinist, living in Sweden. He has been successful in several worldwide events such as the Gotland Chamber Music Festival (Sweden), the St. He has also begun his own Festival called the O/MODƏRNT located in Sweden.

Career

At twelve he entered the world of fame in the Edinburgh Festival and at the Queen Elizabeth Hall. Since then, Ticciati has been performing with several orchestras from England, Romania, Sweden, the Far East, Estonia and the USA.
Some of his career highlights have taken place in concertos performed in the Baltic Sea Festival in Sweden, the Carnegie Hall, and the Hermitage Music Festival held in St Petersburg.
Ticciati currently gives regular concerts in important halls in Europe and in the Far East. He plays accompanied by pianists such as Staffan Scheja, Svetlana Navarssadian, Sophia Rahman, Michael Tsalka and Henrik Måwe.
Hugo normally gives masterclasses and seminars on violin teaching and lectures on music-related subjects all over the world. In autumn 2008, he was invited to become the guest violin teacher and lecturer in music history at a new university in New York. Hugo's teaching basically searches for ways to apply the physical and spiritual aspects of meditation to practicing art, playing and living in music.
London was the place where Hugo started studying violin, before going to the University of Toronto. He continued studying with the Russian violinists, Nina and Oleg Balabina in Sweden, where he now is considered as a Swedish citizen. Hugo has won the international competitions Giovani Talenti and Rovere d'Oro at San Bartolomeo al Mare, Italy (2002), and the Mendelssohn Cup in Bari, Italy (2004). In 2007 he was admitted as a Fellow of the Royal Schools of Music in the United Kingdom.

Projects

Ticciati has started a new festival named O/MODƏRNT (which means "Unmodern") as artistic director at Ulrikdals Castle Theatre Confidencen, in Sweden.
Ticciati's philosophy over the festival establishes that the best way to outperform is creating a premeditated concept of what the expectation of the festival should be. He is interested in looking back to the past and structuring his own musical vision, just as Bach did. That is why his first O/ Modernt festival was focused on Bach´s music and its influences in the musical world since his death.
Hugo enhances the contemporary music world, working with composers such as Albert Schnelzer, Anders Hillborg, Djuro Zivkovic, Leonardo Coral, Andrea Tarrodi, Tobias Broström, Thomas Jennefelt, Sergey Yevtushenko and Esaias Järnegard.
Within other projects, he is working with Bill Connor (English composer), on "An Improvised Violin Concerto". Over the next seasons, Ticciati will be performing concertos in Russia, Romania, Sweden, England and Mexico.

Music Festivals

Ticciati has been invited to several renowned musical events, such as the Gotland Chamber Music Festival (Sweden), the St.
For this year (2011) Sweden, a guest of honor in FIC, will be represented by Angereds Teater, Åke Parmerud, Stockholm Jazz Orchestra, and Hugo Ticciani, who will be working with Michael Tsalka.




