[[Kari Berg]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 births, Living people, People in fashion, Synthpop musicians, Swedish electronic musicians, Swedish female models, Swedish female singers, Swedish film actresses, Swedish musicians, Swedish people of Norwegian descent

Kari Berg is a Swedish/Norwegian singer-songwriter, actress, model and author. She was born in Östersund, Jämtland in Sweden. She was the female singer of Ashbury Heights and is now part of the EBM-band Chaos All Stars and doing a solo career. She has starred in a film and has modelled for designers in several genres.

Personal life

Kari currently lives in Umeå, Sweden.

Modelling

During the years Kari has been published for example in Kamera & Bild, Skin Two, QLTR and Göteborgsposten, worked with designers like Atsuko Kudo and Naucler Design, appeared in advertisement for Mariart & Sveriges Frisörföretagare and done runway shows at Umeå Fashion Week and STHLM Fashion Market.
Kari was called The Chameleon by a photographer after seeing how many different looks she had when modelling and this is now her trademark. She was the main character in Thomas Di Leva music video Öppnar mitt hjärta and has also participated in an Elegant Machinery music video.
Kari is currently represented by the Swedish agencies Nocturnal Agency and Stockholmsgruppen Models.

Acting

Kari started out her entertainment career as an actress, with around 7 years in theatre school. This later went into modelling and she stopped acting in theatre and films for several years. In the end of 2011 she announced that she was to star in a movie, but that she was going to tell more about that later.

Music

Kari took a step out in the music business in the later part of 2008 when she joined as the female vocalist of the synth-pop duo Ashbury Heights. And in late 2010 she joined the EBM-band Chaos All Stars.
She has played on bigger stages like M'era Luna Festival, Amphi Festival and Gothic Festival Waregem (now Shadowplay Festival). She was the female part of the duo Ashbury Heights from 2008 until the band disbanded due to the other half of the bands argument with the label.
Kari is a mezzosoprano.

Ashbury Heights

Kari joined Ashbury Heights as the new female vocalist in the later part of 2008 and got a lot of attention from the press. Many were curious about her voice since she hadn't released anything earlier, but also since she was already a known model in the alternative world. After playing at Gothic Festival Waregem (now Shadowplay Festival) they got very good reviews and the worries about the change in the line-up decreased. The band continued getting good reviews after life gigs and also being praised for their album Take Cair Paramour which was released in 2010. In the end of 2010 the band disbanded after a long fight between the label and the male vocalist of the band, this went public with a letter from the male vocalist to the press.

Chaos All Stars

In the end of 2010 she joined the EBM-band Chaos All Stars. Shortly after that, they released the song We Are The Sinners exclusively to the visitors of the festival ElectriXmas in Sweden. In July 2011 the song Forget Them was released via a compilation album by Side Line Magazine. In December 2011 they released the song Autumn Nights with a music video where Kari was featured in, with the video having a strong Gothic feel with rococo furniture and also a pillar room.
In 2012 the band released a CD on February 24 which was called "I Need It All". The response from the media was really good and they got top reviews on the CD. Several reviews also brought up their joy over hearing more of Kari and only positive reviews of her voice has been mentioned. When Kari is on stage with Chaos All Stars she wears latex, the latest outfit from Naucler Design. It has a strong military vibe.
On the CD they have the song "Iron Sky" which is featured in the Director's Diary for the Finnish movie Iron Sky.

Solo career

In the end of 2010 Kari announced that she was pursuing a solo career. She started it with a collaboration with Chaos All Stars on a song called We Are The Sinners which ended up with Kari joining the band instead. She has also done collaborations with bands like Ad Inferna, Psy'Aviah and DE TOT COR. For the song Deep Dark Desire with Psy'Aviah she also did a photo shoot in a red latex dress by Naucler Design. In an interview with Psy'Aviah, Yves stated that they are doing another collaboration with Kari in 2012.
Yves: Working with Kari was awesome, in many ways. She has a great sense of humor, she writes her stuff fluently, she has great looks and a very special sound in her voice. I found it a pleasure to work with her and I have just agreed with her that she will do another collaboration with us in the near future. – Peek-a-boo Magazine

Awards and nominations

Discography

Singles

Compilation Albums

Collaborations

Remixes








