[[Chick Hearn]]

CATEGORIES: 1916 births, 2002 deaths, Accidental deaths from falls, Accidental deaths in California, American people of Irish descent, American radio sports announcers, American television sports announcers, Bowling broadcasters, Bradley Braves men's basketball players, Burials at Holy Cross Cemetery, Culver City, College basketball announcers in the United States, College football announcers, Golf writers and broadcasters, Los Angeles Lakers broadcasters, Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame inductees, National Basketball Association broadcasters, UNLV Runnin' Rebels basketball, Sportspeople from Chicago, Illinois, Basketball players from Illinois

Francis Dayle "Chick" Hearn (November 27, 1916 – August 5, 2002) was an American sportscaster.  Known primarily as the long-time play-by-play announcer for the Los Angeles Lakers of the National Basketball Association, Hearn was remembered for his rapid fire, staccato broadcasting style, inventing colorful phrases such as slam dunk, air ball, and no harm, no foul that have become common basketball vernacular, and for broadcasting 3,338 consecutive Lakers games starting on November 21, 1965. Associated Press, August 16, 2002  Additionally, Hearn started the now common tradition of estimating the distance of shots taken.
Of note is that most of Hearn's games in the television era were simulcast on both radio and television, even after most teams chose to use different announcers for the different media.

Biography

Early life and nickname

Hearn grew up in Aurora, Illinois in west suburban Chicago and attended high school at Marmion Academy and college at Bradley University. He earned the nickname "Chick" while an Amateur Athletic Union basketball player at Bradley, when teammates played a prank on him: giving him a shoebox to see his surprised reaction when he opened it and found not sneakers inside, but instead a dead chicken.
He and his wife Marge were married August 13, 1938. They had two children, a son, Gary and a daughter, Samantha, both of whom predeceased Hearn.

Broadcasting streak

Hearn's broadcasting streak began on November 21, 1965. Hearn missed the Lakers' game the previous night after having been stranded in Fayetteville, Arkansas by inclement weather after having announced a game between Arkansas and Texas Tech. Even that was only Hearn's second missed assignment for the Lakers since he had become the team's broadcaster in March 1961. He would not miss another until December 16, 2001. Over the course of the streak, Hearn was paired with several different color men, including "Hot" Rod Hundley, Pat Riley, Keith Erickson, and Stu Lantz.
Hearn's streak of 3,338 consecutive Lakers games came to an end midway through the 2001-02 season when he underwent cardiac bypass surgery. Hearn recovered from his illness but suffered a broken hip after falling while putting gas in his car which extended his time away from the Lakers broadcast booth. Chick recovered from both issues and resumed broadcasting that season, receiving a standing ovation from the Staples Center crowd upon his return. His final game was Game 4 of the 2002 NBA Finals where the Lakers defeated the New Jersey Nets to win their third consecutive NBA championship.

Non-Laker work

Hearn was the long-time host of Bowling for Dollars on KTLA (1972-1977); KHJ-TV (now KCAL-TV) (1978). He called the closed-circuit television broadcast of the first Ali-Frazier fight in 1971. He also did boxing commentary for Forum Boxing cards in Inglewood in the 1980s, usually appearing alongside former featherweight contender Ruben Castillo.  Hearn also did the play-by-play for basketball during the 1992 Summer Olympics.S. Open golf tournament from 1957-1964.  At the time, Hearn handled the sports desk of the local news program on Los Angeles' NBC affiliate, KRCA (now KNBC).  Hearn announced USC football and basketball games from 1956-61.,USC Annenberg Establishes Chick Hearn Scholarship Fund :: Legend announced USC football and basketball from 1956-61 before 40-year Lakers stint and also served as the play-by-play broadcaster for USC football games on tape-delayed, syndicated telecasts during the 1973 season. Hearn also called UNLV Runnin' Rebels basketball games on KHJ/KCAL with Ross Porter from 1986 to 1990.
Hearn also served as an announcer in The Fish That Saved Pittsburgh, The Love Bug, The Simpsons, Rugrats and Garfield and Friends. Hearn was the radio announcer, whose voice could be heard blaring from the castaway's radio on Gilligan's Island.
Hearn can be heard on the Pink Floyd album The Wall (at the 4:07 mark of the song "Don't Leave Me Now" as "Pink" flips through television channels just before destroying his television set leading into the song "Another Brick in the Wall Pt. 3"). This clip of Hearn appears to have been taken from an actual game between the Lakers and the Bulls which was probably recorded during the 1978-79 season. 
Before the playoffs in the 1986 season, Hearn released a 12 inch rap single "Rap-Around".  The song features Chick in the studio re-creating many of his most famous 'Chickisms' and was distributed by Macola Records (who distributed an early Dr. Dre/Ice Cube group "World Class Wrecking Cru".google.com/uploads/pics/label_world_class_wreckin_cru_house_calls_macola_mrc_1008_1987_b.com/labels/macola/world-class-wreckin-cru-house-calls.

Death

During the summer of 2002, Hearn suffered a fall at his Encino, California home, and struck his head causing serious injury. Three days later, on August 5, 2002, Chick Hearn died of his injury. He was 85. He was interred in the Holy Cross Cemetery in Culver City, California next to his son Gary, who had died of a drug overdose on June 1, 1972,Gary Hearn (1942 - 1972) - Find A Grave Memorial and his daughter Samantha, who had died from complications of anorexia on May 24, 1990.

Honors

On May 9, 1991, Hearn became the third broadcaster to be inducted into Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Massachusetts.
In honor of his contributions to the Los Angeles Lakers, both the Lakers and the city of Los Angeles renamed a portion of West 11th Street between Figueroa Street and Georgia Street (now L.A. Live Way) to Chick Hearn Court. This street currently runs alongside Staples Center's main entrance. The Los Angeles County Metropolitan Transportation Authority further honored the broadcaster by changing the name of the nearby Blue Line station to Pico-Chick Hearn. His name was later hung from the rafters of the Staples Center, alongside the retired numbers of past Lakers players, though with a microphone in place of a number.
Hearn also has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, in radio.  Hearn's star is located at 6755 Hollywood Blvd.
On April 27, 2010, Chick Hearn was honored with a bronze statue at Star Plaza outside Staples Center.

On-air style and demeanor

Hearn was notable for his focus on calling play-by-play.  He did not chitchat while the game was in motion. He was able to report clearly and rapidly, which he considered a gift. This style was especially well-suited for his notable simulcasts of Laker games on television and radio, which were a tradition during his forty-plus year tenure. He was especially appreciated on radio. Shortly after Hearn's departure, the simulcasts were ended, with some listeners complaining that his successor, Paul Sunderland, was difficult to follow for radio listeners. He was formal, always referring to the Lakers's former owner as "Mr. Cooke".

Chickisms

The particular phrases that Chick used during his broadcasts were labeled "Chickisms". Many are staples of basketball. When a book of his memoirs was published in 2004, it included an audio CD with the calls as well as a Chick Hearn Rap-Around rap song created with the samples.

Nicknames for Laker players

Memorable calls






