[[Bobby Joe Ebola and the Children MacNuggits]]

CATEGORIES: 1995 establishments in California, American comedy musical groups, American hip hop groups, American punk rock groups, Folk rock groups from California, Musical groups established in 1995, Musical groups from the San Francisco Bay Area

Bobby Joe Ebola and the Children MacNuggits (also known as Bobby Joe Ebola) are an American acoustic folk-rock duo from Pinole, California. Formed in 1995, the traditional incarnation of the band consists of vocalist Corbett Redford III and guitarist/vocalist Dan Abbott. The duo is often joined onstage and in the studio by numerous musicians and friends for full band stage performances and recordings. Early performances featured occasional backup vocals from John Geek, also singer for Fleshies. Both Abbott, Redford and Geek were founding members of the indie label S.P.A.M. Records, and co-organizers of Geekfest, a series of free all-ages music festivals held in the late 1990s,
Bobby Joe Ebola is known for its social criticism, using satirical lyrics to touch on controversial subjects, and performances that combine elements of punk rock and standup comedy.
Between 1995 and 2000, the band toured the U.S. several times and released two full length albums, one EP and a split 7" record with Pleasanton, California, band Your Mother,
In a rare effort by an independent band without major label funding, Bobby Joe Ebola set forth to film 13 music videos,
The band released a 7" vinyl single for their song, "Bone Dagger" on Suckerpunch Records on September 4, 2012.
In December 2012, the band will be releasing a new full length record entitled, Trainwreck to Narnia. The CD and digital versions of the album will be available on the Rooftop Comedy label. The 12" vinyl version will be released on Las Cruces' New Mexico label, Dirt Cult Records.
Other upcoming releases slated for release in early 2013 include the Meal Deal With The Devil CD EP with accompanying read-along storybook illustrated by Jason Chandler of Horrible Comics, The Bobby Joe Ebola Songbook with "Blues Turn Brown/The Poor flexi-disc" featuring chords, lyrics and illustrations inspired by the songs of the band, the "Tashirojima" Vinyl 7" Single (all profits will benefit JEARS (Japanese Emergency Animal Rescue and Support)), the Bad Boys Gotta Rock It! (Live Recordings from 1995  and
The Mr. Sausage Brand Microwave Rock Opera Double CD/LP/Digital.

History

Origins

Bobby Joe Ebola and the Children MacNuggits first formed in 1995, Redford then called Abbott, who he had met when they were both attending Pinole Valley High School, and asked him if he would like to start a band. Abbott agreed and the band was formed.
The band's unusual name came from a conversation between Abbott and Redford in the parking lot of the Pinole Burger King minutes before their first show. Abbott recalled in an interview that "1995 was the year Ebola killed 300 people in the Congo, so that was in our heads. I guess we also liked the juxtaposition between suburban America (including us) turning themselves into greasy breaded lumps, and the brutal (though natural) internal liquefaction that, at the time, seemed like the most extreme way to die. Plus we were stoned to tears". The band has frequently mentioned during interviews that the name "Bobby Joe" is a reference to the character from the movie Evil Dead II named Bobby Joe, portrayed by actress Kassie DePaiva.
The band self-released its debut EP, Two Cats Running, Backup singer John Geek, spoke to then MRR coordinator Tim Yohannan, who explained that since Bobby Joe Ebola was not punk rock, MRR would not print advertising for the band.
Faced with this rejection by the pillars of the local punk rock community, the band and their friends decided to organize their own show. Renting a generator and a P.A. system, the group threw a free, all-ages festival at a shoreline park at Point Molate Beach Park. The festival was the first of a series of such events called Geekfest, and became the nucleus of a new subculture in East Bay music. was held without proper permits and therefore illegal.

Geekfest and S.P.A.M. Records

S.P.A.M. ("Smarmy Post Angst Musicians") Records was an underground collective of East Bay artists and musicians which began in 1996 with the release of Bobby Joe Ebola and the Children MacNuggits' "Two Cats Running EP" and a CD compilation of local bands entitled "If You Can't Laugh At Yourself We'll Do It For You".
Geekfest was a series of free, all-ages outdoor concerts organized by the S.P.A.M. Records collective beginning in 1997, largely in response to the difficulties of securing gigs for Bobby Joe Ebola and the Children MacNuggits and S.P.A.M.-affiliated bands. Due to a scarcity of all-ages venues in the San Francisco Bay Area, and the East Bay punk scene's identity crisis in the wake of mainstream commercial success by several formerly underground acts like Green Day and Rancid, the band found itself without places to play shows. Copying the tactics of the local underground rave scene, the first Geekfest events were held illegally at Point Molate Beach Park in Richmond, CA, part of a neglected Navy fuel depot beneath the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge.
Shows were booked (and announced) via a voicemail connected to (510) BAD-SMUT on a first-come, first served basis, without regard to music genre or notoriety, or any official headlining bands. Thus, Geekfest became known for featuring an unpredictable variety of entertainment, and the undisclosed schedules meant that attendees had no idea when any particular act would play. As Geekfest became a semi-regular event with a culture all its own, its effects were felt on both Bobby Joe Ebola and on S.P.A.M. Records. The band, as the events coordinators, promoters, and hosts, networked and collaborated with touring bands and other show organizers, and nearly all S.P.A.M. releases were from veterans of Geekfest. In August 1998, the first Geekfest campout was held at Lake Lodoga, near central California's East Park Reservoir. Sometime later that year the S.P.A.M. collective met the Pyrate Punx, another group of show promoters, artists and musicians, who were primarily based out of the San Francisco Mission District's thriving punk scene. Recognizing shared values, if not always aesthetic ones, the two groups co-organized the second Geekfest campout, billed as Pyrates vs Geeks. In subsequent years it became known as Libertatia, an event which is still organized annually by the Pyrate Punx community.
During this time, Bobby Joe Ebola was in the middle of a prolific songwriting and recording period. In 1997, the band released "Advice For Young Lovers" a split 7" record with Geekfest alumni Your Mother, and the 18-track "At One With The Dumb" CD (S.P.A.M.).
Both S.P.A.M. Records and Geekfest were initially organized out of a place known as Hermosa Street House in Pinole, CA, where several S.P.A.M. members had spent their youth. The local blighted suburban surroundings and low-wage service-industry employment served as fodder for many of Bobby Joe Ebola's early songs.
At around this time, the City of Richmond took notice of Geekfest and demanded that the events be covered by liability insurance which the collective members could not afford. Faced with an unsympathetic local press, and increasing opportunities for shows elsewhere, the S.P.A.M. collective moved to Oakland in 1998, renting out warehouse space at the Punx With Presses warehouse.

Initial breakup and hiatus

In 2000, Bobby Joe Ebola recorded and released ¡Carmelita Sings!: Visions of a Rock Apocalypse (S.P.A.M.),
After the breakup of the band, Corbett remained as the head coordinator of S.P.A.M. Records,
Though broken up, Dan and Corbett remained friends, and on more than one occasion (mostly at friends' request or for benefit shows) they would re-unite for one-off shows. Dan and Corbett also starred together in the independent film, Neptune, directed by filmmaker Anthony Marchitiello,

Reunion

In 2009, Abbott and Redford began developing a pilot for an animated version of their unreleased rock opera, A Sausage Named Clarence.
Tinged with psych rock, dark folk, and twee elements, F was heralded a bold, more mature direction for the group.

Music videos

For their first music video, the band chose the single from the EP of the same name, Freaky Baby. The video featured dancing by the acclaimed bicycle dance troupe, The Bay Area Derailluers.
The band had so much fun creating the video, they soon announced they would be filming one music video for each of the thirteen songs on their F LP, with plans for a DVD version of the album to be released.
An animated music video was created by artist Mike Foxall of XRAY Studios for the band's song Bone Dagger and was released on July 4, 2012.

Musical style and influences

Bobby Joe Ebola has described their band's sound as "pretty songs about awful things". Musically, they often deviate from their signature "satiric folk rock" sound to incorporate other styles, among them ska, punk rock, polka, dark folk, classic rock and even hip hop. The band has stated that their tendency to jump musical genres has to do with involving satire in their songs as well as letting the song's sound arrive organically Abbott and Redford often sing in harmony with one another and alternate taking lead vocal duties. When playing live, the group often mixes social commentary and standup comedy in between songs.
The band acknowledges The Hope Bombs, a self-proclaimed "geeky" punk rock band featuring future S.P.A.M. alumni and Bobby Joe Ebola studio musician Ben Morss and former Bobby Joe Ebola bassist Robert Eggplant from Blatz (band) as a musical inspiration. and many of the punk bands from the Bay Area's early 1990's punk-rock boom.

Personnel

Principal members:
Live performance and studio guests:
Past members:

Discography








