[[Don Feder]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, American columnists, Boston University School of Law alumni, Massachusetts lawyers, New York lawyers, People from Fulton County, New York, Writers from Massachusetts, Writers from New York

Don Feder is a media consultant and free-lance writer.  He is also World Congress of Families Communications Director.  Feder operates Don Feder Associates, a communications firm for non-profits with a message (those promoting faith, family, freedom and national security)."Don Feder Associates"

Early life

Don Feder grew up in Johnstown, New York, and graduated from Johnstown High School in 1965. Feder is a 1969 graduate of the Boston University College of Liberal Arts and a 1972 graduate of the Boston University School of Law. He is admitted to the practice of law in New York and Massachusetts. He was a leader of Young Americans for Freedom—chapter chairman, Massachusetts State Chairman, New England Regional Director and member of the National Board of Directors from 1966 to 1972. At the time, YAF was America's largest conservative organization.

Career

Feder practiced law in New York state from 1973-1976. He was the first executive director of Citizens for Limited Taxation (1976-1979), a Massachusetts taxpayers group which launched a successful drive for a statewide cap on property taxes. He was also the executive director of the Second Amendment Foundation an organization dedicated to preserving freedom of gun ownership from 1979-1981.
Feder was a Boston Herald editorial writer and syndicated columnist from June 1983 to June 2002."Goodbye to all this" Jewish World Review, July 1, 2002. His column appeared in the Herald for 19 years. His 2,000th column appeared on February 28, 2002.
Feder's column was syndicated by Creators Syndicate and carried by more than 40 newspapers and e-magazines. His writings have appeared in USA Today, The Wall Street Journal, The Weekly Standard, National Review, The American Enterprise, Readers Digest, FrontPage Magazine,"Related Articles" FrontPage Magazine."Don Feder" Human Events
He wrote two books: A Jewish Conservative Looks at Pagan America (1993) and Who's Afraid of the Religious Right? (1996).
Feder has addressed the annual conventions or meetings of the Rabbinical Council of America, Concerned Women for America, Toward Tradition, the Christian Coalition of America, National Right to Life Committee, the Conservative Political Action Conference, the College Republicans, the Council for National Policy, The Heritage Foundation, Family Research Council, the Interfaith Zionist Leadership Summit, the World Affairs Councils of America  of Boston and Portland, Maine, World Congress of Families II (Geneva, 1999) III (Mexico City, 2004), IV (Warsaw, 2007) and Amsterdam (2009), as well as the Values Voter Summit (2006 and 2008).
Feder has lectured or debated at Harvard, Dartmouth, Princeton, Hillsdale College, Bates College, Carlton College, Grove City College, New York University, Regent University, UCLA, Hampshire College, the University of Massachusetts Amherst, Boston University and Boston College.
He has appeared on network and syndicated radio and television shows, including The O'Reilly Factor, C-SPAN, Politically Incorrect, The 700 Club, Focus on the Family, Beverly LaHaye Live, Phyllis Schlafly Live, Coral Ridge Ministries, Fox & Friends, and Jerry Falwell's Listen America. His columns have been read on the air by Rush Limbaugh, Dr. Laura and Michael Savage."Don Feder to Discuss Pro-Obama Media Coverage on Savage Nation" ChristianNews Wire, June 17, 2009.
Feder was the communications director and public spokesman of the documentaries Demographic Winter: the Decline of the Human Family and Demographic Bomb: Demography is Destiny from 2008  to 2010. These are the first and only documentaries on the worldwide decline in birthrates.

Controversy

As a student at Boston University, Feder worked against the anti-war movement. In November 1969, he helped to organize a Support Our Troops Rally on the Boston Common.
Feder wrote a column on Puerto Rican statehood for the Boston Herald (1998) which Hispanic groups condemned as racist.
In January 2004, Feder spoke at a rally on the Boston Common against the legalization of same-sex marriage in Massachusetts. In 2005, he spoke at a press conference at the National Press Club against the "War on Christmas".
In 2009, Feder attempted to speak on hate crimes at the University of Massachusetts Amherst, but was prevented from speaking by a group of student protesters."Protesters shut down Republican Club's Don Feder speech at UMass" Mass Live, March 11, 2009.
In 2011, he coordinated a full-page advertisement criticizing GOProud's participation in CPAC."What would Ronald Reagan think of CPAC today?" Vision America, February 2011.
Feder has been criticized for calling homosexuals "a sorry collection of individuals, connected only by their carnal appetites, caught up in a perverted lifestyle."
He was further criticized in 2014 for comments he made in Kiev in which he compared gay marriage to pedophilia and polygamy, as well as his statements of approval for Russian President Vladimir Putin's actions in the 2014  Crimean crisis.

Awards and honors

Feder is the 1998 recipient of the International Communications Award of the Republic of China on Taiwan and the winner of the first-place prize in the Amy Foundation Writing Awards for 1993. The Amy Foundation recognizes writers who project Biblical truths in the secular media.

Personal life

Feder has been married for 37 years. He has four children and three grandchildren.






