[[Geoff Mulligan]]

CATEGORIES: American computer scientists

Geoff Mulligan is an American computer scientist who developed embedded Internet technology and 6LoWPAN.

Life

Raised in Palo Alto, California, Mulligan attended Henry M. Gunn High School. He graduated from the United States Air Force Academy in 1979 with a bachelor's degree in computer science. 
While in the Air Force, he worked on the ARPAnet. 
The ARPAnet evolved into the Defense Data Network, where he worked on security and performance and also designed and directed installation of the Pentagon data networks that used cable TV technology.
Mulligan returned to the Air Force Academy, where he oversaw the design and installation of the Academy's local area network, FALCONnet. During this assignment, he earned his Master's degree in computer information sciences at the University of Denver and taught at the Air Force Academy, University of Denver, Webster University, and Chapman College.
In 1990, Mulligan joined Digital Equipment Corporation in Palo Alto. He focused on network security, electronic mail, TCP/IP networking, networking tools and firewall technology. He worked on the DEC SEAL firewall with Marcus J. Ranum,
Mulligan began working at Sun Microsystems in 1992. He developed and maintained the Solaris TCP/IP utilities and kernel.  He also worked on Sun's wide area network and firewall complex. He continued with the IPv6 design team and wrote a PC-based implementation, along with a packet decoder, and worked on the development of an IPv4/IPv6 border gateway. He was the principal architect of Sun's firewall product, Sunscreen SPF 100.
Mulligan further developed Sunscreen, adding network address translation and topology hiding technologies.
In 2001, Mulligan was hired by Invensys as the chief scientist for the Home Controls Division, where he worked on resource and energy management technology, including home gateway design and development, web-based tools, and low-power, low-speed, low-cost wireless networks such as the IEEE 802.15 standards marketed with the Zigbee trademark. Invensys worked on a project to put wireless IPv6 communications in smoke alarms and appliances.
He was one of the founding board members of the Zigbee Alliance  He says he wrote the first embedded IPv6 implementation and created and named 6LoWPAN. In 2006, he started the consulting firm Proto6, where he worked for companies and the US Department of Defense.
Mulligan worked with others to begin the Internet Protocol for Smart Objects (IPSO) Alliance in 2008.
He was chairman for the Alliance until 2013.
In June 2013, Mulligan became one of the second round of Presidential Innovation Fellows, working at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST).

Works

Mulligan holds over 15 patents in computer security, networking and electronic mail.
In 1999, he wrote "Removing the Spam: Email Processing and Filtering".  The book explains the operation and management of two widely distributed Unix e-mail tools: Sendmail and Procmail.

Congressional testimony

In 1997, Mulligan testified before Congress on electronic commerce and computer security. The Committee on Science held a briefing on Secure Communications in February, which was the second in a series of briefings on computer security. The theme of the briefing was the need to protect the confidential nature of private communications and to ensure that stored proprietary data remains uncompromised.




