[[Manchukuo Temporary Government]]

CATEGORIES: 2004 establishments in Hong Kong, Manchukuo, Organizations established in 2004, Organisations based in Hong Kong, Chinese anti-communists

The Manchukuo Temporary Government is an organisation established in 2004 in Hong Kong. Journalists and internet users have expressed doubts about its authenticity and aims.

Structure and symbols

Media summaries of its website state that the Manchukuo Temporary Government includes an emperor, a royal family, a prime minister, and a cabinet. It continues to use the old National Anthem of Manchukuo and Flag of Manchukuo. It claims to have overseas branches in Brazil, Italy, Japan, Taiwan, and the United States.
The Manchukuo Temporary Government is a member of the International Monarchist Conference. It also seeks to join the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization.

Financial activities

The Manchukuo Temporary Government's "central bank", which claims to succeed the old Central Bank of Manchou, declared the old Manchukuo yuan to have a fixed exchange rate of 0.8 to the United States dollar, and offers currency exchange services by post.

Reactions

The Manchukuo Temporary Government received occasional media attention in the context of the politics of Taiwan around the time of the 2009 elections, as its members may be distant relatives of Kuomintang general-secretary and ethnic Manchu King Pu-tsung, and it was jokingly suggested that King himself might be one of its secret agents.
The Manchukuo Temporary Government also provoked angry reactions from some quarters. A NOWnews guest columnist in May 2011, in the midst of other arguments against Taiwan independence, called the Manchukuo Temporary Government "the shame of the people of Northeast China". Its stated political positions, such as support for the Dalai Lama and the Tibetan independence movement, as well as its calls to disrupt the 2008 Summer Olympics in Beijing, earned it the ire of  internet users in mainland China. At one point, rumours were spreading in mainland Chinese internet forums that one "Toshiaki Kawashima" (川島志明), whom they alleged to be the nephew of Yoshiko Kawashima and prime minister of the Manchukuo Temporary Government, was working as a secret agent for Chen Shui-bian in Papua New Guinea with the aim of fomenting violence against Chinese people there.






