[[Nicholas Estavillo]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, Living people, People from San Juan, Puerto Rico, Puerto Rican United States Marines, Puerto Rican military personnel, American military personnel of the Vietnam War, New York City Police Department officers, Puerto Rican law enforcement personnel, United States Marines

NYPD Chief of Patrol Nicholas Estavillo (Ret.), (born March 13, 1945) is a former member of the New York Police Department who in 2002 became the first Puerto Rican and the first Hispanic in the history of the NYPD to reach the three-star rank of Chief of Patrol.

Early years

Estavillo was born and raised in the sector Hato Rey, a section of San Juan the capital of Puerto Rico. There he received his primary education at El Colegio del Espiritu Santo. In 1954, when he was 9 years old, he moved to New York City with his mother. They lived in the borough of Brooklyn, where he attended St. Peter's School.  Estavillo graduated from Bishop Loughlin Memorial High School and was awarded the Puerto Rican Leadership Scholarship, making it possible for him to attend St. Francis College."True Blue: A Tale of the Enemy Within", Publisher: Old King Road Press, Chapter 28, page 347, ISBN 978--1-60179-012-5.
Estavillo enlisted in the United States Marine Corps during the Vietnam War and was a member of the 3rd Force, Recon Co. of the Marines Recon Force. The Marine Recon Force is a valuable asset to the Marine Air-Ground Task Force when the MEF Commander is faced with uncertainty in the battlefield. The unit provides timely intelligence to command and control for battlespace shaping, allowing the MAGTF to act, and react, to changes in the battlefield. He continued his education at the New York Institute of Technology where he earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Criminal Justice.

Career in the NYPD

In 1968, Estavillo applied to become an officer in the New York Police Department and graduated from the New York Police Academy after six months of training. His first assignment as a Police Officer was at the 19th Precinct located at East 67th Street in the Upper East Side of New York. The population density of the 19th Precinct is one of the highest in the United States, with residents estimated at 217,063.
In 1988, Estavillo graduated from the FBI National Academy at Quantico, Virginia. Back with the NYPD, he rose in rank throughout the years and served as Precinct Patrol Sergeant and Precinct Lieutenant/Platoon Commander at the 24th Precinct.  As Captain, he served as Commanding Officer of the 34th Precinct covering the Manhattan neighborhoods of Washington Heights and Inwood.

NYPD Chief of Patrol

In 2002, Estavillo was promoted to Chief of Patrol, thus becoming the first Hispanic to reach the executive level of three stars Chief at N.Y.P.D. More than 20,000 Police Officers and 4,000 Civilian support staff of the N.Y.P.D. Patrol Services Bureau were under his supervision.
The duties of a Chief of Patrol include the coordination and deployment of the Department's eight Patrol Boroughs which include 76 Precinct Commands. The Patrol Chief is also in charge of the Special Operations Division, which includes the Emergency Services Unit, Mounted Unit, Aviation Unit, Harbor Unit and Canine Unit. Estavillo managed the resources to combat crime and support counter terrorism strategies; provided supervision to direct, observe and evaluate performance, equipment and training of personnel. Estavillo retired in 2007 from the NYPD.

Legacy

In 2003, Estavillo was named National Grand Marshal of the Puerto Rican Day Parade in New York City.
Estavillo is the father of four children and has five grandchildren. He is a member of the New York State Association of Chiefs of Police, the American Academy of Professional Law Enforcement, the N.Y.P.D. Marine Corps Association, the Marine Force Recon Association, the F.B.I. National Academy Associates, the N.Y.P.D. Hispanic Society and serves as advisor to the Association of Retired Hispanic Police.

Military decorations

Among Estavillo's military decorations and awards are the following:
Badges






