[[List of birds of Madeira]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of biota of Madeira, Lists of birds of Europe, Birds of Madeira

This is a list of the bird species recorded in Madeira. The avifauna of Madeira includes a total of 286 species, of which two are endemic, two have been introduced by humans, and 203 are rare or accidental. The two listed species that are extinct and the one that is locally extirpated are not included in the species count. Eighteen species are globally threatened (twelve near-threatened, two vulnerable, three endangered and one critically endangered).
This list's taxonomic treatment (designation and sequence of orders, families, and species) and nomenclature (common and scientific names) follow the conventions of Clements's 6th edition.  The family accounts at the beginning of each heading reflects this taxonomy, as do the species counts found in each family account.  Introduced and accidental species are included in the total counts for Madeira.
The following tags have been used to highlight certain relevant categories. The commonly occurring, native, species do not fall into any of these categories.

Ducks, geese and swans

Order: Anseriformes
Family: Anatidae
The family Anatidae includes the ducks and most duck-like waterfowl, such as geese and swans. These are birds that are modified for an aquatic existence with webbed feet, flattened bills and feathers that are excellent at shedding water due to an oily coating. There are 131 species worldwide and 21 species which occur in Madeira.

Pheasants and partridges

Order: Galliformes
Family: Phasianidae
The Phasianidae are a family of terrestrial birds which consists of quails, partridges, snowcocks, francolins, spurfowls, tragopans, monals, pheasants, peafowls and jungle fowls. In general, they are plump (although they may vary in size) and have broad, relatively short wings. There are 156 species worldwide and 3 species which occur in Madeira.

Loons

Order: Galliformes
Family: Gaviidae
The loons or divers are a group of aquatic birds found in many parts of North America and northern Eurasia (Europe, Asia and debatably Africa). All living species of loons are members of the genus (Gavia), family (Gaviidae) and order (Gaviiformes). There are 5 species worldwide and 1 species which occurs in Madeira.

Grebes

Order: Podicipediformes
Family: Podicipedidae

Shearwaters and petrels

Order: Procellariiformes
Family: Procellariidae
The procellariids are the main group of medium-sized 'true petrels', characterised by united nostrils with a medium septum, and a long outer functional primary. There are 75 species worldwide and 11 species which occur in Madeira.

Storm-Petrels

Order: Procellariiformes
Family: Hydrobatidae
The storm-petrels are relatives of the petrels, and are the smallest of sea-birds. They feed on planktonic crustaceans and small fish picked from the surface, typically while hovering. The flight is fluttering and sometimes bat-like. There are 21 species worldwide and 6 species which occur in Madeira.

Tropicbirds

Order: Phaethontiformes
Family: Phaethontidae
Tropicbirds are slender white birds of tropical oceans, with exceptionally long central tail feathers. Their heads and long wings have black markings. There are 3 species worldwide and 1 species which occurs in Madeira.

Storks

Order: Ciconiiformes
Family: Ciconiidae
Storks are large, long-legged, long-necked, wading birds with long, stout bills. Storks are mute; bill-clattering is an important mode of stork communication at the nest. Their nests can be large and may be reused for many years. Many species are migratory. There are 19 species worldwide and 2 species which occur in Madeira.

Boobies and gannets

Order: Suliformes
Family: Sulidae
The sulids comprise the gannets and boobies. Both groups comprise medium-to-large coastal sea-birds that plunge-dive for fish. There are 9 species worldwide and 1 species which occurs in Madeira.

Cormorants

Order: Suliformes
Family: Phalacrocoracidae
The Phalacrocoracidae is a family of medium-to-large coastal, fish-eating sea-birds that includes cormorants and shags. Plumage colouration varies with the majority having mainly dark plumage, some species being black and white, and a few being colourful. There are 38 species worldwide and 2 species which occur in Madeira.

Bitterns, herons and egrets

Order: Pelecaniformes
Family: Ardeidae
The family Ardeidae contains the bitterns, herons and egrets. Herons and egrets are medium to large sized wading birds with long necks and legs. Bitterns tend to be shorter necked and more wary. Unlike other long-necked birds suck as storks, ibises and spoonbills, members of Ardeidae fly with their necks retracted. There are 61 species worldwide and 8 species which occur in Madeira.

Ibises and spoonbills

Order: Pelecaniformes
Family: Threskiornithidae
The Threskiornithidae is a family of large terrestrial and wading birds which includes the ibises and spoonbills. They have long, broad wings with 11 primary  and about 20 secondary feathers. They are strong fliers and despite their size and weight, very capable soarers. There are 36 species worldwide and 2 species which occur in Madeira.

Osprey

Order: Accipitriformes
Family: Pandionidae
The Pandionidae family contains only one species, the Osprey. The Osprey is a medium large raptor and a specialist fish-eater with a worldwide distribution. 

Hawks, kites and eagles

Order: Accipitriformes
Family: Accipitridae
Accipitridae is a family of birds of prey and include hawks, eagles, kites, harriers and Old World vultures. These birds have powerful hooked beaks for tearing flesh from their prey, strong legs, powerful talons, and keen eyesight. There are 233 species worldwide and 10 species which occur in Madeira.

Caracaras and falcons

Order: Falconiformes
Family: Falconidae
Falconidae is a family of diurnal birds of prey. They differ from hawks, eagles, and kites in that they kill with their beaks instead of their feet. There are 62 species worldwide and 8 species which occur in Madeira.

Bustards

Order: Otidiformes
Family: Otididae
Bustards are large terrestrial birds mainly associated with dry open country and steppes in the Old World. They are omnivorous and nest on the ground. They walk steadily on strong legs and big toes, pecking for food as they go. They have long broad wings with "fingered" wingtips, and striking patterns in flight. Many have interesting mating displays. There are 26 species worldwide of which 1 species occurs in Madeira.

Rails, crakes, gallinules, and coots

Order: Gruiformes
Family: Rallidae
Rallidae is a large family of small to medium-sized birds which includes the rails, crakes, coots, and gallinules. Typically they inhabit dense vegetation in damp environments near lakes, swamps, or rivers. In general they are shy and secretive birds, difficult to observe. Most species have strong legs, and have long toes which are well adapted to soft, uneven surfaces. They tend to have short, rounded wings and be weak fliers. There are 143 species worldwide and 12 species which occur in Madeira.

Cranes

Order: Gruiformes
Family: Gruidae
Cranes (Gruidae) are large, long-legged and long-necked birds. Unlike the similar-looking but unrelated herons, cranes fly with necks outstretched, not pulled back. Most have elaborate and noisy courting displays or "dances". There are 15 species worldwide of which 1 species occurs in Madeira.

Thick Knees

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Burhinidae
The thick-knees (Burhinidae) are a group of largely tropical waders in the family Burhinidae. They are found worldwide within the tropical zone, with some species also breeding in temperate Europe and Australia. They are medium to large waders with strong black or yellow black bills, large yellow eyes and cryptic plumage. Despite being classed as waders, most species have a preference for arid or semi-arid habitats. There are 9 species worldwide of which 1 species occurs in Madeira.

Plovers & Lapwings

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Charadriidae
The family Charadriidae includes the plovers, dotterels, and lapwings. They are small to medium-sized birds with compact bodies, short, thick necks and long, usually pointed, wings. They are found in open country worldwide, mostly in habitats near water, although there are some exceptions. There are 66 species worldwide of which 10 species occur in Madeira.

Oystercatcher

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Haematopodidae
The oystercatchers (Haematopodidae) are large and noisy plover-like birds, with strong bills used for smashing or prising open molluscs. There are 11 species worldwide of which 1 species occurs in Madeira and 2 species are either extirpated or extinct.

Avocets & Stilts

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Recurvirostridae
Recurvirostridae is a family of large wading birds, which includes the avocets and the stilts. The avocets have long legs and long up-curved bills. The stilts have extremely long legs and long, thin, straight bills. There are 9 species worldwide of which 2 species occur in Madeira.

Sandpipers

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Scolopacidae
The Scolopacidae are a large diverse family of small to medium sized shorebirds including the sandpipers, curlews, godwits, shanks, tattlers, woodcocks, snipes, dowitchers and phalaropes. The majority of species eat small invertebrates picked out of the mud or soil. Variation in length of legs and bills enable different species to feed in the same habitat, particularly on the coast, without direct competition for food. There are 89 species worldwide of which 32 species have been recorded in Madeira.

Pratincoles & Coursers

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Glareolidae
Glareolidae is a family of wading birds comprising the pratincoles, which have short legs, long pointed wings and long forked tails, and the coursers, which have long legs, short wings and long pointed bills which curve downwards. There are 17 species worldwide of which 2 species occur in Madeira.

Gulls

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Laridae
Laridae is a family of medium to large seabirds and includes gulls and kittiwakes. They are typically grey or white, often with black markings on the head or wings. They have stout, longish bills and webbed feet. There are 55 species worldwide of which 26 species have been recorded in Madeira.

Skuas

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Stercorariidae
The family Stercorariidae are, in general, medium to large sea birds, typically with grey or brown plumage, often with white markings on the wings. They nest on the ground in temperate and arctic regions and are long-distance migrants. There are 7 species worldwide of which 4 species have been recorded off the coasts of Madeira.

Auks

Order: Charadriiformes
Family: Alcidae
Auks (Alcidae) are a family of seabirds which are superficially similar to penguins with their black-and-white colours, their upright posture and some of their habits but which are able to fly. There are about 23 species worldwide, of which 6 are recorded in Madeira.

Pigeons & Doves

Order: Columbiformes
Family: Columbidae
Pigeons and doves are stout-bodied birds with short necks and short slender bills with a fleshy cere. There are 308 species worldwide of which 5 species occur in Madeira.  The Madeiran Wood Pigeon (Columba palumbus maderensis), an endemic subspecies, is extinct. 

Cuckoos

Order: Cuculiformes
Family: Cuculidae
The family Cuculidae includes cuckoos, roadrunners and anis. These birds are of variable size with slender bodies, long tails and strong legs. Unlike the cuckoo species of the Old World, North American cuckoos are not brood parasites. There are 138 species worldwide of which 2 species occur in Madeira.

Barn owls

Order: Strigiformes
Family: Tytonidae
Barn owls are medium-sized to large owls with large heads and characteristic heart-shaped faces. They have long strong legs with powerful talons. There are about 16 species worldwide with 1 in Madeira.

Typical owls

Order: Strigiformes
Family: Strigidae
Typical owls are small to large solitary nocturnal birds of prey. They have large forward-facing eyes and ears, a hawk-like beak and a conspicuous circle of feathers around each eye called a facial disc. There are about 199 species worldwide, of which 2 have been recorded in Madeira.  There is also one endemic species, known only from fossil remains, that probably became extinct following human settlement of the island.

Nightjars

Order: Caprimulgiformes
Family: Caprimulgidae
Nightjars are medium-sized nocturnal birds with long wings, short legs and very short bills that usually nest on the ground. Most have small feet, of little use for walking, and long pointed wings. Their soft plumage is camouflaged to resemble bark or leaves. There are 86 species worldwide of which 2 have been recorded in Madeira.

Swifts

Order: Apodiformes
Family: Apodidae
Swifts are small aerial birds, spending the majority of their lives flying. These birds have very short legs and never settle voluntarily on the ground, perching instead only on vertical surfaces. Many swifts have long swept-back wings that resemble a crescent or a boomerang. There are 98 species worldwide of which 4 species occur in Madeira.

Kingfishers

Order: Coraciiformes
Family: Alcedinidae
Kingfishers are medium-sized birds with large heads, long pointed bills, short legs, and stubby tails. There are 93 species worldwide and 1 species which occurs in Madeira.

Bee-Eaters

Order: Coraciiformes
Family: Meropidae
The bee-eaters are a group of near passerine birds in the family Meropidae. Most species are found in Africa but others occur in southern Europe, Madagascar, Australia and New Guinea. They are characterised by richly coloured plumage, slender bodies and usually elongated central tail feathers. All are colorful and have long downturned bills and pointed wings, which give them a swallow-like appearance when seen from afar. There are 26 species worldwide, 1 of which occurs in Madeira.

Typical Rollers

Order: Coraciiformes
Family: Coraciidae
Rollers resemble crows in size and build, but are more closely related to the kingfishers and bee-eaters. They share the colourful appearance of those groups with blues and browns predominating. The two inner front toes are connected, but the outer toe is not. There are 12 species worldwide of which 1 species occurs in Madeira.

Hoopoes

Order: Coraciiformes
Family: Upupidae
Hoopoes have black, white and orangey-pink colouring with a large erectile crest on their head. There are 2 species worldwide, 1 of which occurs in Madeira.

Woodpeckers

Order: Piciformes
Family: Picidae
Woodpeckers are small to medium sized birds with chisel like beaks, short legs, stiff tails and long tongues used for capturing insects. Some species have feet with two toes pointing forward, and two backward, while several species have only three toes. Many woodpeckers have the habit of tapping noisily on tree trunks with their beaks. There are 218 species worldwide of which 1 species occurs in Madeira.

Shrikes

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Laniidae
Shrikes are passerine birds known for their habit of catching other birds and small animals and impaling the uneaten portions of their bodies on thorns. A typical shrike's beak is hooked, like a bird of prey. There are 31 species worldwide, 2 of which occur in Madeira.

Old-World Orioles

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Oriolidae
The Old World Orioles are colourful medium sized passerine birds. The beak is slightly curved and hooked, and, except in the figbirds, as long as the head. The plumage of most species is bright and showy, although the females often have duller plumage than the males. They are not related to the New World orioles. There are 29 species worldwide of which 1 species occurs in Madeira.

Crows

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Corvidae
The Corvidae family includes crows, ravens, jays, choughs, magpies, treepies, nutcrackers, and ground jays. Corvids are above average in size for the bird order Passeriformes. Some of the larger species show high levels of learning behavior. There are 120 species worldwide of which 3 species occur in Madeira.

Larks

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Alaudidae
Larks are small terrestrial birds with often extravagant songs and display flights. Most larks are fairly dull in appearance. Their food is insects and seeds. There are 91 species worldwide of which 3 species occur in Madeira.

Swallows and Martins

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Hirundinidae
The Hirundinidae family is a group of passerines characterized by their adaptation to aerial feeding. Their adaptations include a slender streamlined body, long pointed wings and short bills with wide gape. The feet are designed for perching rather than walking, and the front toes are partially joined at the base. There are 75 species worldwide, 6 of which have been recorded in Madeira.

Wrens

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Troglodytidae
The wrens are mainly small and inconspicuous except for their loud songs. These birds have short wings and a thin down-turned bill. Several species often hold their tails upright. All are insectivorous. There are 80 species worldwide of which all but one are New World species, and that 1 species occurs in Madeira.

Kinglets

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Regulidae
The kinglets or crests are a small group of birds often included in the Old World warblers, but frequently given family status because they also resemble the titmice. There are 7 species worldwide, 1 of which occurs in Madeira.

Phylloscopidae

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Phylloscopidae
Phylloscopidae is a newly described family of small insectivorous birds formerly placed in the Old World warbler family. Its members occur in Eurasia, ranging into Wallacea and Africa (and the Arctic Warbler breeding east into Alaska). Most live in forest and scrub and frequently catch food on the wing. There are 75 species worldwide, 5 of which occur in Madeira.

Acrocephalidae

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Acrocephalidae
Acrocephalidae (the marsh- and tree-warblers or acrocephalid warblers) is a family of oscine passerine birds, in the superfamily Sylvioidea. Most species are rather plain olivaceous brown above with much yellow to beige below. They are usually found in open woodland, reedbeds or tall grass. There are 55 species worldwide, 7 of which occur in Madeira. 

Locustellidae

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Locustellidae
Locustellidae is a newly recognized family of small insectivorous songbirds ("warblers"), formerly placed in the Old World warbler family. It contains the grass-warblers, grassbirds, and the Bradypterus "bush-warblers". The species are smallish birds with tails that are usually long and pointed. Most live in scrubland and frequently hunt food by clambering through thick tangled growth or pursuing it on the ground. There are 55 species worldwide, 2 of which occur in Madeira. 

Old World Warblers

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Sylviidae
The family Sylviidae is a group of small insectivorous passerine birds. The Sylviidae mainly occur as breeding species, as the common name implies, in Europe, Asia and, to a lesser extent Africa. Most are of generally undistinguished appearance, but many have distinctive songs. There are 75 species worldwide, of which 8 species occur in Madeira.

Old World flycatchers

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Muscicapidae
Old World flycatchers are a large group of small passerine birds native to the Old World. They are mainly small arboreal insectivores. The appearance of these birds is very varied, but they mostly have weak songs and harsh calls. There 274 species worldwide and 14 species which occur in Madeira.

Thrushes and allies

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Turdidae
The thrushes are a group of passerine birds that occur mainly in the Old World. They are plump, soft plumaged, small to medium-sized insectivores or sometimes omnivores, often feeding on the ground. Many have attractive songs. There are 335 species worldwide and 7 species which occur in Madeira.

Starlings

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Sturnidae
Starlings are small to medium-sized passerine birds. Their flight is strong and direct, and they are very gregarious. Their preferred habitat is fairly open country. They eat insects and fruit. Plumage is typically dark with a metallic sheen. There are 125 species worldwide and 3 species which occur in Madeira.

Wagtails and pipits

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Motacillidae
The Motacillidae are a family of small passerine birds with medium to long tails. They include the wagtails, longclaws and pipits. They are slender, ground feeding insectivores of open country. There are 54 species worldwide and 8 species which occur in Madeira.

Calcariidae

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Calcariidae
The Calcariidae are a small family of passerine birds. There are 6 species worldwide and 1 species which occurs in Madeira.

New World warblers

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Parulidae
A group of small, often colourful passerine birds restricted to the New World. Most are arboreal and insectivorous. There are about 118 species worldwide, 2 of which occur as vagrants in Madeira.

Buntings

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Emberizidae
The emberizids are a family of passerine birds. They are seed-eating birds with a distinctively shaped bill. There are 9 species worldwide of which 1 species occurs in Madeira.

Finches

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Fringillidae
Finches are seed-eating passerine birds, that are small to moderately large and have a strong beak, usually conical and in some species very large. All have 12 tail feathers and 9 primaries. These birds have a bouncing flight with alternating bouts of flapping and gliding on closed wings, and most sing well. There are 137 species worldwide of which 11 species occur in Madeira.

Sparrows

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Passeridae
Sparrows are small passerine birds. In general, sparrows tend to be small, plump, brown or grey birds with short tails and short powerful beaks. Sparrows are seed-eaters, and they also consume small insects. There are 35 species worldwide, 2 of which occur in Madeira.

Waxbills and allies

Order: Passeriformes
Family: Estrildidae
The estrildid finches are small passerine birds of the Old World tropics and Australasia. They are gregarious and often colonial seed-eaters with short thick but pointed bills. They are all similar in structure and habits, but have a wide variation in plumage colours and pattern. There are 141 species worldwide, 1 of which occurs in Madeira.








