[[Smooth Radio presenter history]]

CATEGORIES: Smooth Radio

The presenter history of Smooth Radio includes many well-known British radio personalities who made their names on networks such as Radio 1, Radio 2, and other stations. The Smooth Radio brand began life in 2004 with the Manchester-based 100.4 Smooth FM, and gradually expanded to encompass a number of regional stations; these were subsumed into a UK-wide station in 2010. The regional stations were reintroduced in 2014.
Several prominent broadcasters and disc jockeys have been recruited to the line-up. Current and former presenters on Smooth include Emma B, Simon Bates, Tony Blackburn, Paul Coia, Kate Garraway, Mark Goodier, Kevin Greening, David Jensen, Myleene Klass, Lynn Parsons, Andy Peebles and Graham Torrington. As a national broadcaster, the station's flagship breakfast show was presented by Simon Bates, who left Classic FM after more than a decade to join Smooth. Breakfast and Drivetime shows are currently fronted by a number of regional presenters. In addition, Smooth has also played featured one-off specials presented by personalities such as Russell Grant, Denise Van Outen and Dionne Warwick.

Pre-2010

Kevin Greening was a presenter on 102.2 Smooth Radio, 
Carlos hosted a show on 105.7 Smooth Radio in Birmingham until joining the national Smooth Radio in 2010.
Andy Peebles began presenting a networked weekday evening show from March 2009,

2010–2014

When GMG launched Smooth as a national station in 2010, Simon Bates left Classic FM after 13 years to join Smooth Radio as its new weekday breakfast presenter from January 2011.
Pat Sharp was appointed as Tony Blackburn's replacement in January 2011, The programme was dropped as part of a schedule overhaul less than two months later.
The station announced a major overhaul of its schedule following its relocation from Manchester to London in October 2013. The actress Tina Hobley was announced as a Sunday morning presenter. The changes also saw the departure of many well-known names, such as Andy Peebles and Andi Peters.
In December 2013, it was announced that former LBC 97.3 presenter Anthony Davis would join the station as its Drivetime presenter from January 2014.

2014–present

Global Radio announced a relaunch of the Smooth Brand in February 2014, taking effect from 3 March. This coincided with a return to some regional programming, and the departure of Simon Bates, Lynn Parsons, Carlos and David Prever. New names joining the network included Andrew Castle, who would host the breakfast show in London, replacing Bates. Other changes included Kate Garraway taking over Parsons' mid-morning show, Paul Phear joining the network as an afternoon presenter and Heart Cambridge presenter Chris Skinner replacing Carlos in the evenings. Myleene Klass of Classic FM was also given a Saturday morning show on Smooth, replacing David Prever.
Global announced that regional breakfast and drivetime shows would return from 24  March 2014, and a raft of presenters were hired to host the programmes. As well as Castle and Davis presenting breakfast and drivetime for Smooth Radio London, Darren Parks, formerly of Real Radio joined to present the breakfast show on Smooth Radio North West, while Carlos returned to front the region's drivetime programme. Smooth Radio North East hired Steve Coleman, previously a presenter on Magic AM for breakfast, and Clive Warren, formerly of Metro Radio and Radio 1 as his drivetime counterpart. On Smooth Radio East Midlands, the roles were filled by Gareth Evans of BBC Radio Nottingham and Emma Caldwell of Capital FM, while Nigel Freshman of Free Radio and Charlie Jordan, previously a Smooth presenter in the West Midlands joined Smooth West Midlands.

One-off presenters

Denise Van Outen has hosted one-off shows for Smooth, covering for Emma B in May 2011,

Current programming/presenters

The current line-up at Smooth is as follows.
Monday to Friday
Saturday
Sunday




