[[FC Barcelona]]

CATEGORIES: FC Barcelona footballers, FC Barcelona, 1899 establishments in Spain, Association football clubs established in 1899, Catalan symbols, Copa del Rey winners, Football clubs in Barcelona, G-14 clubs, La Liga clubs, Unrelegated association football clubs



Futbol Club Barcelona (. is a professional football club, based in Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
Founded in 29 November 1899 by a group of Swiss, English and Catalan footballers led by Joan Gamper, the club has become a symbol of Catalan culture and Catalanism, hence the motto "Més que un club" (More than a club). Unlike many other football clubs, the supporters own and operate Barcelona. It is the world's second-richest football club in terms of revenue, with an annual turnover of $613 million, and the third most valuable sports team on the globe, worth $2.6 billion.
Barcelona is the most successful club in Spain, in terms of overall official titles won (81). Barcelona was ranked first in the 'All-Time Club World Ranking' by IFFHS, on 31 December 2009, The club has a long-standing rivalry with Real Madrid; matches between the two teams are referred to as "El Clásico".
Barcelona is one of the most supported teams in the world, and has the largest fan base among all sports teams on all major social networks. Barça's players have won a record number of Ballon d'Or awards (10), as well as a record number of FIFA World Player of the Year awards (7). In 2010, the club created history when three players who came through its youth academy (Messi, Iniesta & Xavi) were chosen as the three best players in the world, having bagged the top spots at the FIFA Ballon d'Or, an unprecedented feat for players from the same football school.
Barcelona was one of the founding members of La Liga, and is one of three clubs which have never been relegated from the top division, along with Athletic Bilbao and Real Madrid. In 2009, Barcelona became the first Spanish club to win the continental treble consisting of La Liga, Copa del Rey, and the Champions League. That same year, it also became the first football club ever to win six out of six competitions in a single year, thus completing the sextuple, comprising the aforementioned treble and the Spanish Super Cup, UEFA Super Cup and FIFA Club World Cup.

History

Beginnings of FC Barcelona (1899–1922)

