[[Amalek]]

CATEGORIES: Edom, Hebrew Bible nations, Torah people, Genocides

Amalek () is a figure in the Hebrew Bible.  According to the Book of Genesis and 1 Chronicles, Amalek was the son of Eliphaz, the grandson the Biblical figure Esau/Edom the twin brother of the same parents of Jacob/Israel in the Bible, and of the concubine Timna. Timna was a Horite and sister of Lotan. Amalek was the grandson of Esau (Gen. 36:12; 1 Chr. 1:36) who was the chief of an Edomite tribe (Gen. 36:16).
At Genesis 36:16, Amalek is described as the "chief of Amalek", and thus his name can be construed to refer to a clan or a territory over which he ruled.  Josephus calls him a 'bastard' (νόθος), though in a derogative sense. Feldman, '"Remember Amalek!": Vengeance, Zealotry, and Group Destruction in the Bible According to Philo, Pseudo-Philo, and Josephus,'' Hebrew Union College Press, 2004 pp.8-9 A late extra-biblical tradition, recorded by Nachmanides, maintains that the Amalekites were not descended from the grandson of Esau but from a man named Amalek, from whom the grandson took his name.

Amalekites

The Amalekites were a people mentioned a number of times in the book of Genesis, and considered to be Amalek's descendants. In the chant of Balaam at Numbers, 24:20, Amalek was called the 'first of the nations', attesting to high antiquity.J. Macpherson,  'Amalek' in James Hastings,(ed.) A Dictionary of the Bible: Volume I (Part I: A -- Cyrus), Volume 1, University Press of the Pacific, Honolulu,  (1898) 2004, pp.77-79,p.77.
The name is often interpreted as "dweller in the valley", and occasionally as "war-like," "people of prey", "cave-men"Z'ev ben Shimon Halevi, Kabbalah and Exodus,Weiser Books 1988 p.101. In some rabbinical interpretations, Amalek is etymologised as a people am, who lick blood,David Patterson, A Genealogy of Evil: Anti-Semitism from Nazism to Islamic Jihad, Cambridge University Press, 2011, pp.43,244. but most specialists regard the origin to be unknown.M. Weippert, Semitische Nomaden des zweiten Jahrtausends. Biblica vol. 55, 1974, 265-280, 427-433
In Arabic, the corresponding term for the Biblical Amalek is Imlīq, whose descendants Al-′Amālīq were early residents of the ḥaram at Mecca, later supplanted by the Banu Jurhum, and formed one of the first tribes of ancient Arabia to speak Arabic. Crosby,Ubayd ibn Sharīyah, The History, Poetry, and Genealogy of the Yemen: The Akhbar of Abid B. Sharya Al-Jurhumi. Gorgias Press LLC, 2007 p.81 n.65 Imlīq is a back-formation from Amālīq, which was considered to be a broken Arabic plural.
Some interpret Gen. 14:7 (which refers to the "land of the Amalekites") to mean that the Amalekites existed as early as the time of Abraham, in the region that would later become the Roman province of Arabia Petraea.
In the Pentateuch, the Amalekites are nomads who attacked the Hebrews at Rephidim ().
Agag's death might be expected to have been the end of the Amalekites; however, they reappear in later periods described in the Bible (see below). Even Samuel said to Agag: "As thy sword hath made women childless, so shall thy mother be childless among women"() before be "hewed Agag in pieces before the LORD".

War against the Amalekites

As the Jewish Encyclopedia put it, "David waged a sacred war of extermination against the Amalekites," who may have subsequently disappeared from history. Long after, in the time of Hezekiah, five hundred Simeonites annihilated the remnant "of the Amalekites that had escaped" on Mount Seir, and settled in their place (1 Chr. 4:42–43).
The Biblical relationship between the Hebrew and Amalekite tribes was that the Amalekite tribes without provocation pounced on the Hebrews when they were weak.  The Amalekites became associated with ruthlessness and trickery and tyranny, even more so than Pharaoh or the Philistines, and required a ruthless response:
This enmity is repeated in Numbers 24, in Balaam's fourth and final oracle:
And again in the law, in Deuteronomy 25:
The fighting is mentioned again in Judges 3:13, in the Judgeship of Ehud, and again under Gideon, as the Amalekites allied with the Midianites (Judges 6:3, 6:33, 7:12).  This enmity is also the background of the command of the Lord to Saul:
Saul's failure to obey this command cost him his kingship. Note the commentary on this total destruction later by Samuel, when Saul summons him from the dead through prophetic vision literary tool:
Flavius Josephus also commented on this event:
The destruction of animals and booty, however, was not universal at Saul's time.  This was evidently a command for a particular battle.  His contemporary David handled the matter differently a few years later.

Survival of the Amalekites

It is not clear if the historical Amalekites were exterminated or not.  1 Samuel 15:7–8 states that "He took Agag king of the Amalekites alive, and all his people he totally destroyed with the sword." This implies that after Agag had been killed so were all the people of Agag who consequently became extinct. In a later story in the time of Hezekiah, however, the Simeonites annihilated a group of Amalekites on Mount Seir and settled in their place:  "And five hundred of these Simeonites, led by Pelatiah, Neariah, Rephaiah and Uzziel, the sons of Ishi, invaded the hill country of Seir.  They killed the remaining Amalekites who had escaped, and they have lived there to this day." (1 Chr. 4:42–43).

Haman and the Book of Esther

In the Book of Esther, the arch villain is Haman, an Amalekite (his origin is evident from the epithet the Agagite—i.e., descendant of the agags, Amalekite kings) that led the plot to kill the Jews. Because the Lord promised to "blot out the name" of Amalek (Exodus 17:14), it is customary when the book of Esther is read at the Purim festival, for the audience to make noise whenever "Haman" is mentioned, so that his name is not heard.

Ethical issues

Some commentators have discussed the ethics of the commandment to exterminate all the Amalekites, including the command to kill all the women, children, and the notion of collective punishment.
Maimonides explains that the commandment of killing out the nation of Amalek requires the Jewish people to peacefully request of them to accept upon themselves the Noachide laws and pay a tax to the Jewish kingdom. Only if they refuse must they be physically killed.
Some commentators, such as Rabbi Hayim Palaggi (1788–1869) argued that Jews had lost the tradition of distinguishing Amalekites from other people, and therefore the commandment of killing them could not practically be applied ("..." Kol Ḥai, 73, on Sanhedrin 96b)

Commandments to exterminate Amalekites

Of the 613 mitzvot (commandments) followed by Orthodox Jews, three refer to the Amalek: to remember what the Amalekites did to the Israelites, not to forget what the Amalekites did to Israelites, and to destroy the Amalekites utterly. The rabbis derived these from Deuteronomy 25:17–18, Exodus 17:14 and 1 Sam. 15:3. Rashi explains the third commandment:
As enumerated by Maimonides, the three mitzvot state:

Amalekites in the Bible

Kings of the Amalekites

Listing of Amalek/Amalekite references in Hebrew Scripture

Allies of the Amalekites

In the books of 1 Samuel and Judges, the tribe of Kenites are associated with the Amalekites, sometimes their allies, sometimes allied with the tribes of Israel. The Amalek people are invariably enemies of Israel. Saul's successful expedition against the unidentified "city of Amalek," in the plain (1 Sam. 15) resulted in the capture of the Amalekite king, Agag. In Judges 6-8 in the story of Gideon, the Amalekites and the Midianites are said to have amassed a visible army of at least 135,000 encamped against Israel.

In Rohl's Reconstruction

David Rohl moves the Amalekites from the Negev and the Sinai to the northern Land of Israel, in the neighborhood of Mount Carmel and Jenin. See New Chronology (Rohl).

Amalekites in post-biblical era

In Jewish tradition, the Amalekites came to represent the archetypal enemy of the Jews.  The concept has been used by some hassidic rabbis (particularly the Baal Shem Tov) to represent atheism or the rejection of God.  Nur Masalha, Elliot Horowitz and Josef Stern suggest that Amalekites have come to represent an "eternally irreconcilable enemy" that wants to murder Jews, and that Jews in post-biblical times sometimes associate contemporary enemies with Haman or Amalekites, and that some Jews believe that pre-emptive violence is acceptable against such enemies.[ref]

Armenians as Amalekites

Yiddish tradition identified Armenians as descendants of Amalek,[ref]Michael Wex
Born to Kvetch: Yiddish Language and Culture In All of Its Moods, Souvenir Press,2011 pp.87-88.[/ref] an ascription once current among Eastern Jews. Hart, 1850 p.219
The tradition identifying Armenians and Amalekites goes back to the early 10th. century, when it is attested in the Byzantine chronicle Josippon attributed to the Southern Italian Jew Joseph ben Gorion.
The Italian rabbi Obadiah ben Abraham of Bertinoro wrote to his father of the sects in Jerusalem, to which he had made aliyah late in the 15th century, he listed among the Christians 
"the Latins, Greeks, Jacobites, Amalekites,Abyssinians." It may be that Byzantine Jews made the identification of Armenians and Amalekites to distinguish the former from the Greek Orthodox Christians, and its continued use seems primarily aimed to register the idea that the Amalekites still existed within the realm of Chrisendom.
The Byzantine Emperor Leo V the Armenian, who ruled from 813 AD to 820 AD until his assassination by one of his top generals, Michael the Amorian, was known as "the Amalekite" apparently because of his approval of the Islamic prohibition against the depiction of sacred images.), Holy Women of Byzantium: Ten Saints' Lives in English Translation, Dumbarton Oaks, 1996 pp.172-3 n.60
In 1839 the British Jewish-Christian missionary Joseph Wolff was struck by what he thought remarkable, namely 'that the Armenians, who are detested by the Jews as the supposed descendants of the Amalekites, are the only Christian church who have interested themselves for the protection and conversion of Jews.'Elliott S. Horowitz,Reckless Rites: Purim and the Legacy of Jewish Violence, Princeton University Press, 2006 
Itamar Ben-Avi, in the newspaper HaZvi in 1909, intervened in an editorial ("We") to speak on behalf of the Armenians who were reportedly being slaughtered by the Ottoman Turks, and protested at Jewish indifference to calls to help alleviate their plight. He characterized the reaction of some of his coreligionists as follows:
 "'A slight grimace on their lips, a short heartfelt sigh, and nothing more. The Armenians are not Jews, and according to folk tradition the Armenians are nothing more than Amaleks! Amaleks? We would give them help? To whom? To Amaleks? Heaven forbid!'.'Ya'ir Oron, The Banality of Indifference:Zionism and the Armenian Genocide, Transaction Publishers, London, 2002, p.126. 

Nazis as Amalekites

The Nazis and Adolf Hitler have been referred to as Amalekites.
A prominent 19th and early 20th century rabbi, Rabbi Yosef Chaim Sonnenfeld, claimed upon Kaiser Wilhelm's visit to Palestine in 1898, three decades before Hitler's rise to power, he had a tradition from his teachers that the Germans are descended from the ancient Amalekites.The First Word: Are Jews still commanded to blot out Amalek? - Jerusalem Post
Samuel's words to Agag: "As your sword bereaved women, so will your mother be bereaved among women." (Samuel 1:15:33) were quoted by Israeli President Itzhak Ben-Zvi in his handwriting in response to a telegram sent by Nazi war criminal Adolf Eichmann's wife pleading for clemency after he was taken to Israel and sentenced to death.Carmel, Yoseph, Itzchak Ben Zvi from his Diary in the President's office , Mesada , Ramat Gan, 1967 , page 179

Palestinians as Amalekites

Nur Masalha has written that: 
 "Frequently Jewish fundamentalists refer to the Palestinians as the 'Amalekites' … of today… According to the Old Testament, the Amalek … were regarded as the Israelites' inveterate foe, whose 'annihilation' became a sacred duty and against whom war should be waged until their 'memory be blotted out' forever (Ex 17:16; Deut 25:17-19)…. Some of the modern political messianics insist on giving the biblical commandment to 'blot out the memory of the Amalek' an actual contemporary relevance in the conflict between the Israelis and Palestinians. 
The Palestinians have been associated with Amalek since 1974 when Rabbi Moshe Ben-Tzion Ishbezari of Ramat Gan made the association in a book.Robert Eisen The peace and violence of Judaism: from the Bible to modern Zionism, Oxford University Pres, 2011 p.152. A former campus rabbi of Bar-Ilan University, Hess published in the university's student paper in February 1980 an article on "The Genocide Commandment in the Torah",Yisrael Hess, Mitzvot Hagenocide Batorah, in Bat Qol, (Bar-Ilan University)) February 26, 1980.  in which he concluded that:
 'The day is not far when we shall be called to this holy war, to this commandment of the annihilation of Amalek.' Hess's reference to Amalekites was later taken in Israel to be an allusion to the Palestinian Arabs, especially since he spoke of a jihad.
 'Against this holy war God declares a counter jihad . . . God is not content that we annihilate Amalek -'blot out the memory of Amalek' - he also enlists personally in this war . .'Nur Masalha The Bible and Zionism: Invented Traditions, Archaeology and Post-Colonialism, Zed Books, 2007 pp.150-1, p.199. 
In 1982 Danny Rubinstein, in his book On the Lord's Side  argued that this notion permeates the Gush Emunim movement's bulletins, citing one such article on 'The Right to Hate' which affiremed:-
 'In every generation there is an Amalek. The Amalekism of our generation finds expression in the deep Arab hatred towards our national revival in our forefathers' land.' 
In 1985 Uriel Tal, in his Foundations of a Political Messianic Trend in Israel,Uriel Tal, Foundations of a Political Messianic Trend in Israel, in The Jerusalem Quarterly, Number 35. Spring 1985. argued that Hess's position is to be contextualised within a totalitarian messianic force, whose process he summed up as follows.
Ron GeavesRon Geaves, Islam and the West post 9/11, Ashgate Publishing, Ltd., 2004, p 30. also writes that 'in settler circles, the Palestinians are likely to be identified with the Amalekites', and citing the same pamphlet from the campus rabbi attached to Bar-Ilan University, adds that the message is passed on through 'the religious schools where boys are taught that the Arab is Amalek.'
After Baruch Goldstein's massacre of Palestinians at the Mosque in Hebron, Rabbi Arthur Waskow argued that Goldstein had decided to 'blot out the memory of Amalek' by machine-gunning the Palestinian worshippers, and commented:
 So then, in our generation, for some Jews the Palestinians become Amalek. Some Palestinians are terrorists? Some Palestinians call publicly for the State of Israel to be shattered? The archetypes of fear slide into place: all Palestinians are Amalek. And the fantasies of the powerless become the actions of the powerful. For in our generation, Jews have power.'Alastair G. Hunter, '(De)nominating Amalek, Racial Stereotyping,'  in Jonneke Bekkenkamp, Yvonne Sherwood (eds.)Sanctified Aggression: Legacies of Biblical and Post Biblical Vocabularies of Violence, T&T International/Continuum International Publishing Group, 2003 pp.92-108, pp.103-104, p.104. 
After the death of Yassir Arafat, a declaration was issued by 200 rabbis of Pikuach Nefesh asserting that the anniversary of the death of 'this Amalek of our generation' should be celebrated as 'a day of rejoicing'. Horowitz   Reckless Rites: Purim and the Legacy of Jewish Violence, Princeton, University Press, 2006, p.3.

Zionists as Amalekites

The anti-Zionist Haredi rabbi Zalman Teitelbaum denounced the proposed draft of Haredi men by the Israel Defense Forces by saying "the Zionists came from the seed of Amalek. There has never been such a sect that caused so much damage to the Jewish people."

Neturei Karta as Amalekites

The Neturei Karta are an Haredi group known for their radical opposition to the state of Israel and extreme wariness with regard to non Haredi Jews. Historically, Neturei Karta equated Zionism with Amalek and Nazism. Katz (ed.), The Impact of the Holocaust on Jewish Theology, New York University Press, 2005 pp.132-159, p.136. For some Neturei Karta rabbis the very word 'amalek' is read in gematriya to  mean 'politic', which in their view is something pious Jews should never engage in, since politics for them constitutes galut, or exile. Mazie, Israel's Higher Law: Religion and Liberal Democracy in the Jewish State, Lexington Books 2006 p.57.



Footnotes






