[[American chestnut]]

CATEGORIES: Castanea, Edible nuts and seeds, Hardwood forest plants, Trees of the Great Lakes region (North America), Trees of the Northeastern United States, Trees of the Southeastern United States, Flora of Ontario, Trees of Michigan, Trees of Missouri, Trees of Ohio, Trees of North Carolina, Trees of Ontario, Trees of Virginia, Trees of West Virginia, Trees of Delaware, Natural history of the Great Smoky Mountains, Trees of humid continental climate, Native American cuisine

The American chestnut, Castanea dentata, is a large, monoecious deciduous tree of the beech family native to eastern North America. Before the species was devastated by the chestnut blight, a fungal disease, it was one of the most important forest trees throughout its range. There are now very few mature specimens of the tree within its historical range, although many small shoots of the former live trees remain. However, there are hundreds of large (2 to 5 ft diameter) trees outside its historical range, some in areas where less virulent strains of the pathogen are more common, such as the 600 to 800 large trees in northern lower Michigan. G. 1982. The present status and future prospect for the American chestnut in Michigan. Mich. Bot. 21: 117–128. W., W. H. Weidlich, K. Z. Haufler, C. S. Thomas, and C. P. Paul. 1983. Chestnut blight and recovering American chestnut trees in Michigan. Can. J. Bot. 61:3164–3171.

Description

Castanea dentata is a rapidly growing deciduous hardwood tree, historically reaching up to  in diameter. It ranged from Maine and southern Ontario to Mississippi, and from the Atlantic coast to the Appalachian Mountains and the Ohio Valley. It has several related chestnut species, such as the European sweet chestnut, Chinese chestnut, and Japanese chestnut, which are distinguishable from the American species by a few morphological traits such as leaf shape, petiole length and nut size. C. dentata was once one of the most common trees in the Northeastern US. In Pennsylvania alone, it is estimated to have comprised 25-30% of all hardwoods. The tree's huge population was due to a combination of rapid growth and a large annual seed crop in comparison to oaks which do not reliably produce sizable numbers of acorns every year. Nut production begins when C. dentata is only 7–8 years old.
C. dentata can be best identified by the larger and more widely spaced saw-teeth on the edges of its leaves, as indicated by the scientific name dentata, Latin for "toothed". The leaves, which are 14–20 cm (5–8 in) long and 7–10 cm (3–4 in) broad, also tend to average slightly shorter and broader than those of the sweet chestnut. The blight-resistant Chinese chestnut is now the most commonly planted chestnut species in the US, while the European chestnut is the source of commercial nuts in recent decades. It can be distinguished from the American chestnut by its hairy twig tips which are in contrast to the hairless twigs of the American chestnut. The chestnuts are in the beech family along with beech and oak, but are not closely related to the horse-chestnut, which is in the family Sapindaceae.
The chestnut is monoecious, producing many small, pale green (nearly white) male flowers found tightly occurring along 6 to 8 inch long catkins. The female parts are found near base of the catkins (near twig) and appear in late spring to early summer.
The American chestnut is a prolific bearer of nuts, usually with three nuts enclosed in each spiny, green burr, and lined in tan velvet. The nuts develop through late summer, with the burrs opening and falling to the ground near the first fall frost.
The American chestnut was a very important tree for wildlife, providing much of the fall mast for species such as white-tailed deer and wild turkey and, formerly, the passenger pigeon. Black bears were also known to eat the nuts to fatten up for the winter. The American Chestnut also contains more nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium and magnesium in its leave when compared to other trees that share its habitat. This means they return more nutrient to the soil which helps with the growth of other plants, animals, and microorganisms.Scientific America: "A New Generation of American Chestnut Trees May Redefine America's Forests:

Chestnut blight

Once an important hardwood timber tree, the American chestnut is highly susceptible to chestnut blight, caused by an Asian bark fungus (Cryphonectria parasitica, formerly Endothia parasitica) accidentally introduced into North America on imported Asiatic chestnut trees. The disease was first noticed on American chestnut trees in what was then the New York Zoological Park, now known as the Bronx Zoo, in 1904, by chief forester Hermann Merkel. While Chinese chestnut evolved with the blight and developed a strong resistance, the American chestnut had little resistance.  The airborne bark fungus spread 
New shoots often sprout from the roots when the main stem dies, so the species has not yet become extinct. However, the stump sprouts rarely reach more than  in height before blight infection returns.
The total number of chestnut trees in eastern North America was estimated at over three billion, and 25% of the trees in the Appalachian Mountains were American chestnut. The number of large surviving over  in diameter within the tree's former range is probably fewer than 100. Huge planted chestnut trees can be found in Sherwood, Oregon, as the Mediterranean climate of the West Coast is not conductive to the spread of the fungus, which relies on hot, humid summer weather. American chestnut thrives as far north as Revelstoke, British Columbia. Although large trees are rare east of the Mississippi River in modern times, it exists in pockets of the blight-free West, where the habitat was agreeable for planting: settlers brought seeds for American chestnut with them in the 19th century. At present, it is believed that survival of C. dentata for more than a decade in its native range is almost impossible. The fungus utilizes Northern red oak as a host, and while the oak itself is unaffected, any American Chestnuts nearby will quickly succumb. In addition, the hundreds of chestnut stumps and "living stools" dotting Eastern woodlands may still contain active pathogens.
Several organizations are attempting to breed blight-resistant chestnut trees. One of these is the American Chestnut Cooperators Foundation, which breeds surviving all-American chestnuts, which have shown some native resistance to blight. The Canadian Chestnut Council is an organization attempting to reintroduce the trees in Canada, primarily in Ontario. Another is The American Chestnut Foundation, which is backcrossing blight-resistant Chinese chestnut into American chestnut, to recover the American growth characteristics and genetic makeup, and then finally intercrossing the advanced backcross generations to eliminate genes for susceptibility to blight. The goal is eventually to restore the species to the eastern forests of North America. Backcrossed trees were first planted back into the forest for testing in 2009. In April 2012, another batch of trees were planted at an old mining site.9  In 2005, a hybrid tree with mostly American genes was planted on the lawn of the White House.[ref]
