[[Andorra and the euro]]

CATEGORIES: Euro by country, Politics of Andorra

Andorra has a monetary agreement with the EU allowing it to make the euro its official currency, and permitting it to issue euro coins as early as 1 July 2013. They plan to issue their first coins by March or April 2014.

Background

Andorra did not have an official currency prior to adopting the euro, and unlike its two larger neighbours, France and Spain, which surround it, it is not a member of the EU. However it de facto used the EU's euro (the currency of the Eurozone states) as it had historically used the French franc and Spanish peseta. When those two currencies were replaced by the euro in 2002, the euro replaced the franc and peseta as the sole circulating currency in Andorra.
Three other European microstates outside of the EU, Monaco, San Marino and the Vatican City, also faced this situation but they, unlike Andorra, concluded agreements with the EU for the right to mint their own euro coins. Euro coins have a common design on one side, and a national-specific side on the other. Hence those three microstates could design their own national side, mint and distribute their own coins. As with coins minted in other eurozone states, the microstate coins are valid across the eurozone; however they do not gain representation on the euro's governing bodies, the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Eurogroup.

Currency agreements

In 2003, Andorra requested the right to mint its own coins and the following year the Council of the European Union adopted its negotiating position with Andorra. Following Andorra's agreement to abide by Council Directive 2003/48/EC on taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments, the Commission recommended opening negotiations.
In October 2012, Jordi Cinca, Andorra's Minister of Finance, stated that 1 January 2014 was a more likely date to start issuing euros due to delays in adopting the legislation required by the monetary agreement.

Design

A design competition for the national side of the euro coins was launched in March 19, 2013, with a deadline of April 16.
The 2 euro, fifty cent, twenty cent and ten cent coins will be produced by the Monnaie de Paris, while the 1 euro, five cent, two cent and one cent coins will be manufactured at the Royal Mint of Spain.








