[[Fag hag]]

CATEGORIES: Pejorative terms for people, LGBT slang, Stock characters, LGBT terms, Slang terms for women, Clichés, Reclaimed words

Fag hag is a gay slang phrase referring to a woman who either associates mostly or exclusively with gay and bisexual men, or has gay and bisexual men as close friends. The phrase originated in gay male culture in the United States and was historically an insult.

Usage

Fag hags are frequently stereotyped as outgoing women who are seeking a substitute for heterosexual relationships, or who are secretly (or openly) sexually attracted to gay men.  In fact, many women who identify as fag hags are already in romantic relationships, either with straight men or with women but appreciate the alternative experience of socializing with gay men and may prefer the gay culture to the straight counterpart.

Related terms

American fag hag synonyms include fruit fly, queen bee, homo honey, fruit loop, Goldilocks, flame dame, fairy princess, gabe (a portmanteau of "gay" and "babe"), Tori (in honor of Tori Spelling and Tori Amos), and fairy godmother. Recently, cherry fairy has started to catch on as well in some select social groups in San Francisco and the East Coast, and gayboy bunny (a play on "Playboy Bunny" which originated in a Robot Chicken skit about 8 Mile and Looney Tunes) has been coined for fag hags who are attractive or have boyfriends, to counteract the stereotype that fag hags are unable to find a suitable straight partner. Men of any sexual orientation who have many lesbian friends are called dutch boys or lesbros in the United States.
In the case of friendships between lesbians and gay men, the term dyke diva describes the gay man in the relationship. A straight man of platonic affinity with gay men is a fag stag; again, the usage is rare in mainstream sexual culture. In the United Kingdom, a straight man who enjoys the company of lesbians is known as a dikey likey.
For men who have many lesbian friends the slang terms dutch boy, lesbro or dyke tyke apply. And If You're Not, Maybe You Should Be, Joshua David Stein, Details, September 2009."Six rules for dyke tykes", Richard Wassersug, Curve, August 2005.
People who associate with lesbian, gay, and bisexual people may be called fruit flies regardless of their sex.

In popular culture

The term has often been used in entertainment. In the film Fame (1980), writer Christopher Gore used the term fag hag in describing the character Doris in her relationship with her gay friend, Montgomery. Comedian Margaret Cho has written and regularly talks in her stand-up routines about being a fag hag. In an episode of the UK TV sitcom Gimme Gimme Gimme, Tom refers to Linda as a fag hag. In the made-for television series Tales of the City, based on Armistead Maupin's novel series, Mona Ramsey (played by Chloe Webb) wonders if her friendship with Michael "Mouse" Tolliver (Marcus D'Amico) makes her a "fag hag."
The first annual Miss Fag Hag Pageant took place in New York City on May 17, 2009 at Comix comedy club with judges Caroline Rhea, Michael Musto, Hedda Lettuce and Katina Corrao. Heather Shields took the first prize.








