[[San Marino–European Union relations]]

CATEGORIES: Third-country relations of the European Union, Foreign relations of San Marino

Relations between San Marino and the European Union (EU) began in February 1983.

Agreements

San Marino is not party to the Schengen Agreement, however it has an open border with the EU (although some random police checks are made) and has had a customs union with the EU (since 1991, including agricultural produce since 2002).  San Marino and the EU have also concluded an agreement on savings taxation.
Via a monetary agreement, San Marino uses the euro as its sole currency (it previously used the Sammarinese lira, set at par with the Italian lira) and is allowed to mint a limited number of coins itself with their own design.

Future integration

In November 2012, after the Council of the European Union had called for an evaluation of the EU's relations with the sovereign European microstates of Andorra, Monaco and San Marino, which they described as "fragmented",
As EEA membership is currently only open to EFTA or EU members, the consent of existing EFTA member states is required for the microstates to join the EEA without becoming members of the EU.  In 2011, Jonas Gahr Støre, the then Foreign Minister of Norway which is an EFTA member state, said that EFTA/EEA membership for the microstates was not the appropriate mechanism for their integration into the internal market due to their different requirements than large countries such as Norway, and suggested that a simplified association would be better suited for them.  Pascal Schafhauser, the Counsellor of the Liechtenstein Mission to the EU, said that Liechtenstein, another EFTA member state, was willing to discuss EEA membership for the microstates provided their joining did not impede the functioning of the organization.  However, he suggested that the option direct membership in the EEA for the microstates, outside of both the EFTA and the EU, should be given consideration.
On 18 November 2013 the EU Commission published their report which concluded that "the participation of the small-sized countries in the EEA is not judged to be a viable option at present due to the political and institutional reasons", but that Association Agreements were a more feasible mechanism to integrate the microstates into the internal market, preferably via a single multilateral agreement with all three states.

Full membership

The left-wing opposition Popular Alliance has been reported to be in favour of joining the EU, while the ruling San Marinese Christian Democratic Party opposes.'Oldest republic' torn by poll-rig claims, The Australian, 2006-06-06
In 2010 the Parliament tasked the government to open negotiations for further integration with the European Union,Decision submitted by the Parliamentary Groups of the Majority for a better integration of the Republic of San Marino with the European Union, approved by the Great and General Council during its sitting of 15 December 2010 and subsequently a technical group prepared a report on EU and EEA membership.Summary of the Final Report prepared by the Technical Group for the Assessment of new Policies for the Integration with the European Union -  February 2011
A campaign was launched in 2010 aiming to collect enough signatures to force a referendum on EU membership for San Marino. the government argued that the referendum should be canceled since the question had been resolved, even though the letter did not request full membership in the EU for San Marino.  The Guarantor Board accepted this argument and canceled the referendum on 24 February.
On 7 July 2011 the Grand and General Council rejected calls for an application for full EU membership, and instead approved an agenda that called for further negotiations on enhancing San Marino's integration with the EU, without excluding the possibility of membership in the future.
A second campaign also succeeded in collecting enough signatures for a referendum on EU membership. Although a majority voted in favour, a low turnout meant that the quorum of 32% of registered voters voting in favour was not reached, meaning the proposal was rejected.Referendum 2013 Ministry of the Interior








