[[JJ Doyle]]

CATEGORIES: 1985 births, Living people, Camogie managers, Wexford camogie players

John Joseph (JJ) Doyle is a former hurler who managed the Wexford camogie to All-Ireland championship success in 20102010 All-Ireland Final reports in Irish Examiner, Irish Independent and Irish Independent match at a glance, Irish Times colour piece and match report, comment by Tom Humphries and Mary Hannigan, RTÉ online, Irish Times online and RTÉ online match-tracker and 2011.2011 final Wexford 2-7 Galway 1-8 Report in Camogie.ie, RTE Online, Tuam Herald Wexford People Homecoming in Enniscorthy Echo Wexford People Preview in Irish Examiner Irish Times Irish Independent

Hurling career

Doyle was educated in Marshalstown National School and Enniscorthy CBS. He played hurling for Wexford in all grades up to and including minor, was a substitute on the Wexford Minor hurling team which lost by a point to Kilkenny in the Leinster championship final of 1992 and played with NUI Maynooth in the Fitzgibbon Cup. 
He joined Naomh Éanna in 2001 and lined out in Senior hurling with them as well as playing a big part in getting camogie back up and running in Gorey. He coached every team in the club from Under-12 up to adult level over a six-year period before moving to Ballymitty in 2008 where he has been involved with successful Rackard League boys' and girls' football teams.New Ross Standard: Doyle unveiled as new Wexford Senior camogie manager

2010 Championship

In December 2009 he was appointed Wexford camogie manager in succession to Stellah Sinnott, following a recommendation put forward by a county board sub-committee. He was permitted to pick his own backroom team, selectors Joe Brennan (Naomh Éanna) and Tommy Roche (Marshalstown). 
Monaghan native Gerry McQuaid oversaw training. Bridget Moran (Oulart-The Ballagh) was retained as team medic. Fr Odhran Furlong was enlisted as Mental Fitness Coach.Enniscorthy Echo: Camogie boss JJ unveils his new backroom team 
His team retained the National League they had won in 2009, defeating Kilkenny by a point in the final, and won the All Ireland championship for the first time since 2007, defeating Galway in the final. Wexford suffered two defeats in the round-robin series, losing to Galway by a point Galway 1-8 Wexford 0-10 report on RTÉ Online Enniscorthy Echo, Galway Independent and Connacht Tribune and to Cork by six pointsCork 2-10 Wexford 0-10 Report in Irish Times, Irish Independent and on RTÉ online but qualified for the final with four victories, Dublin by 36 pointsWexford 7-15 Dublin 0-3 report on RTÉ Online Clare by 15 points,Wexford 2-17 Clare 1-5 report on RTÉ Online Tipperary by nine pointsWexford 2-17 Tipperary 0-14 Report in Enniscothy Echo, on breakingnews.ie, gaa.ie, and in Enniscorthy Echo and Kilkenny Advertiser and again by seven points in the All Ireland semi-final.ie, Breakingnews.ie They then beat Galway by two points in the All Ireland final.2010 All-Ireland Final reports in Irish Examiner, Irish Independent and Irish Independent match at a glance, Irish Times colour piece and match report, comment by Tom Humphries and Mary Hannigan, RTÉ online, Irish Times online and RTÉ online match-tracker

2011

In 2011 he was also entrusted with responsibility for the intermediates after Karen Barnes stepped down and coached both to the All Ireland championship. The only player not available was Caroline Murphy, the Ferns St Aidan's player who was away working in Canada.
In 2011 he and his backroom team achieved history by coaching both senior and Intermediate teams to victory in the All Ireland championship, and the seniors to win the National League as well.
The 2011 All Ireland campaign got off to an inauspicious start with a surprise first round defeat to Galway by 11 points.
 
 "People had said a lot of things about Wexford camogie, especially the senior team. People questioned our girl's hunger. People questioned our desire, said that Galway were going to be hungrier than us. They questioned a lot of things about the team. We wanted to get the opportunity to answer them. Thankfully we have done that."

It was the only defeat of the campaign as they went on to beat Cork by three points,Wexford 0-14 Cork 1-8 report on RTÉ Online and Wexford Echo Kilkenny by five points,Wexford 1-14 Kilkenny 1-9 report on RTÉ Online Irish Independent Gorey Guardian Kilkennycamogie.ie, Offaly by 16 pointsWexford 3-19 Offaly 1-9 report on RTÉ online and Dublin by eight pointsWexford 1-16 Dublin 0-9 report on Camogie.Wexford 2-11 Cork 1-9 Semi-final report in Sunday Independent, Irish Times on RTÉ online








