[[Alice B. Toklas]]

CATEGORIES: 1877 births, 1967 deaths, American autobiographers, American expatriates in France, American Jews, American memoirists, American Roman Catholics, Burials at Père Lachaise Cemetery, Roman Catholic feminists, Converts to Roman Catholicism from Judaism, Jewish American writers, Jewish feminists, Jewish women writers, Lesbian writers, LGBT Christians, Lesbian feminists, LGBT Jews, LGBT memoirists, LGBT writers from the United States, Writers from San Francisco, California, American cookbook writers, American people of Polish-Jewish descent

Alice B. Toklas (April 30, 1877 – March 7, 1967) was an American-born member of the Parisian avant-garde of the early 20th century.

Early life, relationship with Gertrude Stein

She was born Alice Babette Toklas in San Francisco, California, into a middle-class Jewish family (her father had been a Polish army officerMerrill, James. A Different Person: A Memoir, New York: Alfred P. Knopf, 1993, p. 75.) and attended schools in both San Francisco and Seattle. For a short time she also studied music at the University of Washington. She met Gertrude Stein in Paris on September 8, 1907, the day she arrived. Together they hosted a salon that attracted expatriate American writers, such as Ernest Hemingway, Paul Bowles, Thornton Wilder, and Sherwood Anderson, and avant-garde painters, including Picasso, Matisse, and Braque.
Acting as Stein's confidante, lover, cook, secretary, muse, editor, critic, and general organizer, Toklas remained a background figure, chiefly living in the shadow of Stein, until Stein published her memoirs in 1933 under the teasing title The Autobiography of Alice B. Toklas. It became Stein's bestselling book.
"She was a little stooped, somewhat retiring and self-effacing.  She doesn't sit in a chair, she hides in it; she doesn't look at you, but up at you; she is always standing just half a step outside the circle.  She gives the appearance, in short, not of a drudge, but of a poor relation, someone invited to the wedding but not to the wedding feast," wrote W. G. Rogers in his 1946 memoir of the couple. G. When this you see remember me GERTRUDE STEIN in person, New York: Rinehart and Co., 1946.
Poet James Merrill wrote that before meeting her "one knew about the tiny stature, the sandals, the mustache, the eyes" but that he had not anticipated "the enchantment of her speaking voice—like a viola at dusk."
Toklas and Stein were a couple until the latter's death in 1946.

After Stein

Although Gertrude Stein had willed much of her estate to Toklas, including their shared art collection (some of them Picassos) housed in their apartment at 5, rue Christine, the couple's relationship had no legal recognition. As the paintings appreciated in value, Stein's relatives took action to claim them, eventually removing them from Toklas's residence while she was away on vacation and placing them in a bank vault. Toklas then relied on contributions from friends as well as writing to make a living.
Toklas published her own literary memoir, a 1954 book that mixed reminiscences and recipes under the title The Alice B. Toklas Cookbook.  Her name was later lent to the range of cannabis concoctions called Alice B. Toklas brownies.   The cookbook has been translated into numerous languages, most recently into Norwegian in 2007. A second cookbook followed in 1958 called Aromas and Flavors of Past and Present; however, Toklas did not approve of it as it had been heavily annotated by Poppy Cannon, an editor from House Beautiful magazine. She also wrote articles for several magazines and newspapers, including The New Republic and the New York Times.
In 1963 she published her autobiography, What Is Remembered, which abruptly ends with Stein's death.
Her later years were very difficult because of poor health and financial problems. Toklas became a Roman Catholic convert in her old age. Toklas died in poverty at the age of 89 and is buried next to Stein in Père Lachaise Cemetery, Paris, France; Toklas's name is engraved on the back of Stein's headstone.

In modern culture

Both Toklas and Stein are referred to in both the stage play Mame and its film version, Auntie Mame. In a lyric of the song "Bosom Buddies," Vera Charles declares: "But sweetie, I'll always be Alice Toklas, if you'll be Gertrude Stein."
The 1968 Peter Sellers movie I Love You, Alice B. Toklas was named for Toklas's cannabis brownies, which play a significant role in the plot.
An episode called "Tabitha's Weekend" that aired on TV's Bewitched on March 6, 1969 has Endora asking about some cookies she is offered, "They're not by chance from an Alice B. Toklas recipe?" When told they were not, "Then I think I'll pass," is her answer.
The Alice B. Toklas LGBT Democratic Club, a political organization founded in 1971 in San Francisco, is a namesake of Toklas.
The Bicycle Transportation Alliance in Portland, Oregon, offers the "Alice B. Toeclips Awards" as the signature event of its annual fundraiser.[ref]
</ref>
Samuel Steward, who met Toklas and Stein in the 1930s, edited Dear Sammy: Letters from Gertrude Stein and Alice B. Toklas (1977) and wrote two mystery novels featuring Stein and Toklas as characters: Murder Is Murder Is Murder (1985) and The Caravaggio Shawl (1989).
Toklas appears in the book title and in one of the essays in Otto Friedrich's 1989 book, The Grave of Alice B. Toklas and Other Reports from the Past (New York, Henry Holt). The chapter includes a sensitive interview with the elderly Alice.
In 2008, an anonymous group of American lesbian readers established the Alice B. Medal.  Named for Toklas, this award is given annually to a living writer who has a career that includes "consistently well-written" narratives with lesbian themes.
The San Francisco Board of Supervisors voted in 1989 to rename a block of Myrtle Street between Polk Street and Van Ness Avenue in San Francisco as Alice B. Toklas Place, since Toklas was born one block away on O'Farrell Street.
Toklas was mentioned in the song "My Name Is Bud" by the Punk Band NOFX.
Toklas and Stein are both mentioned in the Tim Curry song "I Do the Rock."  ("Gertrude's hanging pictures, Alice making tea.")
The Stein and Toklas relationship was depicted in the 2011 Woody Allen film Midnight in Paris.
Vancouver writer, broadcaster, and notorious cat-fancier Bill Richardson wrote "Waiting for Gertrude - a graveyard gothic", published in 2001 






