[[Portland (minor league baseball team)]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct minor league baseball teams, Defunct baseball teams in Oregon, Sports teams in Portland, Oregon, 1893 establishments in Oregon, 1893 disestablishments in Oregon

Portland was the name of a professional baseball team that a member of the fleeting Oregon State League in 1893. Portland represented Portland, Oregon and played against teams from Albany, Independence, and Oregon City. In the early stages of the team, H. Hammond oversaw the club's operations. Later, W. H. Kennedy led the team financially and Edward Stapleton bore the managerial duties. Portland used City View Park as their home until switching to the West End Grounds after June 25. In all league games, Portland played 18 games compiling seven wins and 11 losses.

Formation

A Portland club was one of the four planned team to be a member of the newly formed Oregon State League. 
At a league convention on May 11, 1893 in Salem, Oregon, Hammond and Watts released the league constitution, and by-laws. Both stepped down as leaders of the league and in their place league owners voted W. M. Hunt of the Salem club as president. A few weeks later, Hunt announced the league's schedule would feature 36 games. Before their first game, Portland worked deals with the local electric streetcar operators to give fans a discount of fare to City View Park, the club's home field. Admission into the park would cost twenty-five cents a person. Women, however, had the privileged of being admitted into the grandstands for free while their male counterparts were faced with an additional twenty-five cent charge.

Regular season

Portland's official first game started at 2:45 p.m. on May 30, 1893. Albany took the game 11–5.
On June 4, Portland faced Albany for the second time in as many days, losing the them by a score of 6–11.
Portland's first win of the season came on June 18 in Independence. Portland toppled the home team, 5–1. The two clubs instead used the Oregon City ballpark where Portland defeated Independence 10–9. Five-hundred spectators were present as Portland marked their first game at their new home, West End Grounds.
In their next four games, Portland faced Oregon City. The first two games were played on the weekend of July 2–3 in Oregon City. During the second game, Portland's Rankin hit two home runs. Portland was edged 6–5 in that contest. The league folded after the game and play was canceled.
It was announced on August 12, 1893 that the Portland club was going to travel to Boise, Idaho to play their team. In the first game, Portland sent Youngy Johnson to start. Boise edged Portland 7–6. Portland also lost the second game, 10–8.

Roster

Game log




