[[Geography of Barbados]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Barbados

Barbados is an Continental Island in the North Atlantic Ocean; and is located at 13°10' north of the equator, and 59°32' west of the Prime Meridian.  As the easternmost isle of the Lesser Antilles in the West Indies, Barbados lies 100 kilometres (62 mi) east of the Windward Islands and Caribbean Sea. to the east and south (or to the edge of the continental margin). To the west, however, most of Barbados' maritime consist of a median lines with neighbours. These neighbours include: Martinique, and Saint Lucia to the northwest, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to the west, Trinidad and Tobago and Venezuela to the southwest, and Guyana to the southeast.
Barbados' total land area is .
The physical characteristics of Barbados are its lowlands or gently sloping, terraced plains, separated by rolling hills that generally parallel the coasts. Elevations in the interior range from 180 to 240 metres above sea level. Mount Hillaby is the highest point at 340 metres above sea level. Farther south, at Christ Church Ridge, elevations range from sixty to ninety metres. Eighty-five percent of the island's surface consists of coralline limestone twenty-four to thirty metres thick; Scotland District contains outcroppings of oceanic formations at the surface, however. Sugarcane is planted on almost 80 percent of the island's limestone surface. The soils vary in fertility; erosion is a problem, with crop loss resulting from landslides, washouts, and falling rocks. Most of the small streams are in Scotland District. The rest of the island has few surface streams; nevertheless, rainwater saturates the soil to produce underground channels such as the famous Coles Cave.
In 2009
The south-eastern part of the island has undergone small scale oil and gas capturing from possibly as early as 1919 when the British Union Oil Company acquired over 75% of the drilling rights in Barbados.2D Long Offset Seismic 
In 2006 a local Barbadian group has hinted that it may seek to form its own nation on Culpepper Island.  At present the group is not currently recognized by any nations.  It is not known how this new nation could impact on the overall eastern EEZ of Barbados.pantribalconfederacy.com/confederacy/reclamation/

DST

Barbados no longer observes Daylight Saving Time.  It was last used between Sunday, 20 April 1980 at 2:00 AM and Thursday, 25 September 1980 at 2:00 AM.  On 25 September of that year the clock was shifted from -3:00 to -4:00, where it has remained since.

Statistics

Location

Area

Area comparative

Land boundaries

Climate

Terrain

Natural resources

Land use

Natural hazards

Environment - current issues

Climate

Barbados lies within the tropics. Its generally pleasant maritime climate is influenced by northeast trade winds, which moderate the tropical temperature. Cool, northeasterly trade winds are prevalent during the December to June dry season. The overall annual temperature ranges from  in the coastal zone.

Disputes

Guyana and Barbados have a portion of maritime which overlap and are disputed with Venezuela,How Trinidad Recognised Venezuela's Claim to Most Of Guyana's Land 18 June 2007, Notes From The Margin the later which claims ownership of the maritime overlapping the first two.NGO reports Barbados is bidding oil blocks in Venezuelan waters 28 July 2008, El Universal

Notes








