[[KTM Class 92]]

CATEGORIES: KTM Komuter

The Class 92 is a type of electric multiple unit operated by Keretapi Tanah Melayu on its KTM Komuter services. A total of 38 sets were built by China's Zhu Zhou Electric Locomotives Co Ltd, in 6-car formations.
The Class 92 was procured under a Malaysian Government initiative,  National Key Result Area (NKRA) to reduce congestion and improve public transport with a specific RM2 billion allocation to KTMB to improve commuter rail efficiency. A sum of RM 1.894 billion was spent to procure these trains, with the remainder being spent on the improvement of signalling along the Putra-Mid Valley stretch and a ticketing system upgrade. 

Operation

The class 92 is set to complement and replace the earlier 3 coach class 8x commuter trains. It will operate along the two komuter lines and is expected to service all 53 stations. However, the Rawang-Tanjung Malim route is usually not serviced by this coach. At certain stretches, it will operate at its service operational speed of 120 km/h. During current 15-minute frequency operations, as many as 25 class 92 sets are used while the remaining sets are kept in reserve. In the future (10-minute frequency operations), it is expected for the total maximum of concurrently used sets to increase to 36 with 2 to remain in reserve.  
During festivities, such as the "homecoming" exodus, saw class 92 sets operating intercity routes, such as the KL Sentral-Ipoh route complementing the ETS train service.

Maintenance and Depot

The Class 92 sets will be maintained by its manufacturer CSR Zhuzhou. The maintenance facility will be based mainly at KTM's Sentul Komuter Depot while a minor secondary base will be located at Tanjung Malim. The Batu Gajah Rail depot will continue its role as the testing place for new Class 92 sets.
On top of all that, a new special 

Design and Construction

The Class 92 is designed for low dwell times and high passenger seating capacity, being built with three double leaf doors per side and having full longitudinal seating at its cab-coaches. Its middle coaches feature a mixture of longitudinal and traverse 2+2 seating. It has wide gang-ways interconnecting each coach, allowing passengers to distribute effectively throughout the length of the train. However, two middle coaches of the class 92 is designated women's only coaches by its operator KTM. Thus, limiting full interactivity within the train set. Dynamic route maps located above doors details trains position relative to station in real-time. CCTVs and 3-pin power outlets are provided as further features. Since the train is to operate in the tropics, the trains have an over-head air-conditioning systems, to provide ventilation, dehumidification and comfortable temperature control.
The exterior and interior of the class 92 is fully designed in Germany by Tricon Design AG for CSR Zhuzhou. It was then assembled in CSR Zhuzhou's Electric Plant train factory in China. While power traction units and other electrical systems were built by Siemens subsidiaries in China. Certain niche components were made in Siemens factories in Germany. 

Formation

|} 
Cars 2 and 5 are equipped with a double-arm Z-shaped pantograph. 
Cars 3 and 4 are designated women's only car.

Corruption Investigation

The purchase of the KTM class 92 was notably under investigation by the Malaysian Anti Corruption Commission (MACC) over its tender process. In 2008, the Chinese railway manufacturer Zhuzhou Electric Locomotive Co Ltd, being the lowest bidder, was originally awarded the tender to build 3 car sets at the cost of RM 13.7 million. This figure later increased to RM 48 million per 6 car set. According to the details revealed to the press about the investigation, the re-negotiation process was held directly with the manufacturer and there was certain irregularities in pricing. The investigation is still on-going. 
This is not the only set of irregularities in railway procurement occurring in Malaysia. In 2009, the Malaysian Ministry of Transport was under investigation over the purchase of used diesel multiple units. Following the investigation and general consensus at parliament at the time. The purchase of used these diesel multiple units was eventually canceled.

Operational Issues

There has been a number of issues related to the Class 92. In a comment by KTMB's incumbent president, Elias Kadir has noted that the class 92 is "not up to standard". In other related incidents, in which Class 92 sets malfunctioned was due reportedly to poor maintenance and non-payment to suppliers.

Vandalism

Immediately, following its launch a number of KTM Class 92 were intentionally damaged, at least 20 side windows are cracked or holed, due a number of stone throwing incidents.   to counter these incident. This implies that the glasses used are not shatter proof and poses a certain danger to commuters traveling on the SCS.

Accidents and Incidents

On 15 February 2013 at 23:00, an out-of-service KTM Class 92 SCS 25 derailed near Shah Alam station while returning to Sentul depot for maintenance. No one was injured. The train was heavily damaged and was subsequently written off.

Launch Delays

Originally the first set was expected to be launched in December 2011, it was later delayed to January 


Gallery

Image:Ktmb class 91 and class 92 ipoh station.jpg|Class 91 and Class 92 at Ipoh station
Image:KTMB Class 92 SCS at Batu Gajah Depot (1).jpg|Class 92 at Batu Gajah Depot
Image:KTMB Class 92 SCS at Batu Gajah Depot (2).jpg|Class 92 at Batu Gajah Depot
Image:KTMB Class 92 SCS at Batu Gajah Depot (3).jpg|Class 92 at Batu Gajah Depot
Image:Ktmb class 92 batu gajah testing.jpg|Undesignated Class 92 at Batu Gajah Station
Image:KTMB Class 92 SCS 1 KL Sentral Junction .jpg|Class 92 SCS 1 at KL Sentral Junction
Image:KTMB Class 92 SCS 14 KL Sentral Junction.jpg|Class 92 SCS 14 at KL Sentral Junction




