[[Monsieur Lazhar]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 films, 2010s drama films, Canadian films, Canadian drama films, Films about suicide, Films about educators, Films about immigration, Films set in Montreal, Films shot in Quebec, Films based on plays, Films directed by Philippe Falardeau, Genie Award for Best Picture winners, French-language films

Monsieur Lazhar is a 2011 Canadian French-language drama film directed by Philippe Falardeau. The screenplay was developed from Bashir Lazhar, a one-character play by Évelyne de la Chenelière. The film was nominated for the Oscar for Best Foreign Language Film at the 84th Academy Awards. The film was released theatrically in the United States on 13 April 2012 by distributor Music Box Films.

Plot

In Montreal, an elementary school teacher hangs herself. Bashir Lazhar, an Algerian immigrant, then offers his services to replace her, claiming to have taught in his home country. Desperate to fill the position, the principal takes him at his word and gives him the job. He gets to know his students despite the cultural gap evident from the very first day of class and despite his difficulty adapting to the school system's constraints. As the children try to move on from their former teacher's suicide, nobody at the school is aware of Bashir's painful past, or his precarious status as a refugee. His wife, who was a teacher and writer, died along with the couple's daughter and son in an arson attack. The murderers were angered by her last book, in which she pointed a finger at those responsible for the country's reconciliation, which had led to the liberation of many perpetrators of huge crimes. The film goes on to explore Bashir's relationships with the students and faculty, and how the students come to grips with their former teacher's suicide. One student, Alice, writes an assignment on the death of their teacher, revealing the deep pain and confusion felt by each of the students.
Bashir eventually comes to be loved and respected by the students he is teaching. However, the teacher's death still haunts the students. During a school dance, a student named Simon is found to have a photo of his former teacher. It is revealed that he tried to get her into trouble after she tried to help him through his family struggles. Bashir eventually gets the students to open up about the death, especially Simon, who is blamed (and blames himself) for causing the teacher's suicide. Eventually, some parents discover that Bashir has no teaching qualification; previously, he had run a restaurant. He is then fired from the school. He asks the principal to be able to teach one more day, convincing her by noting that the old teacher never got to say goodbye to her students. On his last day, Bashir has his students correct a fable he wrote which is a metaphor of his tragic past life in Algeria and the loss of his family in a fire. Before he leaves, one of his students, Alice (whom he professed to be his favourite to her mother) gives him a tearful hug goodbye.

Cast

Production

There were 28 days of shooting, about an average time for a film to be shot in Quebec. The principal filming occurred in the summer so the production could use the school and so the educations of the child actors were not disrupted. Four of the shooting days occurred in the winter."Director Philippe Falardeau Monsieur Lazhar Interview." (Archive) Collider. Retrieved on 5 January 2013.

Reception

Box office

Monsieur Lazhar grossed $2,009,517 in North America and $4,572,398 in other countries, for a worldwide total of $6,581,915.

Critical response

The film received a very high critical acclaim. At Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a rating of 97%, based on 110 reviews and an average rating of 8.1/10.

Awards

The film was selected as the Canadian entry for the Best Foreign Language Film at the 84th Academy Awards, Alongside the Polish-Canadian co-production In Darkness, which was submitted and nominated on behalf of Poland, the two films marked the first time in the history of Canadian cinema that two films with Canadian connections were finalists for the Best Foreign Language Film Oscar in the same year."Canadian roots grow at Oscars". The Chronicle-Herald, 17 February 2012. It is also the second consecutive year that a Canadian film in French was nominated in this category, following the nomination of Denis Villeneuve's Incendies at the 83rd Academy Awards.
Monsieur Lazhar was the most rewarded film at Quebec's own Jutra Film Awards, winning seven out of nine categories for which it was nominated, a finalist in the most categories at the Jutra awards.
It additionally earned nine nominations at Canada's Genie Awards, with the nominations honouring the film itself, the cast's acting performance, the cinematography, the costumes, the direction, the editing, the overall sound, and the musical score, with a total of eight nominations,Stroumboulopoulos, G. Genie nominations, CBC News. 17 January 2012. eventually holding the highest number of wins in the competition, gaining six Genie Awards for Best Picture, Best Actor, Best Supporting Actress, Best Adapted Screenplay, Achievement in Direction, and Achievement in Editing.








