[[Bint Allayl]]

CATEGORIES: Thoroughbred racehorses, Northern Dancer bloodline, Racehorses trained in the United Kingdom, British racehorses, Cartier Award winners, Thoroughbred family 4

Bint Allayl (19 January 1996 – 22 February 1999) was a British champion Thoroughbred racehorse. She was rated the best two-year-old filly of 1998 by both the International Classification and the Cartier Racing Awards. She won three of her four races including the Queen Mary Stakes and the Lowther Stakes and was made favourite for the 1999 1000 Guineas. She was put down after suffering an injury in training in February 1999.

Background

Bint Allayl, a powerfully built ("barrel-chested")
Green Desert finished second to Dancing Brave in the 2000 Guineas and became a leading sprinter, winning the July Cup. Apart from Bint Allayl, he sired the winners of over 1,000 races, including Oasis Dream, Sheikh Albadou and Cape Cross, the sire of Sea The Stars. Society Lady, a daughter of the Canadian champion La Voyageuse, failed to win a race but produced the Jersey Stakes winner Kheleyf. Bint Allayl was inbred 3x4 to Northern Dancer (see below)
Bint Allayl was sent into training with Mick Channon at West Ilsley, Berkshire.

Racing career

1996: two-year-old season

Bint Allayl made her debut in a five-furlong maiden race at York in May. Ridden by Frankie Dettori, she reportedly had "every chance" but was beaten a neck by Pipalong,
She was then moved up to Group Three class for the Queen Mary Stakes at Royal Ascot where she was again matched against Pipalong. She had already been described in the press as "arguably the season's fastest two-year-old",
It was more than two months before Bint Allayl appeared for her final start, the Lowther Stakes at York, although she was reported to be working impressively at home.
Plans to run Bint Allayl in the Moyglare Stud Stakes and the Cheveley Park Stakes

Death

Despite a strong belief in the press that Bint Allayl would join the Godolphin Racing team, her owner decided to keep the filly in England with Mick Channon. During the winter, she required surgery on an injured hock but appeared to have fully recovered. On 24 February 1999, Bint Allayl was injured when cantering during light exercise at West Ilsley. She received emergency veterinary treatment, but examinations revealed that she had suffered an untreatable "spiral fracture of her left-fore humerus". She was euthanized that evening.

Race record

Assessment

In the 1998 International Classicifation, Bint Allayl was assessed at 116, making her the highest rated two-year-old filly in Europe.
She was named European Champion Two-year-old Filly at the Cartier Racing Awards.

Pedigree




