[[Talk Dirty (Jason Derulo song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 songs, 2013 singles, Jason Derulo songs, 2 Chainz songs, Billboard Rhythmic Airplay number-one singles, Number-one singles in Australia, Number-one singles in Germany, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, UK R&B Singles Chart number-one singles, Songs written by 2 Chainz, Music videos directed by Colin Tilley, Billboard Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) number-one singles, Songs about sexuality

"Talk Dirty" is a song by American singer-songwriter Jason Derulo, released as the second single from his third studio album, Tattoos (2013) in Europe and Oceania. Derulo's third album was retitled Talk Dirty for its US release, featuring an alternative tracklisting. It was released as the third single in the US on January 7, 2014.allaccess.
A music video for "Talk Dirty" was directed by Colin Tilley, which incorporates types of dance from a variety of cultures: it was released through Derulo's account on YouTube on August 7, 2013. Upon its release, "Talk Dirty" debuted at number one on the Australian singles chart, making it 2 Chainz's first single to top the chart, and reached the top two in New Zealand.

Background and release

During an interview with Digital Spy, Derulo stated that the prospect of his first single with a guest appearance made him "really excited": he called "Talk Dirty" "shocking" and "out there", and felt that listeners would "be thinking 'Hmm, really?!'", but also that "it was so much fun". The song was released to digital retailers in New Zealand on August 2, 2013, with a release in Australia following on August 9: it was released in the United Kingdom on September 15, 2013. On December 17, Derulo released the official acoustic version of the song. Following the success of the song Derulo re-recorded the song and premiered the official Spanish version of the single 'Háblame sucio' also with the guest vocals of 2 Chainz on February 27, 2014, and is scheduled for digital release on March 11, 2014.jasonderulo.idolator.com/7507940/jason-derulo-unleashes-a-spanish-version-of-smash-hit-talk-dirty-listen

Composition

"Talk Dirty" largely eschews the pop and electronic influences found in Derulo's earlier work, instead drawing prominently from contemporary R&B. which Spin likened to those found in "Thrift Shop" by Macklemore and Ryan Lewis and "Somewhereinamerica" by Jay-Z. The track is in the Phrygian dominant scale, with a tonal centre of F sharp major.  A version with a sax solo in place of the rap verse was also released to mainstream radio. The chorus also uses a sample from Balkan Beat Box' song "Move It"

Critical reception

James Rettig of Billboard commended Derulo for "taking more risks" with the song's composition than in "The Other Side", citing the horn sounds backing the chorus as an example. Spin criticized Derulo's sexualised lyrics for demonstrating "cultural ignorance", but concluded that the song as a whole "is the craziest song that could be a hit right now", in that Derulo's lyrics make those performed by 2 Chainz "appear almost tasteful". Writing for MSN, Kathy Iandoli described the song as "horn-heavy, splashy, braggy", and wrote that 2 Chainz's lyrics lend the song "X-rated fun" by "balancing out the PG-rated verses" of Derulo.
Rap-Up noted how "Talk Dirty" demonstrates a "more scandalous side" of Derulo.  Kathy Iandoli's review of the song for MSN contains the subtitle "Apparently the booty speaks a universal language", based on Derulo's lyrics – which he partly speaks in a patois – claiming that even if he cannot speak the language of a foreign woman, her "booty don't need explaining", and his reference to "lipstick stamps" on his passport. DJBooth reviewer Richard quipped that "Talk Dirty" demonstrates how when Derulo "spits game to beautiful women... he always manages to make himself understood".

Live performances

Derulo performed "Talk Dirty" for the first time, along with an acoustic cover of his previous single "The Other Side", at the House of Blues music hall in Orlando as part of the "Presents Hook Up #4" series of concerts organised by American radio station 102 JAMZ. Derulo first performed the track live on the Australian morning show Sunrise on December 27, 2013.tv.com/sunrise/video/watch/20499205/best-of-2013-jason-derulo-performs/ Derulo performed the track live for the first time in the United States on January 23, 2014 on Jimmy Kimmel Live!, his second televised performance of the song was performed on The Arsenio Hall Show on February 6, 2014.arseniohall.html The song's third television performance was on the season 18 opener of the competitive reality show, Dancing With the Stars, which premiered on St. Patrick's Day in 2014.eonline.com/news/519018/jason-derulo-kicking-off-new-season-of-dancing-with-the-stars-with-live-performance

Music video

Background

The music video for "Talk Dirty" was directed by Colin Tilley – who also directed the videos for the previous Derulo singles "It Girl", "Breathing", "Fight for You" and "The Other Side" – with filming taking place on July 14, 2013.

Reception

Although Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV claimed that the video was thematically shallow, writing that it contained "no real plot... other than "ass"... "hot babes playing trumpets" and "flexing pecs", she complimented Derulo's choreography and dancing, observing him to "shake it like a bawse while scoping out those hot babes playing trumpets" as he "dances and twerks around the video's many colorful sets", and quipped "The more pec-flexin', the better!"

Chart performance

"Talk Dirty" first appeared on the New Zealand singles chart issue dated August 12, 2013, debuting at number 27: it reached its peak position of number two in its fifth week on the chart. In Australia, "Talk Dirty" debuted at number one the ARIA Singles Chart, making it Derulo's second song to do so in the country, after his 2010 single "In My Head", as well as 2 Chainz's first Australian number one. In Europe, it topped the German Media Control Charts and reached number 7 on the Dutch Top 40 in the Netherlands, and number 1 on the Ultratop 50 chart in the Flanders region of Belgium. 
The single sold nearly 100,000 copies in the UK three days after its release and was predicted to reach number one. This became Derulo's third number one song in UK, after "In My Head" and "Don't Wanna Go Home", and 2 Chainz's first in the country as well. "Talk Dirty" remained number 1 on the UK charts for the second consecutive week.Jason Derulo scores second week at Number 1 with Talk Dirty 
In its fifth week on the Billboard Hot 100 singles chart in the US, the song jumped nine places from fifteen to six, selling 194,000 copies.musictimes.htm The following week the song rose to position of number 4, giving Derulo his first top ten hit since his 2010 single, "Ridin' Solo" and fourth overall, selling an additional 234,000 copies.billboard.

Track listing

Credits and personnel

Charts

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Certifications




Release history




