[[Mihail Gheorghiu Bujor]]

CATEGORIES: Alexandru Ioan Cuza University alumni, Inmates of Târgu Jiu camp, Members of the Chamber of Deputies of Romania, Members of the Great National Assembly, People of the Russian Civil War, People from Iaşi, Romanian atheists, Romanian communists, Romanian Comintern people, Romanian journalists, Romanian lawyers, Romanian newspaper editors, Romanian pacifists, Romanian prisoners sentenced to death, Romanian prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment, Romanian Social Democratic Party (defunct) politicians, 1881 births, 1968 deaths

Mihail Gheorghiu Bujor (November 8, 1881 - June 17, 1964) was a Romanian lawyer, journalist and socialist militant. An important figure in the early Romanian labour movement, he embraced communism during World War I and organised Romanian armed detachments in Odessa in support of the October Revolution, hoping to foment a revolution in his native country. A political prisoner in Romania for much of the interwar period and during World War II, he held several minor political offices after the regime change in the late 1940s.

Early life

Mihail Gh. Bujor was born in Iaşi, the sixth children of Gheorghe Gheorghiu, a civil servant.
After completing a local high school, Bujor enrolled in the school of law at the University of Iaşi, also following the courses of several other faculties, such as literature, philosophy and natural sciences.

Reorganisation of the socialist movement

In 1901 Mihail Gh. Bujor began to write articles for Cronica ("The Chronicle"), a Bucharest newspaper, and continued to do so until 1904.
As a result of his activity, Bujor was elected in the Committee of the Socialist Union during the second Conference of trade unions and socialist circles of June 1907. The other members of the Committee were Rakovsky, Frimu, N. D. Cocea and Gheorghe Cristescu.

World War I and Russian Revolution

After World War I started, the Romanian Social Democratic Party adopted a pacifist stance and supported the neutrality of Romania. Mihail Gh. Bujor participated in the 1914 extraordinary Congress of the PSDR and the July 1915 Bucharest Inter-Balkan Socialist Conference, which adopted strong anti-war declarations.
In Odessa, Bujor and Rakovsky organised the Romanian Committee for Social-Democratic Action, the latter leaving for Petrograd soon after. The committee, which also included socialists Ion Dic Dicescu, Alexandru Nicolau, and Alter Zalic, sought to mobilize the sizeable Romanian workers population in the region, many of them evacuated from Romania along with strategic factories in the wake of the German invasion. Bujor also maintained contact with the socialists in Iaşi, supplying them with printed manifestos, and in Odessa he organised a revolutionary armed battalion from local Romanian soldiers.
After the October Revolution, Bujor, although reserved at first, sided with the Bolsheviks, and in December he left for Petrograd to meet the new leadership. The committee also changed its position towards communist revolution in Romania, considering it as both feasible and necessary.

Imprisonment and later life

At the end of 1919 Mihail Gh. Bujor returned to Romania, where he militated for the transformation of Socialist Party of Romania (PSR) into a communist party. To that end, he wrote several manifestos, pamphlets and articles in the socialist press. Bujor also contributed to the documents that were to be presented in the following congress of the PSR.
Bujor spent most of the interwar period imprisoned at Doftana, with long periods under solitary confinement. Following a long campaign of socialist and communist-minded intellectuals, he was eventually amnestied in 1934.

Notes





