[[AJ McCarron]]

CATEGORIES: 1990 births, Living people, Alabama Crimson Tide football players, American football quarterbacks, American Roman Catholics, Players of American football from Alabama, Sportspeople from Mobile, Alabama

Raymond Anthony "AJ" McCarron, Jr. (born September 13, 1990) is an American football quarterback. He played college football for the University of Alabama Crimson Tide. Following the  2013 BCS National Championship Game against Notre Dame, McCarron became the first quarterback to win back-to-back consensus national championships in the BCS era. McCarron is one of only seven quarterbacks in history to win back-to-back titles in some form and the first quarterback to win back-to-back consecutive titles since Nebraska's Tommie Frazier in 1994 and 1995.go.

Early years

McCarron was born and raised in Mobile, Alabama.  He attended Our Lady of Lourdes Catholic School from kindergarten to fourth grade before transferring to St. Paul's Episcopal School. At the age of 5, McCarron was severely injured in a jet-ski accident and almost died.
He capped off his high school football career at the 2009 U.S. Army All-American Bowl.

College career

In his first season at Alabama, McCarron accepted a redshirt and did not play during the season

Starting quarterback

After a tight competition for the starting quarterback position during spring practices, McCarron was named as the co-starting quarterback alongside Phillip Sims for the team's 2011 season opener versus Kent State,
During the course of his sophomore season, McCarron led an 11–1 overall record during the regular season, including 7–1 record in conference. During his first season as starting quarterback, he passed for a total of 2,634 yards with 16 touchdowns and five interceptions and a BCS National Championship.
McCarron had a strong start in his second year as starting quarterback for Alabama as the Tide started off the season with a 9–0 record. In his first five games of the season, he passed for 999 yards and 12 touchdowns with zero interceptions.
On December 12, 2012, ahead of their game versus Notre Dame, McCarron announced that he would be coming back to Alabama for his senior season. He was named winner of the 2012 CFPA Quarterback Trophy on January 22, 2013.rolltide.html
McCarron made the cover of Sports Illustrated
As a senior in 2013, McCarron was again a second-team All-Southeastern Conference (SEC) selection. During the season he passed John Parker Wilson to become Alabama's all time passing yard leader.Alabama QB AJ McCarron breaks school single-season passing record in Sugar Bowl defeat

Personal life

McCarron got engaged to Katherine Webb on March 28, 2014.
McCarron is a devout Roman Catholic.abc3340.

Career statistics






