[[Marching Men]]

CATEGORIES: 1917 novels, 20th-century American novels, Labor literature, Novels set in Chicago, Illinois, Novels by Sherwood Anderson, Social classes, John Lane (publisher) books

Marching Men is a 1917 novel by American author Sherwood Anderson. Published by John Lane, the novel is Anderson's second book; the first being the 1916 novel Windy McPherson's Son. Marching Men is the story of Norman "Beaut" McGregor, a young man discontented with the powerlessness and lack of personal ambition among the miners of his hometown. After moving to Chicago he discovers his purpose is to empower workers by having them march in unison. Major themes of the novel include the organization of laborers, eradication of disorder, and the role of the exceptional man in society. The latter theme led  post-World War II critics to compare Anderson's militaristic approach to homosocial order and the fascists of the War's Axis powers.
Marching Men was written as a hobby project while Sherwood Anderson was still working in advertising. A combination of a small first run,  mediocre reviews, and poor sales, convinced Anderson's publisher not to give Marching Men a second run. The novel has since been reprinted several times by other publishers including a 1927 Russian translation, yet is generally forgotten by the reading public except as a step in the development of its author. 42

Development history

Like Windy McPherson's Son, Sherwood Anderson wrote his second novel while he worked as an advertising copywriter in Elyria, Ohio between 1906 and 1913, several years before he published his first literary writing and a decade before he became an established writer. Though the author later claimed that he had written his first novels in secret, Anderson's secretary remembers typing the manuscript on company time "around 1911 or 1912". xii-xiv 
Inspiration for Marching Men came in part from the author's time as a laborer in Chicago between 1900 and 1906 (where he, like his protagonist, worked in a warehouse, went to night school, was robbed, and fell in love several times) and his service in the Spanish-American War which took place towards the end of the war and just after the armistice in 1898–99. After separating from his fellow soldiers to remove it, he observed them and recalled "I had become a giant ... I was, in myself, something huge, terrible and at the same time noble. I remember that I sat, for a long time, while the army passed, opening and closing my eyes".

Plot summary

Books I-II

The novel begins with the fourteen-year-old Norman McGregor packaging a loaf of bread for his uncle, the "village wit",Anderson (1972), 10 – who ironically nicknames him "Beaut" because of his off-putting appearance – in his mother Nance's Coal Creek bakery (bought with the savings of her late husband/Beaut's father "Cracked" McGregor).  Not long after, frustrated by the local miners expecting bread on credit without first settling their debts, Beaut closes the bakery during a miner's strike. That evening, as the now-drunk miners move to ransack the bakery (and assault Beaut), he is saved by a troupe of soldiers marching in formation. After the episode, the bakery remains closed and Nance goes to work at the mining office while Beaut idles about. When Beaut is 18 years-old, his mother becomes too ill to work and the young man gets a job as a stableboy. One day, as a prank, his fellow stableboys get Beaut (a teetotaler up to that point) blind drunk with a "horrible mess" made just for that purpose. Having reached a breaking point, Beaut takes the rest of his father's savings and leaves Coal Creek for Chicago on the same evening. He arrives in the City just after the 1893 World's Fair. Despite a shortage of jobs, McGregor easily finds a warehouse job and settles into a routine of work during the day and night school/independent reading at night. One day, in a break from the ordinary, the usually unsocial McGregor gives in to the urging of his neighbor Frank Turner, a barber and amateur violin-maker, and goes to a dance. Despite his aloofness, McGregor meets Edith Carson, a frail, mousy, and somewhat homely milliner/shop owner, with whom he develops a platonic relationship.

Books III-IV

Book III begins with Beaut returning to Coal Creek for his mother's funeral. During the funeral procession, the miners who attend fall spontaneously into step and Beaut is once-again inspired by the power of marching men. Back in Chicago, Edith Carson, who had gained a modicum of wealth through her shrewd business dealings, loans McGregor the money necessary for him to quit working full-time and attend school to become a lawyer, his long-time ambition. Not long after McGregor is admitted to the bar, the son of a wealthy industrialist is found murdered. In order to quell newspaper speculation as to their involvement, the political bosses decide to redirect the media's attention by framing and demonizing small-time thief Andy Brown, an acquaintance of McGregor. From jail, Brown requests that McGregor act as his lawyer. Though McGregor refuses at first, he ends up with the job. After an unsuccessful solo investigation, McGregor turns to wealthy heiress-turned-settlement house-volunteer, Margaret Ormsby, for help. Margaret, a "new woman"Ditsky(1977), 111 who dresses fashionably, is self-assured in demeanor, and is capable of acting independently is bothered by McGregor's bluntness, but decides to aid him nevertheless. On a tip from Edith Carson, and with Ormsby's connections, McGregor is able to clear Andy Brown of any wrongdoing. In the interim, Margaret Ormsby and McGregor develop a romance.

Books V-VII

While McGregor is slowly building up his idea of marching men (his law practice on the backburner), he decides that he wants to marry Margaret Ormsby. As he is leaving a formal party at her family's mansion, McGregor asks Margaret to marry him, but gets nervous and flees before she can respond. A few weeks later, McGregor falls asleep at the house of Edith Carson and wakes up with her stroking his hair. Realizing that their relationship is more intimate then he had thought, he goes to Margaret and reveals his past experiences with women. Margaret hears McGregor's confession and declares that she will still marry him, but first, she must go talk to Edith. A few weeks later, when McGregor is in the neighborhood for a teamster's strike, he finds that Edith's shop had recently come under new ownership. Rushing to the train station, he finds Edith about to depart. Together, they go to the Ormsby house and in a confrontation Margaret cedes her claim over McGregor to Edith. As Edith and McGregor are leaving, Margaret's father, David, leader of a plow trust (nicknamed "Ormsby the Prince" by the City's oligarchs),Anderson (1972), 137 extends a hand to McGregor. The two men shake, the narrator noting their polite antagonism towards each other.
Soon, the marching men idea blooms with workers coming together and marching to and from work in the evenings. Becoming nervous over newspaper reports and rumors of the worker gatherings, several "men of affairs" discuss the matter. David Ormsby volunteers to dissuade to McGregor from further organizing but cannot communicate his point to the impassive McGregor. The marching men movement peaks during a demonstration on Labor Day, climaxing with a speech by McGregor. Riding in a carriage with her father at the fringe of the demonstration, Margaret Ormsby is overcome by McGregor's oration, but later professes her allegiance to her father. The book ends that same night with a solitary David Ormsby, a foil to the stereotype of the ruthless businessman,Smith (1959), 283 at his window overlooking the city, meditating on his life choices: "What if McGregor and his woman knew both roads? What if they, after looking deliberately along the road toward beauty and success in life, went, without regret, along the road to failure? What if McGregor and not myself knew the road to beauty?"Anderson (1972), 225

Themes

Unity of workers

As with Anderson's novels Poor White (1920) and Beyond Desire (1932),Anderson (1972), 93 class struggle is a major theme in Marching Men.Calverton (1929), 391 Another critic noted the novel's plot shows "... the inexorable clicking-into-place of a process of dialectic. It is Marxist reasoning, and imposes a vision of historical necessity upon its time". 114
From the beginning of the novel, the narrator, and by extension McGregor, treats disorganized workers with scorn; from the miners of Coal Creek,Ditsky (1977), 104 to the downtrodden laborers of Chicago who are shown mastered by their bosses (unlike McGregor, who does not follow this trend).Dunne (2005), 24 and 26 Indeed, this realization is foreshadowed in Chapter 3 of Book IAnderson (1972), 36 when as a young man he sees a troupe of marching soldiers disperse a rowdy mob of miner's (and, as a consequence, save his family's bakery) during a strike. 106
Towards the end of the novel, the heretofore nascent power of the marching workers organized by McGregor is affirmed when the city's oligarchs deem it necessary to act against it... moral acknowledgement of social responsibility". 35

Order versus disorder

In line with the McGregor's ideal of unified workers was a "quest" to make order from the chaos around him. Examples of comparisons in the plot begin early on when miners in disarray are compared with organized soldiers. Later, an unbridled Chicago is contrasted with McGregor's orderly routine.Anderson (1972), 182-185 Beyond plot points, phrases such as "In the heart of all men lies sleeping the love of order ..."Anderson (1972), 48 and speaking of McGregor, "His body shook with the strength of his desire to end the vast disorder of life",Anderson (1972), 76 among othersAnderson (1972), 73, 106, 108-109, 113, and others  also work to set up the dichotomy of order and chaos.
Despite the repetition of this theme in the text, there is some discussion about its pervading influence. It is ironic, critic Clarence B. Lindsay posits, that while McGregor is busy organizing the marching men, he (as opposed to the narrator) all but ignores the chaos in the city he is constantly traversing.Ditsky (1977), 110 This view is furthered by Mark Whalan who likened Anderson's "imposition of order by masculine force" to the "masculine misogyny" of the Italian Futurists many of whom, unlike Anderson (who did not actually see combat during his military service), moved away from their glorification of violence after experiencing World War I.

The exceptional man

From the book's opening chapter, the narrator of Marching Men portrayed McGregor as separate from those around him..."Anderson (1972), 86 that he reads about such as Nero and Napoleon... "Dunne (2005), 14 and 22 making him the dream-object of women and envy of men from Coal Creek to Chicago. His size and strength, which is noted even during his teenage yearsAnderson (1972), 19 is later joined by brains when he completes night school and becomes a lawyer.
To some critics McGregor's exceptionalism helps Marching Men read as a proletarian novel,Hackett (1918), 58 while others see in it an antecedent to the grotesqueness of the characters in Anderson's 1919 short story cycle, Winesburg, Ohio... that America will breed Beaut McGregors—talented, charismatic, romantic, cruel—who will use their powers to achieve frightening goals".Whalan (2007), 70

Literary significance and criticism

Upon publication, reviews of Marching Men were moderate with a small number of reviewers taking strong negative stances. In one such  review, an anonymous critic from the New York Times Book Review noted that the beginning of the novel was "sufficiently well done to lead the reader to expect a novel of possibly a trifle more than average interest and average merit" but ultimately concludes that neither McGregor, "nor the book ever seems to get anywhere in particular".Anonymous (27 October 1917), 9 Aside from these faults, several critics also commented on Marching Men's "deliberate vagueness",Anonymous (11 October 1917), 404 calling the book a "generous if misty vision of the future". 338
Despite the book's deficiencies, reviewers were practically unanimous in praising the realistic description and mood of Anderson's settings from Coal Creek to Chicago. Others, like editor Francis Hackett wrote "Where Marching Men succeeds is in thrusting the greater American realities before us ..." to which critic George Bernard Donlin, in his Dial review, adds "Mr. Anderson's book interested me chiefly as the expression of a vigorous and sincere mind ...".
Written almost a decade before Sherwood Anderson established himself as a writer with the release of his 1919 short story cycle, Winesburg, Ohio, Marching Men is generally considered, along with Windy McPherson's Sons and two other unpublished novels,Bassett (2005), 26 as one of Anderson's "apprentice novels".

Publication history

Marching Men was the second book of Anderson's three-book contract with the publisher John Lane (the first being Windy McPherson's Son (1916) and the third being Mid-American Chants, published in 1918).W. Huebsch picked it up in 1921 following Anderson's success with Winesburg, Ohio, novel Poor White, and short story collection The Triumph of an Egg.W. Huebsch version."V Nogu! (Marching men): roman". Worldcat. Accessed 26 September 2011.



Sources




