[[Ferdinand Porsche]]

CATEGORIES: People from Liberec District, German Bohemian people, Automotive pioneers, Naturalized citizens of Germany, German founders of automobile manufacturers, German inventors, International Motorsports Hall of Fame inductees, German automobile designers, Porsche family, Volkswagen people, 1875 births, 1951 deaths, SS officers

Ferdinand PorscheThe name Porsche is pronounced  in English, with an audible schwa. (3 September 1875 – 30 January 1951) was an automotive engineer and founder of the Porsche car company. He is best known for creating the first gasoline-electric hybrid vehicle (Lohner-Porsche), the Volkswagen Beetle, the Mercedes-Benz SS/SSK, several other important developments and Porsche automobiles. In addition, Porsche designed the 1923 Benz Tropfenwagen, which was the first race car with a mid-engine, rear-wheel drive layout.
Porsche was an important contributor to the German war effort during World War II. He was involved in the production of advanced tanks, such as the Tiger I, Tiger II, Elefant, and Panzer VIII Maus, as well as other weapon systems, such as the V-1 flying bombs.com/1998/01/11volkswag Porsche was a member of the German Nazi party and the SS. He was a recipient of the German National Prize for Art and Science, the SS-Ehrenring, and the War Merit Cross. He was called the Great German Engineer by Nazi propaganda despite his Austrian-Czech background.
In 1996, Porsche was inducted into the International Motorsports Hall of Fame and in 1999 posthumously won the award of Car Engineer of the Century.

Early life

Ferdinand  Porsche was born to German-speaking parents in Maffersdorf (   
He showed a strong aptitude for mechanical work at a very early age. He attended classes at the Imperial Technical School in Reichenberg ( In Vienna he would sneak into the local university whenever he could after work. Other than attending classes there, Porsche  never received any higher engineering education. During his five years with Béla Egger, Porsche first developed the electric hub motor.nndb.com/people/142/000174617/
After the breakup of the Austro-Hungarian Empire at the end of World War I, he chose Czechoslovakian citizenship.

Early career

In 1898, Porsche joined the Vienna-based factory Jakob Lohner & Company, which produced coaches for Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria as well as for the kings of England, Sweden, and Romania.
The Egger-Lohner was a carriage-like car driven by two electric motors, directly fitted within the front wheel hubs and powered by batteries. This drive train construction was easily expanded to four-wheel drive, by simply mounting two more electric motors to the rear wheels, and a four-motor example was ordered by the Englishman E. W. Hart in 1900. In December that year, the car was displayed at the Paris World Exhibition under the name Toujours-Contente. Even though this one-off vehicleLohner-Porsche: The Real Story had been commissioned for the purposes of racing and record-breaking, the  the weight of the batteries meant that it was singularly reluctant to climb hills: it also suffered from limited range due to limited battery life.
Still employed by Lohner, Porsche introduced the "Lohner-Porsche Mixte Hybrid" in 1901: instead of a massive battery-pack, an internal combustion engine built by the German firm Daimler drove an generator which in turn drove the electric wheel hub motors. As a backup a small battery pack was fitted. This is the first petroleum electric hybrid vehicle on record, although since sufficiently reliable gears and couplings were not available at the time, he chose to make it a series-hybrid, an arrangement now more common in diesel-electric or turbo-electric railway locomotives than in automobiles.
Though over 300 Lohner-Porsche chassis were sold up to 1906, most of them were two-wheel drive; either front- or rear-wheel driven trucks, buses and fire-engines. Some four wheel drive buses were produced, but no four wheel drive automobiles.
The vehicles achieved speeds of up to , broke several Austrian speed records, and also won the Exelberg Rally in 1901, with Porsche himself driving a front-wheel drive hybrid example. It was later upgraded with more powerful engines from Daimler and Panhard, which proved to be enough to gain more speed records. In 1905 Porsche was awarded the Pötting prize as Austria's most outstanding automotive engineer.
In 1902 he was drafted into military service. He served as a chauffeur to Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria, the crown prince of Austria whose assassination sparked World War I a decade later.

Austro-Daimler

In 1906, Austro-Daimler recruited Porsche as their chief designer. Porsche's best known Austro-Daimler car was designed for the Prince Henry Trial in 1910, named after Wilhelm II's younger brother Prince Heinrich of Prussia. Examples of this streamlined, 85 horsepower (63 kW) car won the first three places, and the car is still better known by the nickname "Prince Henry" than by its model name "Modell 27/80". He also created a 30 horsepower model called the Maja, named after Mercedes Jellinek's younger sister, Andrée Maja (or Maia) Jellinek.
Porsche had advanced to Managing Director by 1916 and received the honorary doctorate degree, "Dr. techn h.c." from the Vienna University of Technology in 1916, hence the "Dr. Ing h.c" in his name, meaning "Doktor Ingenieur Honoris Causa". Porsche successfully continued to construct racing cars, winning 43 out of 53 races with his 1922 design. In 1923, Porsche left Austro-Daimler after differences ensued about the future direction of car development.
A few months later Porsche was given new job as Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft's Technical Director in Stuttgart, Germany, which was already a major center for the German automotive industry. In 1924 received another honorary doctorate from the Stuttgart Technical University for his work at Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft in Stuttgart and was later given the honorary title Professor. While at Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft he came up with several very successful race car designs. The series of models equipped with superchargers that culminated in the Mercedes-Benz SSK dominated its class of motor racing in the 1920s. 
In 1926, Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft and Benz & Cie merged into Daimler-Benz, with their joint products beginning to be called Mercedes-Benz. However, Porsche's ideas for a small, light-weight Mercedes-Benz car was not popular with Daimler-Benz's board.  He left in 1929 for Steyr Automobile, but the Great Depression brought about Steyr's economic collapse and Porsche ended up being unemployed.

Founding of Porsche

In April 1931 Porsche founded his consulting firm, Dr. req. h.c. F. Porsche GmbH, Konstruktionen und Beratungen für Motoren und Fahrzeugbau (designs and consulting services for engines and vehicles), in Stuttgart, where he returned. With financial backing from the Austrian advocate Anton Piëch and Adolf Rosenberger, Porsche successfully recruited several old co-workers he befriended at his former places of employment including Karl Rabe, Erwin Komenda, Franz Xaver Reimspiess, and his son, Ferry Porsche.
Their first project was the design of a middle class car for Wanderer. Other commissioned designs followed. As the business grew, Porsche decided to work on his own design as well, which happened to be a reincarnation of the small car concept from his days at Daimler-Benz in Stuttgart. He financed the project with a loan on his life insurance. Later Zündapp decided to help sponsor the project, but lost interest after their success with motorcycles. NSU then took over the sponsorship, but also lost interest due to the high tooling costs.
With car commissions low in the depressed economic climate, Porsche founded a subsidiary company Hochleistungs Motor GmbH (High Performance Engines Ltd.) in 1932 to develop a racing car, for which he had no customer. Based on Max Wagner's mid-engined layout 1923 Benz Tropfenwagen, or "Teardrop" aerodynamic design; the experimental P-Wagen project racing car (P stood for Porsche), was designed according to the regulations of the 750 kg formula. The main regulation of this formula meant that the weight of the car without driver, fuel, oil, water and tires was not allowed to exceed .
In 1932 Auto Union Gmbh was formed, consisting of struggling auto manufacturers Audi, DKW, Horch and Wanderer. The Chairman of the Board of Directors, Baron Klaus von Oertzen wanted a show piece project, so at fellow director Adolf Rosenberger's insistence, von Oertzen met with Porsche, who had done work for him before. At the 1933 Berlin Motor Show, German Chancellor Adolf  Hitler announced his intention to motorize the nation, with  every German owning either a car or a tractor in the future and unveiled two new programs: the "people's car" and a state-sponsored motor racing programme  to develop a "high speed German automotive industry": to initiate this, Mercedes-Benz were to be given an annual grant of 500,000 Reichsmark. 
These projects led to two projects for Porsche, and set a precedent for the rest of the decade with Porsche undertaking further projects for the Nazis, including the Tiger tank and the Elefant tank destroyer.

The Volkswagen Beetle and  membership of the Nazi Party and SS

In June 1934, Porsche received a contract from Hitler to design a  "people's car" (or Volkswagen), following on from his previous designs such as the 1931 Type 12 car designed for Zündapp. The first two prototype cars were completed in 1935. These were followed by several further pre-production batches during 1936 to 1939. The car was similar to the contemporary designs of Hans Ledwinka of  Tatra (in particular Tatra V570 and Tatra 97), which resulted in a lawsuit against Porsche based on infringement of Tatra's patents regarding air-cooling of the rear engine. The suit was first stopped by German invasion of Czechoslovakia and later by Volkswagen paying a settlement several years after World War II. 
Since being engaged by the Nazi authorities in building the Volksauto, Porsche was praised as the Great German Engineer.[ref]
