[[Wensleydale cheese]]

CATEGORIES: English cheeses, Yorkshire cuisine, Cow's-milk cheeses, Sheep's-milk cheeses, Blue cheeses, Wensleydale, Mixed milk cheese, British products with protected designation of origin, Cheeses with designation of origin protected in the European Union

Wensleydale is a cheese produced in Wensleydale, North Yorkshire, England.

Flavour and texture

Good Wensleydale has a supple, crumbly, moist texture and resembles a young Caerphilly. The flavour suggests wild honey balanced with fresh acidity.

History

Wensleydale cheese was first made by French Cistercian monks from the Roquefort region, who had settled in Wensleydale. They built a monastery at Fors, but some years later the monks moved to Jervaulx in Lower Wensleydale. They brought with them a recipe for making cheese from sheep's milk.

Wensleydale Creamery

Wensleydale Creamery in the town of Hawes has been hand-making cheese for more than 100 years.
In May 1992, Dairy Crest, a subsidiary of the Milk Marketing Board, closed the Hawes creamery with the loss of 59 jobs. This was the last creamery in the dale. Dairy Crest transferred production of Wensleydale cheese to Yorkshire's traditional rival, Lancashire.
Six months later, in November 1992, following many offers to rescue the Creamery, a management buyout took place, led by local businessman John Gibson and the management team. With the help of eleven members of the former workforce, cheese making recommenced in Wensleydale. It now employs 190 locals and buys from 36 farms located in Wensleydale.
There are several main types of cheese in the range produced by the Wensleydale Creamery:
Wensleydale Dairy Products is looking to protect the name Yorkshire Wensleydale Cheese under a submission for Protected designation of origin.

Common flavour combinations

The flavour of Wensleydale is suited to combination with sweeter produce, such as fruit. A popular combination available in many restaurants and delicatessens is Wensleydale containing cranberries. 
In Yorkshire, apple pie may be accompanied by white Wensleydale, giving rise to the saying 'an apple pie without the cheese is like a kiss without the squeeze'.
In Yorkshire and North East England it is often eaten with fruit cake or Christmas cake. 

References in culture

The Smell of Reeves and Mortimer

In the Series 2, episode 6 of The Smell of Reeves and Mortimer the introductory sequence tells the tale of a German hair metal band called Wensleydale Cheese whose obsolete jet malfunctioned and crashed an hour's flight out of Halifax Stanfield International Airport. The only survivors were guitarists Ralf and Karl Haussmann, subsequently driven to cannibalism of their backup singers in the hostile wilderness.

George Orwell

In his essay 'In Defence of English Cooking', George Orwell rates Wensleydale as second only to Stilton among British cheese varieties.

Monty Python

Wensleydale was one of the cheeses named by John Cleese in the Monty Python sketch "The Cheese Shop", which originally appeared in a 1972 episode of Monty Python's Flying Circus. In addition the shop owner, played by Michael Palin, was named Henry Wensleydale.

Wallace and Gromit

In the 1990s, sales of Wensleydale cheese had fallen so low that production was at risk of being suspended.

Pinky and the Brain: "Cheese Roll Call"

In Series 1, Episode 8, aired 1 October 1995, Pinky (an anthropomorphic mouse) sings about his favourite thing, cheese. During the "Cheese Roll Call", only three of a vast army of cheeses introduce themselves. One of them is Wensleydale, which describes itself as "Lightly pressed and smooth textured, with a subtle milky flavour that is clean and refreshing."








