[[Muskerry West]]

CATEGORIES: Baronies of County Cork, MacCarthy dynasty

Muskerry West ( Muskerry West)
is one of the baronies of Ireland, an historical geographical unit of land. Its chief town is Macroom. It is one of 24 baronies in the county of Cork. It may also be viewed as a half barony because some time before the 1821 census data, it was divided from its other half - Muskerry East. Other neighbouring baronies include Duhallow to the north (whose chief town is Newmarket) and the Barony of Carbery East (West Division) to the south (whose chief town is Dunmanway).

Legal context

Baronies were created after the Norman invasion of Ireland as divisions of counties and were used the administration of justice and the raising of revenue. While baronies continue to be officially defined units, they have been administratively obsolete since 1898. However, they continue to be used in land registration and in specification, such as in planning permissions. In many cases, a barony corresponds to an earlier Gaelic túath which had submitted to the Crown.

History

The Múscraige and Corcu Duibne descend form Corc, a son of Cairbre Musc. While the Múscraige petty kingdoms were scattered throughout the province of Munster, the largest were centred around the present baronies of Muskerry (West and East).Mumu by Dennis Walsh
The tribes or septs were pre-Eóganachta, that is before the 6th century. At this time, the territory did not extend south of the River Lee (although the river bisects the current barony). A pedigree of the chieftains of the tribe may be found in the Book of Leinster.Ó Murchadha, Diarmuid, Family names of County Cork, pg 153.18)
The main septs were:
Rivalry between the princely houses of the outer circle of the Eóganacht would eventually undo the kingdom of Múscraige Mittaine. The O'Donoghues, originally from Eóganacht Raithlind, moved in to become the new princes of Eóganacht Locha Léin. Sometime after 1096, Múscraighe Mittaine fell to the O'Flynns .  The local Ó Donnagáin dynasty persisted in their opposition to the usurpers, at least until 1115 when they killed the reigning O'Flynn king of Muskerry.  Thereafter, both dynasties were united in obscurity.
From 1118 onwards, the kings of Desmond came from  the leading family of Eóganacht Chaisil - the MacCarthy dynasty.  The reigning king at the time of the Norman invasion of Ireland was Dermod Mór na Cill Baghain MacCarthy, who, in 1171 submitted to King Henry II of England. In so doing, he hoped to secure the king's protection for his lands, particularly from Henry's own barons, as was the Gaelic way. Instead, Henry granted of Dermod's entire kingdom to two of his leading adventurer knights, Robert Fitz-Stephen and Milo de Cogan in 1177. According to Giraldus, the grantees took possession of seven cantrefs only; three to the east of Cork city were allocated to Fitz-Stephen and four to the west to de Cogan. 347; Benedictus Abbas, i, 163..  The remaining twenty four cantrefs they allowed to MacCarthy at rent.
An invasion into  Múscraige Mittaine in 1201 in reported in the Annals of Inisfallen as follows:
As neither Fitz-Stephen nor de Cogan left male heirs, the inheritance was confused. This suited the purposes of King John of England who, when he came to the throne, was determined to weaken the power of the Irish barons. He sequestered the kingdom of Desmond to the English crown and from 1200 to 1207 he proceeded to parcel out the land among his loyal subjects. Richard de Cogan (son of Milo's brother, Richard) got Múscraige Mittaine which he was expected to win by the sword. LXVI, No. 204; July–December 1961; pages 105-116.
The de Cogans conquered most of this area, building castles at Mourne Abbey, Maglin (near Ballincollig), Dundrinan, (Castlemore near Cookstown), Dooniskey, Mahallagh, and Macroom.  About 1242, John de Cogan (Richard's son) had the patronage of the churches of Clondrohid, Matehy, and Kilshannig.  In 1254-5, "Muscryemychene" was one of the cantrefs to pay a compotum of 40/- so that the county sessions might be held there.
The O'Learys (0 Laoghaire) were originally chiefs of the territory lying around Rosscarbery, but removed from there about the time of the Anglo-Norman invasion. They became lords, under the MacCarthy dynasty, of the country between Macroom and Inchigeelagh. In 1642, sixteen leading men of the name were attainted (legally deprived of civil rights), including Connor O'Leary of Carrignacurra and Auliff O'Leary of Cunnowley.
Following the Battle of Callann, the MacCarthies successfully repulsed the Cambo-Normans although their leader Fínghin Mac Carthaigh was slain. In 1280 the MacCarthy Reagh sept of Carbery made peace with the main branch of the family, whose king was Domhnall Ruadh MacCarthy, the nephew of Fínghin Mac Carthaigh. They apportioned Desmond amongst themselves. The Cogans gradually lost their power and lands in Muskerry. Efforts by the viceroys Lionel and Rokeby to recover Cogan lands from the MacCarthys in east Muskerry failed. In 1398 the Mac Carthys were not alone free to plunder from Dingle to the territory of the Barretts, but could carry on their ancient feud against the Carbery MacCarthys at Carrigrohane.

Civil parishes

There are 12 civil parishes in the barony.Placenames Database of Ireland: Muskerry West
Note 1: The parish of Macroom consists of the core around the town as well as two exclaves mainly enclosed by the parish of Clondrohid as well as a third exclave between Clondrohid and the parish of Aghabulloge in the neighbouring barony of Muskerry East. 
Note 2: Parishes shared with the neighbouring barony of Muskerry East to the east.
Note 3: Parishes shared with the neighbouring barony of Duhallow to the north.
Note 4: Parishes shared with the neighbouring barony of Carbery East to the south.

Attractions





From :
From other sources:

