[[Brain Mapping Foundation]]

CATEGORIES: Neuroscience organizations

The Brain Mapping Foundation was established in 2004 by neuroscientist Babak Kateb, in order to advance cross pollination of ideas across physical sciences into biological sciences/neuroscience.  The organization provides funding to the members of the Society for Brain Mapping and Therapeutics (SBMT). One of the main focus of the foundation is to further establish and fund the National Center for NanoBioElectronics (NCNBE) in order to rapidly integrate nanotechnology, devices, imaging, cellular and stem cell therapy. The organization has played a significant role in President Obama's BRAIN initiative.

Definition of brain mapping

The study of the anatomy and function of the brain and spinal cord through the use of imaging (including intra-operative, Microscopic, Endoscopic and Multi-Modality imaging), Immunohistochemistry, Molecular & optogenetics, Stem cell and Cellular Biology, Engineering (material, electrical and biomedical), Neurophysiology and Nanotechnology (See Brain Mapping for more information).

Mission statement

Brain Mapping Foundation (BMF) is a non-profit 501c3 charitable organization, which is established for the purpose of facilitating multidisciplinary brain and spinal cord research and expediting integration of cutting-edge technologies into the field of neuroscience. BMF is focused on translating state-of-the-art technologies from NASA, DOD and industry into neurosurgery/neuroscience in order to bring the most advanced medicine to wounded warriors and civilians with neurological disorders.

Special projects

Currently the organization is focused on establishing Global Alliance for Nano-Bio-Electronics through its National Center for NanoBioElectronic and has shaped policies in the field of Nanoneuroscience and Nanoneurosurgery. NCNBE has also launched a graduate training program in NanoBioElectronic, which will be offering a doctoral degree in NanoBioElectronics.

Publications

BMF has been a major supporter of the Society for Brain Mapping and Therapeutics (SBMT) annual meetings and its publications.

Funded projects

The foundation funds multidisciplinary translation research such as:
The Brain Mapping Foundation has been supporting annual meetings of Society for Brain Mapping and Therapeutics in the last 10 years.elsevier.com/about/press-releases/health-sciences/elsevier-and-brain-mapping-foundation-co-host-6th-annual-world-congress-of-ibmisps-on-brain-mapping-and-image-guided-therapy

Brain Mapping Day at the US Congress

Brain Mapping Foundation in collaboration with the Society for Brain Mapping and Therapeutics (SBMT), hold the Brain Mapping Days at the US Congress and Canadian Parliament to educate policymakers about the state-of-the-art research in neuroscience.  More information about the Brain Mapping Days can be found at  and 
Several notable scientists, such as Dr. Keith L. Black and Jean Paul Allain, have briefed congressional leaders during the Brain Mapping Days organized by BMF and SMBT.indianaeconomicdigest.asp?SectionID=31&SubSectionID=80&ArticleID=65134

Awards

Brain Mapping Foundation and the Society for Brain Mapping and Therapeutics (SBMT) have established a relationship to identify the most important scientific and clinical contributions to the field, and recognize them with the prestigious "Pioneer" awards.  The awards are presented in partnership with SBMT, industry leaders and other foundations to highlight the significant work done by scientists, industry leaders, individuals, and policymakers.
Congresswoman Gabrielle Giffords is the only award recipient who has been recognized twice by the Society and the Foundation for her courage and dedication toward raising awareness for neurotrauma as well as her role in healthcare reform; she was awarded a Beacon of courage and dedication and Pioneer in healthcare policy award by the Foundation and the Society.wafb.com/story/14313763/medical-group-to-honor-rep-giffords-with-award

Global Physicians and Scientists (GPS)

GPS is a humanitarian program, which is focused on mobilizing physicians, scientists and surgeons to serve for few weeks in the poor and rural areas of the United States and abroad. This program collaborates with industry and government officials and uses the national and international SBMT centers as bases of operations. The program is designed to help alleviate healthcare disparities by bringing world class physicians to poor areas, and to help improve local economies through micro and neuro economics.






