[[Roar (song)]]

CATEGORIES: Katy Perry songs, 2013 songs, 2013 singles, Number-one singles in Australia, Number-one singles in Austria, Canadian Hot 100 number-one singles, Irish Singles Chart number-one singles, Number-one singles in New Zealand, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, Billboard Hot 100 number-one singles, Billboard Adult Contemporary number-one singles, Billboard Adult Top 40 number-one singles, Billboard Hot Dance Club Songs number-one singles, Billboard Mainstream Top 40 (Pop Songs) number-one singles, Song recordings produced by Cirkut (record producer), Song recordings produced by Dr. Luke, Song recordings produced by Max Martin, Songs written by Bonnie McKee, Songs written by Dr. Luke, Songs written by Max Martin, Songs written by Katy Perry, Pop rock songs, Power pop songs

"Roar" is a song by American recording artist Katy Perry for her fourth studio album, Prism (2013). It was serviced to radio stations as the lead single from the record on August 10, 2013; it was digitally released on August 12, 2013. The song was written by Perry, Bonnie McKee, Dr. Luke, Max Martin, and Cirkut, and produced by the latter three. The lyrics address standing up for oneself and self-empowerment.
"Roar" received generally mixed reviews from music critics; many appreciated its overall production, while others felt that its lyrical content contained "clichés". The song was a commercial success, becoming Perry's eighth non-consecutive number one song on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100, and, also peaked at number one in various charts, including Australia, Canada, Ireland, Scotland, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. Additionally, it also reached the top five in most international charts, including France, Germany, Italy, and Switzerland.
To promote the song, Perry performed at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards, under the Brooklyn Bridge, as the ceremony's closing, on The X Factor, and on the German TV show Schlag den Raab. Grady Hall and Mark Kudsi directed the song's music video, which features Perry trying to adapt to the jungle where she survived a plane crash, and taming a tiger. It garnered generally mixed reviews from music critics. "Roar" was nominated for the Song of the Year and for the Best Pop Solo Performance at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards. The song is among some of the best-selling singles worldwide.

Background and composition

The song was mixed by Serban Ghenea at MixStar Studios. "Roar" was recorded in four other studios: Luke's in the Boo, Playback Recording Studio and Secret Garden Studios, all located in the state of California, as well as MXM Studios in Stockholm, Sweden.
The song's release was announced with the release of a video teaser, entitled "Burning Baby Blue", that saw Perry burning a blue wig.
Musically, "Roar" is styled in power pop, and features elements of glam rock and arena rock.

Critical reception

Miriam Coleman from Rolling Stone appreciated the songs's "easy poppy beat" and the its "repeated refrains", factors which the reviewer believed that contributed to make the song a "determined note for the new album".

Usage in sports

On September 16, 2013, the song was unexpectedly used during player introductions by the Cincinnati Bengals in their home opener against the rival Pittsburgh Steelers on Monday Night Football, to tie in the song's jungle theme with the team's nickname. Throughout the game, the song was also played sporadically during game breaks. Although the Bengals won the game 20-10, the song drew much criticism by Bengals fans and even some of the team's players. One Bengals fan even told the Wall Street Journal that Steeler fans sitting near him were laughing at the Bengals fans throughout the game; the Steelers themselves have used the Styx song "Renegade" frequently at Heinz Field since 2001.

Plagiarism accusations

Upon the release of "Roar", many accused Perry of copying Sara Bareilles' "Brave".

Commercial performance

North America

On the Billboard Hot 100, the song debuted at number eighty-five on the week-ending August 24, 2013 due to radio airplay.
"Roar" also reached number one on both the US Pop Songs and Adult Pop Songs. The number-one position on the Pop Songs chart gave Perry her tenth number one, tying her with Rihanna for the most number ones on the airplay-based chart.
The song has also reached the top spot on both the Adult contemporary chart and Hot Dance Club Songs. 
On August 31, 2013, "Roar" debuted at number one on the Canadian Hot 100 on the strength of digital downloads.

Elsewhere

In the United Kingdom, "Roar" entered at number one on the UK Singles Chart on September 8, 2013, selling 179,500 copies in its first week and ending the prolonged number-one run of Ellie Goulding's "Burn". The song became Perry's fourth UK number-one single.
The song reached number four on the Italian Singles Chart, where it was eventually certified Platinum by the Federation of the Italian Music Industry, for sales of over 15,000 digital copies.
"Roar" entered at the top of the New Zealand Singles Chart after just four days on sale, becoming Perry's ninth number-one single, second top debut and her eleventh top ten.
In Russia, on the Tophit Weekly General Airplay chart the song debuted at number 395 on August 25, 2013 and it has climbed the chart, peaking so far at number five on November 17, 2013.Основные параметры ротации трека на радиостанциях, работающих в системе TOPHIT.

Music video

Filming of the official music video for "Roar" began on August 7, 2013 and ended on August 9, 2013. The video was released on September 5, 2013, directed by Grady Hall and Mark Kudsi, and filmed at the Los Angeles County Arboretum and Botanic Garden.

Synopsis

At the beginning of the video, Katy and her boyfriend have crashed their plane in the middle of the jungle. Katy shows signs of worry, while her boyfriend takes pictures of himself and dumps his bags on her to explore. As it turns to night, they wander through the jungle as he throws things back at her. Suddenly, he is attacked by a tiger and Katy dumps her bags and runs off screaming. She approaches a lake and is almost bitten by a crocodile when she puts her hand in the water. She sits on a rock and ends up covered in tarantulas. As she looks into the lake while singing the chorus, she sees a reflection of a tiger instead of herself. Behind her in the darkness there are dozens of pairs of blinking eyes, but they are revealed to be fireflies which fly around her before forming an image of a roaring tiger in the sky.
Presumably a few days later, Katy has since made friends with a monkey and uses her stiletto heel to form a spear. She uses it to shoot a banana, which she gives to the monkey. In another scene, she bathes in the lake, with the help of an elephant who sprays her with water from the lake using its trunk. Katy helps a crocodile by brushing its teeth using a toothbrush she has salvaged, and tries to reach her clothes which have been taken by the elephant. At night, she holds a torch and explores a cave. Inside, she watches an animated drawing on the wall in which humans try to kill a tiger; attempting to burn it as it grows stronger and shooting spears which it sends firing back towards them. The next morning, Katy emerges from the cave, wearing a leopard-print bra and grass skirt, laced up legs and bare feet, displaying a boost of confidence and holding the spear she made earlier. She stands on top of a waterfall, overlooking the jungle, and then swings across the sky on a vine.
With the help of the monkey, Katy builds a cat toy which she uses to distract the tiger who ate her boyfriend earlier in the video. She lures it into an area of the jungle, and traps it inside. She comes face-to-face with the tiger and the two of them roar at each other, until her roar tames the tiger as it sits in front of her submissively. Afterwards, she is shown sitting on a giant grass throne, wearing a flower crown as the rest of the jungle animals sit around her, including the tiger, monkey and elephant. The tiger is shown wearing a collar that says "Kitty Purry", a reference to her real-life cat of the same name. Katy takes selfies with the monkey on her boyfriend's phone, applies lipstick made from berry juice, and paints the elephant's toenails pink. She then awakens from sleeping in the plane, leading the viewer to think all the previous events have just been a dream, but walks out of the plane still in the jungle, stretching her arms and yawning with the animals sitting around her.

Reception

Upon its release, the music video received mixed reviews from critics. Idolator contributors Robbie Daw, Sam Lansky, and Carl Willott gave it mostly lackluster reviews. Daw considered that the release of such a "safe" video was a disappointment for Perry and expressed eagerness to her next single; while Lansky likened its "edginess" to that of a "woman's antiperspirant commercial"; and the latter divided the video in what he considered to be of "good cheesy" and "bad cheesy": he highlighted the fake set, Perry's acting and the ending, but criticized the CGI, which he deemed "dopey", the product placement and Perry's "overly literal roar-off with a tiger". The only writer for the website that gave the visual a favorable review was Mike Wass, who appreciated the "campy elements" in it, while noting that it drew inspiration from the music video for "Doctor Jones" by the dance-pop group Aqua. In total, the reviews had an average score of approximately 6 out of 10.
James Montgomery from MTV believed that the video drew inspiration from Sheena, Queen of the Jungle and stated the video did not take itself too seriously, describing it as "camp".

Live performances

Perry first performed "Roar" at the 2013 MTV Video Music Awards, under the Brooklyn Bridge, as the ceremony's closing.

Formats and track listings

Charts and certifications

Weekly charts

Certifications









Year-end charts

Release history

Perry released a video teaser for "Roar" on August 2, 2013 along with an announcement that the American release was scheduled for August 12








