[[JC Chasez]]

CATEGORIES: 1976 births, American adoptees, American child singers, American dance musicians, American house musicians, American male singers, American Mennonites, American pop singers, American tenors, American record producers, American singer-songwriters, Living people, Jive Records artists, Mouseketeers, Musicians from Maryland, Musicians from Washington, D.C., 'N Sync members, People from Bowie, Maryland, Reality television judges, Sony BMG artists

Joshua Scott "JC" Chasez (born August 8, 1976) is an American singer-songwriter, dancer, entertainer, record producer, and occasional actor. He started out his career as a cast member on the The Mickey Mouse Club. Then he rose to superstardom as one of the two lead vocalists of the boy band 'N Sync. After the band's split-up, Chasez released his solo album, Schizophrenic, and has gone on to write and produce for music acts such as Girls Aloud, Basement Jaxx, David Archuleta, Matthew Morrison, and the Backstreet Boys. He also served as a judge for America's Best Dance Crew.

Early life and education

Chasez was born in Washington, DC, on August 8, 1976. His biological mother entrusted his care to her former foster parents, Roy and Karen Chasez, hoping that they would be able to provide him with an education and a stable family life. Chasez has said that he does not know who his biological father is, and has no plans to search for him.
After being adopted, Chasez grew up in Bowie, Maryland, He always danced when he was a child.

Career

Early career

As a child, Chasez was extremely shy, but when a friend bet him $20 to enter a talent show, he won the contest and soon realized he had a knack for performing and that he really enjoyed singing. In 1989, his mother Karen Chasez noticed a small ad in the Washington Post announcing auditions for Disney's The Mickey Mouse Club, and encouraged Chasez to try out.  He chose to audition, selecting the song "Right Here Waiting" by Richard Marx.  Chasez was soon cast as a performer in the fourth  season and stayed until the show's cancellation in 1995. Since there was another Mouseketeer named Joshua, Chasez went by his first and last initials, "JC", to avoid confusion. It was during his time as a Mouseketeer that Chasez befriended future bandmate Justin Timberlake, along with other future entertainers including Britney Spears, Ryan Gosling, Tony Lucca, Keri Russell, and Christina Aguilera.
He wrote the song "Give In To Me" (a.k.a. "Give Me The Love I Need") when he was 18 in 1994 and he sings the lead on it on Euge Groove's debut CD.

'N Sync

JC Chasez and Justin Timberlake were the two lead singers of what would become the popular boy band 'N Sync. The group officially formed in 1995, and became popular in Europe in 1996. In 1998, the band released its debut album *NSYNC which sold 11 million copies, and became very popular in the United States. After the band had its series of legal struggles with manager Lou Pearlman, they signed with Jive Records. They released their second studio album No Strings Attached in 2000, which became the fastest selling album of all time selling 2.4 million copies in the first week alone, making it the most albums sold in one week, and had the #1 hit single "It's Gonna Be Me". Other singles from the No Strings Attached Album included Bye Bye Bye, This I Promise You, and It Makes Me Ill. The band went on to produce their third studio album, Celebrity in 2001, which sold 1.8 million copies in the first week.
After the group's Celebrity Tour in 2002, the band decided to take a hiatus. During this time, Chasez produced his own album, Schizophrenic. They never officially disbanded, but since 2004, they have never reunited for any musical purposes, and there have been mixed reactions as far as whether the reunion would happen. In August 2013, JC rejoined with Justin and the rest of 'N Sync for a one time performance at the MTV Awards.

Solo career

During 'Nsync's scheduled hiatus, Chasez pursued work as a songwriter and producer. His first solo single, "Blowin' Me Up (With Her Love)", co-produced by Dallas Austin, was released on the 2002 Drumline soundtrack.
In 2004, Chasez's debut album Schizophrenic was released on Jive Records. The album was produced by Chasez, Dallas Austin, and contributing artists Basement Jaxx, BT and rapper Ol' Dirty Bastard, under the pseudonym Dirt McGirt.
Promotion for the album was affected by former band mate Justin Timberlake and Janet Jackson's Super Bowl XXXVIII halftime show controversy, after which Chasez was unceremoniously dropped from his halftime-show performance at the 2004 Pro Bowl. The NFL feared lyrics of the album's first single, "Some Girls Dance with Women", expressed too much sexuality.
In 2007, Chasez parted ways with Jive Records, and Backstreet Boys. Chasez was a judge on Randy Jackson's America's Best Dance Crew on MTV. He stayed on the panel for all seven seasons from 2008 to 2012, until its cancellation.
In November 2010, the song "If U C Kate" written by Dallas Austin, Taio Cruz, Alan Nglish, and Chasez was featured on the British band McFly's album, Above the Noise.
Longtime friend and co-worker, Justin Timberlake helped produce a few songs on Chasez's album, said "In my opinion, he had the best voice out of all of us ... Out of all the boy bands, call 'em what you will, he was the one that could out-sing all of us. And I've known him since I was 10, so it was fun to sit behind the board and push him."
In February 2012, Chasez announced via his website
Chasez will join the North American tour of Andrew Lloyd Webber's rock opera Jesus Christ Superstar as Pontius Pilate. He will be joined by Superstar winner Ben Forster and other well known recording artists in the tour, including Incubus' Brandon Boyd, Destiny's Child Michelle Williams, and Public Image Ltd's John Lydon.eonline.com/news/528699/jc-chasez-michelle-williams-and-more-team-up-for-jesus-christ-superstar-north-american-tour

Discography

Albums

Singles

All regularly released singles and their chart peak position in U.S. Billboard Hot 100 (US 100), U.S. Top 40 Mainstream (US Main), UK Singles Chart (UK), Canadian Singles Chart (CAN), Australian Singles Chart (AUS), New Zealand Top 40 (NZ), Irish Top 50 (IRE) and in the Belgian UltraTop 50 (BEL).

Guest appearances

Filmography






