[[Nijinsky (horse)]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 racehorse births, 1992 racehorse deaths, Thoroughbred racehorses, British racehorses, Racehorses bred in Ontario, Northern Dancer bloodline, Racehorses trained in Ireland, British Classic Race winners, Canadian Horse Racing Hall of Fame inductees, Triple Crown of Thoroughbred Racing winners, European Thoroughbred Horse of the Year, United States Champion Thoroughbred Sires, American Champion Thoroughbred broodmare sires, British Champion Thoroughbred Sires, Irish Classic Race winners, Thoroughbred family 8

Nijinsky (21 February 1967 – 15 April 1992), usually known in the United States as Nijinsky II, was a Canadian-bred, Irish-trained Thoroughbred racehorse and sire. He was the outstanding two-year-old in Europe in 1969 when he was unbeaten in five races. In the following season he became the first horse for thirty-five years to win the English Triple Crown.
He was also historically important for establishing the international reputation of his sire Northern Dancer. Retired to stud he became the Leading sire in Great Britain & Ireland and the Leading broodmare sire in North America.

Background

Nijinsky, a bay horse with a white star and three white feet, was bred at E. P. Taylor's Windfields Farm in Oshawa, Ontario, Canada. He was from the second crop of foals sired by Northern Dancer, the winner of the 1964 Kentucky Derby who went on to become one of the most influential sires of the 20th century. His dam, Flaming Page, by Bull Page, was a highly successful racemare, winning the 1962 Queen's Plate. At stud, she produced only two other foals, but one of these was Fleur, who produced the 1977 Epsom Derby winner The Minstrel.
He was offered for sale at the Windfields Farm's annual yearling auction where he was bought for $84,000 by the American minerals magnate and industrialist Charles W. Engelhard, Jr., acting on the advice of the Irish trainer Vincent O'Brien. It was Engelhard's wife Jane who decided that the colt should be named after the dancer Vaslav Nijinsky. Nijinsky was shipped to Ireland, where he was trained by O'Brien at Ballydoyle, County Tipperary.

Racing career

1969: two-year-old season

Nijinsky's first four races were all at the Curragh. In June he started at odds of 4/11 and won a six furlong maiden race by half a length. He followed up with easy wins in the Anglesey Stakes and the Railway Stakes. On his fourth appearance he was extended for the first time in the Beresford Stakes. He won decisively from Decies, a colt who went on to win the Irish 2000 Guineas in 1970. Having proved himself the best of the Irish two-year-olds, he was sent to England in October to contest the Dewhurst Stakes at Newmarket. Ridden for the first time by Lester Piggott he was held up at the back of the six horse field before moving through to take the lead inside the final furlong. He was an easy and impressive winner, earning himself top rating in the British Free Handicap.

1970: three-year-old season

=Spring=

On his first appearance as a three-year-old, Nijinsky won his prep race by beating Deep Run he pulled clear to win by two and a half lengths from Yellow God.

=Summer=

Nijinsky's opposition in the Derby at Epsom was stronger and he started at odds of 11/8. His rivals were headed by the French-trained colt Gyr.
On 27 June Nijinsky followed up his Epsom win by taking the Irish Derby at the Curragh. Ridden by Liam Ward, he started at odds of 4/11 and produced impressive late acceleration to win by three lengths from Meadowville.
In August, Nijinsky contacted ringworm, which delayed his training schedule.

=Autumn=

Nijinsky appeared to recover fully after being placed on a "rich" diet including raw eggs and Irish Stout, although his margin of victory over Meadowville was only one length. As of 2012, he is the last horse to accomplish the feat of sweeping the English Triple Crown: since 1970 only Reference Point (1987), Nashwan (1989), Sea The Stars (2009) and Camelot (2012) have won two of the three races, but Oh So Sharp won the filly's version of the Triple Crown in 1985.
In his next race, Nijinsky was sent to France for the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe at Longchamp in Paris in October. Piggott produced Nijinsky in the straight to make his challenge on the wide outside and 150m from the finish he caught the front runners Miss Dan and Sassafras and took a slight lead. In the last strides however, Nijinsky appeared to veer left away from Piggott's whip,
Less than two weeks after his defeat in the Arc, Nijinsky ran his last race in the Champion Stakes over ten furlongs at Newmarket. Although he had been known to sweat freely before some of his previous races, Nijinsky on this occasion appeared to become particularly nervous and anxious before the start. In the race itself he ran well below his best form and was beaten 3/4 length at odds of 4/11 by the five-year-old English horse Lorenzaccio.

Assessment and honours

Nijinsky was given a rating of 138 by Timeform, the second highest for a winner of the Epsom Derby up to that time.
In 1970, a film was made about his racing career entitled A Horse Called Nijinsky. Narrated by Orson Welles, it was released in British cinemas and in 1988 released on VHS video.imdb. have been named in Nijinsky's honour. A bronze statue of him stands at Ballydoyle.telegraph.co.html

Stud record

Having been sent to stand at stud in the United States, he was registered there as Nijinsky II.
Nijinsky II sired 155 Stakes/Group winners, and is the only sire to have a winner of the Kentucky and Epsom Derbies in the same year. His notable progeny includes:
Nijinsky was euthanised in April 1992 as a result of "the infirmities of old age" after suffering from laminitis since 1985.

Pedigree



Further reading


