[[Herod Agrippa]]

CATEGORIES: New Testament people, Herodian dynasty, Iulii, Roman-era Jews, 10 BC births, 44 deaths, Roman client rulers, 1st-century monarchs in the Middle East, 1st-century Romans, Judean people, Judaea (Roman province), Deaths onstage

Herod Agrippa, also known as Herod or Agrippa I (10 BC – 44 AD), was a Judean monarch during the 1st century AD.  The grandson of Herod the Great and son of Aristobulus IV and Berenice.).  He was, according to Josephus, known in his time as "Agrippa the Great". 2. § 2 Christian and Jewish historiography take different views of this king, with the Christians largely opposing Agrippa and the Jews largely favoring Agrippa.
Agrippa's territory comprised most of Israel, including Judea, Galilee, Batanaea and Perea. From Galilee his territory extended east to Trachonitis.

Life

Rome

Josephus informs us that, after the murder of his father, young Agrippa was sent by Herod the Great to the imperial court in Rome.  There, Tiberius conceived a great affection for him, and had him educated alongside his son Drusus, who also befriended him, and future emperor Claudius.  On the death of Drusus, Agrippa, who had been recklessly extravagant and was deeply in debt, was obliged to leave Rome, fleeing to the fortress of Malatha in Idumaea.  There, it was said, he contemplated suicide. 7. § 2
After a brief seclusion, through the mediation of his wife Cypros and his sister Herodias, Agrippa was given a sum of money by his brother-in-law and uncle, Herodias' husband, Herod Antipas, Tetrarch of Galilee and Perea, and was allowed to take up residence in Tiberias, and received the rank of aedile in that city, with a small yearly income.  But having quarrelled with Antipas, he fled to Flaccus, proconsul of Syria.  Soon afterwards he was convicted, through the information of his brother Aristobulus, of having received a bribe from the Damascenes, who wished to purchase his influence with the proconsul, and was again compelled to flee.  He was arrested as he was about to sail for Italy, for a sum of money which he owed to the treasury of Caesar, but made his escape, and reached Alexandria, where his wife succeeded in procuring a supply of money from Alexander the Alabarch.  He then set sail, and landed at Puteoli.  He was favorably received by Tiberius, who entrusted him with the education of his grandson Tiberius Gemellus.  He also formed an intimacy with Caligula, then a popular favorite.  Agrippa was one day overheard by his freedman Eutyches expressing a wish for Tiberius' death and the advancement of Caligula, and for this he was cast into prison.

Caligula and Claudius

Following Tiberius' death and the ascension of Agrippa's friend Caligula in 37 , Agrippa was set free and made king of the territories of Gaulanitis, auranitis, Batanaea and Trachonitis that his uncle Philip the Tetrarch had held with the addition of Abila. Agrippa was also awarded the ornamenta praetoria and could use the title amicus caesaris ( friend of Caesar). To top it all off Caligula presented him with a golden chain of a weight equal to the iron one he had worn in prison, which Agrippa dedicated to the Temple of Jerusalem on his return to his ancestral homeland. In 39, Agrippa returned to Rome, and brought about the banishment of his uncle, Herod Antipas, whose tetrarchy consisting of Galilee and Peraea he then was granted. Thus creating a jewish kingdom without its centre JudeaAgrippa I, Daniel.R. Swartz, Mohr 1990
On the assassination of Caligula in 41, Agrippa played a part in the struggle surrounding the accession between  Claudius and the praetorian guard and the senate. How big a part Agrippa played can't be said for sure, it entirely depends on the source. Cassius Dio simply writes that Agrippa cooperated with Claudius in seeking rule. Flavius Josephus gives us two versions, in Jewish War he is presented as a messenger to a confident and energetic Claudius and in the Antiquities of the Jews Agrippa's role is central and crucial: he convinces Claudius not to capitulate to the Senate and convinces the Senate to avoid attacking Claudius. Schwartz, Mohr 1990    After the accession Claudius gave Agrippa dominion over Judea and Samaria and he was granted the ornamenta consularia, while the kingdom of Chalcis in Lebanon was at his request given to his brother Herod.  Thus Agrippa became one of the most powerful kings of the east; the territory more or less equaled that which was held by his grandfather Herod the Great.
In the city of Berytus he built a theatre and amphitheatre, baths, and porticoes.  He expressed similar magnanimity in Sebaste, Heliopolis and Caesarea.  The suspicions of Claudius prevented him from finishing the fortifications with which he had begun to surround Jerusalem.  His friendship was courted by many of the neighboring kings and rulers, some of whom he housed in Tiberias, which also caused Claudius some displeasure.

Reign and death

Accounts in Josephus

Agrippa returned to Judea and governed it to the satisfaction of the Jews.  His zeal, private and public, for Judaism is recorded by Josephus, Philo the Alexandrian and the rabbis.  Perhaps because of this, his passage through Alexandria in the year 38AgrippaI, Daniel R. schwartz, 1990instigated anti-Jewish riots.  At the risk of his own life, or at least of his liberty, he interceded with Caligula on behalf of the Jews, when that emperor was attempting to set up his statue in the Temple at Jerusalem shortly before his death in 41. Agrippa's efforts bore fruit and persuaded Caligula to rescind his order thus preventing the Temple's desecration. 1982, p. 155
After Passover in 44, Agrippa went to Caesarea, where he had games performed in honor of Claudius.  In the midst of his speech to the public a cry went out saying "this is not the voice of a man but of a god" and Agrippa did not publicly react. At this time he saw an owl perched over his head. During his imprisonment by Tiberius a similar omen had been interpreted as portending his speedy release and future kingship, with the warning that should he behold the same sight again, he would die. He was immediately smitten with violent pains, scolded his friends for flattering him and accepted his imminent death.  He experienced heart pains and a pain in his abdomen, and died after five days. 345–350 (Chapter 8 para 2)  Josephus then relates how Agrippa's brother, Herod of Chalcis, and Helcias sent Aristo to kill Silas. Chapter 8 para 3 But before the multitude were made acquainted with Agrippa's being expired, Herod the king of Chalcis, and Helcias the master of his horse, and the king's friend, sent Aristo, one of the king's most faithful servants, and slew Silas, who had been their enemy, as if it had been done by the king's own command.
Acts 12 relates that he was eaten by worms, after God struck him for accepting the praise of sycophants, comparing him to a god.
The Jewish Encyclopedia has a different account of Agrippa's reign:
 Claudius, showed himself grateful to Agrippa for important services rendered him, and upon his accession, placed under his rule the remainder of Palestine, the territories of Samaria, Judea, and Idumæa, formerly governed by Archelaus. Loaded with honors and titles, Agrippa returned home, and the few remaining years of his benevolent sway afforded the people a brief period of peace and prosperity. The evil consequences of a ruler's unbridled passions and tyranny had been sufficiently evident to him in Rome, and they had taught him moderation and strict self-control. His people regarded him with love and devotion, because he healed with tender hand the deep wounds inflicted upon the national susceptibilities by brutal Roman governors. He ruled his subjects with compassion and friendliness. Like the ancestral Asmoneans from whom he sprang through his noble grandmother Mariamne, he honored the Law. Like the merest commoner, he carried his basket of first-fruits to the Temple; with the people he celebrated appropriately the Feast of Tabernacles, and he devoted to the sanctuary a golden chain with which Caligula had honored him. On one occasion, while in the street, he met a bridal procession which drew up to let him pass, but he halted and bade it take precedence. He sought to lighten taxation, remitting the impost on houses in Jerusalem. On the coins minted by him he carefully avoided placing any symbols which could offend the people's religious sentiment. Thus, prosperity and comfort seemed to be dawning anew for the Jews.
 The Romans, however, became jealous of this rising prosperity, and—sometimes covertly, sometimes openly—laid all manner of obstacles in his way. When he began to repair the fortifications of the capital, he was abruptly bidden to cease. His attempts to fraternize with neighboring peoples—vassals of Rome—were construed as portending rebellion. His sudden death at the games in Cæsarea, 44, must be considered as a stroke of Roman politics. His death, while in the full vigor of his years, was deeply lamented by his people, notwithstanding the fact that he had made many considerable concessions to heathen manners and customs. The Christians looked upon his death as a judgment for his undisguised hostility to their young community (Acts, xii.)."It must be said that this was not an accurate representation of the Christians' attitude; writing only 16 years later "Luke" claimed that the gruesome death was retribution for Agrippa's blasphemous acceptance of the flattery of a delegation from Tyre and Sidon, "The voice of a god, not of a man." (Acts. 12.20–24) Nor does it appear that any suggestion was made at the time that there was a Roman conspiracy behind the sudden death of the Emperor's old friend.
The Talmud also has a positive view of his reign:
The Mishnah explained how the Jews of the Second Temple era interpreted the requirement of ).  The king would recite the same blessings as the High Priest, except that the king would substitute a blessing for the festivals instead of one for the forgiveness of sin. (Mishnah Sotah 7:8; Babylonian Talmud Sotah 41a.)

Account in the New Testament

"King Herod" mentioned in the Bible's Acts of the Apostles, is identified by historians as the same person as Herod Agrippa. The identification is based in part on the description of his death, which is very similar to Agrippa's death in Josephus's Antiquities of the Jews 19.8.2, although Josephus does not include the claim that "an angel of the Lord struck him down, and he was eaten by worms." Further evidence is the identification of the ruler in Acts 12:1 as "Herod the king," since Agrippa is the only Herod who would have had authority in Jerusalem at that time.5.1
The description of Herod Agrippa as a cruel, heartless king who persecuted the Jerusalem church, having James son of Zebedee killed and imprisoning Peter, stands in contrast with Josephus' account of a kindly man. According to Josephus, he was a milder ruler than his grandfather Herod the Great, and Josephus records him as talking with and then forgiving a law student accused of political rabble rousing, rather than punishing him as his grandfather and some other Herods would have done.
Blastus is mentioned in the New Testament as Herod's chamberlain. Herod Antipas, uncle and predecessor of Agrippa as ruler of Galilee and Peræa, is the Herod mentioned in the Gospels who authorized the execution of John the Baptist and played a role in the trial of Jesus.Acts 25:13 – 26:32

Progeny

By his wife Cypros he had a son and three daughters. They were:

Agrippa in other media

Notes






