[[Pilot (Up All Night)]]

CATEGORIES: 2011 television episodes, Television pilots

"Pilot" is the first episode of the first season of the American comedy television series Up All Night and the show's first episode overall. The episode premiered in the United States on NBC on September 14, 2011. The episode was written by series creator Emily Spivey and was directed by James Griffiths.
"Pilot" introduces each of the main characters, as well as establishes the basic premises of the series. In the episode, Reagan (Christina Applegate) decides to return to work after giving birth to her baby with the support of her stay-at-home husband Chris (Will Arnett). Once she returns to work, Regan must deal with the endless needs of her friend and boss, Ava (Maya Rudolph) the host of her own talk show, that Regan works as a producer on.
"Pilot" debuted Up All Night, in a special timeslot between America's Got Talent and the short-lived NBC series, Free Agents at 10:00 p.m. According to Nielsen Media Research, the episode received 10.95 million viewers and received a 3.7 rating/10% share in the 18–49 demographic, ranking first in its timeslot. It currently ranks as the highest-rated episode of the series. The episode also received mostly positive reviews from critics. 

Plot

After giving birth to her baby, Reagan (Christina Applegate) decides to return to work with the support of her stay-at-home husband Chris (Will Arnett). Once she returns to work, Regan must deal with the endless needs of her friend and boss, Ava (Maya Rudolph) the host of her own talk show, that Regan works as a producer on.

Production

"Pilot" was written by series creator Emily Spivey and was directed by James Griffiths. The series was based on creator Spivey's life when she went back to working on Saturday Night Live after giving birth to a baby boy.

Reception

Ratings

The pilot was first shown on September 14 2011, in the United States on NBC. It was shown between America's Got Talent and the short-lived NBC series, Free Agents. In its original American broadcast, the pilot was viewed by an estimated 10.950 million viewers and received a 3.7 rating/10% share among adults between the ages of 18 and 49, according to Nielsen Media Research. This means that it was seen by 3.7% of all 18- to 49-year-olds, and 10% of all 18- to 49-year-olds watching television at the time of the broadcast. The episode ranked first in its timeslot beating CBS series Big Brother which received a 2.9 rating/8% share in the 18–49 demographic and ABC series Nightline which received a 1.2 rating/3% share in the demo. Despite the good ratings for the premiere, the series had a large drop at the 15-minute mark dropping from a 4.2 rating to a 3.3 rating in the 18–49 demographic.

Reviews

"Pilot" received mostly positive reviews. The success of the pilot led to the series holding a rating of 64/100 on Metacritic from 25 reviews. He ultimately gave the series a B- rating the Baby Scenes with a B+ and the Rudolph scenes a C/C-.




