[[Sapiens International Corporation]]

CATEGORIES: Companies listed on NASDAQ, Companies of Israel, Companies established in 1990, Software companies of Israel

Sapiens International Corporation is a publicly traded company, headquartered in Israel, that develops computer software solutions for the insurance industry.

History

Sapiens grew out of an initiative, dubbed DB1, undertaken by a group of scientists from the Weizmann Institute of Science during the 1960s to develop a novel object-oriented application generator for use with mainframe computers. One of the driving forces behind the initiative was Tsvi Misinai, a graduate of the Technion who in 1972 went on to spearhead the project. By the late 1970s and early 1980s, in large part owing to rapidly fluctuating inflation rates in Israel and the corresponding demand for a computer platform able to keep up with constant pricing shifts, the Weizmann team, now a company calling itself AAA–Advanced Information Systems, began marketing DB1 to domestic insurance firms. Subsequently, the company's first overseas client appeared in the form of a London-based international infrastructure firm in 1986. That same year, joined by entrepreneurs Ron Zuckerman and Shaul Shani, the company severed itself from the Weizmann Institute and was incorporated under its new name—Sapiens.
By 1990, Sapiens had established a client base encompassing Israel, the United Kingdom, Switzerland, Canada, South Africa, Germany, and Venezuela. In 1990 Sapiens was registered as a public limited liability company in the Netherlands Antilles under the name Sapiens International Corporation N.V. In 1991 Sapiens Latin American Division entered the Brazilian market. In 1992 shares of Sapiens began trading on the NASDAQ exchange. The year 1993 is considered the company's zenith, with 900 workers employed at 33 branches around the world and a market cap of US$340 million.
During the second half of the 1990 Sapiens focused on developing a business rules technology (eMerge)  and Legacy Modernization products and services. The company was highly successful in winning contracts for updating information systems to deal with the Year 2000 problemSapiens Builds Brandname, Globes, 14 January 1999 and to adapt systems to the changeover to the new single European currency (the 'Euro').Sapiens International Corporation N.V. FORM 20-F 2001

Refocusing on Insurance Software

In 2001, Formula Systems, until then a minority shareholder, acquired control over the (then struggling) company. Dan Goldstein, then Chairman of The Formula Group, assumed the role of Chairman of Sapiens, and supervised its recovery. The company decided to focus solely on developing software solution for the Insurance Industry.  
In 2010, Sapiens acquired Harcase, a Canada based software company, developer of policy administration suite for Property and Casualty Insurance.Sapiens Acquires Canada-based P&C Software Vendor Harcase, insurance & technology magazine,
In 2011, Goldstein initiated and carried out a 3-way corporate merger, between Sapiens and two subsidiaries of Formula Vision. These two companies both also focused on Insurance solutions, FIS (Formula Insurance Solutions) and IDIT, merged into Sapiens to form a world leader in software for the Insurance sector.Sapiens, IDIT and FIS Sign Definitive Agreement to Merge; Merged Company to Become a Major Global Insurance Solutions Provider, July 21, 2011, PRNewswire

Products








