[[Huw Edwards (conductor)]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century conductors (music), 21st-century conductors (music), Alumni of the University of Surrey, American music educators, British music educators, Living people, Northwestern University people, People from Swansea, Portland Youth Philharmonic conductors, Southern Methodist University alumni, Welsh conductors (music), Welsh emigrants to the United States, Year of birth missing (living people)

Huw Edwards is a Welsh conductor currently serving as music director of Olympia, Washington's Olympia Symphony Orchestra and orchestra conductor at the University of Puget Sound. Edwards' conducting career began at age seventeen when he became music director of the Maidstone Opera Company in England. He later attended the University of Surrey, where he conducted the college orchestra along with an ensemble that he formed on his own. At age twenty-three, he won a conducting competition which sent him to Southern Methodist University in Dallas, Texas. He then held a lecturer position at Northwestern University in Chicago, where he was also a doctoral candidate. Edwards was conductor and music director of the Portland Youth Philharmonic from 1995 to 2002 followed by the Seattle Youth Symphony from 2002 to 2005. He served as music director of the Portland Columbia Symphony Orchestra from 2000 to 2012 and has been with the Olympia Symphony Orchestra since 2002. In May 2012 Edwards accepted a position as orchestra conductor at the University of Puget Sound.

Early life and education


Born in South Wales, Edwards moved with his parents to England and sang in choirs as a child. He witnessed his first opera (Giuseppe Verdi's Un ballo in maschera) at eleven years old when his parents took him to the Royal Opera House in Covent Garden.
Edwards has been conducting since age seventeen when he became music director of the Maidstone Opera Company in England, a position he held for six years.

Career

Prior to joining the Portland Youth Philharmonic, Edwards had written extensively about music. He contributed to Stagebill in Chicago, Dallas, London and Washington, D.C. and wrote program notes for Daniel Barenboim, Yo-Yo Ma and the Guarnari Quartet.

Portland Youth Philharmonic

Edwards became conductor and music director of the Portland Youth Philharmonic (PYP) in 1995, following Jacob Avshalomov's forty-year tenure and becoming the orchestra's third conductor. He was selected unanimously by a twelve-person committee from a field of more than one hundred candidates, and was officially handed the baton by Avshalomov at the season opening Riverside Classics concert on August 30.
Released on March 27, 1998, Fountain of Youth became the orchestra's sixth commercial recording on Compact Disc (previous recordings were vinyl or cassette). The compilation album included works recorded at the Arlene Schnitzer Concert Hall during seasons seventy-three and seventy-four.
During Edwards' seven years with the orchestra, he and other PYP representatives established a peer mentor program which partnered orchestra musicians with low-income students with little access to music education,

Seattle Youth Symphony Orchestra

He became music director of the Seattle Youth Symphony at the start of its sixtieth season (2002–2003), putting him in charge of 1,000 young musicians participating in the symphony and its four preparatory orchestras as well as the organization's outreach programs and summer music festival (Marrowstone). He has stated the following about working with young musicians:

Portland Columbia Symphony Orchestra, Olympia Symphony Orchestra

Edwards began serving as music director of the Portland Columbia Symphony Orchestra in 2000. His year-long audition process for the music director position with the Olympia Symphony Orchestra began during the 2002–2003 season. The season also marked his fifth with the Marrowstone Summer Music program, where he remained until 2005. In 2010, Edwards was one of four finalists for the conductor position with the Yakima Symphony Orchestra. 
In April 2012 Edwards announced his resignation at the end of his twelfth season with the Portland Columbia Symphony Orchestra, citing exhaustion from the commutes between Olympia and Portland as the reason.

University of Puget Sound

In May 2012, Edwards accepted the orchestra conductor position at the University of Puget Sound, a private liberal arts college located in Tacoma, Washington.

Interests

Dedicated to music education, Edwards enjoys conducting Beethoven for youth orchestras. He has admitted that he did not envision a career conducting youth orchestras but also that he "did not rule them out". His favorite composition is "Parsifal" by Wagner; other favorites include unaccompanied choral music, cello suites by Bach, quartets by Beethoven and jazz, including Nat King Cole. Apart from music, Edwards likes the Chicago Bears, CrossFit, golf, kayaking, Masterpiece Theater, poetry, and Rhône wine along with the winemaking process. Edwards is an avid sports fan and fitness advocate; he is a former rugby player, enjoys running and playing squash, and believes there are similarities between how music and sports affect the community. He was sometimes referred to as "coach" by musicians of the Portland Youth Philharmonic. Edwards has shared that he would want to work at a vineyard or winery, or be a sports radio host or travel correspondent for a publication if he were not a conductor.








