[[Michael H. Cohen]]

CATEGORIES: University of California, Berkeley School of Law alumni, Haas School of Business alumni, Iowa Writers' Workshop alumni, Columbia University alumni, Harvard Medical School faculty, American medical writers, American lawyers, American legal writers

Michael H. Cohen is an American attorney, speaker and writer. He is the founder of the Michael H. Cohen Law Group and a former professor at Harvard Medical School and the Harvard School of Public Health. Cohen has authored books on healthcare law and policy.

Legal career

After law school Cohen served as a law clerk to Chief Judge Thomas P. Griesa in the Southern District of 
New York. Cohen began his legal career as a corporate, securities, and M&A attorney at Davis Polk & Wardwell in New York City. At the same time Cohen began training as a seminarian, yogi, Ericksonian hypnotherapist, and energy healer.

Education and teaching

Cohen has a BA from Columbia University, a JD from Boalt Hall School of Law at the University of California, Berkeley, an MBA from the Haas School of Business at the University of California, Berkeley, and an MFA from the Iowa Writers Workshop. While in law school he was a member of the California Law Review Cohen served as an Assistant Professor of Health Law and Policy at the Harvard School of Public Health and as an
Assistant Professor of Medicine at Harvard Medical School starting in 2000.
Cohen served as Director of Legal Programs at Harvard Medical School Division for Research and Education in Complementary and Integrative Medical Therapies, and was awarded a Fortieth Anniversary Senior Fellowship at the Center for the Study of World Religions within Harvard Divinity School. Cohen has served as the committee Consultant for the National Academy of Sciences Committee on the Use of Complementary and Alternative Medicine by the American Public, and was the president of the Institute for Integrative and Energy Medicine in Newport Beach, California.
In addition to his teaching career in the field of healthcare law and policy, Cohen is a graduate of the New Seminary in New York City and an ordained interfaith minister.

Publishing

Cohen's first book was Creative Writing for Lawyers, which was published in 1990. The book was intended to draw the natural fictional talents of lawyers, with the idea that legal and fictional writing are compatible genres.
Cohen then authored the book Beyond Complementary Medicine: Legal and Ethical Perspectives on Health Care and Human Evolution in 2000. Dr. Wayne Jonas reviewed the book in the Journal of the Association of American Medical Colleges stating that, "Cohen poses many of the hard questions that arise at the interfaces of different cultures, beliefs, and goals ... he points out the consequences of applying legal and ethical principles to concepts and assumptions not usually discussed in conventional circles yet used and believed daily by the public."
In 2002 Cohen authored the book Future Medicine: Ethical Dilemmas, Regulatory Challenges, and Therapeutic Pathways to Health Care and Healing in Human Transformation. Health Affairs reviewer Dr. Clyde B. Jensen stated that the book, "makes at least three valuable contributions to the integration of conventional and complementary medicine. First ... the book identifies many of the legal and ethical issues that will emerge in the future within complementary and alternative medicine ... Second, it implies that conventional and complementary health care may not be two divergent forms of health care, but rather, similar forms of health care functioning on different parts of a health care continuum. ... Third, it emphasizes the importance of the spirit in healing and health."
Cohen then authored the book Healing at the Borderland of Medicine and Religion in 2006. Dr. Joshua Grossman reviewed the book in the Journal of the National Medical Association, writing that Cohen had provided "the outstanding text that I wished I had available to me years ago" and that navigated the "exquisitely challenging interface between conventional medicine and complementary and alternative medicine with ... skill, caring and concern".
In addition to his books, chapters, and law review articles, he has also written articles in medical journals including Archives of Internal Medicine

Bibliography of major works






