[[The Girl with the Whooping Cough]]

CATEGORIES: 1910 plays, Broadway plays, Censorship in the United States

The Girl with the Whooping Cough (1910) is a play written by Stanislaus Stange. Adapted from a French farce, the show featured dialogue that was condemned as indecent by many contemporary reviewers. The play's appearance on Broadway was suppressed when New York City officials threatened not to renew the operating license of the theater.

Plot

The story follows the misbehaviors of Regina (Valeska Suratt) as she passes whooping cough to the numerous men she kisses. In the final act, her amours land her in divorce court, where she performs a dance routine borrowed from Suratt's vaudeville act.

Broadway production and suppression

After early performances in Trenton, New Jersey,
Based on this evidence, Gaynor asked New York City Police Commissioner William F. Baker to suppress the play. On May 6, 1910, Baker contacted the theater's management company, Klaw & Erlanger. He threatened that if the play was not stopped, he would refuse to renew the theater's operating license, which expired at the end of April. Abraham L. Erlanger promised to cancel the show, but Woods did not agree. After unsatisfactory meetings with Baker and Gaynor, Woods went to the New York Supreme Court on May 9, 1910, to get an injunction preventing the police from closing down the play. The judge gave Woods the order he requested, but while it prevented the authorities from interfering with the show directly, it did not compel them to renew the license for the theater. Left with no home for his production, Woods was forced to shut it down.
Notwithstanding the objections from Woods, Gaynor's actions garnered a positive response from the press. A column in The New York Times said his actions were guided by "common sense and good taste".

Reception

The play was "unmercifully damned by the critics", according to theater scholar Gerald Bordman. The Trenton True American described the performances there as "disgustingly vulgar". A brief review of the Broadway opening from The New York Times called it "stupid", although the reviewer found some humor in the performance of supporting player Dallas Welford. Drama critic George Jean Nathan called it "nauseating and ... disgusting in its futile efforts to be risqué".
When the play went on the road after being shut down in New York, the Philadelphia Times declared it "coarse", "vulgar" and not worthy of any "self-respecting person".






