[[Henriette von Schirach]]

CATEGORIES: 1913 births, 1992 deaths, German women writers, Nazis

Henriette "Henny" von Schirach (née Hoffman; February 3, 1913, Munich-Schwabing – January 27, 1992, Schwabing) was a German writer and wife to Baldur von Schirach, former Reich Youth leader and Gauleiter in Vienna. Henriette von Schirach is one of the few people known to have challenged Hitler personally about the persecution of Jews.annefrank.dk/Schirach/

Early life

Henriette Hoffman was the eldest child of the photographer Heinrich Hoffmann and was born to his first wife, Therese "Nelly" Baumann († 1928), a former singer and actress. Along with her brother Henry (b 1916), she spent her childhood in Schwabing. Her house was an early National Socialist stronghold, and in 1920 her father, a nationalist and anti-Semitic DAP member, joined the National Socialist Party. When she was nine years of age she first met Adolf Hitler, who frequently came to the Hoffmann house for dinner. She described a moment when she met him when she was 17:

From 1923 onwards her father became the personal photographer of Hitler and held a lucrative business selling busts of Hitler. By 1930 Henriette Hoffman worked alongside her studies at the University of Munich, as Hitler's secretary. Previous to the suicide of Geli Raubal, Hitler briefly dated Henriette. 218. Soon after in 1931 Henriette met Baldur von Schirach, the former leader of the Nazi Student League and the youngest of Hitler's entourage, the couple married on 31 March 1932 in Munich, where both Adolf Hitler and Ernst Roehm acted as best men.
Between 1933 and 1942, Henriette gave birth to four children: Angelika Benedicta, Klaus, Robert, and Richard. She also became grandmother of Ariadne von Schirach. Henriette identified with the goals of her husband, who held sole control over the educational system of the German Reich. He was appointed by Hitler to the Gauleiter and Reich Governor in Vienna, and moved with his family to the prestigious Vienna Hofburg.

Confrontation of Hitler

In the television programme Hitler's Henchmen (Episode, Corrupter of the Youth, about her husband Baldur Von Schirach) Dr. Henk van Capelle and Dr. Peter van de Bovenkamp tell how Henriette von Schirach in 1943 was invited to the Netherlands by friends in the German occupation forces. A transcript is played in the programme in which she explains "I heard screaming outside the hotel late at night so went out to investigate. I saw Jewish women and children being bundled into transportation to be deported. I then asked a German soldier what they were doing to which he replied, "What Hitler is doing in Holland is wrong, we are making enemies of the Dutch which is a big mistake, make sure you tell him this the next time you visit the Berghof". She went on to say that what she had witnessed in Amsterdam had troubled her deeply.
Henriette broke off her visit to the Netherlands, and telephoned the Berghof to make an appointment with Hitler: "It was a splendid, somewhat sultry fall evening when we joined the regular company by the large open fire at the Berghof. I was still confused and had thought out no plan for the manner in which I would approach Hitler .. Long after midnight Hitler turned to me and asked in a friendly tone: You have just come back from Holland, have you not?" Henriette presumed on her long friendship with Hitler to describe what she had witnessed in Amsterdam: "Although I had already had a double cognac, the moment still came totally unexpectedly. I took a deep breath and answered: Yes, that is why I am here. I wanted to speak to you about some terrible things I saw; I cannot believe that you know about them. Helpless women were being rounded up and driven together to be sent off to a concentration camp and I think that they will never return." "A painful stillness fell; all color had left Hitler's face. His face looked like a death mask in the light of the flames. He looked at me aghast and at the same time surprised and said: We are at war. He very cautiously stood up. At that moment he screamed at me: You are sentimental, Frau von Schirach! You have to learn to hate! What have Jewish women in Holland got to do with you?"
"The rest of the company were quiet as mice. Nobody looked at me. I walked out of the room and once in the vestibule I began to run. One of Hitler's adjutants came running after me. The Führer was furious. I was asked to leave the Obersalzberg immediately."
Henriette von Schirach and her husband were never invited again.annefrank.html
Following the first major American air attack on Vienna, Baldur von Schirach sent his family to Bavaria to the country house Aspen Stone.

After the war

At the end of the war Henriette's husband attempted to avoid capture, posing as a writer ("Dr. Richard Falk"). But he soon decided to surrender to the Americans, doing so in June 1945. He was tried and convicted at Nuremberg, being sentenced on 1 October 1946, for crimes against humanity for his deportation of the Viennese Jews. He served 20 years as a prisoner in Spandau Prison. On 20 July 1949 whilst Baldur von Schirach was imprisoned, Henriette filed for divorce, because of her romantic involvement with Peter Jacob, former husband to German film director Leni Riefenstahl. The divorce was granted a year later in July 1950.
In 1956, there was discussion in the media about the last three Nazi war criminals detained at Spandau, (Rudolf Hess, Albert Speer, and Baldur von Schirach), due to the long time for detention and high cost to the international community to imprison war criminals. Henriette Hoffman von Schirach traveled to London to the British Foreign Secretary Selwyn Lloyd in order to request a reduction of the 20-year prison sentence for her ex-husband. She was unsuccessful. That same year she published her book The Price of Glory.
In 1982, Henriette von Schirach published a book of anecdotes about Hitler, called Frauen um Hitler: Nach Materialien (Women around Hitler: After Materials). Here she describes Hitler as a "cozy Austrian", who "wanted to make himself and others a little bit happy."

Notes




