[[Endocrine system]]

CATEGORIES: Endocrine system

The endocrine system refers to the collection of glands of an organism that secrete hormones directly into the circulatory system to be carried toward a distant target organ. The major endocrine glands include the pineal gland, pituitary gland, pancreas, ovaries, testes, thyroid gland, parathyroid gland, hypothalamus, gastrointestinal tract and adrenal glands.  The endocrine system is in contrast to the exocrine system, which secretes its hormones using ducts. Examples of exocrine glands include the sweat glands, salivary glands, mammary glands, and liver. The endocrine system is an information signal system like the nervous system, yet its effects and mechanism are classifiably different.  The endocrine system's effects are slow to initiate, and prolonged in their response, lasting from a few hours up to weeks.  The nervous system sends information very quickly, and responses are generally short lived.  In vertebrates, the hypothalamus is the neural control center for all endocrine systems. The field of study dealing with the endocrine system and its disorders is endocrinology, a branch of internal medicine.
Special features of endocrine glands are, in general, their ductless nature, their vascularity, and commonly the presence of intracellular vacuoles or granules that store their hormones. In contrast, exocrine glands, such as salivary glands, sweat glands, and glands within the gastrointestinal tract, tend to be much less vascular and have ducts or a hollow lumen.
In addition to the specialised endocrine organs mentioned above, many other organs that are part of other body systems, such as the kidney, liver, heart and gonads, have secondary endocrine functions. For example the kidney secretes endocrine hormones such as erythropoietin and renin.
A number of glands that signal each other in sequence are usually referred to as an axis, for example, the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis.
As opposed to endocrine factors that travel considerably longer distances via the circulatory system, other signaling molecules, such as paracrine factors involved in paracrine signalling diffuse over a relatively short distance.
The word endocrine derives from the Greek words ἐνδο- endo- "inside, within," and κρίνειν krinein "to separate, distinguish".

Endocrine organs and known secreted hormones

Hypothalamus

Pineal body (epiphysis)

Pituitary gland (hypophysis)

The pituitary gland (or hypophysis) is an endocrine gland about the size of a pea and weighing 

=Anterior pituitary lobe (adenohypophysis)=

=Posterior pituitary lobe (neurohypophysis)=

Oxytocin and anti-diuretic hormone are not secreted in the posterior lobe, merely stored.

Thyroid

Alimentary system

=Stomach=

=Duodenum (small intestine)=

=Liver=

=Pancreas=

Pancreas is a mixed endocrine and exocrine gland and it secretes both enzymes and hormones.

Kidney

Adrenal glands

=Adrenal cortex=

=Adrenal medulla=

Reproductive

=Testes=

=Ovarian follicle and corpus luteum=

=Placenta (when pregnant)=

=Uterus (when pregnant)=

Calcium regulation

File:Endocrine caclcium en.svg
File:Calcium regulation.png

=Parathyroid=

=Skin=

Targets

Heart

Bone marrow

=Skeletal muscle=

In 1998 skeletal muscle was identified as an endocrine organ.

Adipose tissue

Diffuse neuro-endocrine system (DNES)

The Diffuse neuro-endocrine system (DNES) comprises hormone-secreted cells, that have commonalities with neurons and are found in the Epithelium of organs of the body.

Major endocrine systems

The human endocrine system consists of several systems that operate via feedback loops. Several important feedback systems are mediated via the hypothalamus and pituitary.

Interaction with immune system

Extensive bidirectional interactions exist between the endocrine system and the immune system.

In other species

A neuroendocrine system has been observed in all animals with a nervous system and all vertebrates have an hypothalamus-pituitary axis.

Diseases

