[[Centre d'Etudes Diplomatiques et Stratégiques]]

CATEGORIES: Postgraduate schools in France

The Center for Diplomatic and Strategic Studies (French: Centre d'Etudes Diplomatiques et Stratégiques, CEDS) is an accredited postgraduate school and a think tank in diplomacy and international relations headquartered in Paris. CEDS is the graduate and doctoral school of the Écoles des hautes études internationales et politiques (HEI-HEP), founded in 1899 by Émile Durkheim, Charles Seignobos, and Romain Rolland. In 1986, Pascal Chaigneau (HEC School of Management and Paris Descartes University),
Initially a non-academic institution reserved to serving diplomats and either generals or senior officers, it also admits commissioned officers at large, executives, and senior civil servants (Hauts fonctionnaires) linked to the diplomatic service. Among others, its Greek branch has educated the commanding officer of the Greek Navy's Frigate Command between him attending the Naval Postgraduate School and the Harvard Kennedy School of Government.

Specific relationship with diplomats

Along with the Institut français, the CEDS is a de facto lever of the French diplomatic influence (Action Française à l'étranger).

Faculty and research

Research

The CEDS edits the peer-reviewed academic journal Enjeux Diplomatiques et Stratégiques. It also publishes a limited number of its students' doctoral thesis as books either independently or via the publishing house l'Harmattan in Paris, in English, in the series "Diplomacy and Strategy".

Faculty

=Military=

The CEDS is formally associated to the French Joint Defence College and the ECOSOC of the United Nations. Among its faculty are antiterrorism and ICTY intelligence expert Raymond Carter, who is also a former alumni of CEDS. Most of the military faculty of the CEDS also comes from the French Institut des hautes études de défense nationale.

=Diplomatic=

Ambassadors Michel Raimbaud (France), Carlos Carrasco (Bolivia), Cristina Aguiar (Dominican Republic), Mickaël Lebedev (Russian Federation), George Ayache (France), former cabinet member Dominique de Villepin,Ayache, G. Chaigneau, P Dictionnaire Biographque des Relations Internationales depuis 1945, Economica 2007 and Patrick Boursin (France) all teach at the CEDS, along with Andrei Gratchev, former spokesperson of Mikhail Gorbachev and member of the World Political Forum.document of the World Political Forum 2004 Confidential lecture at the CHEAR - DGA Ministry of Defense March 10th 2005

Alumni






