[[Hever Castle]]

CATEGORIES: Country houses in Kent, Castles in Kent, Gardens in Kent, Visitor attractions in Kent, Historic house museums in Kent, Astor family, Buildings and structures in Sevenoaks, Grade I listed buildings in Kent, Reportedly haunted locations in England

Hever Castle is located in the village of Hever, Kent, near  Edenbridge,  south-east of London, England. It began as a country house, built in the 13th century. From 1462 to 1539 it was the seat of the Boleyn, originally 'Bullen', family. Discover Britain's historic houses. The Southeast. Pub. Reader's Digest. ISBN 0-276-44068-4. P. 43.
Anne Boleyn, the second queen consort of King Henry VIII of England, spent her early youth there, after her father, Thomas Boleyn had inherited it in 1505. He had been born there in 1477, and the castle passed to him upon the death of his father, Sir William Boleyn. It later came into the possession of King Henry's fourth wife, Anne of Cleves. In the 21st century the castle is a tourist attraction.

History

There have been three main periods in the construction of this historic castle. The oldest part of the castle dates to 1270 and consisted of the gatehouse and a walled bailey. The second period was when the castle, then in need of repair, was converted into a manor in 1462 by Geoffrey Boleyn, younger brother of Thomas Boleyn, Master of Gonville Hall, Cambridge. He added a Tudor dwelling within the walls. The third period of repair and renovation was in the 20th century when it was acquired by William Waldorf Astor. 
Geoffrey's grandson, Thomas Boleyn, inherited the castle in 1505. He lived there with his wife Lady Elizabeth Howard and their children George, Mary and Anne (the future wife of Henry VIII). It is not known if Anne was born at Hever (the year of her birth is not certain) but she lived there until she was sent to the Netherlands in 1513 to receive an education at the court of the Archduchess Margaret.
Henry VIII often used the nearby Bolebroke Castle to conduct his courtship with Anne.  
The property came into the possession of Henry VIII after the death of Anne's father, Thomas Boleyn, in 1539. He bestowed it upon Anne of Cleves in 1540 as part of the settlement following the annulment of their marriage.  Hever Castle still has one of Henry's private locks, taken with him on his various visits to noblemen's houses and fitted to every door for his security. Discover Britain's historic houses. The Southeast. Pub. Reader's Digest. ISBN 0-276-44068-4. P. 45.
The building subsequently passed through various owners, including the Waldegrave family in 1557 and the Meade Waldo family from 1749 to 1903.  During this latter period of ownership the castle fell into a poor state of repair, during which time it was leased to various private tenants. In 1903 it was acquired and restored by the American millionaire William Waldorf Astor, who used it as a family residence. Oxford Dictionary of National Biography, Oxford University Press, 2004; He added the Italian Garden to display his collection of statury and ornaments.
Since 1983 the castle has been owned by Broadland Properties Limited. The estate is now run as a conference centre, but the castle and grounds are open to the public.

Attractions for tourists

Hever Castle is now a tourist attraction, drawing on its links to Anne Boleyn and Henry VIII, its mazes, gardens and lake. There is an annual events programme with assorted events including jousting tournaments and archery displays in the summer months and an annual patchwork and quilting exhibition in September. The castle has also become the venue for a triathlon.
The castle offers three floors containing antique furniture, Anne Boleyn's prayer books, instruments of torture, and a large collection of Tudor paintings. There is also a museum of the Kent Yeomanry. The remains of the original country house timbers can still be seen within the stone walls of the fortification, while the gatehouse is the only original part of the castle.
It has the oldest working original portcullis in England.Hever Castle at Pastscape
The grounds of the castle include a yew maze, planted in 1904. There is also a water maze, opened in 1999, the object of which is to get to the folly at the centre without getting wet, while in the children's adventure playground there is a tower maze. The castle gardens contain a wide range of features including an Italianate garden (including Fernery), rose gardens, a herb garden, and topiary.

Gallery

Image:Hever Castle 12.JPG|Hever Castle
Image:Hever Castle sideview.jpg|Hever Castle - side view
Image:Hever Castle Water Maze.jpg|The water maze
Image:Hever Castle bridge over long lake.JPG|A bridge over the lake
Image:Hever Castle rose garden with fountain.JPG|One of the rose gardens
Image:Statue on Hever Castle Grounds.jpg |Statue in the castle grounds  
Image:Statue2 on Hever Castle Grounds.jpg|Another statue in the castle grounds
Image:Hever Castle cottages near moat.JPG|Cottages near the castle








