[[Gary G. Hamilton]]

CATEGORIES: American television journalists, Guggenheim Fellows

Gary G. Hamilton is an American TV journalist/on-air host & reporter and producer who's worked in news, sports, music and entertainment. He's currently the on-air TV host/reporter for the New York Yankees Scoreboard and broadcasting department. Formerly, he was a digital reporter for Channel One News, a youth-oriented news program broadcast in 8,000 high schools and middle schools across the country, reaching more than six million students daily. He was also a frequent on-air contributing reporter for CBSNews. Mr. Hamilton has also worked for NBC News, CBS News, MTV and Globestar Media/ND Promotions, an entertainment and music video promotions company. He was also a freelance music writer for the popular music website, AllHipHop.com/2008/09/09/chamillionaire-mixtape-messiah-4-mixtape-review/ and had a stint with SONY BMG's Columbia Records.

Biography

Gary G. Hamilton was born and raised in Houston, TX. He's a graduate of North Shore Senior High School. Involved in many different clubs and activities, Gary was the co-anchor for the school's in-house newscast, "Mustang News" which aired directly after Channel One News. Upon graduation, Gary attended Abilene Christian University and received a Bachelor of Science degree in broadcast journalism. After internships with KPRC-TV 2, the local NBC affiliate in Houston, Houston's Majic 102.1, 979 the Box, and BET's 106 and Park, Gary was accepted into NBC's prestigious Page Program.
Gary moved to New York from Houston to join Page Program. While in the program, Gary was offered a job within NBC Universal, so stayed with NBC for another year. After a great experience at NBC, he followed his true love—music—and worked at MTV, followed by Columbia records. At the same time, he was assisting local Houston rapper Mike Jones of Swisha House as Houston's local rap scene exploded onto the national scene.mtv.whatmakesyoustrong.ndpromotions.com.com/2008/04/25/young-jeezy-the-mixtape-monster/
While loving working in music, a great opportunity came about that he couldn't pass up, and he left to join Channel One News, the school newscast he watched every day in middle school and high school, and the same newscast that preceded his anchoring of "Mustang News". Channel One was partnered with NBC News, so he returned to his old stomping ground. Gary was hired as an overnight production assistant, but he knew he was destined to be on-air. After lots of hard work, Gary began reporting hard news, entertainment and human interest stories on-air, as well as producing stories for himself and other reporters. He also hosted hosted Channel One's "Next Big Thing", a weekly entertainment and tech segment. During his time at Channel One News with NBC News, he also worked with the weekend edition of NBC's TODAY. Most notably, helped produce segments for TODAY's coverage of the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing.
Channel One News went on to partner with CBS News, and Gary continued to churn our great news and human interest stories for the teen news network. At the same time, he became a contributing reporter with CBSNews. Gary would dually work with Channel One and CBSNews. Currently, Gary is the on-air host/in-stadium reporter and senior producer for the New York Yankees Broadcasting & Scoreboard department. He also reports on-air and producers for the official website of the New York Yankees.

Recognitions and Notable Works

Gary Hamilton's Channel One News story on African-American inventors in which he reported and produced is now permanently part of an exhibit in the Charles H. Wright Museum of African American History. He's also covered the second inauguration of President Barack Obama, the G-20 Summit, as well as natural disasters like the tornado that struck Henryville, Indiana in 2012, the Texas wildfires of 2011, and the drought that struck mid-western America in 2012.forbes.
Gary has also interviewed numerous celebrities and professional athletes, including Mariano Rivera, CC Sabathia, Curtis Granderson, David Banner, 9th Wonder, Thomas Jones, Angie Stone, Macy Gray, Jaheim, Case, and many, many more.
But his true passion lies in covering human interest stories, and showcasing great works that every day people are doing; People like Stephen Stafford, a kid genius who entered Morehouse College when he was just 11-years-old, Dr. Jennifer A. Mazzotta-Perretti, a New York teacher who donated her kidney to save the life of one of her students, and Lovetta Conto, an oprhan who's parents were killed by rebels in the Liberian country of Africa who now makes jewelry worn by celebrities like Angelina Jolie.




