[[Charlize Theron]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Afrikaner people, Afrikaans-speaking South African people, American female models, American film actresses, American film producers, American humanitarians, American people of Afrikaner descent, American people of Huguenot descent, American people of German descent, American people of Dutch descent, American people of South African descent, American pro-choice activists, American women's rights activists, Animal rights advocates, Best Actress Academy Award winners, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Independent Spirit Award for Best Female Lead winners, LGBT rights activists from South Africa, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Living people, Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Leading Role Screen Actors Guild Award winners, People from Benoni, Silver Bear for Best Actress winners, South African women's rights activists, South African emigrants to the United States, South African female models, South African film actresses, South African film producers, South African humanitarians, South African people of Dutch descent, South African people of German descent, South African people of Huguenot descent, United Nations Messengers of Peace, White South African people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, American television actresses, South African television actresses, HIV/AIDS activists

Charlize Theron (General American pronunciation:  is a South African and American actress, producer, director, and fashion model. She rose to fame in the late 1990s following roles in the films The Devil's Advocate (1997), Mighty Joe Young (1998), and The Cider House Rules (1999). Theron received critical acclaim for her portrayal of serial killer Aileen Wuornos in Monster (2003), for which she won the Silver Bear, Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award, and Academy Award for Best Actress among several other accolades, becoming the first South African to win an Academy Award in a major acting category. In recent years, she has moved into the field of producing, both in television and film.
She received further Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for her performance in North Country in 2005, and a Golden Globe Award nomination for her performance in Young Adult in 2011. In 2012, she appeared in Snow White & the Huntsman and Prometheus, both of which were box office successes. Theron became a U.S. citizen in 2007, while retaining her South African citizenship.

Early life

Theron was born in Benoni, in the then-Transvaal Province of South Africa, the only child of Gerda (née Maritz) She changed the pronunciation when she moved to the U.S. to give it a more "American" sound.
She grew up on her parents' farm in Benoni, near Johannesburg.
Theron attended Putfontein Primary School (Laerskool Putfontein), a period she later characterised as not "fitting in".

Career

Early work

Although seeing herself as a dancer, Theron at 16 won a one-year modeling contract at a local competition in Salerno As Theron recalled in 2008,
At 19, 

Success and hiatus

She starred in four films in 2000 – Reindeer Games, The Yards, The Legend of Bagger Vance and Men of Honor – and was briefly considered a new It girl. Theron has said of this period in her career that, "I kept finding myself in a place where directors would back me but studios didn't. began a love affair with directors, the ones I really, truly admired. I found myself making really bad movies, too. Reindeer Games was not a good movie, but I did it because I loved John Frankenheimer."Johnathan Van Meter (October 2004). Bronzed bombshell. Vogue/Style. Accessed 2008-06-24.
After appearing in other films, Theron starred as serial killer Aileen Wuornos in Monster (2003). Film critic Roger Ebert called it "one of the greatest performances in the history of the cinema".
In 2005, Theron portrayed Rita, Michael Bluth's (Jason Bateman) love interest, on the third season of Fox's critically acclaimed television series Arrested Development.
Theron received Best Actress Academy Award and Golden Globe Award nominations for her lead performance in the drama North Country. Ms. magazine also honoured her for this performance with a feature article in its Fall 2005 issue. She was also supposed to star in a movie adaption of the graphic novel Jinx, but neither project has been produced yet.
In 2008, Theron was named the Hasty Pudding Theatricals Woman of the Year.
In October 2009, Theron was cast to star in a sequel to the Mad Max films, titled Mad Max: Fury Road.
On 4 December 2009, Theron co-presented the draw for the 2010 FIFA World Cup in Cape Town, South Africa, accompanied by several other celebrities of South African nationality or ancestry. During rehearsals she drew an Ireland ball instead of France as a joke at the expense of FIFA, referring to Thierry Henry's handball controversy in the play-off match between France and Ireland.

Recent work

Following a three-year hiatus from the big screen, Theron returned to the spotlight in 2011 with Young Adult. Directed by Jason Reitman, the film earned critical acclaim especially for Theron's performance. She was nominated for a Golden Globe Award and several other high profile awards. Theron played the Wicked Queen in the film Snow White & the Huntsman, which began production in 2011 and was released in 2012.Huffington Post – Charlize Theron to play evil queen in Snow White and the huntsman
In 2011, she described her process for becoming the characters in her film:

In 2012, she starred in Ridley Scott's science fiction film Prometheus. On 7 February 2013 it was announced that Theron was cast as Libby Day, the lead character in the film adaptation of the Gillian Flynn novel Dark Places. The film is to be directed by Gilles Paquet-Brenner, and Theron will also have a producer credit.com

Personal life

Theron has a son, Jackson, whose adoption was announced in March 2012.
In the mid-1990s, Theron had a two-year relationship with actor Craig Bierko.

Health concerns

While filming Aeon Flux in Berlin, Germany, Theron suffered a herniated disc in her neck, caused by a fall while filming a series of back handsprings. This required her to wear a neck brace for a month. When filming The Road, Theron injured her vocal cords during the labour screaming scenes.The Road Region 1 DVD, Special feature: The Making of The Road

Promotional deals

Having signed a deal with John Galliano in 2004, Theron replaced Estonian model Tiiu Kuik as the spokeswoman in the "J'adore" advertisements by Christian Dior.
From October 2005 to December 2006, Theron earned US$3 million for the use of her image in a worldwide print media advertising campaign for Raymond Weil watches.

Activism

The Charlize Theron Africa Outreach Project (CTAOP) was created in 2007 by Charlize Theron, Academy Award winning actor and UN Messenger of Peace, in an effort to support African youth in the fight against HIV/AIDS. CTAOP's mission is to help keep African youth safe from HIV/AIDS. The Project is committed to supporting community-engaged organizations that address the key drivers of the disease. Although the geographic scope of CTAOP is Sub-Saharan Africa, the primary concentration has mostly been Charlize's home country of South Africa. CTAOP's approach is based on the belief that community-based organizations on the ground understand the social and structural relationships of their communities better than anyone. By supporting these organizations through grant giving, networking, and spotlighting their work, CTAOP enables communities to mobilize and empower themselves to prevent HIV.
In December 2009, CTAOP and TOMS Shoes partnered to create a limited edition unisex shoe. The shoe was made from vegan materials and inspired by the African baobab tree, the silhouette of which was embroidered on blue and orange canvas. Ten-thousand pairs were given to destitute children, and a portion of the proceeds went to CTAOP.
Theron is involved in women's rights organisations, and has marched in pro-choice rallies.[ref]

She is a supporter of same-sex marriage and attended a march to support that in Fresno, California, on 30 May 2009.
She is a gay rights activist and refuses to get married until same sex marriage is legal in the United States.

 In a June 2011 interview on Piers Morgan Tonight, she stated


Filmography

Awards and nominations








