[[United States House of Representatives elections in Alabama, 2014]]

CATEGORIES: United States House of Representatives elections, 2014, United States House of Representatives elections in Alabama

The 2014 United States House of Representatives elections in Alabama will be held on Tuesday, November 4, 2014. Voters will elect the 7 U.S. Representatives from the state of Alabama. The elections will coincide with the elections of other offices, including a gubernatorial election. Primary elections will be held on June 3, 2014 for offices that need to nominate candidates. If no candidate wins a majority of the vote, primary runoffs will be held on 15 July, 2014.

District 1

Republican Bradley Byrne won the December 2013 special election held after the resignation of Jo Bonner.

District 2

Republican Martha Roby has represented the district since being elected in 2010. She will face Democrat Erick Wright, the only other candidate to file for the office.

District 3

Republican Mike D. Rogers has represented the district since being elected in 2002. He is being challenged in the Republican primary by Thomas Casson. Democrat Jesse T. Smith is also running.

District 4

Republican Robert Aderholt has represented the district since being elected in 1996. He is being challenged in the Republican primary by Thomas E. Drake II. No Democrat filed for the office.

District 5

Republican Mo Brooks has represented the district since being elected in 2010, after defeating the incumbent, party switching Democrat-turned-Republican Parker Griffith, in the Republican primary. Griffith ran again in the Republican primary in 2012, and Brooks won again. Supporters of Griffith circulated petitions to get Griffith on the ballot as an independent.al.html He considered doing so, but instead rejoined the Democratic Party and is running for Governor. No Democrat filed to run against Brooks, who will face only fellow Republican Jerry Hill.

District 6

Republican incumbent Spencer Bachus, who has represented the 6th district since 1993, is not running for re-election. Also running are Will Brooke, an executive with Harbert; Chad Mathis, an orthopedic surgeon; Gary Palmer, president of the Alabama Policy Institute, a conservative think tank; State Senator Scott Beason, who unsuccessfully challenged Bachus in the primary for the seat in 2012; attorney Robert Shattuck and businessman Tom Vigneulle.
Republicans who declined to run include Bill Armistead, the Chairman of the Alabama Republican Party and a former State Senator; State Senator Slade Blackwell; Greg Canfield, the Secretary of the Alabama Department of Commerce and former State Representative; David Carrington, the President of the Jefferson County Commission; Jefferson County Manager Tony Petelos; Minda Riley Campbell, an attorney and daughter of former Governor Bob Riley; Rob Riley, an attorney and son of former Governor Riley; and State Representative David Standridge, who also unsuccessfully challenged Bachus in the primary for the seat in 2012.
The winner of the Republican primary will face Democrat Avery Vise in November.

District 7

Democrat Terri Sewell has represented the district since being elected in 2010. She will face a primary challenge from former Birmingham City Attorney Tamara Harris Johnson. No Republican filed to run for the office.






