[[Levon Khachigian]]

CATEGORIES: Australian biochemists, Australian medical researchers, Australian people of Armenian descent, People from Sydney, University of New South Wales alumni, University of New South Wales faculty, 1964 births, Living people

Levon Michael Khachigian (born 6 March 1964 in Beirut, Lebanon) is an Australian medical scientist notable for work in vascular cell and molecular biology, cardiovascular pathology, and cancer pathology.

Early life and education

Khachigian was born in Beirut to Armenian parents who were evangelical Protestant missionaries,
Khachigian subsequently obtained a B.Sc. with first-class honours, a Ph.D., and a D.Sc. from the University of New South Wales.

Career

The Khachigian research group developed Dz13, a molecule that targets the master regulator c-Jun, which is implicated in numerous diseases. This development was published in The Lancet.

Honours

Khachigian has served as a President of the Australian Society for Medical Research and of the Australian Vascular Biology Society. He has also been a member of the editorial boards of 12 journals, including American Journal of Pathology and Endothelium. Khachigian has been awarded an Australia Fellowship by the National Health and Medical Research Council, a Commonwealth Health Minister's Award for Excellence in Health and Medical Research, a GlaxoSmithKline Australia Award for Research Excellence, a Gottschalk Award from the Australian Academy of Science, a Eureka Prize for Scientific Research, and a Eureka Prize for Medical Research.

Controversies

2009

In 2009, Khachigian's lab retracted three papers An independent investigation found no evidence of misconduct.
A former scientist in Khachigian's research group Ying Morgan raised concerns with the university. The university appointed an independent panel to investigate these concerns and "there were no findings of research misconduct."

2013

In July 2013, a Dz13 trial was suspended. In an official statement, the University of New South Wales claimed that the more recent allegations are novel, that at each of Khachigian's clinical trials, Kachigian's work has been approved by ethics committees, and that, at each stage, funding bodies have been advised as necessary.
Furthermore, Khachigian, released a statement and reply to questions posed to him. In it, he asserted that, as the matter was under investigation, he could not comment; however, Khachigian maintained that the data is as is and not manipulated and that the allegations were unsubstantiated.






