[[Moana Pozzi]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, 1994 deaths, Cancer deaths in France, Deaths from liver cancer, Italian female pornographic film actors, Italian television personalities, People from Genoa

Anna Moana Rosa Pozzi (; 27 April 1961 – 15 September 1994), best known as Moana Pozzi and Moana, was an Italian pornographic actress, actress, television personality, model, politician and writer.

Early years

Pozzi was born Anna Moana Rosa Pozzi in Genoa, Liguria. Her parents chose her name from a geographic map of Hawaii: it means "where the sea is deepest".  Her father Alfredo Pozzi was a nuclear engineer and he moved around the world with his family for work, and her mother Rosanna was a housewife. As a teen, Moana lived with her family in Canada, then in Brazil. At 13 years old, in 1974, Moana moved back to Italy with her family, where she finished secondary school. When the family had to move again to Lyon, France, she decided to start living independently in Rome around 1980, when she was 19 years old.
In Rome, Pozzi started working as a model and studied acting. Sometimes she performed in TV adverts or as a walk-on in comedy movies. 

Career

In 1986, Pozzi met Riccardo Schicchi, manager of Diva Futura, the agency of the most famous porn stars like Cicciolina. Her first A-movie in hard core was Fantastica Moana, where she used her real name for the first time. She also took part in the famous Curve Deliziose (Delicious Curves) next to Cicciolina others, the first live show in Italy where naked models would masturbate onstage.  

Early 1990s

Pozzi was conscious of her role in show business. 
In 1991, Pozzi published her first book Moana's Philosophy where she listed, with marks from 4 to 9.5, twenty famous celebrities who had been her lovers. The list included actors like Robert De Niro, Harvey Keitel, Roberto Benigni and Massimo Troisi, soccer players like Paulo Roberto Falcão and Marco Tardelli, writers like Luciano De Crescenzo. 
In 1992, Pozzi co-founded, with Hungarian Cicciolina Ilona Staller, the Love Party of Italy, whose political program included legalization of brothels, better sex education and the creation of "love parks". 
Her sister Maria Tamiko "Mima" Pozzi became a porn actress, as well, with the stage name of Baby Pozzi.

Death

In the summer of 1994, Pozzi was ill, unable to eat without vomiting, and losing weight. She took time off and travelled to India with her husband Antonio Di Ciesco and then entered a clinic in Lyon, France. She died on 15 September 1994, at the age of 33. Most reports say that she died of liver cancer.
On the 10th anniversary of her death (2004), new rumours resurfaced and the court of justice of Rome opened a new file to investigate. In December 2005, the Italian TV show Chi l'ha visto? presented for the first time the official death certificate of a Lyon cemetery, recording the exact day of the actress's death. Interviews with the family finally confirmed the circumstances. Her husband Antonio di Ciesco was also interviewed for the first time in 1995. Also shown was the unmarked grave in the "Pozzi" burial plot in Lerma, near Alessandria in Piedmont, northern Italy.
Her brother Simone revealed in February 2006, on the same TV programme, that he was actually her son. Moana's mother confirmed this some time ago. He wrote a book telling his story, which was published in 2006. The book discusses Moana's personality, her differing relations with the other members of her family (especially with her sister Mima), and the course of her illness and death.
On 2 April 2007, Pozzi's husband Antonio Di Ciesco told the newspaper "Il Messaggero" that during her final days, Moana had asked him to speed her death. He claims that he euthanised her by letting air enter her IV, causing an air embolism.

Success

Moana Pozzi performed in about 100 porn movies, mostly in Italy, but also some in Los Angeles with Gerard Damiano as director. She sold about 1 million videotapes. She was on the covers of 50 major magazines, not including pictorials in porn magazines. She was reportedly worth more than 50 billion 1990 Italian liras, about 40 million Euros. Some of her profits were donated posthumously to funding medical research on tumors.
Moana Pozzi inspired the main character of the 1999 film Guardami ("Look at me"); in 2009 a miniseries based on her life was produced, entitled Moana. In 2010, her former manager Riccardo Schicchi produced and directed  I Segreti di Moana ("The Secrets of Moana"), in which the title role was played by Vittoria Risi.

Notes






