[[Saro Tribastone]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 births, Italian musicians, Italian composers, Italian mandolinists, Sicilian composers, People from Ragusa, Sicily, Living people

 
His compositions express sounds of music made of popular Sicilian, Spanish flamenco and Latin rhythms and also echoes ethnic Greek, Arabian and Indian sounds. His style resembles the nuevo flamenco and world music. His passion for music began at the age of 6, when he was given his first acoustic guitar. Since then, he has been continuously perfecting his technique of Flamenco from various lands. At the age of 8, he started making his first short instrumental compositions. In his musical career, he has also composed soundtracks for several documentaries and television. Some of his songs have been used as accompanying music for programs broadcast on satellite TV in the USA over the years. Some choice tracks have been placed in satellite TV programs for the BBC, RAI, Discovery Channel, MTV and The Oprah Winfrey Show. His music also has been featured on The Landscape Channel.
In 2006, his first EP titled Fanusa was released, which contains the songs "Fanusa", a flamenco-derived South American track, "Serenade", inspired from Celtic music, and "Danza de la Luna Nueva", which mixes tango, flamenco and Greek music. Two of his songs, "Eve" and "Bongo Beach", produced together with the English duo Coyote were selected for the Laissez Faire Lounge 2 compilation, produced by ZYX Music as well as many other compilation albums. His latest album is Viento De Siroco, which is full of Mediterranean melodies. Many of his songs are named after places in Italy as a tribute to his homeland. His song "Libertad" features the Middle Eastern drum darabukka accompanying the guitar.
To date Saro has two albums and a single to his credit: The single Salinas (2012), the full length instrumental world collection titled Viento De Siroco (2009) and the EP Fanusa (2006).
In addition, he often performs live together in groups with Sicilian folk musicians. Associated acts include Cordasicula, a Sicilian duo since 2012, which offers original music inspired by the traditional sounds of the Mediterranean, especially in Sicily and southern Italy, wherein vocals and frame drums by Marilena Fede, are intertwined with the melodies played by Saro Tribastone on tzouras, mandolin and swing guitar. Tribastone also performs with the folk music band Faciti Rota from southern Italy. Saro also joined a group called Robasicula in 2007 and has been playing traditional and original popular music from Sicily with them, and currently performs live frequently. He also has art directed some folk music festivals and concerts in Sicily, like Ibla Folk, Abballati Abballati and Il Cuore In Una Barca Di Carta (The Heart In A Paper Boat). 

Discography

Photo Gallery

File:S Tribastone 1.jpg|Saro Tribastone playing the Greek Tzouras
File:S Tribastone 2.jpg|Saro Tribastone playing the Greek Tzouras
File:S Tribastone 3.jpg|Saro Tribastone playing the Greek Tzouras in a live event
File:S Tribastone 4.jpg|Saro Tribastone playing the Italian guitar live
File:S Tribastone 7.jpg|Saro Tribastone performing live
File:Cordasicula 1.jpg|The duo Cordasicula performing live (2013)
File:Cordasicula 2.jpg|The duo Cordasicula performing live in Paris
File:S Tribastone 6.jpg|Saro Tribastone playing the Tzouras on the Mediterranean shore








