[[Conduit (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 albums, English-language albums, Funeral for a Friend albums

Conduit is the sixth studio album by Welsh post-hardcore band Funeral for a Friend. It was released on 28 January 2013 through Distiller Records and 5 February 2013 through The End Records in the United States. This is the band's first release with former Rise to Remain drummer Pat Lundy, who replaced long-term drummer and vocalist Ryan Richards after the material was written

Style

Conduit is described as being more consistently heavy than their previous releases, as they have all varied in style.
The band's new drummer Pat Lundy has summarised the style on the record as "lot heavier and a lot more current" describing Davies' vocals as "exploring more than ever now". Lyrical themes on the album range through several topics, "from the passage of time to the power of advertising to friends dying".
The song 'The Distance' is seen as continuing the album's theme as being "a driving rocker that speaks to making a connection" and has been claimed to feature one of the album's catchiest choruses and guitar licks. 'Best Friends and Hospital Beds' is an example of a song featured on the album that is in critics opinion designed for live shows.
Tracks 'Death Comes To Us All' and 'Grey' have been compared to the "apocalyptic anthems" of their previous album Welcome Home Armageddon.

Title and packaging

Conduit has been described by the other band members as about the experiences of being in a band. For the album art the band recruited Wales-based artist Snowskull, who was revealed to be Matthew Evans, who was a founding vocalist in Funeral for a Friend. Matthew Davies, the band's current vocalist, decided to contact Evans as Davies felt the inclusion of a former member was very apt. Evans also performed backing vocals on track 1, "Spine".

Release and promotion

The first single released from the album was "Best Friends And Hospital Beds". Despite the song being released as a single on 12 November 2012, its music video was released a month prior on 10 October. The music video was directed by Ryan Mackfall and is set in a "bleak and derelict landscape" and has been described as a "28 Days Later style viral infection video".
Conduit was be released through Distiller Records on 28 January 2013 in the United Kingdom and 5 February 2013 through The End Records in the United States.
Two days after its release in the United Kingdom, Conduit appeared on the UK Albums Chart at 16 and ended the week at 34.

Reception

Conduit received generally positive reviews from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalised rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 66, based on 11 reviews, which indicates "generally favorable reviews". Rock Sound writer Ben Patashnik gave the album a 9 out of 10 score praising the band's youthful energy and as being "one of our most treasured bands", summarising his review with "if they can't be the biggest band in the UK any more, this album screams, they might as well go back to being one of the best." The Shields Gazette gave the album a six out of ten commenting on the raw sound of the album: "Many of the melodic touches are gone, and this is a much rawer offering, as if they were just setting out. That works well on the likes of Nails and Sun-Less, but some tracks do sound a bit samey. Not a bad album then, but not their best". Ross Watson of the Scottish publication The Skinny praised the album's "short, lean entirely engaging" punk approach.

Track listing

Music videos

Recording personnel

Chart performance




