[[Eurovision Song Contest 1968]]

CATEGORIES: Eurovision Song Contest by year, 1968 in music, 1968 in London, Events at the Royal Albert Hall, Eurovision Song Contest 1968

The Eurovision Song Contest 1968 was the 13th Eurovision Song Contest. The contest was won by the Spanish song "La, la, la", performed by Massiel.  Originally Spain entered Joan Manuel Serrat to sing "La La La", but his demand to sing in Catalan was an affront to Francoist Spain. Serrat was withdrawn and replaced by Massiel, who sang the same song in Spanish.

Location

Located on the River Thames, London is the capital city of England and the United Kingdom, the largest metropolitan area in the United Kingdom, and the largest urban zone in the Europe by most measures.  London has been a major settlement for two millennia, its history going back to its founding by the Romans, who named it Londinium.
The 1968 venue was the Royal Albert Hall, a concert hall situated on the northern edge of the South Kensington area, in the City of Westminster, London, England, best known for holding the annual summer Proms concerts since 1941.
Since its opening by Queen Victoria in 1871, the world's leading artists from several performance genres have appeared on its stage and it has become one of the UK's most treasured and distinctive buildings. Each year it hosts more than 350 events including classical concerts, rock and pop, ballet and opera, sports, award ceremonies, school and community events, charity performances and banquets.
The hall was originally supposed to have been called The Central Hall of Arts and Sciences, but the name was changed by Queen Victoria to Royal Albert Hall of Arts and Sciences when laying the foundation stone as a dedication to her deceased husband and consort Prince Albert. It forms the practical part of a national memorial to the Prince Consort – the decorative part is the Albert Memorial directly to the north in Kensington Gardens, now separated from the Hall by the road Kensington Gore.

Format

1968 was the first time that the Eurovision Song Contest was broadcast in colour. The countries that broadcast it in colour were France, Germany, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and Sweden; in the United Kingdom it was broadcast as an encore presentation on BBC Two the next day.  Also all of Eastern Europe and Tunisia broadcast the contest.  Katie Boyle hosted the contest for a third time.

Vote rigging allegations

In May 2008, a documentary by Spanish film-maker Montse Fernández Villa, 1968. Yo viví el mayo español, centred on the effects of May 1968 in Francoist Spain,
The documentary claimed that the contest should in fact have been won by the United Kingdom's entry – "Congratulations" performed by Cliff Richard – which finished second by one vote.

Participating countries

There were no withdrawing, returning, or débutantes in the 1968 contest.

Conductors

Each performance had a conductor who maestro the orchestra.

Returning artists

Only one artist returned in this year's contest.  The winner of the 1962 contest, Isabelle Aubret, returned once more for France.

Results

Scoreboard

International broadcasts and voting

The table below shows the order in which votes were cast during the 1968 contest along with the spokesperson who was responsible for announcing the votes for their respective country. Each national broadcaster also sent a commentator to the contest, in order to provide coverage of the contest in their own native language. Details of the commentators and the broadcasting station for which they represented are also included in the table below.

Non-participating countries

Several non-participating countries also decided to broadcast the contest on their respective television stations.






