[[Ms.]]

CATEGORIES: Women's social titles, Honorifics

"Ms" or "Ms." (normally  when unstressed[ref]
 entry "Ms". It may be pronounced with schwa even in stressed situation.[/ref]) is an English honorific used with the last name or full name of a woman, intended as a default form of address for women regardless of their marital status.2. Etymology:  An orthographic and phonetic blend of Mrs n.1 and miss n.2 Compare mizz n. The pronunciation with final /-z/ would appear to have arisen as a result of deliberate attempts to distinguish between this word and miss n.2; compare mizz n., and perhaps also Miz n.1 -- n.: Etymology: Representing the spoken realization of Ms n.2 (see discussion at that entry).  Accessed 2012-07-25 Various plural forms used are "Mss.", "Mses.", and "Mmes."Derived from the traditional French-based plural Mesdames, identical to the form used for "Mrs."

Historical development and revival of the term

"Ms." began to be used as early as the 17th century, along with "Miss" and "Mrs.", as a title derived from the then formal "Mistress", which, like Mister, did not originally indicate marital status.
The earliest known proposal for the modern revival of "Ms." as a title appeared in The Republican of Springfield, Massachusetts on November 10, 1901:

The term was again suggested as a convenience to writers of business letters by such publications as the Bulletin of the American Business Writing Association (1951) and The Simplified Letter, issued by the National Office Management Association (1952).
In 1961, Sheila Michaels attempted to put the term into use when she saw what she thought was a typographical error on the address label of a copy of News & Letters sent to her roommate.
Even several public opponents of "non-sexist language", such as William Safire, were finally convinced that Ms. had earned a place in English by the case of US Congresswoman Geraldine A. Ferraro. Ferraro, a United States vice-presidential candidate in 1984, was a married woman who used her birth surname professionally rather than her husband's ("Zaccaro"). Safire pointed out that it would be equally incorrect to call her "Miss Ferraro" (as she was married), or "Mrs. Ferraro" (as her husband was not "Mr. Ferraro")—and that calling her "Mrs. Zaccaro" would confuse the reader. "On Language: Goodbye Sex, Hello Gender", The New York Times, August 5, 1984, Section 6 p. 8.

Usage

Suggestions about how Ms should be used, or whether it should be used at all, are varied. The American Heritage Book of English Usage states that: "Using Ms. obviates the need for the guesswork involved in figuring out whether to address someone as Mrs. or Miss: you can't go wrong with Ms. Whether the woman you are addressing is married or unmarried, has changed her name or not, Ms. is always correct." The Economist states that it generally uses the title a person adopts, but warns that Ms. is an "ugly" title.economist.com/styleguide/t#node-21532475
The most formally written sections of The Times and The Daily Telegraph, the Court & Social pages, both began to allow Ms in the 1990s, presumably if a woman (generally attending a memorial service or formal dinner) requested to be referred to as such.  The Times Court & Social page has allowed this form of address since 1991, and the equivalent Telegraph page has accepted it since 1995.
Some etiquette writers and famous figures do not support the use of Ms., including Charles Kidd, the current editor of Debrett's Peerage and Baronetage, who claims the usage is "not very helpful" and that he had been "brought up to address a married woman as Mrs John Smith, for example".  The former British Conservative Party MP Ann Widdecombe stated "I can't see the point of Ms and I don't see it as an issue". 
On the other hand, the default use of Ms., especially for business purposes, is championed by some etiquette writers, including Judith Martin (a.k.a. "Miss Manners").

Notes




