[[Ethan Ruby]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, American philanthropists

Ethan Ruby  is President and CEO of Theraplant, LLC.

Early life and education

Ethan Ruby grew up in Massachusetts and received his early education in Rhode Island at the Moses Brown School Ethan grew up around the world of medicine as the son of a pediatrician and a Mental Health Counselor/Physical Therapist.  Both parents, Terry E. Ruby, PhD, and Eric J. Ruby, MD, are strong supporters of Medical Marijuana.tauntongazette. After graduating from the University of Pennsylvania in 1997, where he studied both psychology and business, he moved to New York City where he co-founded a Wall Street trading firm Boo Trading, LLC.

Accident and injury

On November 29, 2000 while crossing a Manhattan street, with the walk light, Ethan Ruby was struck by a driver who ran a red light and hit another car which then hit him, leaving him with no feeling below his chest. He was treated in intensive care for seven weeks, followed by another eight weeks at a rehabilitation facility. He was not able to return to work until nine months after the incident that nearly claimed his life. Ruby is now a T6 paraplegic. He has no feeling below his chest except for persistent pain in his legs.

Philanthropy and charity work

9 years ago Ruby co-founded Poker4Life, which hosts charity poker tournaments for non-profit organizations. As an avid Poker Player, Ruby made it to the finals of the World Poker Tour in 2008 and became the first person in a wheelchair to play professional poker on national television. According to Ruby, "It doesn't matter whether you're crippled or what color you are, or whatever. It all boils down to one mind against another. I'll take those odds any day."6
Ruby is Chief Pedestrian Officer for Citystreets an organization became involved in an effort to make New York City's streets safer for everyone and more accessible for people in wheelchairs. Citystreets has transitioned from pedestrian rights and advocacy to an organization for people-centric urban design and transportation solutions for safer, more livable cities. In August 2013, Citystreets launched a national campaign to reduce road deaths and injuries.
Ruby was a founding partner of Wearable Collections, an organization that helps reduce the estimated 386 million pounds of annual textile waste while raising funds for charitable organizations. Some of the proceeds go to nonprofit organizations like The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis.
In addition, Ruby created a 'pay it forward' program, called 'GiveGoodGet' that's sole purpose is to start cycles of positive energy in communities by rewarding random acts of kindness in an effort to "instill the desire in individuals to help others and to be good citizens."
Ruby sits on several Boards including Community Counseling of Central Connecticut Inc., The Awesome Foundation, and Alexandra Beller/Dances. He is a recipient of the Humanitarian of the Year award from Mt. Sinai, and was the New York City Chairperson for The Miami Project to Cure Paralysis for 5 years. Ruby regularly addresses high school, college and graduate-level classes on the topics of living with spinal cord injury, overcoming adversity and personal motivation, and gave the 2008 commencement address at his alma mater, Moses Brown School.

Wheel Comfort

Ruby has received a patent for a product called Wheel Comfort, a footplate for paraplegics to attach to their wheel chair for more comfort and less damage to the feet.

Medical marijuana

In 2012, Connecticut legalized the use of medical marijuana.  On January 28 Theraplant was named one of the 4 licensed producers for Connecticut.nbcconnecticut.html   They proved to be the top candidate of all 17 applicants, with the highest ranking score according to the Department of Consumer Protection.towntimesnews.txt As the CEO Ruby and company are moving forward to develop their medicinal Marijuana operation in Watertown, CT and look forward to providing much needed medical relief to those in need.rep-am.txt




