[[Yum! Brands]]

CATEGORIES: Yum! Brands, Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Companies based in Louisville, Kentucky, Companies established in 1997, Food companies of the United States, Multinational food companies, Restaurant groups, 1997 establishments in the United States

Yum! Brands, Inc. or Yum! is a United States-based Fortune 500 corporation. Yum! operates four licenses Taco Bell, KFC, Pizza Hut, and WingStreet restaurants worldwide. Prior to 2011, Yum! also owned Long John Silver's and A&W Restaurants.
Based in Louisville, Kentucky, it is the world's largest fast food restaurant company in terms of system units—more than 40,000 restaurants around the world in over 125 countries.yum.

History

Tricon Global

Yum! was created on May 30, 1997,, with notable exceptions the contracts of franchisees such as HMSHost and college-operated Pizza Hut locations with Coca-Cola products that override Yum's lifetime PepsiCo contract, along with some scattered KFC franchises across the United States which continue to maintain Coke fountain rights.

Expansion

In March 2002, Tricon announced the acquisition of Lexington, Kentucky-based Yorkshire Global Restaurants, owner of the Long John Silver's and A&W Restaurants chains and its intention to change the company's name to Yum! Brands, Inc. On May 16, 2002, the name change became effective after a vote during the company's annual shareholders meeting, and on June 17, 2002, Yum! executed a two-for-one stock split. Shortly afterwards, due to Yum!'s lifetime contract with Pepsi, Long John Silver's and A&W Restaurants (both of which previously served Coca-Cola products) began switching to Pepsi products, with A&W retaining A&W Root Beer from a separate deal with Dr Pepper Snapple Group.
In 2003, Yum! launched WingStreet as a hybrid combo unit with an existing Pizza Hut franchise.

International growth

In January 2011, Yum! announced its intentions to divest itself of its Long John Silver's and A&W brands to focus on its core brands of KFC, Pizza Hut and Taco Bell. For the decade leading up to the company's announcement, major growth had relied on international expansion. With little presence outside North America, the two chains no longer fit in the company's long-term growth plans. Yum! Brands had originally purchased the parent company of Long John Silver's and A&W brands in 2003 for $320 million.
In May 2011, Yum! agreed to purchase mainland Chinese hot pot chain Little Sheep for HK$4.56 billion.thechinaperspective. The Ministry approved the deal in November 2011, according to Little Sheep representatives.thechinaperspective.com/articles/chinacorporaten-8897/
In 2012, KFC was the first American fast food restaurant to operate in the West Bank; it opened in Ramallah; a Pizza Hut is also planned.American fried chicken comes to the Palestinian territories, Los Angeles Times, 04-02-2012, access date 20-02-2012
In 2013, a few KFC locations in China supplied chicken found to contain "excess levels of chemical residue". Yum! has lost 6% of sales from publicity in China as of January 25.
The company opened its first restaurant in Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia in May, 2013. For Mongolia, KFC is the first western fast food to open its doors in the country. The company is planning to open 15 more restaurants in Ulaanbaatar in the next 5 years, including the country's first drive-thru service.
Yum Brands also has opened Taco Bell and Pizza Hut restaurants in newer Target stores.
Yum! Brands opened its 40,000th store in Calangute, Goa, India in October 2013.

Corporate

The current chairman and chief executive officer of Yum! Brands is David C. Novak. He is also a member of the Yum! executive/finance committee.
Since 2006, Yum! Brands has served as the corporate sponsor of the Kentucky Derby.Kentucky Derby including Yum Brands in its name – May 5, 2006

Brands

Current

Former



Notes




