[[Arnaud Tsamere]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, 21st-century French male actors, French comedians, French male film actors, French humorists, French people of Breton descent, French male stage actors, French male television actors, French television personalities, French television writers, People from Bordeaux

Arnaud Tsedri (born 11 March 1975), better known by the stage name Arnaud Tsamere (; sometimes written with a grave accent as Arnaud Tsamère), is a French comedian, actor and television presenter. He is primarily known for his appearances on France 2's sketch comedy show On n'demande qu'à en rire, as well as playing Captain Sport Extrême in the comedy science fiction programme Hero Corp.
After quitting his sales job, he joined the Déclic Théâtre group, where he acted in plays and participated in improvisation events. He wrote his first one-man show, Réflexions profondes sur pas mal de trucs, in 2002 with Arnaud Joyet, and his second, Chose Promise, in 2007 with Joyet and François Rollin. He has attended comedy festivals in Montreux, Avignon and Puy-Saint-Vincent, and is currently a member of the Ligue Majeure d'Improvisation.

Early life

Tsamere's paternal grandparents are from Guipavas, and his father is Breton. Une éducation rigoureuse is rendered here as "a strict upbringing".
Speaking about his early life and its relation to his surreal comic style, Tsamere said:
 I grew up in a very comfortable environment. I wanted for nothing; serious things never happened to me in life. I have never been a victim of injustice, so I have nothing to protest. I don't have any particular origins which would be interesting to talk about. ... So, I do absurd stuff because I don't want to talk about other things. 
After getting his baccalauréat, he studied law at university, where he discovered an improvisational match in his first year and "fell in love" with the performance. In 1998, he obtained a master's degree in business law and later got a job working in export sales. However, he realised that he "could no longer live without the stage", and on the advice of his friend Arnaud Joyet and Déclic Théâtre co-founder Alain Degois, quit his job and launched his career as a comedian.

Career

Theatre, improvisation and stand up

After quitting his previous job, Tsamere took part in the Déclic Théâtre improvisation group under its co-founder Alain "Papy" Degois, whom he said "pushed me, gave me confidence, coddled me and got me to act in plays and improvisation matches". Between 2003 and 2005, he played the baron Christian de Neuvillette in an adaptation of Cyrano de Bergerac at the Château de Gizeux with the theatre group La Pastière, which he was introduced to by Degois.
He began writing his first one-man stand-up comedy show in 2002 with his friend Arnaud Joyet, inspired by a videotape of comedian François Rollin. The show, entitled Réflexions profondes sur pas mal de trucs ("Profound Reflections on Quite a Few Things"), played on theatrical "flops", a form of humour that Tsamere said "can seem easy but isn't". It was performed at the Blancs Manteaux theatre from April 2005 to January 2006.
Tsamere met Rollin at the Dinard Comedy Festival, and he joined Tsamere and Joyet to write a second show, Chose Promise ("Promised Thing"). In it, Tsamere plays a secondary school economics teacher named Patrice Valenton, performing as part of a promise made to a friend who died in a car accident.
Tsamere has attended comedy festivals such as the Montreux Comedy Festival,
He is now part of the Ligue Majeure d'Improvisation.

Television and radio

In 2005, with the help of Frédéric Testot, whom he met at a Puy-Saint-Vincent comedy festival, Tsamere got the job of presenting the weather forecast in Le Grand Journal on Canal+. He also appeared in Canal+'s SAV des émissions, which Tsamere has described as "nothing pornographic or erotic. It was a serious series of documentaries." He says he was asked after Frédérique Bel refused, because he was "probably the only one liable to accept".
In 2007 Tsamere met Simon Astier during the recording of the M6 show Off Prime. He was given the role of Captain Sport Extrême in Astier's comedy science fiction programme, Hero Corp, which is broadcast on France 4. He only appeared in one episode of the first series, but more frequently in the second. He also said "I've loved this character. I love playing crackpots."
In 2010 he participated in the sketch comedy talent show On n'demande qu'à en rire, created and presented by Laurent Ruquier and broadcast on France 2. Ruquier asked him to do so after he saw Tsamere in Monique est demandée caisse 12 and Le Comique. He already knew all of the original participants, except for Nicole Ferroni, whom he discovered at a comedy festival in Puy-Saint-Vincent in January 2011.
In September 2011, Tsamere appeared with On n'demande qu'à en rire colleague Jérémy Ferrari in two editions of Ruquier's late-night talk show On n'est pas couché—however, in what would have been their third week, they decided to quit the show as they thought that "our duo was not the right formula to succeed Jonathan their predecessor", as well as to concentrate on their "solo projects".
He has also appeared on various game shows, including Mot de passe

Film

In 2011, Tsamere's first film role was Séverin in Charles Nemes' Au bistro du coin. In the same year, he appeared in Pascale Pouzadoux's La Croisière, and in the short films Le Métro (directed by Dianeïa Schaefer) and Deal (Wilfried Méance).
Tsamere played the character of Vincent in Arnaud Demanche's short film Being Homer Simpson, in which he appeared alongside Philippe Peythieu and Véronique Augereau, the voice actors of Homer and Marge respectively in the French dub of the animated series The Simpsons.

Influences

On his website, Tsamere provides a link to that of François Rollin, as well as to that of English comedian Ricky Gervais, whom he calls "my absolute master". Other role models of his are the brothers Simon and Alexandre Astier—he says of them and Gervais that he "could watch them perform anything". He has stated that his favourite director is Tim Burton, linking this to his surreal style.

Personal life

Tsamere is a cycling enthusiast, and has written several columns about sport for the newspaper Le Monde,
He enjoys romantic comedy films, of which his favourites are Pretty Woman and Notting Hill. Tsamere's favourite television programme is the Belgian documentary series Strip-Tease, and he describes himself as "a real TV addict" (téléphage). He also likes Grey's Anatomy, and Hero Corp, in which he appears—he says he is "not ashamed" to watch himself. He has read Une Vie by Guy de Maupassant, which he described as "so beautiful", and the biography of Apple Inc. founder Steve Jobs, which he said is "the story of an incredible life".

Credits

Film

Short films

Television

=Non-fictional appearances=

Radio

Theatre



General

Specific




