[[Typhoon Utor]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 Pacific typhoon season, 2013 disasters in the Philippines, Typhoons in the Philippines, 2013 disasters in China, Typhoons in China, Typhoons in Hong Kong, Retired Pacific typhoons




Typhoon Utor (international designation: 1311, JTWC designation: 11W, PAGASA name: Labuyo, VNCHMF designation: Bão số 7), is the 15th depression and the 2nd typhoon in the 2013 typhoon season.
It was a powerful tropical cyclone which struck the Philippines and southern China. Developing into a tropical storm on August 9, Utor soon underwent explosive intensification and became a typhoon within a half of day. After making landfall over Luzon late on August 11, the typhoon re-emerged in the South China Sea, and it ultimately made its second landfall over Guangdong, China on August 14.

Meteorological history

Early on August 8, the Joint Typhoon Warning Center (JTWC) reported that a tropical disturbance had developed north of Yap.
On August 11, under the influence of low vertical wind shear, very favourable poleward and westward outflow, and warm sea surface temperature, Utor began to intensify more and formed a clear eye.
Owing to peaks of western Luzon, Utor significantly weakened as the deep convection became disorganised. Early on August 12, Utor arrived at the South China Sea, where the environment southwest of an anticyclone was favourable with diffluence aloft, light vertical wind shear and excellent radial outflow. Later, Utor weakened into a tropical storm overland, and JMA downgraded the system into a tropical depression at noon on August 15. However, the remnants began tracking very slowly in Guangxi, until the tropical depression finally dissipated on August 18.

Preparations and impact

Philippines

Ahead of Utor affecting the Philippines, PAGASA issued various tropical cyclone signals for Luzon and Visayas, including signal 3 for the provinces of Aurora and Isabela and signal 1 for Metro Manila.

Utor made its landfall in Casiguran, Aurora at 3 AM (local time) on August 12. Power lines and telecommunications went down and many houses were destroyed.
Throughout the Philippines, at least ten people were killed while four others were listed as missing. A total of 398,813 people were affected by the typhoon, roughly a third of whom were displaced from their homes. Significant infrastructural damage took place with 2,565 homes destroyed and 18,090 more damaged. Losses from Utor amounted to ₱1.08 billion (US$24.8 million), the majority resulting from agricultural damage.

China

The  Chinese bulk carrier Trans Summer sank some 
Widespread damage took place in Guangdong Province where at least four people were killed and four others were listed missing. An estimated 109 million people were affected, 16.15 million of whom were temporarily relocated due to the threat of flooding. Typhoon-force winds caused a belt factory in Dongguan to collapse, killing 1 person and injuring 17 others.
Following the storm, prices of vegetables were raised by an average of one percent in Guangzhou, while the price of leafy vegetables were raised by as much as 15 percent.
Retirement==	
PAGASA announced that the name Labuyo, would be retired from its naming lists after it had caused over  PAGASA chose the name Lannie to replace Labuyo.








