[[Salvatore Calderone]]

CATEGORIES: 1876 births, 1929 deaths

Salvatore Calderone (1876–1929) was an early American movie theatre magnate and founder of the Calderone chain of theatres located on Long Island, New York.  He was noted as being the "Master Showman of Nassau County."Justa Nuther, Just Some More, Hempstead Sentinel, July 27, 1933

Early life

Calderone was born in Sicily, Italy and came to America in 1893 to work as a newspaperman.  He was employed first by the New Orleans newspaper, The Picayune, and six years later in 1899 came to New York City to work for the newspaper, Il Progresso.  During this period of his life he was also known as having an interest in a California fruit producing enterprise. Calderone, Theatre Magnate, The Hempstead Sentinel, February 14, 1929; and S. Calderone Dies, Owner of Theatres, New York Times, February 11, 1929

Entry into the Theatre Business

He became interested in the theatre business, and in 1907 partnered with his brother to acquire and manage the first of a number of theatres located in the lower part of Manhattan.  In 1910 his theatre located at 331 Bowery was badly damaged in a fire that broke out in the upper floors of the building it occupied.Church Rites Held for S. Calderone, Theatre Magnate, The Hempstead Sentinel, February 14, 1929

Expansion

Not long after the war began in 1914, Calderone decided to leave New York City, and came to Hempstead, located in Nassau County, Long Island, where he acquired the Strand Theatre, located on Front Street.  This new enterprise prospered under his management and he soon decided that Hempstead and the surrounding villages of that part of Long Island retained great promise for an expansion of the movie theatre business.  Along with other prominent individuals he formed a corporation named the "Calderone Corporation" that built the first big movie house, named the Hempstead Theatre, which was built c. 1920.
Like so many other theatre owners and managers, Calderone was in favor of allowing his theatres to open up for showings on Sunday, which was against the law in New York State in the 1920s.  He, along with several other Long Island theater owners, were indicted for breaking the law and showing movies or theatrical performances on a Sunday during the spring of 1923.  A few years later, local municipalities on Long Island began using their power to let theatres show movies on Sundays - which was allowable under the parameters of the state law.  Calderone's St. James Theatre, located in St. James, Suffolk County, Long Island, began showing films on Sundays in 1930.Port Jefferson Echo, May 15, 1930 & July 24, 1931
By 1927, the Calderone chain operated more than half-a-dozen theatres in Nassau County, including two in Hempstead, one in Lynbrook, one in Valley Stream, one in Glen Cove, one in Westbury, and one in Mineola.  Calderone soon became "...a powerful figure in the theatrical field...," and acted as the guiding hand behind the chain.  During the late summer of 1927 unionized workers threatened to strike against Calderone if they did not receive higher wages, while other nearby theater owners agreed to the unions demands, Calderone refused, and the strike ensued.L.I. Stage Hands Win Wage Boost on Strike Threat, Brooklyn Daily Eagle, August 31, 1927; and Ruling Frees Jailed Striker, Brooklyn Daily Eagle, December 13, 1928  From late 1928 through early 1929, Calderone entered into negotiations to sell his five large Nassau County theatres to the Fox Theatres Corporation.  The negotiated price was said to have been $3 million.

Movies vs. Vaudeville

During the period of Salvatore Calderone's management of his theatre chain (called during his day the 'Calderone Theatre Circuit') he aggressively promoted films and vaudeville acts.  Each of his theatres could accommodate both genres, and allowed Calderone to offer an immense variety of acts.  Nearly every act would be booked across one or more theatres in the chain, moving from one community to another, as was noted in many advertisements during the 1920s.  African American performers, who were usually part of revues or cabarets, were featured regularly." Rivoli Theatre Advertisement, Hempstead Sentinel, April 1, 1926

Death

Salvatore Calderone had been having health problems before he suffered a heart attack in the early morning of Sunday, February 10, 1929 at his home at 80 Terrace Avenue, Hempstead, Long Island.  Dr. Benjamin Seaman was called to the home where Calderone died at 5:30 in the morning surrounded by his family.  At the time of his death local newspapers remarked "His life is an example of what can be accomplished by those who come to America from other places.  It shows that opportunities are always here for those who are ready to seize them.Chain Movie Builder of Nassau Dead, Long Island Daily Press, February 11, 1929; and Hempstead Sentinel, February 14, 1929
His funeral service was held at Our Lady of Loretto on Greenwich Street in Hempstead on Tuesday, February 12, 1929, followed by burial at Calvary Cemetery.  His immediate survivors included his wife, Rosario Calderone, and sons Frank (who helped run the chain), Roy, and Anthony.  While his death announcement notes Calderone was buried in Calvary Cemetery, at some point his body was removed to Greenfield Cemetery, located in Uniondale, Nassau County, Long Island, New York, where he was re-interred in an elegant mausoleum.findagrave.cgi?page=gr&GSln=CAL&GSpartial=1&GSbyrel=all&GSst=36&GScntry=4&GSsr=1241&GRid=45648496&

Legacy

While many sources indicate the Calderone chain was sold to Fox in 1929, it appears that Salvatore Calderone's death put an end to that plan as the theatre chain remained in operation for many years after his death.  His son, Dr. Frank A. Calderone (1901 - 1987), who was an expert on preventive medicine and a leading early figure in the World Health Organization, continued to operate many of the theatres created by his father until around 1980.1920-1990,  Frank A. Calderone, New York Times, February 24, 1987  In addition to those located in Nassau County, the company also owned and operated theatres in neighboring Suffolk County.
During Salvatore Calderone's life, the company built and managed most of its theatres.  After his death, the company appears to have begun leasing out the theatres to other management chains, as Frank Calderone left the management of the company to others and did not return to an active role until 1954.Dr. Frank A. Calderone, New York Times, February 24, 1987 According to Rob Boehm of cinematreasures.  The Valley Stream and Lynbrook by Century.  UA succeeded Skouras and Century folded.  The Valley Stream operated as the Rio for a time before it was demolished.  The Lynbrook went over to UA."Email correspondence with Rob Boehm of cinematreasures.org, August 2013

Calderone Theatre & Concert Hall

The chain opened one of their most expensive theatres in June 1949 in Hempstead, Long Island.  Named the "Calderone Theatre," it was designed by William Lescaze (1896–1969) one of the pioneers of modernism in American architecture and cost $2 million and seated 2,500 people.  At the time of its dedication, a plaque was erected in the new theatre honoring Salavatore Calderone and his work in founding the chain that bore his name.$2,000,000 Theater Opens in Hempstead, Brooklyn Daily Eagle, June 1949  The Calderone Theatre eventually was divided into a 7 screen multiplex before it became the Calderone Concert Hall, which required the installation of a stage as it was the only Calderone theatre not to have one at the outset.  Due to its fine acoustics, it was sought after as a performance venue for leading bands and musicians.  The Calderone family sold the hall in 1982 to Rana Management who planned to renovate the building. and /

Theatre Locations 1907 - 1949




