[[Peter Staley]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, Oberlin College alumni, HIV/AIDS activists, American health activists, People with HIV/AIDS, LGBT rights activists from the United States

Peter Staley is an American HIV/AIDS-LGBT rights activist, known for founding the Treatment Action Group (TAG) and the educational website AIDSmeds. He is a primary figure in the Oscar-nominated documentary How to Survive a Plague.

Early life and education

Staley was born in Sacramento, California in 1961, the third of four children. His father was a plant manager for Procter & Gamble at the time, and his family moved throughout the US until he was eight years old, when his family moved to Berwyn, Pennsylvania after his father was hired to run the PQ Corporation, based in Philadelphia.

Involvement with ACT UP

Staley was diagnosed with AIDS-Related Complex (ARC) in 1985, after seeing a doctor for a persistent cold.
On April 25, 1989, Staley and three other activists barricaded themselves in an office at Burroughs Wellcome in Research Triangle Park, NC to protest the price of AZT (at the time priced at $8,000-$10,000 per year).
On September 14, 1989, Staley and six other activists staged another demonstration to protest the rising cost of AZT, this time in the New York Stock Exchange.
In 1989, he was part of a group that stormed the Fifth International AIDS Conference in Montreal, at the time a members-only event for doctors and HIV/AIDS researchers.

Involvement with TAG

In 1991, Staley founded an ACT UP activist affiliate called TAG (which originally stood for Treatment Action Guerrillas, and later Treatment Action Group).
TAG broke away from ACT UP to focus on protesting government agencies on working for faster drug solutions through more coordinated AIDS research efforts.

amfAR

From 1991-2004, Staley served on the board for amfAR (the Foundation for AIDS Research).[ref]
</ref> In October 2000, he was honored by the organization as the recipient of their Award of Courage.<ref></ref>

AIDSmeds.com

In 1999, Staley founded AIDSmeds."

Ad campaign against crystal meth

In 2004, Staley funded and launched an ad campaign in New York, warning of the link between crystal meth use and HIV in gay and bisexual men.

How to Survive a Plague

Staley features prominently in the 2012 documentary How to Survive a Plague, which depicts the early years of the AIDS epidemic and the actions of ACT UP and TAG.






