[[Pallathadka Keshava Bhat]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, Indian botanists, University of Madras alumni, People from Kasaragod district, People from Udupi, People from Cumaná, 1940 births, 2010 deaths

Pallathadka Keshava Bhat (3 January 1940 - 25 July 2010) (also known as Dr. P. Keshava Bhat) was a retired professor, prominent ethnobotanist, botanist, naturalist, proponent of herbalism, scientist and a well known personality in Venezuela.India.India.grassrootinnovations.pdf[ref]
 [/ref] ಮರೆಯಲಾಗದ್ದ ಮಹಾನ್ ಸಸ್ಯಶಾಸ್ತ್ರಜ್ಞ ಡಾ.ಪಳ್ಳತ್ತಡ್ಕ ಕೇಶವ ಭಟ್ | Oppanna : ಒಪ್ಪಣ್ಣನ ಬೈಲಿನ ಒಪ್ಪಂಗೊ ಪಾಠ ಪುಸ್ತಕಲ್ಲಿ 'ಪಳ್ಳತ್ತಡ್ಕ ಕೇಶವ ಮಾವ' | Oppanna : ಒಪ್ಪಣ್ಣನ ಬೈಲಿನ ಒಪ್ಪಂಗೊ 

Early life

He was born in Pallathadka, Kerala, India on January 3, 1940 to Pallathadka Subraya Bhat and Lakshmi Amma in a Havyaka Brahmin family. He married Devaki and the couple had four children, all born in Cumana, Venezuela. After retirement he lived with his family at Manipal, Karnataka in India.
He Graduated from the University of Madras in B.Sc and Ph.D in Botany. He has also worked as a Research Assistant in the Presidency College, Chennai (Earlier Madras)
(1966-1968) and obtained the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
(C.S.I.R) senior fellowship in 1968-1969. He could speak in 17 languages which include Spanish, Sanskrit, Kannada, German, French etc.


Career

He taught Botany for both under graduate and post graduate students at Universidad de Oriente, in Cumana, Venezuela and retired in 1987 as a Senior Professor of Botany.
He was a Botanist who advocated holistic living and alternate scientific approach. He has also suggested "A New Interpretation of Solar System".
Curriculum vitae of Dr. Pallathadka Keshava Bhat | Free Energy And Free ThinkingThe Helical Model - Our solar system is a vortex!!!, page 1The end of the academic, helio-centric "clock work face" orbit theory?The Vortex Solar System ! | Lightworkers. Pallathadka Keshava Bhat and Walter Russell | MoonThe New Interpretation of our Solar System - Esoteric OnlineThe vortex motion of our SunsGoodies // Random Awesomeness I Encounter » Blog Archive » The Helical Model of the Solar System (is probably crap)The helical model - our solar system is a vortex | The Monroe InstituteVedic Science: New interpretation of Solar system by an Indian scientistMisterPerfect : Dr. Bhat & The Helical Model | Weather UndergroundCataclysmic Turning Of 'The Great Solar Serpent' Close Helix: Solar System a Dynamic Process (Agora1Society.pateo.pdfAstronomy & Related Mythology | Lightworkers. He extensively propagated consuming simple food and simple living in several countries like Venezuela, Peru, Colombia, Brazil, Bolivia, Mexico, Dominican Republic, Puerto Rico etc.
In 1990 he was elected to a Global Expert Committee on Medicinal Plants of developing countries during the First
International Convention of South with colleagues in the field, in Tanzania in 1990. The event was sponsored by the World Health Organization, the South Commission and the Government of Tanzania, among others. He also had a participation in the Earth Summit held in Brazil in June 1992 and at the World Conference on Food and Nutrition, held in Rome in December 1992. 

Naturism

Bhat was an ethnobotanist committed to promote the authentic naturism: a simple way to live better. He strongly advocated that the solution to health problems, especially in tropical countries, is possible by a proper education to learn to live and implementing a preventive health plan, which results in an overall change in the lifestyle. 
He revolutionized theories in the field of medicine as Grandma's Law, the Law of Savings and hanged and embryogenesis (formation of the fetus with their respective energy components). 
In South America, he is better known and recognized as the padre-del-tropical-naturismo (Father of Tropical Naturism).  
He advocated native food and spread the message of simple food and his method was recognized as "naturism". Respecting water, wind, plant and animals was part of his naturism and eating simple food, following simple way of life were the messages of his naturism. 






