[[Candida Baker]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, Living people

Candida Baker (born 1955) is an Australian author, photographer, journalist and natural horsemanship practitioner. She was born in England and moved to Australia in 1977.

Biography

Baker was born into a literary and theatrical family; her grandfather, J. C. Squire, and subsequently moved to Australia in 1977.

Career

In 1982 Baker embarked on a ten-year writing project, interviewing 36 Australian writers for her Yacker - Australian Writers Talk About Their Work series, published by Picador
In 1988, The Age newspaper offered Baker a position as a features writer based in Sydney, a position she held for seven years.  Between 1986 and 1999 Yacker 1, 2, and 3, were all published, and Baker's first novel, Women and Horses, was a runner-up in the prestigious Vogel Australian Literary Awards in 1990. Tracey Hordern, 'Incoming Writers Festival director', The Northern Star, 31 July 2010. It was published in Australia by Picador, and in the U.S as a hardback by St. Martin's Press.
In 1994 Baker's book of short stories, The Powerful Owl, was also published by Picador.
In 2000 Baker's second novel, The Hidden, was published by Knopf, and included Baker's own photographs – a theme she would continue later in her anthologies. In 2001 Baker left News Ltd and moved out from Sydney to the Byron Bay hinterland where she continues to write articles and books.  many of them published by Allen & Unwin.
Baker was appointed Director of the 2011 Byron Bay Writers' Festival, and director of the Northern Rivers Writers' Centre. Guests for the Festival included John Pilger, Louis de Bernières and Paul Kelly.
She currently writes an occasional column for Wendy Harmer's online magazine The Hoopla, and a fortnightly column for The Northern Star entitled Candidly Speaking.
During the course of her career Baker has also contributed to numerous anthologies, and also edited The Penguin Book of the Horse. She has written two children's books, The Little Angels Counting Book and I Know That.

Personal life

Candida Baker is the eldest daughter of English actor George Baker MBE. Born in London and raised in the small hamlet of Rousham in Oxfordshire, Baker immigrated to Australia when she was 22 after covering the London-to-Sydney car rally. She lived with and later married the respected Australian writer and journalist Robert Drewe whom she met when they were both working at Australian Consolidated Press. Baker and Drewe were together for 25 years, and had two children before moving to the North Coast of New South Wales. Drewe and Baker's marriage has now ended.Janet Hawley "One man's island", Sydney Morning Herald, 22 September 2012 
Baker is currently undertaking a MA in art history with the University of Adelaide and the Art Gallery of South Australia.






