[[Human gastrointestinal tract]]

CATEGORIES: Abdomen, Digestive system, Endocrine system, Routes of administration

The human gastrointestinal tract (GI tract) is an organ system responsible for consuming and digesting foodstuffs, absorbing nutrients, and expelling waste.
The tract is commonly defined as the stomach and intestine, and is divided into the upper and lower gastrointestinal tracts. The tract may also be divided into foregut, midgut, and hindgut, reflecting the embryological origin of each segment.
The whole digestive tract is about nine metres long.
The GI tract releases hormones to help regulate the digestive process. These hormones, including gastrin, secretin, cholecystokinin, and ghrelin, are mediated through either intracrine or autocrine mechanisms, indicating that the cells releasing these hormones are conserved structures throughout evolution. 2005. Introduction to Behavioral Endocrinology. Sinauer Associates: Massachusetts. p 57.

Structure

The structure and function can be described both as gross anatomy and as microscopic anatomy or histology. The tract itself is divided into upper and lower tracts, and the intestines small and large parts.

Upper gastrointestinal tract

The upper gastrointestinal tract consists of the esophagus, stomach, and duodenum.
The exact demarcation between the upper and lower tracts is the suspensory ligament of the duodenum (also known as the Ligament of Treitz). This delineates the embryonic borders between the foregut and midgut, and is also the division commonly used by clinicians to describe gastrointestinal bleeding as being of "upper" or "lower" origin. Upon dissection, the duodenum may appear to be a unified organ, but it is divided into four segments based upon function, location, and internal anatomy. The four segments of the duodenum are as follows (starting at the stomach, and moving toward the jejunum): bulb, descending, horizontal, and ascending. The suspensory ligament attaches the superior border of the ascending duodenum to the diaphragm.
The suspensory muscle of duodenum is an important anatomical landmark which shows  the formal division between the duodenum and the jejunum, the first and second parts of the small intestine, respectively.

Lower gastrointestinal tract

The lower gastrointestinal tract includes most of the small intestine and all of the large intestine.

=Small Intestine=

The small intestine begins at the duodenum, which receives food from the stomach. It is a tubular structure, usually between 5.5 and 6 m long. Its main function is to absorb the products of digestion (including carbohydrates, proteins, lipids, and vitamins) into the bloodstream. It has three major divisions:

=Large Intestine=

The large intestine consists of the cecum, colon, rectum, and anal canal. It also includes the vermiform appendix, which is attached to the cecum. The colon is further divided into:
The main function of the large intestine is to absorb water.

Development

The gut is an endoderm-derived structure. At approximately the sixteenth day of human development, the embryo begins to fold ventrally (with the embryo's ventral surface becoming concave) in two directions: the sides of the embryo fold in on each other and the head and tail fold toward one another. The result is that a piece of the yolk sac, an endoderm-lined structure in contact with the ventral aspect of the embryo, begins to be pinched off to become the primitive gut. The yolk sac remains connected to the gut tube via the vitelline duct. Usually this structure regresses during development; in cases where it does not, it is known as Meckel's diverticulum.
During fetal life, the primitive gut can be divided into three segments: foregut, midgut, and hindgut. Although these terms are often used in reference to segments of the primitive gut, they are also used regularly to describe components of the definitive gut as well.
Each segment of the gut gives rise to specific gut and gut-related structures in later development. Components derived from the gut proper, including the stomach and colon, develop as swellings or dilatations  namy cells of the primitive gut. In contrast, gut-related derivatives — that is, those structures that derive from the primitive gut but are not part of the gut proper, in general develop as out-pouchings of the primitive gut. The blood vessels supplying these structures remain constant throughout development.

Histology

