[[Jesse Benton]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Living people, Kentucky Republicans

Jesse Benton is a political consultant and libertarian activist known for working with conservative and libertarian organizations like Americans for Tax Reform, the Liberty Coalition, and the American Conservative Union. Benton is strongly associated with the Paul family, serving as a high-ranking staffer for both Ron Paul and Rand Paul. He is married to Ron Paul's granddaughter. Benton is the campaign manager of Republican Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, who is running for re-election in 2014. 

Career

Benton's political career began in 2000 when he worked with the Republican National Committee. 
In 2010, Benton served as Rand Paul's campaign manager when Paul was elected Senator of Kentucky. Benton simultaneously served as Ron Paul's political director. Rand Paul had never run for office before, and was seen as an underdog.  
After the 2012 presidential election, Benton agreed to serve as Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell's campaign manager for his 2014 re-election campaign. In hiring Benton, McConnell hoped to avoid a competitive Republican primary from a conservative challenger, although Tea Party Republican Matt Bevin would ultimately challenge McConnell.
His role in Ron Paul's 2012 presidential campaign has been a source of controversy.

Political views

Benton has described himself as both a political operative and activist. Benton views his role as helping to bring the "voice" of the Tea Party into a governing coalition.

Controversies

Benton has been criticized by many Ron Paul supporters who see Benton as being overly concerned with his own career, 
In August 2012, conservative activist and former Ron Paul aide Dennis Fusaro released emails and phone conversations that implicated Benton in being involved in an attempt to bribe Iowa state senator Kent Sorenson in order to secure Sorenson's support of Ron Paul's presidential campaign. Sorenson initially supported Michele Bachmann's candidacy, but switched his support to Paul, prompting Bachmann to accuse the Paul campaign of bribing Sorenson. 

Personal life

Benton is a Philadelphia native and an alumnus of Mary Washington College, where he was an economics major.






