[[INS Vikrant (2013)]]

CATEGORIES: Aircraft carriers of the Indian Navy, Vikrant-class aircraft carriers, 2013 ships


INS ''Vikrant (Sanskrit: víkrānta "courageous") (IAC-I) is the first Vikrant-class aircraft carrier built by Cochin Shipyard Limited for the Indian Navy and  the first aircraft carrier built in India. Work on the ship's design began in 1999, and the keel was laid in February 2009. The carrier was floated out of its dry dock on 29 December 2011 and was launched in 2013. Construction is expected to be completed by 2016 and the ship is due to be commissioned in 2018. The motto of the ship is जयेम सं युधि स्पृध:  (Jayema Sam Yudhi Sprdhah'') in Sanskrit, which is taken from Rig Veda 1.8.3 and means 'I defeat those who dare to fight with me'.

Design

INS Vikrant is the first ship of the Vikrant class of aircraft carriers. The name Vikrant (Sanskrit vikrānta, literally "stepping beyond") means "courageous" or "bold". It is 
Vikrant is powered by four General Electric LM2500+ gas turbines on two shafts, generating over 

Construction

Vikrant is the first aircraft carrier to be designed by the Directorate of Naval Design of the Indian Navy and the first warship to be built by Cochin Shipyard. Its construction involved participation of a large number of private and public firms. The keel for Vikrant was laid by Defence Minister A.K. Antony at the Cochin Shipyard on 28 February 2009.
The AB/A grade steel which was supposed to be supplied from Russia faced problems in delivery. To resolve this, the Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory (DMRL) and Steel Authority of India Limited (SAIL) created facilities to manufacture the steel in India.
The ship uses modular construction, with 874 blocks joined together for the hull. By the time the keel was laid, 423 blocks weighing over 8,000 tons had been completed.
In March 2011, it was reported that the project had been affected by the delay in the delivery of the main gearboxes for the carrier. The supplier, Elecon Engineering, attributed it to having to work around a number of technical complexities due to the length of the propulsion shafts.
In July 2012, The Times of India reported that construction of Vikrant has been delayed by three years, and the ship would be ready for commissioning by 2017. Later, in November 2012, NDTV reported that cost of the aircraft carrier had increased and the delivery has been delayed by at least five years and is expected to be with the Indian Navy only after 2018 as against the scheduled date of delivery of 2014. Work has begun for next stage which includes installation of the integrated propulsion system.

Launch

In July 2013, Defence Minister A. K. Antony announced that Vikrant would be launched on 12 August at the Cochin Shipyard. The ship was launched by his wife, Elizabeth Antony, on 12 August 2013.
Extensive sea trials are expected to begin in 2016 and the ship will be inducted into the navy by late 2018.INS Vikrant, first Indian-made aircraft carrier, enters water next week NDTV 11 August 2013India launches first indigenous aircraft carrier INS Vikrant Times of India 12 August 2013
According to Vice Admiral Robin Dhowan, about 83% of the fabrication work and 75% of the construction work was complete. He said that 90% of the body work of the aircraft carrier had been designed and made in India, about 50% of the propulsion system, and about 30% of its weaponry. He also said that the ship would be equipped with a long range missile system with multi-function radar and a close-in weapon system (CIWS). After the launch, Vikrant was re-docked for the second phase of construction, in which the ship will be fitted with various weapons and sensors, and the propulsion system, flight deck and the aircraft complex will be integrated.






