[[The ISIS Group]]

CATEGORIES: 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations, Non-governmental organizations based in Australia

The ISIS Group is a partnership between an international development organisation (The ISIS Foundation) and a corporate advisory business (ISIS Asia Pacific). The objective of ISIS Asia Pacific is to fund the core support costs of The ISIS Foundation. The organisation was founded in Bermuda in 1998 by New Zealand-born business woman Audette Exel. 

Name

The name, The ISIS Group, comes from Isis, the Egyptian goddess of children and motherhood.bloomberg.html She is also said to be the friend of slaves and the downtrodden,R.E Witt, Isis in the Ancient World, p. 7, 1997, ISBN 978-0-8018-5642-6 reflecting the group's work with trafficked children and impoverished communities.

History

The ISIS Group was co-founded in 1998 in Bermuda by Audette Exel and a small group of friends. Exel had just finished a two-year position as chairperson of the Bermuda Stock Exchange. Soon after formation, The ISIS Foundation began to conduct development research in Humla, Nepal, and also fostered connections with Kiwoko Hospital in the war-torn Luwero Triangle, Uganda."about">
By 2000, The ISIS Foundation had helped build Yalbang School in Humla, and a neonatal intensive care unit in Kiwoko Hospital.
In 2002, The ISIS Foundation registered as a charitable trust in the United Kingdom.
In 2004, The ISIS Foundation discovered 136 trafficked children in an orphanage in Nepal, and began to negotiate with the human traffickers for their custody. Custody was granted in 2006. 96.
In 2007, The ISIS Group moved its headquarters from Bermuda to Sydney, Australia, and ISIS Asia Pacific Pty Limited was set up as a "business-for-purpose".
In 2009, ISIS Foundation (USA) was set up and in 2011 it received 501(c) status.isisgroup.pdf

The ISIS model

The ISIS model is a business/not-for-profit partnership. The entirety of the profits made by the private business ISIS Asia Pacific are directed towards covering the core support costs of The ISIS Foundation, allowing any other donor money to flow straight to the Foundation's project sites in Uganda and Nepal. The ISIS Group is credited with being 'one of the earliest examples of "Business-for-Purpose"'.listener.co.nz/current-affairs/business/helping-the-poor-a-kiwi-womans-dedication/

ISIS Asia Pacific

ISIS Asia Pacific is a corporate advisory and private placement business. ISIS Asia Pacific provides financial services to fund managers, raising capital from wholesale clients (mainly superannuation funds and other institutional bodies) and high-net-worth individuals.

The ISIS Foundation

The ISIS Foundation is an international development organisation with established projects in Nepal and Uganda. The Foundation supports initiatives in health, education and other community development.

Project Sites

Nepal

The ISIS Foundation began operations in Kathmandu, the capital of Nepal, and Humla, a remote region in the north-west of Nepal, in 1998. Their primary focus is on sustainable education, gender equality, healthcare, and community infrastructure, and they form partnerships with many local NGOs, like The Himalayan Innovative Society, to augment their delivery capabilities. The Foundation has also partnered with the Himalayan Children Society to build a local school which now educates 215 children from the region.
In 2004, The ISIS Foundation was alerted to more than 100 Humli children being held by traffickers in Kathmandu, in 'absolutely appalling conditions'. Over the next two years ISIS Foundation worked with the Nepalese Government and Police to secure custody of the children from the traffickers. This was achieved in 2006, and the children were slowly reconnected with their families, with the Foundation maintaining support through education and healthcare.

Uganda

The ISIS Foundation began working with Kiwoko Hospital in 1998. The hospital is located in the Nakaseke District, 80 kilometres northwest of the Ugandan capital, Kampala. They have established a neonatal intensive care unit in the hospital, and provide support for community healthcare, maternal healthcare and people living with HIV/AIDS.

Research

The ISIS Foundation conducts baseline and follow-up research in Humla, Nepal to inform the delivery of their programs. To conduct this research, Foundation staff survey every household in each village where they are located. The Foundation's field and research staff also participated in group meetings and focus discussions in each village, to discuss specific topics and get key insights from the participants. Research topics include: disease prevalence and health-seeking behaviour, access to education and nutrition status of mothers and children.
The ISIS Foundation began similar household surveys in Uganda in 2011, focusing on understanding key health factors, such as health and sanitation in the home. They also collect data to monitor the health status and outcomes associated with neonatal intensive care unit patients at Kiwoko Hospital. The data was analysed in collaboration with the University of Washington.








