[[Starred Up]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 films, 2010s crime drama films, British films, British drama films, English-language films, Films directed by David Mackenzie, Prison films, Film4 Productions films, Fox Searchlight Pictures films, Films set in Northern Ireland

Starred Up is a 2013 British prison crime drama film directed by David Mackenzie and scripted by Jonathan Asser. The film stars Jack O'Connell, Ben Mendelsohn, and Rupert Friend. The film is based on Asser's experiences working as a voluntary therapist Haydon, Chris (23 October 2013). "Shame/Violence Intervention". Retrieved 7 April 2014. at HM Prison Wandsworth, with some of the country's most violent criminals. The title is a term used to describe the early transfer of a criminal from a Young Offender Institution to an adult prison.

Cast

Production

On 8 October 2012 it was confirmed that Mackenzie was attached to direct the film in Northern Ireland, with O'Connell attached to star as the male lead.
Financing for Starred Up was provided by Film4 alongside Creative Scotland, Quickfire Films, Northern Ireland Screen and Lip Sync Productions.

Release

Starred Up premiered at the Telluride Film Festival,
On 8 October 2013, Fox Searchlight Pictures acquired the distribution rights to Starred Up in the United Kingdom shortly after the screenings at the Telluride Film Festival and the Toronto International Film Festival.
The film was released in the United Kingdom and Ireland on 21 March 2014.

Reception

Critical response

Starred Up received critical acclaim by critics and at festivals, for its acting (particularly for Jack O'Connell, Ben Mendelsohn and Rupert Friend), David Mackenzie's direction, realism, and the father-son dynamic of Asser's screenplay. Film review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reports that 98% of critics gave the film a "Certified Fresh" rating, based on 43 reviews with an average score score of 7.6/10, with the site's consensus stating, "Smart, hard-hitting, and queasily realistic, Starred Up is an instant classic of U.K. prison cinema." 
Todd McCarthy of Hollywood Reporter spoke highly of the piece particially the "unpredictable dynamic between Eric and his father Neville", and praised enormously the acting performance of O'Connell, "Young actor Jack O'Connell is the main attraction in this tough British drama." and further adding, "O'Connell would seem to have live wires running through his whole body and it should be very interesting to follow his career from here on."
Peter Debruge of Variety noted praise of Mackenzie, remarking, "Mackenzie isn't attempting to craft a larger-than-life antihero here, but delving into the sociology of this hellish subculture, where prisoners and staff alike coexist in this dehumanizing environment." and that of Asser, "Asser brings more than just realism, however, crafting the central father-son relationship on the foundation of classical Greek tragedy."
Rich Cline of Shadows on the Wall, albeit, noting the piece "deploys cliché in the prison-thriller genre" he adds "it continually twists its story in more personal directions, which allows the fine cast to create vividly intense characters." Furthermore, praising the acting, " O'Connell delivers a powerfully involving performance that captures Eric's inner emotional energy with remarkable balance." as well as those of Mendelsohn and Friend. And Mackenzie's "earthy, edgy direction."
Jason Gorber of Twitch gave the film an "B" rating, stating "Starred Up is a gritty, intense, and shockingly unique take on the prison drama genre." Heralds the acting O'Connell and Mendelsohn, "O'Connell's performance is one of the finest of the year, and Mendelsohn once again demonstrates his unique brand of cold hearted intensity.", as well as Asser's screenplay, "Asser captures life in the system with enormous clarity." And notes the depth in its execution, "Shakespearean in its levels of violence and manipulation".
Emma Simmonds of The List spoke positively and commented, "Starred Up gives you a good sharp shake and, in doing so, truly opens your eyes." Describing Asser's script as "authentically abrasive and peppered with welcome snatches of humour" and both Mackenzie and cinematographer Michael McDonough as being able to "capture the volatility of the environment without surrendering sensitivity to character."
Eric Kohn of IndieWire gave the piece an "A-" rating, commenting of director Mackenzie, "Pushing beyond the brutal exterior of his material, Mackenzie reveals the tender story of estrangement beneath, but never forces the sentimentality." And additional, "British director David Mackenzie's gradually affecting "Starred Up" has all those ingredients but uses them for more precise means that merely revealing the harsh nature of life behind bars. Mackenzie applies a sharp kitchen sink realism to this haunting setting and directs it toward an ultimately moving family drama that just happens to involve vicious convicts."
Mark Kermode of The Observer gave a positive review of the piece, commenting, "Mackenzie keeps us grounded in the maze of prison life, coaxing powerful performances from his cast, each apparently encouraged and emboldened to find their own space." Speaking highly of Friend's performance as "terrifically edgy" and describing O'Connell's as "An electrified and electrifying performance" furthering such a statement by remarking "there's a hint of the young Malcolm McDowell about him." He concludes by praising cinematographer Michael McDonough's ability to "capture the claustrophobia of the physical environment without reducing the characters within the frame." 

Accolades

Awards and nominations






