[[Resurrection of the dead]]

CATEGORIES: Biblical phrases, Eschatology, Christianity-related controversies, Resurrection

A resurrection of the dead is a common component of a number of eschatologies, most commonly in Christian, Islamic, Jewish and Zoroastrian eschatology. The phrase refers to an event in the future — multiple prophecies in the histories of these religions assert that the dead will be brought back to life at some point in the future.
A minority claim this has already happened in the pastFor example Christian Full Preterism or is occurring now without most knowing it. Christadelphians - What they believe and teach Birmingham, CMPA 1977 believe that only a select few will be resurrected. Some Christians, who hold to the doctrine of Millennialism, interpret the Book of Revelation to indicate two resurrections of the dead - at either end of a millennium.See Ben Witherington ref below

Zoroastrianism

Zoroastrian belief in an end times renovation of the earth, frashokereti including some form of revival of the dead can be attested from the 4th Century BCE. Longenecker - Life in the Face of Death: The Resurrection Message of the New Testament p48 1998 "Franz König, for example, concludes that the earliest attestation of Zoroastrian belief in a resurrection cannot be dated before the fourth century BC (cf. Zarathustras Jenseitsvorstellungen und das Alte Testament [Vienna: Herder, ." As distinct from Judaism this is the resurrection of all the dead to universal purification and renewal of the world.R. M. M. Tuschling - Angels and Orthodoxy: A Study in Their Development in Syria and ... - 2007 p23 271 " While admitting that Judaism and Zoroastrianism share a belief in resurrection, he points to a significant difference between them: in Iranian religion all are resurrected and purified as part of the renewal of the world."
Frashokereti is the Zoroastrian doctrine of a final renovation of the universe, when evil will be destroyed, and everything else will be then in perfect unity with God (Ahura Mazda). The term probably means "making wonderful, excellent".
The doctrinal premises are (1) good will eventually prevail over evil; (2) creation was initially perfectly good, but was subsequently corrupted by evil; (3) the world will ultimately be restored to the perfection it had at the time of creation; (4) the "salvation for the individual depended on the sum of person's thoughts, words and deeds, and there could be no intervention, whether compassionate or capricious, by any divine being to alter this." Thus, each human bears the responsibility for the fate of his own soul, and simultaneously shares in the responsibility for the fate of the world.

Judaism

Hebrew Bible

The earliest reference in the Hebrew Bible to raising from Sheol is found in the Song of Hannah (1 Sam. 2:6). However this is usually understood by commentators to be read figuratively not a literal expectation of God bringing down to Sheol and raising up. Bromiley - 1995 ".." Resurrection passages prior to Daniel are primarily taken as dealing with national resurrection as in Isaiah's (26:19) "Your dead shall live; Together with my dead body they shall arise."Theological Dictionary of the Old Testament:   9 p156 G. Johannes Botterweck, Helmer Ringgren, Heinz-Josef Fabry - 1998 "Such resurrection means primarily national restoration.24 b. Yahweh/Israel.25 Yahweh's promise "Your dead shall live" is accepted with " This passage in Isaiah later became a touchpoint for rabbinical discussion on the resurrection." B. Objected R. Abba bar Mammal, '"Your dead shall live, my dead bodies shall arise' (Isa." Temporary resurrections of individual dead people are found in the Hebrew Bible, such as Elijah and the widow's son at Zarephath: "Behold your son lives." ()
National resurrection is found in Ezekiel's Vision in the Valley of Dry Bones reads, "Thus saith the Lord GOD unto these bones; Behold, I will cause breath to enter into you, and ye shall live". ()
According to the Jewish Encyclopedia article on resurrection,.

Second Temple period

In the Second Temple period the concept of resurrection of the dead is found in 4Q521 among the Dead Sea scrolls, Josephus records it (Antiquities 18.14; Jewish War 2.163), and the New Testament records that the Sadducees did not believe in an afterlife, but the Pharisees believed in a literal resurrection of the body. Resurrection of the dead appears in detail in the extra-canonical books of Enoch, Jubilees, Apocalypse of Baruch, 2 Esdras and the Maccabees.

Rabbinical period

The Resurrection is a core belief of the Mishnah. He who says, the resurrection of the dead is a teaching which does not derive from the Torah, "...g., in the morning prayer Elohai Neshamah, in the Shemoneh 'Esreh and in the funeral services. Maimonides made it the last of his thirteen articles of belief: "I firmly believe that there will take place a revival of the dead at a time which will please the Creator, blessed be His name."

Christianity

New Testament teachings

According to the New Testament, Jesus argued with the Sadducees over the doctrine of the resurrection. These passages are ).
The "Sign of Jonah" () may be about the resurrection of the dead. From the Jesus Seminar's Scholars Version (commonly known as "The Five Gospels") translation of Matthew 12:38-42: "..... At judgment time, the queen of the south will be brought back to life along with this generation ..."
The "resurrection of the righteous" is mentioned at .
In Acts of the Apostles, the Apostles and Paul of Tarsus argued in support of the doctrine: .

Nicene Creed and Early Christianity

Most Christian denominations profess the Nicene Creed, which affirms the "resurrection of the dead"; most English versions of the Nicene Creed in current use include the phrase:
Both "resurrection of the dead" and "world to come" are phrases found in Christian Bibles.
The centrality of this idea for Christian doctrine is early stated in 1 Corinthians 15 by Paul the Apostle:
The Christian writers Irenaeus and Justin Martyr, in the 2nd Century, wrote against the idea that only the soul survived. Martyr insists that a man is both soul and body and Christ has promised to raise both, just as his own body was raised. He wrote: "Seeing as ... the Saviour in the whole Gospel shows that there is salvation for the flesh, why do we any longer endure those unbelieving and dangerous arguments, and fail to see that we are retrograding when we listen to such an argument as this: that the soul is immortal, but the body mortal, and incapable of being revived? For this we used to hear from Pythagoras and Plato, even before we learned the truth. If then the Saviour said this, and proclaimed salvation to the soul alone, what new thing, beyond what we heard from Pythagoras and Plato and all their band, did He bring us? But now He has come proclaiming the glad tidings of a new and strange hope to men."
Jesus appears to have been in general agreement with the position held by some Pharisees, as illustrated by his response to a question regarding marriage at the resurrection (). While the Christian doctrine of resurrection is based on Jewish belief, how the emphasis on this involving the actual flesh increased parallel with Christianity succeeding among the Greek populace may connect to traditional Greek beliefs that true immortality always had to involve both body and soul. Although the Greeks held that a few individuals had been resurrected to physical immortality, there was no ancient Greek belief in a general resurrection of the dead. Indeed they held that once body had been destroyed, there was no possibility of returning to life. A number of early Church Fathers, like Pseudo-Justin, Tatian, Irenaeus,  and Athenagoras of Athens, argues about the Christian resurrection beliefs in ways that answer this traditional Greek scepticism to post-mortal physical continuity. Greek Resurrection Beliefs and the Success of Christianity. New York: Palgrave Macmillan 2009.
Traditional Christian Churches, i.e. ones that adhere to the creeds, continue to uphold the belief that there will be a general and universal resurrection of the dead at "the end of time", as described by Paul when he said, "....." (Acts 17:31 KJV) and "..." (Acts 24:15 KJV).

Roman Catholicism

According to the Catholic Encyclopedia: ""No doctrine of the Christian Faith", says St. Augustine, "is so vehemently and so obstinately opposed as the doctrine of the resurrection of the flesh"... This opposition had begun long before the days of St. Augustine."
According to the Catechism of the Catholic Church the body after resurrection is changed into a spiritual, imperishable body:

According to the Summa Theologica, spiritual beings that have been restored to glorified bodies will have the following basic qualities:

Lutheranism

Although Martin Luther personally believed and taught resurrection of the dead in combination with soul sleep, this is not a mainstream teaching of Lutheranism and most Lutherans traditionally believe in resurrection of the body in combination with the immortal soul."
According to the Lutheran Church—Missouri Synod (LCMS), on the last day,

Anglicanism

There are many theologians, such as Thomas Oden, popular Christian writers such as Randy Alcorn, and Christian scholars such as the Anglican Bishop of Durham N.T. Wright, who have defended the primacy of the resurrection in Christian faith.
Interviewed by Time in 2008 senior Anglican bishop and theologian N. T. Wright spoke of "the idea of bodily resurrection that people deny when they talk about their 'souls going to Heaven,'" adding: "I've often heard people say, 'I'm going to heaven soon, and I won't need this stupid body there, thank goodness.' That's a very damaging distortion, all the more so for being unintentional." Instead, Wright explains: "In the Bible we are told that you die, and enter an intermediate state." This is "conscious," but "compared to being bodily alive, it will be like being asleep." This will be followed by resurrection into new bodies, he says. "Our culture is very interested in life after death, but the New Testament is much more interested in what I've called the life after life after death."

Methodism and other evangelicals

The Reverend M. Douglas Meeks, professor of theology and Wesleyan studies at Vanderbilt Divinity School, states that "it is very important for Christians to hold to the resurrection of the body." F. Belton Joyner in United Methodist Answers, states that the "New Testament does not speak of a natural immortality of the soul, as if we never actually die. It speaks of resurrection of the body, the claim that is made each time we state the historic Apostles' Creed and classic Nicene Creed", given in The United Methodist Hymnal.
The Doctrinal Basis of the Evangelical Alliance affirms belief in "the resurrection of the body, the judgment of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ, with the eternal blessedness of the righteous, and the eternal punishment of the wicked."

Baptist Churches

James Leo Garrett Jr.,  E. Glenn Hinson, and  James E. Tull  write that "Baptists traditionally have held firmly to the belief that Christ rose triumphant over death, sin, and hell in a bodily resurrection from the dead."

Anabaptists and Restorationists

Several churches, such as the Anabaptists and Socinians of the Reformation, then Seventh-day Adventist Church, Christadelphians, Jehovah's Witnesses, and theologians of different traditions reject the idea of the immortality of a non-physical soul as a vestige of Neoplatonism, and other pagan traditions. In this school of thought, the dead remain dead (and do not immediately progress to a Heaven, Hell, or Purgatory) until a physical resurrection of some or all of the dead occurs at the end of time. Some groups, Christadelphians in particular, consider that it is not a universal resurrection, and that at this time of resurrection that the Last Judgment will take place. Raised to Judgement Bible Teaching about Resurrection & Judgement Christadelphian, Birmingham 1991

Millenialists

Some commentators interpret the Book of Revelation as requiring two resurrections of the dead, one is before the Millennium, the other after it.5 It is then proper to conclude that John believes in a future millennial reign upon the earth ..."

Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

According to The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) all those who have lived on the earth will be resurrected, regardless of their righteousness, "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive." (1 Corinthians 15:22, see also Acts 24:15).  Those who are righteous will be resurrected at the Second Coming of Jesus Christ. This is a part of the First Resurrection ( KJV).
Before the resurrection, the spirits of the dead are believed to exist in a place known as the spirit world, which is similar to yet fundamentally distinct from the traditional concept of Heaven and Hell. It is believed that the spirit retains its wants, beliefs, and desires in the afterlife ( KJV).
The resurrection is believed to unite the spirit with the body again, and the LDS Church teaches that the body (flesh and bone) will be made whole and become incorruptible, a state which includes immortality.  After His resurrection, Christ stated to his disciples: "Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me have."(Luke 24:39)   This is a departure from the Trinity doctrine established by the Nicene Creed; for Christ is now a resurrected personage, different in substance from His Father, to whom Christ went after His resurrection.  He said to Mary, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father." (John 20:17).  After Christ was resurrected, he ministered for 40 days among the people (Acts 1:3), and was seen by more than 500 (1 Cor 15:6).  He continues to have His resurrected body of flesh and bones, for He will return to this earth just as he left it, "this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven." (Acts 1:11).  It should be noted that God created mankind in His image and after His likeness (Gen 1:26,27)--it is not God who transforms himself into the image of man.  And so our resurrected bodies have an eternal purpose, just like our Father's who is in heaven.
According to LDS doctrine, Jesus Christ was the first to be resurrected into incorruptibility (1 Cor 15:20), followed by many church members who were also dead. ( KJV) are frequently cited as examples of this.

Modern de-emphasis

Early church fathers defended the resurrection of the dead against the pagan belief that the immortal soul went to the underworld immediately after death.
At the close of the medieval period, the modern era brought a shift in Christian thinking from an emphasis on the resurrection of the body back to the immortality of the soul. 3, "Resurrection of the Dead" by Andre Dartigues, ed. by Jean-Yves Lacoste (New York: Routledge, 2005), 1381. This shift was a result of a change in the zeitgeist, as a reaction to the Renaissance and later to the Enlightenment. Dartigues has observed that especially "from the 17th to the 19th century, the language of popular piety no longer evoked the resurrection of the soul but everlasting life. Although theological textbooks still mentioned resurrection, they dealt with it as a speculative question more than as an existential problem."
This shift was supported not by any scripture, but largely by the popular religion of the Enlightenment, deism. Deism allowed for a supreme being, such as the philosophical first cause, but denied any significant personal or relational interaction with this figure. Deism, which was largely led by rationality and reason, could allow a belief in the immortality of the soul, but not necessarily in the resurrection of the dead. American deist Ethan Allen demonstrates this thinking in his work, Reason the Only Oracle of Man (1784) where he argues in the preface that nearly every philosophical problem is beyond humanity's understanding, including the miracles of Christianity, although he does allow for the immortality of an immaterial soul. 1, A-K, "Deism," Edited by Gordon Stein (Buffalo, NY: Prometheus Books, 1985), 134.

Influence on secular law and custom

Formerly, it was widely believed that to rise on judgement day the body had to be whole and preferably buried with the feet to the east so that the person would rise facing God. p. 215Essex, Mass. - Cemetery: The Old Burying Ground, Essex, Mass.I. Description and History "Up until the early 1800s, graves were marked by pairs of headstones and footstones, with the deceased laid to rest facing east to rise again at dawn of Judgement Day."Grave and nave: an architecture of cemeteries and sanctuaries in rural Ontario "Sanctuaries face east, and burials are with the feet to the east, allowing the incumbent to rise facing the dawn on the Day of Judgment" An Act of Parliament from the reign of King Henry VIII stipulated that only the corpses of executed murderers could be used for dissection. Little was known about anatomy and medical schools were very keen to get their hands on dead bodies that they could dissect"

Islam

In Islam, Yawm al-Qiyāmah ( "the Day of Judgment") is believed to be God's final assessment of humanity. The sequence of events (according to the most commonly held belief) is the annihilation of all creatures, resurrection of the body, and the judgment of all sentient creatures.
The exact time when these events will occur is unknown, however there are said to be major which are to occur near the time of Qiyamah (End time). Many Qur'anic verses, especially the earlier ones, are dominated by the idea of the nearing of the day of resurrection. Gardet, Qiyama, Encyclopaedia of the Qur'an
The Day of Resurrection
Nearing the end of time, the trumpet will be blown and creation will cease to exist.  God, Almighty, says:
"And the Trumpet will be blown, and all who are in the heavens and all who are on the earth will swoon away, except him whom God wills." (Quran 39:68)
It will be blown a second blowing, and all creation from the beginning of time till the end of time will be resurrected.  God, the Exalted, tells us:
"And the Trumpet will be blown (i.e.  the second blowing) and behold!  From the graves they will come out quickly to their Lord." (Quran 36:51)
People will be standing naked, barefooted and uncircumcised.  The Prophet described to us what will happen, he said:
"You will be gathered, barefooted, naked, and uncircumcised (as God says):
"As We began the first creation, We shall repeat it." (Quran 21:104)

Transhumanism and technology

In his 1994 book The Physics of Immortality, physicist Frank J. Tipler, an expert on the general theory of relativity,  presented his Omega Point Theory which outlines how a resurrection of the dead could take place at the end of the cosmos.  He posits that humans will evolve into robots which will turn the entire cosmos into a supercomputer which will, shortly before the big crunch, perform the resurrection within its cyberspace, reconstructing formerly dead humans (from information captured by the supercomputer from the past light cone of the cosmos) as avatars within its metaverse. Tipler, The Physics of Immortality: Modern Cosmology, God and the Resurrection of the Dead (New York: Doubleday, 1994), ISBN 0198519494. 56-page excerpt available here.
British physicist and pioneer in the field of quantum computing, David Deutsch, agrees with Tipler's Omega Point cosmology and the idea of resurrecting deceased people with the help of quantum computersDavid Deutsch (1997). "The Ends of the Universe". The Fabric of Reality: The Science of Parallel Universes—and Its Implications. London: Penguin Press. ISBN 0-7139-9061-9. but he is critical of Tipler's theological views.
Italian physicist and computer scientist, Giulio Prisco presents the idea of quantum archaeology or the idea of finding stored information in the universe about each human to resurrect everyone with reversible computing.blogspot.html
Ray Kurzweil, American scientist, inventor and futurist believes that when the singularity happens it will be possible to resurrect the dead by digital recreation.singularityweblog.com/ray-kurzweil-singularity/
Russian philosopher and transhumanist Nikolai Fyodorovich Fyodorov advocated resurrection of the dead using scientific methods. Fedorov tried to plan specific actions for scientific research of the possibility of restoring life and making it infinite. His first project is connected with collecting and synthesizing decayed remains of dead based on "knowledge and control over all atoms and molecules of the world". The second method described by Fedorov is genetic-hereditary. The revival could be done successively in the ancestral line: sons and daughters restore their fathers and mothers, they in turn restore their parents and so on. This means restoring the ancestors using the hereditary information that they passed on to their children. Using this genetic method it is only possible to create a genetic twin of the dead person. It is necessary to give back the revived person his old mind, his personality. Fedorov speculates about the idea of "radial images" that may contain the personalities of the people and survive after death. Nevertheless, Fedorov noted that even if a soul is destroyed after death, Man will learn to restore it whole by mastering the forces of decay and fragmentation. "The Philosophy of the Common Task of N. F. Fedorov.
Cryonics is the low-temperature preservation of humans who cannot be sustained by contemporary medicine, with the hope that healing and resuscitation may be possible in the future."What is Cryonics?". Alcor Foundation. Retrieved 2 December 2013. "Cryonics is an effort to save lives by using temperatures so cold that a person beyond help by today's medicine might be preserved for decades or centuries until a future medical technology can restore that person to full health." Cryonics procedures ideally begin within minutes of cardiac arrest, and use cryoprotectants to prevent ice formation during cryopreservation. "Scientific justification of cryonics practice". Rejuvenation Research 11 (2): 493–503. doi:10.1089/rej.2008.0661. PMID 18321197. However, the idea of cryonics also includes preservation of people long after death because of the possibility that brain encoding memory structure and personality may still persist or be inferable in the future. Whether sufficient brain information still exists for cryonics to successfully preserve may be intrinsically unprovable by present knowledge. Therefore, most proponents of cryonics see it as an intervention with prospects for success that vary widely depending on circumstances.








