[[Nelly Ben Hayoun]]

CATEGORIES: French designers, Producers

Nelly Ben Hayoun is a French scientist. Born in Valence, Drôme, France, Ben Hayoun now resides in London, United Kingdom. An award-winning director and experience designer, she works with scientists and engineers to devise events and experiences. Ben Hayoun is also an exhibitor and speaker who has worked with museums and design centres across the world. 
Ben Hayoun collaborated with Beck, Bobby Womack, Damon Albarn,Inrockuptible International Space Orchestra interview Maywa Denki, Bruce Sterling and Penguin Café in a musical collaboration that took music into space. Launched from a Japanese launch pad in August 2013, she assembled the International Space Orchestra (ISO) - the world first orchestra of space scientists from NASA Ames Research Center, Singularity University, International Space University and the SETI Institute.
In 2013, Icon Magazine nominated Ben Hayoun as one of the 50 international designers "shaping the future".Icon 122: Future 50

Background

Ben Hayoun is a visiting professor at the Architectural Association School of Architecture (Unknown Fields Division), a lecturer and researcher at Central Saint Martins  and Bruce Sterling's blog "Beyond the Beyond" on Wired.
Ben Hayoun initially trained in painting then Textile Design at Olivier de Serres National College of Art and Design in Paris and then graduated from Design Interactions (MA) at the Royal College of Art. She is currently a researcher (PhD Candidate) in Human Geography at Royal Holloway, University of  London, UK.nellyben.com/about/contact-cv/"] Nelly Ben Hayoun Studio

Designer of Experiences at SETI Institute

Ben Hayoun was appointed Designer of Experiences at the SETI Institute under the supervision of David Morrison, Jill Tarter, Karen Randall, Franck Marchis, Adrian Brown and Janice Bishop in May 2013. Her work at SETI focuses on extending outreach activities and design in terms of scope, scale, and methods of engagement towards architecture, installations, environments, social system, performances, experiences and narratives, as events.

Extreme Fieldwork

Ben Hayoun speaks about the value of 'extreme' fieldwork which she considers an essential part of designer training. For Ben Hayoun, designing experiences implies tangibility, hence fieldwork, and working collaboratively with experts. in Japan.
About her practice she said: "My working method is to go in situ in scientists' research centres and design events that radically change and adapt their attitudes to their research to a non-scientific audience's creative needs. Design should be embedded in a physical experience, it should be something you remember like seeing a painting and remembering the tone of it."Ough Interview

Director of the International Space Orchestra (ISO)

Alongside her role as designer of experiences at the SETI Institute, Ben Hayoun is directing the International Space Orchestra at NASA Ames Research Center. The International Space Orchestra is a project she created and assembled over the summer of 2012, with a team of space scientists from the NASA Ames Research Center, SETI Institute (search for extraterrestrial life), Singularity University, and the International Space University.COИTЯOL", International Space Orchestra Official Website"Projects by NELLY BEN HAYOUN STUDIO", NELLY BEN STUDIO Official Website
In January 2013, the International Space Orchestra feature film had its world premiere at the Rotterdam International Film Festival where it was acclaimed as a "masterpiece" by the Independent Cinema Office (ICO), DOMUS, February 11, 2013 "as thrilling as watching a rocket launch" and "Spine Tingling" (The Guardian).

Launch in space

Ben Hayoun's work Ground Control: An Opera in Space, performance recordings by the International Space Orchestra was released from the International Space Station in November, 2013.
On 4 August 2013, two ArduSat (Arduino based Nanosatellite run by the company Nanosatisfi) carrying the ISO recordings of Ground Control: An Opera in Space were launched aboard the H-IIB Launch Vehicle, HTV-4 from Yoshinobu Launch Complex at the Tanegashima Space Centre."Nelly Ben Hayoun's artwork launched into space", "Wired", by Bruce Sterling, August 7, 2013
On 19 November 2013, these ArduSat got released from the International Space Station by the six-member Expedition 38 crew. The orbiting residents worked with mission controllers around the world on deploying the ArduSat from Kibo's airlock Tuesday 19 at 7:10 a.m. EST.
The recordings of Ground Control: An Opera in Space was recorded at Skywalker Ranch, George Lucas' studio, where Star Wars was developed.

Head of Experiences at WE Transfer

In December 2013, Nelly Ben Hayoun announced her collaboration with File sharing service, WeTransfer.
About the collaboration she said:
"We Transfer's 18 million monthly active users will be able to experience the places I go, the activities I do and the people I meet. Each entry will be numbered so people can follow the diaries as they are published," This will extend into a further storytelling platform that will incorporate the service's app, she explains. "I have my practice, which is all about bringing the scientific and creative communities together through carefully designed experiences, and ultimately WeTransfer is about creating unique experiences for their community of digital users." 

Lectures, talks and speeches

Ben Hayoun has delivered lectures in many countries on design and teaching design, experience design and space public outreach.

Exhibitions

Awards and fellowships






