[[Tennis Court (song)]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 EPs, 2013 singles, Lorde songs, Songs written by Joel Little, Universal Music Group singles, Virgin Records EPs

{{Infobox single
| Name = Tennis Court
| Cover = Lorde Tennis Court.png
| Artist = Lorde
| Album = Pure Heroine
| Border = yes
| B-side = "Swingin Party"
| Released =  (see release history)
| Format = {{flat list|
| Recorded = 
| Genre      = 
| Length = 
| Label = {{flat list|
| Writer = 

"Tennis Court" is a song by New Zealand recording artist Lorde, taken from her debut album Pure Heroine (2013). On 7 June 2013, the song was released as the album's second single by Universal Music Group, following "Royals". Tennis Court EP was also released, comprising three additional tracks. "Tennis Court" served as the fourth single from Pure Heroine in the United States.
Written by Lorde and Joel Little and produced by Little, "Tennis Court" features synthesisers and electronic pulses in its composition. The lyrics address Lorde's new-found fame and criticise the "high life."
"Tennis Court" was well received by critics, who complimented the song's production and musical style. The single garnered success in Oceania, peaking at number one on the New Zealand singles chart and entering the top thirty chart in Australia. In Europe, it charted in Belgium (in both Flanders and Wallonia), France, the UK and Germany; the song also appeared on multiple US charts. "Tennis Court" was certified platinum by both the Australian Recording Industry Association and Recorded Music NZ. A music video for the song was directed by Joel Kefali and features Lorde staring into the camera during one continuous shot. To promote Pure Heroine and the song, Lorde performed "Tennis Court" several times, including on Live on Letterman.

Writing and release

Lorde was spotted by Universal Music Group (UMG) after performing at her school. She signed with UMG at age 13, and was later paired up with Joel Little, a singer, songwriter and producer. According to Little, Lorde developed her songwriting skills on "Tennis Court", for which she wrote the melody and the whole chorus:

On 7 June 2013, "Tennis Court" was released as Pure Heroine Nevertheless, the label later decided to cancel the contemporary hit radio release of "Glory and Gore" and send "Tennis Court" there as originally planned. "Tennis Court" will impact US hot adult contemporary radio and contemporary hit radio on 21 and 22 April 2014, respectively. "Tennis Court" will be released in the United Kingdom on 12 May 2014.

Production and composition

"Tennis Court" was produced by Joel Little, who recorded it at his Golden Age Studios in Morningside, Auckland.
The lyrics of "Tennis Court" address Lorde's newly established fame Paul Lester, writing for The Guardian, compared the song's lyrical theme to that of two other songs by Lorde: "Royals" and "Million Dollar Bills" (from The Love Club EP).
"Tennis Court" opens with Lorde questioning "Don't you think that is boring how people talk?" featuring her, in the words of Lester, "sweet, sultry and sour" voice, which suggests "a frictional relationship with the high life." At the bridge, Lorde sings "I fall apart, with all my heart/ And you can watch from your window", which was described as a "perfect" commentary on the breakdowns of teenage celebrities in an article published by The Huffington Post.

Reception

"Tennis Court" received critical acclaim from music critics and media outlets. Siân Rowe from NME ranked the EP a seven out of ten, complimenting the song for its "forward-looking genres" and Lorde's "strong pop vocals."
"Tennis Court" debuted at number one on the New Zealand Singles Chart during the week of 17 June 2013,

Live performances

To promote "Tennis Court", Lorde held a concert at Le Poisson Rouge in New York and performed the song among others on 6 August 2013. This was her first U.S. show.

Music video

The official music video for "Tennis Court" was directed by Joel Kefali, who previously worked with Lorde on the accompanying video for her debut single "Royals".
Writing for The Washington Post, Bethonie Butler observed a discrepancy between Lorde's statement that "In a perfect world, she would never do any interviews, and probably there would be one photo out there of her", and the fact that, in the music video, Lorde is "front and center." Butler viewed the video as "a metaphor for celebrity." Writing for Ryan Seacrest's website, Kathleen Perricone complimented the "super simple" clip, which allowed Lorde's "voice and lyrics to really shine." Lindsay Zoladz, of Pitchfork Media, compared the video to that for The Replacements' "Bastards of Young." MTV Buzzworthy blogger Luke O'Neil wrote that the "Tennis Court" video is "a bit unsettling at first, but eventually it starts to make sense. is trying to do things a bit differently, and so far it seems like it's working."

Track listing

Charts

Weekly charts

Year-end charts

Certifications




Release history

Single

Tennis Court EP








