[[H. Vasken Aposhian]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, Living people, University of Arizona faculty, Thimerosal controversy, Brown University alumni, Toxicologists, University of Rochester alumni

H. Vasken Aposhian is a toxicologist and an emeritus professor of molecular and cell biology at the University of Arizona, a post he held beginning in 1975. He is also a former professor of pharmacology at the medical school at said university. He received his undergraduate degree, Bachelor of Science, in chemistry, at Brown University, 1948. He received a master's degree and a PhD in physiological chemistry at the University of Rochester, where he published some scientific studies about the synthesis of isoalloxazine ring-containing compounds. Previous posts he had held include at Vanderbilt, Tufts University, and the University of Maryland. His views about mercury in vaccines and in dental amalgams go against the consensus of the medical community. 

Research

Aposhian's first academic appointment was to Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,

Thimerosal controversy

Aposhian has recently advocated for the view that thimerosal-containing vaccines cause autism, testifying, for example, not just in the autism omnibus trial as mentioned above, but also before the Institute of Medicine in 2004 before they issued a review concluding that the evidence favors rejecting a vaccine-autism link. 

Autism omnibus trial

In the autism omnibus trial, Aposhian also elaborated on a potential theory as to how MMR and thimerosal-containing vaccines might have worked together to give Michelle Cedillo autism. The proposed mechanism involved something known as "mercury efflux disorder", and Aposhian testified that "The hypothesis was made less than three or four weeks ago." Aposhian also testified, with regard to the concept of a dose-response relationship, that "This is an ancient form of quotation
that until recently we taught in medical schools, and in undergraduate school, and in graduate school. We now have to consider the hyper susceptibility of people."

Dental amalgam controversy

In addition to being opposed to mercury in vaccines, Aposhian has also voiced concern about the safety of mercury in dental amalgam fillings. On July 11, 1994, Aposhian was interviewed for a BBC program entitled "Poison in the Mouth." The host of the program, Tom Mangold, said that Aposhian's research had shown that two-thirds of the mercury in the body came from dental amalgam fillings.mercuryexposure. These fillings continuously emit mercury vapor, which will go to the brain and is converted to mercuric mercury….thimerosal which again will be taken up by the brain and quickly converted to mercuric mercury – all three forms are neurotoxic. By neurotoxic, we mean it will damage nerve and it will damage brain tissues." These concerns are supported by some of Aposhian's research, which has concluded that there exists "a positive correlation between the amount of amalgam in the teeth and the amount of amalgam in the body" of subjects who were given the chelating agent 2,3-dimercapto-1-propanesulfonic acid.[ref]
</ref>

Selected Publications

Mercury

Arsenic




