[[Transport in Bhutan]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in Bhutan

Transport in Bhutan comprises approximately  of roads and two airports, Yongphulla Airport and Paro Airport, the latter of which serves international flights. As part of Bhutan's infrastructure and modernization programs, its road system has been under development since the 1960s.
There are no railways or ports; Bhutan is a landlocked country.

History

Until 1961, because of the lack of paved roads, travel in Bhutan was by foot or on muleback or horseback. The 
By the mid 1970s, about  of mule tracks to connect the nation's 4,500 settlements.

Roadways

The country's primary road is the East-West highway, known locally as the Lateral Road, which was constructed starting in 1962. The road starts in Phuentsholing on the southwestern Indian border and terminates in Trashigang in the far east, with spurs to other main centres such as Paro, Thimphu, and Punakha. The Lateral Road is built to a standard width of only , to minimise head-on collisions. Road accidents still occur frequently and, because of the steep mountainous topography, are typically horrific. Most of the route between Paro Airport and Thimphu has recently been improved to a two lane road. 
The Lateral Road traverses are a number of high passes, including Tremo La and Do Chu La. The highest pass on the road is at Chapcha; the second-highest pass is at Trumshing La in central Bhutan at an altitude of over 
Main roadways in western and eastern Bhutan are maintained by Dantak, a unit of Border Roads Organisation engineering division of Indian Army and in the rest of the country by the Bhutanese government's Department of Roads.
Because much of the geology is unstable, there are frequent slips and landslides, which are aggravated by both summer monsoon and winter snowstorm and frost heave conditions. Teams of Indian labourers are housed at work camps in the mountain passes to be dispatched to clear the roads in the event of road blockage. The conditions in the work camps are poor, with the workers reduced to breaking rock into gravel on a piece-rate basis when not clearing the roads. An international aid project is under way to stabilise the worst sections of the road. A major Japanese aid project seeks to replace most of the narrow single track bridges with two-way girder spans capable of carrying heavier traffic.
Most freight is moved on eight-ton  Tata trucks, which are often overloaded. There is a network of passenger buses, and the most common vehicle in government and private use is the four-wheel-drive pickup.
A national driver licensing system includes a driving test, but this is not rigorous. Government drivers are trained at the Samthang Vocational Training Institute driving school (formerly the National Driving Training Institute) or they learn on the job as 'handy boys'. 
The roads do not have traffic lights; a stoplight installed in Thimphu has been dismantled, and there are recent reports of plans to reinstate it.

Airports

The single runway at Paro Airport is located in a steep-sided valley with restricted VFR approaches. During the monsoon season, flights are often delayed by cloud cover. Drukair is the national carrier, connecting Paro to Kolkata and Delhi in India, Bangkok in Thailand, Dhaka in Bangladesh and Kathmandu in Nepal. The airline replaced its two aging BAe 146 four-engined jets in 2004 with faster and more capacious Airbus A319-100 aircraft.
The Royal Bhutanese Government's 10th Five Year Plan (2008-2013) includes the building of at least two more domestic airstrips at Bathpalathang in Bumthang District and near the southern Bhutanese town of Gelephu in Sarpang District.

Railway

As of 2012, Bhutan had no railways.
On 25 January 2005, the King of Bhutan and Indian Prime Minister agreed to carry out a feasibility study for rail links. Possible routes were Hasimara–Phuentsholing with a branch to Pasaka (18 km); Kokrajhar–Gelephu (70 km); Pathsala–Naglam (40 km); Rangla–Darranga–Samdrupjongkar (60 km); and Banarhat–Samtse.
In December 2009, the King of Bhutan approved the final plan to build a 








