[[Foreign relations of El Salvador]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of El Salvador

El Salvador is a member of the United Nations and several of its specialized agencies, the Organization of American States (OAS), the Central American Common Market (CACM), the Central American Parliament (PARLACEN), and the Central American Integration System (SICA). It actively participates in the Central American Security Commission (CASC), which seeks to promote regional arms control. 
El Salvador also is a member of the World Trade Organization and is pursuing regional free trade agreements. An active participant in the Summit of the Americas process, El Salvador chairs a working group on market access under the Free Trade Area of the Americas initiative. 
El Salvador has joined its six Central American neighbors in signing the Alliance for Sustainable Development, known as the Conjunta Centroamerica-USA or CONCAUSA to promote sustainable economic development in the region.

Bilateral relations

Republic of China (Taiwan)


El Salvador maintains official diplomatic relations with the Republic of China (Taiwan) instead of the People's Republic of China. President Mauricio Funes stated El Salvador will only have commercial ties with the People's Republic of China and promised to the ROC president that El Salvador will maintain their diplomatic ties. As part of its military ties with El Salvador, the ROC sold T-65 Assault Rifles to El Salvador during the 1970s and 1980s, which are used by the National Civilian Police, and trained Salvadorian military officers during the civil war. It was one of the first countries that aided Salvadorian government and people during the 2011 floods. The ROC ambassador to El Salvador is Andrea Lee and the Salvadorian ambassador to the ROC is Marta Chang de Tsien. Ambassadorial relations began in 1961. El Salvador is one of the ROC's strongest supporters in the UN and the National Legislative Assembly's President Silfrido Reyes visited Taiwan recently to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Republic of China (Taiwan). The elected president of El Salvador , Salvador Sanchez Ceren , said that does not intend to restrict relations with Taiwan, following a scandal involving alleged corruption Taiwanese cooperation funds . "Theme of our foreign policy is open to the world and that sense we are to strengthen relationships and not restrict them , because we are a country we need to exchange with everyone , "said the former guerrilla and Salvadoran Vice current , the June 1 will take over as the new ruler of El Salvador. Sánchez Ceren was referring being consulted about the research process opened in El Salvador to the president of that country Francisco Flores, for having received funds from Taiwan, and whether this influence change its policy toward the Republic of China (Taiwan) . "As president I will be respectful of the process and the decision of the prosecution "because" there is clear evidence that were not well used those resources, " he said. But he said that has not been raised at any time restrict relations with Taiwan but , on the contrary to strengthen the diplomatic relations/ties with the Republic of China (Taiwan) and open the doors of El Salvador to the world. Sánchez Ceren said the investigation against Flores is in the hands of the prosecution and in the Legislature , which has formed a commission. He is investigated for having received at least $ 10 million in donations from Taiwan between 2003 and 2004. Sanchez stated his willingness to strengthen strengthen the  official diplomatic relations/ties with the Republic of China (Taiwan) and make Taiwan one of El Salvador's development partners on the future. Sanchez has stated during the presidential campaing that El Salvador will respect its official diplomatic relations with Taiwan.

Russia


El Salvador established diplomatic relation with Russia on 1992 after the end of the Salvadoran Civil War and after the end of the cold war. Russian Foederation foreign minister Sergei Lavrov visited El Salvador and since then legislative visits of legislative even from anti-narcotics cooperation have been acomplished. El Salvador has benefited with the selling of Russian tractors and Russian vans.

Cuba


Cuba and El Salvador have resumed diplomatic relations on June 1, 2009. El Salvador previously suspended diplomatic relations with Cuba 50 years ago due to the Cuban Revolution. El Salvador is also the very last Latin American nation to do so.

Honduras


In July 1969, El Salvador and Honduras fought the 100-hour Football War over disputed border areas and friction resulting from the 300,000 Salvadorans who had emigrated to Honduras in search of land and employment. The catalyst was nationalistic feelings aroused by a series of soccer matches between the two countries. The two countries formally signed a peace treaty on October 30, 1980, which put the border dispute before the International Court of Justice. In September 1992, the court issued a 400-page ruling, awarding much of the disputed land to Honduras. Although there have been tensions between citizens on both sides of the border, the two countries have worked to maintain stability and signed an agreement in November 1996 to establish a framework for negotiating the final disposition of citizens and property in the affected areas. El Salvador and Honduras share normal diplomatic and trade relations.
The Honduras-El Salvador Border Protocol ratified by Honduras in May 1999 established a framework for a long-delayed border demarcation, which is currently underway; with respect to the maritime boundary in the Golfo de Fonseca, the ICJ referred to the line determined by the 1900 Honduras-Nicaragua Mixed Boundary Commission and advised that some tripartite resolution among El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua likely would be required.

Mexico


Diplomatic relations between Mexico and El Salvador were established in 1838.

Palestine


El Salvador, which is home to a sizeable ethnic Palestinian community, was widely expected to join the succession of South American governments that recognised Palestine in the end of 2010. 
The Central American Integration System (SICA) was expected to adopt a co-ordinated position on the issue at its summit in San Salvador on 18 August.

Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic


El Salvador recognized the SADR on July 31, 1989. On April 1997, El Salvador cancelled relations with the SADR. On June 2009, and during a visit of SADR's president, Mohamed Abdelaziz, relations were restored. On November 30, 2010, the SADR and El Salvador upgrade their relations to ambassadorial level.SADR and El Salvador establish diplomatic relations at ambassadorial level

United States


U.S. policy towards the country promotes the strengthening of El Salvador's democratic institutions, rule of law, judicial reform, and civilian police; national reconciliation and reconstruction; and economic opportunity and growth. El Salvador has been a committed member of the coalition of nations fighting against terrorism and has sent 10 rotations of troops to Iraq to support Operation Iraqi Freedom.


Illicit drugs

El Salvador is a transshipment point for cocaine; cannabis produced for local consumption; domestic drug use on the rise.






