[[MasterChef Junior]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 American television series debuts, 2010s American television series, American cooking television series, American reality television series, American television series based on British television series, English-language television programming, Fox network shows, MasterChef US

MasterChef Junior is a cooking competition television series that is airing on Fox. It premiered on Friday, September 27, 2013.
On March 5, 2014, MasterChef Junior was renewed for a third season, before production on season two began.

Format

Children between the ages of 8 and 13 apply to become a contestant on the series. Twenty-four applicants are chosen to audition. At the auditions, the applicants are split into three groups. One group prepares seafood dishes, one prepares pasta dishes, and one group prepares dessert dishes to present to the judges. 12 of the applicants become contestants for the next round, and all 24 receive one of the MasterChef franchise's signature aprons that they get to keep, regardless of their progress.
After the audition round, two contestants are sent home per episode. The winner receives a prize of US$100,000 and the MasterChef Junior trophy.

Cast

The series is judged by Gordon Ramsay, Joe Bastianich, and Graham Elliot.

Production

Fox placed casting calls for participants in January 2013. The name was later changed to MasterChef Junior.
There were concerns that Ramsay's style of cursing at the contestants on his other competition shows (most notably Hell's Kitchen) would carry over to MasterChef Junior, but Ramsay said that he had only cursed twice during the production of the series, and never at the contestants. In the final editing, he cursed once in front of the contestants, but not at them.

Broadcast

The first season of MasterChef Junior premiered on September 27, 2013. Fox announced there will be a second season.masterchefjuniorcasting.com/

Season 1 (2013)

The winner of MasterChef Junior season 1 is Alexander.

Top 12

Elimination table

Episodes

=Episode 1=

After a nationwide search for the best junior home chefs in the country, twenty-four are invited to the MasterChef kitchen to compete for a spot in the top twelve. The children are split up into three groups of eight. The first group is assigned to create a restaurant quality seafood dish of their choosing. After all eight meals are tasted, Roen with his seared ahi tuna and sushi, Jack with his seared crab cakes, Molly with her fish tacos and Sofia with her Chilean sea bass advance into the top twelve. The second group is assigned to create a stunning plate of fresh pasta. After all eight meals are tasted, Gavin with his tortellini, Jewels with her gnocchi, Troy with his sea scallop fettuccine, Dara with her herb and cheese spaetzle and Tommy with his pumpkin ravioli advance to the next round. The final group has to create an amazing dessert. After all eight meals are tasted, Alexander with his pistachio macaroons, Sarah with her chocolate molten lava cake and Kaylen with her mint lime cupcakes advance, creating the top twelve.

=Episode 2=

Before the series' first mystery box challenge, Gordon announced that the winner will receive $100,000, which excites all the young home cooks. The mystery box for this episode contains filet mignon, tiger shrimp, puff pastry, mixed berries, soy sauce, onion, garlic, potatoes, mushrooms, peppers, cherry tomatoes, ginger, greens and blue cheese. Also in the mystery box is a tablet, where the contestants can use it to Skype anybody they want to get ideas for their dish. The top three for the mystery box are Jack, Alexander and Troy. In the end, Jack's Surf and Turf with potato puff is deemed the winning dish in the first mystery box of the series.
For winning the mystery box, Jack gains immunity from the Elimination Challenge as his first advantage. The theme of the Elimination Challenge is the judges' childhood favorite meals. For his second advantage, Jack is given the opportunity to choose what the rest of the contestants would have to cook. His choices are Joe's chicken wings, Graham's hamburger and Gordon's fish sticks. Jack ultimately chooses the burger. The eleven competing contestants are given an hour to create a restaurant quality burger. The three best meals of the Elimination Test are Alexander's beef slider with black garlic aioli, despite Joe fearing he's overthinking the dish, Gavin's Italian burger with cucumber tomato salad, and Kaylen's "All around the world" beef and pork burger with onion rings. Sarah also pleased the judges with her All-American burger with pineapple and baked beans. The bottom three meals are Jewels' lamb burger with caramelized onions, Molly's Korean barbecue burger with kimchi and fried onions, and Tommy's breakfast burger with sweet potato tots. In the end, the judges send Jewels to safety, leading to the elimination of Molly and Tommy.

=Episode 3=

The top 3 from the previous elimination challenge, Alexander, Gavin and Kaylen, are each given a quart of heavy cream and told to whip it to stiff peaks. Whoever had the thickest cream - measured by holding the bowl upside-down over one of the judges' heads - would get an advantage for the next team challenge. Alexander goes first, holding his bowl over Graham's head, and not one drop falls on the judge. Gavin is next. While his cream doesn't have stiff peaks, it's still thicker and more whipped than plain cream, though it's not thick enough to prevent a large portion from falling on Joe's head. Kaylen is last to take her turn, and her cream is even thinner than Gavin's, resulting in it completely drenching Gordon, who, for the first time in this series, swears aloud. Alexander is thus judged the winner - after which he dumps the contents of his bowl over Graham's head anyway, and everyone ends up throwing cream at Graham.
As the winner of the last challenge, Alexander has the task of dividing the top 10 into 5 groups of 2; he thus selects Troy to join him, pairs Gavin with Sofia, Jack with Kaylen, Roen with Jewel and Dara with Sarah. The task for this challenge is to recreate Gordon Ramsey's signature dish, Beef Wellington, with sides of mashed potatoes and broccolini. Ultimately, Dara and Sarah, whose execution of the dish is deemed absolutely flawless, are narrowly judged to have the best meal by Mr. Ramsay. Closely following are Alexander and Troy, whose meal is only prevented from being perfect by the fact that they waited too long to coat their filet in mustard. Alexander had pointed out that was supposed to be done immediately after the filet was seared, but Troy wouldn't listen to him. Gavin and Sofia's meal, while criticized for having an overly thick layer of pastry on the wellington, is also felt to be very good overall. The weakest 2 meals are those of Jack and Kaylen, along with Jewels and Roen. Jack and Kaylen's wellington suffered from soggy pastry, overcooked filet as a result of using insufficient mushroom duxelles, and mushy broccolini, while Jewels and Roen's wellington is severely over-seasoned with salt and has too much pastry. After deeming the other 3 teams safe, the judges ultimately decide that Jewels and Roen had the weaker of the 2 meals, resulting in their elimination.

=Episode 4=

The mystery box consists of "foods kids hate:" liver, kidneys, snails, brussel sprouts, sardines, artichoke, blue cheese, olives, dates and fennel. Dara's attempt to make a blue cheese soufflé goes badly wrong from using too much batter in her ramekin, leaving her as the only member of the top eight to not present a meal, though the judges still commend her ambition. The top three for the mystery box are Sarah's deep-fried sardines, Alexander's sticky toffee pudding and Troy's snail chowder. In the end, Sarah wins the challenge.
After winning the mystery box, Sarah gains immunity from the Elimination Challenge as her first advantage. The theme of the Elimination Challenge is desserts. Sarah is able to choose what the rest of the contestants would have to cook. Her choices are Joe's cupcakes, Graham's 3-layer cake and Gordon's fruit tarts. Sarah chooses Graham's layer cake, with hopes of eliminating Alexander and Troy. The rest of the competing contestants are given 1 1/2 hours to create a three-layer cake. Most of them had never prepared one before and face a series of problems. Alexander mistakes his flour for confectioners' sugar and has to start over, and Sofia cries when her batter refuses to work. Gordon comes over to Sofia and gets her back on her feet, but both Alexander and Sofia have fallen behind. The 2 best cakes of the Elimination Test are Dara's cayenne-spiced chocolate cake, and Gavin's all-chocolate cake. Jack's vanilla raspberry cake with meringue buttercream frosting, while not up to the standards of the top 2, also gets positive feedback and saves him from elimination. The 4 worst cakes are Troy's lemon cake with cream cheese icing, Alexander's lemon cake with meringue icing, Kaylen's vanilla cake with berry icing and Sofia's chocolate cake with berry buttercream. Unfortunately, Sarah's plan to eliminate Troy and Alexander backfired, as Troy's cake did just enough to keep him in the competition, while Alexander survives mostly by virtue of his past performances (despite the judges calling his cake a "disaster"), leading to the tearful elimination of Kaylen and Sofia. Before leaving the MasterChef kitchen, Kaylen and Sofia express who they think would win the competition (Alexander-Sofia, and Dara-Kaylen (who would coincidentally be the two juniors to make it to the finale).

=Episode 5=

The Top 6'contestants travel to Drago Centro in Los Angeles. Joe announces they'd be competing in the restaurant takeover challenge, which scares some of the kids. Because Dara and Gavin had the best cakes last episode, they're named team captains. Dara chooses Alexander and Jack for her red team while Gavin chooses Troy and Sarah for his blue team. The teams have to prepare 2 appetizers and entrees from the menu: A Burrata Salad and Seared Albacore Tuna for appetizers, along with Short Rib Ravioli and Pan Seared Branzino for entrées. The teams have an hour of prep and 75 minutes of lunch service. Promptly after prep time begins, Troy takes command of the blue team, but Gordon tells him to calm down and allow team captain Gavin to take control. The red team, however, shares responsibilities and decides democratically who'd do what. Troy and Sarah have a hard time getting along. Once prep time is over, Mr. Ramsay, who's the expediter, begins calling out orders and service officially starts. The blue team falls behind because they're struggling to work together, and even have to redo a dish because Troy had sliced the tuna too thin. On the red team, Dara and Alexander begin arguing, but Jack and Gordon bring them back together. The guests enjoy their appetizers and give good reviews, with no clue that the chefs are children. The teams now have to prepare a dish for Chef Ian of the restaurant. While the blue team continue to have conflicts, the red team gets it together. Chef Ian tests the teams' appetizers. The blue team's Burrata Salad looks and tastes better and for the tuna, both teams get good reviews. The teams now prepare their entrees for fifty customers and Chef Ian. Gavin of the blue team tries to ease the tension between Troy and Sarah. However, the red team gets it together and works in unison. The customers give mixed reviews. The teams prepares Chef Ian's meals. The blue team finally works together, but on the contrary, the red team struggles to get the order done. The red team's ravioli looks and tastes better while the blue team's ravioli is lacking sauce. The red team's Branzino looks better, but the blue team's Branzino tastes better. The guests fill out their comment cards, and the young cooks come out of the kitchen to greet the guests, who are blown away by the fact that children ages 9 to 13 cooked their food. The cooks travel back to the MasterChef kitchen to find which team won the challenge. Back in the kitchen, the judges declare the Red team the winners, sending Dara, Alexander and Jack to the semifinals. The Blue team is up for elimination; however, only one will be safe. In the end, the judges save Troy, while Gavin and teary-eyed Sarah are sent home. Before they left, Gordon asked them about who they think will win. Sarah thought Troy would win, despite him giving her a hard time at the restaurant, and Gavin said Jack will win.

=Episode 6=

All 4 remaining contestants are asked to make a perfect soft-cooked egg but thrown a curveball by being refused any sort of timer and forced to go completely on gut instinct to determine when their egg is ready. When the eggs are presented, Alexander and Jack's eggs are completely hard-cooked, and while Dara's yellow is somewhat softer, it's still mostly solid. Troy's egg is about halfway between being soft and hard-cooked, resulting in him being named the winner for delivering the closest to what the judges had asked for.
As the winner of the individual challenge, Troy's advantage is to assign himself and the other 3 cooks one of 4 cuts of chicken. He chooses thigh for himself, gives Alexander the liver (considered the hardest cut), Dara the wings and Jack the breast. During the cooking phase, Dara is composed and confident throughout, Jack keeps going back and forth to the pantry to get ingredients he forgot, Troy ignores Joe's advice to cook 2 thighs as a backup plan, while Alexander is extremely nervous about his cut, as he knew nothing about cooking liver. Troy is first-up to be judged, and serves up a pan-fried thigh with romesco sauce. Unfortunately, Troy had confused the cooking times of chicken breasts and thighs, and when Gordon cuts it open, the interior of the thigh is completely raw, leaving the judges unable to taste it. They nonetheless compliment him on his presentation and the taste of the side items, but it's of little consolation to Troy, who knows he's highly likely not going to make it to the finale due to this mistake. Dara serves soy-ginger wings with pickled veggies, which gets unanimous praise from the judges, and in particular is complimented on its presentation. Alexander creates a pate of his liver and serves it atop a garlic crostini, which gets huge praise from the judges for turning what's by far the hardest of the 4 cuts into a rustic, restaurant-quality meal that causes Mr. Ramsay to joke that, if Alexander was 5 years older, then he'd hire him on the spot. Finally, Jack serves a goat cheese and sun-dried tomato stuffed chicken breast roulade wrapped in prosciutto, asparagus and roasted potatoes; the judges all love the meal and are astonished that Jack, the youngest remaining competitors, had served up the most complex dish of the night and executed it so well. With Troy's elimination largely a foregone conclusion, the judges are left to choose between Alexander, Dara and Jack. Alexander is named the first finalist for having the best overall meal in this challenge, leaving Dara and Jack. Ultimately, the judges make Dara the other finalist for her presentation skills and being the only contestant in the top 4 not to finish in the bottom 3 or 4 of a challenge, leading to the elimination of Jack and Troy.

=Episode 7=








