[[Kamijo (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: Versailles (band), Visual kei musicians, Japanese singer-songwriters, Japanese heavy metal singers, Japanese rock singers, Japanese pop singers, Japanese male singers, Japanese models, Japanese actors, Living people, 1975 births, Musicians from Kanagawa Prefecture

Kamijo is a Japanese singer-songwriter, musician, and music producer.altervista.htm He is best known as lead singer of the visual kei bands Lareine and Versailles. He has also been the head of two independent record labels; the first being Applause Records (formed in 2000), and currently Sherow Artist Society since 2006. His music covers many genres, Lareine having mainly a pop rock style, and Versailles a clear symphonic metal and power metal sound.syncl. In 2013, Kamijo began a solo career for the first time, with his debut single "Louis~艶血のラヴィアンローズ".yahoo.co.oricon.co.jp/prof/artist/14373/profile/full/

Early life

Kamijo was raised in a family of musicians; his mother and grandmother were both piano player, and his grandfather a violinist. His first steps in rock are set in the mid 90s, when he worked as a roadie for the visual kei rock band Malice Mizer. He shared this job with Mayu, a guitarist with whom he formed the band Lareine.jpopasia.com/celebrity/kamijo/

Career

1994–2007: Lareine

In August 1994, Mayu and Kamijo (then using the name Shoki) met for the first time while they were working as roadies for Malice Mizer. The same year, in November, they decide to form a band together, which they named Laliene ru cheri, commonly called just Laliene; named that way for the French Queen Marie Antoinette. Along with guitarist Sakuren and drummer Kyouka, they begin to play. Later bass player Emiru entered the band, completing the first line-up.visunavi.com
In March, 1996, Laliene held a live concert for their first anniversary, where they changed the name of the band to Lareine. That same year they released their first recording "Saikai no Hana", distributed freely at the anniversary concert in a limited number of 100 copies. After many years of releasing many albums, EPs and singles, during a short separation of the band, Kamijo created the band New Sodmy, and recorded two albums and five singles.jame-world.html
In February 2007, Lareine finally came to its end, having played their last live on October 31, 2006. The last recording of Lareine consists of 10 piano versions of their most popular songs.

2007–2012: Versailles

In March 2007, Kamijo and Hizaki (ex-Sulfuric Acid), and Jasmine You (ex-Jakura), formed the band Versailles. Later, Teru (ex-Aikaryu) and Yuki (ex-Sugar Trip), who were recommended by the Rock May Kan venue in Tokyo, joined the band. Hizaki, Jasmine You and Teru previously played together as part of Hizaki Grace Project.
Kamijo and Hizaki created the concept of Versailles in the autumn of 2006 and spent six months gathering members to express it. Their band concept is "the absolute youshikibi (beauty of form) sound and extremes of aestheticism". On March 30, 2007 the details of the band were announced. They released promotional material through the internet, set up an English language page on MySpace, and had several interviews with foreign press. Versailles made their first appearance with a showcase on June 23, followed by their first performance on June 24. On these dates they also distributed their first single and DVD single, "The Revenant Choir".metropolis.co.asp
The band signed with the German CLJ Records label and released the EP Lyrical Sympathy on October 31, both in Japan and Europe. Their song "The Love From A Dead Orchestra" also appeared on a compilation album released by Sony BMG in Germany on November 9, called Tokyo Rock City. On September 23, 2008, Kamijo modeled clothing for the brand Alice and the Pirates on the runway at Individual Fashion Expo IV.
In January 2011, he and the rest of Versailles started starring in their own TV mini drama called  The band released four albums, one EP, eight singles, two live albums, ten music videos, one compilation albums and several DVDs.

2013: Solo career

In January 2013, Kamijo announced he would start a solo career, with his first release being the single "Louis ~Enketsu no La Vie en Rose~" on August 28.
Kamijo also sang backup on the 2013 debut album Heartstrings by Aisenshi, the new band of Eizo Sakamoto (Anthem) and She-Ja (Volcano).

Discography






