[[Hoosiers]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 films, 1980s drama films, American films, American basketball films, American teen films, Basketball in Indiana, Directorial debut films, English-language films, Film soundtracks, Films set in Indiana, Films set in 1952, Films shot in Indiana, Orion Pictures films, Sports films based on actual events, United States National Film Registry films, Film scores by Jerry Goldsmith

Hoosiers is a 1986 sports film written by Angelo Pizzo and directed by David Anspaugh. It tells the story of a small-town Indiana high school basketball team that wins the state championship. It is loosely based on the Milan High School team that won the 1954 state championship.
Gene Hackman stars as Norman Dale, a new coach with a spotty past. The film co-stars Barbara Hershey and Dennis Hopper, whose role as the basketball-loving town drunk earned him an Oscar nomination. Jerry Goldsmith was also nominated for an Academy Award for his score.

Plot

Norman Dale arrives in the rural southwest Indiana town of Hickory to become a high school teacher and head basketball coach.  He was hired by Cletus Summers, the principal and a longtime friend of Dale's.  Dale had lost a previous collegiate coaching position after striking a student, so the job is something of a last chance for him.
Like much of the state, Hickory is passionate about basketball. Dale is questioned rather pointedly and intensely at an impromptu meeting at the town barber shop. People are aware that the best player in town, Jimmy Chitwood, does not intend to play on this season's team due to his attachment to the previous coach. Faculty member Myra Fleener warns Dale not to try to persuade Jimmy to change his mind; she believes he needs to focus on academics in order to get a scholarship to attend college and have a better future.  Dale has no intention of going after Jimmy; in fact, Dale meets with Jimmy and tells him that playing on the team is ultimately his choice and that he doesn't care whether Jimmy eventually joins the team.
The school enrollment is so small that Dale has only seven players on his squad. At his first practice, Dale immediately dismisses the acting coach, one of the townsmen.  The man threatens Dale not to "screw up" the team.  Minutes into addressing the players for the first time, he dismisses two, Buddy Walker and Whit Butcher, from the team for not paying attention when he speaks.  He then begins drilling the remaining five players (Rade Butcher, Merle Webb, Everett Flatch, Strap Purl, and Ollie McLellan) with fundamentals and conditioning but no scrimmages, much to the players' dislike.  Townsmen intrude on the practice and demand to know what Dale is doing. Whit's father intervenes, however, and makes his son apologize to Dale and ask for another chance.  Mr. Butcher then shows his support of Dale by dismissing the townsmen.  Later, Mr. Butcher will join Dale on the bench.
Built on a four-pass offense, Dale remains steadfast when Rade Butcher disobeys him and shoots without passing, benching him despite shooting accurately, and playing with four players after another fouls out.  Rade later jumps to Dale's defense in an ensuing game when an opposing player threatens him.  After the brawl, Cletus, who has been assisting Dale in coaching, decides his heart cannot take the tension.
The coach alienates the community with a slow, defensive style that does not immediately produce results and also by losing his temper, which causes him to be ejected from multiple games.   
With Cletus laid up, Dale invites knowledgeable basketball fan Shooter Flatch, Everett's alcoholic father, to join him on the bench as a new assistant. This, too, confounds the town, including Everett. The coach has just one condition, that Shooter must be sober at all times around the boys.
By the middle of the season, an emergency town meeting is called to vote on whether Dale should be dismissed. Fleener appreciates the coach's staying away from Jimmy and sides with him, but the town votes him out. At the last minute, Jimmy enters the meeting and asks permission to speak: he says he's ready to begin playing basketball again, but only if Dale remains as coach.  Fleener's mother calls for a re-vote, and the town almost unanimously votes for Dale to stay as coach.
From this point, Hickory becomes an unstoppable team. Along the way, Dale proves Shooter's value to the townspeople (and to Shooter himself) by intentionally getting himself ejected from a game and forcing Shooter to show his coaching ability.  Shooter does just that by diagramming a play by which Hickory wins the game on a last-second shot.  Despite a setback in which Shooter arrives drunk to a game and ends up in a hospital, the team advances through tournament play, with contributions from unsung players, such as the pint-sized Ollie and devoutly religious Strap.
Hickory shocks the state by reaching the championship game in Indianapolis. In a large arena and before a crowd bigger than any they've seen, the Hickory players face long odds to defeat a team from South Bend, whose players are taller and more athletic.  But with Chitwood scoring at the last second, tiny Hickory takes home the 1952 Indiana state championship.

Cast

Basis

thumb|right|Milan High School Basketball Team, 1954.The film is very loosely based on the story of the 1954 Indiana state champions, Milan High School (
In most U.S. states, high school athletic teams are divided into different classes, usually based on the number of enrolled students, with separate state championship tournaments held for each classification. At the time, Indiana conducted a single state basketball championship for all of its high schools, and continued to do so until 1997.
Some elements of the film do match closely with those of Milan's real story. Like the movie's Hickory High School, Milan was a very small high school in a rural, southern Indiana town. Both schools had undersized teams. Both Hickory and Milan won the state finals by two points: Hickory won 42–40, and Milan won 32–30. The final seconds of the Hoosiers state final hold fairly closely to the details of Milan's 1954 final; the final shot in the movie was taken from virtually the same spot on the floor as Bobby Plump's actual game-winner. The movie's final game was shot in the same building that hosted the 1954 Indiana final, Butler University's Hinkle Fieldhouse (called Butler Fieldhouse in 1954) in Indianapolis.
Certain aspects of the film obfuscate the racial reality of 1950s small-town southern Indiana and its many sundown towns. 
African-American students sitting in integrated bleachers at home or visiting school gymnasiums in Southern Indiana towns before the 1950s was a rarity if not entirely fictional. Afro-American barnstorming basketball players did appear in Jasper gyms long before the 1950s.  The professional New York Renaissance lost a game to the host Jasper Coca-Colas in 1936.

Production

During filming on location at Hinkle Fieldhouse, directors were unable to secure enough extras for shooting the final scenes even after casting calls through the Indianapolis media. To help fill the stands, they invited two local high schools to move a game to the Fieldhouse. Broad Ripple and Chatard, the alma mater of Maris Valainis who played the role of Jimmy Chitwood, obliged, and crowd shots were filmed during their actual game. Fans of both schools came out in period costumes to serve as extras and to supplement the hundreds of locals who had answered the call. At halftime and following the game, actors took to the court to shoot footage of the state championship scenes, including the game-winning shot by Hickory.
Speculation exists that the character of Norman Dale was named for Norm Ellenberger, whose middle name is Dale. A longtime college assistant coach, he once played basketball for coach Tony Hinkle at Butler.
The film's producers chose New Richmond to serve as the fictional town of Hickory, and recorded most of the film's location shots in and around the community. Signs on the roads into New Richmond still recall its role in the film. In addition, the old schoolhouse in Nineveh was used for the majority of the classroom scenes and many other scenes throughout the movie.
The home court of Hickory is located in Knightstown and is now known as the "Hoosier Gym."  
Pizzo and Anspaugh shopped the script for two years before they finally found investment for the project. Despite this seeming approval, the financiers only approved a production budget of $6 million, forcing the crew to hire most of the cast playing the Hickory basketball team and many of the extras from the local community around New Richmond. Gene Hackman also predicted that the movie was going to be a "career killer." Despite the small budget, dire predictions, and little help from distributor Orion Pictures, Hoosiers grossed over $28 million and received two Oscar nominations (Dennis Hopper for Best Supporting Actor and Jerry Goldsmith for Best Original Score).ESPN the Magazine Movie Spectacular - An oral history of "Hoosiers," an iconic sports movie - ESPN

Soundtrack

The music to Hoosiers was written by veteran composer Jerry Goldsmith. Goldsmith used a hybrid of orchestral and electronic elements in juxtaposition to the 1950s setting to score the film. He also helped tie the music to the movie by using recorded hits of basketballs on a gymnasium floor to serve as additional percussion sounds.com Washington Post film critic Paul Attanasio praised the soundtrack, writing, "And it's marvelously (and innovatively) scored (by composer Jerry Goldsmith), who weaves together electronics with symphonic effects to create a sense of the rhythmic energy of basketball within a traditional setting.
The score would go on to garner Goldsmith an Oscar nomination for Best Original Score, though he ultimately lost to Herbie Hancock for Round Midnight.  Goldsmith would later work with filmmakers Angelo Pizzo and David Anspaugh again on their successful 1993 sports film Rudy.
Until 2012, the soundtrack was primarily available under the European title Best Shot, with several of the film's cues not included on the album.
Track listing (1987 release):

In 2012, Intrada Records released Goldsmith's complete score, marking the first time the soundtrack has been released on CD in the United States.com
Track listing (2012 release):

Reception

Critical response

Hoosiers received positive reviews. Rotten Tomatoes gives the film a score of 88% based on reviews from 43 critics, with an average score of 7.5/10.  The critical consensus is that "it may adhere to the sports underdog formula, but Hoosiers has been made with such loving craft, and features such excellent performances, that it's hard to resist."
Chicago Sun-Times critic Roger Ebert praised the film, writing that what made it...
Ebert closed his review with the comment, "It's a movie that is all heart."Ebert, Roger. "Hoosiers," Chicago Sun-Times (Feb. 27, 1987).
The New York Times Janet Maslin echoed Ebert's sentiments, writing, "This film's very lack of surprise and sophistication accounts for a lot of its considerable charm."Maslin, Janet. "Film: Gene Hackman as a Coach in 'Hoosiers,'" New York Times (Feb. 27, 1987). Washington Post critics Rita Kempley and Paul Attanasio both enjoyed the film, despite its perceived sentimentalism and lack of originality. Kempley wrote, "Even though we've seen it all before, Hoosiers scores big by staying small."Kempley, Rita. "Hoosiers," Washington Post (Feb. 27, 1987). Attanasio pointed out some problems with the film: "some klutzy glitches in continuity, and a love story (between Hackman and a sterile, one-note Barbara Hershey) that goes nowhere. The action photography flattens the visual excitement of basketball (you can imagine what a Scorsese would do with it);" but he noted the film's "enormous craftsmanship accumulates till you're actually seduced into believing all its Pepperidge Farm buncombe. That's quite an achievement."Attanasio, Paul. "Hoosiers," Washington Post (Feb. 27, 1987).
Time magazine's Richard Schickel praised the performance of Gene Hackman, writing that he was "wonderful as an inarticulate man tense with the struggle to curb a flaring, mysterious anger."Schickel, Richard. "Cinema: Knight-Errant Hoosiers," Time (Feb. 9, 1987). And Variety wrote that the "pic belongs to Hackman, but Dennis Hopper gets another opportunity to put in a showy turn as a local misfit."Variety Staff. "Hoosiers," Variety (Dec. 31, 1985).
Pat Graham of the Chicago Reader was the rare dissenter, writing of the film that "Director David Anspaugh seems only marginally concerned with basketball thematics: what matters most is feeding white-bread fantasies (the film is set in the slow-footed 50s, when blacks are only a rumor and nobody's ever heard of slam 'n' jam) and laying on the inspirational corn.... Bobby Knight would not be amused, though Tark the Shark might've had a good laugh at the naive masquerade."Graham, Pat. "Hoosiers," Chicago Reader. Accessed Mar. 27, 2012.

Awards and honors

Hoosiers has been listed by many publications as one of the best sports movies ever made.
Hoosiers was ranked number 13 by the American Film Institute on its 100 Years... 100 Cheers list of most inspirational films.
In June 2008, AFI revealed its "Ten top Ten" — the best ten films in ten classic American film genres — after polling over 1,500 people from the creative community. Hoosiers was acknowledged as the fourth best film in the sports genre.
A museum to commemorate the real life achievements of the 1954 Milan team has been established.
American Film Institute Lists








