[[Kimberly-Clark Health Care]]

CATEGORIES: Manufacturing companies based in Georgia (U.S. state), Medical equipment manufacturers

Kimberly-Clark Health Care provides products for infection prevention, digestive health, respiratory health, surgical solutions and pain management. It sells its products through distributors in the United States and internationally. The company is headquartered in Roswell, Georgia. Kimberly-Clark Health Care Inc. operates as a subsidiary of Kimberly-Clark Corporation.

History

On March 26, 1872, Kimberly, Clark & Co. was established in Neenah, Wisconsin through the partnership of four businessmen—John A. Kimberly, Havilah Babcock, Charles B. Clark and Frank C. Shattuck.
The first recorded healthcare product by Kimberly-Clark was absorbent wadding, intended to replace cotton. It was used as a bandage for wounded soldiers in World War I. Army nurses adapted the material for menstrual use.
In 1980, Health Care began to grow as it was separated from consumer packaged goods management and products, such as Kleenex, with a move to Roswell, Georgia, its current headquarters.

Expansion

Kimberly-Clark Health Care opened European Health Care operations in Brussels in 1991.
In 1999, Kimberly-Clark Health Care expanded into new global markets with the introduction of medical devices, including Mic-Key Enteral Feeding Systems and Trach Care Closed Suction Systems.

Company acquisitions

In 1998, Ballard Medical Product, a maker of disposable medical devices for respiratory care, gastroenterology and cardiology, was purchased by Kimberly-Clark for $764 million.
That same year, Kimberly-Clark also acquired TECNOL Medical Products, Inc., a maker of disposable face masks and patient care products.
Kimberly-Clark acquired Safeskin Corporation in 2000, a maker of disposable gloves for healthcare, high technology and scientific industries.
In 2009, Kimberly-Clark acquired Baylis Medial Company's Pain Management Business.
Also in 2009, Kimberly-Clark acquired I-Flow Corporation, a healthcare company that develops and markets drug delivery systems and products for post-surgical pain relief and surgical site care.

Products

Kimberly-Clark Health Care focuses on five categories of products.

Surgical solutions

K-C's surgical solutions focus on protecting the healthcare professional during procedures and keeping the surgical environment sterile.
Products include:
Kimberly-Clark Health Care developed the MicroCool Breathable High Performance Surgical Gown. It has the highest AAMI level of liquid barrier protection against blood and other bodily fluids. The gown has a micro porous fabric, which utilizes two layers of nonwoven fabric to enclose a protective film layer that "breathes," to dispel body heat.
In 1978, Kimberly-Clark invented Kimguard Sterilization Wrap as an affordable, high-performance alternative to traditional cloth wrapping materials and metal containers. Since creating the original wrap, Kimberly-Clark made two improvements to the product, resulting in One-Step and One-Step Quick Check sterilization wraps.

Digestive health

Kimberly Clark offers digestive health products for enteral feeding, diagnostics and endoscopy procedures.
Products include:
Kimberly-Clark's Mic-Key Low-Profile & Mic Feeding Tubes are used in patients who require enteral feeding, can't tolerate oral feeding, require gastric decompression and/or medication delivery directly into either the stomach, distal to the stomach, distal duodenum or proximal jejunum.

Respiratory health

KimVent Ventilator-associated pneumonia (VAP) products provide critical care clinicians with airway management products, education and compliance programs.
Products include:
Kimberly-Clark makes cuffed endotracheal tubes for both adults and pediatrics. The device was introduced by the company in 2006 and is made out of micro-thin polyurethane.

Pain management

Kimberly-Clark offers pain management products for Chronic Pain and Surgical Pain.
Products include:
Kimberly-Clark Cooled Radiofrequency (RF) System is used to create radiofrequency lesions in nervous tissue, which can help to treat spine anatomy.
The ON-Q Pain Relief System, an I-Flow LLC product, is a narcotic alternative for managing pain after surgery. It provides regional anesthesia therapy directly to or near the surgical site.

Protection and Infection prevention

Kimberly-Clark's personal protective equipment protects healthcare workers and patients from contamination and infections.
Products include:
After acquiring SafeSkin, a maker of disposable gloves, Kimberly-Clark Health Care entered the latex and synthetic glove market.
Kimberly-Clark Health Care also produced the first FDA approved face mask designed for children.

HAI watch programs

Not on My Watch

In 2008, Kimberly-Clark Health Care launched a global educational campaign, Not on My Watch. Its purpose is to educate healthcare workers and support their efforts to reduce the spread of Healthcare Associated Infections (HAI) such as MRSA, CLABSI and Cdiff.
Kimberly-Clark Health Care offers a patient-focused website for HAI prevention, preventinfections. It is an educational website for both patients and caregivers that includes information on how they can protect themselves from the risk of HAIs during a stay in the hospital or other healthcare facility.

HAI Watchdog

In 2010, the HAI Watchdog Awards were created to recognize the efforts of healthcare professionals working together to prevent healthcare-associated infections (HAI). It facilitates the sharing of best practices among clinicians and recognizes four exceptional participants with educational grants. The awards are broken into two categories:

=Clinician's Choice Award=

This category is for HAI prevention initiatives that help educate and build awareness, but may not be directly measured by specific HAI rate changes.

=Panel-Judged Award=

This category is for successful programs yielding a measurable reduction in HAI rates over time.

Clean Hands Care

In 2013, Kimberly-Clark released a campaign called "Clean Hands Care" to spread awareness about how washing and sanitizing hands can prevent Hospital-Associated Infections (HAI).

Headquarters/Campus

Kimberly-Clark Health Care's campus is located in Roswell, Georgia, just north of Atlanta. It sits on 98 acres of private land with 45 acres being undeveloped natural habitat. There is a nine acre lake that provides water for irrigation and wildlife, as well as running and walking trails for employees. 
The headquarters is made up of four office buildings. Each building consists of Kimberly-Clark business sectors, including Global Health Care, Kimberly-Clark Professional and Global Non-Wovens. More than 1,200 scientists, engineers, marketers, financial analysts, sales representatives and operations employees work on the Roswell site. The campus also includes an activities center with a lake-side restaurant and a 24,000-square-foot health center. The health center offers on-site medical services, a fully equipped exercise room, exercise classes, complimentary towel/laundry services and a 25-meter indoor swimming pool.

Corporate governance

Current members of the board of directors of Kimberly-Clark are: John R. Alm, John F. Bergstrom, Abelardo E. Bru, Robert W. Decherd, Thomas J. Falk, Fabian T. Garcia, Mae C. Jemison, James M. Jenness, Nancy J. Karch, Ian C. Read, Linda Johnson Rice, and Marc J. Shapiro.

Sustainability

Kimberly-Clark Health Care focuses on sustainability in four areas:
In 2011, Kimberly-Clark Corporation announced its Sustainability 2015 strategy and five-year goals:
In 2012, Kimberly-Clark Health Care developed Blue ReNew. The program helps healthcare facilities recycle Kimguard Wrap by identifying recycling partners, training operating room teams and measuring results.

Awards

In 2012, Kimberly-Clark Corporation was awarded #1 in industry in Newsweek Magazine's Green Rankings.
In 2013, Kimberly-Clark Health Care was named a winner of the Practice Greenhealth 2013 Champion for Change Awards, recognizing the company's ongoing commitment to sustainability accomplishments in support of people, the planet and products.

Community

Kimberly-Clark Foundation matched $1.5 million in employee giving and awarded about $800,000 in grants to charities where employees volunteered more than 77,000 hours in 2012.
In the last decade, Kimberly-Clark and its employees have contributed more than $60 million to United Way, helping to improve lives and build stronger communities through the areas of education, financial stability and health.
In 2012, Kimberly-Clark and U.S. employees raised about $6.6 million for United Way, an increase of 8.6 percent over 2011.
Since Kimberly-Clark's original grant to help launch MedShare in 1998, the company has funded the shipment of $18.5 million worth of supplies to 13 countries in Latin America.




