[[Possessive Love]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 songs, 1988 singles, Songs written by Patrick Leonard, Songs written by Madonna (entertainer), Atlantic Records singles

"Possessive Love" is a song by American singer Marilyn Martin, released as the lead single from her 1988 album This is Serious. The song was written by Patrick Leonard, Madonna and Jai Winding.

Background

When Martin emerged with the duet "Separate Lives" with Phil Collins, Martin signed with Atlantic Records for a two-record deal. Her 1986 self-titled debut album Marilyn Martin peaked at #72 on the Billboard 200, whilst the single "Night Moves" entered the Top 30 of the Billboard Hot 100. In 1988, Atlantic released Martin's second album, This is Serious, which included "Possessive Love" However, the album and its singles did not sell very well, with "Possessive Love" failing to make a chart impact.
"Possessive Love" was written purposely for Martin, at the suggestion to Madonna by Leonard. However the song has also been reputed to have been originally written and demoed by Madonna during the sessions for her 1987 film/soundtrack Who's That Girl but then got scrapped. The original demo sung by Madonna remains unreleased, and in 1988 the track was given to Martin, who recorded the track with Leonard. Martin's version features longtime backup singer Donna DeLory. A year later, Martin sang backing vocals for Madonna's hit 1989 single "Cherish" from her fourth studio album Like a Prayer.
In an exclusive interview with Martin by Breathe Cast writer Timothy Yap, one question spoke of the song, stating "You also got a chance to record an original song by Madonna and Patrick Leonard called "Possessive Love" and you did sing backing vocals for Madonna on her "Like a Prayer" album. How did you get to work with Madonna? What was it like working with her? Are you still in contact with her?" Martin replied "I met Pat Leonard when I began the search for a producer for my second album. He's the one who approached Madonna with the idea of writing a song for me and she graciously agreed. Pat called me one day while he was working on her "Like a Prayer" album and asked if I would like to come and sing backgrounds... talk about an "Are you kidding?" moment!! She was impressive, to say the least, very in charge. That was the only time I met her."

Release

The single was released in the UK, Germany and Japan via Atlantic Records. The single was distributed by WEA International Inc.45cat.jpg In America, the song was released as a promotional 7" single only. The single's b-side was the album track "Homeless", which was taken from the This is Serious album. It was written by Martin, Jon Astley and Billy Nichols, whilst Astley produced the track.
In the UK and Germany, a 7" and 12" vinyl was issued.
In Japan, the song was released on CD only with the same track-listing. The 2-track 3" CD single was housed in a unique snap-pack picture sleeve with lyrics on the inside.
In America, two promotional versions of the single were issued, both on 7" vinyl. The first featured the same track-listing, and came in a picture sleeve,
All versions featured a full colour picture sleeve which used an almost identical photograph/artwork as used for the This is Serious album.

Promotion

A music video was created for the single.
In the UK a magazine poster was issued featuring a photo of Martin, whilst highlighting 'the new single'.

Track listing

Critical reception

Alex Henderson of Allmusic reviewed the This is Serious album, and stated "Even though "This is Serious" is very much a pop/rock record, there are hints of R&B on spirited, infectious tracks like "Try Me," the title song, and the single "Possessive Love" (which Madonna co-wrote). And that isn't surprising because Martin was quick to point out that she grew up listening to R&B extensively. "This is Serious" had the makings of a hit, but surprisingly, the album turned out to be a commercial disappointment. Even though "Marilyn Martin" is the more essential of her two albums, "This is Serious" is also quite enjoyable."
On April 10, 1988, staff writer Deborah Wilker of the South Florida Sun - Sentinel reviewed the album and stated "Possessive Love, the best track from her second album, bares striking similarities to Madonna's style, with good reason: The tune was written by Madonna and Patrick Leonard."
In a review of Martin's 2012 album Trust, Love, Pray, Breathe Cast writer Timothy Yap mentioned the song, stating "After her bubbly girlish pop image on "Possessive Love," her leather slick rock chick look on "Night Moves" or her girl-next-door country gal vulnerability on "Through His Eyes," what is the musical direction of this new record? She answers it in the title of one of her songs, "every way and always." Like a buffet of styles, there is much to enjoy here: from string-laden big balladry to jaunty soul-filled funk to straight ahead vintage pop."

Personnel

Possessive Love

Homeless






