[[Geography of Benin]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Benin

Benin, a narrow, phallus-shaped, north-south strip of land in West Africa, lies between the Equator and the Tropic of Cancer. Benin's latitude ranges from 6°30′ N to 12°30′ N and its longitude from 1° E to 3°40′ E. Benin is bounded by Togo to the west, Burkina Faso and Niger to the north, Nigeria to the east, and the Bight of Benin to the south.
With an area of  at its widest point.
It is one of the smaller countries in West Africa, about one eighth the size of Nigeria, its neighbor to the east. It is, however, twice as large as Togo, its neighbor to the west. A relief map of Benin shows that it has little variation in elevation, averaging  in elevation.

Biogeography

The country can be divided into four main areas from the south to the north. The low-lying, sandy, coastal plain which has a highest elevation of .
Benin has fields lying fallow, mangroves, and remnants of large sacred forests. In the rest of the country, the savanna is covered with thorny scrubs and dotted with huge baobab trees. Some forests line the banks of rivers. In the north and the northwest of Benin the Reserve du W du Niger and Pendjari National Park attract tourists eager to see elephants, lions, antelopes, hippos and monkeys. Previously Benin offered habitat for the endangered Painted Hunting Dog, Lycaon pictus,C. Michael Hogan. 2009 although this canid is considered to have been extirpated from Benin, due to human population expansion. Woodlands comprise approximately 31 percent of the land area of Benin. 2003
Location:
Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean, between Nigeria and Togo
Geographic coordinates:
Map references:
Africa
Area:
 total:
112 620 km²
  country comparison to the world: 108
 land:
110 620 km²
 water:
2 000 km²
Area comparative
Land boundaries:
 total:
1 989 km
 border countries:
Burkina Faso 306 km, Niger 266 km, Nigeria 773 km, Togo 644 km
Coastline:
121 km
Maritime claims:
 territorial sea:
200 nautical miles (370.4 km)
Climate:
tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north
Terrain:
mostly flat to undulating plain; some hills and low mountains
Elevation extremes:
 lowest point:
Atlantic Ocean 0 m
 highest point:
Mont Sokbaro 658 m
Natural resources:
small offshore oil deposits, limestone, marble, timber
Land use:
 arable land: 23.53%
 permanent crops: 2.37%
 other: 74.1% (2005)
Irrigated land: 120 km² (2003)
'Total renewable water resources: 25.8 cu km (2001)
Freshwater withdrawal (domestic/industrial/agricultural):
  total: 0.13 cu km/yr (32%/23%/45%)
  per capita: 15 cu m/yr (2001)
Natural hazards:
hot, dry, dusty harmattan wind may affect north in December to March
Environment - current issues:
inadequate supplies of potable water; poaching threatens wildlife populations; deforestation; desertification
Environment - international agreements:
 party to:
 signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements
Geography - note:
sandbanks create difficult access to a coast with no natural harbors, river mouths, or islands.

Climate

Benin's climate is hot and humid. Annual rainfall in the coastal area averages . Variations in temperature increase when moving north through a savanna and plateau toward the Sahel. A dry wind from the Sahara called the harmattan blows from December to March. Grass dries up, the vegetation turns reddish brown, and a veil of fine dust hangs over the country, causing the skies to be overcast. It is also the season when farmers burn brush in the fields.

Extreme points

This is a list of the extreme points of Benin, the points that are farther north, south, east or west than any other location.



Line notes




