[[Xfce]]

CATEGORIES: Free desktop environments, X Window System, Compositing window managers, 1996 software, Desktop environments based on GTK+

Xfce (pronounced as four individual letters) is a free software desktop environment for Unix and Unix-like platforms, such as Linux, Solaris, and BSD. It aims to be fast and lightweight, while still being visually appealing and easy to use. It consists of separately packaged components that together provide the full functionality of the desktop environment, but which can be selected in subsets to create the user's preferred personal working environment.

Features

Xfce is based on the GTK+ 2 toolkit (like GNOME 2). It uses the Xfwm window manager, described below. Its configuration is entirely mouse-driven, with the configuration files hidden from the casual user.
It is possible to run Xfce with 40 MB of memory using Alpine Linux.

History

Olivier Fourdan started the project in 1996.

Early versions

Xfce began as a simple project created with XForms, meant to be a free Linux clone of CDE. Fourdan released the program, a simple toolbar, to ibiblio (then "SunSITE").[ref]
[/ref]
Fourdan continued developing the project, and in 1998, Xfce 2 was released with the first version of Xfce's window manager, Xfwm. He requested to have the project included in Red Hat Linux, but was refused because the project was based on XForms. Red Hat only accepted software that was open source and released under either a GPL compatible or BSD compatible license, but, at the time, XForms was closed source and free only for personal use. For the same reason, Xfce was not in Debian before version 3. Xfce 2 was only distributed in Debian's contrib component.4.0.20000513-1 changelog
In March 1999 Fourdan began a complete rewrite of the project based on GTK+, a non-proprietary toolkit whose popularity was increasing. The result was Xfce 3.0, which was licensed under the GNU GPL. Along with being based completely on free software, the project gained GTK+'s drag-and-drop support, native language support, and improved configurability. Xfce was uploaded to SourceForge.8.1.

Modern Xfce

In version 4.0.0, released  In January 2007, Xfce 4.4.0 was released. This included the Thunar file manager, a replacement for Xffm. Support for desktop icons was added. Also, various improvements were made to the panel to prevent buggy plugins from crashing the whole panel.[ref]

In January 2011, Xfce 4.8.0 was released. This version included changes such as the replacement of  ThunarVFS and HAL with GIO, udev, ConsoleKit and PolicyKit, and new utilities for browsing remote network shares using several protocols including SFTP, SMB, and FTP. Window clutter was reduced by merging all file progress dialog boxes into a single dialog. The panel application was also rewritten for better positioning, transparency, item and launcher management. 4.8 also introduced a new menu plugin to view directories. The 4.8 plugin framework remains compatible with 4.6 plugins. The display configuration dialog in 4.8 supports RandR 1.2, detecting screens automatically and allowing users to pick their preferred display resolution, refresh rate and display rotation. Screens can be configured to either work in clone mode or being placed next to each other. Keyboard selection has become easier and more user-friendly. Also, the manual settings editor has been updated to be more functional.
The 4.8 development cycle was the first to use the new release strategy formed after the "Xfce Release and Development Model" developed at the Ubuntu Desktop Summit in May 2009. A new web application was employed to make release management easier, and a dedicated Transifex server was set up for Xfce translators. The project's server and mirroring infrastructure was also upgraded, partly to cope with anticipated demand following the release announcement for 4.8.
Xfce 4.10, released April 28 2012, introduced a vertical display mode for the panel and moved much of the documentation to an online wiki  The main focus of this release was on improving the user experience.

Software components

Xfce has forked only a couple of the GNOME Core Applications and written most from scratch. Applications developed by the Xfce team are based on GTK+ and Clutter and self developed Xfce libraries.
Xfce provides a development framework which contains the following components:
Other than Xfce itself, there are third-party programs which use the Xfce libraries, such as the Xfce Terminal (xfce4-terminal, former Terminal). One of the services provided to applications by the framework is a red banner across the top of the window when the application is running with root privileges warning the user that they could damage system files.

Xfwm

Starting with version 4.2, Xfwm integrates its own compositing manager.

Thunar

Thunar is the default file manager for Xfce, replacing Xffm. It resembles GNOME's Nautilus and is designed for speed and a low memory footprint
More recently, Squeeze has been started as an archive manager designed to integrate better into the Xfce desktop, though no further updates have been released since 24 February 2008, the development git branch for both squeeze and xarchiver are more up to date and feature rich than the last stable release.

Orage

Starting with version 4.4, Xfcalendar was renamed to Orage and several features were added. Orage has alarms and uses the iCalendar format, making it compatible with many other calendar applications. It also includes a panel clock plugin and an international clock application capable of simultaneously showing clocks from several different time zones.

Leafpad

Leafpad is the default  text editor for Xfce in many Linux distributions, including Xubuntu.10 Officially Released. News.com (2011-10-13). Retrieved on 2013-07-17. At one point Xubuntu and some other Xfce-based distributions switched to a fork of Leafpad called Mousepad, developed by Erik Harrison and Nick Schermer to provide printing support and Xfce integration,  but Leafpad gained printing support in version 0.8.11. Github. Retrieved on 2013-07-17. 
Latest version of Mousepad is 0.3.0, and is considered part of xfce4-goodies in many distributions.

Parole

Parole is a media player that is based on the GStreamer framework. It is developed by Ali Abdallah and is part of the Xfce Goodies.

Xfmedia

Xfmedia is a xine-based media player for the Xfce desktop environment. It is unmaintained since November 2006 at version 0.9.2.

Xfburn

A CD/DVD burning program.

Products and distributions using Xfce

Xfce is included as one of the graphical user interfaces on the Pandora handheld gaming system.
It is the default desktop in the following Linux distributions:
It is also included as a standard desktop option in many other distributions, including Ubuntu, Fedora, Linux Mint and Mageia. That means a stable version of Xfce is kept on these distribution repositories and user can easily install it from the package manager/command line.








