[[W. Nelson Francis]]

CATEGORIES: 1910 births, 2002 deaths, Brown University faculty, Linguists, Harvard University alumni

W. Nelson Francis, Ph.D. (October 23, 1910 – June 14, 2002) was an American author, linguist, and university professor. He served as a member of the faculties of Franklin & Marshall College and Brown University, where he specialized in English and corpus linguistics. He is known for his work compiling a text collection entitled the Brown University Standard Corpus of Present-Day American English, which he completed with Henry Kučera.

Early life

Winthrop Nelson Francis was born on October 23, 1910 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. Both of his parents were from New England. His mother was raised in Calais, Maine. His mother attended Wellesley College and taught public school in Boston, before marrying Francis' father and moving to Philadelphia. His father, Joseph Sidney Francis, Francis grew up in the Germantown area of Philadelphia, where he attended the Charles W. Henry Public School and Penn Charter School.F.K. (1998). First Person Singular III: Autobiographies by North American Scholars in the Language Sciences, "A Pilgrim's Progress: From Philology to Linguistics", John Benjamins Publishing, pages 61–69. ISBN 978-9027245762
He earned an undergraduate degree in 1931 from Harvard University, where he majored in Literature, focusing on the study of English, Greek, Latin, and French languages.sagepub.extract He later attended the University of Pennsylvania, where he earned his Ph.D. in Linguistics 1937. His doctoral thesis presented a study of 14th-century Middle English text. In 1939, professor and Middle English scholar Carleton Brown read his dissertation and took it to England and presented it to Mabel Day of the Early English Text Society. In 1942, the manuscript was published by the Oxford University Press.
In 1939, Francis married Anne Poage Funkhouser of Roanoke, Virginia. Together, they had two children, sons John Winthrop Nelson Francis and Samuel H. Francis.
During World War II, he served for three years as an officer in the United States Navy, serving from 1943 to 1946. He was married to Nearlene (née Burkley). They had one child, daughter Nearlene Jocelyn Bertin Francis. His wife was also a professor and member of the faculty at Brown University, where she literature and composition, while also overseeing the English as a second language (ESL) program. She also served as the Director of the International Students Office. Between 1976 and 1977, she lectured at the University of Trondheim in Norway. In 1979, she was an assistant dean of students and assistant professor of English at Wheaton College in Norton, Massachusetts. She served in this capacity until 1982.

Professional background

Academics

Following his graduation from the University of Pennsylvania, Francis joined the faculty of Franklin & Marshall College, where he taught English. In 1957, he headed a faculty committee, which re-evaluated the college's curriculum. The following year, he was named as the chair of the English department. In 1958, his first book was published, which was entitled, The Structure of American English. His scholarly work on varieties of English additionally included compiling, writing, and editing an edition of the 14th-century Book of Vices and Virtues for the Early English Text Society. He was honored with a Fulbright Research Fellowship conducted field research in Norfolk, England, between 1956 and 1957 for the Survey of English Dialects, which was being compiled at the University of Leeds.  
In 1962, he joined the staff of Brown University as a professor of Linguistics and English. In 1964, he began working on a joint language project of Brown University and Tougaloo College, which lasted through 1968. The project applied linguistic principles in a syllabus of Standard American English for African-American freshmen at Tougaloo College. After the project was completed, he became the chair of the linguistics department, serving in that capacity through 1976. While he officially retired at that time with the title of Emeritus Professor, he continued to teach historical and comparative linguistics and advise students. In 1987, he was appointed chair of Brown's newly established Department of Cognitive and Linguistic Sciences. He taught his last course at Brown in 1990.

Writing

After joining the faculty of Brown, Francis took a course in computational linguistics from Henry Kučera, who taught as a member of the Slavic Department staff. In the early 1960s, they began collaborating on compiling a one-million-word computerized cross-section of American English, which was entitled the Brown Standard Corpus of Present-Day American English, but commonly known as the Brown Corpus. The work was compiled between 1963 and 1964, using books, magazines, newspapers, and other edited sources of informative and imaginative prose published in 1961. Once completed, the Brown Corpus was published in 1964. Each word in the corpus is tagged with its part of speech and the subject matter category of its source. Disseminated throughout the world, the Brown Corpus has served as a model for similar projects in other languages and as the basis for numerous scholarly studies, including Francis and Kučera's Frequency Analysis of English Usage, which was published in 1967.
Francis has written articles which have been published in American Speech, College Composition and Communication, College English, Computers and the Humanities, Contemporary Psychology, East Anglian Magazine, English Journal, The Explicator, Language, Language in Society, Lingua, Modern Language Notes, PMLA, The Quarterly Journal of Speech, Speculum, Style, and Word.

Business

In 1977, Francis cofounded the International Computer Archive of Modern and Medieval English (ICAME) at the University of Oslo.

Speaking

Francis served as a keynote speaker, lecturer, and visiting professor in London; Edinburgh; Cairo; Tokyo; and Trondheim, Norway. He also participated in a Nobel Symposium on computer corpus linguistics in Stockholm.

Board memberships

Published works

Books

Other






