[[Primedia]]

CATEGORIES: Media companies of South Africa

Primedia is a South African media group, headquartered in Sandton, Johannesburg. It currently operates more than 50 brands in broadcasting, advertising, marketing, promotions, sport, entertainment and digital media.

History

Primedia was established in 1994 and its listing on the JSE Securities Exchange was completed in April 1995. Primedia remained listed on the JSE until 1 October 2007 when its listing was terminated following a successful private equity transaction (scheme of arrangements).
The Primedia Group is backed by Mineworkers' Investment Company (MIC), Brait Entities, the FirstRand Group and the Old Mutual Group (Old Mutual Private Equity and Old Mutual Specialised Finance) who are major shareholders.
Primedia's advertising businesses are located principally in South Africa. This includes radio broadcasting, outdoor advertising, commuter and other out of home media opportunities, and spans both the traditional and non-traditional media sectors.
The group's content businesses comprise filmed entertainment consisting of cinema exhibition, film distribution, home entertainment; and electronic games. The group is also engaged in new growing sectors of the digital industry through its recently formed Primedia Digital division which incorporates Primedia's internet, mobile and other content based businesses.

Subsidiaries

Primedia Broadcasting

567 CapeTalk is a commercial AM radio station based in Cape Town, South Africa, broadcasting on AM/MW 567 to Cape Town. The station is also webcast via its website. It was established in 1997.
Radio 702, currently known as Talk Radio 702, is a commercial FM radio station based in Johannesburg, South Africa, broadcasting on FM 92.7 and FM 106 to the greater Gauteng province. The station is also webcast via its website.
Kfm is a radio station based in Cape Town, South Africa.
94.7 Highveld Stereo is a radio station that broadcasts on the 94.7FM frequency from Johannesburg, Gauteng, South Africa.
Crimeline is an independent Initiative started by Primedia aimed at helping South African authorities fight crime through anonymous tip-offs.
Eyewitness News is Primedia Broadcasting's news brand.
PrimeTalent is a talent management company aimed at providing a range of professional services to Primedia Broadcasting's on air talent.
Lead SA is a Primedia Broadcasting initiative, supported by Independent Newspapers to promote active citizenship. Lead SA's focus areas include education, road safety and the environment.

Advertising, Marketing & Promotions

Cinemark is an advertising sales company that represents Ster-Kinekor and selected independent cinemas. Client solutions include on-screen advertising, foyer branding, a plasma network, eventing, activations, ticket incentive programmes and conferencing.  Have over 40 years in the theatre environment. 

Primedia Outdoor - Primedia Outdoor is a national outdoor advertising media specialist. Part of the Out-of-Home division of Primedia (Pty) Ltd, Primedia Outdoor focuses primarily on the marketing and sales of outdoor advertising signage. It offers national outdoor exposure across a mix of media types, including digital signs, airport advertising, freeway and suburban spectaculars and street furniture. Primedia Outdoor targets consumers in major urban areas through to those living in rural communities in Limpopo and the Eastern Cape. ComutaNet offers advertising that ranges from the interior and exterior of buses, taxis and trains to station platforms, taxi rank promotions and trailer advertising, as well as radio and TV offerings.

Primedia Instore – Primedia Instore deals with the installation, maintenance and removal of point of sale advertisements on behalf of FMCG (Fast Moving Consumer Goods) companies in the retail store environment. Retail outlets that we

Primedia Africa - currently operates in Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Zambia, Kenya, Uganda, Nigeria and Ghana. Supplier of outdoor media in the SADC regions, offering various media formats specific to clients' needs. 

Primedia Lifestyle Group is the No.1 integrated shopping centre marketing company in South Africa. Founded in 1996, the Primedia Lifestyle Group, a Primedia Unlimited subsidiary delivers marketing services to over 35 Shopping centres nationwide, ranging from Convenience Centres to Super-Regional's. The company offerings include Primedia Lifestyle Marketing Services (marketing strategy, budget management, brand management, research, tenant relations, events, PR and Exhibitions), Red Pixel (creative, production and design) and Media Xpress (media planning, buying and strategy) 

Primedia Unlimited is the creative media hub of the Primedia group in the out of home arena through 10 different companies:

Fashion Media  - Fashion Media specializes in Retail Media holding the exclusive static media rights to in-store advertising for Edgars, Edgars Active and Red Square stores nationwide. The advertising mediums increase shopper's propensity to purchase as they are situated closest to the point of purchase. 

Smartbench - Smartbench is a network of strategically placed

Mall Active - Mall Active is a mall activation company specialising in running activations in any shopping mall in South Africa. 

Mall Worx - In-mall advertising in the township and middle LSM mall environment

Primestars Marketing - Primestars Marketing, a social enterprise built on the ethos of doing good, specializes in facilitating Youth Development programmes for high school learners from underprivileged communities

Source CRM - Source is a full service digital agency specializing in mall CRM & Loyalty. 

Wideopen Platform - Wideopen offers advertisers spatially dominant and environmentally integrated outdoor advertising: from mega building wraps to temporary construction site branding, dominant airport advertising to inner-city packages

XP Digital - A subsidiary of Primedia Unlimited, XP Digital™ has the sole advertising rights to 42" HD screens located at dispensaries in Clicks and Dis-Chem pharmacies nationwide

GlamCam - Glam Cam provides photo brand activation through sharing moments. The photographs can be branded with unique branding, message or logos 

Salon Media - Advertising in hair salons nationally. Including mirror decals, digital screens and activations, combined with 100% category exclusivity. 

Fitting Exposure - Fitting exposure offers exposure for clients in the Jet, Edgars, Ackermans, and Legit fitting room space.

Entertainment

Ster-Kinekor Theatres is the filmed and digital entertainment division of Primedia and the largest cinema exhibitor in South Africa with 33 Junction value cinemas and 15 Classic cinemas nationwide - a total of over 400 screens and 60 000 seats.

Specialise in the distribution of content for the home entertainment environment for both the movie and gaming markets. Delivery spans all aspects of distribution logistics, warehousing and retail sell through. 

The division responsible for the management, marketing and distribution of electronic gaming software and hardware such as PlayStation, Xbox and Nintendo Wii.

Digital

Primedia Online
Primedia Online is a digital publishing company housing four distinct units: iafrica.

eXactmobile
Mobile and digital interactive technologies, consumer service marketing, music aggregation and licensing

Prezence 
Prezence is a new media agency which produces a range of service and products from strategic planning and conceptualisation, to design and development.

Spectrum
Spectrum is a digital media solutions provider specialising in the distribution and exhibition of digital media content into multiple environments.

Flying Circus
The Flying Circus is a state of the art range of high-end post production and visual effects services. 

365 Digital
Display, mobile, video and Rich Media ad serving, ad server implementation and migration, technical support, ad operations and campaign management, yield optimization, customized product and process training. 

Juice content
Juice Content is a resource dedicated entirely to fulfilling your content needs through syndication, creation, and strategy. 

Simfy Africa
Simfy Africa is the first music streaming service to launch in South Africa and gives consumers the option to discover new music or listen to the latest release




