[[1945 Outer Banks hurricane]]

CATEGORIES: 1940–1949 Atlantic hurricane seasons, Category 2 Atlantic hurricanes, Hurricanes in Florida, Hurricanes in North Carolina, 1945 natural disasters in the United States

The 1945 Outer Banks hurricane was a moderate hurricane that struck Florida and affected the East Coast of the United States in late June, 1945. The first tropical storm and the first hurricane of the Atlantic season, it developed on June 20 in the western Caribbean Sea off Honduras. For the next two days, it moved generally northward into the Gulf of Mexico. Reaching hurricane intensity on June 23, it then turned northeast toward the Florida peninsula. It made landfall in the Big Bend on June 24, then weakened to a tropical storm over land. Minor damage was reported in Florida, but the storm produced heavy, though beneficial, rains that eased one of the state's worst recorded droughts. Upon entering the Atlantic Ocean, it re-intensified into a hurricane and paralleled the East Coast. On June 26, it struck the Outer Banks of North Carolina as a minimal hurricane, producing minor damage but heavy rainfall.
Continuing northeast, the cyclone delivered gale-force winds to New York and southern New England, causing traffic accidents and minor wind damage. Heavy rains drenched the area, and high waves offshore caused ships to need rescue. One man died in a traffic accident; some people were rescued on Long Island Sound. Peak winds on land were  at Nantucket, forcing ships to remain in port. The U.S. Coast Guard sought to escort ships at sea into safe harbor. Overall, the impact of the storm was minor, though temperatures fell almost 20°F the day after the storm.

Meteorological history

On June 19, a tropical disturbance was detected between Swan Island and the Honduran coast. However, surface data in the vicinity did not indicate a closed circulation until 12 UTC on June 20., equal to Category 2 on the modern Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale, due primarily to the absence of corroboration. After peaking late on June 23, the storm quickly lost intensity.
The hurricane continued northeast and made landfall at 08 UTC on June 24, north of the Tampa Bay Area..
After moving offshore, however, the cyclone quickly regained force. Within seven hours, it re-intensified into a minimal hurricane and paralleled the Southeastern United States, following the warm Gulf Stream. Early on June 26, the northeast-moving hurricane approached the North Carolina coast, and made a second landfall at 01 UTC near Beaufort, North Carolina. Passing very near to Cape Hatteras, the eye of the storm moved offshore at Oregon Inlet, near Wanchese. The storm maintained hurricane intensity as it moved over and northeast of the Outer Banks. At 06 UTC on June 27, the cyclone finally lost tropical characteristics, but still retained winds of hurricane force for another 12 hours. Continuing to the northeast, the extratropical low passed south of Nova Scotia and hit Miquelon, Miquelon-Langlade, Saint Pierre and Miquelon, with winds of . The system survived another four days, only to lose its identity near Iceland at 12 UTC on July 4.

Preparations and impact

As early as June 19, the U.S. Weather Bureau began sending reconnaissance missions to monitor the developing storm in the Caribbean. The regular reports sent by the airplanes provided valuable data about the intensity of the small cyclone.  Nevertheless, the cyclone continued to parallel the East Coast, so storm warnings were eventually extended to Atlantic City, New Jersey; small watercraft in the Northeastern United States were advised to stay in port.
Winds in the Tampa Bay Area reached tropical storm force, 
In New York and New England, the outer bands of the hurricane produced gale-force winds and high surf;  peak winds were reported at up to 






