[[Typhoon Ken (1982)]]

CATEGORIES: Typhoons in Japan, 1982 in Japan, 1982 Pacific typhoon season

Typhoon Ken was the fourth typhoon to strike Japan during the 1982 Pacific typhoon season. Forming along the western end of the monsoon trough in the Philippine Sea, the system had organized into a tropical depression on September 16, and by that night a tropical storm. As a compact system, rapid intensification continued, with Ken becoming a typhoon on the evening of September 17 and a major typhoon on September 18. The cyclone up to this point had a history of progressing slowly west-northwest, but Ken eventually stalled on September 20 and became a larger cyclone. As a mid-latitude trough to its north deepened, Ken took off to the northeast towards Okinawa. Ken made landfall upon Shikoku early on September 25, and moved onward into the Sea of Japan where it evolved into an extratropical cyclone. Five people were killed while 18 others were hurt. A total of 114 mudslides were reported, resulted in over 2,000 homes flooded. Additionally, 12 homes were damaged or destroyed. Seventy-four flights were cancelled as well.

Meteorological history

During mid-September, a monsoon trough was present in the Philippine Sea. On September 14, a
persistent area disturbance weather was first visible on satellite imagery. On September 15, the Japan Meteorological Agency (JMA) started to monitor the system. east-southeast of Taiwan.
The typhoon moved west-northwest at a slower rate than expected, but on September 19, Typhoon Ken, a subtropical ridge moved west-southwest, moving into south China and the South China Sea. As such, many tropical cyclone forecast models showed Ken turning north-northeast, but Ken began to stall on September 20 instead. Around this time, the JMA estimated peak wind speeds of . Initially, Ken was small, but around this time the storm began to grow in size. The cause of the structural change is unknown, but it is possible that some dry air got induced into the storm's circulation, which also caused the eye to collapse and the storm to weaken.
By September 21, Ken began to move erratically due to a deepening trough that was centered north of Typhoon Ken before taking off in the general direction of Japan. Weakening ensued thereafter due to increased wind shear. By September 23, the JWC reported that winds had diminished below Category 2-equaivlent strength on the SSHWS while the JMA reported winds of  Despite this, the JMA kept an eye on the system for two more days.

Impact and aftermath

Because Ken posed a threat to shipping lanes, a tropical cyclone warning was issued for shipping lanes for a span of 66 hours, lasting from 0900 UTC September 19 until 0300 UTC September 22. Upon making landfall in Japan, Ken became the fourth storm to strike the nation during the season.
Heavy rains resulted in 114 mudslides,



Notes




