[[Galaxy Supernova]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 singles, Girls' Generation songs, Japanese-language songs, Universal Music Japan singles, S.M. Entertainment singles, 2013 songs

"Galaxy Supernova" is the eighth Japanese single by South Korean girl group Girls' Generation. It was released on September 18, 2013 in Japan.

Background

It was announced on August 11, 2013, that Girls' Generation would be releasing their eighth Japanese single, "Galaxy Supernova", on September 18, 2013.
Girls' Generation's Japanese website announced that "Galaxy Supernova" will be used in an advertisement campaign for Samantha Thavasa Jeans, the very first jeans brand from Samantha Thavasa, a Japanese fashion company. Girls' Generation will be featured in commercials for Samantha Thavasa with possible projects in the future related to the advertisement campaign.

Music video

The dance version music video for "Galaxy Supernova" was released on September 4, 2013 and the music video was released on September 5, 2013.
The video begins in silence with the girls lining up in colored denim, which is reminiscent of the music video for "Gee" music video, and also features the girls wearing metallic and futuristic-looking dresses while dancing in a box set with LED lights serving as the background. The group also reuses the "arrow dance" from previous video "Hoot" in the first chorus.
A behind the scenes video was released on September 20, 2013, featuring scenes from the photo shoot for the collection as well as the group practicing their choreography.

Reception

Seoulbeats criticized SM's infamous walled setting in the music video, calling it boring. The article also noted the choreography as too tame for the group's standards. However, the review complimented the song's catchiness and cuteness as well as the effort to place extra focus on member Sooyoung.

Commercial performance

Galaxy Supernova achieved the number one spot on Tower Record's pre-order charts. The single took the number four spot on its debut in Oricon Daily Single Chart The single managed to sell 14,564 physical copies on its second day achieving first place in the Oricon Daily Singles Chart.
Galaxy Supernova debuted on 38th spot in Japan Hot 100

Promotion

The group gave a "Secret Live" performance of "Galaxy Supernova" and "Gee" to 200 lucky fans in Tokyo on the release day of the single and held a "Premium Talk" event on September 19 in Osaka to promote the release of "Galaxy Supernova". 
Girls' Generation performed it together with "Genie" on Japanese television music show Live Monster on January 12, 2014.

Track listing

Charts

Oricon chart

Billboard—Japan charts

Release history




