[[Big School (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 2010s British television series, 2013 British television programme debuts, BBC television comedy, English-language television programming

Big School is a BBC situation comedy starring David Walliams, Catherine Tate, Steve Speirs, Frances de la Tour and Philip Glenister. It is set in a secondary school and follows the comedic relationships of the teachers. and was met with polarized reviews. The final episode of the first series aired on 20 September 2013.
On the 2 December 2013, BBC controller Charlotte Moore announced that Big School had been renewed for a second series, to begin airing in August 2014.

Plot

The series follows Keith Church (David Walliams), a socially inept chemistry teacher at the fictional Greybridge Secondary  School, near Watford North London, who falls for new French teacher Sarah Postern (Catherine Tate), who believes herself to be an inspirational teacher, in tune with youth culture and a beautiful woman. However she is also getting attention from uncouth and cocky sports teacher Trevor Gunn (Philip Glenister).
Other characters include:
The pupils at the school are portrayed as being mainly interested in social networking, texting and partying and as being bored by the attempts of Mr Church and Miss Postern to engage with them. The most prominent of them is a streetwise pupil called Manyou, played by Joivan Wade, who is asked for advice on how to succeed with women by Mr Church.

Production

The show was written by David Walliams, who had previously produced Little Britain, along with Dawson Bros. and directed by Tony Dow.
Scenes for the series were shot at Bishopshalt School, Hillingdon, West London. The pupils gave up their school holidays to come to the school and be extras.bbc.co.uk/programmes/p01d3njz/profiles/catherinetate retrieved 9 September 2013

Main cast

The Series 1 final episode featured a guest appearance from comedy actor Kulvinder Ghir, as Mr. Rupesh, the school bus driver.

Episode Guide

Series 1 (2013)

The first series was confirmed in January 2013, and began airing on 16 August 2013.

Series 2 (2014)

Series 2 will premiere in August 2014. It began filming on 26 April 2014 according to Walliams' Twitter page that day. 
NOTE: Overnight ratings are not official, and do not include views on BBC iPlayer, BBC HD or recorded catch up services. They are just a note of the amount of viewers on the BBC channel at the time of airing, and therefore are not an accurate representation. Official accurate figures are released 10 days after original transmission by BARB.

Reception

The series was met with mixed feedback. Christopher Stevens of the Daily Mail commented: "If we were expecting old-fashioned comedy, we're certainly getting it. The traditional approach brings benefits. There's no wobbly handheld camera work, no improvised dialogue, no barrage of foul language, no filthy single entendres. Instead, there's a brisk script with plenty of jokes. This has the feel of a sitcom that will win viewers over." and The Guardian said of Walliams: "This performance, and his writing, gives the show good jokes and heart."
There was negative feedback to the opening of the series, with The Daily Telegraph stating: "A bit tired, perhaps, the school thing, but surely a straightforward setting for a sitcom" before concluding "Let's just put it this way: amusing it was not. Mission aborted." MSN UK said, "Like most BBC comedies aiming to please mass audiences, there were plenty of moments that didn't work, but the writing avoided being outright terrible. A family show like this (even one inexplicably broadcast post-watershed) simply can't please everyone all the time".
The series opened to 4.2m viewers. The second instalment scored 3.63m (17.4%) for BBC One, making it the most watched programme of primetime outside of the soaps and news for the night.

DVD release

The first series of Big School was released onto DVD on 23 September 2013.






