[[Bugil Academy]]

CATEGORIES: Schools in South Korea, Private schools in South Korea

Bugil Academy (Hangul: 북일고등학교; Hanja: 北一高等學校) is a private, independent boarding school located in Cheonan, South Korea. Established in 1975, it is one of Korea's most selective secondary schools, especially with the recent founding of a specialized Global Leader Program that aims sending selected students to colleges abroad. The school is sponsored by Hanhwa Group, one of the largest Business conglomerates in Korea.

Traditions

Cherry Blossom Festival

Bugil Academy is famous for its cherry blossoms that fill the wide campus every spring.naeil.asp?bulyooid=5&nnum=708607 Its reputation has even led the Korean indie band Busker Busker to write a popular song "Cherry Blossom Ending". The Cherry Blossom festival is held usually in mid-April when blossoms reach their peak. Since 1976, it has grown to become a festival for the entire Cheonan city and annually attracts hundreds of visitors. The festival is even more famous for the fireworks on the last night. In 2010, the school spent nearly $300,000 on fireworks for commemorating the 25th anniversary of the school's establishment. Unlike what many think, the school's official flower is not cherry blossom but Korean Forsythia.

Strict Discipline

Strict discipline defines the educational style of Bugil Academy. It is based on strong military-style traditions that includes military salute and trainings. Because of this reason, there are often criticisms that the school is overly stringent, conservative and anachronistic in some sense.naeil.asp?bulyooid=1&nnum=618725 Whether this discipline helped or not, Bugil Academy had the highest number of students accepted to Korea Army Academy at Yeongcheon, Korea Naval Academy and Korea Air Force Academy in many years. 

Baseball Team

Bugil Baseball Team is one of the strongest teams in the Korean High Schools' League.bugil.hs.jsp|date=August 2013 Closely related to the professional Korea League team Hanhwa Eagles, it has achieved notable successes in a wide variety of competitions. Since 1978, it has won 23 championships 15 runner-ups and 21 third-bests. Some of the respected players who graduated from Bugil Academy are Kim Tae-Gyun (baseball), Yoon Hyung Bae and Na Ju-hwan.

Global Leader Program

Bugil Academy's Global Leader Program (GLP) was designed as a "school within a school". Therefore, its structure and curriculum is completely different from the rest of Bugil Academy. Much more selective and specialized, the GLP currently has 73 students: 22 seniors, 21 juniors and 30 sophomores. The current Director is Dr. Seungho Pi.

Academics

Featuring a challenging Advanced Placement-oriented curriculum taught in English-only classes, the GLP provides preparation for the Korean students to the top-tier universities in the United States and the United Kingdom. The school intends its students to develop their own unique color and character through their experiences at Bugil Academy which will help them to stand out among the increasing number of Korean applicants. Each student takes seven courses including a Directed Research Project that allows students to conduct their independent research on his or her topic of interest. The GLP has a 6:1 student teacher ratio, and each student is assigned one teacher as his or her mentor. The school believes that its academic environment enhances time management skills, diligence and self-reliance. Since its opening, the GLP had faculty members with diverse nationalities including the United States, Canada, China, Colombia, Ecuador, Russia and South Africa. The AP average for 2012 was 4.2, with 77% of the tests receiving scores of 4 and 5, and 92% receiving scores of 3,4 and 5.

Exchange programs

Bugil Academy GLP boasts its numerous exchange programs with many different schools worldwide. Schools involved in the exchange program with Bugil are Hwa Chong Institution in Singapore, Westlake High School (Texas) and Townview Magnet Center. The GLP students are also annually invited to several international events such as Asia-Pacific Youth Leaders' Summit (APYLS) by Hwa Chong Institution, Dominion International Young Leaders' Summit (DIYLS) by Dominion High School and International Young Leaders' Forum (IYLF).

Residence Life

All GLP students must reside in the school dormitory for all three years. The part of the main building of the GLP, Summit Hall, serves as dormitory for female students. Constructed in 1976 and renovated in 2009, Summit Hall has six classrooms, one library with 9,000 volumes (the biggest English library for secondary schools in Korea), one fitness room and a music room. Dormitory for male students is located next to the front gate. Both dormitories have dorm parents who inspect students daily schedule; all students wake up at 6:00am and attend classes until 6:00pm. From then to 1:00am, students aren't regulated but are asked to manage their time wisely. 

Extracurricular

The GLP has its own extracurricular programs separate from the rest of Bugil Academy. It has a vibrant journalism culture through the student-run weekly newspaper The Headline and literary magazine Icarus. It also has activities with respect to public speaking, and stage performance. Many of the students have exhibited great achievements in competitions such as World Individual Debating and Public Speaking Championships, National Forensic League and several Model Congress and Model United Nations conferences.
In terms of sports, the newly formed lacrosse team has grown quickly to win a championship in the sophomore division of the National tournament. Some other unique extracurricular includes the volunteering club Interact and Three Cups of Tea, a club for tea mania to socialize and discuss.

Admissions

The GLP selects 30 students per grade nationwide and its admissions process is highly competitive. The school demands prospective students to show academic well-roundedness and other various qualities. It also demands students to show adequate English proficiency that would allow them to study in the GLP's English-only curriculum. An interesting factor is that the GLP is under a coed system and nearly half of the admitted students are girls, despite the fact that Bugil Academy as a whole is a boys' school.

College Entrance

In February 2013, the GLP's first graduates attended their graduation ceremony. 23 graduates were accepted to top-tier schools in the United States, France and Japan. The school believes that this successful result will help bringing more prospective students. 






