[[Gil Boyne]]

CATEGORIES: 1924 births, 2010 deaths, Hypnotists, American male writers, American non-fiction writers, American spiritual mediums

Gil Boyne (October 28, 1924 - May 5, 2010) was an American pioneer in modern hypnotherapy who focused on training thousands of "lay" hypnotherapists primarily in Glendale, CA as well as throughout the world. He championed the accessibility of hypnotherapy and consistently fought against legislative efforts worldwide to restrict hypnosis to the purely medical professions, which had largely ignored the therapeutic value of hypnosis until Boyne, Milton Erickson, and Dave Elman. Boyne was mentored by Ormond McGill, with whom he collaborated for the 1977 book "Professional Stage Hypnotism". Over the course of more than 55 years he trained thousands of hypnotherapists globally with his Transforming Therapy™ methods, many of whom themselves wrote many books and created their own hypnotherapy training centers including Randal Churchill (Hypnotherapy Training Institute) and Charles Tebbetts.

Early Life and Career

Boyne was born in Philadelphia, PA, USA in 1924 to a deeply religious Irish American family. His early schooling was religiously focused which impacted his spiritual beliefs throughout his life.
He served in the Navy in the Pacific theatre during World War II, after which he was assigned to a therapeutic program based on psychoanalysis. The program was largely ineffective, and his frustration with the approach, his spiritual and religious upbringing, and experience as a stage hypnotist led him to develop the transformative approach using hypnosis. Contemporary influences included Dave Elman, Milton Erickson, Fritz Perls' Gestalt Therapy and Carl Rogers' "unconditional positive regard".

Hypnotism Training Institute

Gil founded and was the director of the Hypnotism Training Institute in Glendale, CA. In 1976, it became the first licensed Hypnotherapy training center in the United States offering up to 250 hours of training, including a diploma-offering curriculum in professional hypnotherapy.

Transforming Therapy™

With his background and experiences and with influences by his contemporaries mentioned above, Boyne developed the first program designed to train hypnotherapists in a regression-based approach. The resulting program, Transforming Therapy™, was used for decades to train over 12,000 and possibly as many as 15,000 hypnotherapists globally. The approach is generally considered to be rapidly effective3.
Boyne continued to train hypnotherapists for over 55 years, continuing to evolve many novel techniques in the field and imparting them to his students.
Boyne founded Westwood Publishing, one of the first publishers to focus on hypnotherapy-focused publications.
Boyne also founded the American Council of Hypnotist Examiners in 1980.

Hypnotherapist to the Stars

From his Glendale offices near Hollywood, Gil worked with many actors throughout his career, including Sylvester Stallone, Lily Tomlin, and Dolly Parton.
In addition, Boyne reportedly worked with professional and olympic athletes and the US Green Berets.

Awards and Honors

Professional Positions

Bibliography






