[[Uplift Humanity India]]

CATEGORIES: Non-profit organizations based in New Jersey, Companies based in Somerset County, New Jersey, Educational charities, Educational organisations in India, 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations

Uplift Humanity India is a 501(c)(3) non-profit organization

Programs

Rehabilitation Initiative

Uplift Humanity India works with American-Indian teachers in the United States to write its curriculum used for teaching children in India. The latest curriculum, titled "One Step Forward,"
Each summer, Uplift Humanity India sends groups of 15-20 high school and college students selected from across the United States to one of its programs in India. Once there, the students learn the specifics of the curriculum and start teaching in small groups in observation homes for about one month. Lessons are not conducted in a lecture format - rather, teaching is done in a participative manner that emphasizes role playing, games, and video-based lessons.
Beginning in 2011 at the Bal Gokulam facility in Vadodara, the rehabilitation initiative has since expanded to juvenile centers in Indore and Hyderabad.

Uplift Continuation Program

In August 2013, Uplift Humanity India announced the launch of its Uplift Continuation Program beginning in October, which will provide continuing educational support to the children in the observation homes throughout the year. This effectively extends the program so that juveniles and orphans can receive training even when the American students are not visiting in the summer. These programs involve more technology training and vocational skills training that to help the children find a career in the future.

Other Programs

Uplift Humanity India's Books Behind Bars program has donated more than 1000 books to jails in Newark, New Jersey and observation homes in India. The organization sponsors book donation drives in New Jersey each year to support this effort.
Uplift Humanity India has also donated several computer systems to the observation homes along with school supplies to supplement its curriculum.
Every year, as part of its summer program, the organization also offers educational scholarships to the top-performing students. These scholarships are used for continuing education and to help the children pursue job or career training. To date, the scholarships have totaled 1.5 lakh Rupees.

Recognition

Uplift Humanity India has received awards and recognition from Lions Club International and the New Jersey State Assembly for its efforts. Most recently, it has been honored by Narendra Modi, the Chief Minister of Gujarat, who has supported Uplift Humanity India's rehabilitation programs.
In 2014, Uplift Humanity signed on actor Sunkrish Bala as its official brand ambassador. In January 2014, it released a YouTube video with Hollywood Actors Hannah Simone, Rizwan Manji, Gulshan Grover, and Sunkrish Bala spreading awareness and encouraging American youth to volunteer with the organization.timesofindia.com/2014-01-17/vadodara/46299999_1_uplift-humanity-india-bal-gokulam-programme The Times of India released an article stating that "the video featuring these actors went viral and hundreds of Americans applied to become a part of this programme."








