[[Tampa Southern Railroad]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct Florida railroads, Predecessors of the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad

The Tampa Southern Railroad was a subsidiary of the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad originally running from Uceta Yard in downtown Tampa south to Palmetto, Bradenton, and Sarasota with a later extension southeast to Southfort, Florida (near Fort Ogden in the Peace River valley) built shortly after.  It was one of many rail lines built during the Florida land boom of the 1920s.  Most of the remaining trackage (between Tampa and Bradenton) is now part of CSX Transportation's Palmetto Subdivision, with another short portion just east of Sarasota still exists as well that is now part of Seminole Gulf Railway's Matoaka branch.

History

The Tampa Southern Railroad was first incorporated in 1917 as a subsidiary of the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad, and the line was completed to Sarasota by 1924.  It principally competed with the Seaboard Air Line Railroad's parallel route from Durant to Venice which was completed in 1911.  
The Tampa Southern began at the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad's Uceta Yard in Tampa and paralleled the east shore of Tampa Bay to Palmetto via Apollo Beach and Ruskin.  Northeast of Palmetto, a loop was constructed through Ellenton to serve agricultural growers.  Known as the "Ellenton Belt Line", the now abandoned loop branched off the main line near Rubonia and ran in a roughly rectangular trajectory through Ellenton before returning to the main line in Palmetto.  
South of Palmetto, the tracks crossed the Manatee River on a bascule bridge into Bradenton, with Bradenton's passenger depot (which still stands today and serves as a medical clinic 

Southfort Extension

The extension to Southfort in Desoto County was completed in 1927.  It began just south of the Sarasota depot, turning east through Fruitville and briefly running right beside the Seaboard line before it turned south to Venice.  Once out of Sarasota, the line turned southeast passing through Utopia before crossing the Myakka River and continung through Honore and Sidell.  It crossed the Charlotte Harbor and Northern Railway and the Peace River just before entering Southfort, where it merged with the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad's line from Lakeland to Fort Myers and Naples.  In addition to serving freight customers along the line, the Southfort extension frequently served as a shortcut for passenger trains traveling from Tampa to Fort Myers and Naples.  Most of the Southfort extension was removed in 1949 and the line was truncated at Belspur (just east of Fruitville).[ref]
</ref>

Mergers

In 1967, the Atlantic Coast Line Railroad merged with the Seaboard Air Line to form the Seaboard Coast Line Railroad.  The Seaboard's adjacent line was connected to the Tampa Southern tracks in a number of locations.  The merger resulted in the removal of the Seaboard Air Line's swing bridge over the Manatee River (which was located a short distance upstream of both the Tampa Southern's bascule bridge and the Desoto Bridge), despite the fact that city of Bradenton unsuccessfully attempted to have the Seaboard Coast Line keep the Seaboard bridge and remove the Tampa Southern bridge since it went right though downtown Bradenton's waterfront. 
The Tampa Southern route then became the Seaboard Coast Line's main route for all trains between Palmetto and Tampa including Tropicana's Juice Train (which was originally operated by the Seaboard Air Line), since it provided a more direct route to the Tampa yards.  The Seaboard route became the main route south of Bradenton through Sarasota and Venice (which was later leased to Seminole Gulf Railway).
The Seaboard's original route north of Palmetto later became discontinuous as a result of the Seaboard Coast Line's 1986 merger with the Chessie System which created CSX Transportation, leaving the Tampa Southern route as the only thru route.

Current Operations

|}
Today only two portions of the Tampa Southern Railroad remain.  The most notable segment remaining is the portion from Tampa to Bradenton (to a point near the Tropicana Juice Plant).  A vast majority of this portion comprises CSX's Palmetto Subdivision, with the northernmost five miles being part of the Tampa Terminal Subdivision.  Tropicana's Juice Train continues to be the most consistent service on the line today.  
There are a number of spurs along the Palmetto Subdivision as well (some of which are part of the former Seaboard Air Line Route), including the spur to Parrish (which serves the Florida Railroad Museum), the spur into the Tropicana Juice Plant, and the short spur to Oneco which connects to the Seminole Gulf Railway, who operates the remaining Seaboard trackage south through Sarasota.
Seminole Gulf operates the other remaining trackage of the Tampa Southern just east of Downtown Sarasota.  It is part of their branch from Fruitville to Matoaka.  U.S. 301 now runs on the roughly 5-mile abandoned segment between the two portions.




