[[Arcbazar]]

CATEGORIES: Design companies of the United States, Companies based in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Internet companies of the United States, Privately held companies based in Massachusetts, Architectural design

Arcbazar (pronounced "Arch Bazaar") is the first and largest global marketplace for crowdsourcing architecture projects.arcbazar. Crowdsourcing Architecture: A Disruptive Model in Architectural Practice Homeowners, small businesses, start-ups, public agencies who need architectural, interior or landscape design solutions post their design challenge, award and timeframe they need the designs to be delivered. Once posted, designers from all around the world can submit their design concepts and drawings. Clients choose from among the design submissions, these are not project bids or proposals but actual drawings of the design.arcbazar.html#howitworks How Arcbazar works
Arcbazar was founded in December 2010 by Imdat As. Arcbazar launched its online marketplace publicly in July 2011. Arcbazar is based in Cambridge, Massachusetts.Company snapshot BusinessweekStartup Watch: Five you should followThe New World of Building Design
More than 10,000 architectural, interior and landscape designers from around the world work on Arcbazar. Clients receive on average 9.5 designs per project.arcbazar. Clients on Arcbazar
Arcbazar facilitates the competition process, related file transfers, payment options, and public and private communications between designers and clients. Designers have a public profile page and can participate in crowdsourced design contests and upload their design work. The Arcbazar marketplace offers communication channels, design evaluation and ranking processes, and charts to evaluate the performance of designers.arcbazar.html#clients Arcbazar Frequently Asked Questions

Awards

MassChallenge Finalist of 2012, Boston Shark Tank Top 6 finalists,

Criticism

Arcbazar has been heavily criticized by professional media, and in contrast warmly welcomed by popular media. Dwell (magazine), one of the top architecture and home magazines, called Arcbazar "the worst thing to happen to architecture since the internet started." Debates among architectural bloggers worldwide followed.






