[[Hamish Hay Bridge]]

CATEGORIES: Bridges in New Zealand, Buildings and structures in Christchurch, Bridges completed in 1864, NZHPT Category II listings in the Canterbury Region

Hamish Hay Bridge (also known as Victoria Street Bridge; previously Victoria Bridge and initially variably Papanui Bridge and Market Place Bridge) is located in Victoria Square, Christchurch, New Zealand.  Built in 1864, it was renamed in 1989 for Sir Hamish Hay, Mayor of Christchurch; a commemorative bronze plaque is afixed to the bridge's guard rail in the middle of the structure to honor Hay's services. The bridge, the oldest heritage feature in the square, is also the country's oldest cast iron and stone bridge. It survived the 2011 earthquake undamaged. Architectural features include the bridge arch and the balustrade's neo-gothic ornamentation. The bridge is registered as a Category II heritage structure with the New Zealand Historic Places Trust.

Location

Christchurch was surveyed in 1850 with a regular grid layout, interrupted by the Avon River and two diagonal roads making connections to the port in Lyttelton and to the northern hinterland. The road name changed the Victoria Street, and the name of the market square changed to Victoria Square.

History

First bridge (1852)

After settlement of Christchurch having started in December 1850, the Society of Land Purchasers under the chairmanship of Guise Brittan arranged for a first bridge to be erected in the market square, and this was done in March 1852. In 1852, the price of firewood in Christchurch was 21s to 24s depending on quality, but only 7s in Papanui Bush, with the balance the cost of carting, which demonstrates the importance of making transport easier. The bridge was also referred to as the Market Place Bridge, as it was the centrally located in the square that was initially known as Market Place.

Second bridge (1856)

This first single-lane cart bridge was replaced by a structure 
In March 1862, the Christchurch Town Council was set up, but the bridge initially remained under the control of the Canterbury Provincial Council due to its strategic importance.
In August 1863, it was resolved for lights to be installed by the Christchurch Town Council on the Colombo and Papanui bridges, so that pedestrians could find their way to the safe crossing points at night.

Present bridge (1864)

The provincial government contracted Sir Charles Fox in London to design a more substantial bridge.  Fox and Henderson Co. was also charged with tendering the work, and the commission for wrought iron girders went to Head Ashby of Stockton-on-Tees at a cost of £605. A delay was caused by the girders being found to be deficient, and they had to be recast before shipping to New Zealand.
Meanwhile, the local bridge design was undertaken by the Assistant Provincial Engineer, James Wylde, and the site works awarded to Edward George Wright, whose winning tender was £2,375. Wright began his work in January 1864, whilst the iron girders did not arrive in Lyttelton until July of that year. However, the journey by sea had been rough, and shifting cargo had caused three of the girders to crack. This was repaired at John Anderson's foundry at a cost of over £300; Anderson had wrought iron plates riveted over the cracks.
The Canterbury foothills were hit by a severe rainstorm on 3 February 1868, and the Waimakariri River broke its banks between Courtenay and Halkett (near Kirwee), entering the headwater of the Avon River at Avonhead. The flood water reached Christchurch at 10 am of the following day and rose rapidly and that evening, the city was under water. In Dr Barker's house, located on the corner of Worcester Street and Oxford Terrace and thus only some 
The bridge was widened in 1875 to a design by Samuel A'Court.  Wing piers were added and outrigger wooden footpaths were added. The wing piers are documented on a commemorative plaque, but the description is technically incorrect, as the piers are not load-bearing structural elements.
Steam trams started their regular service to St Albans along Whately and Papanui Roads on 5 June 1880,
In 1885, only ten years after the last occasion, the bridge was widened again, this time to its ultimate width of 
The Duke and Duchess of Cornwall and York arrived in Christchurch on 22 June 1901. A number of arches of greenery were erected in their honour, and the last one for them to pass through was the government arch at Victoria Bridge; it was the most impressive of all the arches. Nine semi-circular arches spanned the width of the bridge, and rose to a height of 
On 10 September 1954, the last timetabled tram service in Christchurch crossed the bridge; with the demise of the Papanui–Cashmere route, trams were replaced by buses.
The bridge appears to have survived the 2011 earthquake undamaged.

Heritage registration

The Hamish Hay Bridge is registered as a Category II heritage item by the New Zealand Historic Places Trust. It was registered on 2 April 2004 with registration number 1832. The bridge is significant for its previous transport function, for its association with several early engineers in Christchurch, for its high regard with the public, as this was central to Victoria Square's redevelopment in the 1980s, and as the first cast iron bridge in New Zealand. It is also notable for its commemoration of the significance of Victoria Square and, through plaques, of the tram system and Hamish Hay, and for establishing the neo-gothic style for Avon River bridges, which was subsequently adopted at another five bridges.
On the same day, the other neo-gothic bridges were also registered (downstream to upstream):
Geoffrey Rice, an emeritus professor in history from the University of Canterbury who is writing a book on the history of Victoria Square, regards the Hamish Hay Bridge the most important heritage bridge in Christchurch.



Notes



 | ref        = harv
 | title      = The Cyclopedia of New Zealand : Canterbury Provincial District
 | year       = 1903
 | url        = 
