[[Langdi (sport)]]

CATEGORIES: Traditional sports of India, Sport in Maharashtra, Culture of Maharashtra

Langdi is a traditional Indian field sport, similar to hopscotch.

Efforts to popularise the sport

Langdi is considered to be useful in training for sports like kho kho, volley ball and gymnastics. 
Langdi in Maharashtra is a popular childhood pastime, it is described as the foundation of all sports. Suresh Gandhi, Secretary of Langdi Federation of India acknowledges playing langdi isn't financially rewarding. Stake holders have to arrange for funds out of their own resources.  Mumbai University will be the first Indian university to introduce langdi at the college level, for female students thus revitalising the traditional sport. 5 lakh female students study in the university in 700 colleges affiliated to it. According to Arun Deshmukh, recognition from the Indian Olympic Association is in the pipeline. This recognition results in facilities like concessional railway travel being made available, thus ensuring in growth of the sport.
Expatriate Indians have associated in the effort to popularise langdi out side, in countries such as Thailand. Video films of the sport being played have been prepared in order raise interest internationally.

Brief Rules

The rules of this sport have been standardised by the Akhil Maharashtra Sharirik Shikshan Mandal.
Langdi is a team sport between two sides, played 12 players a side, and an additional three extra players. A match lasts 36 minutes. It is played in four innings of nine minutes each. The team that wins the toss defends. The chasing team sends chasers who hop on one foot and try to tag the defenders. The chasers can step out of the ground as long as they keep on one foot. The defenders are declared out if they step out of the ground or commit a line fault. The team that tags most defenders is declared the winner.

National events

The fourth National Men's and Women's Langdi Championship was held in Chandigarh, in May 2013.




