[[The Pirate Fairy]]

CATEGORIES: 2014 films, 2014 computer-animated films, 2010s fantasy films, 2010s American animated films, American films, American fantasy films, Animated fantasy films, DisneyToon Studios animated films, Tinker Bell films

The Pirate Fairy is a 3D computer-animated fantasy film directed by Peggy Holmes. It is the fifth film in the DisneyToon Studios' Tinker Bell film series, based on the character Tinker Bell from J. M. Barrie's Peter and Wendy. The film features the voices of Mae Whitman, reprising her role of Tinker Bell, Christina Hendricks as a dust-keeper fairy named Zarina, and Tom Hiddleston as a much younger James Hook.

Plot

Zarina (Christina Hendricks), an incredibly gifted and inquisitive pixie-dust talent fairy, is entranced by the magic of blue pixie dust and is determined to find out everything it is capable of, despite having been told not to by Fairy Gary. After intentionally experimenting with some blue pixie dust and causing chaos in Pixie Hollow, Zarina is prohibited from working with pixie dust again. Saddened and hurt by this, Zarina leaves Pixie Hollow.
A year later, Pixie Hollow celebrates the Four Seasons Festival, this year featuring the winter fairies. As the winter fairies perform their act, Tinker Bell (Mae Whitman), Silvermist (Lucy Liu), Iridessa (Raven-Symoné), Rosetta (Megan Hilty), Fawn (Angela Bartys), and Vidia (Pamela Adlon) spot Zarina flying into Pixie Hollow and take cover. Zarina uses some pixie dust to summon several poppies which then cause everyone to fall asleep, before taking the blue pixie dust, which Iridessa notes as being the source of pixie dust and in turn, the fairies' ability to fly. Tink and her friends are not affected, and follow Zarina to the coast.
Zarina leads them to a pirate ship, where it is revealed that Zarina has become the captain of the ship's crew, including the cabin boy, James Hook (Tom Hiddleston). The friends manage to retrieve the blue pixie dust but are stopped by Zarina, who uses other colors of greatly enhanced and modified pixie dust to magically switch their innate magical talents. Tink becomes a water fairy, Silvermist becomes a fast-flying fairy, Fawn becomes a light fairy, Iridessa becomes a garden fairy, Rosetta becomes an animal fairy, and Vidia becomes a tinker fairy.
Tink and the others struggle with their swapped talents as they search for Zarina, Hook, and their crew, in the process meeting a baby crocodile which takes a liking to Rosetta. Hook reveals that the ship drifted off course around the same time that Zarina left Pixie Hollow, and that she became captain with the promise to make the ship fly, which would allow the pirates to plunder anything without getting caught. The fairies then discover the pirates' camp at Skull Rock is home to a second Pixie Dust Tree.
The fairies attempt to retrieve the blue pixie dust but are caught when Iridessa loses control over her nature-based talent and reveals their location. Tink tries to convince Zarina to return to Pixie Hollow, but she refuses as no-one appreciates her talents, which eventually led her to leave. With the fairies now captured, the pirates begin making pixie dust which becomes successful. Hook, curious about what it's like to fly, convinces Zarina to use some on him, with the result that he begins to fly. After joyfully flying around the cave, Hook double-crosses Zarina and traps her in a lantern, revealing himself to be the real captain of the pirate crew and that he has been using her to get the pixie dust for his own purposes of getting to the Second Star to plunder around the Seven Seas.
Tink and the others attempt to escape their prison without any success, until the baby crocodile Rosetta befriended arrives and releases them. The fairies attempt once more to retrieve the blue pixie dust and almost succeed, before being confronted by Hook, who threatens to throw Zarina into the sea unless they hand the blue pixie dust over. Tink gives the pixie dust up, and Hook sprinkles it over the ship before throwing Zarina into the water, leaving the fairies to rescue her.
As the pirates sail towards the Second Star, the fairies return and use their switched talents to defeat the pirates and turn the ship away from the Second Star. Zarina attempts to retrieve the blue pixie dust from Hook, who chases after her. Zarina manages to gain a speck of blue pixie dust which she then throws at Hook, who starts flying crazily as the two kinds of pixie dust react to each other.
As the fairies fly away, Hook angrily swore revenge on them until he is attacked by the baby crocodile, leaving his crew members to laugh at him (much to his dismay).
Zarina returns the blue pixie dust to Tink and her friends, before preparing to leave. However, she is offered the chance to return to Pixie Hollow and this time accepts, and helps her friends to sail the ship back to Pixie Hollow where the others are waking up with no recollection of what happened. Zarina promises not to experiment on pixie dust again, but is convinced by Tink to show her abilities off one last time. Zarina does so, and in the process, gives Tink and her friends back their original talents, allowing them to make a beautiful performance to the audience at the Pixie Hollow Four Seasons Festival.
Upon an extra scene during the end credits of the film, a drifting Captain Hook comes across an unknown ship at sea. One of the crew members, Smee, comes to greet him. Taking no notice of Smee's words, Hook orders to be pulled up into the ship.

Cast

In addition, Tinker Bell's sister Periwinkle and Lord Milori, the leader of the winter fairies, appeared in the film, although neither had a speaking role. The movie also featured the first appearance of the crocodile "Tick-Tock", who would later come to haunt Hook in Peter Pan.

Production

The film was originally titled Quest for the Queen,
Disney announced in January 2014 that former Project Runway winner and fashion designer Christian Siriano would be in charge of creating the ensemble costumes for the fairies, specifically Zarina. Siriano stated that "I loved the challenge of this project. I haven't designed for an animated character before, and I'm excited to take my skills into Zarina's world. She's a unique and new character and I wanted to help make her memorable and iconic. Disney characters are everlasting and I'm so happy as a young designer to help create a bit of Disney history."

Release

The film was released internationally in theaters with the title Tinker Bell and the Pirate Fairy on February 14, 2014, 
In the United States the screenings took place exclusively at the El Capitan Theater in Hollywood, from February 28 to March 19, 2014. 

Home Media

The film was released by Walt Disney Studios Home Entertainment on DVD and Blu-Ray in the United States on April 1, 2014.
Bonus features for the DVD include a documentary and two animated shorts. The Blu-Ray contains the bonus features of the DVD and additions such as deleted scenes, sing-along songs and a making-of clip of "The Frigate That Flies" song with actor Tom Hiddleston. Both media feature the 2D version of the film.
Aside from the individual media, a "combo pack" featuring the DVD, Blu-Ray and Digital Copy versions of the film was also released. During the pre-order period for the combo pack, a limited edition set of four lithographs featuring shots from the film would be included with the order.
Several stores also released exclusive sets which bundled the Blu-Ray combo pack with a certain item of the Disney Fairies merchandise, such as a bonus DVD with the "Pixie Hollow Bake Off" animated short and 10 other mini shorts, the story book and read-along CD of The Pirate Fairy film, a set of six wall decal sheets, and a glitter brush.

Reception

Reviews for The Pirate Fairy have been generally positive. On film aggregation website Rotten Tomatoes, it has a 73% rating, with an average score of 5.5/10, based on reviews from eleven critics.

Soundtrack

The soundtrack features an original song titled "Who I Am," performed by Natasha Bedingfield. It also uses Bedingfield's previously released track, 'Weightless,' which was initially used on the film's scratch recording but so well received, director Peggy Holmes decided to make it permanent.






