[[Engku Isa Al-Husam]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, 1982 births, Living people, Malaysian business executives, Malaysian royalty, Founders

Yang Mulia Engku Isa Al-Husam (born 12 August 1982), and also known as Husam is the Founder and the President of the Institute for Pioneering of Education and Economic Excellence (INSPIRE)
Husam is from the Royal Household of Kedah Pattani Royal Family and the grandson to the Yang DiPertuan Negeri Pulau Pinang (The Head of the State of Penang), Tun Abdul Rahman Abbas.

Early life and education

Husam received his early school education, mainly in Arabic and science stream, from Maahad Al Mashoor Al Islami and SMKA Al Irshad both in Penang. He obtained a Bachelor's Degree in Technology (Information System) minoring in Corporate Management from Universiti Teknologi Petronas.

Career

Husam was formerly a committee member of the Penang Malay Businessmen and Industrialist Association Malaysia and the Treasurer of Penang Malay Chamber of Commerce Malaysia Youth Wing. At international level he sits in committee and chair several task force groups in the Indonesia Malaysia Thailand Growth Triangle (IMT-GT) and LIMA DASAR under the portfolio of Ministry of International Trade and Industry. He is also the member of Malaysia Business Council - Saudi Arabia.
Husam was the youngest committee member of Penang Government Executive Council for the portfolio of International Trade and Industry chaired by YB Dato' Mansor Bin Haji Osman, Deputy Chief Minister (1) of Penang (2010-2013) and was the Associate Director of Institute for Democracy and Economic Affairs (IDEAS). Husam currently sits as the Board of Trustees for Malaysia Cancer Foundation.
He is also the Vice President and CEO of his own group of companies

Charity work

He was the founder of Young Entrepreneur Club (YEC) in Universiti Teknologi Petronas and the founding President of the Maahad Al Mashoor Al Islami, Alumni Association. He is also a member of a charity organization in Perak named Kelab Bakti Gunung Keledang.
Husam was the founder and the President of the Institute for Pioneering of Education and Economic Excellence (INSPIRE),

Honours

He has been conferred
Meritorious Service Medal Pingat Jasa Kebaktian PJK






