[[The Age of Miracles (novel)]]

CATEGORIES: American science fiction novels, 2012 novels, Coming-of-age fiction, Novels set in California, Debut novels

The Age of Miracles is the debut novel of American writer Karen Thompson Walker, published in June 2012 by Random House in the United States and Simon & Schuster in the United Kingdom. The book chronicles the fictional phenomenon of 'slowing', in which one Earth day takes longer to complete.
The novel received positive reviews and publishing deals totalling £1.12 million, and has been translated into many major languages.

Background

The idea for the Slowing first came to Walker on reading that the 2004 Indonesia Tsunami had caused the earth's rotation to slow by some fractions of a second.

Plot

Julia is an eleven-year-old who lives in California. Weeks before her birthday, the world undergoes an unexplained phenomenon called 'slowing', in which the time taken to complete one rotation of the Earth increases. By the time it is confirmed by experts, a day is 24 hours and 56 minutes. The hours steadily increase and dramatically alter life on Earth. Reactions differ: while some try to adapt with it, others, like Julia's grandfather, believe slowing to be a government hoax and still others, like Julia's best friend Hanna's family believe it to be God's wrath and return to their hometowns. After weeks of chaos, the American government announces the adoption of 'clock time', in which the world functions as normal according to the 24-hour clock, regardless of whether it is day or night outside. Some people reject clock time altogether, like Julia's neighbor Sylvia, and set their lives according to the sun, ignoring clock time. Such people, called 'real timers', face discrimination from "normal" people. Meanwhile, the longer days have psychological effects on people: Julia's mother starts suffering from a slowing-related disorder (referred to as 'the syndrome', its effects vary from person to person), crime rates hike and people purportedly become more impulsive (the excuse Julia uses to convince herself when she finds her father is having an affair with Sylvia). In addition to this, Julia's grandfather goes missing on her twelfth birthday.
Julia tries to adapt to her new life. Feeling lonely since Hanna's departure and her subsequent indifference, she strikes up a friendship with her long-time crush, Seth Moreno, and they eventually start a relationship. Julia's grandfather is finally found, dead, after having tripped into his nuclear-proof cellar. This causes Julia's father to leave Sylvia and form a better bond with his wife. Meanwhile, Seth becomes victim of a more aggressive form of the syndrome that nearly kills him. Seth's father decides to take him to Mexico, where the symptoms are supposedly less fatal. Julia receives one last e-mail from Seth after his reaching Mexico, but soon after, America is hit by a 72-hour power failure due to excessive electricity being needed to artificially grow crops. Subsequently, the government allows electricity use only for life-supporting activities. Julia is never able to reach Seth despite several letters to an address he left her.
The last chapter skips to years ahead. By this time, a day stretches to weeks and it is obvious that the human race will soon become extinct. The government launches The Explorer, a spaceship that contains memoirs of life on earth. Julia reveals that she never heard from Seth since the last e-mail but still maintains hope that they will be reunited one day. The book ends with her reminiscing the words she and Seth had wrote on wet cement one summer day: "We were here".

Reception

The Age of Miracles received mostly positive reviews from critics. Michiko Kakutani of The New York Times hailed the book as a "clever mash-up of disaster epic with sensitive young-adult, coming-of-age story" despite noting its  "made-for-Hollywood slickness" and some wayward plot developments.




