[[Saudi Arabia–Syria relations]]

CATEGORIES: Saudi Arabia–Syria relations, Foreign relations of Saudi Arabia, Foreign relations of Syria

Saudi Arabia–Syria relations refer to diplomatic and economic relations between Saudi Arabia and Syria. Diplomatic ties between these two countries of the Middle East have soured markedly by the major events in the region. Relations between Saudi Arabia and Syria further deterriated due to the Syrian Civil War and relations between the two countries became completely severed following Saudi Arabia closing its embassy in Damascus as well as expelling Syrian ambassador. 

Factors affecting relations

Sonoko Sunayama, a Middle East expert, argues that although economic concerns and balance of power are important, concerns about identity and ideology play the most significant role in the two countries' relations.
Both countries share Arab nationalist and Islamic identities. However, a significant element of their identity and regime, namely secular versus conservative pattern, is completely different in that Syria has a secular regime and life-style, while Saudi Arabia a conservative regime and world view.

History

The relations between two countries have been turbulent since their establishment as modern states.

1940s through 1960s

A Syrian mission was opened in Saudi Arabia in 1941. 
Saudi Arabia supported the coup in Syria by Adib Shishakli in December 1950. Nevertheless, Saudi Arabia and Syria were in rival camps in the 1950s and 1960s as a result of the policies of Egypt's leader Gamal Nasser and of the Cold War. Syria advocated Nasser's policies and was the major Arab ally of the USSR. Because new Syrian government declared war against monarchist nations, including Saudi Arabia.

1970s and 1980s

At the end of November 1970, the neo-Baath leaders were toppled and removed, and Hafez Assad became the ruler of Syria. Diplomatic negotiations between two countries were opened and renewed. With the death of Nasser in 1972 the relations began to further improve.
Three months before the joint attacks of Egyptian and Syrian forces on Israeli forces in the Sinai and the Golan Heights Egyptian President Anwar Sadat and Syrian President Hafez Assad visited King Faisal in Riyadh in August 1973. 
Syria's alliance with the Islamic Republic of Iran during the Iran-Iraq war again led to strained relations at the beginning of the 1980s. Syrian president Hafez Assad paid a significant visit to Riyadh on 22 December 1981.

1990s

The relations between Saudi Arabia and Syria were positive in the 1990s. Following the invasion of Kuwait by then Iraqi president Saddam Hussein in August 1990, Syria took part in the US-led international coalition that was established to defend Saudi Arabia and liberate Kuwait.

2000s

Four months after Bashar Assad succeeded his father as Syrian president, he visited Saudi Arabia in October 2000 and met King Fahd. It was his second state visit after Egypt.
The assassination of the Lebanese Prime Minister Rafik Hariri, an ally of Saudi Arabia, in Beirut on 14 February 2005 was detrimental to the relations. In addition, King Abdullah boycotted the Arab League's summit held in Damascus in 2008.
However, Saudi Arabia appointed its ambassador to Damascus, Abdullah Al Eifan, on 25 August 2009.

Syrian civil war

Syrian civil war that began in 2011 damaged the relations between two countries. Because Saudi Arabia and other countries in the region have been allegedly sending weapons to the opposition forces, while Iran to the Assad forces. 
As a result of these events, Saudi Arabia withdrew its delegation from the Arab League's peacekeeping mission in Syria on 22 January 2012

Economic ties

One of the early economic relations between Saudi Arabia and Syria was in 1950 when a trade agreement was signed and Saudi Arabia provided the Syria with financial support. It followed other trade agreements, but all of them were cancelled by King Faisal on 3 May 1966 due to hostile attitude of the neo-Baath government in Syria towards Saudi Arabia. On 4 April 1972, the two countries signed another trade and economic agreement.
In 1997, Syrian exports to Saudi Arabia included mostly livestock, fruits, vegetables textiles and furniture of which overall cost was over 602 million Riyals. Major items exported by Saudi Arabia to Syria were crude oil and its by products, plant oil and dates, and the 1997 cost of them was nearly 262 million Riyals. In addition, Saudi Arabia had private investments in Syria with a cost of US $ 700 million in the same year. The number of joint projects was around 50.
Syria and Saudi Arabia signed an accord on 20 February 2001 to set up a free trade area.
In parallel to tense diplomatic relations in 2008, both countries began to put taxes on each other's products, but, taxes were ended in 2009. Unofficial figure for the 2007 annual Saudi investment in Syria was $750m and it increased to $1 billion in 2009. On 6 and 7 March 2010 Saudi-Syrian Business Forum and the 11th Session of the Syrian-Saudi Joint Committee were held in Damascus. Five cooperation agreements were signed during the events.




