[[Lama Shenpen Hookham]]

CATEGORIES: Lamas

Lama Shenpen Hookham, the Principal Teacher of 'Discovering the Heart of Buddhism' and Spiritual Director of the Awakened Heart Sangha

Biography

Lama Shenpen was born Susan Kathryn Rowan in Essex, England, in 1946. She first encountered Buddhism while studying Geography and Sociology at Reading University, where she became secretary of the University Buddhist Society and had early encounters with Sangharakshita and Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche.chronicleproject.html amongst others.
In the early 1970s, on the advice of Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche, Lama Shenpen went to India where she lived as a nun for six years. There she studied and meditated in retreat under the guidance of Tibetan teachers such as Karma Thinley Rinpoche, Bokar Rinpoche Rangjung Rigpe Dorje, the HH the 16th Karmapa and head of the Kagyu tradition of Tibetan Buddhism, subsequently instructed her to return to the West to teach Mahamudra.
She met her main teacher, Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche, in Europe, and he encouraged her to teach and transmit Mahamudra, On her later return to England, she met and married Lama Rigdzin Shikpo (Michael Hookham), an early pupil of Chögyam Trungpa Rinpoche and now Dharma Director of the Longchen Foundation.longchenfoundation.html
Lama Shenpen is fluent in Tibetan and was the translator for many Tibetan teachers, including Gendun Rinpoche.dhagpo-kundreul.php?option=com_content&task=blogcategory&id=26&Itemid=63 She has also translated a number of important Tibetan texts into English, including Khenpo Rinpoche's 'Progressive Stages of Meditation on Emptiness' which is now a standard work on the realisation of emptiness central to all schools of Buddhism.longchenfoundation.html 
Lama Shenpen is now the Spiritual Director of the Awakened Heart Sangha, and spends most of her time in semi-retreat at the Hermitage of the Awakened Heart in North Wales, United Kingdom. 
"Some places act as a strong focus for us to connect to the spiritual realm," said Lama Shenpen. "H.H. Dilgo Khyentse Rinpoche, one of my teachers, told us that North West Wales was a special area and that establishing a place here devoted to spiritual practice would be of great benefit for generations to come. So that's what we did, and I really hope that the people of Wales will feel a connection with it, even if they are not Buddhists."
Under Lama Shenpen's guidance, in 2011 the Awakened Heart Sangha built an Enlightenment stupa at the Fortress of Enlightenment (Changchub Dzong), the Hermitage at Ynys Graianog, Criccieth, Gwynedd, in North Wales containing a small stupa consecrated by Khenpo Tsultrim Gyamtso Rinpoche. Lama Phuntsok

Contribution to Modern Scholarship

On Khenpo Rinpoche's instructions she produced a seminal study on the profound Buddha Nature doctrines of Mahayana Buddhism. Subsequently published as 'The Buddha Within', 
"It takes a very good mind to have a synoptic view of the whole Buddhist movement with the key doctrine well in focus. This will become a pivotal work for future studies on the subject. It will bring Tibetan studies to a new high in terms of its focus." Kenneth Inada, State University of New York at Buffalo.sunypress.aspx
She is also the author of 'There's More to Dying than Death'
Khenpo Rinpoche and Lama Rigdzin Shikpo have subsequently encouraged Lama Shenpen to develop her teaching activity further, and she is the author of the on-line teaching programmes 'Discovering the Heart of Buddhism' and 'Trusting the Heart of Buddhism'.



Major Publications
External Links

