[[Or Zaruaa Synagogue, Jerusalem, Israel]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century synagogues, Orthodox synagogues in Israel, Sephardic synagogues, Synagogues in Jerusalem, Architectural preservation site, Cultural heritage protection institute

Or Zaruaa Synagogue, Nachlaot, Jerusalem, Israel-  בית כנסת אור זרוע, נחלאות, ירושלים, founded in 1926 (5687 Jewish Calendar) by Rabbi Amram Aburbeh for the Ma'araviimThe Ma'araviim community - Jews originally from North Africa/Morocco; Ma'araviim in Hebrew means westerners or mugrahbim in Arabic–Judeo Hebrew Jewish congregation in Jerusalem, is located on 3 Shmuel Refaeli Street in the Nachalat Ahim neighbourhood in Jerusalem.daat.ac.asp?id1=3912
The synagogue was named Or ZaruaaThe name Or Zaruaa is cited from Psalms 97:11 "Light is sown for the righteous and gladness for the upright in heart" after the Beth Midrash (study hall) that was held in the Old City of Jerusalem by Rabbi Shlomo Aburbeh, Rabbi Amram Aburbeh's father.blogspot.ca/searchq=%D7%90%D7%91%D7%95%D7%A8%D7%91%D7%99%D7%A2

Building

Site

The Or Zaruaa Synagogue is listed among the sites for historic preservation by the Jerusalem municipality, as a heritage building to be protected.
The Or Zaruaa Synagogue preservation site number is 2638.jerusalem.il/pages/pmaindocfiles.aspx
On 19.2.1997, Judge V. Ziler, President of the Jerusalem District Court ruled that Or Zaruaa Synagogue is permanently declared Hekdesh.The judge's decision means its sole purpose is to serve the community as a synagogue. The legal case title originating motion (Jerusalem) 94/491 related to the file document number 2066 trial in court
This Synagogue is included in Web Portal Heritage sites in Israel.פורטל: אתרי מורשת בישראל מחוז ירושלים

Description

The Or Zaruaa Synagogue is a two level  building situated on a hill, 258 square meters in size, in the Nachlaot neighbourhood, centrally located in the core of Jerusalem. The exterior walls are covered with Jerusalem stone, as mandated for all buildings in Jerusalem, making the construction solid. The first floor was built to provide the Rabbi and leader of the community, a dwelling home, which serves today as a kindergarten. The second floor which is the synagogue itself, is designed in a typical Spanish North-African style, where the seating for the men prayers surrounds the Bimah (stage). The hall has a very high ceiling, and it includes a gallery section for the women (ezrat nashim). Tall windows are accentuated by massive stone frames, curved at the top. The window panes are decorated with paintings and ornaments.

History

Rabbi Amram Aburbeh initiated the project of building the new Synagogue due to his understanding of the necessity for the growing population of Ma'araviim Maghrebi Jews families, exiting the walls of the Old City of Jerusalem and settling in newer neighbourhoods
.[ref]Expansion of Jerusalem in the 19th century
[/ref] He approached Don  Yamin Ben Harroch, brought by an article published in the newspaper Doar Hayom on October 26, 1926, page 4  He wished the new Synagogue to serve and meet the needs of the entire public in Jerusalem.
On Tuesday, October 26, 1926, (18 Cheshvan 5687 Jewish calendar) the cornerstone laying ceremony for the Synagogue building took place in Nachalat Ahim neighbourhood. At 3 pm the celebration started by Beit Chinuch Ivrim (The Blind School) youth orchestra playing musical tunes. Honorable leaders of the Jewish communities in Jerusalem, were invited to be present and participate with the community in the festive event. There were Rabbis representing Sephardi Jews and Ashkenazi Jews. Among them Rabbi Shmuel Azran, Harav Hanazir-Rabbi David Ha-Cohen, Rabbi Harlap, Rabbi Ovadia Hadaya, Rabbi Shimon Ashriki, and Shmuel Allaluf. The speaker at the ceremony was Avraham Elmalih,[ref]
 Avraham Elmalih
[/ref] Ma'araviim committee representative, who explained and emphasized the importance of construction in the land of Israel, creating a stronghold foundation. He thanked and praised Yamin Ben Harroch who, in addition to donating to his Jewish community in Melilla, remembered Jerusalem and through his kindness a temple was established, which will be surrounded by new neighbourhoods which will be built and more inhabitants will reside. Mr. Elmalih mentioned the major involvement of Rabbi Amram Aburbeh who was commended for his efforts convincing Yamin Ben Harroch and drawing his interest and attention to Jerusalem to build in the land of Israel. Rabbi Eliyahu Lagimi who followed with a speech and stated the significance of the mitzvah of building, especially in the city of Jerusalem, later became the capital of the Jewish state. Rabbi Nissim Elishar was honored to put on the first corner stone and after him, the rest of the honoured guests followed, adding the next stones.
Rabbi Amram Aburbeh insisted that the construction workers crew will be Jewish.

Or Zaruaa Synagogue activities

Launching the new Or Zaruaa Synagogue took place in 1927. Rabbi Amram Aburbeh, the official owner of the Synagogue, served as the Synagogue Rabbi. For a few years he was a resident in an apartment designated for him and his family on the first floor of Or Zaruaa Synagogue building until his home was built nearby, in Nachalat Ahim neighborhood at 3 Tiberias street. Haim Kobi and his family for 40 years.
Or Zaruaa served as a Synagogue and Beit Midrash, where lessons were taught. The Synagogue congregation participated for several years in Tzedakah, charity activities such as donating funds to needy institutions among them in 1931 Misgav Ladach Jewish Hospital in Jerusalem. Beit Chinuch -Orphans Education House was also supported during the years 1931, 1937, 1939
Rabbi Amram Aburbeh as leader of the community asked each and every member of Or Zaruaa Synagogue to donate and contribute even a small amount of coins to support the Misgav Ladach Hospital. Everyone donated women, men, widows, all participated in Tzedakah (Nedava).
Among the list of family names, it is evident that the members were of many origins (Yemenite, Eini family;Nahalat Ahim was founded in 1925 for the Yemenite community and called after the 4 Yemenite brothers-(Ahim in Hebrew)
Tzdaka family from Aleppo, Syria; Abulafia family from Gallipoli, Turkey; Mizrachi from Iraq; Iran; Bukhara, Uzbekistan). The Or Zaruaa Synagogue, under Aburbeh leadership, welcomed people from different places to unite under one Synagogue to pray together.
[/ref]
Rabbi Amram Aburbeh was nominated the Chief Rabbi of the Nachlaot neighborhood in Jerusalem by the Chief Rabbi of Eretz Israel, Ha'Rishon Le-Tzion, Rabbi Ben-Zion Meir Hai Uziel.
Or Zaruaa Synagogue served as a community and cultural center for events such as a voting poll during the election day on January 1931.

During Health Week, Dr. Rabinovitch, a physician, lecture on children's health took place in Aburbeh Synagogue in Nachalat Ahimas notified by Doar Hayom on May 17, 1933, page 4
And other various lectures[ref]by Rabbi Moshe Sofer announced by HaTzofeh newspaper: HaTzofeh February 23, 1945, page 8.
[/ref]HaTzofeh October 25, 1946, page 8
such as by Mr. Moshe Sofer talk of Shabat HaShekelreligious newspaper HaTzofeh on March 5, 1948, page 8
and a Sermon, drasha on Parashat Ki Tisa.HaTzofeh on January 7, 1949, page 6, ], lecture as was written in Herut newspaper on January 21, 1949.page 7
A congratulations ad to the Chief Rabbi of Israel, Rabbi Ben-Zion Meir Hai Uziel on his 70 anniversary and greetings on behalf of all members of the synagogue on June 16, 1950, was published in Hed Hamizrach newspaper.page 20
Rabbi Amram Aburbeh headed the Or Zaruaa synagogue since its inception in 1926 till 1951 when he was elected to be Chief Rabbi in Petah Tikva, Israel.

Connections to other Synagogues

Between 1925 and 1927 Mr. Yamin Ben Harroch parallelly allocated money for construction of another Synagogue This Synagogue was also named Or Zaruaa.delacole.cgimedio=comunidades&numero=382&nota=382-3
Both Or Zaruaa Synagogues in Jerusalem and Melilla, The original chandeliers, originally from Italy are still present in both synagogues and connected to modern electricity, which later gave the name Or Zaruaa a special dimension to its name since "Or" in Hebrew means "light".Interior of Jerusalem synagogueMelilla synagogue interior
thumb|Or Zaruaa Synagogue Jerusalem Israel, interior of building shows two memorial marble plates, major donor Yamin Ben Harroch.[ref]
Amuta organization Or Zaruaa synagogue named after Yamin Ben Harroch Z"L 
[/ref]
In 2011 the international renowned artist Hai Knafo was inspired by Or Zaruaa and dedicated a painting titled  "Starlight Sower".
Rabbi Amram Aburbeh continued his family tradition of building Synagogues and founded in Petah Tikva, the Great Sephardic Synagogue called Beit Avraham.
In 1970 his son Ehud Avivi-Aburbeh was among the founders of the Synagogue Beit HaKnesset HaKipah HaAl-Adati and Beit Midrash named Netivei-Am after Rabbi Amram Aburbeh opus, in Shechunah Hey neighbourhood in Beer-Sheva.bmoriah.il/130314/%D7%9E%D7%99%D7%93%D7%A2-%D7%9C%D7%9E%D7%AA%D7%A2%D7%A0%D7%99%D7%99%D7%A0%D7%99%D7%9D-%D7%91-%D7%A9#b2 Ganan (195) interviewed by Magda Barnea about the beginning days of synagogue HaKipah Al Adati, file 1555-02 cassette 1066
 wall added to entrance of HaKipah synagogue December 30, 2009 


Footnotes

Gallery

File:Memorial Rabbi Amram Aburbeh at Or Zaruaa Synagogue. Rabbi Amram Aburbeh, author of Netivei Am served as the synagogue's rabbi from its establishment in 1927 till 1951.
File:Or Zaruaa synagogue Jerusalem interior Parochet, blue with golden embroidered letters Rabbi Shlomo Hai Knafo. Blue velvet Parochet with golden embroidered letters. Rabbi Shlomo Hai Knafo ZT"L, son of Dona and Rabbi David Knafo ZT"L, grandson of the author Rabbi Yosef Knafo ZT"L, hier to those burned on sanctifying HaShem in the city Ifrane Morocco, passed away on 7 Iyar 5755. The memorial parochet was donated by his wife Esther Knafo.knafo family donated Parochet
File:Or Zaruaa Synagogue, Jerusalem, Israel parochet with State of Israel emblem, Menorah and olive tree branches leaves. Parochet with State of Israel emblem, Menorah and olive tree branches with green leaves.
File:Or Zaruaa Synagogue in Nachlaot, Jerusalem Israel interior. Parochet red hue with ten commandments. Parochet in red hue decorated with embroidery of The Ten Commandments. Memorial for Reuven ben Zmra, died on 1924.
File:Or Zaruaa Synagogue, Nachlaot, Jerusalem ,Israel interior parochet memorial.. Parochet on Torah Ark (Aron Hakodesh) dark black background decorated with the symbols of the 12 tribes of the ancient Israelites. Memorial for parents of Maman family. Masud ben Zohara Maman Z"L died 21 Tishrei 5714 (1954), Rahma Maman bat Pracha Z"L died 9 B'Av 5754 (1994). Donated by Rahamim Maman.
File:Or Zaruaa synagogue Jerusalem exterior door wooden and magen david zion. Wooden door entrance to first floor decorated with magen david and the word Zion in Hebrew.
File:Or Zaruaa synagogue Jerusalem exterior wall engraved stone sign, Yeshiva donated by Yamin Ben Harroch 1927. On the exterior wall there is a stone sign commemorative plaque which states: Yeshiva donated by Mr Yamin Ben Harroch 1927.
File:HaRav Amram Aburbeh Yeshivat Or Zaruaa Nahlat Ahim 1930 ad in Geulah Calendar. Shachor (Eretz Israel).
File:Or Zaruaa synagogue Jerusalem exterior sign , philantropist Yamin Ben Harroch 1927. Exterior sign, blue letters print on white background, states the synagogue is by philanthropist Yamin Ben Harroch, founded year: 1927.

The entrance gate to Or Zaruaa synagogue, Preservation site on 3 Refaeli street. The exterior of the building bears a sign on Jerusalem stone bricks.






Melilla: exterior and interior photos of Or Zaruaa synagogue:
Basic information:
Location: 3 Refaeli Street Nachlaot, Jerusalem Israel
Affiliation: Orthodox Sephardi Judaism
Status: Active
Founding Rabbi: Amram Aburbeh
gabay: Itzak Cohai
Architectural description:
Architectural style: Traditional Spanish
Completion: 1927
Specifications:
Material: Jerusalem stone
Size : 258 square meters
Heritage: Preservation Site

