[[Florida State Seminoles women's basketball]]

CATEGORIES: Florida State Seminoles women's basketball, College women's basketball teams in the United States

The Florida State Seminoles women's basketball team represents Florida State University, variously Florida State or FSU, in the intercollegiate sport of basketball. The Seminoles compete in the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I and the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC).
Florida State has made thirteen NCAA/AIAW Tournament appearances: advancing to the Round of 32 on eleven occasions, the Sweet Sixteen on two occasions, and the Elite Eight on one occasion. Florida State has also made one appearance in the National Women's Invitation Tournament and two appearances in the Women's National Invitation Tournament. The Seminoles have won the regular season conference title three times and the conference tournament title once.
Florida State has had thirteen All-Americans and five players inducted into the Hall of Fame, and several players have gone on to play in the Women's National Basketball Association (WNBA).
The Seminoles play their home games in the Donald L. Tucker Center on the university's Tallahassee, Florida, campus. The head women's basketball coach is Sue Semrau.



The Florida State Seminoles women's team annually plays an eighteen-game conference schedule that is preceded by an out-of-conference schedule against few annual opponents except for Florida. Their conference schedule consists of a home-and-home game against two permanent rivals (Miami and Clemson), alternating home-and-home games against the other fourteen ACC teams.

History

Florida State University has officially fielded a basketball team since 1970, and the Seminoles are currently in their 44th season of play.

Barbara Hollingsworth Era (1970-1971)

Barbara Hollingsworth served as the first basketball coach for the Florida State Seminoles. She coached at the school for one year.

Linda Warren Era (1971-1972)

Linda Warren became the second basketball coach for the Lady Seminoles. She also coached at the school for one year.

Eddie Cubbon Era (1972-1973)

Eddie Cubbon became the third head coach, staying at the school for one season and compiling a record of 11-5.

Joel Thirer Era (1973-1974)

Joel Thirer, the fourth coach in four years, compiled a 9-6 record in one season.

Millie Usher Era (1974-1976)

Millie Usher became the first coach at Florida State to stay at the school for multiple seasons. Throughout two seasons, she compiled a record of 27-28.

Dianne Murphy Era (1976-1979)

Dianne Murphy, the sixth coach of the program, compiled a 37-35 record in three seasons with the Noles.

Jan Dykehouse-Allen Era (1979-1986)

Jan Dykehouse-Allen stayed at the school for seven years and was the first coach to compile over one hundred victories, with a record of 111-108. She was also the first coach to lead the team to the NCAA Tournament.

Marynell Meadors Era (1986-1996)

Marynell Meadors led the Seminoles for ten years to a record of 132-152 and two tournament appearances.

Chris Gobrecht Era (1996-1997)

Chris Gobrecht was fired after one season at Florida State following a five-win season.

Sue Semrau Era (1997-Present)

Sue Semrau has coached at Florida State for seventeen years and is the winningest coach in program history with a record of 295-201 at the school. She has led the Seminoles to nine tournaments.

Head Coaches

Florida State has had ten head coaches.
|}
*^Sue Semrau's record does not include 22 wins that were vacated that would otherwise make her record 295-201 though the 2012-2013 season. 

Current coaching staff

Players

Notable alumni

2013–14 Roster

Championships

NWIT Championship appearance

Florida State has appeared in the National Women's Invitation Tournament's National Championship game once, in 1982. The Seminoles, coached by Jan Dykehouse-Allen, lost to Oregon State, 76-60, at the Amarillo Civic Center in Amarillo, Texas. 

Conference Tournament Championships

Conference Affiliations

Conference Regular Season Championships

Records and results

Year-by-year results

|-style="background: #ffffdd;"
| colspan="8" align="center" | Metro Conference
|-style="background: #ffffdd;"
| colspan="8" align="center" | Atlantic Coast Conference

Polls

Florida State has ended their basketball season ranked six times in either the AP or Coaches Poll.
Top-10 finishes are colored ██
|}
Florida State has been ranked in the AP Poll a total of 85 times with an eighth place ranking being the best the team has ever received.

Post-season

Florida State has appeared in the postseason a total of eighteen times.

=NCAA Tournament=

The Seminoles have appeared in thirteen NCAA Tournaments.

==NCAA Tournament seeding==

=NWIT=

The Seminoles appeared in the National Women's Invitation Tournament on one occasion.

=WNIT=

The Seminoles have appeared in the Women's National Invitation Tournament twice.

=ACC Tournament=

The ACC Women's Basketball Tournament is the conference championship tournament in basketball for the Atlantic Coast Conference.  It is a single-elimination tournament and seeding is based on regular season records. The winner receives the conference's automatic bid to the NCAA Basketball Tournament.

Awards

All-Americans

Academic achievements

=Academic All-Americans=

Florida State has had multiple players selected as Academic All-Americans based on scholar performance.

Home court

Donald L. Tucker Center

The Seminoles play all of their home games at the Donald L. Tucker Center. It is an 



Bibliography




