[[Arthur Foxton Ferguson]]

CATEGORIES: English baritones, English male singers, People from Leeds, 1866 births, 1920 deaths, Musicians from Leeds, English folk-song collectors, Lecturers, English folk music, English choirs, Oxford choirs

Arthur Foxton Ferguson (3 January 1866 – 2 November 1920) an early 20th century English baritone, lecturer, and German translator who founded The Folk-Song Quartet.

Life and education

Arthur Foxton Ferguson was born 3 January 1866 at 25 Albion Street, Leeds,Yorkshire to Emma and William Ferguson, a bank manager.  He had six siblings including William Harold Ferguson (1874–1950).
As a child he began at Coatham and progressed to Leeds Grammar School. This is confirmed by an entry on 14 February 1887 when then Magdalen President Herbert Warren reported in his notebook that, "Arthur Foxton Ferguson, a Commoner of New College," was elected to an Academical Clerkship at Magdalen College to "sing bass." The baritone had been one of nine students competing for the post. It was very unusual to switch colleges in the day and was only permitted in special situations like his.
On 26 October 1897 he married Susanne Alexandrine Delphine Engel, the daughter of a merchant Carl Albert Engel in the Parish Church, Pinner, Middlesex. A German of Bohemian extraction from Hamburg, she was a spinster and pianist who had studied at the Hamburg Conservatory but gave up her career as a concert pianist and moved to Scarborough to live with her aunt Ida Holt. It was there she met Foxton Ferguson.

Vocal training and repertoire

Foxton Ferguson's vocal training is not well documented prior to his study in Germany but, most likely, his voice was honed in school music programs and choirs. As an Academic Clerk at Magdalen his duties included services with the esteemed organist John Varley Roberts. Foxton Ferguson's talent for solo singing became apparent in his college years at which time he appeared with the "Magdalen Vagabonds".
His post-university musical studies took him to London and then Leipzig, though he was not enrolled at the Königliches Konservatorium der Musik zu Leipzig. Stockhausen's diverse repertoire included opera, oratorio and, most of all, German Lieder. Foxton Ferguson's own repertoire was of a similar breadth and scope.
While he sang bass in ensembles he was called a baritone when singing as a soloist. His concert repertoire included an abundance of Lieder by Schubert and Schumann as well as folk song arrangements and original compositions by contemporary English composers. In opera Foxton Ferguson performed in such diverse repertoire as Mozart's Le nozze di Figaro though opera didn't play as large a role in his career as concerts did.

Career

He is most known for his English translations of German texts including Ottfried's Schubert Fantasies (1914);
He collaborated regularly with Lucy Broadwood, Ernest Walker,
In 1903 Foxton Ferguson sang the premieres of three duets based on German folk songs and arranged by Vaughan Williams (see above) which the singer himself had translated. In recital he also sang the composer's songs "Blackmwore by the Stour" and "Boy Johnny," the latter dedicated to the baritone James Campbell McInnes (1874–1945). The premiere of the Vaughan William's Two Vocal Duets ("The Last Invocation" and "The Bird's Love Song") in 1904, which were the composers' first settings of Walt Whitman, were sung by Foxton Ferguson and Beatrice Spencer who had also sung the premieres of two of the German duets together.
Foxton Ferguson sang with the pioneering conductor Gwynne Kimpton on her "Concerts for the Young" in the years preceding the Great War performing in Duke's Hall, Royal Academy of Music and Steinway Hall where he sang "Mother Goose's Rhymes."
On the evening of 28 March 1914 he gave a song recital under the auspices of The Institute of Arts and Sciences of Columbia University.

The Folk-Song Quartet

The Folk-Song Quartet was Foxton Ferguson's invention and was composed of Beatrice Spencer, soprano, Florence Christie, mezzo-soprano, Louis Godfrey, tenor, and Foxton Ferguson as the bass.
Background: On 3 June 1901, The Western Daily Press reported that a vocal quartet had been formed in London by Foxton Ferguson with a two-fold purpose; firstly, to have a well-practiced solo quartet ready for performances of the Choral Symphony, and secondly to study the large and ever increasing body of quartet repertoire.  and his longtime duet partner Beatrice Spencer had assumed the soprano role solidifying a stable and permanent ensemble for the next fifteen years.

Lectures and teaching

Known for his wit, exuberance, and pithiness onstage, Foxton Ferguson was an expert lecturer on English folk song and gave presentations (where he both spoke and sang) in England, Germany, and on extensive tours of the United States in the years 1909–1914. Often appearing through colleges, libraries, and women's clubs, he lectured at Harvard University, His lecture topics ranged from folk lore and folk songs to Christmas carols and songs of the sea.
Once at a high school in Dallas, TX in March 1913, he gave a two hour lecture (both singing and speaking) on "Vagabondia, or Songs of the Open Road." In that lecture he said the following, "Vagabondage does not mean to me simply long hair and filth. It means being one's self. Every true vagabond is himself. It is of the greatest importance to be one's self."
In 1904 he provided pre-opera lectures for Charles Manners' (1857–1938) Moody-Manners touring company (the larger) for its performances at Theater Royal, Drury Lane lecturing on Charles Gounod's Faust and Fromental Halévy's La Juive, and Richard Wagner's Tristan und Isolde and Lohengrin.
Around the outbreak of World War I, Foxton Ferguson became a Master at Eton College where he was beloved by his students through the last years of his life. An obituary in the Eton College Chronicle of 5 November 1920 reads, "His face was irresistibly humorous; you could not see him without feeling a keen interest in him. His singing (how often and how gladly we have heard him sing) was a constant joy, and abides, thought we shall never hear him sing again, a joy forever. ... you could not meet him without feeling some influence for good: always he lived in harmony with the best and in peace with all. ... to love others first, with or without return, is what matters most; ... he came to us already knowing it, it was in this spirit that he lived and died."

Publications

In addition to his English translations he contributed to several music periodicals including The Academy & Literature,

Family

Foxton Ferguson's younger brother Rev. William Harold Ferguson (1874–1950) was also a composer, clergyman, and hymnbook editor.

Death

Foxton Ferguson died unexpectedly of a duodenal ulcer while singing a concert on 2 November 1920 (The Cottage Hospital Littleham, Exmouth, Devonshire).




