[[Nairobi airport fire]]

CATEGORIES: Building and structure fires, 2013 in Kenya, 2013 fires, Fires in Kenya, Nairobi

On 7 August 2013, a fire broke out inside the main terminal building at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport in Nairobi, Kenya, destroying two of the three units contained in the building. No one was killed, but two people were hospitalized with non-life-threatening injuries. Incoming flights were divered to Uganda, Tanzania, and other airports in Kenya."Inferno roars through E. Africa's largest airport", Associated Press, reported by Jason Straziuso and Tom Odula, published in The Pueblo Chieftan, 7 August 2013

The fire

At approximately 4:30 am local time, Several groups, including the Kenya Army and firefighters from private companies, assisted in fighting the fire. After six hours, on-scene officials indicated that the fire had been contained.
After the fire had been extinguished, businesses affected by the fire reported that items were missing from their businesses. Various reports indicated that first responders had looted fire-damaged businesses during and after the fire, leading some to believe that the fire could have been put out sooner had all the firefighters kept their focus on extinguishing the blaze. Tourists who were displaced by the fire also reported that they were assaulted by thugs who blocked access to the main gate, where the tourists were attempting to retrieve their belongings.

Victims

A spokesman for Kenya Airways, the primary tenant at the airport, indicated that two of its employees had been transported to a local hospital for observation. One of the individuals was treated for smoke inhalation. There were no immediate reports of injuries to firefighting personnel or other airport employees.

Investigation

After the fire was extinguished, a preliminary investigation was started. Possible terrorism was an initial concern because the fire occurred on the fifteenth anniversary of the terrorist bombings of United States embassies in Kenya and Tanzania plus the fact that Kenya has been involved in an armed conflict with Al-Shabaab in neighboring Somalia. Investigators, however, soon ruled out terrorism as the cause of the fire.

Aftermath

The international arrival and departure units were completely destroyed in the fire. Airport officials have elected to use Unit III (used for domestic arrivals and departures) to handle some international traffic. Operations were partly reestablished on  but it is unknown if the fire will affect the opening of the new unit. Unit IV was not damaged in the fire.






