[[Herm]]

CATEGORIES: Herm, Geography of the Channel Islands, Private islands, Car-free zones

Herm (Guernésiais: Haerme) is one of the Channel Islands and part of the Bailiwick of Guernsey, located in the English Channel, north-west of France and south of England. It is  wide; orientated north-south, with several stretches of sand along its northern coast. Guernsey lies to the west and Jersey to the south-east, and the smaller island of Jethou is just off the south-west coast. 
Herm was first discovered in the Mesolithic period, and the first settlers arrived in the Neolithic and Bronze Ages. Many tombs from that period remain today, the majority in the north of the island. The island was annexed to the Duchy of Normandy in 933, but returned to the English Crown with the division of Normandy in 1204. It was occupied by Germany in the Second World War and the scene of Operation Huckaback, but was largely bypassed. Herm is currently managed by Herm Island Ltd, formed by Starboard Settlement, who acquired Herm in 2008, following fears during the sale of the island that the 'identity' of the island was at threat.
Herm's harbour is on its west coast. There are several buildings of note in the vicinity including the White House, St Tugual's Chapel, Fisherman's Cottage, "The Mermaid" pub and restaurant, and a small primary school with about eight children. During a busy summer season, up to 100,000 tourists visit the island, arriving by one of the Travel Trident catamaran ferries operated by the Trident Charter Company. Cars are banned from the island, as are bicycles; quad bikes and tractors used for staff and luggage transport respectively are allowed. 

History

Ancient history to Middle Ages

Herm was first found in the Mesolithic period (between 10,000 and 8,000 B.C), when hunters were in search of food.
The first records of Herm's inhabitants in historic times are from the 6th century, when the island became a centre of monastic activity; the followers of Saint Tugual (also called Tudwal) arrived, establishing Saint Tugual's Chapel. In 709, a storm washed away the strip of land which connected the island with Jethou.
An important moment in Herm's political history was in 933, when the Channel Islands were annexed to the Duchy of Normandy, After the annexation, Herm gradually lost its monastic inhabitants, and between 1570 and 1737 the governors of Guernsey used it as a hunting ground; visiting to shoot, hunt, and fish.

19th century to the Second World War

In 1810, an inn was founded; and during the Industrial Revolution, roads, paths, a harbour, accommodation, a forge, blacksmiths, a brewery, a bakery and a prison were built to cater for the largest number of inhabitants since prehistoric times.  Most were quarrymen working in new granite quarries. Several quarries can still be seen at present, such as on the Common. When the Prince and Princess Blücher
The German occupation of the Channel Islands during the Second World War essentially by-passed Herm. The island was claimed on 20 July 1940 by the Third Reich,; a few weeks after the arrival of German troops in Guernsey and Jersey, German soldiers landed on the island to shoot a propaganda film, The Invasion of the Isle of Wight. Herm's sandy beaches were soon used for practising landings from barges, in preparation for the invasion of England, but otherwise the island saw little of the Germans beyond officers making trips to shoot rabbits.

=Operation Huckaback=

Operation Huckaback was a British Second World War military operation that was originally designed to be a raid on Herm, Jethou and Brecqhou, but instead was only a raid on Herm on the night of 27 February 1943, following an earlier attempt that had been aborted.

Since 1945

In 1949, the States of Guernsey bought Herm from the Crown because of the "unspoilt island idyll that could be enjoyed by locals and tourists alike". One of the island's most influential tenants was Major Peter Wood, who looked after the island from 1949 to 1980 with his wife. The island was run down when he arrived, with the manor hidden in undergrowth, the windows and roofs of the houses having been blown off by a sea mine drifting into the harbour shortly after their arrival,
On 17 May 2008, the BBC reported The trust formed a company based in Guernsey, Herm Island Ltd, to manage the island for the trustees.

Geography and geology

Herm is only 1½ miles long and less than half a mile wide. It is oriented so that its greatest length runs north–south. In the northern part of the island are the Le Petit Monceau and Le Grande Monceau hills. To the north of this is a common, leading to Mouisonniere Beach on the northern coast, with Oyster Point in the northwestern corner and La Pointe du Gentilhomme or Alderney Point at the northeastern corner.

Off the northwestern coast of Herm is the islet of Le Plat Houmet, and beyond that Fondu, which like Herm belongs to Guernsey. In Belvoir Bay on the eastern side of the island are the islets of Mouliere, situated off Frenchman's Point which is to the northeast of the manor village, and Caquorobert. To the south of this off the southeastern coast is Puffin Bay, which contains the islet of Putrainez near the coast and the islet of Selle Rocque further out to the south. The far southwestern point of the island is Point Sauzebourge, and Bishop's Cove is just to the north of this.  North of the cove and south along the beach from the harbour and White House are the Rosiere Steps, with a quarry and cottage of the same name in the vicinity. The Mouette and Percee reefs are offshore here. Hermetier, along known as Rat's Island, lies about 
The isle of Jethou is around three-quarters of a mile to the southwest beyond Point Sauzebourge.

Politics

Herm is a dependency of Guernsey, and is rented out to various tenants.
Cars and bicycles are banned from Herm, in order to keep "peace and tranquility". However, Herm does allow quad bikes and tractors for staff and luggage transport respectively.

Economy and services

Tourism is Herm's main source of income.
During a busy summer season, up to 100,000 tourists visit the island,  arriving by one of the Travel Trident catamaran ferries operated by the Trident Charter Company.
There are three volunteer Special Constables resident on the island, trained and supervised by the States of Guernsey Police Service. Crime rates on the island are low.
There are no medical facilities on Herm and no resident doctor. A small team of first aiders and community first responders is maintained amongst the resident population, Medical evacuation to hospital in Guernsey, where necessary, is achieved by means of the ambulance launch 'Flying Christine III' operated by the Guernsey Ambulance and Rescue Service.
A voluntary fire service operates on the island. Herm Fire Brigade operates a tractor-hauled fire tender with a hose-reel, a pump, a 2,000-litre water tank, and basic fire-fighting equipment which they use while waiting for assistance from the Guernsey Fire Brigade, who also provide the Herm volunteers with training and support.

Notable landmarks

The nondenominational St Tugual's Chapel dates to the 11th century, but it is believed that there was a place of worship on Herm as far back as the 6th century, although it hasn't been confirmed whether the chapel was founded by St Tugual himself or his followers at a later date.

Other buildings on the island include the White House hotel, "The Mermaid" pub and restaurant, and 20 self-catering cottages. The most notable cottages are Fisherman's Cottage, north of the harbour, and Manor Cottage. but visiting clergy conducts non-denominational weekly services during the summer months, and monthly services, led by local lay people, are held during the winter.
Sculptor Antony Gormley had a sculpture installed on Herm in 2010,

Education and culture

A number of French/Norman placenames remain, from the period when the island was in the jurisdiction of the Duchy of Normandy.  The Herm Island map, published by the tenant of Herm, states that main place names, including the island name itself, have unclear origins, although there is an un-official Anglicisation of names; for example, La Pointe du gentilhomme was changed to "Alderney Point". The primary present language on Herm is English.
Herm has one primary school, with around eight pupils; they are taught by a teacher who travels from Guernsey daily. Children over nine are schooled in Guernsey, usually as boarders.
Herm has won Britain in Bloom categories several times: Compton Mackenzie, who owned the island, represented it in Fairy Gold, albeit in a fictional representation.








