[[We Share the Same Sun]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 singles, Stereophonics songs, Songs written by Kelly Jones, 2013 songs

"We Share the Same Sun" is a song by rock band Stereophonics. It is the opening track on their 2013 album Graffiti on the Train and was released as the album's forth single on 12 August 2013. The song was released as a 10" vinyl format and Stereophonics have regularly played it as part of their set list. When Graffiti on the Train was released the song had a mixed to positive response and has been compared to "Landslide" by Fleetwood Mac.

Composition

"We Share the Same Sun" is played at a tempo of 128 beats per minute. for fifteen seconds until lead singer Kelly Jones begins his vocals. Thirty seconds after Jones has started, electric guitar by Adam Zindani is abruptly introduced, along with bass and drums provided by Richard Jones and Javier Weyler, respectively. The second verse is sung in the same melody as the first. The second and last chorus is extended which includes Zindani singing to harmonise with Jones. The bridge section has Zindani echoing Jones' vocals, this is then followed by a guitar solo from Zindani. Note: Although Zindani isn't seen playing the solo, at around 2:50 Jones is seen playing rhythm guitar, thus ruling him out playing the solo.
The guitar in the song was described as "bluesy" by Matthew Horton from the BBC.

Promotion and release

"We Share the Same Sun" was regularly played on BBC Radio 2, particularly on The Chris Evans Breakfast Show, Note: The dates "We Share the Same Sun" were played are: 2, 5, 6, 7 and 9 August. two weeks before its release.[ref]

Formats

Promotional CDs were made available on 1 July 2013 which featured the song as well as the instrumental version. The cover art for the single was created by Steve Goddard who created the artwork for Graffiti on the Train''.

Release history

Music video

The music video for "We Share the Same Sun" was directed by Jones. Although Jamie Morrison is seen playing the drums in the video it was Javier Weyler who provided the drums on the track.

Live performances

In March 2013, Stereophonics held a March Tour to support Graffiti on the Train and "We Share the Same Sun" was played at all the shows.

Critical response

Initial reviews of "We Share the Same Sun" have been mixed to positive. When reviewing Graffiti on the Train, Drowned in Sound contributor Sean Adams gave the song a positive review, calling it one of the stand-out tracks on the record. He compared the beginning of the track to "Landslide" by Fleetwood Mac.
Matthew Horton at the BBC had a less enthusiastic response, describing it as "turning a bluesy guitar over and over against sinister keys – no quick rewards here."

Appearances in other media

The song has been used by Sky Sports F1 in the background of their coverage of race weekends.

Track listings

Personnel

Charts




