[[Jade Mirror of the Four Unknowns]]

CATEGORIES: Chinese mathematics

Jade Mirror of the Four Unknowns,This title was suggested by Joseph Dauben Siyuan yujian ( With this masterpiece, Zhu brought Chinese algebra to its highest level.
The book consists of an introduction and three books, with a total of 288 problems. The first four  problems in the introduction illustrate his method of the four unknowns. He showed how to convert a problem stated verbally into a system of polynomial equations (up to the 14th order), by using up to four unknowns: 天Heaven, 地Earth, 人Man, 物Matter, and then how to reduce the system to a single polynomial equation in one unknown by successive elimination of unknowns. He then solved the high-order equation  by Southern Song dynasty mathematician Qin Jiushao's "Ling long kai fang" method published in  Shùshū Jiǔzhāng ("Mathematical Treatise in Nine Sections") in 1247 (more than 570 years before English mathematician William Horner's method using synthetic division). To do this, he makes use of the Pascal triangle, which he labels as the diagram of an ancient method first discovered by Jia Xian before 1050.
Zhu also solved square and cube roots problems by solving quadratic and cubic equations, and added to the understanding of series and progressions, classifying them according to the coefficients of the Pascal triangle. He also showed how to solve systems of linear equations by reducing the matrix of their coefficients to diagonal form. His methods predate Blaise Pascal, William Horner, and modern matrix methods by many centuries. The preface of the book describes how Zhu travelled around China for 20 years as a teacher of mathematics.
Jade Mirror of the Four Unknowns consists of four books, with 24 classes and 288 problems, in which 232 problems deal with Tian yuan shu, 36 problems deal with variable of two variables, 13 problems of three variables, and 7 problems of four variables.

Introduction

The four quantities are x, y, z, w  can be presented with the following diagram
The square of which is:

The Unitary Nebuls

This section deals with Tian yuan shu or problems of one unknown.
Since the product of huangfang and zhi ji = 24
in which 
We obtain the following equation
Solve it and obtain  x=3

The Mystery of Two Natures

from the given
we get：
and
by method of elimination, we obtain a quadratic equation

The Evolution of Three Talents

Template for solution of problem of three unknowns
Zhu Shijie explained the method of elimination in detail. His example has been quoted frequently in scientific literatureWu Wenjun Mechanization of Mathematics (吴文俊 数学机械化 《朱世杰的一个例子》)pp  18-19 Science Press ISBN 7-03-010764-0Zhu Shijie Siyuan yujian'', annotated by Li Zhaohua (朱世杰原著 李兆华校正 《四元玉鉴》)p149-153 Science Press  2007 ISBN 978-7-03-020112-6J. Hoe  Les Systemes d'Equation Polynomes dans le siyuanyujian1303,Instude Haute Etudes Chinoise, Paris 1977。
Set up three equations as follows
Elimination of unknown between II and  III
by manipulation of exchange of variables
We obtain
and
Elimination of unknown between  IV and V we obtain a 3rd order equation
Change back the variables
We obtain the hypothenus =5 paces

Simultaneous of the Four Elements=

This section deals with simultaneous equations of four unknowns。
Successive elimination of unknowns to get
Solve this and obtain 14 paces

Book I

Problems of Right Angle Triangles and Rectangles

There are 18 problems in this section.
Problem 18
Obtain a tenth order  polynomial equation:
The root of which is x = 3， multiply by 4, getting 12. That is the final answer。

Problems of Plane Figures

There are 18 problems in this section

Problems of Piece Goods

There are 9 problems in this section

Problems on Grain Storage

There are 6 problems in this section

Problems on Labour

There are 7 problems in this section

Problmes of Equations for Fractional Roots

There are 13 problems in this section

Book II

Mixed Problems

Containment of Circles and Squares

Problems on Areas

Surveying with Right Angle Triangles

There are eight problems in this section

Let tian yuan unitary as half of the length, we obtain a 4th order equation
solve it and obtain  x=240 paces，hence length =2x= 480 paces=1 li and 120paces。
Similarity, let tian yuan unitary(x) equals to half of width
we get the equation：
Solve it to obtain  x=180 paces ，length =360 paces =one li。

Hay Stacks

Bundles of Arrows

Land Measurement

Summon Men According to Need

Problem No 5 is the earliest 4th order interpolation formular in the world
In whicn

Book III

Fruit pile

This section contains 20 problems dealing with triangular piles, rectangular piles
Problem 1
Find the sum of triangular pile
and value of the fruit pile is:
Zhu Shijie use Tian yuan shu to solve this problem by letting x=n
Therefore

Figures within Figure

Simultaneous Equations

Equation of two unknowns

Left and Right

Equation of Three Unknowns

Equation of Four Unknowns

Six problems of four unknowns。
Question 2
Yield a set of equations in four unknowns：.Zhu Shijie, Siyuan yujian, annotated by Li Zhaohua , Science Press pp246-249 2007 ISBN 978-7-03-020112-6




