[[United States House of Representatives elections in Oregon, 2014]]

CATEGORIES: United States House of Representatives elections, 2014, United States House of Representatives elections in Oregon

The 2014 United States House of Representatives elections in Oregon will be held on Tuesday, November 4, 2014 to elect the five U.S. Representatives from the state of Oregon, one from each of the state's five congressional districts. The elections will coincide with the elections of other federal and state offices, including the Governor of Oregon and a United States Senator. Primary elections will be held on May 20, 2014.

District 1

The 1st district is located in the northwest corner of Oregon. The incumbent is Democrat Suzanne Bonamici, who has represented the district since winning a special election in 2012. She was re-elected with 60% of the vote in 2012 and the district has a PVI of D+7.
Three Republicans are running: heavy-equipment operator, winemaker and martial arts instructor Delinda Delgado Morgan, mechanical engineer Bob Niemeyer and service manager at a pest-control company Jason Yates are also running.

District 2

The 2nd district is located east of the Willamette Valley and covers roughly two-thirds of the state. It is the largest of Oregon's five districts, and is the seventh-largest district in the nation. The incumbent is Republican Greg Walden, the Chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, who has represented the district since 1999. He was re-elected with 69% of the vote in 2012 and the district has a PVI of R+10.
The Club for Growth has targeted Walden for a primary challenge.
Democrats Aelea Christofferson, Barney Spera and C.F. Vulliet are running.

District 3

The 3rd district most of Multnomah County, including Portland east of the Willamette River, Gresham, and Troutdale. The incumbent is Democrat Earl Blumenauer, who has represented the district since 1996. He was re-elected with 75% of the vote in 2012 and the district has a PVI of D+22.
Republican James Buchal is the only other candidate running.

District 4

The 4th district the southern half of Oregon's coastal counties, including Coos, Curry, Douglas, Lane and Linn counties and most of Benton and Josephine counties. The incumbent is Democrat Peter DeFazio, who has represented the district since 1987. He was re-elected with 59% of the vote in 2012 and the district has a PVI of D+2.
Chemist, Chairman of the Oregon Republican Party and nominee for the seat in 2010 and 2012 Arthur B. Robinson is the only other candidate running. 

District 5

The 5th district includes Oregon's central coast through Salem, north to the southern Portland suburbs, and east to the summit of Mount Hood. The incumbent is Democrat Kurt Schrader, who has represented the district since 2009. He was re-elected with 54% of the vote in 2012 and the district has an even PVI.
Schrader is being challenged in the Democratic primary by former U.S. Army medical specialist and retired union worker Anita Brown.
United States Marine Corps veteran Nathan Page,
 




