[[Dajal, Rajanpur]]

CATEGORIES: Articles created via the Article Wizard, Populated places in Rajanpur District

Dajal is a small town in the Jampur of Punjab, Pakistan. It is on the border of Balochistan province. It is located at 29°33'34"N 70°22'33"E, and its population is around 28,000.

Etymology

Dajal town was esatblished by a saint named Dawood, when he was passing through a mud dunes, he stayed there under the Tree, in local Siraiki language it is called "JAAL". After that place become a small village & called as Doowd Jaal, Afterward when population was increasing, town name changed to Dawojal & finall Dajal

History

During rule of Langahs in 1452, Islam Khan a relation of Lodhi King of Delhi was incharge of the southern part of the Multan Province. Nahars overthrew the supremacy of Langah and the then Lodhi King of Delhi approved the act. Nahars annexed a greater part of Dera Ghazi Khan and charged upon the territory of Dajal and Harrand in the north. Their march was repelled by Miranis in 1482. Albeit the country around Harrand and Dajal inhabited by Gorchani and Lunds tribes was governed by Naseer Khan Noori, Khan of Kalat for 70 years which fell to him in reward of services which he rendered in the battle of Panipat against Marhattas to Abdalies in 1758. Khan of Kalat retained this tract of land until Sikhs drove him out in 1827. Besides the area around Dajal and Harrand the Baloch tribes of Koh-e-Suleman including Marris, Bugtis and Kethrans are said to have been under nominal subjugation of Khan of Kalat though Qaisranis and Buzdars served as personal body guards of Khan of Kalat, but the Khan could never extend his direct sway over these tribes i.e. Qaisranis, Buzdars, Lunds, Khosas, Legharis, Gorchanis and Mazaris inhabiting the mountainous tract from north of south
The country of Harrand and Dajal was given to Khan of Kalat by Temur Shah Durani in 1758. This tract remained under the Khanate up till 1827. In 1827, the Nawab of Bhawalpur occupied the country of Dajal and Harrand for Sikh and thus the rule of Khan of Kalat came to an end over this area. Kabul, the British Government in 1838, 
at Lahore, ratified the treaty of 1834 between the Shah and the 
Maharajah.
By this treaty Shah Shuja renounced his claim to all jurisdiction over the province of Harrand Dajal, at that time still nomi- nally in the Kalat Khanate. Soon after Ranjit Singh's death in 1839. no one having been- found fit to fill the place of that astute ruler, the whole of this part of the country fell into a state of anarchy. The Kalat Sardars, instigated, it is said, by the Khan, raided Harrand Dajal in retaliation for the conduct of the Sikh Government, and in their endeavour to recover the stolen province, all became anarchy and confusion throughout the Dera Ghazi Khan district. In this connection one feature is distinctly noticeable. Prior to, the Tripartite Treaty of 1838 the district of Harrand Dajal — including the Gurchanis, Mazaris, and certain Harris — was claimed by the Khan of Kalat.

Languages

Saraiki is the main language of the town. In nearby areas, Balochi is also spoken. There is a trend in people for speaking Urdu.

Administrative status

Previously Dajal was regarded as a Town Committee but after dissolution of power to the district government plan of President Pervez Musharraf.
It was divided into different union councils and the town committee status was abolished.

Irrigation system

Canal irrigation

Rod Kohi

Major Rod Kohi areas traversed by hill torrents constitute nearly 65 percent of the total area of Pakistan and encompass entire Balochistan.people Living in Pachadh area store rod kohi water for the cultivation of crop.Mostly people and animals lost their life.of Pakistan made small dam but due to the huge water all small dam were destroyed.

Agriculture

The land of Dajal is very fertile in regard to agriculture. Cotton, wheat are generally produced in Dajal.   Different vegetables are also grown there. Mangoes and dates are common fruits grown in this region.

Demographics

Dajal is one of the most famous city in Sub division Jampur,Dera Ghazi Khan division. Popular tribes residing here are Sayed, Soomro, Sarani,Dhandla, Khosa, Chandia,  Gishkori, Leghari, Khawaja's, Machhi, Damrria, Mahar, Lund, Rind, Bhatti, Bhutta, Gurmani, Daha, Arain, Hajana, Gurchani(pahariay),Ghauri, Ahmadani, Babbar, Shah,  QAZI and  Qureshi

Historical places

Famous things ((Popularity))

'''"Dajal(cattle)"
The Dajal are a draft type of cattle and are found mainly in the Dajal area in district Rajan Pur in Punjab Province. Their color is white or gray, deepening to almost black on the neck, shoulder and hump in mature males. The average weight at maturity of Dajal cattle is 500 kg for males and 390 kg for females.
The Dajal breed is an off shoot of Bhagnari breed, having almost similar points. However, Dajal cattle are comparatively smaller in size and lighter in color.
Dajal Cattle Breeding Farm
Dajal Cattle Breeding Farm was established in 1985 on the state landing Rakh DhundhiFazilpur. 
The farm land was transferred to WPADC in February 1964 to operate it as seed Farm.
After a lapse of 8 years i.e. 1972, the WPADC was dissolved and the Punjab government again decided to established a cattle Breeding Farm at Fazilpur to cope with the demands of Dera Ghazi Khan Division.
Initially a Livestock Experiment Station was established in 1972-73 for the breeding of Dajal Cattle and Awassi Sheep, but soon after the Dajal breed of cattle was replaced with Sahiwal under the3 direction of the provincial cabinet. According the scheme was revised and implemented with effect from 1973-74 to breed pure Sahiwal for the objectives given in the next paragraphs.
Buffalos found in Pakistan make up 47% of Pakistan's major dairy animal's population providing more than about61% of the total milk produced in the country. Buffalo breeds found in Pakistan are Nili Ravi, Kundi and Aza Kheli. Nili Ravi is considered best buffalo breed in world and known as Black Gold of Pakistan. Cattle constitute about 53% of the national population of major dairy animals in Pakistan and contribute the share of almost 34.9% to the total milk production in country. The cattle breeds found in the country are Sahiwal, Cholistani, Red Sndhi, Achai, Bhagnari, Dajal, Dhanni, Gibrali, Kankraj, Lohani, Rojhan, and Thari. Out of these, Sahiwal, Cholistani, and Red Sindhi are main dairy breeds and well known internationally due to their distinct characteristics. Other than well-defined cattle breeds, there are a large number of nondescript cattle breeds and crossbred cattle.
Sahiwal and Cholistani are the two main dairy breeds of cattle. Their average milk production per lacta-tion is about 1200-1800 liters with 4.5% butter fat. The age at first calving is more than 3.5 years and calving interval ranges between 1.5 to 2 years. Dhanni, Dajal and Rojhan are draught type breeds with milk production potential of 800-1000 liters per lactation. Utility of these draught breeds has declined over the years due to increased mechanization in agriculture. The production recording and progeny testing program is being executed in Sahiwal breed only and is limited to institutional herds.

Attractions

Four Sufi Sultans
Dajal is also the place of  four Sufi sultans and saints named Abharng Sultan, Sanghi Sultan   and Ganwar Sultan. Bodla Bahar and Hamza Sultan  is the most famous of all these. The Abharang Sultan Gathering (Maela) is a very famous local festival. This festival((maela))starts from 1st Safar ul Muzzaffar to eight Safar ul Muzzaffar.
People from nearby places come to see this maela.

Hamza Sultan's Tomb

It is said

Marri

Marri is a hilly station in the Suliman Range,situated only few kilometres from Dajal
(near the Lalgarh union council).
Marri (Urdu: مرى), is beautiful hill station in Rajanpur District, south Punjab, Pakistan. 
Its altitude   isapproximately 4800 ft above from sea level.
It is about 75 km (47 mi) away from Fazilpur, 116 km (72 mi) away from Jampur, 100 km (62 mi) away from Rajanpur and 116 km (72 mi) away from Mithankot.
Beautiful site and newly built Road is also seenable. Visitors can reach Marri from Fazilpur, 
Hajipur,Lalgarh and Dajal Road. Because Gorchani tribe living here.
Current Chief Of Gorchani tribe is Sardar Shehk Haidar Gorchani.
Marri Is Bloch Word Means "Ghar" Home.
People from Dajal and nearby area go to Marri in summer season.

Roads and facilities

Nearby places

Tufki1.9 km / 1.2 miles	Hothi4.8 km / 3 miles Mayo1.9 km / 1.2 miles	Binda Burra4.8 km / 3 miles Basti Miyo 1.9 km / 1.2miles	Binda Barara4.8 km / 3 miles Onar 2.5 km / 1.5 miles	Hoti4.8 km / 3 miles Unnar2.5 km / 1.5 miles	Basti Hanbi
5.2 km / 3.2 miles Raqba Dhandlah 3.2 km / 2 miles Basti Hanbhi 5.2 km / 3.2 miles Raqba Dhandla 3.2 km / 2 miles Buchrah
6.4 km / 4 miles Raqba Dhandlah 3.2 km / 2 miles Basti Buchrah6.4 km / 4 miles Qassab 3.7 km / 2.3 miles Buchara6.4 km / 4 miles Danwar3.7 km / 2.3 miles	Patwali7.4 km / 4.6 miles Basti Qasab 3.7 km / 2.3 miles Basti Dhandlah 9.3 km / 5.8 miles
Patti Machhi 3.7 km / 2.3 miles	Basti Dhandla 9.3 km / 5.8 miles Darkhan Mahtam 3.7 km / 2.3 miles isran 4 km / 2.5 miles
Basti Dulle 4.3 km / 2.6 miles

Hajo Shareef

Hajo shareef is a small village near Dajal here people are very hard working .
Mostly people are working in Saudi Arabia and UAE Dubai.
Hajo also famous for  one pious man  buried namely Hajo Sakhi Mardan.
His date of birth is celebrated on the 5th of March every year.








