[[Tubal ligation]]

CATEGORIES: Sterilization

Tubal ligation or tubectomy (also known as having one's "tubes tied" (ligation)) is a surgical procedure for sterilization in which a woman's fallopian tubes are clamped and blocked, or severed and sealed, either method of which prevents eggs from reaching the uterus for fertilization. Tubal ligation is considered a permanent method of sterilization and birth control.

Procedure

Tubal ligation is considered major surgery requiring the patient to undergo spinal anesthesia.  It is advised that women should not undergo this surgery if they currently have or have had a history of bladder cancer. After the anesthesia takes effect, a surgeon will make a small incision at each side of, but just below the navel in order to gain access to each of the two fallopian tubes. With traditional tubal ligation, the surgeon severs the tubes, and then ties (ligates) them off thereby preventing the travel of eggs to the uterus.  Other methods include using clips or rings to clamp them shut, or severing and cauterizing them. Tubal ligation is usually done in a hospital operating-room setting. The corresponding male surgical sterilization procedure known as vasectomy is considered minor surgery done with local anesthesia and typically done in an out-patient setting.

Effectiveness

A tubal ligation is approximately 99% effective in the first year following the procedure.  In the following years the effectiveness may be reduced slightly since the fallopian tubes can, in some cases, reform or reconnect which can cause unintended pregnancy.  Method failure is difficult to detect, except by subsequent pregnancy, unlike with vasectomy or IUD.
Of those failures, 15–20% are likely to be ectopic. 84% of those failures occurred a year or more after sterilization.
According to one study, approximately 5% of women who have had tubal ligation will have a failure due to ectopic pregnancy.  Time seems to be a factor as the risk of failure increases after 1 or more years post-surgery.
The risk of ectopic pregnancy is 12.5% for women who have had tubal ligation, which is a greater risk than for those who have not had the surgery. Recanalization or formation of tuboperitoneal fistulas occur, the openings of which are large enough for passage of sperm but too small to allow an ovum to push through, resulting in fertilization/implantation in the distal tubal segment.
Two economic studies suggest that laparoscopic bilateral tubal ligation could be less cost-effective than the Essure procedure, which uses a special type of fiber to induce a benign fibrotic reaction.

Tubal ligation Methods

Bipolar Coagulation
The most popular method of laparoscopic female sterilization, this method uses electrical current to cauterize sections of the fallopian tube.
Monopolar Coagulation
Less common than Bipolar Coagulation, Monopolar Coagulation uses electrical current to cauterize the tube together, but also allows radiating current to further damage the tubes as it spreads from the coagulation site. Many cases involve a cutting of the tubes after the procedure.
Fimbriectomy
By removing a portion of the fallopian tube closest to the ovary, fimbriectomy eliminates the ovary's ability to capture eggs and transfer them to the uterus.
Irving Procedure
This procedure calls for placing two ligatures (sutures) around the fallopian tube and removing the segment of tubing between the ligatures. Then to complete the procedure, the ends of the fallopian tubes are connected to the back of the uterus and the connective tissue respectively.
Tubal Clip
The tubal clip (Filshie Clip or Hulka Clip) technique involves the application of a permanent clip onto the fallopian tube. Once applied and fastened, the clip disallows transference of eggs to the ovary.
Tubal Ring
The silastic band or tubal ring method involves a doubling over of the fallopian tubes and application of a silastic band to the tube.
Pomeroy Tubal Ligation
In this method of tubal ligation, a loop of tube is "strangled" with a suture. Usually, the loop is cut and the ends cauterized or "burned". This type of tubal ligation is often referred to as cut, tied, and burned.
Essure Tubal Ligation
In this method of tubal ligation, two small metal and fiber coils are placed in the fallopian tubes. After insertion, scar tissue forms around the coils, blocking off the fallopian tubes and preventing sperm from reaching the egg.
Adiana Tubal Ligation
In this method of tubal ligation, two small silicone pieces that were placed in the fallopian tubes. During the procedure, the health care provider heated a small portion of each fallopian tube and then inserted a tiny piece of silicone into each tube. After the procedure, scar tissue formed around the silicone inserts, blocking off the fallopian tubes and preventing sperm from reaching the egg. The procedure can no longer be performed due to a lawsuit and judgment brought by the company responsible for Essure.

Reversal

Tubal ligation procedures are done to be permanent and are not considered a temporary form of birth control. Tubal reversal is microsurgery to repair the fallopian tube after a tubal ligation procedure.
Usually there are two remaining fallopian tube segments—the proximal tubal segment that emerges from the uterus and the distal tubal segment that ends with the fimbria next to the ovary. The procedure that connects these separated parts of the fallopian tube is called tubal reversal or microsurgical tubotubal anastomosis.
In a small percentage of cases, a tubal ligation procedure leaves only the distal portion of the fallopian tube and no proximal tubal opening into the uterus. This may occur when monopolar tubal coagulation has been applied to the isthmic segment of the fallopian tube as it emerges from the uterus. In this situation, a new opening can be created through the uterine muscle and the remaining tubal segment inserted into the uterine cavity. This microsurgical procedure is called tubal implantation, tubouterine implantation, or uterotubal implantation.
In vitro fertilization may overcome fertility problems in patients not suited to a tubal reversal.

Side effects

A 1998 review of over 200 articles in the English literature showed that evidence of a post-tubal sterilization syndrome (abnormal bleeding and/or pain, changes in sexual behavior and emotional health, increased premenstrual distress) was inconclusive for women over 30 years of age. The risk for women 20–29 years of age with pre-existing histories of menstrual dysfunction may be increased, "although they do not appear to undergo significant hormonal changes".

Prevalence

Worldwide, female sterilization is used by 33% of married women using contraception, Data from surveys 1997-2007.
