[[Samaritan Pentateuch]]

CATEGORIES: Torah, Biblical criticism, Early versions of the Bible, Ancient Israel and Judah, Samaritan texts, Texts which have been attributed to Moses

The Samaritan Pentateuch, sometimes called Samaritan Torah, (Hebrew: תורה שומרונית torah shomroniyt), is a version of the Hebrew language Pentateuch, the first five books of the Bible, traditionally written in the Samaritan alphabet and used by the Samaritans.  It constitutes their entire biblical canon.
Samaritan practices are based on their version of the Five Books of Moses, which is slightly different from the Masoretic text or the Greek Septuagint texts.  Some six thousand differences exist between the Samaritan and the Masoretic text.  Most are minor variations in the spelling of words or grammatical constructions, but others involve significant semantic changes such as the uniquely Samaritan commandment to construct an altar on Mount Gerizim.  Nearly two thousand textual variations from the Masoretic text agree with the Septuagint and some are shared with the Latin Vulgate.  Throughout their history, Samaritans have made use of translations of the Samaritan Pentateuch into Aramaic, Greek and Arabic as well as liturgical and exegetical works based upon it.
Its value for determining the original text of the Pentateuch has been a subject of contentious  debate especially after the publication of a manuscript of the Samaritan Pentateuch in Europe in the 17th century.  Some Pentateuchal manuscripts discovered among the Dead Sea Scrolls have been identified as bearing a "pre-Samaritan" text type. VanderKam, page 94, citing private communication with Emanuel Tov on biblical manuscripts: Qumran scribe type c.25%, proto-Masoretic Text c. 40%, pre-Samaritan texts c.5%, texts close to the Hebrew model for the Septuagint c.5% and nonaligned c.25%.  Wide agreement now exists among textual critics that the Samaritan Pentateuch represents an authentic ancient textual tradition despite the presence of some unique variants introduced by the Samaritans.

Origin and canonical significance

Samaritan traditions

Samaritans believe that God authored their Pentateuch and gave Moses the first copy along with the two tablets containing the Ten Commandments.H. "Samaritans," pp. 190–197 in Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, Volume 4. George Arthur Buttrick, gen. ed. Nashville: Abingdon, 1962.  They believe their copies preserve this divinely composed text uncorrupted to the present day.  Samaritans commonly refer to their Pentateuch as קושטה ("The Truth").  They trace their descent via the northern Kingdom of Israel, which had parted ways with the southern Kingdom of Judah after the death of King Solomon (see ). 82–83.
Samaritans receive only the Pentateuch into their biblical canon. 91. They do not recognize divine authorship or inspiration in any other book in the Jewish Tanakh." (Commentary on John 13:26) A Samaritan Book of Joshua partly based upon the Tanakh's Book of Joshua exists, but Samaritans regard it as a noncanonical secular historical chronicle.

Scholarly perspective

Modern scholarship connects the formation of the Samaritan community and their Pentateuch as a distinctive sectarian textual tradition with events which followed the Babylonian Captivity. 83.  According to The Interpreter's Bible (Volume 1),
The adoption of the Pentateuch as the sacred text of the Samaritans before their final schism with the Palestinian Jewish community provides evidence that it was already widely accepted as a canonical authority in that region.

Comparison with other versions

Comparison with the Masoretic

Manuscripts of the Samaritan Pentateuch are written in a different Hebrew script than is used in other Hebrew Pentateuchs. Samaritans employ the Samaritan alphabet which is derived from the paleo-Hebrew alphabet used by the Israelite community prior to the Babylonian captivity.  Afterwards Jews adopted a script based on the Aramaic alphabet that developed into the Hebrew alphabet.  Originally all manuscripts of the Samaritan Pentateuch consisted of unvocalized text written using only the letters of the Samaritan alphabet.  Beginning in the 12th century, some manuscripts show a partial vocalization resembling the Jewish Tiberian vocalization used in Masoretic manuscripts. 64–65.  More recently a few manuscripts have been produced with full vocalization. 81.  "Only in recent generations have the Samaritans written a few manuscripts – only for use outside their community – with full vocalization."  However, many extant manuscripts show no tendency towards vocalization.  The Pentateuchal text is divided into 904 paragraphs.  Divisions between sections of text are marked with various combinations of lines, dots or an asterisk; a dot is used to indicate the separation between words.
The critical apparatus accompanying the London Polyglot's publication of the Samaritan Pentateuch lists six thousand instances where the Samaritan differs from the Masoretic text. 77.  However, as different printed editions of the Samaritan Pentateuch are based upon different sets of manuscripts, the precise number varies significantly from one edition to another.D. "Samaritan Pentateuch," pp. 772–775 in Interpreter's Dictionary of the Bible, Supplementary Volume. Keith Crim, gen. ed. Nashville: Abingdon, 1976.  ISBN 9780687192694  Only a minority are significant; most can be categorized as one of the following types:
Among the most notable semantic variations reflecting deliberate scribal intention are those related to the Samaritan place of worship on Mount Gerizim.  The Samaritan version of the Ten Commandments commands that an altar be built on Mount Gerizim on which all sacrifices should be offered. The Samaritan version contains the additional text at Exodus 20:17:
This commandment is absent from the corresponding text of the Ten Commandments in the Masoretic. The Samaritan Pentateuch's inclusion of the Gerizim variation within the Ten Commandments places additional emphasis on the divine sanction given to that community's place of worship.  This variation has similarities to  in the Masoretic commands an altar to be constructed on Mount Ebal, the Samaritan texts has Mount Gerizim.
Several other types of theologically motivated variants are found in the Samaritan Pentateuch.  It shows a tendency to remove anthropomorphic language describing God and introduce intermediaries to perform actions the Masoretic attributes directly to God.  Where the Masoretic describes Yahweh as a "man of war" ( of the Masoretic "upon the knees of Joseph" to "in the days of Joseph."  Samaritan scribes, who interpreted this verse literally, found it improper that the mother of Joseph's grandchildren would give birth on his knees. 94.  Distinctive variants in the Samaritan are also found in certain legal texts where Samaritan practice varies from that prescribed within rabbinical halachic texts.
In about thirty-four instances, the Samaritan Pentateuch imports text from parallel or synoptic passages in other parts of the Pentateuch.  These textual expansions record conversations and events that are implied or presupposed by other parts of the narrative, but not explicitly recorded in the Masoretic text.  For example, the Samaritan text in the Book of Exodus on multiple occasions records Moses repeating to Pharaoh exactly what both the Samaritan and Masoretic record God instructing Moses to tell him.  The result is repetitious, but the Samaritan makes it clear that Moses spoke exactly as God commanded him.  In addition to these substantial textual expansions, the Samaritan Pentateuch on numerous occasions adds subjects, prepositions, particles, appositives, and the repetition of words and phrases within a single passage to clarify the meaning of the text.

Comparison with the Septuagint and Latin Vulgate

The Septuagint (LXX) agrees with the Samaritan in approximately 1900 of the six thousand variations from the Masoretic.  Many of these agreements reflect inconsequential grammatical details, but some are significant.  For example, 
In the Masoretic text, the passage reads:
Some passages in the Latin Vulgate show agreements with the Samaritan against the Masoretic.  For example,  in the Samaritan has "land of Moreh" (Hebrew: מוראה) while the Masoretic has "land of Moriah" (Hebrew: מריה).  "Land of Moreh" is considered to be a Samaritan variant because "Moreh" describes the region around Shechem,Barton 1903, p. 31. where Mount Gerizim is situated.  The Vulgate translates this phrase as in terram visionis ("in the land of vision") which implies that Jerome was familiar with the reading "Moreh", a Hebrew word whose consonants suggest  "vision."Thomson 1919, pp. 312–313.

Evaluations of its relevance for textual criticism

The earliest recorded assessments of the Samaritan Pentateuch are found in rabbinical literature and Christian patristic writings of the first millennium CE.  The Talmud records Rabbi Eleazar b. Simeon condemning the Samaritan scribes: "You have falsified your Pentateuch..."  Eusebius of Caesarea wrote that the "Greek translation the Bible also differs from the Hebrew, though not so much from the Samaritan" and noted that the Septuagint agrees with the Samaritan Pentateuch in the number of years elapsed from Noah's Flood to Abraham.[ref]
