[[Shale gas in the United Kingdom]]

CATEGORIES: Energy in the United Kingdom, Natural gas industry of the United Kingdom

Shale gas in the United Kingdom has attracted increasing attention since 2007, when onshore shale gas production was proposed. A number of wells have been drilled, but as of August 2013, there has been no commercial production of shale gas in the UK. 
In July 2013 UK Prime Minister David Cameron claimed that, "fracking has real potential to drive energy bills down".  However since then figures from industry and government have stated that fracking in the UK alone will not lower prices as the UK is part of a well connected European market.  Such figures included former BP Chief Executive and government advisor Lord Browne, Energy Secretary Ed Davey and economist Lord Stern."Lord Browne: fracking will not reduce UK gas prices", The Guardian 29th Nov 2013"Fracking won't lower energy bills, says Davey", The Telegraph 9th Sep 2013 "'Baseless economics': Lord Stern on David Cameron's claims that a UK fracking boom can bring down price of gas"
Favourable tax treatment was being offered to shale gas producers.

Shale gas areas

The Department of Energy and Climate Change (DECC) has identified large areas of eastern and southern England as having the "best shale gas potential":

Bowland Basin

As of June 2013, the Bowland Basin was the only area in the UK where wells have been drilled specifically for shale gas. Four wells have been drilled by Cuadrilla Resources, and one by IGAS Energy. None of the wells has produced gas.
Cuadrilla started drilling Britain's first shale gas exploration well, the Preece-Hall-1, in August 2010. The well penetrated 800m of organic-rich shale. The company hydraulicly fractured the well in early 2011, but suspended the operation when it triggered two small earthquakes, one of which was large enough to be felt by people at the surface. Work on the well stopped in May 2011, and the government declared a moratorium on hydraulic fracturing that was lifted in December 2012, subject to additional controls to limit seismic risk.bbc.co.org/uploadedFiles/Royal_Society_Content/policy/projects/shale-gas/2012-06-28-Shale-gas. 2011.
In September 2011, Cuadrilla announced a huge discovery of 200 trillion cubic feet (Tcf) of gas in place under the Fylde Coast in Lancashire.
In July 2013, Cuadrilla applied for a permit to hydraulically fracture its previously drilled well at the Grange Hill site.  In April 2014, Cuadrilla published news of their continuing consultation with residents shale gas exploration sites in the Fylde.
In 2011 and 2012, IGas Energy drilled a deep well to evaluate shale gas, and found gas shows in the Bowland Shale, with total organic content averaging 2.7%. The formation was reported to be thermally mature, in the wet gas window. IGAS bought large blocks of gas licences in 2011, much of which is reportedly prospective for shale gas. 
IGas announced that it would drill a well to evaluate shale gas at Barton, near Manchester. Drilling would begin in October 2013, and take two to three months. IGas has not applied for a permit to hydraulically fracture the well. 2013.

Weald Basin

Eurenergy Resource Corporation has announced plans to drill for shale gas in southern England's Weald Basin. 2009) Eurenergy Resources Corporation awarded oil & gas concessions in Europe's East Paris Basin and Weald Basin, accessed 15 April 2009.
Celtique Energie plans to apply for a permit to drill a test to an oil-bearing shale of the Weald Basin in 2014. The well will be drilled in partnership with Magellan Petroleum (UK) Ltd."Celtique Energie outlines unconventional drilling plans", Oil & Gas Journal, 1 July 2013.

Northern Ireland

According to reports from PricewaterhouseCoopers, there could be £80 billion in reserves in Northern Ireland, although these claims were criticised as being sensationalist. 2013

Resource estimates

According to a 2011 report of the Energy and Climate Change Select Committee, "Shale gas resources in the UK could be considerable—particularly offshore—but are unlikely to be a "game changer" to the same extent as they have been in the US, where the shale gas revolution has led to a reduction in natural gas prices."
The size of recoverable resource is made difficult by the uncertainty of the percentage, usually small, of shale gas in place that is recoverable. In addition, companies may embrace large estimations of reserves to boost share prices. In the United States, companies have been subpoenaed on suspicion that the projections they provided to investors, including press-release figures, were inflated. In 2012, national agencies in the U.S and Poland revised dramatically downward their estimates of shale gas reserves.
Part of the problem in evaluation is the uncertainty of decline curve analysis from early data: shale gas wells can fall off sharply during the first year or two, then level off to a slower decline rate; the shape of the curve, and therefore the ultimate recovery, is difficult to predict from early production rates.
Before drilling, IGas estimated gas in place of 4.6 Tcf in the Ince Marshes site, though it was unlikely that more than 20% of it could be recoverable;

British Geological Survey

In June 2013, the British Geological Survey estimated the gas in place within the Bowland Shale of central Britain to be within the range of 822 TCF to 2281 TCF, with a central estimate of , but did not estimate how much of the gas was likely to be recoverable, and cautioned:
Industry estimates were that about 10% of gas in place could be extracted.(27 June 2013 UK shale gas resources 'greater than thought' BBC News business, Retrieved 11 June 2013 130 TCF would supply Britain's gas needs for about 50 years.Chazan, Guy (10 January 2014) Total joins UK's pursuit of shale boom The Financial Times, Companies/Oil and gas section, (web page may require subscription), Retrieved 11 January 2014Urquhart, Conol (11 January 2014) French firm Total to join UK shale gas search The Guardian, Retrieved 11 January 2014
Comment from the British Geological Survey suggested even more substantial shale gas reserves offshore.

US Energy Information Administration

In June 2013, the US Energy Information Administration issued a world-wide estimate of shale gas, which included an incomplete estimate of recoverable shale gas resources in the UK. The Carboniferous shale basins of North of England and Scotland, which include the Bowland Basin, were estimated to have 25 trillion cubic feet of recoverable shale gas. The Jurassic shales of the Wessex Basin and Weald Basin of southern England were estimated to have 600 billion cubic feet of recoverable shale gas and 700 million barrels of associated oil. The agency noted that the UK shale basins are more complex than those in the US, and therefore more costly to drill. On the other hand, as of June 2013, the price of natural gas in the United Kingdom was reported to be more than double the price in the US and Canada by one source and three times higher by other sources.S. natural gas in landmark deal  Reuters, Retrieved 11 January 2014








