[[BAYADA Home Health Care]]

CATEGORIES: Medical and health organizations based in the United States

BAYADA Home Health Care is an international, privately held home health care company. The organization has previously been known as RN Homecare and Bayada Nurses. While the headquarters is based in Moorestown Township, New Jersey, the company employs over 18,000 nursing support staff in 250 offices throughout the United States and India. The organization provides in-home nursing services, which encompass physical, occupational and speech therapy. Additional services include medical social work, home health aides and hospice support. Since 2004, the organization has co-sponsored the "Bayada Award for Technological Innovation in Nursing Education and Practice", which recognizes individuals in the nursing field who work to introduce advancements in technology in support of nursing education and the nursing industry overall.

Background

On January 17, 1975, BAYADA Home Health Care was established as RN Homecare, by J. Mark Baiada in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
In January 2012, BAYADA announced they had acquired  NurseFinders Home Care, expanding their services with 16 locations in nine states.
, BAYADA Home Health Care operates more than 250 offices in 25 states, as well as India. The company employs more than 18,000 nurses, home health aides, therapists, medical social workers, and other health care professionals.  
The company ranks as #15 on the list of largest employers in Philadelphia.

International expansion

In 2012, BAYADA opened their first international office, in Hyderabad, India.  Faced with the challenge of succeeding as a standalone US company in the Indian healthcare market, in 2013 the company bought a 26% stake in Chennai, India-based India Home Health Care (IHHC). IHCC has operations in Chennai and Bangalore with a network of 300 nurses.

Philanthropy

In 2004, BAYADA, in conjunction with Drexel University's College of Nursing and Health Professions, created the BAYADA Award for Technological Innovation in Nursing Education and Practice. The award honors nursing educators and practicing nurses whose innovation leads to improved patient care or improved nursing education.
BAYADA is a Gold Team National Sponsor for the ALS Association, and is also working with local families to offer care at the local level, in addition to developing training programs to help caregivers better serve ALS patients.

Honors and awards






