[[Escapism (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 albums, English-language albums, Sony Music Denmark albums, Indie pop albums by Danish artists

{{Infobox album 
| Name       = Escapism
| Type       = studio
| Artist     = Fallulah
| Cover      = Fallulah, Escapism.jpg
| Released   = 
| Recorded   =
| Genre      = 

Escapism is the second studio album by Danish recording artist Fallulah, released on 4 February 2013 by Sony Music. It was released three years after her platinum selling debut album The Black Cat Neighborhood (2010).
It debuted and peaked at number two on the Danish Album Charts.

Release and promotion

Fallulah trailed the album with the release of a live recording of "He'll Break Up With You When Summer Comes" on her YouTube page on 31 May 2012.
A video for the first single "Superfishyality" was released online on 7 October 2012, premiering on Politiken's website.
Whilst promoting the album, Fallulah performed an acoustic set on the P3 radio show "Smag på P3" on 21 February 2013. She sang "Dried-Out Cities" and a cover of "Wicked Game" by Chris Isaak.
She played at the South by Southwest Festival in Austin, Texas on 13 March 2013.
In July 2013 she was featured on the cover of the free Copenhagen Metro magazine, Metronyt.
Between 30 July and 7 August 2013, Fallulah offered a free download of the Man Without Country remix of "Superfishyality" on her Soundcloud page.

Singles

"Superfishyality" was released as the album's lead single on 8 October 2012. It was released via the on air on sale method, receiving no prior promotion. The song got substantial radio support from P3, who added it to their 'Inevitable' list on the day of release. The title refers to the music industry, which she has a love / hate relationship with. Fallulah explained that the song is her "attempt to navigate in the world, which can be great but also rotten and shallow."
"Dried-Out Cities" was released as the album's second single on 11 January 2013. It's music video was delayed numerous times before being uploaded online on 16 April 2013. Fallulah describes the song as about the division between the aspiration for your life and eventuality of settling down and having children and taking out a large loan from the bank so you can buy an apartment or a house."
"Your Skin" was released as the album's third single on 13 May 2013.

Reception

Critical response

Escapism received generally positive reviews from music critics.

Commercial performance

The album debuted at number two on the Danish Album Charts, selling 626 copies in its first week.

Track listing

Personnel

Credits adapted from the liner notes of the CD edition of Escapism.

Charts

Release history




