[[Bahrain Tamarod]]

CATEGORIES: 2011–2012 Bahraini uprising, 2013 in Bahrain, 2013 protests, Protests in Bahrain, Human rights in Bahrain, Rebellions in Bahrain

 
Bahrain Tamarod (also spelled Bahrain Tamarrod; ; literally "Bahrain Rebellion"), also known as August 14 Rebellion, was a three-day protest campaign in Bahrain that began on 14 August 2013, the forty-second anniversary of Bahrain Independence Day and the two-and-a-half-year anniversary of the Bahraini uprising. The call for protests had started in early July following and inspired by the Egyptian Tamarod Movement that led to the removal of President Mohamed Morsi. Calling for a "free and democratic Bahrain", Tamarod activists, who mobilized social networking websites, said their movement was peaceful, national and non-sectarian. They called for gradual peaceful civil disobedience starting from 14 August. The movement gained the support of opposition societies and human rights activists, including those languishing in prison. The government however, repeatedly warned against the protests, promising those who participate with legal action and forceful confrontation. Rights activists and media reported that authorities had stepped up their crackdown campaigns in the weeks leading to the protests.
In late July, the king called for a parliamentary special session. The pro-government parliament submitted 22 recommendations, some of them calling for stripping those convicted of "terrorist crimes" from their nationality and banning of almost all protests in the capital, Manama. Despite outcries from the United Nations, Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, the king endorsed the recommendations and issued two decrees to their effect. The Prime Minister asked his ministers to carry out the recommendations immediately and issued several warnings against protests. In the following days, the government arrested three photographers, two bloggers, a lawyer and a politician, and prevented human rights activists and journalists from entering the country, deported an American teacher and reportedly encircled entire areas with barbed wire. The government denied arrests had targeted activists. A few days before 14 August, activists said they had gathered tens of thousands of signatures in support of highly anticipated protests.
The day of 14 August witnessed heavy deployment of security forces, which used tear gas and birdshot against hundreds-to-thousands of protesters who gathered in several locations throughout the country. Many shops were closed in response to Tamarod's call for a general strike. Opposition activists and media reported over 60 demonstrations throughout the country. The opposition and several citizens accused authorities of cutting Internet connections. The government blocked a website covering the protests, but activists and citizen journalists provided live coverage on social media websites, and Anonymous targeted a government website. At least twenty protesters were arrested and ten injured, two critically, activists said. The tightened security measures have succeeded in preventing large-scale protests in Manama. On 15 and 16 August, smaller protests occurred in several locations which police dispersed without injuries.
Tamarod and Al Wefaq opposition society praised the protests and said they were successful. The government of Bahrain however said protests did not affect everyday life. The United States said it supported freedom of expression and assembly, and voiced its concern at the chances of violence. Analysts were divided between those who expected protests to be huge and those that did not see them having any chance. They were also divided about the reasons behind the absence of mass protests in Manama, some blaming it on the security forces, others on protest organizers.

Background

Beginning in February 2011, Bahrain saw sustained pro-democracy protests, centered at Pearl Roundabout in the capital of Manama, as part of the wider Arab Spring. Authorities responded with a night raid on 17 February (later referred to by protesters as Bloody Thursday), which left four protesters dead and more than 300 injured. According to the International Federation for Human Rights, at least 80 people were killed during the unrest.

Calls for a rebellion

Inspired by the Egyptian Tamarod Movement that led to the removal of President Mohamed Morsi, Bahraini opposition activists formed Bahrain Rebellion Movement on 3 July 2013 and called for mass protests starting on 14 August, the forty-second anniversary of Bahrain Independence Day under the banner Bahrain Tamarod. One of its members said they were a youth movement, not a political party. A Reuters article described Tamarod as "a loose grouping of opposition activists who came together in early July to push for a 'free and democratic Bahrain' through mass anti-government demonstrations".
Activists mobilized social networking websites such as Facebook and Twitter to campaign for the protest movement. They issued their first statement on 4 July titled "Bahrain has Risen up" and "The August 14 Rebels" describing their goals and reasons. "people of Bahrain want a nation that embraces all its citizens. We want a Bahrain to which we can all belong ... This movement is for freedom, for which Bahrainis have long yearned and made great sacrifices over many decades of struggle." The statement also accused authorities of confiscating the people's values and rights, and "restricting their movement and activities."
In an interview with France 24, Hussain Yousif, a member of the Bahrain Rebellion Movement said the movement will employ all types of peaceful civil resistance including the call for a gradual civil disobedience starting on 14 August with abstaining from shopping, commercial and government transactions such as paying electricity bills. He highlighted the royal family's almost complete monopoly on power, the political stalemate and ongoing human rights violations as main motivations. Yousif added that the main principles of the movement were peacefulness, non-exclusion and recognizing the people's right to self-determination, and called the authorities to understand their demands and refrain from using violence against protesters. "We use pure national slogans, not belonging to any specific sect or ideology," he said. The Christian Science Monitor said the 14 August protests were "the latest installment of a two-year long protest movement." Protests were planned to last for three days.
Left without an epicenter after the destruction of Pearl Roundabout in 2011, Tamarod announced their plans to stage peaceful protests in nine different locations, all in the streets, with the largest expected in Manama. One of the protests was planned near the U.S. embassy, a country that protest organizers had called on to use its influence to prevent government crackdown and protect demonstrations, which they said was an "ethical responsibility" for the U.S. "We hope that you may convey our deep concern to the US State Department and the US Congress to exert a real political pressure on Bahraini regime to avoid any fatal crackdown and bloodshed," they said in an open letter.

Events leading to the protests

Soon after Tamarod's first statement, the Haq Movement for Liberty and Democracy announced its support for protest plans. "Let August 14 be the day of rebellion against the ruling gang in Bahrain," the movement said in a statement. The February 14 Youth Coalition also supported the protests and called for civil disobedience for 3 days. The youth group also told participants to avoid clashing with police.
Jailed activist Zainab al-Khawaja smuggled a letter from prison in which she called people to participate in Tamarod protests. "On 14 February 2011, the people of Bahrain took to the street to demand their rights ... and on 14 August, the day of Tamarod, the people have to go out with same strength in order to send a message to the world and the regime that they have not and will never back down," the letter read.
On 13 July, the Ministry of Interior (MoI) warned against joining the 14 August protests which it called "illegal demonstrations and activities that endanger security". The MoI said it will "deal with any attempt to disturb security and stability". In anticipation to the 14 August protests, the MoI stepped up security measures and further warned that it will take legal action toward those who participate.
Tamarod is reported to have gained popularity among the opposition since mid-July, prompting the United States Embassy in Manama to eventually issue a warning for U.S. citizens to avoid certain areas in Bahrain on 14 August. The selected areas were mostly opposition strongholds.
Maryam al-Khawaja, the acting head of Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) said nightly raids were now occurring all day long and that physical, psychological and sexual torture had continued. "Since the announcing of the planned protest on the 14th of August ... have been seeing a very severe escalation in the crackdown," she said. According to activists, up to 400 were arrested during the month of Ramadhan (10 July–7 August) and more than 100 houses were raided in Manama alone.

Parliament emergency session

On 28 July, the Parliament held an extraordinary session at the request of the King, Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa in which they submitted 22 recommendations calling for tougher penalties against "terrorist crimes" including stripping those convicted with inciting or committing such acts from their nationality and freezing their bank accounts as well as a ban on protests in the capital, Manama. Other recommendations included "increasing punishment for anyone propagating false information about Bahrain in social media networks", "taking legal action against certain political associations which incite and support violent and terrorist acts" and "taking all possible measures to impose peace and security, even if it means imposing a state of national safety of emergency".
The parliament has been dominated by government supporters, especially after the opposition submitted their resignations in early 2011 in protest against government crackdown. According to RT, the Bahraini government often employs the terms "terrorists" or "thugs" to refer to protesters and has used "broad definitions of terrorism to detain scores of protesters and to convict several opposition leaders". A week earlier, the government used an explosion as a pretext to block several planned anti-government protests.
The session was held after weeks of escalations in clashes between protesters and security forces which had seen militant groups using bombs and police firing tear gas and birdshot, and the Minister of Justice said "terrorism" must be quelled before national reconciliation could begin.

Bill Law of the BBC News said the "recommendations if implemented in full would effectively return the country to a state of martial law". An unnamed western diplomat said the recommendations timing was likely due to 14 August protest plans and the increasing violence. Marc Jones said that many of the recommendations were already in place. "Thirty-one Bahrainis were stripped of their citizenship back in November 2012, and there has been a de facto ban on protests in Manama since last year," he added and listed other examples of what he called "reactionary laws" already in place.
Maryam al-Khawaja said the government was merely giving a legal cover for its practices that have been in place for years. On the other hand, Tareq Al Hassan, the Public Security Chief said the session was historical and that it did not target a specific group or sect, rather it targeted terrorists and instigators. "14 August will pass just like regular days of the year and nothing will happen," he added.
The King, the Crown Prince and the Prime Minister (PM) welcomed the recommendations of the Parliament. The King ordered their rapid codification
The Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights expressed concern about the recommendations, highlighting the right to nationality and asking the government of Bahrain "to fully comply with its international human rights commitments, including respect for freedom of expression and peaceful assembly, and association".
Human Rights Watch also criticized the recommendations, calling them "a whole new set of draconian restrictions" that would create "a new state of emergency". "The government has talked a lot about the need for national reconciliation but, once again, its actions in taking on a raft of stern new measures to suppress legitimate protest are undermining any prospects for successful dialogue," its regional director, Nadim Houry said.

Crackdown

Three days after the Parliamentary special session, the government escalated its crackdown, arresting a photographer, Hussain Hubail, a blogger and his lawyer, and has continued to deny visas to foreign journalists.
On 7 August, Al Jazeera English reporter, Hyder Abbasi was prevented from boarding a flight from Qatar to Bahrain. On 8 August, a third photographer, Ahmed Al-Fardan was briefly arrested, threatened and beaten by plainclothes police. An activist reported that 7 journalists were in hiding due to house raids.
On 8 August, the February 14 Youth Coalition said they had gathered tens of thousands of signatures calling for the right to self-determination. "This island will burn to a cinder all those who seek to tamper with its security and stability," he added. The same day an American teacher was deported from Bahrain due to her "radical writing," the Ministry of State for Communications said. Erin Kilbride was accused of working as an unaccredited journalist writing for the outlawed Bahrain Centre for Human Rights (BCHR) and As-Safir Lebanese newspaper, and of having links with Hezbollah.
"posting was deemed to incite hatred against the government and members of the Royal family," the ministry added.
On 12 August, a human rights activist said police fired tear gas and stun grenades on several anti-government protests, and arrested nine demonstrators. The PM also held a meeting with the commander of Peninsula Shield Force, a joint Gulf Cooperation Council force that helped crackdown on protests in 2011. The state-controlled Bahrain News Agency (BNA) also reported that the PM headed a "high level meeting" attended by high-ranking officials to talk over arrangements before protests. The PM said his government was "at a critical stage the struggle to eliminate terrorism".
On 13 August, Bahrain Mirror and activists said security forces have installed barbed wire around a number of residential areas expected to witness large protests. The areas were completely caged according to activists. and Reuters witnesses said security forces had deployed reinforcements, including armored vehicles by night. The area of the-now demolished Pearl Roundabout was filled with hundreds of riot police standing next to armored personnel carriers. Tamarod spokesperson, Hussain Yousif said they will carry on with the protests despite government definite crackdown. The MoI said the heavy deployment was in order to "preserve security and order, and to guarantee an easy flow of traffic".
On the same day, Bahraini authorities summoned the Lebanese ambassador in Bahrain to file a complaint against a conference held by Bahrain Rebellion Movement in Beirut. In the conference, opposition activists called for civil disobedience and mass protests, the BNA reported. A number of Bahraini opposition politicians and human rights activists have based their activities in Beirut where they enjoy more freedom.

Reactions prior to protests

Reporters Without Borders expressed its concern at what it described "a new upsurge in abusive treatment of journalists in the run-up to the major 'Tamarod' rally". The France-based NGO said authorities had arrested 2 bloggers and 3 photographers in recent days. "The authorities plan to impose a news blackout on the 14 August demonstration by jailing netizens and preventing journalists and human rights defenders from visiting Bahrain," it added. Amnesty International issued a statement calling the government of Bahrain to allow Wednesday protests and expressed its fear that the new legislation will be used as a legal cover for quashing peaceful protests. "The Bahraini authorities must not crack down on mass anti-government protests scheduled for tomorrow," it said. The UK-based NGO also condemned the arrest of "journalists, photographers, bloggers and others active on social media networks in recent days a move to silence critics".
The Bahraini government "vehemently refutes any allegations of targeted arrests," said an Information Affairs Authority spokesperson.
Nicholas McGeehan of Human Rights Watch said the government preparations were unjustified, inappropriate and disproportionate. "Bahraini authorities have a grim recent history of using excessive and lethal force to suppress peaceful protests, followed by the persecution of protesters and even doctors who treated their wounds," he added.

Timeline

14 August

Large numbers of security forces were deployed in Manama and helicopters hovered over. Roads leading the to city were guarded by security checkpoints and surrounded by barbed wire.  Reuters reported that all shops were closed in some villages, while most shops in Manama remained open, with big police presence in the area, especially near Bab Al Bahrain. Tamarod had called for a general strike and pleaded businesses to close, while the Bahrain Chamber of Commerce and Industry issued a warning for businesses against responding to calls for a general strike, or risk facing legal action.
In the early morning, up to 100 protesters took to the street in Saar village, west of Manama. The protest was peaceful and protesters were chanting anti-government slogans and waving Bahraini flags, witnesses said. Shortly before the arrival of security forces, the protest dispersed peacefully. In another village south of Manama, the MoI reported that an Asian worker trying to open a blocked road was injured after getting attacked with molotov cocktails and that a main road in Muharraq was blocked with burning tires. It described both incidents as "terrorism".
In Shakhura, west of Manama, police charged a group of 300 protesters who were restricted behind a barbed wire using tear gas and birdshot. Images by Reuters showed police beating an arrested protester after they dispersed the protest. following a video message by Hussain Yousif to hold a rally there. Agence France-Presse (AFP) witnesses reported that hundreds of protesters who gathered in several Shia villages faced police tear gas and birdshot. Citizen journalists and activists provided live photo coverage of the violence on Instagram and Twitter.
Human Rights First (HRF) estimated turnout to be in thousands. BCHR said 10 were injured by tear gas (inhalation) and birdshot, while Al Wefaq said 2 people were in a critical condition.
The BCHR accused the government of using "large amounts of tear gas ... to disperse anyone gathering on the streets". "It has been very difficult for protesters to move from their villages onto the main streets because of the barbed wires that were set up last night," al-Khawaja said. The BCHR also accused the government of dispatching mercenaries from Pakistan and Jordan to aid security forces in the crackdown, however an opposition figure said this claim was hard to prove, because security forces wear masks.
Al Wefaq released a statement accusing authorities of cutting Internet connection in a number of areas. "Personal devices of some citizens have also been selectively cut off," the statement added. The secular-leftist Waad society said that instant messaging applications such as WhatsApp had been blocked by VIVA Bahrain telecommunications company. Several citizens also complained of loss of Internet for several hours in different locations during the day. They said the cut was at a time when protests were being held. Previously in February 2011, when the uprising began, a similar situation occurred during which the Internet became either slow or was lost completely. Telecommunication companies said then that the problem was due an overload on Internet networks.
Reuters described the protests as "an upsurge of a two-and-a-half-year-old campaign". It reported that the morning saw protests end peacefully, while in the evening clashes between protesters and police occurred.

15–16 August

In the morning of 15 August, protesters blocked several main streets and in the afternoon they clashed with police after holding sit-ins in a number of villages, in response to a call by February 14 Youth Coaltion, the Bahrain Mirror reported.
Hundreds of protesters in several Shia villages took to the street at night following a call by February 14 Youth Coalition. They called for the overthrow of the monarchy and chanted "Down with King Hamad", before clashes erupted with security forces. Police fired "buckshot, tear gas, and sound grenades" in response to protesters throwing stones and molotov cocktails at them. Al-Mahafdha said protests were held in Manama, Al Daih and Samaheej among other places and that there were no reported injuries. Witnesses from Bani Jamra said detainees were severely beaten before arrest and that one of them with sickle-cell anemia was taken by an ambulance.

Reactions

Spokesperson of Tamarod, Hussain Yousif lauded protesters response and called for further protests on Thursday and Friday, Human Rights First (HRF) criticized the government of Bahrain response to protests, which they said reflected the "increasing levels of frustration felt by many in Bahrain at the lack of any real reform". "What happened today confirmed fears that the government of Bahrain is determined to crush any form of dissent," said Brian J. Dooley of HRF.
The BNA downplayed the effect of the protests, saying it was "business as usual" in the country. "Bahrainis and expatriates reported to work on Wednesday just like any other day, defying calls by radical opposition groups of road blockades and attack on properties," the state-run agency added. Critics said the protests failed as most streets were empty and protests disorganized. The spokesperson added that they "supported the right of individuals to peacefully assemble and of course, the right of freedom of expression, including in Bahrain".

Analysis

Prior to the protests, HRF said they were "likely to be the most significant in over a year". Saeed al-Shehabi of the London-based Bahrain Freedom Movement said the Tamarod movement would "renew Bahrain's forgotten revolution". Ashley Lindsey of Stratfor global intelligence firm said the likelihood of protests reaching Manama was low due to the experience of security forces.
Writing for RT, Afshin Rattansi speculated that if 14 August protests are met with state violence, then it could be one of the last times Bahraini activists use peaceful means to seek democratic change and that other methods could include an armed struggle in the same way the anti-apartheid movement led by Nelson Mandela deployed armed tactics after peaceful protests failed to bring about change. Jean Shaoul wrote in the World Socialist Web Site that the concurrent timing of crackdown in Bahrain and Egypt was not a coincidence and that evidence showed it was coordinated by the Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf.
Ken Hanly wrote that the political violence in Egypt "will no doubt overshadow whatever repressive measures are taken against protests in Bahrain".
Writing for the Gulf News Hasan Tariq Al Hasan argued that Tamarod protests on 14 August had failed to live up to the expectations. He said that one of the main reasons was conflicting instructions between Bahrain Rebellion Movement and February 14 Youth Coalition, which lunched its own Tamarod protest under the title "Tamarod Storm".



Footnotes
Video

