[[Theodora (11th century)]]

CATEGORIES: Empresses regnant, Macedonian dynasty, Burials at the Church of the Holy Apostles, Byzantine empresses, 984 births, 1056 deaths, Porphyrogenita, 11th-century Byzantine emperors, 11th-century female rulers, Orthodox monarchs

Theodora (; 980 – late August/early September 1056) was a Byzantine Empress born into the Macedonian dynasty that had ruled the Byzantine Empire for almost two hundred years. She was co-empress with her sister Zoe for two months in 1042 and sole empress regnant from 11 January 1055 to 31 August 1056. She was the last of the Macedonian line, and upon her death the empire entered a period of decline that lasted until the accession of Alexios I Komnenos in 1081.

Early life

Theodora was the youngest daughter of the Byzantine Emperor Constantine VIII and Helena, daughter of Alypius.
With the accession of Romanos, Theodora prudently retreated back into the gynaeceum, with its daily religious routines,  She would remain there for the next thirteen years, as Zoe managed the empire with her husbands, Romanos III and, after his death, Michael IV.

Co-empress with Zoe

With Michael IV's death in December 1041, Zoe adopted Michael's nephew, who was crowned as Michael V.  
Zoe immediately assumed power and tried to force Theodora back to her monastery, but the Senate and the people demanded that the two sisters should jointly reign.
Although Theodora and Zoe appeared together at meetings of the Senate or when they gave public audiences, it was soon apparent that their joint reign was under considerable strain.
Constantine IX's preferential treatment of his mistress in the early part of his reign led to rumours that he was planning to murder Zoe and Theodora.

Return to power

Zoe died in 1050 and Constantine IX died on 11 January 1055. As Constantine lay dying, he was persuaded by his councilors, chiefly the logothetes tou dromou John, to ignore the rights of Theodora and to pass the throne to the doux (Duke) of Bulgaria, Nikephoros Proteuon.
A purge of senior officials and the leadership of the European military units followed. Nikephoros Bryennios, whom the western tagmata apparently wanted to proclaim emperor instead, was also dismissed and exiled on Theodora's orders,
Her second period of rule proceeded where the first left off.
Inevitably, Leo Paraspondylos's faction was interested in maintaining its control of government through the aging empress, while the patriarch Michael Keroularios advocated that Theodora advance a subject to the throne through marriage to her, something which would have assured the succession. This was not accomplished. 
Theodora became gravely ill with an intestinal disorder in late August 1056 and died a few days later, on 31 August 1056, at the age of 76.
As Michael VI was not related to the Macedonian dynasty that had ruled the Byzantine Empire for 189 years, he did not receive universal support, resulting in a series of conflicts for the throne among various noble families lasting from 1056 until 1081, the beginning of the Komnenian dynasty.

Sources

Primary sources

Secondary sources






