[[Fellow of the Canadian Securities Institute]]

CATEGORIES: Economy of Canada

The Fellow of CSI (FCSI) is the highest credential offered by the Canadian Securities Institute (CSI, formally CSI Global Education Inc.). CSI is a higher education organization that offers courses and credentials for financial services professionals in Canada and internationally. It is based in Toronto, Canada. FCSI is a registered trademark of CSI Global Education Inc. It is owned by Moody's Analytics.
The Fellow of CSI (FCSI) is a distinction held by a small number of financial services professionals in Canada who have met stringent standards for industry experience, advanced education, ethics and who have been endorsed by peers and superiors. As of fall 2011, 3,380 Canadian financial services professional held an FCSI. To date there have been 17 Honorary FCSIs awarded.
A list of active FCSIs is maintained in the FCSI Directory.

Prerequisites

To earn the FCSI, candidates must already hold and maintain one or more of the following designations:
The Fellow of CSI (FCSI) is the highest distinction offered by the Canadian Securities Institute and is deemed an honour in the Canadian financial services industry.

Work Experience Requirement

To be eligible for the FCSI, a candidate must have a minimum of seven years of financial services work experience within the last 10 years of his/her career.

Education Path

An FCSI candidate who has therequired prerequisite designation (or designations) must take two additional eligible courses from a different stream than that required for the designation(s) already held. A list is posted by the Canadian Securities Institute to identify which courses may/may not be used depending on the designation(s) already held by an FCSI candidate.
In addition, all FCSI candidates must also take Financial Services Industry: Business Drivers and Challenges (FSDC). The FSDC course provides an understanding of the broader economic role and related public policy considerations of the financial services industry and how trust and confidence in the industry affect it.

Certification

Besides holding a pre-requisite designation and taking the additional required courses, a candidate for the FCSI must receive endorsement from a direct supervisor and from a sponsor who is a practising FCSI. This latter requirement is unique to the FCSI; it is not mandated by any other credential offered by the Canadian Securities Institute. Additionally, FCSIs may fulfil their industry contribution requirements by serving as mentors to other financial services professionals.

Code of Ethics

FCSIs are viewed by the Canadian Securities Institute as exemplars for the financial services industry. They must formally sign a Code of Ethics specific to the FCSI every year.
Adherence to the FCSI Code of Ethics is monitored through reviews and periodic audits of Fellows' annual commitment and declaration, public complaints, and tracking of news and regulatory reports.
Allegations of violation of the FCSI Code of Ethics are handled by the Ethics Committee according to the FCSI Ethical Misconduct Disciplinary Process. If the Ethics Committee determines a violation occurred, a disciplinary sanction is recommended.

Maintaining the Credential

The Canadian Securities Institute regards FCSIs as "representatives" of the financial services industry. FCSIs are therefore formally required to make an active contribution to the industry and the public through:
A minimum of 12 hours annually, outside of an FCSI's primary job function, is mandated to fulfil the industry contribution requirement (detailed examples of qualifying contributions are posted online).

Honorary FCSI program

Under special circumstances, the Canadian Securities Institute may award an honorary FCSI to recognize distinguished leadership in financial services.
Each year, the FCSI Advisory Council may select a maximum of two individuals to receive an honorary FCSI. Any active FCSI may nominate candidates for an honorary FCSI. Each candidate must meet the stated eligibility requirements to be considered for an honorary FCSI.
In October 2004, two Canadian financial experts and media commentators were presented with the honorary FCSI: Patricia Lovett-Reid of TD Waterhouse and Fred Ketchen of Scotia McLeod for their efforts to educate the public about financial services. In 2011, Roberta Wilton, PhD, formerly president of CSI Global Education Inc., was awarded the Honorary FCSI.






