[[Frank Bencriscutto]]

CATEGORIES: 1928 births, 1997 deaths, People from Racine, Wisconsin, University of Minnesota faculty, Eastman School of Music alumni, American conductors (music), University and college band directors, American composers, University of Wisconsin&ndash;Madison alumni

Frank Bencriscutto (September 21, 1928 – August 28, 1997), nicknamed "Dr. Ben," was an American conductor and composer of concert band music. Bencriscutto was Director of Bands and Professor of Music at the University of Minnesota for thirty-two years.

Family

Born to Italian immigrant parents in Racine, Wisconsin, Bencriscutto was the ninth of ten children. In 1951, he married Jean Wisner Fischer. The couple had three children.

Education

Bencriscutto earned Bachelor of Music and Master of Music degrees from the University of Wisconsin–Madison and the Doctor of Musical Arts degree from the Eastman School of Music. At Eastman, he studied composition with Howard Hanson and Bernard Rogers and played principal alto saxophone in the Eastman Wind Ensemble under Frederick Fennell. Bierley, William H. Rehrig: The Heritage Encyclopedia of Band Music : Composers and Their Music, Westerville, Ohio: Integrity Press, 1991, ISBN 0-918048-08-7

University of Minnesota

Bencriscutto's work as a conductor at the University of Minnesota (1960-1993) led to many honors for his ensembles.  As director of the University of Minnesota Marching Band, Bencriscutto instituted the Indoor Marching Band Concert at Northrop Auditorium, an annual tradition that has since been copied by university marching bands nationwide.
In 1969, the conductor led the University of Minnesota Wind Orchestra on a landmark 7-week, 10-city, 27-concert cultural exchange tour in the Soviet Union while Bolshoi Ballet toured the United States. The tour culminated with a presidential command performance in the Rose Garden of the White HouseHansen, Richard K: The American Wind Band: A Cultural History, Chicago: GIA Publications, 2004, ISBN 1579994679 and resulted in Dr. Bencriscutto being invited by Dmitri Shostakovich and the Ministry of Culture to be an honored guest of the Soviet Union the following year at the 1970 International Tschaikovsky Competition.E. Ruth Anderson: Contemporary American Composers - A Biographical Dictionary, Second Edition, Boston: G. K. Hall, 1982, 578 p., ISBN 978-0-816-18223-7
Benscriscutto and The University of Minnesota Concert Band made a tour of mainland China in 1980 as the first American band to perform in the People's Republic of China. Concert Band.; by Frank Bencriscutto, conductor. Clarence, N.Y.: Mark Records, 1980
After retiring from the University of Minnesota in 1993, Bencriscutto joined the faculty at the Musashino Academia Musicae in Tokyo, Japan as a visiting professor and conductor of the Wind Ensemble until 1996.

Professional Honors

Bencriscutto was elected to the American Bandmasters Association in 1966.  His work "Sing a New Song" (1973) won the Neil A. Kjos Memorial Award for the most significant contribution to band literature.  He received the Edwin Franko Goldman Award from the American School Band Directors Association in 1993,

Composer

Active as a composer and arranger, Bencriscutto wrote the majority of his original works for concert bands. Several of his compositions have become standards in the repertoire, including Let the Light Shine, Latina, Serenade for Solo Alto Saxophone and Band, Granite Rock, and Summer in Central Park.

Compositions

A list of original compositions is included below.

Concert band

Chorus

Chamber

Pedagogical work







