[[Angry Birds Go!]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 video games, Android games, IOS games, Karting video games, Video games developed in Finland, Windows Phone games, Angry Birds

Angry Birds Go! is a kart racing free-to-play game and is the eighth game in the Angry Birds video game series. The game was co-developed by Rovio Entertainment and Exient Entertainment, sponsored by Red Bull's mobile games and was released on December 11, 2013.

Development

On 12 June 2013, developer Rovio Entertainment posted a teaser trailer website showing the Red Bird speeding into the distance after a "Ready, Set, Go" countdown. The teaser fueled speculation by journalists and fans that the game would be either a racing game or an endless running game.
Angry Birds Go was one of the first apps ever released simultaneously on the four major smartphone platforms: iOS, Android, Windows Phone and BlackBerry 10.
This app supports Rovio accounts so players can sync progress between different devices on the same operating system.

Chapters

Each chapter of Angry Birds Go focuses on a separate course with 1,2 or 3 stages that each feature a competitor to race against in Champion Chase.  
Note: Seedway is currently the only chapter with 2 stages as the first stage (for Red) cannot be replayed and Sub Zero's two additional stages will be released later in 2014. Sub Zero has one stage. 

Race Types

Each of the game's courses has five types of races. Sub Zero has champion chase replaced with slalom.
For Race, Time Boom and Fruit Splat races, these can only be played for five rounds with increase in difficulty until all five rounds each are completed, and then players can complete challenges. All race types except "Versus" has a CC (earned from getting upgrades) limit before you can unlock the race type each time.  
In addition, there is a Jenga mode unlocked either by entering a code from the Angry Birds Jenga toy or with an in-app purchase; this has the racer going down a ramp to smash into blocks and pigs.

Telepods

Telepods allows you to summon a specific kart, but not the specific racer shown on the toy. The summoned kart works in "Stunt", the fourth course. If you haven't unlocked the course yet through gameplay, you can only play the Versus mode. When using Telepods, to summon the specific kart, it is necessary to scan the QR code each time after the app is fully closed.
The Sub Zero episode works with the second set of snow-themed Telepods that can be used on that episode.
Reds super roaster,
Stellas soda pop sedan,
Bombs big bang (normal/special edition,)
The blues tri toaster, 
Kings pigs royal rumbler,
Terences Beep-Beep,
Bubbles rapid roaster,
Matildas tub coapter,
Foreman pigs green barron,
Hals shoemerang,
Corparal pigs dragster snout and
Chucks mega rocket.

Multiplayer

Rovio announced on December 13, 2013 that the multiplayer feature will be included in the upcoming Spring 2014 update.

Reception

The game has received mixed reviews, with a Metacritic score of 60% based on 22 reviews. The Guardian liked the gameplay and was not overly bothered by the in-app purchases.
Tech2 did not like the energy system, which only allows you to play five races with a bird, after which they are locked unless you wait or unlock with crystals (which are slowly earned in-game or with an in-app purchase) and did not like the vehicle upgrade process using in-game currency that is slowly earned by racing or with an in-app purchase for coins.






