[[Kevin Sorbo]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 births, Living people, American Christians, American Lutherans, American male film actors, American male television actors, American memoirists, American people of English descent, American people of German descent, American people of Norwegian descent, American people of Scottish descent, American television directors, Male actors from Minnesota, Male Western (genre) film actors, Minnesota State University Moorhead alumni, People from Hennepin County, Minnesota, 21st-century American male actors, 20th-century American male actors

Kevin David Sorbo (born September 24, 1958) is an American actor best known for the roles of Hercules in Hercules: The Legendary Journeys, Captain Dylan Hunt in Andromeda, Kull in Kull the Conqueror, and Professor Radisson in God's Not Dead.

Early life

Sorbo was born in Mound, Minnesota, where he attended Mound Westonka High School. He is the son of Ardis, a nurse, and Lynn Sorbo, a junior high school mathematics and biology teacher. His father is of Norwegian descent, while his mother has English, German and Scottish ancestry. Sorbo attended Minnesota State University Moorhead, where he double majored in marketing and advertising. In order to make tuition, he began to work as a model for print and television advertising in the 1980s.

Career

Sorbo started his acting career in 1986 making guest appearances in several television series such as 1st & Ten, Murder She Wrote and The Commish.
In 1994, he shot to fame when he played the role of Hercules in the television film Hercules and the Amazon Women. This was the first in a series of television films that served as pilots for the TV series Hercules: The Legendary Journeys, which ran from 1995 to 1999. He also directed a few episodes of the series. At the same time, Sorbo also guest-starred as Hercules in episodes of the 1995–2001 spin-off series Xena: Warrior Princess and provided the voice of Hercules in the 1998 direct-to-video animated film Hercules and Xena - The Animated Movie: The Battle for Mount Olympus.
Other voice-over work followed, with Sorbo providing the voices of Reiko and Quan Chi in the 1997 video game Mortal Kombat 4. In between the years playing Hercules, he played his first leading film role in Kull the Conqueror (1997).
After Hercules came to an end, Sorbo played the starring role of Captain Dylan Hunt in the science-fiction drama series Andromeda from 2000 to 2005. In 2006, he played a recurring role on the final season of The O.C. and guest-starred in the sitcom Two and a Half Men. In 2007, he starred in the direct-to-video film Walking Tall: The Payback, which was a sequel to the 2004 film Walking Tall. He reprised his role in the second sequel, Walking Tall: Lone Justice which released later that year. He also starred in the Lifetime Channel film Last Chance Café, the Hallmark Channel film Avenging Angel, co-starring his real life wife Sam Jenkins and guest starred as a bounty hunter in the season-two episode "Bounty Hunters!" of the series Psych. He appeared in the 2008 spoof film Meet the Spartans, which was a box office success
He served as Executive Producer and star of the movie Abel's Field in 2012.
In 2012, Sorbo appeared in an episode of "Celebrity Ghost Stories" to recount an experience he had while in Minnesota shortly after he graduated from college. He and his girlfriend claimed to have seen the ghost of the "Bride of White Rock Lake" – a woman who supposedly died on her wedding day, murdered by a former lover.
Sorbo voiced one of the main protagonists, Prometheus, in the Wii video game The Conduit.
Sorbo returned to the role of Hercules in a more sinister portrayal, in the video game God of War III released for the PlayStation 3 in March 2010.
In July 2013, Sorbo, along with his wife, Sam, provided voice over for characters in the video game Cloudberry Kingdom♙
In an outtake clip from the Hercules TV series posted in 2010, Sorbo, portraying an evil Doppelgänger of his regular character, says "Wait a minute. This isn't my world. Disappointed!"

Personal life

On January 5, 1998, Sorbo married actress Sam Jenkins, whom he met the previous year when she had a guest role on Hercules. They have three children: Braedon Cooper (born 2001), Shane Haaken (born 2004), and Octavia Flynn (born 2005). Sorbo is the spokesman and chair of A World Fit for Kids! (AWFFK!), a non-profit organization that trains teenagers to become mentors to younger children.
In late 1997 while on a publicity tour for Kull the Conqueror and between the fourth and fifth seasons of Hercules, the newly engaged Sorbo experienced an aneurysm in his shoulder which caused three strokes.
Sorbo is a Christian and considers himself politically independent.
Sorbo believes Hollywood has limited his career because of his conservative political and Christian views.foxnews.com/entertainment/2014/03/20/kevin-sorbo-why-is-hollywood-so-afraid-god/

Filmography

Actor

Guest star

Producer

Director

Video Games






