[[LSU Cox Communications Academic Center for Student-Athletes]]

CATEGORIES: LSU Tigers and Lady Tigers, Louisiana State University buildings and structures

The LSU Cox Communications Academic Center for Student-Athletes, on the campus of Louisiana State University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, is located in the Gym/Armory building. The building opened in 1930 and was completely renovated and reopened in 2002 to house the Academic Center for Student-Athletes.
The goal of the academic center is to offer a comprehensive framework tailored to improve the academic skill set of each student-athlete.

Computing facilities

Academic Center of Excellence computer labs

The Academic Center computer lab offers 45 computer workstations and the Mezzanine lab offers study caroles and computer workstations

Library Tech Center

Group study area with computer access

Tutorial Center

Offers cubicles for tutoring sessions with computer access

Student Learning Center

Technology workstation area

Shaquille O'Neal Life Skills lab

Offers career advisement and professional resume production

Eric Hill communications studio

Offers video production equipment and teaches courses on communication skills and business etiquette

Services

Athlete academic monitoring and iPads are available for LSU student-athletes

Career/Professional development

The Shaquille O'Neal Life Skills program was developed to teach skills in career/professional development throughout a students career.

History

Academic Center history

In 2000, an idea was floated to create an academic center that would house an academic support program that would blend state-of-the-art technology with an appropriate study environment. LSU looked to Richard Manship, longtime Tiger football booster and CEO of Capital City Press and WBRZ-TV, to head the fundraising for the massive project. Manship, along with the Tiger Athletic Foundation, put together the Academic Center Development Council who was in charge of locating donors. Together with a $5.5 million donation by Cox Communications, more than $14 million was donated by private contributors and supporters of LSU Athletics.

Building history

After Huey P. Long became Governor of Louisiana in 1928, he worked with LSU President Thomas Wilson Atkinson to find ways to obtain funding to build new facilities on LSU's campus. A priority was placed on a facility for large student gatherings. President Atkinson proposed a combination Gym/Armory and secured $250,000 from the Louisiana legislature for its construction.
Completed in 1930 and built on the edge of the bluff, the main floor was the gymnasium and the lower floor was the armory. Both floors were located on ground level. The gymnasium had a stage at one end and could be converted into an auditorium by placing four thousand folding chairs on the gymnasium floor and another fifteen hundred in the balcony. When not set up as an auditorium, it provided an open space for basketball games, dances and other events. The second floor provided space for locker rooms, a trophy room and a dance studio.
The Gym/Armory was the original home of the LSU Tigers basketball team after it moved from the old downtown campus. The team moved to the Huey P. Long Field House after it was completed in 1932.
Over the years, the original building was renovated many times. The 20 foot ceilings were dropped to 8 and 9 foot ceilings to accommodate air conditioning and had multiple uses throughout its history.








