[[Bradley Garrett]]

CATEGORIES: Year of birth missing (living people), Living people, Social geographers, American academics, University of California, Riverside alumni

Bradley Garrett (born c. 1980) an ethnographic account of activities of the London Consolidation Crew (LCC), a group of urban explorers Garrett calls "place hackers". Although Garrett has published academic research, he is perhaps better known for his photographic and video work connected to this project which has received worldwide media attention.

Education

Garrett received a B.S. in anthropology and B.A. in history from the University of California, Riverside in 2003 before moving to Australia to undertake an MSc in maritime archaeology at James Cook University in 2005. He did his first ethnographic research with the Winnemem Wintu tribe in Northern California about loss of access to ancestral land inundated by the construction of Shasta Dam. He then worked for the Bureau of Land Management as an archaeologist. He was supervised by the human geographer Tim Cresswell.

Career

Garrett currently works at the School of Geography and the Environment, University of Oxford. His research interests are at the intersections of cultural geography, archaeology and visual methods. Garrett describes himself as a researcher, explorer and photographer and writes that his research is about "finding the hidden in the world".
His most significant work is Explore Everything: Place-Hacking the City. The book describes the exploits of the London Consolidation Crew (LCC), a group urban explorers in London who trespassed into hundred of locations over four years in an attempt to "reveal the hidden city". Garrett claims the goal of this work was to re-map London by exposing the ways in which surveillance and control are embedded in modern spatial planning. Garrett suggests surveillance is subverted and rendered inert through the urban explorer's "place hack" when control of the city is temporarily taken back through creative practice.
Garrett and the LCC came to notoriety first in 2011 when they released photos of the mothballed London Post Office Railway, a 6.5-mile subterranean train network used by the Post Office to transport letters across the city.

Controversy

Garrett has been criticised for becoming too close to his project participants and failing to maintain objective distance. He was later himself arrested on the Tarmac at Heathrow Airport during pre-dawn house raids on the LCC by British Transport Police investigating the group's means of access to abandoned Tube stations. Garrett maintains that he does ethnography in the tradition of the Chicago school (sociology) and claims the only way to understand a culture is to become fully immersed in it.
Garrett has been labelled as "masculinist",






