[[Boston Children's Chorus]]

CATEGORIES: American choirs, Choirs of children

Boston Children's Chorus (BCC), is composed of 500 singers from 12 choirs in five locations around Boston. Its mission is to address the social problems of Boston's children and communities.  Founded in 2003, BCC has performed all over the word in countries such as Japan, Mexico, Australia, Cambodia, Vietnam and Jordan. In addition, BCC has received critical acclaim for its music and Melinda Doolittle and has been televised nationally. BCC's believes in the transformative power of music as a tool for social bridging. Its program focuses on providing children with a comprehensive music education and strong diverse youth leadership.

Founding

BCC was founded by Boston civic leader, Hubie Jones.

Growth

Since BCC's inception, the programs have grown rapidly. In 2003, twenty children were accepted into the initial pilot program, and in 2013 counts almost 500 singers who represent over 50 of Boston's urban and suburban neighborhoods. The program spans twelve different choirs in five Boston locations: the South End, Allston-Brighton, South Boston and Dorchester.
The 2012-2013 season represented 10 Years of Harmony at the annual Holiday Celebration at the Cathedral of the Holy Cross.
In April 2013,  the State of Massachusetts called on BCC to aid in the healing process of Boston in the wake of the tragic events at the Boston Marathon of 2013. The chorus joined with President Barack Obama, first responders and others as they sang In 2014, BCC performed at the Boston Marathon anniversary observances on April 15 in Boston.
The 2013 season ended with a World Premiere performance of "A Boy Called King" at the Institute of Contemporary Art by composer Daniel Bernard Roumain, and tours to Australia

Leadership

David C. Howse joined BCC in 2004
Anthony Trecek-King joined BCC as Artistic Director in 2006. Under his direction, BCC's singers follow a music curriculum that combines both American and European models that develops skills such as sight-reading and ear training for children as young as seven. Trecek-King is a graduate of University of Nebraska at Omaha, where he earned a Bachelor's in Cello Performance and Florida State University, where he completed his Master's in Orchestral Conducting.
BCC now employs 22 administrators, teaching fellows and conductors- headquartered in Boston's South End.

Social justice

BCC's mission is to harness the power of music to bring together Boston's diverse communities and to inspire social bridging. Through intensive choral training and high-profile performances, BCC singers learn discipline and develop leadership skills. In 2013, BCC won the Business Unusual National Challenge 

Musical program

BCC's 500 singers comprise 12 choirs in five different locations. In addition to the 6-8 self-produced concerts in venues such as New England Conservatory's Jordan Hall, Isabella Stewart Gardner Museum, and the Institute for Contemporary Art/Boston, BCC also tours internationally and has performed in Japan, Mexico, Australia, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Jordan. BCC has also appeared on National Public Radio's From the Top.
The organization and its singers, called Ambassadors of Harmony by the Boston Globe., by the President's Committee on the Arts and Humanities.
In 2013, BCC was awarded the National Arts and Humanities Youth Program Awards by First Lady Michelle Obama for its exemplary after school youth arts program.




