[[Holmhills Community Park Cambuslang]]

CATEGORIES: Cambuslang

This is a recreational area in the southern part of Cambuslang, a large village on the south-eastern fringes of the City of
Glasgow, Scotland, UK. The area is bordered to the east by Greenlees Road, to the south by Western Road, to the west by Langlea Road, and to the north by Grenville Drive. Originally the ground was owned by the Lahore family of Whitlawburn Farm in the western part and the other families who owned Holmhills Farm and Greenlees Farm to the east. These lands were used for grazing Guernsey cattle and growing barley until the mid-1960s when John Lahore sold his property to the then Lanark County Council (now South Lanarkshire Council) and moved to Montrose. Shortly afterwards the remaining two farmers also sold up so that, by the end of the 1960s, all the lands comprising the current Holmhills Community Park were owned by the local authority.
Harold Wilson's Labour administration of the day planned to build a social housing scheme beyond the southern edge of this land. The development, to be known as Whitlawburn, would comprise several blocks of three-storey tenemental-style properties and six blocks of twelve-storey high-rise flats. To the north of the new scheme would be a road (Western Road) connecting East Kilbride Road with Greenlees Road, while to the north of that, part of the former farmlands would be sold to developers and individuals for constructing a varied selection of homes ranging from large luxury architect-designed villas to smaller semis and bungalows. All the land between the north of this development and the top of West Coats Road would be left as green open space.
Between 1968 and 1970 a new comprehensive high school (Cathkin High) was built in the south-western corner of the old farmlands to the west of the Holmhills development and above an area which had been known as 'the bomb crater'. Some alleged that this had been caused by a stray German bomb during WWII while others said it was the result of subsidence caused by mine workings underneath the ground from the defunct Coats Pit, once situated near to the Cambuslang Rugby Club on Langlea Road. Today the latter assertion seems more credible when you consider the many test-borings carried out on the land immediately to the north of the so-called bomb crater following the departure of farmer Lahore, and the fact that not until 2006 did construction begin of the new Cathkin and Rutherglen High Schools, which took two years to build and first opened for business in the autumn of 2008. Work was considerably hampered by problems with water, largely from a small burn that runs from east to west on the southern fringe of the development. Furthermore, at the time of writing in August 2013 it has been well known that, for the last few years, 'problems with water' have hindered the council's plans to develop a ball-sports pitch to the rear of the new schools. Conversely, to the east of them a flood-lit artificial-turf sports area opened in 2008 and has proved very successful, both during the day for school pupils and in the evenings for other youngsters from outwith the district. On weekends local children climb the fence and use the pitch for kickabouts.
Despite vociferous local objection, in 1968 the council cut a footpath from the top of West Coats Road (formerly a cul-de-sac) through the fields to the new houses in Holmhills and Whitlawburn to make it easier for residents of the new schemes, as well as pupils at the new Cathkin High School, to get to and from Cambuslang Main Street. Immediately there was a considerable increase in pedestrian traffic along the new route and, as a result, many of the homes bordering it began to suffer from vandalism, a problem that prevailed to a greater or lesser extent until the mid-noughties. Why it lessened then is obscure. But apart from this, in recent years there has been an increasing amount of vehicular traffic too, particularly between the western end of Grenville Drive and the top of West Coats Road, brought about by the tendency of modern parents to ferry their children to and from school in cars and also by the park's mounting popularity as a venue for dog walkers.
Many of these people do not live locally and it has been suggested that some visit the park for a purpose other than just exercising their pets. This suggestion is supported by the significant number of unaccompanied individuals seen in the park with dogs, as well as the fewer number of 'couples' whose conduct implies that they are unrelated and have met each other in the park serendipitously whilst walking their dogs at the same times every day (or night). However, like all allegations these ones must be taken for what they are and always well-seasoned with a liberal pinch of salt. Otherwise they afford a fine source of ribald amusement to members of the dog-less fraternity who live around about.
The main problem with dog-walkers in Holmhills Park is that a few of them are irresponsible. They allow their untrained animals to roam freely off the leash and to foul the footpaths and patches of grassland on which children are likely to play. Hence why, perhaps, the large rugby pitch in front of Holmhills Wood is vastly underused. In addition, untethered dogs pose a substantive danger to toddlers, the elderly and other vulnerable adults. On the upside, the popularity of Holmhills Park with dog-walkers has meant that it doesn't suffer as much from human troublemakers as similar places in and around the Glasgow area. So Holmhills is probably a good example of nature in equilibrium. On the far eastern side beyond Holmhills Wood, originally planted as a windbreak for cattle, a small lochin and surrounding reed bed attracts a variety of interesting birds. The park is also a haven for wild flowers and plants, mostly in spring and summer.

