[[Symbian Ltd.]]

CATEGORIES: Software companies of the United Kingdom, Companies established in 1998, Nokia assets, Symbian OS

Symbian Ltd. was a software development and licensing company, known for the Symbian OS, a smartphone operating system, and other related technologies.  Its headquarters were in Southwark, London, England, with additional offices in the United Kingdom, China, India, Japan, Korea, and the United States.
It was established on 24 June 1998 as a partnership between Ericsson, Nokia, Motorola, and Psion to exploit the convergence between PDAs and mobile phones. Ten years to the day after it was established, on 24 June 2008, Nokia announced that they intended to acquire the shares that they did not already own, at a cost of €264 million. and the pledged contribution of the Symbian OS and user interfaces.
The acquisition of Symbian Ltd. by Nokia was completed on 2 December 2008,
On 18 July 2009, Nokia's Symbian professional services department, which was not transferred to the Symbian Foundation, was sold to the Accenture consulting company.

Symbian OS

Symbian Ltd formerly developed and licensed Symbian OS, an operating system for advanced 2.5G and 3G mobile phones. User interface layers were provided by third parties. These included Series 60, Series 80 and Series 90 by Nokia, UIQ from UIQ Technology and MOAP(S) for NTT DoCoMo.
All three interfaces, as well as the OS, are now owned and maintained by the Symbian Foundation.

Shareholding

Before its outright purchase by Nokia in December 2008, Symbian Ltd. was owned by Nokia (56.3%), Ericsson (15.6%), Sony Ericsson (13.1%), Matsushita (10.5%), and Samsung (4.5%).
The company's founder shareholders were Psion, Nokia, Ericsson and Motorola. Motorola sold its stake in the company to Psion and Nokia in September 2003.
Much of Symbian's initial intellectual property came from the software arm of Psion PLC.

Licensees

Licensees of Symbian's operating system were:

Key people

Symbian Ltd's CEO at the time of acquisition was Nigel Clifford.





 
 


