[[Terah]]

CATEGORIES: Torah people, Abraham

Terah or Térach (

Genesis narrative

Most of what is told about Terah is recorded in  
Terah's son Abram had an encounter with God, who directed him to take the entire family, leave Haran and move to the land of Canaan.

Jewish tradition

When Terah begot Abram

 states that Terah lived 70 years, and he begot Abram, Nachor, and Haran. Rashi on Genesis (37:1) comments on the subsequent elaboration on the story of Abraham that Abraham was the gem of the chronology of Genesis 11 which the Torah wanted to focus on. In the Jewish tradition, Genesis (11:26) teaches that Terah was 70 years old when he begot Abram. The Talmud Avodah Zara 9A says that Abraham was 52 years old at year 2000 AM (Anno Mundi), which means that he was born in the year 1948 AM. Rashi ad loc explains this based on Abram being born when Terah was 70. While it is a given in Jewish tradition that Genesis (11:26) relates that Abram was born when Terach was 70, upon which the current Jewish year is based on, there is yet a question whether Abram was born first as listed, or perhaps last, and is listed first as the wisest similar to Shem, Ham, and Jafeth where Shem was the youngest but wisest. Seder Olam Chapter 2 holds that Abram was the eldest, but the Talmud Sanhedrin 69B leaves the above question open.

Terah's occupation

Terah was a wicked Numbers Rabbah 19:1; 19:33 idolatrous priestMidrash HaGadol, Bereishis 11:28 who manufactured idols. Terah then brought his unruly son before Nimrod, who threw him into a fiery furnace, yet Abram miraculously escaped. Kahana said that God assured Abram that his father Terah had a portion in the World to Come.Genesis Rabbah'' 30:4; 30:12
Rabbi Hiyya's relates this account: 

Leader of the journey

Terah is identified as the person who arranged and led the family to embark on a mysterious journey to Canaan. It is shrouded in mystery to Jewish scholars as to why Terah began the journey and as to why the journey ended prematurely. It is suggested that he was a man in search of a greater truth that could possibly be found in the familiarSforno, Bereishit 12:5 land of Canaan, and that it was Abram who picked up the torch to continue his father's quest, that Terah himself was unable to achieve. 
Goldin, Shmuel. Unlocking the Torah Text Bereishit, Vol. 1, (ISBN 9652294128, ISBN 978-965-229-412-8), 2010, p. 59, 60

When Abram leaves Haran

It is believed that Abram left Haran before Terah died as an expression that he would not be remiss in the Mitzvah, of honoring a parent, by leaving his aging father behind. Though on a journey in the right direction, Terah fell short at arriving to the divine destination — in contrast to Abram, who did follow through and achieved the divine goal, and was not bound by his father's idolatrous past. Abram's following God's command to leave his father, thus absolved him from the Mitzvah of honoring parents, and as Abraham, he would go on to create a new lineage distinct from his ancestors.(Haggadah shel Pesach) - Levene, Osher C. People of the Book, (ISBN 1568714467, ISBN 978-1-56871-446-2), 2004, p. 79-80

Islamic tradition

In some Islam sects, Abraham's father is believed to have been an ignorant man,Stories of the Prophets, Ibn Kathir, Abraham and his father who refused to listen to the constant advice of his wise son. In fact, the earliest story involving Abraham in the Qur'an is his discussion with his father. The name given for this man in the Qur'an (

Abraham's advice

As a father, Azar required his son's most sincere advice. Abraham, after receiving his first revelations from God, invited his father to the way of Islam. Abraham explained to him the faults in idolatry, From the Quran 74/6 "And O Muhammad, when Abraham said to his father Azar: Do you take idols as deities? Indeed, I see you and your people to be in manifest error." 
Abraham told his father that he had indeed received revelations from God, knowledge which his father did not possess,

Wreckage of the idols

The Qur'an states that the people of Abraham were idolaters. When Abraham had become older, he decided to finally teach his community a lesson. He said to himself that he had a plan for their idols, whilst they would be gone away.

Abraham is thrown into the fire

After the incident of the idol wreckage, the people of Abraham, while having admitted their fault, are said to have ignored Abraham's warning and instead retaliated by throwing him into a fire and exclaiming "protect your gods".

Christian tradition

The Christian views of the time of Terah come from a passage in the New Testament at : "Terah took his son Abram, his daughter-in-law Sarai (his son Abram's wife), and his grandson Lot (his son Haran's child) and left Ur of the Chaldeans to go to the land of Canaan." 




