[[Alice Rollins-Crane]]

CATEGORIES: American ethnologists, Year of birth uncertain, People from Indiana, Year of death missing, People of the Klondike Gold Rush, American miners, Women of the Klondike Gold Rush, 19th-century births

Alice Rollins-Crane Moraczewski (also Morajeski, Morajeske, Majoreski, Morajeska, Marachefsky, Moracgeaski, Modjeska) was an American ethnologist, author, business owner, and miner well known for her work with the Apache Native Americans and her time in Alaska and the Yukon. She is the compiler of Smiles and Tears from the Klondyke, and the author of Our Klondyke Success and various other short pieces.

Early life

Alice Rollins was born in Indiana in 1856 or 1861, the oldest of five children
In 1894, Alice married Lorin P. Crane Coming Home: Has had plenty of adventures in the Klondike. Los Angeles Herald, 30 August 1899. in Los Angeles. Eventually, they too, divorced.

Time in Arizona

Rollins-Crane spent nine years living with the Apache tribe in Arizona,The Klondyke Miner and Yukon Advertiser, November 1898 becoming acquainted with Thomas Jeffords.
Rollins-Crane wrote an essay refuting the idea that no sites in the United States deserved the serious attention of archaeologists, saying that La Casa Grande (today the Montezuma Castle National Monument) in Arizona did deserve this attention, and that even in the 16th century, the local native peoples had no tradition as to its builders.The Prehistoric Ruins of Casa Grande, Overland Monthly and Out West Magazine, Volume 36, Issue 214
It was also during this time that Rollins-Crane became a devotee of Chinese herbal medicine as an alternative to surgical procedures. Los Angeles Herald, February 12, 1899

Time in Alaska and the Yukon

Alice Rollins-Crane arrived in the Yukon sometime in 1898, likely as a stampeder during the Klondike Gold RushBackhouse, F. Women of the Klondike. Whitecap Books, 1995. ISBN 1552854078. p. 149 but also, she claimed, "armed with a government commission from the Smithsonian 
Bureau of Ethnology" as well as "credentials from several newspapers and journals, which were duly honoured by the Canadian officials."Our Klondyke Success, Wide World Magazine, June 1901. Retrieved from  Women of the Klondike. Whitecap Books, 1995. ISBN 1552854078. p. 26 and then ran the Whitehorse Rapids, claiming to be the first white woman to do so.
In Dawson City, Alice worked as a writer, author, and miner while still continuing to perform some ethnological work. In 1900, she was employed as a prison inspector, and was sent by the bureau of ethnology of the Smithsonian Institute to study and report on the prison life. The Smithsonian Institution also commissioned her to study the tribal traditions of the Yukon and Alaska. Though none of her notes have survived, she is known to have performed interviews with Yukon Tagish First Nations on death row about their religious beliefs, and concluded that they may have been sun-worshippers.
Rollins-Crane became the domestic partner of William Galpin,Dawson Daily News, Wednesday February 24, 1904 an author and miner living in Dawson City. In 1903, however, she launched a lawsuit against him for assault and threatening to kill her. According to her testimony, she and Galpin had become estranged when they disputed over the authorship of The Widow of Dawson, both claiming to be the author. She sent the manuscript to publishers, and he ordered it sent back. The assault charges against Galpin were dismissed on May 13, 1903. Dawson Daily News, May 13, 1903 However, Galpin would later charge Alice with perjury.
It was during this period that Alice met her third husband, Victor Moraczewski, a man who claimed to be a Russian count, but who was more likely Polish. According to newspaper reports of the time, William Galpin had been pursuing Rollins-Crane with propositions of marriage. She sought shelter in a roadhouse kept by Moraczewski, where he allegedly protected her from assault by Galpin. TO SUE UNCLE SAM. Dawson Daily News, January 2, 1905.
In 1904, both Alice and Count Moraczewski were jailed for several months in Nome, Alaska on charges of theftROYALTY ON COAST: Yukon "Count" and Lady in Seattle. BOTH WERE JAILED. Dawson Daily News, November 16, 1904 after being unable to pay a bail of $5,000. Crane Accuses Husband of Blackmail - Great Jackpot of Three DAwson Characters all Forwarded to Nome. Dawson Daily News. March 7, 1904. Before this point, Alice had been fined for contempt of court three times. In 1905, Victor Moraczewski told newspapers that he would sue the American government on the grounds that his wife had been the victim of mistreatment and personal violence at the hands of government officials.
During this time she also wrote for National Geographic Magazine and the Dawson Daily News.Golden Cleanup Edition, Dawson Caily News, September 1902

Mining Activities

In 1898, Alice organized and became the manager of the Los Angeles Woman's Mining Syndicate, a group of about fifty women who advanced $2500 for the development of Yukon mining properties. According to the contract, the property would be owned by Alice Rollins-Crane, but a certain percentage would be paid back to the syndicate. The syndicate was never officially incorporated, but in 1900, the same women organized the Los Angeles and Yukon Mining Company, and acquired an interest in Alice's mining properties,ALICE GETS THE BOUNCE: Captain Galpin Said to Be Responsible: WRITES THINGS ABOUT HER: Los Angeles Women Decide That Female Promoter, Writer of Stories, and Wife of Russian Count is Entirely Too Clever. The Yukon Sun. September 3, 1903. including 36 below discovery on Hunker Creek for the Los Angeles and Yukon Mining Company. William Galpin, Alice's erstwhile domestic partner, wrote to stockholders in 1903 to tell them that Alice "was no lady" and "was not working in the interests of other stockholders." Alice was forced to step down from the management of the company, although she retained her interests in it.

Later life

After she left the North, Alice Moraczewski opened the Alaska Glacier Ice Cream Parlor in Rhyolite, Nevada.

Death

Rollins-Crane is buried in Los Angeles, in an unmarked grave.[ref]Re: Rollins, Alice --- Ohio/Yukon/Alaska/Arizona
Retrieved August 9, 2013 from 

Legacy

Some of Rollins-Crane's photograph collections of the Yukon are held by the Smithsonian Institution. Retrieved  August 6th, 2013 from 




