[[2012 DH-84 Riama crash]]

CATEGORIES: Aviation accidents and incidents in Australia, Aviation accidents and incidents in 2012, 2012 in Australia

The 2012 Riama crash was an aircraft accident that occurred in Queensland, Australia on 1 October 2012. Riama was a 1934 vintage de Havilland Dragon, returning to Caboolture from the Norra-Aus Fly-In airshow at Monto when the pilot reported the aircraft was encountering heavy clouds and zero visibility. Radio contact with Riama was lost an hour later and a search and rescue operation was initiated shortly after, locating the wreckage in heavily wooded, hilly terrain on 3 October. The pilot and five passengers were killed in the accident.
The final report by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB) was released on 19 December 2013. It found that the pilot was not qualified for instrument flight and the aircraft was not equipped for such flight. The weather at the time on the "coast and extending inland included low clouds and rain." "... the pilot radioed air traffic control (ATC) and requested navigation assistance, advising that the aircraft was in cloud."
"With no or limited visual references available in and near cloud, it would have been very difficult for the pilot to maintain control of the aircraft. After maintaining control in such conditions for about an hour, and being unable to navigate away from the mountain range, the pilot most likely became spatially disoriented and lost control of the aircraft before it impacted the ground."

Aircraft

At the time of the accident, Riama was one of four airworthy examples of the DH.84 Dragon aircraft in the world. After sitting disassembled in a hangar for many years, the aircraft was restored at Murwillumbah Airport by vintage aircraft specialists Mothcair between 1998 and 2002.

Accident

The aircraft departed Monto a few minutes after 11:00 on a direct track towards Caboolture carrying the pilot and five non-paying passengers. The weather for the flight was expected to be VFR (visual flight rules) conditions with good visibility, high clouds and light winds. At 13:15, the aircraft contacted air traffic control, reporting an approximate position 69 km north of Caboolture and requesting assistance with navigation. Shortly after, the pilot issued a distress call as the aircraft had entered thick cloud. Controllers in Brisbane then communicated positional information to the aircraft directly and relayed via other pilots in the area due to difficulties with radio reception. A friend of one of the passengers aboard Riama received a phone call from the aircraft, reporting that they were lost in cloud and unable to maintain altitude at around 13:20. Over the next hour, witnesses in the area around the crash site reported seeing the aircraft flying in and out of cloud at low level. At 13:48, the pilot reported he had one hour of fuel remaining and the last transmission from the aircraft came at 14:04. Neither the aircraft or the pilot were equipped or certified to fly without visual reference to the ground.
A major search and rescue operation was coordinated by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority (AMSA), involving as many as 15 helicopters as well as a specialized fixed wing aircraft flown in from Melbourne. The original search area covered an area of some 1500 square kilometers, made difficult by the hilly terrain and dense vegetation. Local residents on motorcycles also offered to help search remote trails.

Investigation and aftermath

An investigation into the Riama crash was carried out by the Australian Transport Safety Bureau (ATSB), with the final findings released in December 2013. The preliminary findings showed that, contrary to some media reports that the aircraft ran out of fuel, at least one engine was operating at the time of the crash, and fuel was found in the tanks. The ATSB determined the time of impact to be approximately 14:21, 17 minutes after the last communication with the aircraft. The impact was determined to be not survivable.

Final report

The final accident report by the ATSB was released on 19 December 2013. The ATSB stated that:
and
They found that:





