[[Kidnapping of Hannah Anderson]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 in California, 2013 in Idaho, 2013 murders in the United States, Arson in the United States, History of San Diego County, California, Kidnapped American children, Kidnappings in the United States

On or about the afternoon of August 3, 2013,

Abduction and manhunt

Boulevard murders

James DiMaggio had invited Christina Anderson and her children to his home at 2071 Ross Avenue in Boulevard, ostensibly to say goodbye because he was planning to move to Texas.
On August 4, a fire was reported at DiMaggio's house in Boulevard, where firemen found the bodies of Hannah Anderson's mother, Christina, her 8-year-old brother Ethan and the family dog, Cali.
In late September 2013, the San Diego County Medical Examiner's office released results of the autopsies of Christine and Ethan Anderson.  The autopsy of Christine Anderson found that a plastic cable tie had been used to bind her ankles, and that duct tape was wrapped around her neck and mouth. Her right arm and both legs were fractured, and there was a cut on her neck. She had been struck at least twelve times in the head. The autopsy of Ethan Anderson determined that the boy died because of the fire, though he also had skeletal fractures that could have been caused by events the day of the murders.

Abduction reported

On August 4, 2013, Anderson's grandparents called the police and reported their grandchildren missing, prompting police to issue a statewide AMBER Alert,

Sightings in Idaho

On August 8, a couple meeting the description of DiMaggio and Anderson was seen by horseback riders in Cascade, Idaho. The next day, authorities were notified of this sighting after the riders watched a news report about the abduction.

Shooting and rescue

According to Hannah Anderson, DiMaggio, while they were fugitives, had threatened to kill her and anyone who tried to rescue her.
Afterwards, when asked if she was glad DiMaggio was dead, Anderson responded, "Absolutely". 

Suspect

The suspect was James Lee DiMaggio (January 17, 1973 – August 10, 2013), age 40, a telecommunications technician in San Diego. According to a friend of DiMaggio, his father, James Everet DiMaggio, died exactly 15 years to the day before his son. The friend said the elder DiMaggio, who was accused of attempting in 1988 to kidnap the 16-year-old daughter of an ex-girlfriend, committed suicide in August 1998. However, public records indicate his suicide was on August 10, 1995.
DiMaggio was said to be the best friend of Christina's husband, Brett Anderson, and like an uncle to the children."Hannah Anderson returns home to be with family and friends, says her Dad", Associated Press He had helped them with various tasks, such as driving Hannah and a friend from a gymnastics meet,
DiMaggio listed Brett Anderson's mother as beneficiary to his life insurance in 2011, while he lived with her. He intended the $112,000 for the children, but did not trust their parents to handle it. This revelation prompted members of DiMaggio's family to request a paternity test to determine if he fathered the Anderson children. Brett called the suggestion "disgusting" and an Anderson family spokeswoman said DiMaggio had not met Christina till she was six months pregnant with Hannah.
According to released warrants, DiMaggio received letters from Hannah Anderson which were found in his home by investigators, and exchanged over a dozen calls with her before the murders occurred. Gore also suggested that authorities may never be able to fully determine the reason for DiMaggio's crime rampage.




