[[Jeremy Paxman]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, People from Leeds, English people of Scottish descent, Living people, BBC newsreaders and journalists, BBC World News, English reporters and correspondents, English game show hosts, English journalists, English television presenters, Fellows of St Catharine's College, Cambridge, Fellows of St Edmund Hall, Oxford, People educated at Malvern College, Alumni of St Catharine's College, Cambridge

Jeremy Dickson Paxman He is also the question master of University Challenge, succeeding Bamber Gascoigne when the programme was revived in 1994.
At the end of April 2014, Paxman announced that he is to leave Newsnight in June after 25 years of presenting the programme.com, 30 April 2014

Early life and education

Paxman was born in Leeds, West Riding of Yorkshire. His mother, Joan McKay, née Dickson (1920–2009), was a housewife, and his father, Arthur Keith Paxman, worked in industry. and a sister, Jenny, a producer at BBC Radio.
He was brought up in the West Riding of Yorkshire and Peopleton, near Pershore, Worcestershire. In 1964, he went to Malvern College, While at Cambridge, Paxman was briefly a member of the Labour Club.
Paxman was the subject, in January 2006, of an episode of the BBC genealogy series Who Do You Think You Are? The documentary concluded him to be descended from Roger Packsman, a 14th century politician from Suffolk who had changed his name to Paxman (man of peace, "Pax" translates from Latin as peace) to impress "the electorate." His maternal grandmother was born in Glasgow, Scotland. The programme generated much publicity before its transmission by displaying Paxman teary-eyed on camera when informed that his impoverished great-grandmother Mary Mackay's poor relief had been revoked because she had a child out of wedlock.

Career

Journalism

Paxman joined the BBC's graduate trainee programme in 1972. He started in local radio, at BBC Radio Brighton. He moved to Belfast, where he reported the Troubles. He moved to London in 1977. Two years later he transferred from the Tonight programme to Panorama. After five years reporting from places such as Beirut, Uganda and Central America, he read the Six O'Clock News for two years, before moving to BBC1's Breakfast Time programme.

Newsnight

Paxman became a presenter of Newsnight in 1989.
On 13 May 1997 he interviewed Michael Howard in what has become the programme's most recalled encounter. 
Later, during a 20th anniversary edition of Newsnight, Paxman told Howard that he had simply been trying to prolong the interview since the next item in the running order wasn't ready... it was clear... that you Howard weren't going to answer it... at which point a voice came in my ear and said "The next piece of tape isn't cut, you'd better carry on with this for a while" and I'm afraid I couldn't think of anything else to ask you."
In 1998, Denis Halliday, a United Nations Humanitarian Coordinator, resigned his post in Iraq, describing the effects of his own organisation's sanctions as genocide. Paxman asked Halliday in a Newsnight interview, "Aren't you just an apologist for Saddam Hussein?" Later that year Paxman won a Royal Television Society award.
In 2003, Prime Minister Tony Blair opted to make the case for the invasion of Iraq via questions from a TV studio audience, mediated by Paxman. The programme is chiefly remembered for the fact that Paxman asked Blair if he and U.S. President Bush prayed together. Blair replied, "No, Jeremy. We don't pray together."
During the 2005 general election some viewers complained to the BBC that Paxman's questioning of party leaders had been rude and aggressive.
On 26 June 2012 he interviewed the Economic Secretary to the Treasury Chloe Smith about Chancellor George Osborne's decision that day to delay plans to increase fuel duty. Paxman questioned the apparent change in her views on fuel duty.
The BBC announced Paxman's departure from Newsnight at the end of April 2014. He had told BBC Head of News James Harding and BBC Director General Tony Hall that he wished to leave in July 2013, but agreed to stay on Newsnight for another year after the programme had been damaged by the Savile and Lord McAlpine scandals."Jeremy Paxman to quit BBC Two's Newsnight", BBC News, 30 April 2014 In his statement Paxman commented: "After 25 years, I should rather like to go to bed at much the same time as most people."
Paxman's brusque manner is not restricted to political interviews. When around 2005 Newsnight's editor decided to broadcast brief weather forecasts instead of financial reports he openly ridiculed the decision: "And for tonight's weather – it's April, what do you expect?". The financial reports were re-introduced after a few weeks.

Other TV work

Paxman has presented the weekly TV programme review Did You See?, You Decide and, since 1994, University Challenge, bringing him the distinction of "longest-serving current quizmaster on British TV."
In April 2006 The Sun claimed that Paxman earned £800,000 for his Newsnight job and £240,000 for presenting University Challenge, bringing his TV earnings to a yearly total of £1,040,000. This was one of a series of BBC salary leaks in the tabloid press that prompted an internal BBC investigation.
Paxman appeared as himself in an episode of BBC comedy The Thick of It which aired in January 2007. He is seen grilling Junior Minister Ben Swain in a disastrous Newsnight interview.
Beginning on 15 February 2009, his four part documentary The Victorians was transmitted on BBC One. The series explores Victorian art and culture. From 27 February until 26 March 2012, BBC One broadcast Paxman's series Empire, examining the history and legacy of the British Empire.
In 2014 Paxman presented Britain's Great War, an accompaniment to his 2013 book Great Britain's Great War.

Books

Paxman's first book, A Higher Form of Killing (1982), written with then BBC colleague and friend Robert Harris, arose out of an edition of the Panorama programme they had made together on biological and chemical warfare. In a revised 2002 version they asserted that Iraq possessed chemical and biological weapons. In 1985, Paxman published Through the Volcanoes: A Central American Journey, an eyewitness account of people, places and politics. Friends in High Places: Who Runs Britain? (1991) was the result of numerous detailed interviews with the powerful or highly influential, what used to be called The Establishment. Paxman's The English: A Portrait of a People (1999) was not the first of his books to be greeted with wide critical acclaim. The Political Animal: An Anatomy (2003), again based on extensive interviews, examines the motivations and methods of those who constitute the author's professional prey: Westminster politicians.
The otherwise-republican Paxman's On Royalty, which entailed the cooperation of Britain's royal family, became by the time it was published in 2006, to his own surprise and somewhat to the surprise of others, a defence of the country's constitutional monarchy. His recent books have been big sellers. His book, The Victorians: Britain through the Paintings of the Age, published in 2009, was accompanied by a BBC documentary series. In his introduction, Paxman acknowledged that the Irish writer Neil Hegarty had played a significant role in editing the book and bringing it to completion. Paxman stated that since all television is a "collaborative exercise", it was "rather silly for this book – which accompanies a television series – to appear with only one name on the cover."

Radio

Paxman presented the flagship BBC Radio 4 show Start the Week from 1998 to 2002.

Paxman and the BBC

While John Birt was Director General of the BBC, the British press from time to time reported Paxman's criticism of his boss. The former, suspected at first to be an outsider brought in by a hostile government to supervise the BBC's break-up and ultimate sell-off, in turn publicly questioned the confrontational approach, as he saw it, of certain TV and radio interviewers. This was seen at the time as coded criticism of Paxman himself and of his BBC colleague John Humphrys.
On 24 August 2007 Paxman delivered the MacTaggart Memorial Lecture at the Edinburgh International Television Festival. of the oft-quoted "Why is this lying bastard lying to me?" as the supposed dominant thought in his mind when interviewing senior politicians. He called on the television industry to rediscover a sense of purpose.
In November 2012, Paxman publicly defended George Entwistle after his resignation as Director-General of the BBC in connection with a Newsnight report which falsely implicated Lord McAlpine in the North Wales child abuse scandal. Paxman claimed Entwistle had been "brought low by cowards and incompetents" and criticised appointments of "biddable people" to the BBC in the wake of the Hutton Inquiry, as well as cuts to BBC programme budgets and bloated BBC management.
In August 2013 Paxman appeared on Newsnight with a beard, causing a Twitter trend when the broadcaster accused the BBC of pogonophobia.

Awards and honours

In 1996 Paxman received BAFTA's Richard Dimbleby Award for "outstanding presenter in the factual arena." Two years later he won the Royal Television Society's Interviewer of the Year Award for his Newsnight interview (see above) with Michael Howard, as well as the Broadcasting Press Guild's award for best "non-acting" performer. He gained another Richard Dimbleby Award in 2000 and was nominated for the award in 2001 and 2002. He won the Royal Television Society TV journalism presenter of the year award in 2002 and 2007.
Paxman was given an honorary doctorate by the University of Leeds in the summer of 1999 and in December that year received an honorary degree from the University of Bradford. In 2006 he received an honorary doctorate from the Open University. Among those at the ceremony were three members of the Open University's 1999 University Challenge team. Paxman is a Fellow by special election of St Edmund Hall, Oxford, and an Honorary Fellow of his alma mater, St. Catharine's College, Cambridge.

Personal life

Paxman lives with his partner Elizabeth Ann Clough in Stonor, southeast Oxfordshire. They have three children. He is vice-chairman of the Wild Trout Trust conservation charity. He is also a patron of the charity Sustrans.
When, in his twenties, Paxman unsuccessfully applied for the vacant editorship of the Labour-supporting weekly, the New Statesman, he said that in his youth he considered himself a socialist. He had previously stood as a Communist candidate in his school elections. More recently, he has been described as "the archetypal floating voter", and Jon Snow once said that Paxman's greatest strength was being "not very political". Paxman himself has stated that he has no dominant political ideology:
 
 I do understand we have to have a government, and I do firmly believe in democracy. So it's not true to say I'm not a political person. I am a political person. But I'm not a party political person. I don't believe there is a monopoly of wisdom in any one party. I suppose as one gets older – I would have described it at the age of 21 as the process of selling out, but another way of looking at it is to say, actually, the world is not a very simple place, and that as you get older simple-minded solutions seem less attractive.

Criticism

Paxman has been publicly criticised over his and his partner's home help arrangements. Having advertised on a Romanian website, they hired two people at below minimum wage without a written contract. While this is not illegal in the UK if employees live in, Paxman, known for grilling interviewees on workers' rights issues, was criticised when his employees went public, claiming to have been paid "the bare minimum".
Paxman's controversial remarks about the Scots provoked anger at parliamentary level. Twenty Scottish members of parliament signed a House of Commons motion in March 2005 condemning him for comparing supposed Scottish dominance at Westminster to British rule in India: a "Scottish Raj" was running the UK, said Paxman. The row came right after a Cabinet minister had complained that the Newsnight host had been offensive about his Glasgow accent. Paxman's response served further to fan the flames. Paxman himself is quarter-Scottish through his maternal grandmother, a fact which he stated has led to many of his comments being misunderstood as he regards the Scots "with affection".
Paxman has been widely condemned as disrespectful when commenting on the possible exit of Greece from the Eurozone ('like bad kebab vomiting") on 31 May 2012 edition of Newsnight. He received many angry messages from the audience on Twitter and other media accusing him of racist and inappropriate stereotypical analogies.
In 2013 on University Challenge Tom Tyszczuk Smith answered a question incorrectly and was chastised by Paxman. This lead to a series of  articles claiming that Paxman bullied Tyszczuk Smith, and 47 viewers complained to the BBC about the incident.standard.co.html
In November 2013, while being interviewed by Graham Norton Paxman called Prime Minister David Cameron an idiot Rob Wilson MP wrote to the BBC Director-General Lord Hall demanding an apology from Paxman for his comments about the Prime Minister.mirror.co.uk/tv/tv-news/tory-demands-bbc-apology-after-2720518

Paxman in popular culture

Paxman became a focus of media attention in his own right in October 2000 when an Enigma machine, which had been stolen from Bletchley Park Museum, was inexplicably sent to him in the post. He returned it to its rightful location.

Bibliography






