[[The Great British Bake Off (series 4)]]

CATEGORIES: British cooking television programmes

The fourth series of The Great British Bake Off began airing on 20 August 2013.
13,000 amateur bakers applied to appear on the programme, and 100 were selected for screen test, with the best 60 advancing to a three-day audition. From these, 13 contestants were chosen this year so the judges could eliminate two people whenever they wanted.
The winner of the Great British Bake Off 2013 was Frances Quinn.

The Bakers

Results summary

Colour key:

Episodes

Episode 1: Cakes

The bakers were given two hours to make a sandwich cake with filling of their choice for the signature challenge.  For their first technical challenge, the bakers were required to bake an angel food cake using Mary Berry's recipe in two and half hours.  For the showstopper, the challenge was to make a chocolate cake using at least two types of chocolate to decorate the cake.  They were given four hours for this bake.

Episode 2: Bread

The bakers were asked to make in two hours 36 breadsticks, all made using yeast, of at least 25 cm (10 inches) in length, and the breadsticks should be crisp and produce a good snap.  For the technical challenge, the bakers have to make eight English muffin using Paul's recipe in two and three quarter hours.  For the final bake, an elaborately decorated loaf was set as the showstopper challenge to be completed in four hours.

Episode 3: Desserts

For the first challenge of the episode the bakers were asked to make a Trifle of their own choice, using Ladies Fingers, Sponge or Biscuit for the base and either Jam or Custard for the middle layer.  For their second challenge, the bakers were required to bake in an hour and a half Floating Islands using a recipe of Mary Berry.  For the show-stopper, the bakers were set the task of making 24 petit fours, twelve biscuit based, twelve sponge based, to be finished in three hours.

Episode 4: Pies and Tarts

For the signature challenge the bakers are asked to bake a Double-crusted Fruit Pie with a filling of their choice. For their fourth Technical challenge, the bakers were required to bake a Tart that has almost a 700 year history; the English Custard Tart. For the showstopper, the challenge was to make a Filo Pie centrepiece using the Filo pastry that they had made from scratch.

Episode 5: Biscuits and Traybakes

For the signature challenge, the bakers were asked to make their favorite traybake in two hours and cut into identical pieces.  Everything made as part of the traybake however needed to be made from scratch.  In the technical challenge, the bakers needed to make 18 tuiles using Mary's recipe in one and a half hour. Half of the tuiles needed to be shaped in the traditional manner and piped in a concentric circles, and the other rolled up and dipped in chocolate.  In the last challenge, the baker had to make a biscuit tower of at least 30 cm high, to be finished in four hours.

Episode 6: Sweet Dough

In the first challenge, the bakers were required to make a sweet tea loaf using yeast, either in a tin or free form. They were given 3 hours for the task.  For the technical challenge, the bakers baked an apricot couronne using Paul's recipe in two and three-quarter hours.  For the showstopper, the bakers needed to make two different varieties of European sweet buns, 12 of each. The bakers were given 30 minutes to start in the first day so that dough may be proofed overnight, to be finished the second day in four hours.

Episode 7: Pastry

The bakers are challenged to bring the old fashioned suet pudding back up to date for the signature challenge. In the technical bake, the bakers are challenged to create eight perfect religieuse; these are choux buns that are topped with ganache and filled with crème patissiere then carefully balanced one on top of the other. In the Showstopper Challenge, the bakers have 4 hours to make three different types of puffed pastries; one must be filled, another has to be iced and the final one is of their choice.

Episode 8: Quarter Final

This week in the quarter final, the theme for this week were bakes that were free of something (e.g. gluten free, dairy free). In the Signature Challenge, the bakers are challenged to bake a loaf that does not use traditional wheat flours, instead they must use flours such as Spelt, Rye, Potato or Tapioca.  The bakers are challenged in the technical bake to make a Dacquoise which consists of 3 layers; coiled meringue, coffee custard and a hazelnut praline top.  For the showstopper, the bakers are pushed out of their comfort zones and asked to create novelty vegetable cakes which must be dairy free

Episode 9: Semi-Final

This week's theme was French pastry. In the Signature Challenge, the bakers are challenged to make three different types of savoury canapé; one must be Choux, another must be Shortcrust or Rough Puff and the third can be anything of their choice. For the Technical bake, the bakers are challenged to make a Charlotte Royal; made of Swiss roll surrounding a bavarois, it is set with gelatin to form a firm dome when turned out. In the Showstopper Challenge, the bakers are challenged to bake an iconic French Patisserie, the Opera cake

Special episode: Class of 2012

In this episode, shown immediately before the final, the Class of 2012 return to the Bake Off tent to give a special insight to life inside the tent. They divulge how it felt to receive judgement from Mary and Paul; how they coped with having their ingredients siphoned off by Mel and Sue; and to what extent practising bagels, pies, petit fours, meringues, hidden design cakes and gingerbread constructions took over their lives. Reliving their perfectly risen highs and soggy bottom lows, the bakers also reveal how their experience in a tent, in the middle of a field and in extreme weather conditions, has changed their lives.

Episode 10: Final

In the Signature Challenge, the final three are challenged to create a Picnic Pie. The pie must be savoury, the fillings have to create a creative design and has to be strong enough to be served out of the tin. For the Technical Challenge, the bakers are challenged to make 12 perfectly shaped pretzels; 6 savoury with rock salt and 6 sweet, flavoured with poppy seeds and topped with sweet orange zest and glaze. For the final Showstopper Challenge of the series, the bakers are asked to bake the ultimate showpiece - a three tiered wedding cake.

Masterclasses

Mary and Paul take over the tent and take on the challenges that they set for the bakers, showing what they would have done had they been in the bakers shoes.

=Episode 1=

=Episode 2=

=Episode 3=

=Episode 4=

Controversy

Before the series started, there was speculation Paul Hollywood would not appear in the show after his marriage broke down.
During the series, there were accusations of favouritism towards female contestants after the last man Glenn Cosby was eliminated from the show,

Ratings

The show achieved some of the highest ratings seen on BBC Two. According to overnight data, the final episode was seen by 9.1 million viewers at its peak, and averaging over 8 million, more than twice the number of viewers on BBC One and ITV.
All ratings are taken from BARB.

Specials






