[[Leiden International Film Festival]]

CATEGORIES: Film festivals in the Netherlands, Culture in Leiden

The Leiden International Film Festival is a film festival that is organized annually in Leiden, Netherlands. The festival was founded in 2006 by four student friends who were displeased with the cinematic culture in Leiden. It is now the fastest-growing film festival in The Netherlands.

Schedule

The festival's programming consists of many different kinds of fiction films, both big blockbusters and small arthouse films.
The festival is a visitors' and not a market festival, attracting mainly film-fans and not sales agents. During the festival, films are not only screened in cinemas but special screenings are also hosted at venues like museums, an old factory, a historic church and an observatory.

American Independent Cinema and the American Indie Competition

The LIFF attempts to bring American independent cinema to the continent. The American Indie Competition is the festival's main competition, focusing entirely on American independent cinema. Winners of previous competitions include (Untitled) and Safety Not Guaranteed. The prize is not awarded by a jury, but os voted for by all visitors of the selected films.
Some American indies that were screened in the Netherlands at the festival: Breaking Upwards, (Untitled), Safety Not Guaranteed, My Suicide, Howl, Cyrus, Gigantic, Paper Heart, Towelhead, Winter's Bone, Please Give, Lola Versus, Precious, Supporting Characters, Little Miss Sunshine.

2013 American Indie Competition

On September 28, the lineup for the 2013 American Indie Competition was announced by Filmmaker Magazine. Films that will be screening are: Ain't Them Bodies Saints, Bluebird, C.O.G., Coldwater, Computer Chess, Enough Said, Fruitvale Station, A Glimpse Inside the Mind of Charles Swan III, Hide Your Smiling Faces, Kill Your Darlings, Prince Avalanche, The Spectacular Now, Starlet, Sweetwater, Trust Me and Short Term 12. 

Panorama

LIFF's Panorama program screens films from all over the world, from established names to newly discovered filmmakers.
Some films that were screened in the Netherlands for the first time during the Panorama program: Another Year, Amour, Argo, The Artist, Burn After Reading, Boy A, Children of Men, Drive, Elle s'appelait Sarah, Gone Baby Gone, Le Herisson, Das Weiße Band, We Need To Talk About Kevin, You Will Meet a Tall Dark Stranger, 50/50.
During the 2012 edition, the Audience Award was won by The Perks of Being a Wallflower.

Side program

Besides the American Indie and Panorama programs, the LIFF also hosts many special screenings at locations like St Peter's Church (Pieterkerk) and the Rijksmuseum van Oudheden.
One of the most important aspects of the side programming is the Science & Cinema program, combining cinema with contributions from Leiden University.

Attendance, opening films and prize winners

Competition and Iron Herring Award winners






