[[Jules Maigret]]

CATEGORIES: BBC Television programmes, BBC Radio programmes, Fictional French police detectives, Georges Simenon, ITV television programmes, Mystery!

Jules Maigret (; titled Commissaire), Maigret to most people, including his wife, is a French fictional police detective—actually a commissaire or commissioner of the Paris "Brigade Criminelle" (Direction Régionale de Police Judiciaire de Paris)—created by writer Georges Simenon.
Seventy-five novels and twenty-eight short stories about Maigret were published between 1931 and 1972, starting with Pietr-le-Leton (Peter from Latvia) and concluding with Maigret et Monsieur Charles (Maigret and Mister Charles). The Maigret stories were also adapted for television and radio.

Character

Some of his trademark features are his pipes, his mixed approach to detecting (at times relying on pure intuition, at times on method), his laconic manner, and his fondness for alcohol. Often during an investigation, he will step into a small cafe or bar for a drink and possibly a light lunch. His drinks of choice are beer and white wine, though he has also been known to drink pastis, Armagnac, Cognac, Calvados, Pernod, and whisky, as well as grog, to name just a few. This is not to say that he is a drunk, as it is a matter of personal pride that he can hold his liquor, and would be deeply embarrassed if he allowed himself to become intoxicated. Maigret almost invariably wears his heavy overcoat, even when travelling to the Riviera — a fact which leads people unfamiliar with him to mark him instantly as a policeman.
In the books he is described as a stocky man of above-average height, slightly overweight but not obese. He dislikes climbing stairs, and usually uses a police driver or cab for travelling even comparatively short distances in his investigations, though he also occasionally walks. During rural adventures, such as Félicie est là, he was known to borrow bicycles.   Junior officers may be made to carry his attaché case.
Maigret was born at the fictional village of Saint-Fiacre in the Allier department, supposedly in 1884, although different birth years may be inferred from different books. His wife's given name is Louise, but she is almost exclusively referred to as Madame Maigret in the books. They had one child, a daughter who died at birth. Eileen Ellenbogen from Maigret et l'Homme du Banc (1953), p69. Without any living children of his own, Maigret nevertheless demonstrates fondness for children, treating them with kindness and patience, and often indulging them. In most of his books he and his wife live at the corner of Boulevard Richard-Lenoir and the Rue du Chemin Vert but in Maigret in Retirement, he is said to have retained his apartment on the Place des Vosges in the 4th arrondissement of Paris.
He is usually successful and generally confident in his police work, although he does encounter the occasional disappointment. He is most often portrayed as a mentor to his "pupil" sidekicks, usually junior Metropolitan officers or (when he is away from Paris) the local constabulary. Maigret is genuinely proud and happy when one of his junior officers meets with some professional success. The role of mindless puppet, contrasting with the brilliance of Maigret, is reserved for public prosecutors or more frequently a Juge d'instruction or Examining Magistrate.
While Maigret usually conducts his investigations in France, he has also been called upon to visit Belgium, Britain, Germany, Switzerland, the Netherlands, and the United States.

Television adaptations

There have been numerous incarnations of Maigret on the small screen all around the world.  He has been portrayed by French, British, Irish, Austrian, German, Italian, Dutch, Japanese and Russian actors.
In France, Jean Gabin played the part in three films and is seen by many as the best Maigret. Arguably, the most celebrated French version stars Bruno Cremer, who played him in 54 adaptations during 1991–2005. In the USA, this television series airs on Eurochannel.
The Italian actor Gino Cervi played the character on Italian television, starting from 1964 up to 1972; Simenon himself considered Cervi's interpretation of the character to be possibly the best.
In Soviet Union well known Russian theater actor Boris Tenin portrayed Maigret in a number of TV films in 1970s. In Soviet cinema apart from Boris Tenin, Maigret was portrayed by top famous cinema actors Vladimir Samoylov and Armen Dzigarkhanyan. 
In Japan, Kinya Aikawa played Megure, a Japanese-born equivalent to the French Maigret, reinvented in a modern Japanese setting, in Tōkyō Megure Keishi,Tôkyo Megure Keishi Japanese wiki page (Japanese) a 25-episode TV Series aired from 14 April to 29 May 1978 on Asahi TV. Megure's wife was played by Etsuko Ichihara, who earned the praises of Simenon himself: "The best 'Madame Maigret' in my opinion, even including the French ones, was the 'Madame Maigret' on Japanese television. She was exactly right".A picture of Kinya Aikawa as Maigret/Megure, and Simenon's quote from La Revue du Cinéma n° 454, November, 1989. Article retrieved on Trussel.com
The title role in the successful British Maigret TV series was played by the actor Rupert Davies who made his debut on 31 October 1960.  Davies took over the part after Basil Sydney, who appeared as Maigret in the original transmitted pilot, proved unavailable due to ill-health. Davies went on to star in 52 adaptations for BBC TV in the 1960s.  His portrayal won two of the highest accolades: his versions were dubbed into French and played across the Channel; and Simenon himself presented Davies with a novel inscribed to his "perfect Maigret".  The theme song to the TV series was performed by Joe Loss and released in the UK through the EMI Group on His Masters Voice (45-POP 995).
The British television channel ITV produced an adaptation of Maigret in 1992 and 1993, in which Sir Michael Gambon starred as Maigret.  A less successful earlier version (1988) on ITV cast Richard Harris in the lead role, with a somewhat idiosyncratic reading of the character.

Radio adaptations

Maurice Denham played Chief Inspector Maigret in a series of half-hour dramatizations of the novels on BBC Radio 4 from 1992 to 2002, with Michael Gough playing Georges Simenon.
The format of each play would begin with Maigret and Simenon sitting together discussing some fact or event which would then lead into Maigret's recounting a particular case, with Simenon asking questions or commenting from time to time.
After Denham's death, the series was continued in 2003 with Nicholas Le Prevost playing a gruffer, more earthy Maigret and Julian Barnes playing Simenon.

Other appearances

Inspector Joseph Meguire/Jozo Megure from Case Closed is loosely based on Maigret, in both appearance and name.  Both are police inspectors, and are known for wearing hats and overcoats.  The rendering in the Japanese syllabary for Megure and Maigret is the same (me-gu-re; in other words, the names are pronounced the same in Japanese).
Maigret himself was also highlighted in volume 5 of the Case Closed manga's edition of "Gosho Aoyama's Mystery Library, a section of the graphic novels (usually the last page) where the author introduces a different detective (or occasionally, a villain) from mystery literature, television, or other media.

List of novels

List of Maigret novels by date of French-language publication.

List of short stories

List of Maigret short stories by date of publication.






