[[Skipping a Beat]]

CATEGORIES: 2013 songs, 2013 singles, Jordin Sparks songs

"Skipping a Beat" is a song recorded by American recording artist Jordin Sparks. The mid tempo R&B/pop track was written by Cainon Lamb,  Rebecca Johnson & Taurian Osbourne, while the song's production was provided by Lamb. "Skipping A Beat" premiered online via Sparks' official SoundCloud page on August 1, 2013. It was released as a buzz single in preparation for the release of her first official single from her upcoming third studio album. The song was made available for digital download to all digital retailers in the United States on August 13, 2013 through RCA Records. "Skipping a Beat" debuted at number 28 on Ukraine FDR Charts.com.ua/compilation/P/598/

Background and release

On July 22 & 23, 2013 Sparks announced the release of a new singles via her official Twitter account with the hash tags #10DaysBeforeItBreaks & #9DaysBeforeMagic along with 6 second snippets of the songs.
In an interview, Jordin opined that "Skipping a Beat" was "older, but fun and happy and sexy at the same time." 
The single was released as a buzz single as a "taste for the new direction" Sparks' third album would be heading toward, as well as a prelude to the release of the album's first single "Before it Breaks" which will feature American R&B singer Jason Derulo.

Composition

"Skipping a Beat" is an mid tempo R&B and pop song that runs for a duration of three minutes and thirty-eight seconds. It was written by Cainon Lamb, Rebecca Johnson & Taurian Osbourne, while the song's production was provided by Lamb.  A writer from MTV describes the track as a "vaguely old-school '90s R&B track," which featured "ultra-romantic lyrics" over a "catchy humming hook,".
Lyrically, Sparks plays with music metaphors throughout, comparing switching up the tune on a song to falling in love. the song is a confession on Sparks' behalf admitting a special love for admittedly her boyfriend Jason Derulo and her strong feelings towards him which causes her heart to start skipping beats, while hoping for more in the future. The first verse introduces the concept of the song: " You make my heart skip like we're playing hopscotch/Hope I'm the one that you wanna put the rock on/Hey, hey, you make it stutter/Hey, hey, think I love ya/Boy I think I'm gonna need an ambulance/Cause you been doing my heart some damage/But I like it, oh you're so exciting.

Critical reception

Following its release, "Skipping a Beat" was well received by most music critics. Mike Wass of Idolator called the track "an infectious mid-tempo pop song with urban roots" comparing it to Ariana Grande's hit single The Way "with an edge", and added that the track "seems to be an ode to her man. "You're my lover, you're my friend, you're my gangsta," she purrs over tinny synths and piano. It takes a couple of listens but the multitude of hooks pull you in and before you're singing along. Always the sign of a great pop song". John Geraghty of Billboard wrote " With its breezy R&B vibe, the mid-tempo song is essentially the polar opposite" of Sparks' 2011 single "I Am Woman" which was originally planned to lead her third album. Jenna Hally Rubenstein of MTV Buzzworthy called it a "vaguely old-school '90s R&B track" and called Sparks' "Battlefield" one of their favorite songs of 2009 & 2010 "so anything post-"Battefield" is gonna have to work very hard to win our approval... While we totally appreciate the ultra-romantic lyrics and that catchy "humming" hook, we're not entirely convinced that this is Jordin's most progressive offering to date.

Track listing

Radio and release history




