[[Barry Popkin]]

CATEGORIES: Living people, People from Superior, Wisconsin, Researchers, Cornell University alumni, University of Wisconsin&ndash;Madison alumni, University of Wisconsin&ndash;Madison faculty, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill faculty, American food scientists, 1944 births, ISI highly cited researchers

Barry Michael Popkin is an obesity researcher and the W.R. Kenan Jr. Distinguished Professor of Nutrition (as well as Carla Smith Chamblee Distinguished Professor of Global Nutrition) at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Public Health, where he is the director of the Interdisciplinary Center for Obesity. He developed the concept of "nutrition transition". He is the author of over 340 scientific studies and a book, "The World is Fat," published in 2009 by Avery Publishing. Popkin at the UNC Website

Early life and education

Popkin was born in 1944 and grew up in Superior, Wisconsin; neither of his parents had a college education. Popkin describes the food he ate in Superior as "..." He attended the University of Wisconsin, graduating in 1967, after which he spent one year doing graduate work at the University of Pennsylvania. In 1968, he returned to the University of Wisconsin, and received his MS from there one year later. In 1974, he received his PhD in agricultural economics from Cornell University.

Career

From 1971 to 1972 Popkin worked as a research economist at the Institute for Research in Poverty at the University of Wisconsin. From 1974 to 1976 Popkin was a visiting associate professor with the Rockefeller Foundation in Manila, Philippines. He joined UNC-Chapel Hill's faculty in 1977 and became the W.R. Kenan Jr. Distinguished Professor of Nutrition there in 2011.Popkin named Kenan Professor

Research and views

Popkin was a co-author on a widely cited 2004 paper in the American Journal of Clinical Nutrition which argued that high fructose corn syrup-containing beverages may uniquely contribute to obesity.

Nutrition Transition

The concept of nutrition transition, referring to the changes in diet in the Western world from high-fiber diets to those based on more processed foods containing more fat and sugar, was first proposed by Popkin in 1993. Since he proposed the concept, Popkin has published studies about the nutrition transition and its effects in the developing world,






