[[Dimitri Logothetis]]

CATEGORIES: American film directors, American film producers, American screenwriters

'''
Dimitri Logothetis is an award winning actor, director, and producer.

Early life

Dimitri Logothetis was born in Greece, though he immigrated to the United States at the age of six with his mother, Anna, and his father, Euthymios. During World War II, after the Nazis invaded Greece, Dimitri's father was captured and was sent to a work camp in Berlin. His father remained there for the final three years of World War II. After moving to the United States to join his family, Dimitri's father spent eight years working as a mechanic in Los Angeles before he received his American citizenship.
Logothetis attended Beverly Vista Grammar School and Lawndale High School in the Los Angeles South bay where he played football and did some track running. In 1975, Logothetis received a black belt in Tang Soo Do from world champion martial arts Master Howard Jackson. He then went on to study kempo from master Ed Parker, who trained Elvis Presley and Chuck Norris. Logothetis received his black belt in Kempo in 1978.

Career

Logothetis succeeded very quickly as an actor, and appeared in films including New York, New York with Liza Minnelli and Robert De Niro, as well as David Wolper's Victory at Entebbe, and Robert Aldrich's The Choirboys. While working on New York, New York, it was Martin Scorsese who suggested to Logothetis that he should attend film school because of his skillful storytelling. He won a scholarship and attended Loyola Marymount University film school where he received a Master of Arts in film and television directing. There Logothetis adapted a Woody Allen short story, Mr. Big, and made it his thesis short film entitled Call Me Kaiser which he directed, produced and starred in. This film won Logothetis numerous national and international film awards including the Athens, Ohio International Film Festival and in 1979 the award for "Best Short Film" at the Samuel Z. Arkoff film festival, which was handed to him by Roger Corman.
In his last year at Loyola, Logothetis was hired by Capitol Records to direct a documentary of the US tour of the rock band The Knack. He was then hired by Columbia Pictures to produce his first film, Hardbodies 2. In 1987 Logothetis was set to direct his first feature film for New World Pictures, Pretty Smart in which Patricia Arquette made her film debut. By this time he was ready to develop a horror film, Slaughterhouse Rock for United Artists. In 1989 Logothetis decided to explore a different storytelling medium and developed a documentary on five heavyweight boxers who dominated the sport in their time. He directed Champions Forever with Muhammed Ali and Joe Frazier. Danny Aiello then came to Logothetis with a stage play Wheel Barrel Closers which Logothetis adapted for the screen, and directed The Closer, starring Aiello, Diane Baker and Michael Pare. He then acquired the rights to an original Stephen King script written specifically for the screen, and produced Sleepwalkers for Columbia Pictures. In 1994 Logothetis directed and produced Body Shot
He continued his directing career by getting on rotation and directing Mike Hammer
In 2010 Logothetis became a shareholder of and the President of Production of Kings Road Entertainment,Des Lauriers Communications | Past And Future Both Alive At Kings Road Entertainment. Newswire. Retrieved on 2013-09-11. which made such notable films as "The Best of Times" with Robin Williams, "Kickboxer" with Jeann Claude Van Damm, and "All Of Me" with Steve Martin. Logothetis then re-developed, and wrote a series called "The OutfitMcNary, Dave. (2010-10-14) Ted Field teams with pair on Chicago mob story. Variety. Retrieved on 2013-09-11. " based on infamous Chicago mob boss Sam Giancana, that he set up with Radar Pictures and producer Ted Field. He then set up a remake of "All of Me" with John Davis and Dreamworks, which he is set to produce.
Logothetis, along with his project partner Nick Celozzi made a documentary, which Logothetis wrote, produced and directed, on Sam Giancana entitled "Momo" The Sam Giancana Story, which won The 2013 Monaco Film festival, "Best Feature Documentary" with Ted Field and Radar Pictures.






