[[Ferdinand I of Bulgaria]]

CATEGORIES: 19th-century Bulgarian monarchs, 20th-century Bulgarian monarchs, Governors-General of Eastern Rumelia, Converts to Eastern Orthodoxy from Roman Catholicism, Field Marshals of Germany, Kohary family, Bisexual royalty, House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Bulgaria), 1861 births, 1948 deaths, Princes of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, People from Vienna, LGBT people from Bulgaria, Bisexual men, Bulgarian people of the Balkan Wars, Bulgarian people of World War I, Orthodox monarchs, Grand Crosses of the Order of Saints Cyril and Methodius (1909-1944), Recipients of the Order of Bravery, Recipients of the Order of St Alexander, Grand Master of the Order of Military Merit (Bulgaria), Knights of the Golden Fleece, Grand Crosses of the Military Order of Max Joseph, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary, Knights of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, Knights Grand Cross of the Military Order of Maria Theresa, Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Recipients of the Order of the Black Eagle, Knights of the Royal Order of the Seraphim, Recipients of the Order of St. Andrew, Recipients of the Order of St. Vladimir, 1st class, Order of St. Alexander Nevsky recipients, Recipients of the Order of St. Anna, 1st class, Recipients of the Order of the White Eagle (Russia), Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George, Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (military class), Grand Officiers of the Légion d'honneur, Recipients of the Iron Cross (1914), Recipients of the Iron Cross, 1st class, Recipients of the Military Merit Cross (Austria-Hungary), 3rd class, LGBT heads of government

Ferdinand I (26 February 1861 – 10 September 1948),Louda, 1981, Lines of Succession, Table 149 born Ferdinand Maximilian Karl Leopold Maria of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, was the ruler of Bulgaria from 1887 to 1918, first as knyaz (prince regnant, 1887–1908) and later as tsar (1908–1918). He was also an author, botanist, entomologist and philatelist.

Family background

Ferdinand was born in Vienna, a prince of the Koháry branch of the ducal family of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha. He grew up in the cosmopolitan environment of Austro-Hungarian high nobility and also in their ancestral lands in Slovakia and in Germany. The Koháry descended from an immensely wealthy Upper Hungarian (now Slovakian) noble family, who held the princely lands of Čabraď and Sitno in Slovakia, among others. The family's property was augmented by Clémentine of Orléans' remarkable dowry.
The son of Prince August of Saxe-Coburg and his wife Clémentine of Orléans, daughter of king Louis Philippe I of the French, Ferdinand was a grandnephew of Ernest I, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha and of Leopold I, first king of the Belgians. His father Augustus was a brother of Ferdinand II of Portugal, and also a first cousin to Queen Victoria, her husband Albert, Prince Consort, Empress Carlota of Mexico and her brother Leopold II of Belgium. These last two, Leopold and Carlota, were also first cousins of Ferdinand I's through his mother, a princess of Orléans. This made the Belgian siblings his first cousins, as well as his first cousins once removed (his father's first cousins). Indeed, the ducal family of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha had contrived to occupy, either by marriage or by direct election, several European thrones in the course of the 19th century. Following the family trend, Ferdinand was himself to found the royal dynasty of Bulgaria.

Prince of Bulgaria

The first Knyaz (Prince Regnant) of the Third Bulgarian State, Alexander of Battenberg, abdicated in 1886, only seven years after he was elected. In desperate attempts to prevent Russian occupation of Bulgaria, the throne had been previously offered, before Ferdinand's acceptance, to princes from Denmark to the Caucasus and even to the King of Romania.Louda, 1981, Lines of Succession, p 297
His accession was greeted with disbelief in many of the royal houses of Europe. Queen Victoria, his father's first cousin,  stated to her Prime Minister, "He is totally unfit ... delicate, eccentric and effeminate ... Should be stopped at once."Aronson, 1986, Crowns In Conflict, p 83 To the amazement of his initial detractors, Ferdinand generally made a success during the first two decades of his reign.
Bulgaria's domestic political life was dominated during the early years of Ferdinand's reign by liberal party leader Stefan Stambolov, whose foreign policy saw a marked cooling in relations with Russia, formerly seen as Bulgaria's protector.
Stambolov's fall (May 1894) and subsequent assassination (July 1895) paved the way for a reconciliation of Bulgaria with Russia, effected in February 1896 with the conversion of the infant Prince Boris from Roman Catholicism to Eastern Orthodox Christianity. However, this move earned him the animosity of his Catholic Austrian relatives, particularly that of his uncle, Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria.

Tsar of Bulgaria

On 5 October 1908 (celebrated on 22 September), Ferdinand proclaimed Bulgaria's de jure independence from the Ottoman Empire (though the country had been basically independent since 1878).  He also elevated Bulgaria to the status of a kingdom, and proclaimed himself tsar, or king. The Bulgarian Declaration of Independence was proclaimed by him at the Saint Forty Martyrs Church in Turnovo. It was accepted by Turkey and the other European powers.
Ferdinand was known for being quite a character. On a visit to German Emperor Wilhelm II, his second cousin once removed, in 1909, Ferdinand was leaning out of a window of the New Palace in Potsdam when the Emperor came up behind him and slapped him on the bottom. Ferdinand was affronted by the gesture and the Emperor apologised. Ferdinand however exacted his revenge by awarding a valuable arms contract he had intended to give to the Krupp's factory in Essen to French arms manufacturer Schneider-Creusot. A tussle broke out over where his private railway carriage would be positioned in relation to the heir to the Austro-Hungarian throne, Archduke Franz Ferdinand. The Archduke won out, having his carriage positioned directly behind the engine. Ferdinand's was placed directly behind. Realising the dining car of the train was behind his own carriage, Ferdinand obtained his revenge on the Archduke by refusing him entry through his own carriage to the dining car.

Balkan Wars

Like many other rulers before him, Ferdinand desired the creation of a "new Byzantium". He saw this war as a new crusade declaring it, "a just, great and sacred struggle of the Cross against the Crescent."Aronson, 1986, Crowns In Conflict, p 87 Bulgaria contributed the most and also lost the greatest number of soldiers. The great powers insisted on the creation of an independent Albania. Soon after, Bulgaria invaded its recent allies Serbia and Greece, before being attacked itself by Romania and the Ottoman Empire. Although Bulgaria was defeated, the 1913 Treaty of Bucharest granted the Kingdom some territorial gains. A tiny area of land giving access to the Aegean Sea was secured.

First World War and abdication

On 11 October 1915, the Bulgarian army attacked Serbia after signing a treaty with Austria-Hungary and Germany stating that Bulgaria would gain the territory it sought at the expense of Serbia. Ferdinand was not an admirer of German Emperor Wilhelm II (his second cousin once removed) or Austrian Emperor Franz Josef I whom he described as "that idiot, that old dotard of a Francis Joseph". This also entailed forming an alliance with his former enemy, the Ottoman Empire.
During the initial phase of World War I, the Kingdom of Bulgaria achieved several decisive victories over its enemies and laid claim to the disputed territories of Macedonia after Serbia's defeat. For the next two years, the Bulgarian army shifted its focus towards repelling Allied advances from nearby Greece. They were also partially involved in the 1916 conquest of neighboring Romania, now ruled by another Ferdinand I, who was also Ferdinand's second cousin once removed.
Tsar Ferdinand abdicated to save the Bulgarian throne in favour of his eldest son who became Tsar Boris III on 3 October 1918.

Personal life

Ferdinand entered a marriage of convenienceConstant, 1986, ''Foxy Ferdinand'', p 143 with Princess Marie Louise of Bourbon-Parma, daughter of Robert I, Duke of Parma and Princess Maria Pia of Bourbon-Two Sicilies, on 20 April 1893 at the Villa Pianore in Lucca. The marriage produced four children:
Marie Louise died on 31 January 1899 after giving birth to her youngest daughter. Ferdinand did not think again about marriage until his mother, Princess Clémentine died in 1907. To satisfy dynastic obligations and to provide his children with a mother figure, Ferdinand married Eleonore Reuss of Köstritz, on 28 February 1908.Stéphane Groueff, ''Crown of Thorns: The Reign of King Boris III of Bulgaria, 1918-1943'', Madison Books, 1998
In his private relations, Ferdinand was a somewhat hedonistic individual. He was  thought to be bisexual throughout his life, but up to middle age, his inclination was more towards women,Constant, 1986, ''Foxy Ferdinand'', p 96 and he enjoyed affairs with a number of women of humble position, siring a number of illegitimate children whom he then supported financially.
But rumours abounded of homosexual trysts with blue-eyed lieutenants and valets. Ferdinand's regular holidays on Capri, then a famous haunt for wealthy gay men, were common knowledge in royal courts throughout Europe.Duncan Perry, ''Stefan Stambolov and the Emergence of Modern Bulgaria: 1870-1895'', Duke University, 1993

Exile and death

After his abdication, Ferdinand returned to live in Coburg, Germany. He had managed to salvage much of his fortune and was able to live in some style. He commented, "Kings in exile are more philosophic under reverses than ordinary individuals; but our philosophy is primarily the result of tradition and breeding, and do not forget that pride is an important item in the making of a monarch. We are disciplined from the day of our birth and taught the avoidance of all outward signs of emotion. The skeleton sits forever with us at the feast. It may mean murder, it may mean abdication, but it serves always to remind us of the unexpected. Therefore we are prepared and nothing comes in the nature of a catastrophe. The main thing in life is to support any condition of bodily or spiritual exile with dignity. If one sups with sorrow, one need not invite the world to see you eat."Aronson, 1986, Crowns In Conflict, p 175 He was pleased that the throne could pass to his son. Ferdinand was not displeased with exile and spent most of his time devoted to artistic endeavors, gardening, travel and natural history. However, he would live to see the collapse of everything he had held to be precious in life. His eldest son and successor, Boris III, died under mysterious circumstances after returning from a visit to Hitler in Germany in 1943. Boris III's son, Simeon II, succeeded him only to be deposed in 1946, ending the Bulgarian monarchy. The Kingdom of Bulgaria was succeeded by the People's Republic of Bulgaria, under which his sole surviving son, Kyril, was executed. On hearing of his son's death he said, "Everything is collapsing around me."Aronson, 1986, Crowns In Conflict, p 202  He died a broken man in Bürglaß-Schlösschen on 10 September 1948 in Coburg, Germany, cradle of the Saxe-Coburg-Gotha dynasty.  His final wish was to be buried in Bulgaria, and for this reason his coffin was temporarily placed in the crypt of St. Augustin, Coburg, next to his parents' coffins. It can still be found there today.

Ancestors

Decorations and awards

Grand Master of the following Bulgarian Orders:
Also a member of the following foreign orders:





Books

  | last = Aronson
  | first = Theo
  | authorlink = Theo Aronson
  | title = Crowns In Conflict: The Triumph And The Tragedy Of European Monarchy, 1910–1918
