[[Wiska]]

CATEGORIES: Ukrainian female pornographic film actors, Belarusian female pornographic film actors, Ukrainian immigrants to the Czech Republic, Czech pornography, People from Feodosiya, Living people, 1985 births, Teenage pregnancy, Russian pornography

Anastasiya Pavlovna Hagen, née Gryshai ((

Early life

Anastasiya Gryshai was born on 17 October 1985 in Gomel (then Soviet Union) but was raised and spent most of her life in Feodosiya (Crimea, Ukraine). She married Oleksandr (a then 33 years-old local businessman) in 2001 and gave birth to their first child, son Oleksandr Jr., before finishing school. Anastasiya admits that her husband introduced her to swinging sex (which she didn't enjoy) and amateur pornography.
In 2003, Anastasiya's husband Oleksandr was convicted and imprisoned for 8 years for an alleged vehicle arson. The couple states that imprisonment was result of a business dispute and the reason for Anastasiya's out-of-need family-supporting porn career.

Pornography career

It was her husband who initiated Anastasiya's successful start as a nude model, particularly for the Penthouse and MET-Art, and later as a hardcore pornography actress.
In 2004, Anastasiya participated in her first professional porn video scene in Saint Petersburg (Russia), where pornography production was briefly declared legal. Since then, she participated in dozens of videos, particularly for the Anabolic, Combat Zone, Devil's Film, Evil Angel, New Sensations, Sineplex and Woodman Entertainment, until at least 2012.
It is unclear if Anastasiya, a resident and citizen of Ukraine, has ever been engaged in a pornographic production or any other adult entertainment event on Ukraine's territory. She claims she hasn't.[ref]
 at least some of Anastasiya's shooting was arranged by a Czech adult modeling agency "Pavla" which operates exclusively in Prague.pavlamodels.com/

Persecution and asylum seeking

Circa 2007, Wiska's identity was revealed in Ukraine after a family interview for one of the local tabloids, which attracted journalistic interest and launched her as a national celebrity posing for mainstream media.
In 2010, Ukrainian authorities began recurring persecution of Anastasiya's family on the legal grounds of first a child abuse (including forensic examination of her children for possible sexual assault).Украинская порнозвезда Анастасия ГРИШАЙ (WISKA): «Те, кто проверял нашу семью, собирались провести медицинский осмотр моих детей — двухлетнего Оскара и восьмилетнего Саши — на наличие следов полового акта. Ужас! Психологическая травма на всю жизнь!» Later, when pornography production in the country became illegal, Anastasiya was investigated on this allegation, with her home searched, as well.
The persecution was initiated by a prominent Communist member of parliament representing Crimea.
FEMEN protest movement staged a highly publicized public event in Anastasiya's support which included her interviews and topless posing in traditional FEMEN entourage.
In 2010, Anastasiya and her family moved to the Czech Republic and applied for an asylum while she was pregnant with her third child.
As of August 2013, the family was denied asylum,Чехія остаточно відмовила колишній порноакторці Wiska в статусі біженки 





News publications

Porn industry dossiers



