[[Sin offering]]

CATEGORIES: Jewish animal sacrifice, Jewish sacrificial law, Twenty-four priestly gifts

A sin offering ( korban khatta'at) is a biblical sacrifice offered to achieve  atonement for the committing of an unintentional sin.Maimonides, Mishnah Torah, Laws of Unintentional Sins (Shegogot)1:1

Etymology

The Hebrew noun hatta'at "sin" comes from the verb hata' (חָטָא) "to sin." The first use is in the sentence "sin lies at your door" to Cain in Genesis 4. The noun hata'at can mean "sin," or also by metonymy in phrases such as "the bullock... it is sin," or "a bullock for a sin, for atonement," it can also stand for sin offering. The high priest was instructed to "lay his hand upon the head of the sin (rosh ha-khatta't רֹאשׁ הַֽחַטָּאת), and slay the sin in the place of the burnt offering" (Leviticus 4:29). To avoid confusion the more explanatory term korban khatta'at "a sacrifice of sin" (Hebrew: קרבן חטאת ) is found in rabbinical commentaries.Brown Driver Briggs Hebrew Lexicon entry hatta'at
In the Septuagint the Hebrew term "sin" is sometimes directly translated as "sin" - either by the Greek feminine noun hamartia ("sin" ἁμαρτία), or less commonly by the neuter noun hamartemata ("result of sin," "sinful thing" ἁμάρτημα) thereby duplicating the metonymy in the Hebrew text. More often the Greek paraphrases the Hebrew with expressions such as "that which is for sin" (peri hamartias περὶ ἁμαρτίας) or "for sins" (hyper hamartion ὑπὲρ ἁμαρτιῶν)- since the Greek noun hamartia does not have the double meaning of the noun khatta'at in Hebrew.Bauer Greek Lexicon, entry hamartia

In the Hebrew Bible

The sacrificial animal for sin offerings depended on the status of the sinner offering the sacrifice; 
Like all types of sacrifices offered on the altar, the animal had to be completely unblemished.
Apart from such general offerings for an unintended sin, the offering was also made on the following:

Ritual

The ritual of the sin offering began with the offerer confessing his/her unintentional sin while placing his/her hands and pushing his/her full weight over the head of the animal. In the case of community offerings the elders performed this function, in the case of Yom Kippur, the high priest performs this task. The animal would then be slaughtered by a ritual butcher, the blood carefully collected by the priest in an earthen vessel and sprayed/thrown on the two outer corners of the altar, while the fat, liver, kidneys, and caul, were burnt on the roof of the altar.
On the Day of Atonement, some of the blood would be sprinkled in front of the veil covering the entrance to the Holy of Holies when the blood would be sprinkled in front of the mercy seat; this was done seven times. The remainder of the blood was poured out at the base of the altar, and the earthen vessel that had contained it would be smashed.
the remaining flesh of the animal (in later rabbinical interpretation as one of the twenty four priestly gifts) was later consumed by the priest and his family, except when the priest himself was the offerer (such as in community offerings, and in the case of the Day of Atonement), when it would be burnt outside the sanctuary.
When the sacrificial animal was a bird, however, the ritual was quite different. The bird was slaughtered by a thumb being pushed into its neck, and the head being wrung off. A second bird would then be burnt on the altar as a whole sacrifice, completely immolated by fire.

Textual criticism

According to 19th century textual scholars these rules originate from two different layers in the priestly source, thought by scholars to be one of the source texts of the Torah; the priestly code within the priestly source is believed to be a series of additions to the text, from Aaronid editors, over a long period.Jewish Encyclopedia, sin offering In the Book of Hosea, a reference to the earlier form (Hosea 4:7-8) suggests a possible reason for the change - the priests were accused of rejoicing in the people's wickedness as they were living off the sin offerings.
The other sin offerings are considered by scholars to be gradual developments; from being offered after contact with unclean animals, which is more of a taboo, to being offered for ritual uncleanliness in general, and finally to being offered for arbitrary sins. The gradations, according to which the type of sacrificial animal depends on the social status of the sinner, are considered by textual scholars to also be a later development.Jewish Encyclopedia, Leviticus




