[[Invasion of the Body Snatchers]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 films, 1950s science fiction films, American films, American science fiction horror films, Apocalyptic films, Black-and-white films, Body Snatchers films, English-language films, Films directed by Don Siegel, Films set in California, United States National Film Registry films, Works about McCarthyism, Alien invasions in films

Invasion of the Body Snatchers is a 1956 American black-and-white science fiction film directed by Don Siegel, starring Kevin McCarthy and Dana Wynter, that was released through Allied Artists Picture Corporation. Daniel Mainwaring adapted the screenplay from Jack Finney's 1954 novel The Body Snatchers. Keep Watching The Skies Vol I: 1950 - 1957, McFarland & Co., 1982. ISBN 0-89950-032-3.
The story depicts an extraterrestrial invasion of a small California town. The invaders replace human beings with duplicates that appear identical on the surface but are devoid of emotion or individuality. A local doctor uncovers what is happening and tries to stop them. Keep Watching The Skies Vol I: 1950 - 1957, McFarland & Co., 1982. ISBN 0-89950-032-3.
In 1994 Invasion of the Body Snatchers was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."

Plot summary

Psychiatrist Dr. Hill is called to the emergency ward of a hospital, where a screaming man is held in custody. Dr. Hill agrees to listen to his story. The man identifies himself as Dr. Miles Bennell, and recounts, in flashback, the events leading to his arrest and arrival at the ward:
In the town of Santa Mira, California, Miles Bennell, a local doctor, sees a number of patients who believe their loved ones have been replaced by impostors. Another patient is his former girlfriend, recently divorced Becky Driscoll. Becky tells him that her cousin Wilma has the same fear about her Uncle Ira. Dr. Dan Kauffman, a psychiatrist in the town, assures Bennell that these cases are merely "epidemic mass hysteria."
That same evening Bennell's friend Jack Belicec finds a body with his facial features, though it's not fully developed; the next body found is a copy of Becky in the cellar of her home. When Bennell calls Kauffman to the scene, the bodies have mysteriously disappeared and Kauffman suspects Bennell of falling for the same hysteria. The following night, Bennell, Becky, Jack, and Jack's wife Teddy again find duplicates of themselves, emerging from large seed pods; they conclude that the townspeople are being replaced while asleep by exact physical copies. Miles tries to make a long distance call for help from federal authorities, but the phone operator claims that all long-distance lines are busy; Jack and Teddy drive off to seek help in the next town. Bennell and Becky discover that most inhabitants have been replaced and are devoid of any humanity; they flee to Bennell's office to hide for the night.
The next morning, they see truckloads of the large pods heading to neighboring towns, to be used to replace their populations. Kauffman and Jack, both of whom have become "pod people," arrive at Bennell's office and reveal that an extraterrestrial life form is responsible for the invasion. After their takeover, they explain, life loses its frustrating complexity because all emotions and sense of individuality vanish. Bennell and Becky manage to escape and hide in a mine outside of town. Bennell later comes upon a nearby farm and discovers more large seed pods growing by the hundreds. While he is gone, Becky falls asleep and is transformed into one of them; when he returns she calls to the pursuing "pod people." Bennell, now panicking, runs and eventually finds himself on a crowded highway, frantically screaming to passing motorists, "They're here already! You're next! You're next!"
The flashback ends as Bennell finishes this story. Dr. Hill and the on-duty doctor doubt his account until an injured truck driver, involved in a highway accident, is brought into the emergency room; he was found in his wrecked truck buried under a load of giant seed pods. Both doctors realize that Bennell's story is true, and immediately call the Federal authorities.

Cast

Novel and screenplay

Jack Finney's novel ends with the extraterrestrials finally leaving Earth after they find that humans are offering strong resistance, despite having little reasonable chance against the alien invasion; the "pod people" have a life span of no more than 5 years, so 5 years after taking over the last human being, the invaders would then have to seek out a new world with new life forms as hosts, leaving behind a depopulated Earth. Keep Watching The Skies Vol I: 1950 - 1957, McFarland & Co., 1982. ISBN 0-89950-032-3.

Production

Budgeting and casting

Invasion of the Body Snatchers was originally scheduled for a 24-day shoot and a budget of USD $454,864. The studio later asked Wanger to cut the budget significantly. The producer proposed a shooting schedule of 20 days and a budget of $350,000.
Initially, Wanger considered Gig Young, Dick Powell, Joseph Cotten and several others for the role of Miles. For Becky he considered casting Anne Bancroft, Donna Reed, Kim Hunter, Vera Miles and others. With the lower budget, however, he abandoned these choices and cast Richard Kiley, who had just starred in The Phenix City Story for Allied Artists. Kiley turned the role down and Wanger cast two relative newcomers in the lead roles: Kevin McCarthy, who had just starred in Siegel's An Annapolis Story, and Dana Wynter, who had done several major dramatic roles on television. 25-26.
Sam Peckinpah had a small part as Charlie, a meter reader. Peckinpah was a dialogue coach on five Siegel films in the mid-1950s, including this one.

Principal photography

Originally producer Wanger and Siegel wanted to film Invasion of the Body Snatchers on location in the town that Jack Finney described in his novel: Mill Valley, just north of San Francisco. In the first week of January 1955, Siegel, Wanger and screenwriter Daniel Mainwaring visited Finney to talk about the film version and to look at Mill Valley. The location proved too expensive and Siegel with Allied Artist executives found locations resembling Mill Valley in Sierra Madre, Chatsworth, Glendale, the Los Feliz neighborhood and in Bronson and Beachwood Canyons - all of which would make up the town of "Santa Mira" for the film. In addition to these outdoor locations, much of the film was shot in the Allied Artists studio on the east side of Hollywood. Keep Watching The Skies Vol I: 1950 - 1957, McFarland & Co., 1982. ISBN 0-89950-032-3.
The film was shot by cinematographer Ellsworth Fredericks in 23 days between March 23 and April 18, 1955. The cast and crew worked a six-day week with Sundays off. The production went over schedule by three days because of night-for-night shooting that Siegel wanted. Additional photography took place in September 1955, filming a frame story the studio insisted on (see Original intended ending). The final budget was $382,190. Keep Watching The Skies Vol I: 1950 - 1957, McFarland & Co., 1982. ISBN 0-89950-032-3.

Post-production

The project was originally named The Body Snatchers after the Finney serial. However, Wanger wanted to avoid confusion with the 1945 Val Lewton film The Body Snatcher. The producer was unable to come up with a title and accepted the studio's choice, They Come from Another World and that was assigned in summer 1955. Siegel objected to this title and suggested two alternatives, Better Off Dead and Sleep No More, while Wanger offered Evil in the Night and World in Danger. None of these were chosen, and the studio settled on Invasion of the Body Snatchers in late 1955. The film was released at the time in France under the mistranslated title "L'invasion des profanateurs de sépultures" (literally: Invasion of the defilers of tombs), which remains unchanged today.
Wanger wanted to add a variety of speeches and prefaces. He suggested a voice-over introduction for Miles. 126. While the film was being shot, Wanger tried to get permission in England to use a Winston Churchill quotation as a preface to the film. The producer sought out Orson Welles to voice the preface and a trailer for the film. He wrote speeches for Welles' opening on June 15, 1955, and worked to persuade Welles to do it, but was unsuccessful. Wanger considered science fiction author Ray Bradbury instead, but this did not happen, either. Mainwaring eventually wrote the voice-over narration himself.
The studio scheduled three film previews on the last days of June and the first day of July 1955. According to Wanger's memos at the time, the previews were successful. Later reports by Mainwaring and Siegel, however, contradict this, claiming that audiences could not follow the film and laughed in the wrong places. In response the studio removed much of the film's humor, "humanity" and "quality," according to Wanger. He scheduled another preview in mid-August that also did not go well. In later interviews Siegel pointed out that it was studio policy not to mix humor with horror.
Wanger saw the final cut in December 1955 and protested the use of the Superscope aspect ratio. Its use had been included in early plans for the film, but the first print was not made until December. Wanger felt that the film lost sharpness and detail. Siegel originally shot Invasion of the Body Snatchers in the 1.85:1 aspect ratio. Superscope was a post-production lab process designed to create an anamorphic print from non-anamorphic source material that would be projected at an aspect ratio of 2.00:1.com.

Original intended ending 

Both Siegel and Mainwaring were satisfied with the film as shot. It was originally meant to end with Miles screaming as truckloads of pods pass him by. 125. The studio, wary of a pessimistic conclusion, insisted on adding a prologue and epilogue to the movie suggesting a more optimistic outcome to the story, which is thus told mainly in flashback. In this version the movie begins with a ranting Bennell in custody in a hospital emergency ward. He then tells an arriving doctor (Whit Bissell) his story. In the closing scene pods are found at a highway accident, confirming his warning. The Federal Bureau of Investigation is notified, though it remained ambiguous whether they intervene in time to save the Earth. Keep Watching The Skies Vol I: 1950 - 1957, McFarland & Co., 1982. ISBN 0-89950-032-3.
Mainwaring scripted this framing story and Siegel shot it on September 16, 1955, at the Allied Artists studio. In a later interview Siegel complained, "The film was nearly ruined by those in charge at Allied Artists who added a preface and ending that I don't like."Alan Lovell: Don Siegel. American Cinema, London 1975. In his autobiography Siegel added that "Wanger was very much against this, as was I. However, he begged me to shoot it to protect the film, and I reluctantly consented …". An Autobiography, Faber and Faber, London/Boston 1993.
While the Internet Movie Database states that the film's original ending had been reinstated for a re-release in 1979,Info on Invasion of the Body Snatchers' alternate versions on IMDB.Review by Steve Biodrowski on Cinefantastiqueonline.com
Though disapproved of by most reviewers, George Turner (in American Cinematographer) and Danny Peary (in Cult Movies)Danny Peary: Cult Movies, Dell Publishing, New York 1981. endorsed the subsequently added frame story. Nonetheless, Peary emphasized that the added scenes changed significantly what he saw as the film's original intention (see Themes).

Theatrical release

When the film was released domestically in February 1956, many theaters displayed several pods (made of papermache) in theater lobbies and entrances, along with large lifelike black and white cutouts of McCarthy and Wynter running away from a crowd. The film made more than $1 million in the first month, and in 1956 alone made more than $2.5 million in the U.S. Keep Watching The Skies Vol I: 1950 - 1957, McFarland & Co., 1982. ISBN 0-89950-032-3. When the British release (with cuts imposed by the British censorsInvasion of the Body Snatchers on the BBFC website.) took place in late 1956, the film earned more than a half million dollars in ticket sales. 26.

Themes 

Some reviewers saw in the story a commentary on the dangers facing America for turning a blind eye to McCarthyism,Leonard Maltin speaks of a "McCarthy-era subtext" – Leonard Maltin's 2008 Movie Guide, Signet/New American Library, New York, 2007. or of bland conformity in postwar Eisenhower-era America. Others viewed it as an allegory for the loss of personal autonomy in the Soviet Union or communist systems in general."… it is the quintessential Fifties image of socialism." – Noel Carroll, Soho News, Dec. 21, 1978. For the BBC, David Wood summarized the circulating popular interpretations of the film as follows: "The sense of post-war, anti-communist paranoia is acute, as is the temptation to view the film as a metaphor for the tyranny of the McCarthy era." Danny Peary in Cult Movies pointed out that the addition of the framing story had changed the film's stance from anti-McCarthyite to anti-communist.
In W. S. Poole's Monsters in America the film is argued to be an indictment of the damage to the human personality caused by reductionist modern ideologies both of the Right and the Left. Scott. Monsters in America: Our Historical Obsession with the Hideous and the Haunting. Waco, Texas: Baylor, 2011. ISBN 978-1-60258-314-6. In An Illustrated History of the Horror Film, Carlos Clarens saw a trend manifesting itself in Science Fiction films, dealing with dehumanization and fear of the loss of individual identity, being historically connected to the end of "the Korean War and the well publicized reports of brainwashing techniques". Comparing Invasion of the Body Snatchers with Robert Aldrich's Kiss Me Deadly and Orson Welles' Touch of Evil, Brian Neve found a sense of disillusionment rather than straightforward messages, with all three films being "less radical in any positive sense than reflective of the decline of screenwriters' great liberal hopes". A social tradition, Routledge, Oxon, 1992.
Despite a general agreement among film critics regarding these political connotations of the film, actor Kevin McCarthy said in an interview included on the 1998 DVD release that he felt no political allegory was intended. The interviewer stated that he had spoken with the author of the novel, Jack Finney, who professed no specific political allegory in the work.[ref]
DVD commentary track, quoted in:

</ref>
In his autobiography, I Thought We Were Making Movies, Not History, Walter Mirisch writes: "People began to read meanings into pictures that were never intended. The Invasion of the Body Snatchers is an example of that. I remember reading a magazine article arguing that the picture was intended as an allegory about the communist infiltration of America. From personal knowledge, neither Walter Wanger nor Don Siegel, who directed it, nor Dan Mainwaring, who wrote the script nor original author Jack Finney, nor myself saw it as anything other than a thriller, pure and simple."[ref]
</ref>
Don Siegel spoke more openly of an existing allegorical subtext, but denied a strictly political point of view: "… I felt that this was a very important story. I think that the world is populated by pods and I wanted to show them. I think so many people have no feeling about cultural things, no feeling of pain, of sorrow. … The political reference to Senator McCarthy and totalitarianism was inescapable but I tried not to emphasize it because I feel that motion pictures are primarily to entertain and I did not want to preach."Interview with Don Siegel in Alan Lovell: Don Siegel. American Cinema, London 1975.

Reaction 

Critical reception

Largely ignored by critics on its initial run,George Turner: A Case for Insomnia, in American Cinematographer, March 1997, American Society of Cinematographers, Hollywood 1997. Invasion of the Body Snatchers received wide critical acclaim in retrospect and is considered one of the best films of 1956.

Legacy

Invasion of the Body Snatchers was selected in 1993 for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

DVD releases

The film was released on DVD in 1998 by U. S.-label Republic (an identical re-release by Artisan followed in 2002); it includes the Superscope version plus an Academy ratio version. The latter is not the original full frame edition but a pan and scan-reworking of the Superscope edition that loses visual detail.
DVD editions exist on the British market (including a computer colorized version), German market (as Die Dämonischen) and Spanish market (as La Invasión de los Ladrones de Cuerpos).
Olive Films released a Blu-ray Superscope version of the film in 2012.

Related works

Listed are only works directly connected to Jack Finney's novel or Don Siegel's film, not thematically related works like Robert Heinlein's The Puppet Masters and its dramatizations, Val Guest's Quatermass 2 or Gene Fowler's I Married a Monster from Outer Space. 








