[[Memory play]]

CATEGORIES: Drama genres, Memory, Theatrical genres

Memory play is a term coined by playwright Tennessee Williams, describing his work The Glass Menagerie. In his production notes, Williams says, "Being a 'memory play', The Glass Menagerie can be presented with unusual freedom of convention."Williams, p xvi In a widening of the definition, it has been argued that Harold Pinter's plays Old Times, No Man's Land and Betrayal are memory plays, where "memory becomes a weapon".  Brian Friel's Dancing at Lughnasa is a late 20th-century example of the genre.

The Glass Menagerie

In the play-script, Williams describes the scene:  The scene is memory and is therefore non-realistic. Memory takes a lot of poetic licence. It omits some details; others are exaggerated, according to the emotional value of the articles it touches, for memory is seated predominantly in the heart. The interior is therefore rather dim and poetic.  In his first few lines Tom Wingfield declares:  The play is memory. Being a memory play, it is dimly lighted, it is sentimental, it is not realistic. In memory everything seems to happen to music. That explains the fiddle in the wings. I am the narrator of the play, and also a character in it. The other characters are my mother Amanda, my sister Laura and a gentleman caller who appears in the final scenes.The narrator, Tom Wingfield, moves in and out of the action, directly addressing the audience at times. The other characters Amanda and Laura also revisit their own memories throughout.

Other examples

The 1970s works of Harold Pinter, including Landscape, Silence, A Kind of Alaska, Betrayal and Old Times have been described by Michael Billington and others as memory plays.  Characters recite their own versions of past events and there is no clear indication of which, if any, is true.
The term has also been used to describe film, such as John Ford's The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance, described by Scott Eyman as containing "under populated sets" and "archetypal characters".



Bibliography


