[[Taiwanese Wave]]

CATEGORIES: Taiwanese culture

Taiwanese Wave or Tairyu (

History

Towards the turn of the 21st century, despite the early success of the Hallyu-wave, there was an equally noticeable growth in cultural imports from Taiwan, which, like South Korea, is also one of the Four Asian Tigers. The spread of Taiwanese popular culture occurred slightly earlier, before the Hallyu-wave was known in Asia. In 2001, the Taiwanese drama "Meteor Garden" was released and soon attracted audiences from all over the region. It became the most-watched drama series in Philippine television history, The popularity of "Meteor Garden" (an adaptation of the Japanese manga series Boys Over Flowers) can be attributed to these two factors:
As a result of the success of "Meteor Garden", its sequel "Meteor Garden II" was gradually released into many Asian countries as well, before the source material was later adapted by networks in Japan, South Korea, and China respectively.
In 2002, the Korean Drama "Winter Sonata" became the first of its kind to equal the success of "Meteor Garden", attracting a cult following in Asia with sales of Winter Sonata-related products such as DVD sets and novels surpassing US$3.5 million in Japan.
Since 2002, television programming trends in Southeast Asia began to undergo a drastic change as TV series from South Korea and Taiwan filled the slot originally reserved for Hollywood movies during prime time. Although dramas from South Korea gradually overtook those from Taiwan, much of Asia still had their eyes focused on Taiwanese bands such as F4, S.H.E and Fahrenheit. The breakthrough for K-pop came with the debut of TVXQ, SS501"WBW: SM vs. DSP".Retrieved 2013-07-18. and Super Junior, the latter hailed by the BBC as a household name in the region.
By the late 2000s, many Taiwanese music acts could no longer catch up with their K-pop counterparts. Although a number of Taiwanese bands such as F4 and Fahrenheit continued to retain a small but loyal fan base in Asia, teenagers and young adults from all over the world were much more receptive to K-pop bands such as Big Bang and Super Junior, both of whom have managed to attract a huge number of fans from South America, parts of Eastern Europe, the Middle East, and to a smaller extent, the Western world (particularly among immigrants with an Asian, Middle Easten, African, or Eastern European background).

In Japan

K-pop is actually only one of two popular trends going on over in Japan, and the other trend is Taiwanese pop (sung in Mandarin). There is even a word for it in Japanese called 台流 (pronounced Tairyū), which literally means the influx of Taiwanese pop culture in Japan. This trend has been prevalent in Japan for quite some time though, with Taiwanese idol dramas like Meteor Garden, It started with a kiss, Hot Shot, and soon Autumn's Concerto making waves in Japan, while Japanese artists like Gackt making frequent visits to Taiwan for pleasure.
Today, the Taiwanese male singer Show Luo has been regarded as leading the Taiwanese wave in Japan.  The Japanese media even praised that he is the Taiwanese version of Japanese idol Yamashita Tomohisa.








