[[Saumur]]

CATEGORIES: Communes of Maine-et-Loire, Subprefectures in France

Saumur () is a commune in the Maine-et-Loire department in western France.
The historic town is located between the Loire and Thouet rivers, and is surrounded by the vineyards of Saumur itself, Chinon, Bourgueil, Coteaux du Layon, etc. which produce some of France's finest wines.

History

Prior to the French Revolution Saumur was the capital of the Sénéchaussée de Saumur, a bailiwick, that existed until 1793. Saumur was then the location of the Battle of Saumur during the Revolt in the Vendée.

During the Battle of France, in World War II, Saumur was the site of the Battle of Saumur (1940) where the town and south bank of the Loire was defended by the teenage cadets of the cavalry school.
In 1944 it was the target of several Tallboy and Azon bombing targets from Allied planes. 
The first raid, on 8/9 June 1944,Saumur Railway Tunnel dambusters.uk quoting AIR27/2128
On 22 June of the same year, nine Consolidated B-24 Liberators of the United States Army Air Forces used Azon 1,000 lb glide bombs against the Samur Bridge; escorted by 43 North American P-51 Mustangs.  During the morning of 24 June, 74 American Boeing B-17 Flying Fortresses were again dispatched to the bridge; 38 hit the primary and 36 hit Tours/La Riche Airfield without loss; escort was provided by 121 of 135 P-51s.
The town of Saumur was awarded the Croix de Guerre with palm for its resistance and display of French patriotism during the war.

Demographics

Main sights

Saumur is home to the Cadre Noir, the École Nationale d'Équitation (National School of Horsemanship), known for its annual horse shows, as well as the Armoured Branch and Cavalry Training School, the officer school for armored forces (tanks).  There is a tank museum, the Musée des Blindés, with more than 850 armored vehicles, wheeled or tracked.  Most of them are from France, though some come from other countries such as Brazil, Germany, and the Soviet Union, as well as axis and allied vehicles of World War Two.
The School of Saumur is the name used to denote a distinctive form of Reformed theology taught by Moses Amyraut at the University of Saumur in the 17th century.  Saumur is also the scene for Balzac's novel Eugénie Grandet, written by the French author in 1833, and the title of a song from hard rock band Trust (whose lyrics express their poor opinion of the city: narrow-minded, bourgeois and militaristic).
Amongst the most important monuments of Saumur are the great Château de Saumur itself which stands high above the town, and the nearby Château de Beaulieu which stands just 200 metres from the south bank of the Loire river and which was designed by the architect Jean Drapeau. A giant sequoia tree (which is protected) stands in the grounds of Château de Beaulieu.
The architectural character of the town owes much to the fact that it is constructed almost exclusively of the beautiful, but fragile, Tuffeau stone.

Notable people

Saumur was the birthplace of:
The French mathematician Abraham de Moivre initially studied logic at Saumur.
Marquis de Sade was briefly imprisoned in the Château de Saumur (then a jail) in 1768.

Twin towns

The town is twinned with:








