[[Kliegl Brothers Universal Electric Stage Lighting Company]]

CATEGORIES: Manufacturing companies based in New York, Lighting brands, Electrical engineering companies, 1896 establishments, 1996 disestablishments, American brands

Kliegl Brothers Universal Electric Stage Lighting Company was an American manufacturer of electrical stage lighting products in the 20th century. The company had a significant influence in the development of theatrical, cinema, television, and specialty lighting. It equipped many major performing venues in the United States and its products were used in several other countries as well. Their eponymous product, the Klieglight, was the trade name for two quite different production lights manufactured by the company, and survives today in both industry argot and in popular idiom as a synonym for "spotlight" or "center of attention".

History

Origins

The company was founded in 1896 in New York City when a Bavarian immigrant, Anton Kliegl, in
partnership with A. H. Guendel,  purchased the Myerhofer Electric Stage Lighting Company, and
renamed it the Universal Electric Stage Lighting Company. A year later his older brother Johann Kliegl replaced Guendel, and the firm became known as the Kliegl Brothers Universal Electric Stage Lighting Company. From its infancy as a firm so small that its proprietors also worked as stagehands to supplement their income,

Factories

In the beginning, the firm occupied the Meyerhofer facilities in the old Star Theatre at 842 Broadway, New York City. After 1980, the company's business began to decline, and by 1990 they had moved to a smaller plant at 5 Aerial Way, Syosset, Long Island, New York.

Management

Johann Kliegl was born in Bad Kissingen, Bavaria, German Empire in 1869, and his brother Anton in 1872. Johann, trained as a locksmith, emigrated to the United States in 1888, and Anton, trained as a plumber, followed him there in 1893. There they both started working in a factory which manufactured electric arc lamps.
Throughout their lives, the two brothers maintained close ties to Bad Kissingen, and endowed there a school, still extant, and grown to encompass grade, middle and high school divisions. Many of their employees were brought over from Bad Kissingen, such that the "patois" on the factory floor was known to the staff as "50th Street Deutsch". Anton, in fact, died in Bad Kissengen on May 19, 1927.
Management was retained by the Kliegl family throughout the history of the firm. Johann remained active until a few days prior to his death on September 30, 1959. His son, Herbert Kliegl, was by that time the managing head of the firm, and remained so until a few weeks before his death on October 3, 1968. The firm ceased operations in November 1996.New York Department of State

Products

At the time of the firm's founding, electric lighting for the stage was in its infancy. Held finds no catalog of stage lighting equipment earlier than Kliegl's catalog of 1898.
Initially they continued the Myerhofer business as "contractors and manufacturers", as noted in their Catalog G of 1913.
The development of electrical standards was spurred, in part, by the Iroquois Theatre fire of 1903. Kliegl Brothers' Catalog E states that "plugs and receptacles are in accordance with Underwriter's requirements and pass city inspections"
A precursor of today's spotlights, the "baby spotlight", their first using an incandescent lamp, was introduced in their Catalog E of 1906 as cited in Rubin 
In their 1922 catalog, the company was still featuring its motion picture studio equipment, but by 1926, references to motion picture applications had dwindled to a single line of type on the first page. In 1924 they introduced the use of glass rondels as color media in border and footlights, eliminating coloring of individual lamps.
Kliegl Brothers introduced its Fresnel lens spots in 1929, and by 1935 were ordering their own Fresnel lenses from Corning. as cited in Rubin
Pages devoted to Kliegl products in the 1928/29 catalogs of retailers such as Holzmueller on the west coast and wholesalers like Marle in Stamford, Connecticut, showed that their sales now extended well beyond their own factory. The condensed catalog of 1929 for the first time lists a broader range of "Mazda" (incandescent lamps) than arc spots. By 1930, the "Mazda" name has vanished, yielding to "incandescents".
In 1932, the Kliegl brothers installed their new ellipsoidal reflector spotlights in the Center Theatre in Radio City. and billed on pages 42–45 of Catalog 40 of 1936 as "The New Klieglight".
Catalog 40 of 1936 introduced a full line of architectural downlights (individual architectural products had been made for some time), the autotransformer dimmer (originally dubbed the "Transtat", the catalog was overstamped, changing the trade name to "Autrastat"), motor operated dimmers, fresnel lens spots, etc. At the same time, the more obsolete and exotic products began to disappear.
This catalog also introduced "Alzak" reflectors, Alzak being a proprietary process for producing a mirror-like finish on aluminium. Under agreement with the process owner, Alcoa, Kliegl Brothers created reflectors using the Alzak process for their own use and for sale at the Kliegl Reflector Company, a separate subsidiary plant located on 11th Avenue between 33rd and 34th streets (opposite the location of the present Javits Center). Major was the only other licensee for stage lighting reflectors.
An interesting specialty, prominently featured in this catalog, but dating to the first catalog, was the effect projector, in which rotating, hand painted, transparent discs rotated before projector spots. Precise optical lenses spread the image to beam lighted patterns or images, ranging from a simple snowfall to the elaborate "Christ Rising to Heaven with Three Angels", onto a stage backdrop. Six artists sat before the tall 50th Street windows on the third floor hand painting the tiny images which would be magnified many times when in use. By 1960, effect projectors had been made obsolete by film, and later, computer-generated projections.
By catalog T61, issued in 1954, the arc spots were represented by a single model, while the Klieglight line offered models ranging from 250 watt to 3000 watt spots. The company was also offering their "Dynabeam" lensed follow spot, and fresnels from 100 to 2000 watts. In that era of patch panels and small numbers of high wattage dimmers, Kliegl Brothers
offered its "Safpatch" patch panels, and "Rotolector" rotary power switches, both developed by Herbert Kliegl. Both products interlocked the electrical contacts with a circuit breaker, preventing arcs while switching or patching.
From the beginning of the firm's operations, custom products were readily available. Indeed, the craft shop system used throughout its history made little differentiation between custom and standard products.  High-end lighting designers regularly sought out Kliegl Brothers, who could design and produce the hardware that would fulfill their visions. Often, the custom product made its mark on the industry, such as the wall washers designed for the UN General Assembly room, or the fluorescent wall washers for New York's Pan American (now Met Life) building lobby, both designed by Herbert Kliegl. A custom oddity was the scoreboard designed for Madison Square Garden, across 50th Street from the factory. This remained in use until the relocation of the Garden to its current home atop Penn Station.
Until 1959 Kliegl provided controls as an assembler of equipment purchased or licensed from others. Resistance plates and variable brush autotransformers were largely purchased from Ward Leonard; magnetic amplifiers from General Electric. Thyratron dimmers were manufactured under license from Strand Electric of England. All this started to change in 1958.
In 1959 the first commercially viable solid state theatre dimmer, Kliegl's SCR(R), was introduced as model R59. Improved models followed. Within two years, the solid state dimmer had, as a practical matter, swept away all other dimming systems.
In the 1960s, like other theatrical suppliers, the company was making more from amateur theatre companies than from either film or professional theatre. But by the 1978 series of catalog brochures, product development had significantly slowed down. An attempt to build a modern control console had failed, and the control systems had been largely outsourced. Luminaire and accessory lines had further narrowed, and the trend was inexorable. Unable to compete in a world of low-cost mass production, the firm finally ceased operations in 1996.

Klieglight

The first "Klieglight" was a powerful carbon arc light designed for the motion picture industry.

Major projects

The following is a representative sampling of major projects undertaken by Kliegl Brothers:




