[[Egyptian Armed Forces]]

CATEGORIES: Military of Egypt, Conscript militaries

The Egyptian Armed Forces are the largest in Africa, and the Middle East. In 2014, it is ranked the 13th most powerful in the world,Global Fire Power " GFP " 
In addition, Egypt maintains large paramilitary forces.223 The Central Security Forces comes under the control of the ministry of interior. The Egyptian Border Guard Forces and the Egyptian National Guard comes under the control of the Ministry of Defence.



The Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, the senior uniformed officer, is currently Colonel General Sedki Sobhi and the Chief of Staff is currently Lieutenant General Mahmoud Hegazy.
The Armed Forces' inventory includes equipment from different countries around the world. Equipment from the former Soviet Union is being progressively replaced by more modern U.S., French, and British equipment, a significant portion of which is built under license in Egypt, such as the M1 Abrams tank.
To bolster stability and moderation in the region, Egypt has provided military assistance and training to a number of other African and Arab states. Egypt remains a strong military and strategic partner and is a participant in NATO's Mediterranean Dialogue forum. The Egyptian military is one of the strongest in the region,
In January 2011, a delegation led by the chief of staff of Egypt's armed forces, Lt. Gen. Sami Hafez Enan, was in Washington, D.C., although the visit was truncated due to the protests. The sessions, an annual country-to-country military coordination, were being led for the U.S. by Assistant Secretary of Defense for International Security Affairs Alexander Vershbow. A meeting with Adm. Mike Mullen, chairman of the U.S. Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other talks had been planned to extend to 2 February. However, in light of events in Egypt, the delegation left Washington to return home. "Egyptian Military Chiefs Cut Pentagon Visit Short". The New York Times. Retrieved 28 January 2011. Before their Friday night departure, Vershbow urged the two dozen Egyptian military representatives "to exercise 'restraint'". The New York Times. 29 January 2011 (30 January 2011, p. A1, New York edition). Retrieved 30 January 2011.
Senior members of the military can convene the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces, so during the course of the Egyptian Revolution of 2011, when Mubarak resigned and transferred power to this body on 11 February 2011.
On Sunday 12 August 2012, new president Mohamed Morsi announced a series of military appointments. Hussein Tantawi, the minister of defence and the commander-in-chief of the Armed Forces, were both retired.ahram.eg/NewsContent/1/64/50239/Egypt/Politics-/Morsi-retires-Egypts-top-army-leaders;-amends--Con. Morsi awarded both men state medals and appointed them as advisors to the president. Thirdly, the president appointed the head of the military intelligence, Abdul Fatah al-Sisi, as Minister of Defence to replace Tantawi. Sedki Sobhi, the commander of the Third Army, was appointed as Chief of Staff of the Armed Forces. Morsi also retired the Commander of the Navy, Mohab Memish, and appointed him as head of the Suez Canal Authority.
On 3 July and up on respond to millions of Egyptians demands demonstrating in streets all over Egypt since 30 June 2013 the head of the Egyptian Armed Forces, General Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, announced President Mohamed Morsi removal from power, suspension of the constitution, and new presidential and Shura Council elections. The severe crackdown on the Muslim Brotherhood commenced.
The U.S. provides annual military assistance to the Egyptian Armed Forces.  In 2009, the U.S. provided nominal $1.3 billion to the Egyptian military ($ Much of this is in equipment such as tanks and jet fighters that are surplus to Egyptian needs and kept in storage."Egypt May Not Need Fighter Jets, But The U.S. Keeps Sending Them Anyway."

Politics and business

The Armed Forces enjoy considerable power, prestige and independence within the Egyptian state. 
During almost the entire history of the Republic of Egypt, active or retired military officers have been head of the Egyptian state. The one democratically-elected civilian who served as president was removed by a military coup after only one year (July 2012-July 2013).
Starting with the Egyptian Revolution of 1952, which created the Republic of Egypt, and was organized by the Free Officers Movement,  presidents of Egypt (Gamal Abdel Nasser, Anwar Sadat, Hosni Mubarak) were ex-military officers for almost 60 years.  This was interrupted with the 2011 revolution, when one of those presidents (Mubarak) stepped down, and the Supreme Council of the Armed Forces ruled until an elected president -- Muhammad Morsi—took office. On 3 July 2013, General Al-Sisiannounced Morsi removal in 2013 Egyptian coup d'état, although the interim president he named was a civilian—the Chief Justice of Supreme Constitutional Court Adly Mansour.
Even the new constitution drafted and passed under Morsi included protections for the military from legal and parliamentary oversight,

Business

The military which has its own Hospitals, Factories, Clubs and Gas Stations which serve it's Officers, Soldiers, and public as well also influential in business, engaging in road and housing construction, consumer goods, resort management, and extensive tracts of real estate. Much military information is not made publicly available, including budget information, the names of the general officers and the military's size (which is considered a state secret). According to journalist Joshua Hammer, "as much as 40% of the Egyptian economy" is controlled by the Egyptian military.com| 18 August 2011| (free online article not complete, does not include quoted portion). the number which is described as a "myth" by some economists and journalists and contribution considered by some as "necessary" for the Egyptian Economy and the needs of the Armed Forces to maintains its strength.

Structure

Egyptian Armed Forces structure contains several main branches and departments. Egyptian Armed Forces main branches are the Army, the Air Force, the Air Defense, and the Navy.

Army

The inventory of the Egyptian armed forces includes equipment from the United States, France, the United Kingdom, the Soviet Union, and the People's Republic of China. Equipment from the Soviet Union is being progressively replaced by more modern U.S., French, and British equipment, a significant portion of which is built under license in Egypt, such as the M1A2 Abrams tank which makes Egypt the owner of the second largest number of latest generation main battle tanks in the region and the first in the case of the older generations.
Conscripts for the army and other service branches without a university degree serve three years as enlisted soldiers. Conscripts with a General Secondary School Degree serve two years as enlisted personnel. Conscripts with a university degree serve one year as enlisted personnel or three years as a reserve officer. Officers for the army are trained at the Egyptian Military Academy one of the oldest academies in the world.

Air Force

The Egyptian Air Force or EAF is the aviation branch of the Egyptian Armed Forces. Currently, the backbone of the EAF is the F-16. The EAF (planes and pilot training) is considered to be the strongest in Africa and one of the strongest in the Middle East. The Mirage 2000 is the other modern interceptor used by the EAF. The Egyptian Air Force has 220 F-16s (plus 20 on order) making it the 4th largest operator of the F-16 in the World. It has about 1,100 combat aircraftAircraft Strength by Country and 245 armed helicopters. The Air Force is undergoing massive modernization. Mikoyan confirmed that talks with Egypt are underway for the sale of 40 Mig-29SMT jet-fighters with a possible additional batch of 60-80 planes.

Air Defense Command

The Egyptian Air Defense Command or ADF (Quwwat El Diffaa El Gawwi in Arabic) is Egypt's military command responsible for air defense. One of the most powerful air defenses in the world. Egypt patterned its Air Defense Force (ADF) after the Soviet Anti-Air Defenses, which integrated all its air defense capabilities – antiaircraft guns, rocket and missile units, interceptor planes, and radar and warning installations.
Its commander is Lieutenant General Abdul Meniem Al-Toras.

Navy

Although the Egyptian Navy is the smallest branch of the military, it is large by Middle Eastern standards. 
The Egyptian Navy is known to be the strongest in the African continent,  and the largest in the Middle East in spite of the rapid growth of other countries' navies within the region.
Some fleet units are stationed in the Red Sea, but the bulk of the force remains in the Mediterranean. Navy headquarters and the main operational and training base are located at Ras el Tin near Alexandria.
The current commander is Vice Admiral Osama El-Gendi.
The Navy also controls the Egyptian Coast Guard. The Coast Guard is responsible for the onshore protection of public installations near the coast and the patrol of coastal waters to prevent smuggling. it has an inventory consisting of about thirty five large patrol craft (each between twenty and thirty meters in length) and twenty smaller Bertram-class coastal patrol craft built in the United States.
See list of naval ships of Egypt for a list of vessels in service.

Departments and Authorities

=The Engineering Authority=

The Eningeering Authority of the Egyptian Armed Forces (EAAF) is the sector beneath the Armed Forces responsible for the Engineering work ,it's missions variety between War and peace time, In War time the authority is responsible for the engineering aid to the Forces, one of the Authority major operations was Operation Badr (1973). In Peace time the authority is responsible in helping build Egypt's  infrastructure and the national projects including Cities, stadiums, clubs.

=Department of Morale Affairs=

The Department of Morale Affairs (DMA) is responsible for managing the Egyptian Armed Forces' public image ,boosting goodwill towards troops, writing the speeches of the Armed forces' public statements, contacting the media and organizing the Egyptian Armed Forces' conferences and symposiums.

=Military Judiciary=

The Military Judiciary Authority is responsible for the Judicial Affairs assigned by the Egyptian Constitution. The Military Judiciary is responsible for the Disposition of cases related to the Armed Forces' institutions and personnel. both civilians and military personnel appear before the court.

=The Financial Authority=

=The Research Authority=

=Military intelligence Management=

=Management and Administration=

=Department of Armament Affairs=

=Department of Officers' Affairs=

Arab Organization for Industrialization

The Arab Organization for Industrialization supervises nine military factories which produce civilian goods as well as military products. Initially the owners of AOI were the governments of Egypt, Saudi Arabia, and the United Arab Emirates, before the latter governments gave their shares back to Egypt in 1993, valued at $1.8 billion. AOI is now entirely in Egyptian hands.

Military schools

There is an undergraduate military school for each branch of the Egyptian Military establishment, and they include:

Foreign military assistance





Further reading




