[[Seven (Lisa Stansfield album)]]

CATEGORIES: Lisa Stansfield albums, 2014 albums

Seven is the seventh studio album by British singer Lisa Stansfield released on 31 January 2014. It is her first new album since 2004's The Moment.

Background and release

After releasing her previous album The Moment in 2004, Stansfield focused on acting. She played herself in the comedy series Monkey Trousers in mid-2005. In late 2006, she appeared in the drama series Goldplated, playing Trinny Jamieson. In September 2007, Stansfield appeared in another television series, Agatha Christie's Marple. She played Mary Durrant in the episode titled Ordeal by Innocence. Later, Stansfield dubbed one of the characters (Millie, an elf) for the English version of the Finnish animated film Quest for a Heart released in December 2007. She has also recorded the title song "Quest for a Heart" written by Charlie Mole and Lee Hall and produced by Mole in collaboration with Ali Thomson. In 2007, Stansfield joined the cast of The Edge of Love directed by John Maybury. The film starring Keira Knightley, Sienna Miller, Cillian Murphy and Matthew Rhys premiered in June 2008. Stansfield played the role of Ruth Williams. In mid-2009, she starred in the Nick Mead-directed documentary Dean Street Shuffle playing herself. In 2012, Elaine Constantine gave Stansfield a role in her upcoming film Northern Soul which is an independent docu-drama about the social phenomenon and generation of this music and dance movement.
Stansfield's career has spanned over three decades, boasting sales of over twenty million records and a string of international top ten hits including: "All Around the World," "Change," "All Woman" and "Someday (I'm Coming Back)." The Grammy nominated, multi BRIT, Ivor Novello and Silver Clef Award winner has returned to the studio in 2012 to record her next album along with long-time songwriting partner and husband Ian Devaney. Stansfield also embarked on the Seven Tour toured in 2013 and will continue it in 2014. In August 2013, she announced that her seventh studio album titled simply Seven will be released in October 2013. However on 16 October 2013, Stansfield announced via her Facebook that the release date had been pushed back to early 2014. Seven was released on 31 January 2014 in Germany and 10 February 2014 in the United Kingdom.

Content

Seven which has been produced and written in the United Kingdom by Stansfield and Ian Devaney features tracks such as: "Can't Dance," "The Rain," "Stupid Heart," "Conversation," "The Crown," "Strong," "So Be It" and "Picket Fence." Recorded in both Los Angeles and Manchester, Stansfield has collaborated with John Robinsony and orchestrator Jerry Hey, both integral to the creation of Michael Jackson's Off the Wall, Thriller and Bad and have worked with Stansfield for over two decades. Following her critically acclaimed return to live performance in 2013 – The Times wrote that Stansfield "still has the most distinctive and sensuous voice in soul pop." Seven marks her return to the international stage and confirms her status as one of the UK's premier recording artists. The deluxe edition contains live versions of Stansfield's previous hits, recorded during her Seven Tour.

Reception

Critical reception

Seven has so far received favourable reviews. TheGayUK's Chris Jones said: "Finally, after 10 long years, she's back - but by god, it was worth the wait. Seven, Lisa's seventh album, gives us 10 tracks that make you cry, make you dance and make you glad you have ears!." The Daily Express's Stephen Unwin said: "And after a hiatus of almost 10 years, Lisa is back. Late 2012 saw her dipping her toes in with a few sell-out, intimate UK gigs, just to let everyone know that the voice is still spine-tingling, and to showcase a few tracks from this comeback album which are more-ishly good."

Commercial performance

Seven debuted in mid-February 2014 at number thirteen in Uk and Germany , number twenty-five in Austria, number thirty-two in Czech Republic and number forty-two in Switzerland.

Track listing

Charts

Release history




