[[Declaration of Geneva]]

CATEGORIES: Medical ethics, 1948 works

The Declaration of Geneva (Physician's Oath) was adopted by the General Assembly of the World Medical Association at Geneva in 1948, amended in 1968, 1983, 1994 and editorially revised in 2005 and 2006.

Creation

During the post World War II era and immediately after its foundation, the WMA showed concern over the state of medical ethics in general and all over the world, taking the responsibility for setting ethical guidelines for the world physicians. The details of the Nazi Doctors' Trial at Nuremberg and the revelations about what the Imperial Japanese Army had done at Unit 731 in China during the war clearly demonstrated the need for reform, and for a re-affirmed set of guidelines regarding both human rights and the rights of patients.
In 1946, a study committee had been appointed to prepare a "Charter of Medicine" which could be adopted as an oath or promise that every doctor in the world would make upon receiving his medical degree or diploma. It took two years of intensive study of the oaths and promises submitted by member associations to draft a modernized wording of the ancient oath of Hippocrates which was sent for consideration at the WMA's second general assembly in Geneva in 1948. The medical vow was adopted and the assembly agreed to name it the "Declaration of Geneva."

Declaration

The Declaration of Geneva, as currently published by the WMA 
reads:

Changes from original

The original oath read "My colleagues will be my brothers," later changed to "sisters and brothers." Age, disability, gender, and sexual orientation have been added as factors that must not interfere with a doctor's duty to a patient; some rephrasing of existing elements has occurred. Secrets are to remain confidential "even after the patient has died." The violation of "human rights and civil liberties" replaces "the laws of humanity" as a forbidden use of medical knowledge. The original declaration stated that a doctor would respect human life "from the time of conception," and the 1994 revision stated "from its beginning." which was removed altogether in the editorial revisions in the English version but is still found in other language versions that have not followed the editorial changes such as the German Handbuch der ärztlichen Ethik.

Timeline (WMA meetings)

Other Oaths

Upon a physician's retirement, the "Physician's Oath on Retirement" is being proposed "to address the moral, psychological, social, and cultural responsibilities that a physician assumes when voluntarily relinquishing the responsibilities of active medical practice."








