[[Max Allan Collins]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, Living people, American comics writers, American mystery writers, American crime fiction writers, University of Iowa alumni, Writers from Iowa, Anthony Award winners, Shamus Award winners, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists

Max Allan Collins (born March 3, 1948) is an American mystery writer. He has written novels, screenplays, comic books, comic strips, trading cards, short stories, movie novelizations and historical fiction.  He wrote the graphic novel Road to Perdition (which was developed into a film in 2002), created the comic book private eye Ms. Tree, and took over writing the Dick Tracy comic strip from creator Chester Gould and one of the Batman comic books for a time. He wrote books to expand on the Dark Angel TV series. He has also written books and comics based on the TV series franchise CSI. In 2006 he wrote Buried Deep (also released as "Bones Buried Deep"), based on the TV series Bones.
He has also written two sequel novels to Road to Perdition: Road to Purgatory and Road to Paradise.  He also wrote three more graphic novels starring the characters from Road to Perdition.  These graphic novels, called collectively On the Road to Perdition, form the basis of the film.
He also co-founded the International Association of Media Tie-in Writers with Lee Goldberg. The IAMTW is an organization for writers of tie-ins and novelizations.
Collins studied in the Iowa Writers' Workshop at the University of Iowa.
Collins is a fan of the mystery writer Mickey Spillane from childhood and later became friends with him.  The two collaborated on a comic book series in the 1990s called Mike Danger.  Upon Spillane's death in 2006, Collins was entrusted to finish several uncompleted works by Spillane including Dead Street, The Goliath Bone, and The Big Bang.  Several other uncompleted works may be finished by Collins and published in the future.

Selected bibliography

Quarry series

This series features a former US Marine sniper, turned professional assassin after returning from Vietnam in 1973.
Cinemax has ordered a 1970s-set drama pilot to Quarry. Written by Michael D. Fuller and Graham Gordy based loosely on a series of books by Collins, the project centers on a Marine marksman who, upon returning home from Vietnam in 1973, finds himself shunned by those he loves and demonized by the public. The disillusioned vet is quickly recruited into a network of contract killers and corruption spanning the Mississippi River.deadline.com/2013/04/cinemax-orders-contract-killer-drama-pilot-based-on-max-allan-collins-quarry-books/Pilot Scoop: Cinemax Orders 1970s Drama Quarry tvnewstoday, April 5, 2013

Nolan series

This series features a professional thief, similar to and apparently inspired by Richard Stark's "Parker" character, who operates in the Midwest.

Mallory series

The Mallory series is about a mystery writer in Iowa who solves crimes.

Nathan Heller series

Collins's longest running series and arguably his best known work is his Nathan Heller series.  Heller is a Chicago private investigator who gets involved in famous crimes and meets famous people of the 1930s and 1940s, including Orson Welles, Frank Nitti, and Sally Rand.  The first novel in this historical fiction series, True Detective, won the 1984 Shamus Award for Best P.I. Hardcover from the Private Eye Writers of America.  Collins won his second Shamus in 1992 for the Heller novel Stolen Away, an account of the Lindbergh kidnapping. His 1999 novel Flying Blind sees Heller investigate the disappearance of Amelia Earhart, along the way becoming romantically involved with her. With the release of Chicago Confidential, Collins moved the action into the 1950s.  The most recent novel, Target Lancer, about an alleged attempt to assassinate JFK in Chicago just weeks before the actual assassination in Dallas, was published in November 2012.

Eliot Ness series

This series of novels is about real life Untouchable Eliot Ness's career as Director of Public Safety in Cleveland.

Dick Tracy series

Novelizations

Road to Perdition series

(*)Note: Road to Perdition: On the Road, is a single-volume collection of On the Road to Perdition Books 1-3.

Disaster series

CSI: Crime Scene Investigation novels

(**)Note: Mortal Wounds, is a trade paperback omnibus which collects Double Dealer, Sin City, and Cold Burn into a single volume.

CSI: Miami novels

Criminal Minds novels

Jack & Maggie Starr series

A mystery series set in and around the American comic book industry during the tail end of the Golden Age of Comic Books

Writing as Barbara Allan (with wife Barbara Collins): Trash 'n' Treasure series

Writing as Patrick Culhane

Miscellaneous

Comics

Movies and music

In addition to his work as a writer, Collins has also written and directed four movies: Mommy, Mommy 2: Mommy's Day, Real Time: Siege at Lucas Street Market, and Eliot Ness: An Untouchable Life (based on his Edgar Award–nominated play). All four were produced independently on location in Collins' hometown of Muscatine, Iowa.  The first three are available on DVD — separately or in the Black Box set — from Troma Team Video, and the Ness film is distributed by VCI Entertainment.
Collins has also written and performed music with his rock band, Crusin'.






