[[Zielona Góra]]

CATEGORIES: Zielona Góra, Cities in Silesia, Cities and towns in Lubusz Voivodeship, Wine regions of Poland, City counties of Poland

Zielona Góra ) is a city in Lubusz Voivodeship, in western Poland, with 118,982 inhabitants within the city limits (31 March 2011) and 294,000 inhabitants within the metropolitan area, including three neighbouring counties (2005).
Zielona Góra has been in Lubusz Voivodeship since 1999, prior to which it was the capital of Zielona Góra Voivodeship from 1950–1998. It is the seat of Lubusz Voivodeship's elected assembly (sejmik) and executive (the seat of the centrally-appointed governor or voivode being Gorzów Wielkopolski). The city's name, in Polish, Czech, and German, means "green mountain".

History

The first settlement in the area of Zielona Góra was built in the valley near the Złota Łącza stream during the reign of Polish ruler Mieszko I. The written records of the Slavic settlement date to 1222 and an increase of its population by Henryk Brodaty. Other documents date the settlement to 1302. 164
The region received influx of German burghers in the second half of the 13th century during the medieval Ostsiedlung. 74 The settlement became a city with Crossener Recht, a variation of Magdeburg rights, in 1323. The earliest mention of the town's coat of arms is from 1421, although it is believed to have been arranged since the beginning of the 14th century. 154 A document in the town archive of Thorn (Toruń) dating from before 1400 used a sigil with the name GRVNINBERG, an early form of the German name Grünberg.
In 1294, Henry III, Duke of Głogów, founded a church in honour of Saint Hedwig, patron saint of Silesia. This building, today called the konkatedra św. Jadwigi w Zielonej Górze, is the oldest building in the city. A wooden castle near the city, built ca. 1272, was the residence of Duke Jan of Ścinawa from 1358–65; John had ceded his lands to Henry V, Duke of Glogau. 165 In 1477 the town defeated a 5,000-strong army from neighbouring Brandenburg which attempted to seize it during the succession war to the Duchy of Glogau. In 1488 John II, Duke of Sagan, destroyed the castle to prevent his enemies from using it.
After the collapse of the Duchy of Sagan, the town fell to the Kingdom of Bohemia, a state of the Holy Roman Empire. Grünberg converted to Lutheranism during the Protestant Reformation through the efforts of Paul Lemberg, Abbot of Sagan. 166 The city declined during the 17th century, especially during the Thirty Years' War (1618–48) and following decades. Grünberg endured plundering, debts, emigration of burghers, and fires. In 1651 during the Counter Reformation, the Habsburg Monarchy of Austria reintroduced Roman Catholicism and suppressed Protestantism. The city was subjected to heavy Germanisation and German craftsmen banned Poles from attending any practice allowing them to work as members of guilds. A rebellion caused by conscription ended with many Poles being imprisoned.
The city was annexed by the Kingdom of Prussia by the 1742 Treaty of Breslau which ended the First Silesian War. The Prussians introduced religious toleration, leading to the construction of the Protestant parish church Zum Garten Christ from 1746–47; Catholic Poles were later discriminated against, however. The textile industry suffered during the 1820s while adjusting to the Industrial Revolution and an import ban by the Russian Empire. The city's economy began to recover after many clothiers emigrated to Congress Poland.
During industrialisation, many Germans from the countryside moved to large industrial cities and a large number of Poles came to German cities to work as well. The Polish population was pushed by Germanisation to rural villages, although some remained in the town contributed to the economic revival of the city. A Polish church remained functional until 1809 and a Polish craftsmen association (Towarzystwo Polskich Rzemieślników) was established by Kazimierz Lisowski in 1898, it existed till 1935  when Lisowski was murdered by Gestapo.
Since 1816 after the Napoleonic Wars, Grünberg was administered within the district Landkreis Grünberg i. Schles. in the Province of Silesia. In 1871 it became part of the German Empire during the unification of Germany. English industrialists purchased some of the city's textile factories during the 1870s and 1880s. By 1885, most of Grünberg's population of 14,396 were Protestants.
In 1919, Grünberg became part of the Province of Lower Silesia within Weimar Germany. On 1 April 1922 it became a district-free city, but this status was revoked on 1 October 1933 while part of Nazi Germany.
The Soviet Red Army occupied Grünberg with little fighting in February 14, 1945 during World War II. In that course, about 500 people committed suicide. troops, and the town was partly resettled with Poles transferred from Polish areas annexed by the Soviet Union. The city was officially renamed from the German name Grünberg to the Polish name Zielona Góra — both of which mean "Green Mountain" — and the 18th century Protestant church was reconsecrated as a Catholic church (Kościół Matki Boskiej Częstochowskiej).
The University of Zielona Góra was opened in 2001. The city is also the seat of the Roman Catholic Diocese of Zielona Góra-Gorzów.

Wineries

The city has been known for its wines for centuries. It is now one of two places in Poland with wine grape cultivation mainly for white wines (the other being the wine growing region near the town of Warka in Masovia). The first wineries around the city were built in 1314. At Paradyż (Paradise) Abbey near Zielona Góra, monks have been making wine since 1250. The number of vineyards at peak production is estimated at 4,000 in the region, and 2,500 in Zielona Góra itself. During the communist era wine production was reduced, but since 1990 it has recovered. Since 1852 an annual Wine Festival has taken place in the town. However, nowadays wine is no longer produced in Zielona Góra itself (the last factory was closed in the early 1990s).
Luksusowa vodka, (Polish for Luxury Vodka), made from potatoes rather than grain, is produced in Zielona Góra.

Education

The city has a university and a College of International Trade and Finance. Currently there are 18,000 students studying in the city.

Secondary education

Secondary education is based on the High School type of educational facility.

Universities and colleges

Politics

Members of Parliament (Sejm) elected from the constituency:


Airport

Zielona Góra Airport is located at Babimost, north-east of the city. It is currently the eleventh busiest airport in Poland, in terms of traffic size. Formerly a military base, it has become an important transport hub for western Poland. LOT Polish Airlines currently offers daily flights to Warsaw.

Events

International relations

Twin towns — Sister cities

Zielona Góra is twinned with:

People

Gallery

File:Ratuwiw21.jpg|Town hall on market square
File:Zielona_Góra,_konkatedra_św.jpg|St Hedwig concathedral
File:Kaplgjz12.jpg|14th-century chapel
File:Matkibo3w21.jpg|Church of Our Lady of Częstochowa
File:Lazienna.JPG|The Hunger Tower from the 15th century
File:Zielona_Góra - Braniborska Tower.jpg|Astronomical observatory
File:Palmkg21.jpg|Palm house with restaurant on vine hill
File:Bicn.JPG|Zielona Góra Main Library
File:Zielona Góra - plan.svg|City map
File:Blaeu_1645_-_Silesia_Inferior.jpg|Grünberg on Blaeu's 1645 map of Lower Silesia
File:Blaeu 1645 - Nova totius Germaniæ descriptio.jpg|In Blaeu's 1645 atlas (spelled Grūberg with a macron)
File:Schlesien Kr Grünberg.png|Grünberg on the German map of 1905



Bibliography

 
 

Notes




