[[Wałbrzych]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Lower Silesian Voivodeship, Wałbrzych County, Wałbrzych

Wałbrzych  from the Czech border.

Etymology

According to the city's official website, the early Polish name of the settlement was Lasogród ("forest castle").Official Page of Wałbrzych History section 
The German name Waldenburg (also meaning "forest castle") refers to the castle Nowy Dwór, whose ruins stand south of the city; the name came to be used for the entire settlement.555. It first appeared in the 15th century coming from the words Wald 'forest' and Berg 'mountain' later associated with castlePoradniajezykowa.us.pl The modern Polish name for the settlement,"Wałbrzych", comes from the German name Walbrich, a late medieval linguistic variation of the older names "Wallenberg" or "Walmberg".55, ISBN 83-85579-33-8

History

Middle Ages

According to the Geographical Dictionary of Poland published by Polish Scientific Publishers PWN, the city's predecessor, Lasogród, was an early medieval Slavic settlementSłownik geograficzno-krajoznawczy Polski Maria Irena Mileska 1994 page 781 Wydawn. Nauk. PWN, 1994 whose inhabitants engaged in hunting, honey gathering, and later agriculture. Lasogród eventually developed into a defensive fort, the remains of which were destroyed in the 19th century during expansion of the city.
Some German publications argue that no archaeological or written records support claims of a Slavic settlement or the existence of a castle before the late 13th century,Vorgeschichtliche Funde innerhalb des Stadtgebietes sind spärlich und zweifelhaft in der Deutung, so daß eine frühe Dauersiedlung nicht angenommen werden kann. Für die Existenz einer "Waldenburg" im Bereich der Altstadt gibt es keinerlei Anhaltspunkte. Weczerka, p.555 and that during the Middle Ages the area of Wałbrzych was part of the unpopulated Silesian Przesieka. Weczerka, p.416 and 555Badstübner, p.2.11. According to a writing from 1667 by jurist and historian Ephraim Ignatius Naso, Wałbrzych already existed as a small village in 1191. Weczerka, p.555 who says the city was founded between 1290 and 1293, and was mentioned as Waldenberc in 1305.
He places the city near Nowy Dwór (). The city website, however, mentions the building of the castle as a separate event in 1290.Um.pl A part of Nowy Dwór castle, a manor built in the 17th century, was destroyed in the 19th century.341.
The city was chartered in 1426, but it did not receive the rights to hold markets or other privileges due to the competition of nearby towns and the insignificance of the local landlords. Subsequently, the city became the property of the Silesian knightly families, initially the Schaffgotsches in 1372, later the Czettritzes, and from 1738, the Hochberg family, owners of Fürstenstein Castle.

Modern Era

Coal mining in the area was first mentioned in 1536. The settlement was transformed into an industrial centre  at the turn of the 19th century, when coal mining and weaving flourished. In 1843 the city obtained its first rail connection, which linked it with Breslau (Wrocław). In the early 20th century a glassworks and a large china tableware manufacturing plant, which are still in operation today, were built. In 1939 the city had about 65,000 inhabitants.
After World War II, became once more part of a  Polish state, and as in all of post-war Poland most of the German population was expelled. However, Walbrzych was one of the few areas where several GermansWerner Besch, Dialektologie: Ein Handbuch zur Deutschen und allgemeinen Dialektforschung, Walter de Gruyter, 1982, p.178, ISBN 3-11-005977-0 were held back as they were deemed indispensable for the economy.79, ISBN 157181504 A continuous post-war German society has been maintained in Walbrzych since 1957.
The city was relatively unscathed by the Second World War, and as a result of combining the nearby administrative districts with the town and the construction of new housing estates, Wałbrzych expanded geographically. At the beginning of the 1990s, because of new social and economic conditions, a decision was made to close down the town's coal mines. In 1995, a Museum of Industry and Technology was set up on the facilities of the oldest coal mine in the area, KWK THOREZ. The 2005 the film Komornik was filmed in and around Wałbrzych.

Sights

City districts

Including date of incorporation into the city

Education

Politics

Wałbrzych constituency

Members of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Wałbrzych constituency

Sports

Last time Górnik played in Polish Basketball League - the Polish top basketball league in 2009.
There are many semi-professional or amateur football clubs (like Zagłębie Wałbrzych, Juventur Wałbrzych, Podgórze Wałbrzych, Gwarek Wałbrzych, Czarni Wamag Wałbrzych and one basketball club (KS Dark Dog is playing in the Polish 3rd league)

Media

Notable people

International relations

Twin towns — Sister cities

Wałbrzych is twinned with:





Bibliography

 
 

Notes



 

