[[Spanish moss]]

CATEGORIES: Tillandsia, Plants described in 1762, Bromeliaceae species, Epiphytes, Flora of the Caribbean, Flora of Central America, Flora of Mexico, Flora of South America, Flora of the Southeastern United States, Flora of Alabama, Flora of Florida, Flora of Georgia (U.S. state), Flora of Louisiana, Flora of Mississippi, Flora of North Carolina, Flora of South Carolina, Flora of Texas, Flora of Virginia, Flora of Delaware, Flora of Hawaii, Flora of Maryland, Flora of Puerto Rico, Flora of Cuba, Flora of Haiti, Flora of the Dominican Republic, Flora of Queensland, Flora of Polynesia, Flora of the Bahamas, Flora of Bermuda

Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneoides) is a flowering plant that grows upon larger trees, commonly the Southern Live Oak (Quercus virginiana) or Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum) in the southeastern United States from Texas and Florida north to Missouri and Virginia. It is also native to much of Mexico, Bermuda, the Bahamas, Central America, South America and the West Indies as well as being naturalized in Queensland (Australia) and in French Polynesia.Kew World Checklist of Selected Plant Families, Tillandsia usneoides
The plant's specific name usneoides means "resembling Usnea", and it indeed closely resembles its namesake Usnea, also known as beard lichen, but in fact Spanish moss is not biologically related to either mosses or lichens. Instead, it is an angiosperm in the family Bromeliaceae (the bromeliads) that grows hanging from tree branches in full sun or partial shade. Formerly this plant has been placed in the genera Anoplophytum, Caraguata, and Renealmia., GRIN Taxonomy for Plants, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture. The northern limit of its natural range is Northampton County, The primary range is in the southeastern United States (including Puerto Rico), to Argentina, growing wherever the climate is warm enough and has a relatively high average humidity. It has been introduced to similar locations around the world, including Hawaii and Australia.
The plant consists of a slender stem bearing alternate thin, curved or curly, heavily scaled leaves  The plant has no aerial roots and its flowers are tiny and inconspicuous. It propagates both by seed and vegetatively by fragments that blow on the wind and stick to tree limbs, or are carried by birds as nesting material.

Ecology

Spanish moss is an epiphyte which absorbs nutrients (especially calcium) and water from the air and rainfall. Spanish moss is colloquially known as "air plant"."From Bearded Trees" Popular Mechanics, October 1950, p. 155.
While it rarely kills the trees, it lowers their growth rate by reducing the amount of light to a tree's own leaves. It also increases wind resistance, which can prove fatal to the host tree in a hurricane.
In the southern U.S., the plant seems to show a preference of growth on Southern Live Oak (Quercus virginiana) or Bald Cypress (Taxodium distichum) because of these trees' high rates of foliar mineral leaching (calcium, magnesium, potassium, and phosphorus) providing an abundant supply of nutrients to the plant,William H. Schlesinger and P. L. Marks, "Mineral Cycling and the Niche of Spanish Moss, Tillandsia usneoides L.", American Journal of Botany, Vol. 64, No. 10 (Nov.–Dec., 1977), pp. 1254–1262. but it can also colonize other tree species such as Sweetgum (Liquidambar styraciflua), crepe-myrtles (Lagerstroemia spp.), other oaks, and even pines.
Spanish moss shelters a number of creatures, including rat snakes and three species of bats. One species of jumping spider, Pelegrina tillandsiae, has been found only on Spanish moss.

Spanish moss in culture and folklore

Due to its propensity for growing in humid southern locales like Georgia, Louisiana, Mississippi,  Florida, Eastern North Carolina, southeastern Virginia, South Carolina, east and south Texas, and Alabama, the plant is often associated with Southern Gothic imagery.
It was introduced to Hawaii in the 19th century, and became a popular ornamental and lei plant.''"Nā Lei o Hawai`i - Types of Lei" It is often called "Pele's hair" after Pele the Hawaiian goddess. The term "Pele's hair" is also used to refer to a type of filamentous volcanic glass.
Canadian singer-songwriter Gordon Lightfoot wrote a ballad entitled "Spanish Moss".
American Punk Rock band Against Me! has a song titled "Spanish Moss" on their 2010 album White Crosses.net/releases/white_crosses
"Look into the Spanish moss. Let your mind conjure up old ghosts. Ride your bike through lost Florida streets. Everything we've said and done, can be so easily forgotten. You can always change who you are."

Human uses

Spanish moss has been used for various purposes, including building insulation, mulch, packing material, mattress stuffing, and fiber.  In the early 1900s it was used commercially in the padding of car seats."Hair From Trees....Adams, Dennis. Spanish Moss: Its Nature, History and Uses. Beaufort County Library, SC. It is still collected today in smaller quantities for use in arts and crafts, or for beddings for flower gardens, and as an ingredient in the traditional wall covering material bousillage.
In the desert regions of the southwestern United States, dried Spanish moss plants are used in the manufacture of evaporative coolers, colloquially known as swamp coolers. These are used to cool homes and offices much less expensively than using air conditioners. A pump squirts water onto a pad made of Spanish moss plants. A fan then pulls air through the pad and into the building. Evaporation of the water on the pads serves to reduce the air temperature, thus cooling the building. The Economics of the Evaporative Cooler Industry in the Southwestern United States. Stanford University Graduate School of Business. p. 167.
Spanish moss is also known to have been worn by the women of the Timucua Indian tribe.
It is also used by some as the filling for traditional voodoo dolls.

Gallery

 

Image:Spanish moss in Pender County, NC IMG_4472.JPG|Spanish moss at Moores Creek National Battlefield in Pender County, North Carolina
Image:Spanish moss.
Image:DirkvdM orosi mossy tree.
Image:Sp_moss_CU_th.
Image:Spanish-moss-tree.
Image:Bald Cypress swamp and Spanish Moss.jpg|Bald Cypress swamp and Spanish Moss at First Landing State Park in Virginia Beach, Virginia
Image:Mousse espagnole en Louisiane.
Image:Peles Hair.
Image:Spanish moss sg.
Image:Spanish_moss_sc.jpg|Spanish moss growing on a tree on Hilton Head Island, South Carolina
File:Field and trees with Spanish moss.jpg|Field and trees with Spanish moss (Harry Walker, photographer, Texas, circa 1915-1920)
File:Spanish moss - bunch.JPG|A bunch of Spanish moss
File:Spanish moss - tip.JPG|The end of a strand of Spanish moss






