[[Manhattan (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 films, American films, English-language films, 1970s romantic comedy films, American LGBT-related films, American romantic comedy films, Black-and-white films, Films directed by Woody Allen, Films set in Manhattan, Films set in New York City, Films shot in New York City, Juvenile sexuality in films, Museums in popular culture, United Artists films, United States National Film Registry films, Best Foreign Language Film César Award winners, Screenplays by Woody Allen

Manhattan is a 1979 American romantic comedy-drama film directed by Woody Allen from his screenplay co-written with Marshall Brickman and produced by Charles H. Joffe.  Allen co-stars as a twice-divorced 42-year-old comedy writer dating a 17-year-old girl (Mariel Hemingway) before eventually falling in love with his best friend's (Michael Murphy) mistress (Diane Keaton).  Meryl Streep and Anne Byrne also star in the film.
Manhattan was filmed in black-and-white and 2.35:1 widescreen.  The decision to shoot in black and white was to give New York City a "great look".  The film also features music composed by George Gershwin, including his arguably most famous piece, Rhapsody in Blue, which inspired the idea behind the film.  Allen described the film as a combination of his previous two films, Annie Hall and Interiors.
The film was met with widespread critical acclaim and was nominated for two Academy Awards: Best Supporting Actress for Hemingway and Best Writing, Screenplay Written Directly for the Screen for Allen and Brickman.  Its North American box office receipts of $39.9 million made it Allen's second biggest box office hit (after adjusting for inflation). Often considered Allen's best film,Woody Allen – Biography by Jason Ankeny (Rovi), in The New York TimesArticle in New York by Bilge Ebiri on AFI Top 100 it ranks 46th on AFI's 100 Years...100 Laughs list and number 63 on Bravo's "100 Funniest Movies."  In 2001, the United States Library of Congress deemed the film "culturally significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry.

Plot

The film opens with a montage of images of Manhattan accompanied by George Gershwin's Rhapsody in Blue.  Isaac Davis (Woody Allen) is introduced as a man writing a book about his love for New York City.  He is a twice-divorced, 42-year-old television comedy writer dealing with the women in his life who quits his unfulfilling job.  He is dating Tracy (Mariel Hemingway), a 17-year-old girl attending the Dalton School.  His best friend, college professor Yale Pollack (Michael Murphy), married to Emily (Anne Byrne), is having an affair with Mary Wilkie (Diane Keaton).  Mary's ex-husband and former teacher, Jeremiah (Wallace Shawn), also appears.  Isaac's ex-wife Jill Davis (Meryl Streep) is writing a confessional book about their marriage.  Jill has also since come out of the closet and lives with her partner, Connie (Karen Ludwig).
When Isaac meets Mary, her cultural snobbery rubs him the wrong way.  Isaac runs into her again at an Equal Rights Amendment fund-raising event at the Museum of Modern Art hosted by Bella Abzug (who is played by herself) and accompanies her on a cab ride home.  They chat until sunrise in a sequence that culminates in the iconic shot of the Queensboro Bridge.  In spite of a growing attraction to Mary, Isaac continues his relationship with Tracy but emphasizes that theirs cannot be a serious relationship and encourages her to go to London to study acting.  In another iconic scene, at Tracy's request, they go on a carriage ride through Central Park.
After Yale breaks up with Mary, he suggests that Isaac ask her out.  Isaac does, always having felt that Tracy was too young for him.  Isaac breaks up with Tracy, much to her dismay, and before long, Mary has virtually moved into his apartment.  Emily is curious about Isaac's new girlfriend, and after several meetings between the two couples, including one where Emily reads out portions of Jill's new book about her marriage with Isaac, Yale leaves Emily to resume his relationship with Mary.  A betrayed Isaac confronts Yale at the college where he teaches, and Yale argues that he found Mary first.  Isaac responds by discussing Yale's extramarital affairs with Emily, but Yale told her that Isaac introduced Mary to him.  In the denouement, Isaac lies on his sofa, musing into a tape recorder about the things that make "life worth living". When he finds himself saying "Tracy's face", he sets down the microphone.
He leaves his apartment and sets out on foot for Tracy's.  He arrives at the lobby of her family's apartment just as she is leaving for London.  He says that she does not have to go and that he does not want "that thing about her that he likes" to change.  She replies that the plans have already been made and reassures him that "not everybody gets corrupted" before saying that he's "got to have a little faith in people."  He gives her a slight smile segueing into final shots of the skyline with some bars of Rhapsody in Blue playing again.  An instrumental version of "Embraceable You" plays over the credits.

Cast

Production

Development

According to Allen, the idea for Manhattan originated from his love of George Gershwin's music.  He was listening to one of the composer's albums of overtures and thought, "this would be a beautiful thing to make ... a movie in black and white ... a romantic movie".
According to actress Stacey Nelkin, Manhattan was based on her romantic relationship with Woody Allen.  Her bit part in Annie Hall ended up on the cutting room floor, and their relationship started when she was 17 years old and a student at New York's Stuyvesant High School.

Filming

Allen talked to cinematographer Gordon Willis about how fun it would be to shoot the film in black and white, Panavision aspect ratio (2.35:1) because it would give "a great look at New York City, which is sort of one of the characters in the film".
The famous bridge shot was done at five in the morning. The bridge had two sets of necklace lights on a timer controlled by the city. When the sun came up, the bridge lights went off. Willis made arrangements with the city to leave the lights on and that he would let them know when they got the shot. Afterwards, they could be turned off. As they started to shoot the scene, one string of bridge lights went out, and Allen was forced to use that take.
After finishing the film, Allen was very unhappy with it and asked United Artists not to release it.  He offered to make a film for free instead.  He later said, "I just thought to myself, 'At this point in my life, if this is the best I can do, they shouldn't give me money to make movies'".

Music

All titles of the soundtrack were compositions by George Gershwin. They were performed by the New York Philharmonic under Zubin Mehta and the Buffalo Philharmonic under Michael Tilson Thomas.
A part of the first movement of Mozart's Symphony No. 40 is heard in a concert scene.

Reaction

Box Office

Manhattan opened in 29 North American theaters on April 25, 1979.  It grossed $485,734 ($16,749 per screen) in its opening weekend and earned $39.9 million in its entire run,

Critical response

The film received largely positive reviews and currently holds a rating of 98% "Certified Fresh" on Rotten Tomatoes.
Alexander Walker of the London Evening Standard wrote, "So precisely nuanced is the speech, so subtle the behaviour of a group of friends, lovers, mistresses and cuckolds who keep splitting up and pairing off like unstable molecules".

Accolades

New York Film Critics Circle named Allen best director for Manhattan.  It also won the BAFTA Award for Best Film.  In Empire magazine's poll of the 500 greatest movies ever made, Manhattan was ranked number 76.empireonline.asp
The film was number 63 on Bravo's "100 Funniest Movies."  In 2001, the United States Library of Congress deemed it "culturally significant" and selected it for preservation in the National Film Registry. It is also ranked #4 on Rotten Tomatoes' 25 Best Romantic Comedies.[ref]
</ref>
American Film Institute recognition
Manhattan also inspired the song "Remember Manhattan" written by Richard Marx and Fee Waybill from Marx's debut album.

Home release

Allen wanted to preserve Willis's compositions and insisted that the aspect ratio be preserved when the film was released on video (an unusual request in a time when widescreen films were normally panned and scanned for TV and video release).  As a result, all copies of the film on video (and most television broadcasts) were letterboxed, originally with a gray border.
Manhattan was first released on Blu-ray on January 24, 2012 alongside Allen's 1977 film Annie Hall. Both releases included the films' original theatrical trailer.

Legacy

Manhattans screenplay was performed in front of a live audience at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art on November 15, 2012, as part of Jason Reitman's Live Read series. Actors read the script, narrowed to six speaking parts, and still photographs from the movie were projected behind them."Jason Reitman to re-create Woody Allen's Manhattan in live-read event" by Anthony Breznican, Entertainment Weekly, November 9, 2012. Retrieved August 31, 2013. The cast included:Jason Reitman to Live Read Manhattan in L.A", The Woody Allen Pages, November 10, 2012. Retrieved August 31, 2013."Stephen Merchant and Olivia Munn Starred in Jason Reitman's Manhattan'' Live Read", The Woody Allen Pages, November 18, 2012. Retrieved August 31, 2013.
In keeping with the project's focus on impermanence and spontaneity, there are no rehearsals, shows are announced only days prior, and the names of some cast members are withheld entirely; performances are not recorded."Jason Reitman Brings Memorable Movies to Life at LACMA", by Katherine Tulich. The Los Angeles Times, January 19, 2012. Retrieved August 31, 2013.



Bibliography




