[[Aristarchus of Samos]]

CATEGORIES: 310 BC births, 230 BC deaths, 3rd-century BC Greek people, 3rd-century BC writers, Ancient Samians, Ancient Greek astronomers, Ancient Greek mathematicians

Aristarchus of Samos (  His astronomical ideas were often rejected in favor of the geocentric theories of Aristotle and Ptolemy.

Heliocentrism

Though the original text has been lost, a reference in Archimedes' book The Sand Reckoner (Archimedis Syracusani Arenarius & Dimensio Circuli) describes another work by Aristarchus in which he advanced the heliocentric model as an alternative hypothesis.  Archimedes wrote:

Aristarchus thus believed the stars to be very far away, and that in consequence there was no observable parallax, that is, a movement of the stars relative to each other as the Earth moves around the Sun. The stars are much farther away than was generally assumed in ancient times; and since stellar parallax is only detectable with telescopes, his speculation although accurate was unprovable at the time.
The geocentric model was consistent with planetary parallax and was assumed to be the reason why no stellar parallax was observed. Rejection of the heliocentric view was common, as the following passage from Plutarch suggests (On the Apparent Face in the Orb of the Moon):

The only other astronomer of antiquity who is known by name and who is known to have supported Aristarchus' heliocentric model was Seleucus of Seleucia, a Hellenistic astronomer who lived a century after Aristarchus. — The Copernicus of Antiquity: Aristarchus of Samos (1920) – p.41
The heliocentric theory was successfully revived nearly 1800 years later by Copernicus, after which Johannes Kepler described planetary motions with greater accuracy, with Kepler's laws, and Isaac Newton gave a theoretical explanation based on laws of gravitational attraction and dynamics.

Distance to the Sun (lunar dichotomy)

The only surviving work usually attributed to Aristarchus, On the Sizes and Distances of the Sun and Moon, is based on a geocentric world view.  It has historically been read as stating that the angle subtended by the Sun's diameter is 2 degrees, but Archimedes states in The Sand Reckoner that Aristarchus had a value of ½ degree, which is much closer to the actual average value of 32' or 0.53 degrees.  The discrepancy may come from a misinterpretation of what unit of measure was meant by a certain Greek term in Aristarchus' text.dioi.pdf
Aristarchus claimed that at half moon (first or last quarter moon), the angle between Sun and Moon was 87°. Aristarchus is known to have also studied light and vision. 299–300; Thomas, op. cit., pp. 2–3.
Using correct geometry, but the insufficiently accurate 87° datum, Aristarchus concluded that the Sun was between 18 and 20 times farther away than the Moon. (The true value of this angle is close to 89° 50', and the Sun's distance is actually about 400 times the Moon's.) The implicit false solar parallax of slightly under 3° was used by astronomers up to and including Tycho Brahe, ca. AD 1600.  Aristarchus pointed out that the Moon and Sun have nearly equal apparent angular sizes and therefore their diameters must be in proportion to their distances from Earth, so that the diameter of the Sun was between 18 and 20 times larger than the diameter of the Moon.

The Great Year and an estimate of the length of the month

Mentioned by Archimedes and by others as the first to propose a heliocentric "universe", Aristarchus also proposed a "Great Year" of 4868 solar years, equalling exactly 270 saroi,
each of 18 Callippic years plus 10⅔ degrees. (Syntaxis, book 4, chapter 2.)
Its empirical foundation was the 4267 month eclipse cycle, cited by Ptolemy as source of the "Babylonian" month, which was good to a fraction of a second (1 part in several million). It is found on cuneiform tablets from shortly before 200 BC, though Ptolemy did not attribute its origin to Babylon.
(Due to near integral returns in lunar and solar anomaly Thus, estimation of the length of the month was ensured to have relative accuracy of 1 part in millions.)
Embedded in the Great Year was a length of the month agreeing with the Babylonian value
to 1 part in tens of millions, decades before Babylon is known to have used it.
There are indications that Babylon's month was exactly that of Aristarchus, which would suggest that one party obtained it from the other or from a common source.
Aristarchus's lunar conception represents an advance of science in several respects.
Previous estimates of the length of the month were in error by 114 seconds (Meton, 432 BC) and 22 seconds (Callippus, 330 BC).1 ‡3

Precession

The Vatican library has preserved two ancient manuscripts with estimates of the length of the year.
The only ancient scientist listed for two different values is Aristarchus. It is now suspected that these are among the earliest surviving examples of continued fraction expressions.  The most obvious interpretations can be computed from the manuscript numbers.
The results are years of 365 1/4  + 1/152 days, and 365 1/4  − 15/4868 days, representing the sidereal year and the civil, supposedly tropical year.
Both denominators can be related to Aristarchus, whose summer solstice was 152 years after Meton's and whose Great Year was 4868 years.
The difference between the sidereal and tropical years is due to precession. The former value is accurate within a few seconds. The latter is erroneous by several minutes.
Both are close to the values later used by Hipparchus and Ptolemy, and the precession indicated is almost precisely 1 degree per century, a value which is too low. 1 degree per century precession was used by all later astronomers until  the Arabs. The correct value in Aristarchus's time was about 1.38 degrees per century.1 ‡3

Notes



              |first= Sir Thomas
              |authorlink= T.L. Heath
              |title= Aristarchus of Samos, the ancient Copernicus ; a history of Greek astronomy to Aristarchus, together with Aristarchus's Treatise on the sizes and distances of the sun and moon : a new Greek text with translation and notes
              |url= 
              |year= 1913
              |publisher= Oxford University Press
              |location= London
              |ref= Reference-Heath-1913}}

Further reading

  | last = Gomez
  | first = A. G.
  | title = [ '' Aristarchos of Samos, the Polymath'']
  | publisher = AuthorHouse
  | year = 2013
  | isbn = 978-1-4817-8949-3}}
  | last = Stahl
  | first = William
  | title = Aristarchus of Samos
