[[Dermatology]]

CATEGORIES: Dermatology, Medical specialties

Dermatology is the branch of medicine dealing with the hair, nails, skin and its diseases. Random House, Inc. 2001. Page 537. ISBN 037572026.  It is a specialty with both medical and surgical aspects.aad.html A dermatologist takes care of diseases, in the widest sense, and some cosmetic problems of the skin, scalp, hair, and nails.aad.org

Etymology

Attested in English in 1819, the word dermatology derives from the Greek δέρματος (dermatos), genitive of δέρμα (derma), "skin"δέρμα, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus (itself from δέρω dero, "to flay"δέρω, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library) + -logy, "the study of".

History

Readily visible alterations of the skin surface have been recognized since the dawn of history, with some being treated, and some not.  In 1801 the first great school of dermatology became a reality at the famous Hôpital Saint-Louis in Paris, while the first textbooks (Willan's, 1798–1808) and atlases (Alibert's, 1806–1814) appeared in print during the same period of time. (2003). Fitzpatrick's Dermatology in General Medicine. (6th ed.).  McGraw-Hill Professional. Page 3. ISBN 0-07-138076-0.

Training

After earning a medical degree (M.D. or D.O.), the length of training in the United States for a general dermatologist to be eligible for Board Certification by the American Academy of Dermatology, American Board of Dermatology or the American Osteopathic Board of Dermatology is a total of four years.  This training consists of an initial medical, transitional, or surgical intern year followed by a three-year dermatology residency.
Following this training, one- or two- year post-residency fellowships are available in immunodermatology, phototherapy, laser medicine, Mohs micrographic surgery, cosmetic surgery or dermatopathology.  For the past several years, dermatology residency positions in the United States have been one of the most competitive to obtain.

Fellowships

Cosmetic dermatology

Dermatologists have been leaders in the field of cosmetic surgery. Andrews' Diseases of the Skin: Clinical Dermatology (10th ed.). Saunders. Page 895. ISBN 0-7216-2921-0.  Some dermatologists complete fellowships in surgical dermatology.  Many are trained in their residency on the use of botox, fillers, and laser surgery.  Some dermatologists perform cosmetic procedures including liposuction, blepharoplasty, and face lifts.

Dermatopathology

A dermatolopathologist is a pathologist or dermatologist who specializes in the pathology of the skin.  This field is shared by dermatologists and pathologists.  Usually a dermatologist or pathologist will complete one year of dermatopathology fellowship.  This usually includes six months of general pathology, and six months of dermatopathology.

Immunodermatology

This field specializes in the treatment of immune-mediated skin diseases such as lupus, bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus vulgaris, and other immune-mediated skin disorders.

Mohs surgery

The dermatologic subspecialty called Mohs surgery focuses on the excision of skin cancers using a tissue-sparing technique that allows intraoperative assessment of 100% of the peripheral and deep tumor margins developed in the 1930s by Dr. Frederic E. Mohs.  The procedure is defined as a type of CCPDMA processing. Physicians trained in this technique must be comfortable with both pathology and surgery, and dermatologists receive extensive  training in both during their residency.  Physicians who perform Mohs surgery can receive training in this specialized technique during their dermatology residency, but many will seek additional training either through preceptorships to join the American Society for Mohs Surgery

Pediatric dermatology

Physicians can qualify for this specialization by completing both a pediatric residency and a dermatology residency.  Or they might elect to complete a post-residency fellowship.

Teledermatology

Teledermatology is a form of dermatology where telecommunication technologies are used to exchange medical information via all kinds of media (audio, visual and also data communication, but typically photos of dermatologic conditions) usually made by non-dermatologists for evaluation off-site by dermatologists).P, Chimenti S. (2005): Teledermatology In: Frisch P, Burgdorf W.: EDF White Book, Skin Diseases in Europe. Berlin, 130-133Douglas A. Perednia, M.D., Nancy A. Brown, M.L.S., OregonHealthSciencesUniversity Teledermatology: one application of telemedicine
This subspecialty deals with options to view skin conditions over a large distance to provide knowledge exchange,DermNet NZ: the dermatology resource to establish second-opinion services for expertsThe Community for Dermatology | Teledermatology or to use this for follow-up of individuals with chronic skin conditions. 2006 e&iH. Peter Soyer, Rainer Hofmann-Wellenhof, Cesare Massone, Gerald Gabler, Huiting Dong, Fezal Ozdemir, Giuseppe Argenziano telederm.

Therapies

Therapies provided by dermatologists include, but not restricted to:
Most dermatologic pharmacology can be categorized based on the Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification System, specifically the ATC code D.



Notes




