[[Rzeszów]]

CATEGORIES: Rzeszów, 1354 establishments, Populated places established in the 1350s, City counties of Poland, Cities and towns in Podkarpackie Voivodeship, Galicia (Eastern Europe), Palaces in Poland

Rzeszów ( It is located on both sides of the Wisłok River, in the heartland of the Sandomierska Valley. The city, which was granted a town charter in 1354, has been the capital of the Subcarpathian Voivodeship since 1999, and is also the seat of Rzeszów County.
Rzeszów is served by an international airport, is a member of Eurocities, and is home to a number of higher education schools, company headquarters, and foreign consulates.

History

Early History

In the area of Rzeszów, the first humans appeared in the late Paleolithic Age, archeologists have excavated a tool made in that period at site Rzeszów 25. In the mid-6th century BC, the first farmers came to the area of the city, most likely through the Moravian Gate. Later on, Rzeszów was a settlement of the Lusatian culture, which was followed by the Przeworsk culture.
In the 5th century, first Slavs appeared in the area, which is confirmed by numerous archeological findings. Most probably, Rzeszów was then inhabited by the Vistulans. Some time between 11th and 13th century the town was annexed by the Ruthenians. Polish princes of the Piast dynasty annexed it in 1264 and in Tarnów, there was a meeting of Prince Bolesław V the Chaste, and Prince Daniel of Galicia, during which both sides agreed that the border would go between Rzeszów and Czudec (Rzeszów belonged to Red Ruthenia, while Czudec and Strzyżów to Lesser Poland).
After unification of Poland (see Testament of Bolesław III Krzywousty), Rzeszów remained in Ruthenian hands until 1340, when Casimir III the Great annexed Red Ruthenia, inviting his knights to govern the newly acquired land. According to some sources, at that time Rzeszów was inhabited by the Walddeutsche, and was called Rishof (during World War II, the Germans renamed it into Reichshof). The town was granted Magdeburg rights, it had a parish church, a market place and a cemetery, and its total area was some 1,5 km2. Magdeburg rights granted Rzeszów's local authorities the permission to punish criminals, build fortifications and tax merchants.
In 1458 Rzeszów was burned by the Vlachs and the Tatars, in 1502 the Tatars destroyed it again. Earlier, in 1427, Rzeszów had burned to the ground in a big fire, but the town recovered after these events, due to its favorable location on the main West - East (Kraków - Lwów) and North - South (Lublin - Slovakia) routes. In the 15th century first Jews settled in Rzeszów. 16th century was the time of prosperity for the town, especially when Rzeszów belonged to Mikołaj Spytek Ligęza (since the 1580s), who invested in infrastructure, building a castle, a Bernardine church and a monastery. Rzeszów then had some 2,500 inhabitants, with a growing Jewish community. The town was granted several royal rights, including the privilege to organize several markets a year. At that time, Rzeszów finally grew beyond its medieval borders, marked by fortifications. A new town hall was built in 1591
In 1638 Rzeszów passed into the hands of the Lubomirski family, becoming the centre of its vast properties. At first, the town prospered and in 1658, first college was opened there, which now is High School Nr 1. The period of prosperity ended, and furthermore, there were several fires and wars, which destroyed the town. Rzeszów was first captured by the Swedes during The Deluge, then by the troops of George II Rákóczi leading to the Treaty of Radnot. During the Great Northern War, the Swedes again captured Rzeszów, in 1702, then several different armies occupied the town, ransacking it and destroying houses.
In the mid-eighteenth century, the town's population was composed of Roman Catholics and Jews in almost equal numbers (50,1% and 49,8%, respectively).J. Motylkiewicz. "Ethnic Communities in the Towns of the Polish-Ukrainian Borderland in the Sixteenth, Seventeenth, and Eighteenth Centuries". C. M. Hann, P. R. Magocsi ed. Galicia: A Multicultured Land. University of Toronto Press. 2005. p. 37. In 1772, following first partition of Poland, Rzeszów became part of the Austrian Empire, to which it belonged for 146 years. In the late 18th century, Rzeszów had 3,000 inhabitants. By mid-19th century, the population grew to around 7,500, with 40% of them Jewish. In 1858, Galician Railway of Archduke Charles Louis reached Rzeszów, which resulted in further development of the town. In 1888 first telephone lines were opened, in 1900 - gas street lamps, and in 1911 - power plant and water system. The population grew to 23,000, with half of inhabitants being Jewish. A number of modern building were constructed, most of them in Secession style.
During World War I, several battles took place in the area of the town. Rzeszów was home to a large garrison of the Austro-Hungarian Army, and in the city of Przemyśl, located nearby, there was a major fortress. In the late summer of 1914, Russian troops moved towards Rzeszów, and on September 21, they captured it. First Russian occupation lasted only 16 days, ending after an attack of the Austrians, on October 4. Under Russian pressure, the Austrians were unable to keep the town, and on November 7, the Russians again appeared in Rzeszów. In late fall of 1914, the frontline was established between Tarnów and Gorlice, and Rzeszów became an important center of the Imperial Russian Army, with large magazines of food and ammunition located there. Russian occupation lasted until May 1915.
After the Russians were pushed out of Galicia, Rzeszów remained outside of the area of military activities. Austrian administration returned, but wartime reality and destruction of the town had a negative effect on the population, and the quality of life deteriorated.

Since Poland's independence

On 12 October 1918, Rzeszów's mayor, together with Town Council, sent a message to Warsaw, announcing loyalty to the independent Polish government. On November 1, after clashes with German and Austrian troops, Rzeszów was a free town, and on November 2, mayor Roman Krogulski took a pledge of allegiance to the Polish state. During World War One, some 200 residents of Rzeszów died, rail infrastructure was destroyed, as well as approximately 60 houses.
In 1920, Rzeszów became capital of a county in the Lwów Voivodeship. The town grew, and creation of the Central Industrial Region had an enormous impact on Rzeszów. It became a major center of defense industry, with PZL Rzeszów opened there in 1937, it also was a home to a large garrison of the Polish Army, with the 10th Motorized Cavalry Brigade stationed there. In 1939, Rzeszów had 40,000 inhabitants, but its dynamic growth was stopped by the Invasion of Poland.
On 6 September 1939, Rzeszów was bombed by the Luftwaffe. The town was defended by the 10 Cavalry Brigade and 24th Uhlan Regiment from Kraśnik. German attack began on September 6 in the afternoon, and the Wehrmacht entered the city on the next day in the morning. Rzeszów, renamed into Reichshof, became part of the General Government, in 1941 a ghetto was opened there, whose Jewish inhabitants were later murdered in Bełżec extermination camp.
During the war, Rzeszów was a main center of Polish resistance (Home Army, AK), with Rzeszów Inspectorate of the AK covering several counties. On May 25, during Action Kosba, Home Army soldiers killed on Rzeszów street Gestapo henchmen, Friederich Pottenbaum and Hans Flaschke. In the summer 1944, during Operation Tempest, units of the Home Army attacked German positions in the town, and on August 2, Rzeszów was in the hands of the Home Army. Polish authorities loyal to the London Government tried to negotiate with the Soviets, but without success. NKVD immediately opened a prison in the cellars of the Rzeszów Castle, sending there a number of Home Army soldiers. In the night of October 7/9 1944, Home Army unit under Lukasz Cieplinski attacked the castle, trying to release 400 inmates kept there. The attack failed, Cieplinski was captured and subsequently executed in 1951 (see 1951 Mokotów Prison execution).
On 7 July 1945, Rzeszów became capital of the newly created Rzeszów Voivodeship, which consisted of western counties of prewar Lwów Voivodeship, plus some eastern counties of prewar Kraków Voivodeship. This decision had a major impact on the city, as it quickly grew. New offices of the regional government were built, and in 1951, several neighboring villages were annexed by Rzeszów, and the area of the city grew to 39 km2. In 1971 and 1977, further villages were annexed. In early 1981, Rzeszów was a main center of peasant's protests, who for fifty days occupied local offices, which resulted in signing of the Rzeszów - Ustrzyki Agreement, and creation of Rural Solidarity.
On 1 January 1999, the city became the capital of Podkarpackie Voivodeship. Its population grew to 170,000, and area to 91,43 km2.

Holocaust

Until the outbreak of World War II the Jews of Rzeszów numbered 14,000, more than one-third of the total population. Of Rzeszów's 14,000 Jews, only 100 survived the war in Rzeszów itself, hiding all over Poland, and in various camps. After the war an additional 600 Rzeszów Jews returned from the Soviet Union. Almost all of them subsequently left the city and the country.

The Pope's visit

In 1991 Pope John Paul II visited Rzeszów. During the celebrations in which nearly 1,000,000 people participated, the pope beatified Bishop Józef Sebastian Pelczar, former bishop of Przemyśl. On 25 March 1992 Pope John Paul II established the new Diocese of Rzeszów. The city of Rzeszów became the administrative centre of the new Diocese and the Church of the Sacred Heart became the new city cathedral.

Other

In 2004, Rzeszów hosted the Central European Olympiad in Informatics (CEOI).

Education

Universities:
Notable high schools:

Transport

Transit

Rzeszów is located on the main 22px West-East European E40 Highway, which goes from Calais in France via Belgium, across Germany, Poland, Ukraine and onto Russia and Kazakhstan. (Within Poland the E40 follows the 22px A4 Highway and the DK 4 National Road). However, the 20px 20px is not regarded as a 'highway' in the Rzeszów area – it is by Western standards, just a regular, one-lane main A-road, although, it is being upgraded. Other Polish cities located by the E40 highway are Wrocław, Opole, Katowice, Kraków, Tarnów, Ropczyce and Przemyśl.
In recent years, communication has been improved by modernisation of the roads within the city. SCATS traffic system has been implemented.
Highway A4 is being built as a beltway of the city, running through the northern districts of Rzeszów.

Airport

Rzeszów-Jasionka Airport (Port Lotniczy Rzeszów-Jasionka) is located in the village of Jasionka 10 km north of the city. As of January 2014 scheduled passenger services are offered by Ryanair, LOT Polish Airlines, EuroLOT, and Lufthansa. This is supplemented seasonally by tourist charter flights to typical summer leisure destinations.
For more details see Rzeszów-Jasionka Airport or its Official website.

Buses

The city operates 49 bus lines including night and airport buses. Rzeszów is also a gateway to the Bieszczady mountains, with many buses heading for Sanok.

Railways

Rzeszów is an important rail hub is on the main West-East rail route; . This runs from Silesia and Kraków, Kraków Main station (Kraków Główny) – Medyka on the Polish eastern border. This line then continues on to Ukraine. Its main railway station was established in the 19th century and apart from it, there are five additional stations in the city: Rzeszów Staroniwa, Rzeszów Zwięczyca, Rzeszów Osiedle, Rzeszów Załęże and Rzeszów Zachodni (freight only). There are also two non-electrified lines stemming from Rzeszów – to Jasło and to Tarnobrzeg.

Culture

Theatres

Museums

Art galleries

Libraries

Other

Economy

Industry

At Widelka substation, situated approximately  northnortheast of Rzeszów, the Rzeszów–Khmelnytskyi powerline, the only 750 kV powerline in Poland, ends.

Main sights

Sports

Notable people

As the largest city of the region Rzeszów has a diverse set of notable people associated with it. Hero of anti-Nazi and anti-Soviet resistance, Lukasz Cieplinski, singer Justyna Steczkowska, general Józef Zając, and leading theater director Jerzy Grotowski, among others, were born or lived in the city. Polish prime minister and commander-in-chief general Władysław Sikorski studied there, while pioneer of the oil industry, Ignacy Łukasiewicz, spent much of his life in Rzeszów. Anja Rubik, Polish topmodel, was born in 1983 in Rzeszów. Natalie Portman's family were Jews from Rzeszów. Rich Szaro, American football player, Dawid Kostecki professional boxer, and Patrycja Mikula Playboy girl come from Rzeszów.

Media

Radio

Press

Television

Climate

Rzeszów lies in the north temperate zone and has a continental climate with four distinct seasons. It is characterised by a significant variation between hot summers and cold, snowy winters. Average temperatures in summer range from  In view of the fact that Rzeszów lies near the Carpathian Mountains, there is sometimes a halnyA note attempting to provide the English comprehension of halny, which lacks a one-word translation: Halny is a singular masculine noun in Polish (plural: halne) when denoting the wind. Wind is of masculine gender in Polish: wiatr. The terms halny and wiatr halny are synonymous. Halny is also a general masculine adjective derived from the feminine noun hala, a grassy meadow typical of the higher elevations of the Carpathian Mountains and the Alps. The feminine singular adjective is halna, while the neuter singular and the plural for all three genders of the adjective is halne. – a föhn wind, when the temperature can rise rapidly.

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

Rzeszów is twinned with:

Gallery

File:P8100171.JPG|City hall
File:TeatrSiemaszkowejRzeszów.jpg|Theater of Wanda Siemaszkowa
File:Rzeszów zamek 2004b.jpg|Palace of Lubomirski family
File:Rzeszowski strój ludowy XIV Wystawa Wielkanocna wójta Gminy Sanok.JPG|Rzeszovian women's dress
File:P8100166.JPG|Historic market square
File:Kosciol w centrum Rzeszowa.JPG|Farny Square in Rzeszów
File:Rzeszów, ul. 3 Maja 23 (bank 2).jpg|Bank
File:Rzeszów Synagoga Staromiejska.jpg|Old Synagogue
File:P8070122.JPG|University
File:Rzeszów Pomnik Czynu Rewolucyjnego.jpg|Revolution Monument



Bibliography

Notes




