[[Płock]]

CATEGORIES: Płock, Cities and towns in Masovian Voivodeship, City counties of Poland

Płock  (Yiddish: Plotzk) is a city on the Vistula river, in central Poland. According to the data provided by GUS on 30 June 2009 there were 126,675 inhabitants. It is located in the Masovian Voivodeship (since 1999), having previously been the capital of the Płock Voivodeship (1975–1998).
The city's official full name is Princely Capital City of Płock (or Ducal Capital City of Płock) ((Statut Miasta Płocka) Załącznik do Uchwały Nr 302/XXI/08 Rady Miasta Płocka z dnia 26 lutego 2008 roku (Dz. Urz. Woj. Mazowieckiego z 2008 r. Nr 91, poz. 3271)
It now is a capital of a powiat (county) at the extreme west of the Mazovian Voivodeship. From 1079 - 1138 Płock was capital of Poland, and is considered Poland's historical capital. Its cathedral has the sarcophagi of the Polish monarchy. It is the cultural, academic, scientific, administrative and transportation center of the west and north Masovian region.Płock : Local History, Virtual Shtetl website, accessed 28 October 2013
Responding to the extension of rights by Polish kings, Jewish settlers came to the city by the 14th century. They built a community, and comprised a large proportion of the population through the 19th century, sometimes of more than 40%. They contributed trades and crafts, and helped industrialization. In 1939, they made up 26% of the city's population. The Nazis established a Jewish ghetto in Płock in 1940. They transported many to other areas and killed most. After war's end, 300 Jewish residents of more than 10,000 in the region had survived. 

History

The area was long occupied by pagan peoples. In the 10th century, a fortified location was established high of the Vistula River's bank. This location was at a junction of shipping and routes and was strategic for centuries. Its location was a great asset.
In 1009 a Benedictine monastery was established here. It became a center of science and art for the area. In 1075, a diocese seat was created here for the Christian church. Płock was the capital city during the reign of the Polish monarchs Władysław I Herman and Bolesław III Krzywousty (1079–1138). It was also a seat of several of the Dukes of Masovia.

Duke Capital City of Płock

Formerly, during the rule of the first monarchs of the Piast dynasty, even prior to the Baptism of Poland, Płock served as one of the monarchial seats, including that of Prince Mieszko I and King Bolesław I Chrobry. The king built the original fortifications on Tumskie Hill, overlooking the Vistula River. From 1037–1047, Płock was capital of the independent Mazovian state of Masław. Płock has been the residence of many Mazovian princes.
From 1079 to 1138, the city was the capital of Poland, then earning its title as Duke Capital City of Płock ( It served as the medieval capital during the reigns of the Polish monarchs Władysław I Herman and Bolesław III Krzywousty.

17th and 18th centuries

The city suffered major losses in population due to plague, fire, and warfare, with wars between Sweden and Poland in the late 17th and early 18th centuries. At that time, the Swedes destroyed much of the city, but the people rebuilt and recovered.
In the late 18th century, it took down the old city walls, and made a New Town, filled with many German migrants.

19th century

In the 19th century, the city was included within the region controlled by the Russian Empire, when Poland was divided among it, Prussia, and Austro-Hungary. It was a seat of provincial government and an active center; its economy was closely tied to major grain trade. It laid out a new city plan in the early 19th century, as new residents continued to arrive. Many of its finest buildings were constructed in this period in the Classical style. It had a scientific society before mid-century, and in the late 19th century began to industrialize.

20th century

Germany attacked Poland in 1939, and began to take over its government. It impressed people as forced laborers for German factories, treating them harshly. During the German occupation of Poland (1941 to 1945), after the Soviets and Germans were at war, the city was named Schröttersburg, after the former Prussian Upper President Friedrich Leopold von Schrötter.:de:Landkreis Schröttersburg

Culture

The Museum of Płock Mazowiecki provides exhibits and interpretation of the city and region's history.

Religions

The Roman Catholic Church is primary in the city. Płock is the oldest legislated seat of the Roman Catholic diocese; the Masovian Blessed Virgin Mary Cathedral was built here in the first half of the 12th century and houses the sarcophagi of Polish monarchs. It is one of the five oldest cathedrals in Poland.

Mariavite Church

From the visions of Feliksa Kozłowska in 1893, the Mariavite order of priests originated, originally working to renew clergy within the Roman Catholic Church. Despite repeated attempts, they were not recognized by the Vatican and in the early 20th century established a separate and independent denomination. This site is the main seat of the Mariavite bishops. Their most important church was built here in the beginning of the 20th century; it is called Temple of Mercy and Charity and is situated in a pleasant garden on the hill on which the historical centre of Płock is built, near the Vistula river. Poland in total has about 25,000 members of the Old Catholic Mariavite Church, as it is now named, with another 5,000 in France. A smaller sect has 3,000 members in Poland.

Jewish history

The Jewish presence in Płock (they called it Plotzk in Yiddish) dates back many centuries, probably to the 13th and 14th centuries, when records include them. The Polish kings extended rights to them in 1264 and the 14th century, and provided continued political support through the centuries. At the beginning of the 19th century, their more than 1200 residents comprised more than 48% of the city's population in what is considered the cit's Old Town; through the century, their proportions ranged from 30s and 40 percent. It varied as German migrants were arriving in the region, and the area was becoming urbanized, as more people moved to the city. As in other parts of Poland, they were restricted to employment in trades and crafts.Plock: Jewish Community before 1989, Virtual Shtetl, accessed 28 October 2013
In the late 19th century, Jews established two factories to produce farm machines and tools, and the first iron foundry in the city. They had two synagogues and two cemeteries (dating to the 15th century), religious and secular schools, and established a library and hospital. They contributed strongly to the economy and culture of the city. In the early 20th century, they had two newspapers, representing active political parties.
In 1939, Płock had a Jewish population of 9,000, an estimated 26% of the city's total. It had one of the highest proportional Jewish populations in Poland. After Nazi persecution began in 1939, about 2,000 Jews fled the city, with half going to Soviet-controlled territory. They were assigned to locations far from the front. In 1940, the Nazis established a ghetto in Płock. They started actions against the Jews, killing those in an old people's home and sick children, and transporting others to be killed at Brwilski Forest. Ultimately, they transported the Jews to 20 camps and sites in the Radom district, where most died. By 1946, only 300 Jews survived in Płock. While they were active in the new politics, gradually the Jews left, and by 1959 three remained.Płock: Demography, Virtual Shtetl, accessed 28 October 2013 Herman Kruk, a survivor and notable chronicler of life inside the Nazi concentration camps, was born in Płock in 1897.
The small synagogue, built in 1810, was one of the few to survive World War II in the Mazowsze region of Poland. The Great Synagogue was destroyed during the Holocaust. The small synagogue was designated as a historic building about 1960, but deteriorated in physical condition while vacant. It was renovated and adapted for use as a museum, opening in April 2013 as the Museum of Masovian Jews, a branch of the Museum of Płock Mazowiecki. Gruber, "Poland: Płock Synagogue Reopens as a Museum", Samuel Gruber's Jewish Art and Monuments blog, accessed 28 October 2013

Economy

The main industry is oil refining, which was established in 1960. The country's largest oil refinery (Płock refinery) and parent company, PKN Orlen, are located here. It is served by a large pipeline leading from Russia to Germany. Associated industrial activities connected with the refinery are servicing and construction. A Levi Strauss & Co. factory is located in Płock and provides manufacturing jobs.

Education

Transport

Routes

Mass transit

=Buses=

Bus service covers the entire city, with 41 routes.

Bridges in Płock

Sport

Politics

Płock constituency

Members of Parliament (Sejm) elected from Płock constituency

Twin towns - sister cities

Płock is twinned with:



Gallery

File:Wzgorzetumskienoca.jpg|Tumskie Hill featuring Płock Castle
File:Plock Castle.JPG|Płock Castle
File:Solidarity Bridge.JPG|Solidarity Bridge
File:The_pier_in_Płock_at_Vistula_River,_Poland.jpg|Pier in Płock at Vistula River






