[[Clean room design]]

CATEGORIES: Computer law, Cleanroom technology

Clean room design (also known as the Chinese wall technique) is the method of copying a design by reverse engineering and then recreating it without infringing any of the copyrights and trade secrets associated with the original design.  Clean room design is useful as a defense against copyright and trade secret infringement because it relies on independent invention. However, because independent invention is not a defense against patents, clean room designs typically cannot be used to circumvent patent restrictions.
The term implies that the design team works in an environment that is "clean" or demonstrably uncontaminated by any knowledge of the proprietary techniques used by the competitor.
Typically, a clean room design is done by having someone examine the system to be reimplemented and having this person write a specification. This specification is then reviewed by a lawyer to ensure that no copyrighted material is included. The specification is then implemented by a team with no connection to the original examiners.

Examples

A famous example is that of Columbia Data Products who built the first clone of an IBM computer through a clean room implementation of its BIOS.
The more commonly cited case is Phoenix Technologies, which sold its clean room implementation to various PC clone manufacturers.
Another clean room design example is VTech's successful clones of the Apple II ROMs for the Laser 128, the only computer model, among dozens of Apple II compatibles, which survived litigation brought by Apple Computer.
ReactOS is an open source operating system made from clean room reverse engineered components of Windows.

Case law

Clean room design is usually employed as best practice, but not strictly required by law. In NEC Corp. v Intel Corp. (1990), NEC sought declaratory judgment against Intel's charges that NEC's engineers simply copied the microcode of the 8086 processor in their NEC V20 clone. A US judge ruled that while the early, internal revisions of NEC's microcode were indeed a copyright violation, the later one, which actually went into NEC's product, although derived from the former, were sufficiently different to be considered free of copyright violations. Interestingly enough, while NEC themselves did not follow a strict clean room approach in the development of their clone's microcode, during the trial, they hired an independent contractor who was only given access to specifications but ended up writing code that had certain similarities to both NEC's and Intel's code. From this evidence, the judge concluded that similarity in certain routines was a matter of functional constraints resulting from the compatibility requirements, and thus were likely free of a creative element. INTEL : BREAKING NEW GROUND IN THE LAW OF COPYRIGHT, Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, Volume 3, Spring Issue, 1990, pp. 209-222 (particularly p. 213) Although the clean room approach had been used as preventative measure in view of possible litigation before (e.g. in the Phoenix BIOS case), the NEC v. Intel case was the first time that the clean room argument was accepted in a US court trial. A related aspect worth mentioning here is that NEC did have a license for Intel's patents governing the 8086 processor. Elkins, "NEC v. Intel: A Guide to Using "Clean Room" Procedures as Evidence", Computer Law Journal, vol. 4, issue  10, (Winter 1990) pp. 453-481
Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. v. Connectix Corporation was a 1999 lawsuit which established an important precedent in regard to reverse engineering.[ref]
