[[Bottom (TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: 1991 British television programme debuts, 1995 British television programme endings, 1990s British television series, BBC television sitcoms, Bottom (TV series), Television shows set in London, English-language television programming

Bottom is a British sitcom television series that originally aired on BBC2 between 1991 and 1995. It was written by and starring comic duo Adrian Edmondson and Rik Mayall as Richie and Eddie, two flatmates who live on the dole in Hammersmith, London. The programme ran for three series, and was followed by five stage show tours across the United Kingdom between 1993 and 2003, and a feature film Guest House Paradiso. The show is noted for its chaotic, nihilistic humour and violent comedy slapstick.
In 2008, Bottom came in at number 45 in a poll to determine "Britain's Best Sitcom" by the BBC. The show continues to be shown in the UK on Gold and Dave, and has been dubbed in other languages. In Spain the show is known as La pareja basura (The Trash Couple) which aired on Canal+. The theme music was provided by The Bum Notes, a band that once featured Edmondson, and is a cover of "Last Night" by The Mar-Keys.
Plans were made in 2012 for a BBC spin-off series, Hooligan's Island, featuring the Richie and Eddie characters from Bottom. However, that project was cancelled that October prior to production as Edmondson explained that he wished to pursue other interests.

Cast and characters

Recurring characters:

Plot

Eddie and Richie  are two crude, perverted lunatics, with no jobs, very little money and only a filthy flat in Hammersmith (located at "11, Mafeking Parade") to their name. The two spend their time coming up with desperate schemes to acquire sex, attacking each other violently, and getting into dodgy situations.  Bottom is considered the most violent example of britcom, examples of violence include teeth being knocked out, heads crushed in fridge doors, fingers being cut off, penises set on fire, legs being chainsawed off, forks shoved in eyes, pencils forced up noses, bleach being drunk, legs broken and faces shoved in campfires.
Richie is a clumsy, pompous dimwit who attempts to make himself out as being much higher in social status than he actually is, and is both deranged and desperate, as well as being obsessed with sex. Eddie, a cheerfully violent drunkard, meanwhile spends his time getting drunk and wasting the dole money and secretly steals Richie's family heirloom, although he occasionally has moments of demented genius. Eddie's friends—the gormless Spudgun and Dave Hedgehog—both fear Richie, thinking he's psychotic. Although the pair sometimes venture out (the most common location being the local pub, the Lamb and Flag), many of the episodes are set simply within the confines of the pair's squalid flat.

Origins and production

The idea for Bottom was spawned when, in 1991, Edmondson and Mayall co-starred in the West End production of Samuel Beckett's Waiting for Godot at the Queen's Theatre. They have said Bottom was often intended to be a cruder cousin to plays like Waiting for Godot.
However, the origins of the characters are rooted much more deeply. Edmondson and Mayall had been working together since the late 1970s, when they teamed up as "20th Century Coyote". Over the course of their career, they developed the characters of Richie and Eddie, based loosely on their own relationship. The names themselves come from Edmondson's and Mayall's own nicknames for each other; many of Mayall's characters are referred to by some variation of the name "Richard" and "Eddie" is taken from "Eddie Monsoon", Edmondson's nickname since University, which is a play on his then stage name, Ade Edmondson (compare Edina Monsoon in Absolutely Fabulous, who is called "Eddie" by her friend Patsy, and is played by Edmondson's Comic Strip fellow and wife Jennifer Saunders). Edmondson played an unrelated character also called Eddie Monsoon in the second series of The Comic Strip in the episode called Eddie Monsoon: A Life (1984).
The duo would use characters similar to Richie and Eddie in The Young Ones (Rick and Vyvyan, 1982–1984); The Dangerous Brothers (Richard Dangerous and Sir Adrian Dangerous, 1985); Filthy, Rich and Catflap (Richie Rich and Eddie Catflap, 1987); Mr. Jolly Lives Next Door (names not mentioned, 1988); and finally in their adaptation of Waiting for Godot (1991). The series also continued an occasional trend of Edmondson's character having a female name — in this case Edward Elizabeth Hitler.
Edmondson admitted on a 1995 appearance on Pebble Mill at One that the original name for the show was "My Bottom," with the intention of frustrating any continuity announcers introducing the show. Eventually they settled for just Bottom, which both suited the low comedy of the series, and the fact that Richie and Eddie were "at the bottom of life's heap". It also provided the ability to produce episodes titled "'s Up" and "'s Out".
The series was scripted and recorded at thirty-five minutes, with it being edited down to thirty minutes in post production. The original length scripts can be found in the several script books released, and several completely removed scenes were included in the 'Fluff' VHS release that consisted mostly of bloopers and out-takes. Several (but not all) of these scenes, as well as some smaller sections of dialogue also removed for timing reasons, have been re-inserted for DVD releases (although the packaging does not promote this fact).
The final episode of the second series, "'s Out", was not shown as part of the original broadcasts nor initial repeat run. The episode was set on Wimbledon Common, and involved Richie and Eddie encountering a flasher; on 15 July 1992, after the episode was filmed but before it had aired, Rachel Nickell was sexually assaulted and murdered in front of her young son on the Common. Out of sensitivity, and with a hunt for the killer in progress, the BBC decided not to broadcast the episode at that time. It first appeared on the VHS release of series two, before finally being shown for the first time as part of a re-run of series two on 10 April 1995, following the first run of the third series.
Following series two, the series went out of production, with Edmondson and Mayall concentrating on other solo projects, as well as starting the very popular Bottom stage shows; but the series had been so well received that in late 1994, a third series was written and filmed, and broadcast at the start of 1995.
Despite Richie and Eddie seemingly being killed at the end of series three (something which also happened in the episode "Hole", only for them to reappear unharmed in the following episode), a fourth series was written but turned down by the BBC, and several of their live shows as well as Guest House Paradiso have been written and performed since then.

Episodes

The following is a list of all the episodes of Bottom. Every episode's name is meant to be a suffix to the word "bottom".

Series 1 (1991)

Series 2 (1992)

Series 3 (1995)

'*' = Episodes where the episode features only the two main characters
 '+' = Episodes where no part of the episode is set in the flat

Stage shows

The television series spawned five extremely popular live tours, each accompanied by a live recording released on VHS and DVD. The two performers often corpse and seemingly forget their lines and are forced to ad lib - although some audience members have reported the pair supposedly corpsing at the same set points in repeat performances, therefore making it unclear when, and if, genuine corpsing has taken place. During these breaks from the script, the two take part in bouts of one-upmanship, often referencing real-life events (most notably Mayall's well-publicised quad bike accident in 1998) and the area of the venue.
The stage productions were far cruder than the television incarnation, featuring stronger language and new elements such as Richie's latent bisexuality and occasional desire to have sex with Eddie, such is Richie's desperation to have sex with anything.  All five live shows were given the 18 certificate in the UK, as opposed to the 15 certificate given to the TV series.
A performance of each live show was recorded and released on VHS and later DVD. These shows have now been shown on Dave.  The audio from the same performances were also edited for audiotape release.  

Guest House Paradiso

Following the 1997 "Hooligan's Island" tour, Rik Mayall and Adrian Edmondson wrote a spin-off movie together, which Edmondson directed, entitled Guest House Paradiso, released in 1999. The DVD release was advertised as the "Bottom movie", although this had been denied on its cinema release, as in 1999's interview on UK breakfast show The Big Breakfast the week prior to its British cinema release. The style of humour was very much in the same vein as Bottom,Empire review of Guest House Paradiso with a storyline of the pair feeding guests radioactive fish, causing massive amounts of vomiting.

Future of Bottom

Though the pair are currently working apart, a fourth series was at one point written the closing credits on BBC2 it was stated that it will be back for a fourth season
However, in December 2004, almost exactly one year after the Weapons Grade Y-Fronts tour had ended, Adrian Edmondson told the British Daily Mirror newspaper that the pair felt it was "... definitely time to stop. We're both getting too old. We both realised that the show wasn't as engaging as it used to be. We were starting to look a bit ridiculous. ... We're both nearly fifty and we're starting to feel slightly undignified talking about wanking and knobs constantly."
However, on 5 March 2011, the duo made a surprise reunion when Ade Edmondson partook in Let's Dance for Comic Relief. The pre-recorded VT, which saw Ade highlight his sentimental side and his adoration for poetry, ended with Rik Mayall hurling a custard pie in his face. During his performance, dubbed "The Dying Swan," Rik appeared again, this time live on stage, to abruptly end Ade's performance by hitting him several times with a frying pan. Backstage, Ade mentioned that it had been eight years since they've "done anything like that." He went on to come out on top of the voting results and won a place in the final; (in which Rik returned, once again, to drop a ton weight upon Ade)
Following this, Adrian Edmondson mentioned that he and Rik Mayall had conceived an idea for a sitcom set in a retirement home.  "Rik and I have an idea for a sitcom for when we are very, very old. We want to set it in an old people's home 30 years hence. It will be like Bottom, but we will be hitting each other with colostomy bags!" Edmondson said.
In September 2011, Edmondson appeared on the Sunday morning cooking show Something For The Weekend and confirmed to presenter Tim Lovejoy that he and Rik Mayall were planning to reunite and make another series of Bottom, set in an old people's home. However no specific dates were stated regarding the project.

Hooligan's Island

On 19 August 2012, Adrian Edmondson tweeted that he and Rik Mayall had begun writing a new project together, possibly a series based on their 1997 Bottom stage show, Bottom Live 3: Hooligan's Island. On 23 August the BBC announced that they had commissioned a series of Hooligan's Island to be aired on BBC2 in 2013.

DVD releases

In Australia, Bottom: Series One Episodes 1-3 (Comedy Bites) was released on 4 March 2010.








