[[Flavius Aetius]]

CATEGORIES: 396 births, 454 deaths, People from Silistra, Imperial Roman consuls, Magistri militum, Ancient Roman murder victims, Ancient Roman generals, Scythians, Gothic people, Late Roman military personnel, Assassinated military personnel, Praetorian prefects of Gaul, Patricii, 5th-century Romans, Flavii

Aetius  (Latin: Flavius Aetius, 391–454), dux et patricius, was a Roman general of the closing period of the Western Roman Empire. He was an able military commander and the most influential man in the Western Roman Empire for two decades (433-454). He managed policy in regard to the attacks of barbarian federates settled throughout the Western Roman Empire. Notably, he mustered a large Roman and allied (foederati) army to stop the Huns in the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains, ending the devastating Hunnic invasion of Attila in 451.
Along with his rival Count Boniface, he has often been called "the last of the Romans". Edward Gibbon refers to him as "the man universally celebrated as the terror of Barbarians and the support of the Republic" for his victory at the Catalaunian Plains.

Biography

Origins and Family

Aetius was born at Durostorum in Moesia Inferior (modern Silistra, Bulgaria), around 391. 4 His father, Flavius Gaudentius, was a Roman general of Scythian origin,Joseph Cummins, The War Chronicles: From Chariots to Flintlocks, Fair Winds, 2008 p. 110 Google bookThomas J. Craughwell, How the Barbarian Invasions Shaped the Modern World, Fair Winds, 2008, p.60 Google book As the term "Scythian" was frequently used in late antiquity for East Germanic tribes, Joseph Cummins notes that Gaudentius was possibly of Gothic origin. Aetius' mother, whose name is unknown, was a wealthy aristocratic woman of Italian ancestry.8; Zosimus, v.36.1; Chronica gallica 452, 100. Cited in Jones, p. 21. Before 425 Aetius married the daughter of Carpilio,Carpilio had been a comes domesticorum, commander of the imperial guard (Gregory of Tours, ii.8). who gave him a son, also named Carpilio.4.11) and remained at their court as an hostage for some time (Priscus, fr. 8). Later he married Pelagia, widow of Bonifacius, from whom he had a son, Gaudentius. It is possible that he had also a daughter, wife of Thraustila who avenged Aetius' death by killing emperor Valentinian III.8; Priscus, fr. 8; Cassiodorus, Variae, i.4.11; John of Antioch, fr. 201.3 and 204; Marcellinus comes, s.a. 432; Sidonius Apollinaris, Carmina, v.205; Hydatius, 167; Merobaudes, Carmina, iv (poem composed for the first birthday of Gaudentius); Additamenta ad chron. Prosperi Hauniensis, s.a. 455 (only source to cite Thraustila as son-in-law of Aetius). Cited in Jones, p. 21.

Early years and service under Joannes

As a boy, Aetius was at the service of the imperial court, enrolled in the military unit of the Protectores Domestici and then elevated to the position of tribuni praetoriani partis militaris, setting him up for future political eligibility.8; Jones, p. 21. Between 405 and 408 he was kept as hostage at the court of Alaric I, king of the Visigoths.B. History of the Later Roman Empire. XIII.I. p 241 In 408 Alaric asked to keep Aetius as a hostage, but was refused, as Aetius was sent to the court of Uldin, king of the Huns, where he would stay with the Huns throughout much of the reign of Charaton, Uldin's successor..8; Merobaudes, Carmina, iv, 42-46, and Panegyrici, ii.1-4 and 127-143; Zosimus, v.36.1 Aetius's upbringing amongst militaristic peoples gave him a martial vigour not common in Roman generals of the time. XXXV (Chicago: Encyclopædia Britannica, Inc., 1952), p. 559.
In 423 the Western Emperor Honorius died. The most influential man in the West, Castinus, chose as his successor Joannes, a high-ranking officer. Joannes was not part of the Theodosian dynasty and he did not receive the recognition of the eastern court. The Eastern Emperor Theodosius II organized a military expedition westward, led by Ardaburius and his son Aspar, to put his cousin, the young Valentinian III (who was a nephew of Honorius), on the western throne. Aetius entered the service of the usurper as cura palatii and was sent by Joannes to ask the Huns for assistance. Joannes lacked a strong army and fortified himself in his capital, Ravenna, where he was killed in the summer of 425. Shortly afterwards, Aetius returned to Italy with a large force of Huns to find that power in the west was now in the hands of Valentinian III and his mother Galla Placidia. After fighting against Aspar's army, Aetius managed to compromise with Galla Placidia. He sent back his army of Huns and in return obtained the rank of comes et magister militum per Gallias, the commander in chief of the Roman army in Gaul.a. 425; Gregory of Tours, ii.8; Philostorgius, xii.4; Prosp. s.a. 425; Chronica gallica 452, 100; Jordanes, Romana, 328; Jones, p. 22.

First Gallic campaigns

In 426, Aetius arrived in southern Gaul and took command of the field army.B. History of the Later Roman Empire. XIII.I. p 243 At that time Arelate, an important city in Narbonensis near the mouth of the Rhone, under siege from the Visigoths, led by their king Theodoric I. Aetius defeated Theodoric, lifted the Siege of Arelate, and drove the Visigoths back to their holdings in Aquitania.B. History of the Later Roman Empire. XIII.I. p 242 In 428 he fought the Salian Franks, defeating their king Chlodio and recovering some territory they had occupied along the Rhine.4; Prosp. s.a. 425 and 428; Chronica Gallia 452, 102 (s.a. 427); Cassiodorus, Chronica, s.a. 428. Cited in Jones, p. 22. In 429 he was elevated to the rank of magister militum; this was probably the iunior of the two offices of comes et magister utriusque militae, as the senior is known to have been the patricius Flavius Constantinus Felix, the most influential man in those years, and a supporter of Galla Placidia.76 In 430 the Visigoths led by Anaolsus attacked Arelate again but were defeated by Aetius. 1.10 (Vollmer, ad loc.), Hughes, Aetius: Attila's Nemesis, p.76 In May 430, Aetius and the Army accused Felix of plotting against him and had him, his wife, and a deacon killed. Once Felix was dead, Aetius was the highest ranking amongst the magister militae, even if he had not yet been granted the title of patricius or the senior command. During late 430s and 431 Aetius was in Raetia and Noricum, defeating the bacaudae in Augusta Vindelicorum, re-establishing Roman rule on the Danube frontier, and campaigning against the Juthungi.B. History of the Later Roman Empire. XIII.I. p 244, Hughes, Aetius: Attila's Nemesis, p.82 In 431 he returned to Gaul, where he received Hydatius, bishop of Aquae Flaviae, who complained about the attacks of the Suebi. Aetius then defeated the Franks, recapturing Tournacum and Cambriacum.83 He then sent back Hydatius to the Suebi in Hispania.a. 429 e 430; John of Antioch, fr. 201; Hydatius, 92, 93 and 94 (s.a. 430), 95 and 96 (s.a. 431), 98 (s.a. 432); Chronica Gallia 452, 106 (s.a. 430); Jordanes, Getica, 176; Sidonius Apollinaris, Carmina, vii.233. Cited in Jones, pp. 22-23.

War with Bonifacius

While Aetius was campaigning in Gaul, there was an ongoing power struggle between Aetius, Felix, Bonifacius, and the emperor Valentinian's mother and regent Galla Placidia. After the execution of Felix, Aetius and Bonifacius remained as the empire's most influential generals, both constantly vying for the favor of Placidia. In 427 while Bonifacius was away as governor (comes) of Africa, Felix caused him to fall into disfavour with Placidia. Bonifacius was eventually returned to favor by Placidia, but only after Felix had sent Sigisvult and two other armies against him when Aetius warned him of Felix' intentions. In 429, the Vandals exploited this power struggle and crossed over to Africa.3.14-22, 28-29; John of Antioch, fr. 196; Theophanes, AM 5931; Hydatius, 99; Prosperus, s.a. 427. Cited in Jones, p. 23.
In 432 Aetius held the consulate, but Bonifacius was recalled to Italy and received warmly by Placidia. Bonifacius was given the rank of patrician and made the senior comes et magiser utriusque militae, while Aetius was stripped of his military command.B. History of the Later Roman Empire. XIII.I. p 248 Aetius, believing his fall now imminent, marched against Bonifacius and fought him at the Battle of Rimini. Boniface won the battle but was mortally wounded, dying a few months later. Aetius escaped to Pannonia and traveled to the court of his friend, Rua, the king of the Huns. With their help he returned to power, receiving the title of comes et magister utriusque militiae. Aetius then had Bonifacius' son-in-law, Sebastianus, who had succeeded Bonifacius as magister militum, exiled from Italy to Constantinople, bought the properties of Bonifacius, and married his widow Pelagia.a. 432; Chronica Gallica a. 452, 109 and 111 (s.a. 432), 112 (s.a. 433), 115 (s.a. 434); Chronica Gallica a. 511, 587; Additamenta ad chron. Prosperi Hauniensis, s.a. 432; Hydatius, 99; Marcellinus comes, s.a. 432; John of Antioch, fr. 201.3. Cited in Jones, pp. 23-24.

Campaigns against Burgundians, Bacaudae, and Visigoths

From 433 to 450, Aetius was the dominant personality in the Western Empire, obtaining the rank of magnificus vir parens patriusque noster (5 September 435) and playing the role of "protector" of Galla Placidia and Valentinian III while the Emperor was still young.94 At the same time he continued to devote attention to Gaul. In 436, the Burgundians of King Gundacar were defeated and obliged to accept peace by Aetius and Avitus; however, the following year he sent the Huns to destroy them. Apol. Carm. 7.234-240 Allegedly 20,000 Burgundians were killed in a slaughter which probably became the basis of the Nibelungenlied, a German epic. Year 437 saw his second consulship and the wedding of Valentinian and Licinia Eudoxia in Constantinople; it is probable that Aetius attended at the ceremony that marked the beginning of the direct rule of the Emperor. At that time his general Litorius had broken the siege of Narbona and had turned the war in favor of the Romans. The following two years were occupied by a campaign against the Suebi and by the war against the Visigoths; in 438 Aetius won a major battle (probably the Battle of Mons Colubrarius), but in 439 the Visigoths defeated and killed his general Litorius and his Hunnic Foederati. s.a. 439, Hyd. Chronicon, 116 Aetius returned to Gaul after Vetericus had stabilized the situation, and defeated the Visigoths and obtained a treaty.  Hughes, Aetius: Attila's Nemesis, pp. 102-103. On his return to Italy, he was honoured by a statue erected by the Senate and the People of Rome by order of the Emperor; this was probably the occasion for the panegyric written by Merobaudes.a. 435; John of Antioch, fr. 201.3; Prosper of Aquitaine, s.a. 435, s.a. 438, s.a. 439; Cassiodorus, Chronica, s.a. 435; Chronica Gallica a. 452, 117 (s.a. 435), 118 (s.a. 436), 119 (s.a. 437), 123 (s.a. 439); Hydatius, 108 (s.a. 436), 110 (s.a. 437), 112 (s.a. 438), 117 (s.a. 439); Sidonius Apollinaris, vii.234-235 and 297-309; Merobaudes, Panegyrici, i fr. iib 11ff, i fr. iia 22-23, and ii.5-7; Jordanes, Getica, 176; ; Barnes, Timothy, "Patricii under Valentinian III", Phoenix, 29, 1975, pp. 166-168; Jones, pp. 24-26.
In 443, Aetius settled the remaining Burgundians in Sapaudia, south of Lake Geneva. His most pressing concern in the 440s was with problems in Gaul and Iberia, mainly with the Bacaudae. He settled Alans around Valence in 440, and Aurelianum in 442 to contain unrest in Armorica. Gall. s.a. 440, 442, 443, Hughes, Aetius: Attila's Nemesis,128
In Spain, Aetius was slowly losing his grip on the situation. In 441 he appointed Asturius Magister Militum per Hispanias, in order to put down the Bacaudae in Tarraconensis. He was recalled and Merobaudes defeated the Bacaudae of Aracellitanus in 443. In 445 the Romans had the vandals attack Turonium, followed by Vitus who campaigned with a combined force of Romans and Goths in 446, but was ultimately defeated. Chronicn, 125, 128, 131, 134
In 445 Majoran defeated a Frankish siege of Tournacum, followed by a Frankish attack under Clodio in the region of Atrebatum, in Belgica Secunda. Apol. Carm. 5.214 The foederati were stopped in an ambush near Vicus Helena, where Aetius directed the operations while his commander Majorian (later Emperor) fought with the cavalry. 452, 133 (s.a. 438); Sid. Apol. carm. 5.210-218. Cited in Jones, p. 27. Jan Willem Drijvers, Helena Augusta, BRILL, ISBN 90-04-09435-0, p. 12. However, in 450 Aetius had already returned to good terms with the Franks. In that year, in fact, Chlodio died, and the patricius supported his younger son Merovaeus's claim to the throne, Aetius adopted him as his own son and sent him from Rome, where he had been an ambassador, to the Frankish court with many presents. 16; Gregory of Tours, ii.7. It is possible that this happened after the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains in 451 (Jones, p. 27).
The Bacaudae in Armorica revolted again in 447 or 448, and were put down by the Alans of Goar. As a result the leader of the revolt Eudoxius fled to the court of Attila the Hun.a. 448 In 449 the Bacaudae in Spain revolted and sacked Tyrassionis, Illerdensus. The Suebes also entered Tarraconensis to assist the Basilius and his revolt. Chronicon, 141-142

Victory over Attila at the Catalaunian Plains

Before 449 Aetius had signed an agreement with the Huns, allowing some of them to settle in Pannonia, along the Sava River; he also sent to Attila, the king of the Huns, a man called Constantius as a secretary. In 449, Attila was angry for an alleged theft of a golden plate, and Aetius sent him an embassy under Romulus to calm him; Attila sent him as a present a dwarf, Zerco, whom Aetius gave back to his original owner, Aspar. 7 and 8; Suda, Z 29. Cited in Jones, p. 27.
However, the good terms between Romans and Huns did not last, as Attila wanted to attack Gaul; he knew that Aetius was a serious obstacle to his enterprise, and tried to have him removed, but in 451, when the Huns attacked, Aetius was still the commander of the Roman army in Gaul. 199.2; Jordanes, Getica, 191. Cited in Jones, p.27. The large Hunno-German armyIt should be noted that Hunnish armies were never composed entirely of ethnic Huns but contained relative majorities of subject peoples. captured several cities, and proceeded towards Aurelianum.
Aetius, with the help of the influential Gallo-Roman senator Avitus, convinced the Visigoths of king Theodoric I to join him against the external menace; he also succeeded in persuading Sambida (who is falsely accused as having been planning to join the Huns), the Armoricans, the Salian Franks, some of the Saxons, and the Burgundians of Sapaudia to join his forces. Then the joint Roman and Visigothic army moved to relieve the besieged city of Aurelianum, forcing the Huns to abandon the siege and retreat to open country.328-331, 339-341; John Malalas, 358; Jordanes, Getica, 195; Gregory of Tours, ii.7. Cited in Jones, p.27.
On June 20, 451 (some sources place the date on September 20, 451),Bury, J.B., 1923, Chapter 9, § 4. Aetius and Theodoric defeated Attila and his allies at the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains. 452, 139 (s.a. 451), 141 (s.a. 452); Cassiodorus, Chronica, 451; Additamenta ad chron. Prosperi Hauniensis, s.a. 451; Hydatius, 150 (a. 451); Chronicon Paschale, s.a. 450; Jordanes, Getica, 197ff; Gregory of Tours, ii.7; Procopius, i.4.24; John Malalas, 359; Theophanes, AM 5943. Cited in Jones, p. 27. Theodoric died in the battle, and Aetius suggested his son Thorismund retreat to Tolosa to secure his throne, as well as persuading Merovaeus to return to the lands of the Franks; for this reason it is said that Aetius kept all of the booty for his army.7; Jordanes, Getica, 215ff. Cited in Jones, pp. 27-28.
Attila returned in 452 to again press his claim of marriage to Honoria; Aetius was unable to block Attila's advance through the Julian Alps,Prosper, s.a. 452. and Attila invaded and ravaged Italy, sacking numerous cities and razing Aquileia completely, leaving no trace of it behind. Valentinian III fled from Ravenna to Rome; Aetius remained in the field but lacked the strength to offer battle. Gibbon however says Aetius never showed his greatness more clearly in managing to harass and slow Attila's advance with only a shadow force. Attila finally halted at the Po, where he met an embassy including the prefect Trigetius, the ex-consul Gennadius Avienus, and Pope Leo I. After the meeting he turned his army back, having gained neither Honoria's hand nor the territories he desired. A number of practical factors induced Attila to retreat: his army was unable to obtain sufficient food and was suffering from disease; Aetius' army, busy harassing the Huns, had been reinforced by troops sent from the Eastern Empire by the Emperor Marcian, and, finally, Marcian had sent forces north of the Danube to attack the homelands of the Huns under a separate Aetius. (2010) The Fall of the Roman Empire, Pan Macmillan. ISBN 0330529838, 9780330529839, p. 341

Assassination

Although in 453 Aetius had been able to betroth his son Gaudentius to Valentinian's daughter Placidia, Valentinian felt intimidated by Aetius, who had once supported Joannes against him and who, Valentinian believed, wanted to place his son upon the imperial throne. The Roman senator Petronius Maximus and the chamberlain Heraclius were therefore able to enlist Valentinian in a plot to assassinate Aetius. On September 21, 454, when at court in Ravenna delivering a financial account, Aetius was slain by Valentinian's own hand.  Edward Gibbon credits Sidonius Apollinaris with the famous observation, "I am ignorant, sir, of your motives or provocations; I only know that you have acted like a man who has cut off his right hand with his left."Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, ch. 35
Maximus expected to be made patrician in place of Aetius, but was blocked by Heraclius.  Seeking revenge, Maximus arranged with two Hun friends of Aetius, Optila and Thraustila, to assassinate both Valentinian III and Heraclius.  On March 16, 455, Optila stabbed the emperor in the temple as he dismounted in the Campus Martius and prepared for a session of archery practice.  As the stunned emperor turned to see who had struck him, Optila finished him off with another thrust of his blade.  Meanwhile, Thraustila stepped forward and killed Heraclius.  Most of the soldiers standing close by had been faithful followers of Aetius and none lifted a hand to save the emperor.

Legacy

Military legacy

Aetius is generally viewed as a great military commander, indeed he was held in such high esteem by the Eastern Roman Empire, that he became known as the last true Roman of the west.  Most historians also consider the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains as decisively important, crippling Attila by destroying his aura of invincibility.standin.htm Fifteen Decisive Battles of the World "The victory which the Roman general, Aetius, with his Gothic allies, had then gained over the Huns, was the last victory of imperial Rome. But among the long Fasti of her triumphs, few can be found that, for their importance and ultimate benefit to mankind, are comparable with this expiring effort of her arms." Gibbon eloquently states the majority view:
John Julius Norwich caustically referred to the assassination of Valentinian III by his own guards as an act that Valentinian brought on himself by his foolish execution of Aetius, the "Empire's greatest commander."Norwich, John. Byzantium: The Early Centuries Certainly Aetius' military legacy is defined by Châlons, even though he effectively ruled the western empire from 433-450, and attempted to stabilize its European borders under a deluge of barbarians, including foremost, Attila and the Huns.
One of his greatest achievements was the assembling of the coalition against Attila. On this Arther Ferrill says:
While J. B. Bury viewed Aetius as a great military commander, and giant figure of history, he did not consider that the battle itself was particularly decisive. He argues that Aetius attacked the Huns when they were already retreating from Orléans (so the danger to Gaul was departing anyway); and he declined to renew the attack on the Huns next day, precisely in order to preserve the balance of power. (Others suggest that the Huns may have abandoned the siege of Orléans because Aetius's armies were advancing on them.)
Bury suggests that the German victory over the Huns at the Battle of Nedao, three years later, was more important. This determined that there would be no long-term Hunnic Empire in Europe, which Bury thinks would have been unlikely even if they had crushed the Germans on that occasion. For Bury, the result of the battle of the Catalaunian Plains determined chiefly that Attila spent his last year looting Italy, rather than Gaul.  
Bury's view remains in the minority, and the battle is considered crucial by virtually every other major historian.

Controversies

His legacy has been filled with controversy somewhat similar to that of Stilicho. The two best Roman generals of their time, both were killed by jealous emperors, and both left the Empire significantly weaker when they died.  The main difference between the two was that all major historians hail Aetius as a loyal Roman and a pillar of the Empire, while Bury finds Stilicho an unwitting traitor.  While Stilicho was succeeded by Aetius, the Empire simply had no one to take Aetius's place.  At the time of Aetius's death, all the Roman provinces in western Europe had a significant barbarian presence. This had begun a full three generations earlier, when the barbarians were allowed to stay inside the Empire's borders in exchange for peace and their military service.  Edward Gibbon maintains that Aetius could not have expelled them if he had wanted to, as he lacked Roman troops to do the task, and the barbarians were the only army he had to keep the peace.  Gibbon argues in great detail that Roman citizens had lost their martial vigour, with the consequence that the only troops available to Stilicho or Aetius were mostly barbarians.  The Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire, Chapter 38
Gibbon views Aetius in a positive light, as do Norwich, Creasy, Ferrill, and Watson. In 1890, Robert F. Pennel wrote in Ancient Rome from the Earliest Times Down to 476 A.D.
Gibbon believes it was not indifference but rather preoccupation with the Huns and other barbarians that led Aetius to neglect the navy. The subsequent loss of Africa came after Boniface invited the Vandals. Gibbon makes clear that Aetius simply lacked the means to preserve the declining Western Empire in its entirety, while Norwich concludes that he guarded the Empire for three decades and that the after-effects of Aetius's death lie at the feet of the Emperor who foolishly killed him. At a time when Romans did little or none of their own fighting, and no effective navy existed in the West, Aetius had done all he could to preserve some vestige of order in continental Europe.
One could argue that later Emperors Majorian, Leo I and Anthemius saw the necessity of regaining the African provinces. Should Aetius have concentrated his efforts on saving Africa, to the detriment of maintaining some vestige of Empire in Europe?   Michael Grant in his History of Rome states flatly that Aetius was powerless to stop the loss of Africa.  Aetius had begun to move against the Vandals when the forces he sent had to be recalled to fight Attila.  Since Aetius relied on barbarian federates, and as no other Roman General had the respect of those barbarian troops, his death left the Empire bereft of virtually any army in the west.
It is notable that Bury, whilst not believing the Battle of Châlons was significant, did believe in the significance of Aetius's rule in general, saying "From the end of the regency to his own death, Aetius was master of the Empire in the west, and it must be imputed to his policy and arms that Imperial rule did not break down in all the provinces by the middle of the fifth century."  
In the end, there is some disagreement among historians as to the historical place of Aetius.  Was he the protector of Rome for three decades described by Gibbon, Norwich and Bury, the hero of Châlons described by Sir Edward Creasy, or should he be condemned for the loss of Africa, though most historians say he was powerless to stop that loss? Although Bury is cited as a critic of Aetius, he was not, and said of Aetius's death: "Who was now to save Italy from the Vandals?"  The answer was no one.  There was not one figure in the Empire able to take Aetius's place as the champion and defender of the West.  The certain thing about Aetius's place in history is that he will forever be remembered as the last great Western Roman General, and the General who defeated the dreaded Attila the Hun. 

Aetius in the arts

Aetius is the protagonist of several operas titled Ezio (Italian for Aetius), as well as Verdi's opera Attila.
Aetius is played by Powers Boothe in the 2001 American TV Miniseries Attila. Here he is  portrayed as an antagonist whose methods are contrasted with Attila. Aetius is portrayed as the heroic 'Last of the Romans' in William Napier's Attila trilogy (2005), uniting the Romans and the Goths in one final, titanic battle to stop the Huns in their tracks, in the epochal Battle of the Catalaunian Fields. 
While he does not appear in person, Aetius' battle with Attila is documented in detail in Jack Whyte's book The Eagle, during a conversation between King Arthur and Seur Clothar.
Aetius, Galla Placidia and Stilicho all appear as central characters in Jose Gomez-Rivera's historical novel Flavius Aetius: The Last Conqueror, published in 2004. 
Aetius, Attila and Theodoric all appear in Michael Curtis Ford's fourth novel entitled The Sword of Attila, published by Thomas Dunne Books in 2005.
Aetius, Attila, Honoria, Leo and others figure in Louis de Wohl's vivid historical novel Throne of the World (1946), later republished with the alternative title Attila the Hun.
Aetius is an important supporting character in Thomas B. Costain's 1959 novel The Darkness and the Dawn, as are Attila and Valentinian III. The novel also includes an account of the Battle of the Catalaunian Plains.
The movie 476 A.D., about the period of Flavius Aetius and his victory over Attila the Hun at the Battle of Châlons, as well as following the events leading to the End of the Roman Empire on September 4, 476 A.D, will be released in 2013, by Ivan Pavletić.





Bibliography


