[[Hydrangea]]

CATEGORIES: Hydrangea, Flowers, Christmas plants, Flora of Japan, Flora of Korea, Flora of Portugal, Flora of China, Flora of India, Eudicot genera

Hydrangea or  ( by climbing up trees. They can be either deciduous or evergreen, though the widely cultivated temperate species are all deciduous.
Having been introduced to the Azores, H. macrophylla is now very common, particularly on Faial, which is known as the "blue island" due to the vast number of hydrangeas present on the island.
Species in the related genus Schizophragma, also in Hydrangeaceae, are also often known as hydrangeas. Schizophragma hydrangeoides and Hydrangea petiolaris are both commonly known as climbing hydrangeas.
There are two flower arrangements in hydrangeas. Mophead flowers are large round flowerheads resembling pom-poms or, as the name implies, the head of a mop. In contrast, lacecap flowers bear round, flat flowerheads with a center core of subdued, fertile flowers surrounded by outer rings of showy, sterile flowers. The flowers of some rhododendrons can appear similar to those of some hydrangeas, but Rhododendron (including azalea) is in a different order.

Life cycle

Hydrangea flowers are produced from early spring to late autumn; they grow in flowerheads (corymbs or panicles) at the ends of the stems. In many species, the flowerheads contain two types of flowers, small fertile flowers in the middle of the flowerhead, and large, sterile bract-like flowers in a ring around the edge of each flowerhead. Other species have all the flowers sterile and of the same size.

Colors and soil acidity

In most species the flowers are white, but in some species (notably H. macrophylla), can be blue, red, pink, light purple, or dark purple. In these species the color is affected by soil pH. macrophylla and H. serrata cultivars, the flower color can be determined by the relative acidity of the soil: an acidic soil (pH below 6), by the influence of sundry agents in the soil, such as alum or iron, will usually produce flower color closer to blue,. whereas an alkaline soil (pH above 6) will produce flowers more pink.  This is caused by a color change of the flower pigments in the presence of aluminium ions which can be taken up into hyperaccumulating plants.

Partial list of species

Cultivation and uses

Hydrangeas are popular ornamental plants, grown for their large flowerheads, with Hydrangea macrophylla being by far the most widely grown with over 600 named cultivars, many selected to have only large sterile flowers in the flowerheads. Some are best pruned on an annual basis when the new leaf buds begin to appear. If not pruned regularly, the bush will become very 'leggy', growing upwards until the weight of the stems is greater than their strength, at which point the stems will sag down to the ground and possibly break. Other species only flower on 'old wood'. Thus new wood resulting from pruning will not produce flowers until the following season.
Hydrangeas are moderately toxic if eaten, with all parts of the plant containing cyanogenic glycosides.Erowid Hydrangea VaultHigh danger hydrangea? The Guardian | French police hunt gang peddling 'cheaper weed'
In Japan, ama-cha,甘茶 meaning sweet tea, is another herbal tea made from Hydrangea serrata, whose leaves contain a substance that develops a sweet taste (phyllodulcin). For the fullest taste, fresh leaves are crumpled, steamed, and dried, yielding dark brown tea leaves. Ama-cha is mainly used for kan-butsu-e (the Buddha bathing ceremony) on April 8 every year—the day thought to be Buddha's birthday in Japan. Ama-cha is poured over a statue of Buddha in the ceremony and served to people in attendance. A legend has it that on the day Buddha was born, nine dragons poured Amrita over him; ama-cha is substituted for Amrita in Japan.
In Korean tea, Hydrangea serrata (hangul:산수국 hanja:) is used for an herbal tea called sugukcha (수국차) or ilsulcha (이슬차).
The pink hydrangea has risen in popularity all over the world, but especially in Asia. Pink hydrangeas have many different meanings, but generally means, "You are the beat of my heart," as described by the celebrated Asian florist Tan Jun Yong, where he was quoted saying, "The light delicate blush of the petals reminds me of a beating heart, while the size could only match the heart of the sender!"Roll Magazine

Gallery

Image:Hortensiapink.JPG|Hydrangea macrophylla
Image:Hydrangea close up.
Image:Pink Hydrangea Flowers.jpg|Flowers
Image:Hydrangea-heads-pale.
Image:Blue Hydrangea.jpg|Hydrangea macrophylla, flowers
Image:hydrangea_redoute. painted by the botanical artist Redouté.
Image:Hydrangea quericifolia2.jpg|Hydrangea quercifolia
Image:Hydrangea leaves.jpg|Hydrangea macrophylla, leaves
Image:Wild hydrangea var annabelle. Annabelle Hydrangea arborescens
Image:Hydrangea_arborescens. Annabelle Hydrangea arborescens
Image:Hydrangea_arborescens_annabelle. Hydrangea arborescens.
Image:Hydrangea-aspera-zoo-cgn-07074-mutante. sargentiana 
Image:BlueHydrangea.JPG 
Image:Hydrangea paniculata IMG 6629.JPG|Hydrangea paniculata
Image:Hydranchia.JPG|Hydrangea flowers from Kerala, India
Image:hydrangea.arp.750pix. macrophylla, Watermouth Castle, north Devon, England.
Image:Hydrangeas corner.
Image:Hydrangea-08-10-08.
Image:hydrangeea.
File:Hudaraku-san Kannonji 補陀洛山（ふだらくさん）丹州観音寺 P6260051.
File:Flowers and rain.JPG|Hydrangea flowers

Diseases






