[[Lubin]]

CATEGORIES: People from Lubin, Populated places established in the 12th century, Cities and towns in Lower Silesian Voivodeship, Lubin County, Cities in Silesia

Lubin, ) is a town in Lower Silesian Voivodeship in south-western Poland. From 1975–1998 it belonged to the former Legnica Voivodeship. Lubin is the administrative seat of Lubin County, and also of the rural district called Gmina Lubin, although it is not part of the territory of the latter, as the town forms a separate urban gmina. As of the 2009 census, the town had a total population of 74,552.

Geography

Lubin is situated on the Zimnica river in the Lower Silesian historical region, about  north of Legnica.
The town is one of the major industrial locations in Lower Silesia, with the headquarters of the third-largest Polish corporation, the KGHM Polska Miedź mining company.

History

The area of Lubin lies midway between the main settlements of two West Slavic Ślężanie tribes, the Dziadoszanie and the Trzebowianie, whose lands were both subdued by King Mieszko I of Poland about 990. It is unclear which of the two tribes, if either, founded the town. One legend states that the town derives its name from Luba, a young man credited with slaying a giant bear that had been terrifying the inhabitants. A papal bull dated to circa 1155 mentions Lubin as one of 13 Silesian castellanies.
According to legend the Polish voivode Piotr Włostowic of Dunin (1080–1153) had a fieldstone church built on the hill in the west of Lubin, where about 1230 a castellany and a village arose that until today is called the Old Town (). The settlement in the Duchy of Głogów was first mentioned under the Old Polish name of Lubin in a 1267 deed by Pope Clement IV as a fiefdom of Trzebnica Abbey.
The New Town of what is today Lubin was probably founded in the 1280s under the rule of Duke Przemko of Ścinawa by German settlers, maybe descending from Lower Lorraine or Franconia, in the course of the Ostsiedlung. It obtained its city rights about 1295. In 1329 Duke John of Ścinawa paid homage to King John of Bohemia, who upon the death of John's brother Duke Przemko II of Głogów in 1331 invaded the lands, which were incorporated into the Kingdom of Bohemia and shared the political fortunes of the Silesian crown land.
From 1348 Lubin Castle served as the residence of the Piast duke Louis I the Fair and his descendants. In the quarrel with his elder brother Duke Wenceslaus I of Legnica a 1359 judgement by Emperor Charles IV alloted Lubin along with Krzeczyn Wielki, Krzeczyn Mały, Osiek and Pieszków to Louis. About 1353 he had a manuscript on the life of Saint Hedwig of Andechs drawn up, later called Schlackenwerth (Ostrov) Codex, which today is kept at the J. Paul Getty Museum. In the late 15th century the Lubin parish church was rebuilt in its present-day Gothic style, its high altar was moved to Wrocław Cathedral in 1951. Under the rule of Duke George I of Brieg (d. 1521) and his widow Anna of Pomerania, the reformer Caspar Schwenckfeld, born in nearby Osiek, made the town a centre of the Protestant Reformation in Lower Silesia. With Bohemian Silesia, Lubin in 1526 fell to the Habsburg Monarchy, it  was devastated several times during the Thirty Years' War and conquered in the Silesian wars of King Frederick II of Prussia in the mid-18th Century, becoming part of Prussia and later Germany. In 1871, after creation of the German Empire, it was connected by rail to Liegnitz and Glogau.
During World War II about 70% of the town's buildings were destroyed. In 1945 between the days of 8–10 February Red Army soldiers mass-murdered 150 German pensioners in an old-people's home and 500 psychiatric hospital patients in Lubin. The German population was forcibly expelled and gradually replaced by Poles, many of them themselves expellees from areas of eastern Poland annexed by the Soviet Union.
In 1982 the town saw significant demonstrations against the martial law declared by the Communist regime, which were put down by its death squads, resulting in the murder of three people.Lubin 1982 - wydarzenia z 31 sierpnia 1982, stan wojenny, fotografie - Solidarność, historia współczesna, historia stanu wojennego, ZOMO, milicja, podziemie, władza ludowa, demonstracja, opozycja, Michał Adamowicz, Andrzej Trajkowski, Mieczysławie Poźniak, ofiaryDefiance in the Streets - TIME

Education

Sports

Transport

Roads:
No. 3 (International E65) - Jakuszyce-Legnica-Lubin-Zielona Góra-Gorzów Wielkopolski-Szczecin-Świnoujście
No. 36 - Rawicz-Lubin-Prochowice(-Wrocław)
Lubin has an international airport with a 1000m concrete/asphalt runway.

Born in Lubin

International relations

Twin towns - Sister cities

Lubin is twinned with:






