[[Miramax Films]]

CATEGORIES: Film production companies of the United States, Companies established in 1979, Miramax Films films, Film distributors, Former Walt Disney Company subsidiaries, Disney acquisitions, Disney production studios

Miramax is an American entertainment company known for distributing independent and foreign films. Founded in 1979 by Bob and Harvey Weinstein and headquartered in New York City and Cambridge, Massachusetts, Miramax was a leading independent film motion picture distribution and production company before it was acquired by The Walt Disney Company in 1993. The Weinsteins operated Miramax with more creative and financial independence than any other division of Disney, until 2005 when they decided to leave the company and founded The Weinstein Company. Miramax was sold by Disney to Filmyard Holdings, a joint venture of Colony Capital, Tutor-Saliba Corporation, and Qatar Investment Authority in 2010, ending Disney's 17-year involvement with the studio.

History

Founded by the brothers Harvey and Bob Weinstein in Buffalo, New York in 1979, the company was named by combining the first names of their parents Max and Miriam,Weinstein, Bob (April 2003). "All Thanks to Max". Vanity Fair. and was originally created to distribute independent films deemed commercially unfeasible by the major studios.
The company's first major success came when the Weinsteins teamed up with British producer Martin Lewis and acquired the U.S. rights to two concert films Lewis had produced of benefit shows for human rights organization Amnesty International. The Weinsteins worked with Lewis to distill the two films into one film for the US marketplace. The resulting film The Secret Policeman's Other Ball (US Version) was a successful release for Miramax in the summer of 1982. This release presaged a modus operandi that the company would undertake later in the 1980s of acquiring films from international filmmakers and reworking them to suit US sensibilities.
Among the company's other breakthrough films as distributors in the late 1980s and early 1990s were Scandal; Sex, Lies, and Videotape; Tie Me Up! Tie Me Down!; The Crying Game and Clerks. The company also made films such as Pulp Fiction, Flirting with Disaster, Heavenly Creatures and Shakespeare in Love.
In addition to those successes, Miramax acquired and/or produced many films that did extraordinarily well financially. The company became one of the leaders of the independent film boom of the 1990s. Miramax produced or distributed seven films with box office grosses totalling more than $100 million; its most successful title, Chicago, earned more than $300 million worldwide."Chicago". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved February 17, 2012.
The company was also exceptionally successful in securing Academy Award nominations for its releases, many of which resulted in Oscar wins.
In 1992, Miramax began a deal with Paramount Pictures for VHS and TV distribution of certain Miramax releases. Paramount would also distribute theatrically certain releases that might have commercial appeal (such as Bob Roberts, though video rights to that film were owned by Live Entertainment – which is now Lions Gate Entertainment). Paramount still owns video rights to some of these films today, while TV distribution is now with Trifecta Entertainment & Media,

Disney era

In 1993, Miramax was purchased for $60 million by The Walt Disney Company. Harvey and Bob Weinstein continued to operate Miramax until they left the company on September 30, 2005. During their tenure, the Weinstein brothers ran Miramax independently of other Disney companies. Disney, however, had the final say on what Miramax could release (see Fahrenheit 9/11, Kids and Dogma, for examples). Disney's Buena Vista Home Entertainment division released Miramax output.
Miramax operated, until 2005, the label Dimension Films, specializing in genre films and created the Scream and Scary Movie film franchises.
After extensive negotiations and much media and industry speculation, on March 30, 2005, Disney and the Weinsteins announced that they would not renew their contractual relationship when their existing agreements expired at the end of September 2005. The primary source of dispute was over distribution of Fahrenheit 9/11 by Michael Moore. Disney's film studio consortium, Buena Vista Motion Pictures Group assumed control of Miramax, which was projected to have a smaller annual production budget. The Weinsteins started a new film production company called simply The Weinstein Company, and took the Dimension Films label with them. The Miramax name remained with the film studio owned by Disney. Production at Miramax was taken over by Daniel Battsek,
On October 3, 2009, Disney announced that the staff of Miramax was to be reduced by 70%, and the number of releases would be reduced by half to just three films per year. The label's marketing, distribution and administrative functions, which had operated independently, would be folded into the parent studio in Burbank. The move became effective in January 2010. "Disney to slash Miramax Films staff to 20, reduce releases to 3 a year"
Though Disney Studio Chairman Dick Cook was a staunch supporter of Miramax, the brand was less of a priority for Bob Iger, whose strategy was to focus on Disney's branded mass entertainment that can be exploited across Disney's theme parks, television and consumer products. Following Disney's $4-billion acquisition of Marvel Entertainment in 2010, Cook was succeeded by Rich Ross. (September 24, 2009). "Will there be a place for Miramax in Disney's new movie script?". Los Angeles Times. As a result, Miramax was relegated to the status of distribution label.. Business Insider/Associated Press. February 9, 2010
On November 23, 2010, it was reported that Google was interested in purchasing the digital rights to the Miramax library to improve the premium content offerings on YouTube, and compete with similar services such as Hulu and Netflix.

Post-Disney

On December 3, 2010, Disney closed the sale of Miramax for US $663 million to Filmyard Holdings, an investment group and joint venture of Colony Capital, Tutor-Saliba Corporation, and Qatar Investment Authority. The sale included 700 film titles, as well as books, development projects and the "Miramax" name. Mike Lang, the former News Corporation business development executive who was selected as the CEO of Miramax,
After the sale was closed, some movies already developed at Miramax, including The Tempest and Gnomeo & Juliet, were eventually released by Disney under its Touchstone Pictures banner, and theatrical distribution of Don't Be Afraid of the Dark has been shifted to FilmDistrict and Focus Features respectively.
On December 16, 2010, Miramax reunited with Bob and Harvey Weinstein, forming a joint venture with the brothers' current studio, The Weinstein Company, to develop sequels to films from the former studio. Sequels to Rounders, Bad Santa, and Shakespeare in Love were among the films said to be in development under the new deal at the time, while sequels to Bridget Jones's Diary, Cop Land, From Dusk till Dawn, Swingers, Clerks, Shall We Dance?, and The Amityville Horror were billed as "potential" projects. Miramax and TWC also said they would partner on new television shows and special edition home entertainment releases. Three years later, Miramax and the Weinsteins entered into a 20-year production/development agreement, which will cover "multiple titles for films, TV series and live stage productions."Miramax TWC Linkup Homecoming Means 'Shakespeare In Love' And 'Rounders' Sequels, And 'Good Will Hunting' Series
On February 11, 2011, Miramax entered a home entertainment agreement with Lions Gate Entertainment and StudioCanal to distribute over 550 titles from the Miramax library on DVD and Blu-ray. Lionsgate will handle distribution in the United States, with StudioCanal handling European distribution. As of 2012, Warner Home Video had assumed Japanese home entertainment distribution of the Miramax catalog.blu-ray.com/Scream/27876/
On March 1, 2011, Miramax renewed its Canadian distribution deal with Alliance Films, which had always been a distributor of Miramax releases in Canada from 1987 to 2008 and will replace Maple Pictures (which previously distributed Miramax releases from 2008 to 2011). Alliance will have access to all of the company's library titles once again as well as distribution rights to new Miramax films produced in the next five years.
On March 25, 2011, Miramax entered licensing talks with various digital premium services, including Netflix, Amazon, Google, and Hulu, for digital distribution of the former company's film library.
On September 6, 2011, Miramax announced that hundreds of its film titles were available digitally in Latin American territories including Brazil, Mexico and Argentina under a multi-year agreement with Netflix. "Netflix Lands International Licensing Deal With Miramax For Latin American Subscribers". TechCrunch. On September 28, 2011, Miramax signed a multi-year agreement to bring a broad array of its films to Hulu subscribers in Japan. "Miramax Strikes Deal With Hulu to Offer Its Movies in Japan". The Hollywood Reporter. On November 16, 2011, Miramax announced a multi-year digital licensing agreement to stream a broad range of films to Netflix members in the U.K. and Ireland,Lunden, Ingrid (November 16, 2011). "Miramax Is The Latest To Ink A Deal With Netflix For UK Launch". paidContent. and on November 21, 2011, Brazil's NetMovies and Miramax entered into a multi-year movie streaming agreement. "Miramax Announces Deal With NetMovies To Stream Films In Brazil". Deadline New York.
On January 29, 2012, Panasonic announced that the Miramax App will be one of the new apps to join Viera Connect in 2012, enabling users to access Miramax's library of films."Panasonic Announces Significant Expansion of VIERA Connectâ„¢ Smart VIERA Apps and Features for 2012". Breitbart/PR Newswire. January 9, 2012 On January 31, 2012, Miramax signed a video-on-demand agreement with BT Vision that gives BT Vision Unlimited subscribers instant access to a range of Miramax's award-winning movies."BT Vision and Miramax Sign On Demand Movie Deal". Enhanced Online News. January 31, 2012
On March 16, 2012, Mike Lang stepped down from as Miramax CEO.  Miramax CFO Steve Schoch will run the company until a permanent successor can be found."Miramax CEO Mike Lang Resigns". Yahoo! Movie News. March 16, 2012
In March 2012, Miramax and Britain's branded multichannel broadcaster UKTV announced a licensing agreement under which a number of the studio's hit films will be made available to UKTV subscribers across its basic pay and DTT channels. "Miramax Inks Deal With UKTV for Selected Movie Titles Across Britain and Ireland". The Hollywood Reporter.
On April 1, 2012, Miramax and Sky Italia, Italy's leading pay TV platform, announced a deal under which that network will air many of the leading titles from Miramax's collection across all of its pay television channels in Italy. (April 2, 2012). "Miramax, Sky Italia Announce Film Distribution Deal". The Hollywood Reporter. On April 2, 2012, Miramax and the Samuel Goldwyn Jr. Family Trust announced that Miramax's Global Sales team will manage global licensing of the library produced by the legendary Samuel Goldwyn across a broad range of television and digital platforms. "Miramax to rep Goldwyn library" Variety.
On January 22, 2013, Ron Tutor sold his stake in Miramax to co-owner Qatar Investment Authority."Hollywood Deadline" Ron Tutor Sells Stake In Miramax: Report deadline.com, Retrieved on January 22, 2013

Criticism

The company has been criticized for delaying or withholding release of Asian films to which it acquires the U.S. distribution rights
Harvey Weinstein has been criticized for editing films he acquires or develops, such as Asian films like Princess Mononoke. Weinstein has always insisted that such editing was done in the interest of creating the most financially viable film. "I'm not cutting for fun", Harvey Weinstein said in an interview. "I'm cutting for the shit to work. All my life I served one master: the film. I love movies."

List of Miramax films

Miramax Family

Miramax Family (also known as Miramax Family Films) is the family division of Miramax Films created in 1991 and shut down in 2006. Some films distributed by them are:

Further reading






