[[Mary Lou Retton]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, Living people, American female artistic gymnasts, Gymnasts at the 1984 Summer Olympics, Olympic gold medalists for the United States, Olympic silver medalists for the United States, Olympic bronze medalists for the United States, Olympic gymnasts of the United States, Olympic medalists in gymnastics, Originators of elements in artistic gymnastics, International Gymnastics Hall of Fame inductees, University of Texas at Austin alumni, Virginia Republicans, American Christians, American people of Italian descent, People from Fairmont, West Virginia

Mary Lou Retton (born January 24, 1968) is an American former gymnast. At the 1984 Summer Olympics, she won five medals, including gold in the individual all-around competition. Her performance made her one of the most popular athletes in the United States.

Personal life

Retton was born in Fairmont, West Virginia, of Italian heritage (her family's original surname was "Rotunda").
Retton lived in Houston, Texas,

Gymnastics career

Inspired by watching Nadia Comăneci on television, Retton took up gymnastics in her hometown of Fairmont. She was coached by Gary Rafaloski. She then decided to move to Houston, Texas, to train under Romanians Béla and Márta Károlyi, who had coached Nadia Comăneci before their defection to the United States.  Under the Károlyis, Retton soon began to make a name for herself in the US, winning the American Cup in 1983 and placing second to Dianne Durham (another Károlyi student) at the US Nationals that same year.  Retton missed the World Championships in 1983 due to a wrist injury.  Nevertheless, Retton won the American Classic in 1983 and 1984, as well as Japan's Chunichi Cup in 1983.
After winning her second American Cup, the US Nationals, and the US Olympic Trials in 1984, Retton suffered a knee injury when she was performing a floor routine at a local gymnastics center. She had sat down to sign autographs when she felt her knee lock, forcing her to undergo an operation five weeks prior to the 1984 Summer Olympics.  She recovered just in time for the Olympics in Los Angeles, California. In the competition, which was boycotted by the Soviet bloc nations except for Romania, Retton was engaged in a close battle with Ecaterina Szabo of Romania for the all-around gold medal. Trailing Szabo (after uneven bars and balance beam) by 15 hundredths with two events to go, Retton scored perfect 10s on floor exercise and vault — the last event in an especially dramatic fashion, as there had been fears that her knee injury and the subsequent surgery might impair her performance. Retton won the all-around gold medal by 0.05 points, beating Szabo and becoming the first American to receive the all-around gold medal. She also became the first female gymnast from outside Eastern Europe to win the individual all-around gold.
At the same Olympics, Retton won four additional medals: silver in the team competition and the horse vault, and bronze in the floor exercise and uneven bars. For her performance, she was named Sports Illustrated magazine's "Sportswoman of the Year". She appeared on a Wheaties box, and became the cereal's first official spokeswoman.

Post-gymnastics career

An ardent Christian conservative, she was an outspoken supporter of the Reagan Administration in the United States. She appeared in a variety of televised ads supporting Ronald Reagan. Retton delivered the Pledge of Allegiance with fellow former gymnast and 1996 Olympic gold medalist Kerri Strug on the second night of the 2004 Republican National Convention.
Retton's hometown of Fairmont, West Virginia, named a road and park in the town after her. She retired from gymnastics after winning an unprecedented third American Cup title in 1985. She later had cameo appearances as herself in Scrooged and Naked Gun 33⅓: The Final Insult.
During the 1990s, Retton worked as a spokeswoman for the U.S. drugstore chain Revco.
In 1993, the Associated Press released results of a sports studyRetton, Hammill most popular American athletes; Wilstein, Steve, Associated Press; 17 May 1993 in which Retton was statistically tied for first place with fellow Olympian Dorothy Hamill as the most popular athlete in America.womenssportsfoundation.aspx
In 1997, Retton was inducted into the International Gymnastics Hall of Fame.
Retton has many commercial endorsements, including bowling and shampoo.

TV appearances

Medical conditions

Retton was born with hip dysplasia, a condition aggravated by her years as a competitive gymnast. After experiencing increased pain she had hip replacement surgery on her left hip in her mid-30s.  Retton also suffered from incontinence due to an overactive bladder,webmd. Accessed 3 October 2011.biospace.biospace.aspx?NewsEntityId=17519120". Accessed 4 October 2011. arthritis, and hemorrhoids. She serves as a paid spokesperson for Biomet and for Pfizer to publicize treatment for these conditions. In October 2008, she visited the Biomet facility in Warsaw, Indiana and met the machinists who produced her hip implant.[ref]

</ref>

Gymnastics legacy

Retton has an uneven bars move called "The Retton Flip", a transition (front flip) from low- to high-bar, resulting in the gymnast perched or "sitting" on top of the high bar.  This move and many others like it are no longer in the Code of Points no longer in use on bars.










