[[Roanoke College]]

CATEGORIES: Historic American Buildings Survey in Virginia, Universities and colleges in Virginia, Oak Ridge Associated Universities, National Register of Historic Places in Salem, Virginia, University and college buildings on the National Register of Historic Places in Virginia, Educational institutions established in 1842, Council of Independent Colleges, Lutheranism in Virginia, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Education in Salem, Virginia, Roanoke College, Visitor attractions in Salem, Virginia, Schools in Salem, Virginia

Roanoke College is a private, coeducational, four-year liberal-arts college located in Salem, Virginia, United States, a suburban independent city adjacent to Roanoke, Virginia.
Roanoke has approximately 2,100 students (55% female, 45% male) who represent approximately 40 states and 25 countries.  The college offers 35 majors, 30 minors, 23 concentrations, and pre-professional programs in dentistry, engineering, law, medicine, ministry, nursing, pharmacy, and veterinary medicine. Roanoke awards bachelor's degrees in arts, science, and business administration and is one of 280 colleges with a chapter of the Phi Beta Kappa honor society.
Roanoke is an NCAA Division III school competing in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference.  The college fields varsity teams in nine men's and ten women's sports.  Roanoke's athletic nickname is Maroons and the mascot is Rooney, a maroon-tailed hawk.
Roanoke is ranked 2nd on the 2014 U.S. News and World Report list of Up-and-Coming National Liberal Arts Colleges.usnews.com/best-colleges/rankings/national-liberal-arts-colleges/up-and-coming  

History

Early years

Roanoke College was founded in 1842 as a boys' preparatory school by Lutheran pastors David F. Bittle and Christopher C. Baughmann. 9 No. 1 Originally located in Augusta County near Staunton, the school was named Virginia Institute until chartered on January 30, 1845 as Virginia Collegiate Institute.historicmarkers.  The Virginia General Assembly granted a college charter on March 14, 1853 and approved the name Roanoke College, chosen in honor of the Roanoke Valley. Bittle then served as the college's first president.  
Roanoke was one of the few Southern colleges that remained open throughout the American Civil War. 7 No. 2  The student body was organized into a corps of cadets and fought with Confederate forces near Salem in December 1863."Dear Old Roanoke": a ... – Google Books The students were outmatched and quickly forced to surrender, but the Union commander allowed them to return to their studies in exchange for a promise to put down their arms. The college company was formally mustered into the Confederate Army, Virginia Reserves, on September 1, 1864, but the students did not see combat before the war ended. A monument honoring Salem's Confederate soldiers, dedicated in 1909 by the local chapter of the United Daughters of the Confederacy, is on the grounds of the former Roanoke County courthouse, which is now a college academic building.Salem Museum | Walking Tour

International students

Roanoke enrolled its first international students in the late 19th century; the first Mexican student in 1876 and the first Japanese student in 1888.roanoke.pdf "Dear Old Roanoke": a ... – Google Books The first Korean to graduate from an American college or university, Surh Beung Kiu, graduated in 1898."Dear Old Roanoke": a ... – Google Books

Coeducation

Roanoke became coeducational in 1930 when women were admitted to counter a decline in male enrollment caused by the Great Depression.  A small number of women were previously offered limited admission as non-degree seeking students – most from Elizabeth College, a sister Lutheran women's college destroyed by fire in 1921; the students finished the 1921–22 academic year at Roanoke.A Guide to Historical Salem | Vol. 4 No. 3 The first women's residence hall, Smith Hall, opened in 1941.  Roanoke's student body is now more than fifty percent female.
Roanoke adopted the alumnae of Marion College, a sister Lutheran women's college in Marion, Virginia, when it closed in 1967.  Marion Hall, a large residence hall constructed in 1968, honors the college and its alumnae.

National championships

Roanoke athletic teams have won two national championships: the 1972 NCAA Division II men's basketball championship and the 1978 Division II men's lacrosse championship.  Roanoke's third national championship occurred in 2001 when student Casey Smith won an individual championship in the Division III women's 10,000m track and field event.  In 2009, student Robin Yerkes secured Roanoke's fourth national championship when she won an individual championship in the Division III women's 400m track and field event.Roanoke College Athletics

Sesquicentennial

Roanoke experienced exceptional growth in the 1980s and 1990s.  The campaigns financed the renovation and construction of numerous facilities including the library, the student center, and the arts and performance center.
Roanoke's tenth president, and first female president, Sabine O'Hara, took office in 2004.  O'Hara, an expert in sustainable economic development, was recruited to lead formulation of a new strategic plan, one that would advance the college into the next decade.  In 2006, Roanoke unveiled "The 2015 Plan", which calls for expanded academic offerings, an increase in enrollment from 1,900 to 2,100 students, renovation and construction of facilities to support increased enrollment, and growth in endowment resources to support financial aid for more students.  O'Hara resigned in 2007 after unveiling the plan; her tenure was short, but productive with four new residence halls constructed, two academic buildings renovated, a new sports stadium completed, and records set for applications and enrollment.  

President Michael C. Maxey

Michael C. Maxey became Roanoke's eleventh president on July 1, 2007; he was unanimously elected by the board of trustees having served as Roanoke's vice president for college relations and dean of admissions and financial aid from 1992 until his selection as president.  He holds undergraduate and graduate degrees from Wake Forest University.
Maxey has provided dynamic leadership highlighted by Roanoke's current campaign plan – "Roanoke Rising" – that seeks to raise $200 million to finance facilities, endowment, and special projects; the college had already secured $130 million before the campaign was publicly launched on April 13, 2013.com/  The primary objectives of the campaign are a new athletics center and an expanded science complex.  Roanoke is completing its strategic plan as well; the student body now numbers over 2,100 students, several buildings have been renovated including Roanoke's first LEED certified building (Lucas Hall on the Turbyfill Quadrangle), and a new residence hall constructed, the fifth since 2005.  The residence hall is Roanoke's second LEED certified building (New Hall on the "Athletic" Quadrangle).edu/Student_Life/Where_to_Live/Residence_Halls/New_Residence_Hall.htm

Leaders

Principals of Virginia Institute, 1842–1853

Presidents of Roanoke College, 1853 – Present

Lutheran heritage

Established in 1842, Roanoke is the second oldest (Gettysburg College is the oldest) Lutheran-affiliated college in the United States and is associated with three synods of the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America:  the Virginia Synod, the Metropolitan Washington, D.C. Synod, and the West Virginia–Western Maryland Synod.  The Virginia Synod is headquartered in Bittle Hall, the college's first library now occupied by the Bishop of the Virginia Synod.  
Historically, the college has had a small Lutheran population.  Roanoke's student body represents numerous religious denominations; Roman Catholic is the most prevalent, Lutherans total less than ten percent.  Roanoke has an active religious life program for students seeking that experience, but religion is not prominent; students are not required to attend religious services or to take classes in religion.  
Roanoke honors its Lutheran heritage with an independent board of trustees; the church does not control administration.  The dominant aspect of Roanoke's Lutheran heritage is the college's commitment to academic freedom.  Martin Luther encouraged freedom from oppression along with freedom for learning and freedom for service in the community.

Academics

Roanoke is accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools to award bachelor's degrees in arts, science, and business administration.
Roanoke offers 35 majors, 30 minors, and 23 concentrations. Each year, Roanoke accepts approximately 35 incoming freshmen and first-term sophomores to become members of the Honors Program.edu/Academics/Honors_Program/More_Information.  Honors students are offered numerous special learning experiences including plays, lectures, concerts, and service projects.
Roanoke has 15 academic departments:Academic Departments – Roanoke College – Salem, Virginia
Roanoke also has eight pre-professional programs:Pre-Professional Programs – Roanoke College – Salem, Virginia
In 2010, Roanoke was recognized as one of the top 16 colleges or universities where it is hardest to receive an "A" grade.  Roanoke students receive an "A" approximately 30 percent of the time.  Other schools included in the top 16 were Princeton University, Boston University, and MIT.com's Sweet 16 of Tough Graders

Statistics

Student body

Roanoke has approximately 2,100 students (55% female, 45% male) who represent approximately 40 states and 25 countries.  Approximately 60% of the student body is from Virginia; the majority of out-of-state students are from Maryland, Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania.  In 2010, for the tenth consecutive year, Roanoke received a record number of freshman applications, over 4,400 for approximately 550 openings.edu/News_and_Events/Campus_News/Application_record.htm 

Faculty

Roanoke has a tenure-track faculty of 125 (95% hold the highest degrees in their fields) plus a variety of adjunct professors selected from the business, political, and other communities for their subject matter expertise.

Library

Roanoke's Fintel Library, named after Dr. Norman Fintel, eighth president of the college, has a collection of over half a million items.

Special programs

Roanoke has several special programs that bring distinguished visitors to the college.
The Henry H. Fowler Public Affairs Lecture Series brings respected world leaders to campus.  Guest lecturers have included former presidents Gerald Ford and Jimmy Carter, former Secretaries of State Henry Kissinger and Lawrence Eagleburger, former Polish president Lech Wałęsa, former German chancellor Helmut Schmidt, former Pakistan Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto, and numerous other diplomats and public officials.  In addition, the Copenhaver Artist-in-Residence Program brings visiting artists to campus, including theatrical productions, while the Charles H. Fisher Lecture Series brings distinguished scientists to campus.

Upward Bound

The Roanoke College Upward Bound Program (a TRIO program) was established in 1965 and has helped more than 1,200 socio-economically challenged high school students prepare for college.edu/A-Z_Index/Upward_Bound.roanoke.  The program offers classes in math, science, English, foreign languages, computer science, and physical education during the summer and during the academic year.
Roanoke cancelled the 2012 summer session; due to fiscal constraints, the Congress did not renew the five-year grant that funds the program.[ref]


Student organizations

Roanoke has over 100 student organizations that provide learning experiences outside the classroom.
The Student Government Association at Roanoke exists to give students a voice in the administration. It is the highest level student organization. It is made up of an executive council (President, Vice President, Secretary, and Treasurer) and the Senate (21 members).Student Government Association (SGA) – Roanoke College – Salem, Virginia
Student publications and media opportunities include the Brackety-Ack campus newspaper,Brackety-Ack – Roanoke College Student Newspaper – Roanoke College – Salem, Virginia a literary magazine titled On Concept's Edge,Student Publications and Media – Roanoke College – Salem, Virginia the Roanoke Review literary journal,  and the student-operated radio station named WRKE-LP.

Greek life

Organizations

Roanoke has recognized chapters of nine social and two service Greek organizations.edu/Student_Life/Clubs_and_Organizations/Greek_Life.htm
Fraternities:
Sororities:
Service fraternities and sororities:

Greek history

Roanoke has a long history of Greek organizations.  The Black Badge Society, organized at Roanoke in 1859, was one of the earliest Greek organizations established in the South... – Google Books The fraternity became inactive at Roanoke in 1879, but had expanded to include chapters at eight other colleges and universities, the last of which became inactive in 1882.
In addition to the Black Badge Society, Roanoke's inactive fraternities include:
Roanoke added sororities for the first time in 1955; the three organizations, Delta Gamma, Chi Omega, and Phi Mu, were housed in Crawford Hall for many years until they moved to Chesapeake Hall in 2006.  Alpha Sigma Alpha, the fourth sorority, was established in 2002.  Roanoke's newest sorority is Delta Sigma Theta, the college's first historically African-American sorority, established in 2005.  Phi Mu (Gamma Eta Chapter) became inactive in 2014.

Housing

Roanoke's Greek organizations reside in college-owned housing.  Roanoke's original fraternity row, constructed in the 1960s, no longer houses the college's fraternities; the buildings have been converted into residence halls.  The Greek organizations are now housed in various locations on the Roanoke campus.  Kappa Alpha Order, Pi Kappa Alpha, Sigma Chi, and Alpha Sigma Alpha have houses.  Delta Gamma, Chi Omega, Phi Mu, and Pi Kappa Phi occupy Chesapeake Hall, a new residence hall that opened in 2006; each organization has a floor in the four-story building.

Student participation

Roanoke's Greek organizations have a prominent role on campus, but are not dominant; approximately 25% of the Roanoke student body participates in Greek life.  Freshmen students must wait until spring semester to join a fraternity or sorority.  Roanoke has over 100 student organizations that provide many extracurricular opportunities other than Greek life.

Campus

Quadrangles

Roanoke's campus is relatively self-contained with most academic buildings and residence halls built around three quadrangles:  the John R. Turbyfill Front Quad,The Council of Independent Colleges: Historic Campus Architecture Project the "Back Quad", and a new "Athletic Quad" formed by Roanoke's newest residence halls and athletic facilities.  The campus is lined with brick sidewalks and has been recognized for its landscaping and views of the surrounding mountains.  The largest Rock Elm in the United States is on the Turbyfill Front Quad.wdbj7.story  The only Alice Aycock sculpture in Virginia is on the Back Quad.[ref] 


Architecture

The campus architecture is a blend of traditional and modern styles.  The Administration Building, constructed in 1848 with bricks made on-site, and six other buildings, Miller Hall, Trout Hall, Bittle Hall, Francis T. West Hall, Monterey House, and the Old Salem Post Office are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.  Other newer buildings are more modern.  These include Antrim Chapel, the science complex comprising Trexler Hall, Massengill Auditorium, and the Life Science Building, the fine arts building named F. W. Olin Hall, and the C. Homer Bast Physical Education and Recreational Center.

National Register of Historic Places

Seven college buildings are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.  The buildings, with year of construction, are: 

Residence halls

Approximately 70% of the student body resides on campus.  Residence halls for freshman students include Bartlett Hall, Smith Hall, Crawford Hall, Marion Hall, Blue Ridge Hall, Shenandoah Hall, and Tabor Hall.  Upperclass students reside in Afton Hall, Bowman Hall, Chalmers Hall, Wells Hall, Yonce Hall, Fox Hall, Catawba Hall, Augusta Hall, Caldwell Hall, Allegheny Hall, Ritter Hall, Chesapeake Hall, and Elizabeth Hall.
Wells Hall, Yonce Hall, and Fox Hall, known collectively as "The Sections", are Roanoke's most notable residence halls.  Located on the Back Quad, the buildings were constructed in six stages from 1910 to 1958.The Council of Independent Colleges: Historic Campus Architecture Project

President's House

The President's House is in a residential district approximately one-half-mile north of the Roanoke campus on North Market Street.  The colonial revival mansion, one of the largest private homes in the area, was constructed in the late 1930s.  It was purchased in the mid-1950s by John P. Fishwick, president of the Norfolk and Western Railway and a Roanoke alumnus, and was acquired by the college in 1968.  Presidents Kendig, Fintel, Gring, O'Hara, and Maxey have lived in the house.
In April 2011, the President's House and its garden were opened to the public during Virginia's Historic Garden Week.  Selection of sites to participate is very competitive; only five Roanoke Valley residences were featured in 2011.edu/News_and_Events/Campus_News/Presidents_House_on_2011_Home_Tour.htm

Elizabeth Campus

Additional college facilities, mostly residence halls and athletic fields, are located on the site of Elizabeth College, a Lutheran women's college that closed in 1922.  The area, approximately two miles east of the main campus, is referred to as Elizabeth Campus.  Houses for Alpha Sigma Alpha, Kappa Alpha Order, Pi Kappa Alpha, and Sigma Chi are on Elizabeth Campus along with Elizabeth Hall, a large residence hall with apartments for non-freshman students.

College Avenue – Main Street

Roanoke acquired three office buildings on College Avenue across from Francis T. West Hall in 2005–06.  The buildings have been renovated to provide classroom and office space for various college departments.
In 2013, Roanoke purchased two Main Street buildings:  the Bank Building, located on the corner of College Avenue and Main Street across from Francis T. West Hall, and the Old Salem Post Office, located on the corner of Main and Market Streets.[ref]  
  Roanoke had leased the bank building for several years preceding the purchase and will continue to use it for academic purposes.  The post office building, listed on the National Register of Historic Places, is the seventh building on the Roanoke campus listed on the national register; it will be renovated for academic use.

Recent construction

With the opening of three new residence halls in 2005, Caldwell Hall, Allegheny Hall, and Ritter Hall, known collectively as "CAR", the Roanoke campus has more than 50 buildings.  Chesapeake Hall, another new residence hall, opened in 2006.
Trout Hall and Miller Hall, two of Roanoke's oldest buildings, reopened in 2005 and 2006 after complete renovation and a new campus entrance, highlighted by a large colonnade, opened in 2005.
Donald J. Kerr Stadium, a 2,000 seat multi-sport artificial turf athletic complex, opened in 2007.  The artificial surface complements the college's natural surface athletic fields.  The field is used primarily as the home venue of the men's and women's lacrosse teams, but is also suitable for soccer and field hockey.
Roanoke opened the Market Street Complex in 2009; three existing residence halls, Blue Ridge Hall, Shenandoah Hall, and Tabor Hall, were renovated and enlarged to form the complex, which houses approximately 200 freshmen.
Lucas Hall, an academic building constructed in 1941, reopened in 2010 after complete renovation and is Roanoke's first LEED certified building.
Roanoke opened a new 200-bed residence hall in 2012; the building, the college's second LEED certified building, completes the third quadrangle along with Kerr Stadium and Caldwell, Allegheny, and Ritter Halls.  The college previously completed an eight-court competition tennis complex on the Elizabeth Campus and a large parking lot on the main campus; the projects replaced existing facilities and made land available for the new residence hall.comRoanoke College's proposed parking lot – Roanoke.  
Roanoke's next (as of July 2013) large construction project is a new recreation and athletics center; Bowman Hall, a residence hall that opened in 1965, will be razed to make land available for the Morris M. Cregger Center.com/  In addition, Roanoke has purchased a significant number of private homes on Market Street adjacent to campus, which will provide land for future college growth.com

Athletics

Roanoke is an NCAA Division III school competing in the Old Dominion Athletic Conference. The college fields varsity teams (known as "Maroons"; the college's athletic colors are maroon and gray) in nine men's and ten women's sports.  Roanoke is particularly noted for the strength of its men's lacrosse program and women's track and field.

History

Roanoke athletics began in 1870 when the college fielded its first baseball team.  The men's basketball program, added in 1911, received national recognition in 1939 when the team finished third in the National Invitational Tournament, the premiere postseason tournament of that era; and with more than 1,300 wins (almost 2,000 games played; better than 60% winning percentage over more than 90 years) is among the most successful in the nation.  Frankie Allen, arguably the greatest men's basketball player in Virginia college history (2,780 points and 1,758 rebounds), graduated from Roanoke in 1971.
Roanoke teams have won two national championships:  the 1972 NCAA Division II men's basketball championship and the 1978 Division II men's lacrosse championship.  In 2001, Roanoke student Casey Smith won an individual national championship in the Division III women's 10,000m track and field event.  In 2009, student Robin Yerkes secured Roanoke's fourth national championship when she won an individual championship in the Division III women's 400m track and field event. Yerkes is the most decorated athlete ever to graduate from Roanoke, earning 12 All-American honors in multiple events.  
Roanoke teams have won 101 conference championships (as of May 2013; 47 in men's sports, 54 in women's sports) since the college joined the ODAC as a founding member in 1976.roanoke.aspx?tab=all-timeodacchampionships  Roanoke has won more conference championships than any other ODAC school in men's lacrosse (18), women's basketball (13), women's lacrosse (10) and softball (8).  Roanoke and Hampden-Sydney College are tied for the most conference championships in men's basketball (10).

Recent achievements

2011–2012
On January 28, 2012, the men's basketball team defeated Eastern Mennonite University to win the 1,300th game in program history.   With the win, Head Coach Page Moir achieved 375 victories; he is the winningest coach in ODAC history.roanoke.aspx?rc=601&path=mbball
Roanoke completed the 2011–12 academic year with two ODAC championships:  women's outdoor track and field and softball.roanoke.aspx?path=wtrack[ref]
  Roanoke finished second in the conference in golf and women's lacrosse.roanoke.aspx?path=golf  
The softball team defeated Christopher Newport University to win the NCAA Division III Regional Championship and advanced to the NCAA Division III Final Four.  Roanoke ended the season ranked fourth in the nation after losses to Montclair State University and Linfield College.roanoke.aspx
Roanoke athletes won the top ODAC scholar-athlete of the year awards; golfer Brandon Ketron won the men's award, track athlete Sarah Witt won the women's award.[ref]  
  In addition, 91 Roanoke student-athletes were named to the ODAC Academic All-American team.roanoke.aspx?path=athdept
Shelley Olds, class of 2003, finished seventh in the women's road race at the 2012 Olympic Games in London, the best result for an American cyclist since 1992.edu/News_and_Events/Campus_News/Shelley_Olds_Olympics_7th_Place.
2012–2013
Scott Allison retired in 2012 after 27 seasons as head men's soccer coach; in his final season, the team won the ODAC championship and advanced to the opening round of the NCAA Division III tournament. 
Roanoke completed the 2012–13 academic year having won four ODAC championships:  men's soccer, women's indoor track and field, women's outdoor track and field, and men's lacrosse.roanoke.aspx?path=witrack    The men's soccer team advanced to the NCAA Division III tournament; the team was defeated by Emory University.  The men's lacrosse team advanced to the NCAA Division III tournament as well, defeating Centre College before losing to Lynchburg College.  The softball team advanced to the NCAA Division III tournament as an at-large seed; the team was defeated by Christopher Newport University and Emory University.
Roanoke placed 111 student-athletes on the 2012–13 ODAC Academic All-American team, the most in college history.roanoke.aspx?path=athdept

Teams

Roanoke teams compete in the following sports:

Football

Roanoke's football program was discontinued during World War II after more than 60 years of competition.A Guide to Historical Salem | Vol. 3 No. 3 Initially a club sport, the first varsity game occurred in 1892 against Allegheny Institute. The final game was a 42–0 loss to Catawba College on November 13, 1942.
In 1985, the Salem city government constructed an 8,000 seat stadium adjacent to Roanoke's Elizabeth Campus, two miles from the main campus, location of athletic fields and residence halls.  The stadium hosts the annual NCAA Division III football championship even though Roanoke does not compete in the sport.

Rivalries

Roanoke and Washington and Lee University have been rivals for more than a century.  The rivalry, strongest in men's lacrosse, is fueled by a long history of athletic contests; the schools have competed since the 1870s.  The rivalry is also influenced by conference affiliation and geography; the schools are charter members of the Old Dominion Athletic Conference and are located within an hour drive of each other on Interstate 81.  Both schools traditionally have nationally ranked men's lacrosse teams and are usually ranked in the top ten when meeting late in the season.  In addition to Washington and Lee, contests with Hampden-Sydney College and Lynchburg College draw the most attention; both are members of the Old Dominion Athletic Conference.
Roanoke and Virginia Tech were rivals in the late 19th and early 20th centuries when Virginia Tech was a small college.  In 1877, the schools competed in Virginia Tech's first intercollegiate baseball game (Virginia Tech won 53–13), and in 1896, Virginia Tech first wore its current athletic colors – maroon and burnt orange – in a football game against Roanoke.

School colors

Roanoke has two sets of school colors, blue and gold for academic use and maroon and gray for athletic use. This dates to 1907 when the baseball team needed new uniforms, but could not obtain any in blue and gold.  Maroon and gray uniforms were purchased as a substitute.  Within a few years, maroon and gray were adopted as Roanoke's official athletic colors.  The college athletic nickname became Maroons as well.  In recent years, black has been added as an accent color so Roanoke athletic uniforms are often maroon, gray, and black.

Nickname and mascot

Roanoke's athletic nickname is Maroons and the mascot is Rooney, a maroon-tailed hawk.edu/News_and_Events/Campus_News/Rooney.Roanoke College's new mascot lands on campus – Roanoke.

In the press

Roanoke is ranked 2nd on the 2014 U.S. News and World Report list of Up-and-Coming National Liberal Arts Colleges.usnews.com/best-colleges/rankings/national-liberal-arts-colleges/up-and-coming  
In 2005, George Keller, a noted American expert on higher education, authored Prologue to Prominence, A Half Century at Roanoke College. Published by Lutheran University Press, the book documents the college's academic and financial success over the past half century.  Other books about Roanoke College include The First Hundred Years, Roanoke College 1842–1942 by William E. Eisenberg and Dear Ole Roanoke, a Sesquicentennial Portrait, 1842–1992 by Dr. Mark F. Miller.  The books were written as a part of the college's centennial and sesquicentennial celebrations.
Campus Activities Magazine named Roanoke the "2009 Campus of the Year" in recognition of the college's social and academic programs.wikipedia.php?title=Roanoke_College&action=edit&section=42  Roanoke was selected over four other finalists, Ohio State University, Central Michigan University, Boston University, and Marshall University.
Roanoke was listed on the President's Higher Education Community Service Honor Roll in 2012.rcnewsblog.nationalservice.asp  The college is one of 17 colleges and universities in Virginia, and one of 513 nation-wide, named to the list, which recognizes community outreach and civic engagement.

Notable alumni

Business

Education

Government

Other

Roanoke and the railway

The Norfolk and Western Railway, now Norfolk Southern Corporation, has provided career opportunities for many Roanoke alumni; the NWR was headquartered in Roanoke until 1982 and is a major employer in western Virginia. Roanoke graduates who have advanced to leadership positions include Stuart T. Saunders and John P. Fishwick, former presidents of the NWR; John R. Turbyfill, retired vice-chairman, NSC; John S. Shannon, retired executive vice president, NSC; and William T. Ross, Sr., retired assistant vice president, NWR.
Roanoke has strong historic ties to the railway due in part to its alumni connections. The NWR named a Pullman car "Roanoke College" in honor of the college and Fishwick's Salem residence is now the college President's House. Saunders and Turbyfill served as chairman of Roanoke's board of trustees. In 2007, David R. Goode, retired chairman, NSC, endowed Roanoke's Center for Learning and Teaching in honor of his father, sister, and brother-in-law, all Roanoke graduates.






