[[List of Israeli cities]]

CATEGORIES: Cities in Israel, Demographics of Israel, Lists of cities by country, Lists of cities by population, Lists of cities in Asia, Lists of populated places in Israel, Ranked lists of country subdivisions

  
Israeli cities in this list are the cities in Israel and Israeli settlements with city status in the West Bank. The list is based on the current index of the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics (CBS). Within Israel's system of local government, an urban municipality can be granted a city council by the Israeli Interior Ministry when its population exceeds 20,000. The term "city" does not generally refer to local councils or urban agglomerations, even though a defined city often contains only a small portion of an urban area or metropolitan area's population.

List

Israel has 14 cities with populations over 100,000, including Jerusalem at over 500,000 (including occupied East Jerusalem), and Tel Aviv. In all, there are 75 Israeli municipalities granted "city" status by the Ministry of the Interior.
The list includes four Israeli settlements in the West Bank, an area outside of sovereign Israeli territory. The United Nations Security Council,Resolution 446, Resolution 465, Resolution 484, among others the United Nations General Assembly,
The following table lists all Israeli cities by name, district, area, and population, according to the Israel Central Bureau of Statistics' 2009 census:

Fastest growing cities

Eight cities grew by more than 10% between the years 2005 and 2010:

Cities with a declining population

The population of six cities was lower in 2010 than in 2005:

Cities with a significant number of immigrants

Following is a list of cities with an immigrant population of over 10%. The Israel Central Bureau of Statistics considers immigrants to be those who arrived in Israel after 1990. Most came from the former Soviet Union, although a considerable number came from Ethiopia and Argentina. This data is correct as of December 2004:



Notes






