[[James Cook University]]

CATEGORIES: Universities in Queensland, James Cook University, Townsville, Cairns, Buildings and structures in Townsville, Buildings and structures in Cairns

James Cook University (JCU) is a public university and is the second oldest university in Queensland, Australia. JCU is a teaching and research institution. The University's main campuses are located in the tropical cities of Cairns, Singapore and Townsville. JCU also has study centres in Mount Isa, Mackay and Thursday Island. A Brisbane campus, operated by Russo Higher Education, delivers undergraduate and postgraduate courses to international students. The University's main fields of research include marine sciences, biodiversity, sustainable management of tropical ecosystems, genetics and genomics, tropical health care and tourism.

Coat of Arms explained

As a corporate body, James Cook University bears arms comprising four main elements – shield, crest (Captain James Cook's ship, HMS Endeavour, in full sail), supporters (a pair of brolgas with open wings), and motto.
The University motto is Cresente Luce, which means light ever increasing. This motto was first proposed by Professor FW Robinson, professor of English at the University of Queensland, in 1962 for the then University College of Townsville. The university college was established as a college of the University of Queensland. Adopted in 1963, the motto remained unchanged after James Cook University of North Queensland was established and incorporated in April 1970, and later became James Cook University.

History

The university is named after the British sea captain James Cook.
After being proclaimed on 20 April 1970 as an Act of Queensland Parliament, The University College of Townsville became James Cook University of North Queensland on 29 April 1970. The official opening of the university was conducted by Queen Elizabeth II. In 2003 the University opened an international campus in Singapore. The university further expanded its presence by establishing another campus in Brisbane, Queensland in 2006.
A year after JCU's proclamation, Cyclone Althea struck the Townsville region. This, together with the destruction caused by Cyclone Tracy in Darwin 1974, prompted the establishment of a cyclone research facility.

JCU Townsville campus redevelopment

The Discovery Risediscoveryrise.au project was announced in September 2007.

Campuses and other facilities

James Cook University operates three main campuses, located in the tropical cities of Cairns and Townsville in Australia, and the international city of Singapore. Russo Higher Education delivers JCU courses at its Brisbane centre on behalf of the University.
The University also operates study centres in Mackay, Mount Isa and Thursday Island. These study centres provide programs and support for students living in rural and remote areas.

Cairns Campus

The Cairns Campus of James Cook University is located 15 kilometres north of the Cairns central business district, in the suburb of Smithfield. JCU moved to this location from its original inner-city site in 1996. Also located on the campus grounds are Queensland Tropical Health Alliance (QTHA) facilities, Australian Tropical Herbarium (ATH), the Australian Tropical Forest Institute (ATFI), JCU Dental, and The Cairns Institute. Over 4 000 students study at JCU Cairns, including about 410 international students.

Singapore International Campus

James Cook University's Singapore campus was opened in 2003. On 18 July 2008, James Cook University Singapore relocated to a new campus at 600 Upper Thomson Road. In 2012 there were 2 984 students studying with JCU Singapore. This campus provides courses in business, education, information technology, psychology, marine science, and tourism and hospitality, to international and domestic Australian students. James Cook University Singapore fully adapt Australian curriculum and all degree certification is awarded from James Cook University Australia. 

Townsville Campus

JCU's Townsville campus is the University's largest campus and is located on 386 hectares of bush land in the suburb of Douglas, near the army base and the lee of Mt Stuart. Around 12 300 students study at JCU Townsville, including over 1 400 international students. Close to the university is the new Townsville Hospital and Tropical North Queensland Institute of TAFE.tafe.gov.

Brisbane

JCU Brisbane, operated by Russo Higher Education, delivers undergraduate and postgraduate courses in business and information technology to international students, on behalf of James Cook University.

Mackay study centre

JCU's study centre in Mackay is called the Mackay Education and Research Centre (MERC) and is located at the Mackay Base Hospital. It accommodates the teaching of the Bachelor of Social Work and Bachelor of Nursing Science (pre registration) as well as provide facilities for medical and dental placements.

Mount Isa study centre

The Mount Isa Centre for Rural and Remote Health (MICRRH) provides training, development and support of the rural and remote health workforce and the management of key health issues in the rural and remote setting. The centre offers the Bachelor of Nursing Science with a special emphasis on rural, remote and Indigenous health care.

Thursday Island study centre

This study centre is located in the heritage courthouse building on Thursday Island and provides teaching and learning facilities for nursing and education students in the Torres Strait region, including the northern tip of Australia. The Thursday Island study centre opened in 2003.

Other facilities

Orphius Island research Station, Fletcherview Research Station, Paluma rainforest field station, Kirrama rainforest/sclerophyl field station, Daintree Rainforest Observatory (DRO) research facility, Townsville Veterinary Clinic, and the Veterinary Teaching Resource Centre in Malanda.

Academia

The university serves as a catchment area for students from this region and beyond. In 2012, JCU's student population was at 20,913, which includes 6,348 international students.
In 2001 the university took in its first medical students in its newly formed School of Medicine. An undergraduate veterinary degree was added to the university for the first time in 2006 and in 2009 the Bachelor of Dental Surgery commenced. Today the university offers undergraduate and postgraduate degrees in arts, social sciences and psychology, business and information technology, creative arts, education, engineering, law, medicine and health, multimedia journalism and languages, and science. Some courses are available externally.
James Cook University in 2007 became a member of Innovative Research Universities Australia (now called Innovative Research Universities). Innovative Research Universities (IRU) is a network of seven comprehensive universities committed to conducting research of national and international standing.

Study Abroad

JCU currently has Exchange partners in Austria, Brazil, Canada, Colombia, Denmark, Ecuador, France, Germany, Great Britain, Hong Kong, Japan, Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, New Caledonia, Norway, Slovenia, Sweden, USA.

Organisational structure

The university is organised into faculties, schools, departments, research centres and institutes.

Faculty of Arts, Education and Social Sciences

Faculty of Law, Business and the Creative Arts

Faculty of Medicine, Health and Molecular Sciences

Faculty of Science and Engineering

Centres of Excellence

Institutes

Research centres

Rankings

JCU has consistently ranked in the top 400 academic universities world wide since 2010, as measured by the Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU). For 2012, JCU ranked in the top four percent of universities in the world by ARWU.
* unavailable data
In the Commonwealth Government's Excellence in Research for Australia 2012 National Report, JCU research received the highest ranking of 'well above world standard' (rating 5) in the areas of environmental science and management, ecological applications and medical microbiology. The University also received an 'above world standard' ranking for research in the areas of materials engineering, immunology, tourism, biological sciences, agricultural and veterinary sciences, fisheries sciences, veterinary sciences, inorganic chemistry, earth sciences, geochemistry, and geology.

Residential colleges and halls of residence

JCU's Douglas Campus in Townsville has seven on-campus residential colleges, which can accommodate 1,478 students. Services offered by these facilities vary from self-catering to fully catered, and support to students. They are situated in the tropical gardens of the campus.

Residential colleges

Halls of Residence

JCU manages four non-denominational halls for 770 students

Notable alumni and staff

Notable alumni

Notable staff

See Also





 
 

