[[Eric S. Raymond]]

CATEGORIES: 1957 births, Living people, American bloggers, American libertarians, American technology writers, Anarcho-capitalists, Free software programmers, Geeknet, Open content activists, People from Boston, Massachusetts, People with cerebral palsy, Science fiction fans, Science fiction critics, University of Pennsylvania alumni, American anarchists

Eric Steven Raymond (born December 4, 1957), often referred to as ESR, is an American computer programmer, author and open source software advocate. After the 1997 publication of The Cathedral and the Bazaar, Raymond was for a number of years frequently quoted as an unofficial spokesman for the open source movement. He is also known for his work on the popular Roguelike game Nethack for which he wrote the Guidebook, in addition to being a member of the "Dev-Team". More recently, he is recognized in certain circles for his 1990 edit and later updates of the Jargon File, currently in print as the The New Hacker's Dictionary. Raymond, The New Hacker's Dictionary, MIT Press, (paperback ISBN 0-262-68092-0, cloth ISBN 0-262-18178-9)

Biography

Born in Boston, Massachusetts, USA 1957, Raymond lived in Venezuela as a child. His family moved to Pennsylvania, USA in 1971., including a lecture at Microsoft.Open Source Advocate Invited To Microsoft
He wrote CML2, a source code configuration system; while originally intended for the Linux kernel, it was rejected by kernel developers. Linus Torvalds on the other hand said in a 2007 mailing list post that as a matter of policy, the development team preferred more incremental changes.
In 2000–2002 Raymond wrote a number of HOWTOs still included in the Linux Documentation Project. His personal archive also lists a number of non-technical and very early non-Linux FAQs. His books, The Cathedral and the Bazaar and The Art of Unix Programming, discuss Unix and Linux history and culture, and user tools for programming and other tasks. In 1998 he received and published a Microsoft document expressing worry about the quality of rival open-source software.
Raymond is currently the admin of the project page for gpsd, a daemon that makes GPS data from a receiver available in JSON format.

Open source

Raymond says he began his programming career with writing proprietary software, between 1980 and 1985. In a 2008 essay he "defended the right of programmers to issue work under proprietary licenses because I think that if a programmer wants to write a program and sell it, it's neither my business nor anyone else's but his customer's what the terms of sale are". In the same essay he also said that the "logic of the system" puts developers into "dysfunctional roles", with bad code the result.
Raymond also coined an aphorism he dubbed "Linus' Law", inspired by Linus Torvalds: "Given enough eyeballs, all bugs are shallow", that first appeared in The Cathedral and the Bazaar.; The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings on Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary, O'Reilly Media 2001, 241pp. ISBN 0-596-00108-8. p30
Raymond became a prominent voice in the open source movement and co-founded the Open Source Initiative in 1998, taking on the self-appointed role of ambassador of open source to the press, business and public. The internal white paper by Frank Hecker that led to the release of the Mozilla (then Netscape) source code in 1998 cited The Cathedral and the Bazaar as "independent validation" of ideas proposed by Eric Hahn and Jamie Zawinski. Hahn also described the book as "clearly influential". ISBN 0-7382-0670-9. p. 190
Raymond has refused to speculate on whether the "bazaar" development model could be applied to works such as books and music, not wanting to "weaken the winning argument for open-sourcing software by tying it to a potential loser".
Raymond has had a number of public disputes with other figures in the free software movement. As head of the Open Source Initiative, he argued that advocates should focus on the potential for better products. The "very seductive" moral and ethical rhetoric of Richard Stallman and the Free Software Foundation fails, he said, "not because his principles are wrong, but because that kind of language ... simply does not persuade anybody".

Political activism

Raymond is a member of the Libertarian Party. He is a gun rights advocate. As 3D printers become less expensive and more ubiquitous, this could be a major step in the right direction."

Bibliography

By Eric Raymond

=Books=

=Writings posted or archived on his website=








