[[Little Miss Marker]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 films, American films, Black-and-white films, Films based on short fiction, Films directed by Alexander Hall, Gambling films, United States National Film Registry films, 1930s drama films

Little Miss Marker (also known as The Girl in Pawn) is a 1934 American drama film directed by Alexander Hall.  The screenplay was written by William R. Lipman, Sam Hellman, and Gladys Lehman after a short story of the same name by Damon Runyon. The film stars Shirley Temple, Adolphe Menjou, and Dorothy Dell in a story about a little girl held as collateral by gangsters. The film was Temple's first starring role in a major motion picture and was crucial to establishing her as a major film star. The film was named to the United States National Film Registry and has been remade several times.

Plot

The film tells the story of "Marky" (Temple), whose father gives her to a gangster-run gambling operation as a "marker" (collateral) for a bet. When the man loses his bet and commits suicide, the gangsters are left with the girl on their hands. They decide to keep her temporarily and use her to help pull off one of their fixed races, naming her the owner of the horse to be used in the race.  
Marky is sent to live with bookie Sorrowful Jones (Menjou). Initially upset about being forced to look after the girl, the gangster eventually begins to develop a father-daughter relationship with her. His fellow gangsters become fond of her and begin to fill the roles of her extended family. Bangles (Dell) - girlfriend of gang kingpin Big Steve (Bickford), who has gone to Chicago to place bets on the horse - also begins to care for Marky, and to fall in love with Sorrowful, whose own concern for Marky shows he has a warm heart beneath his hard-man persona. Sorrowful, encouraged by Bangles and Marky, gets a bigger apartment, buys Marky new clothes and himself a better cut of suit, reads her bedtime stories, and shows her how to pray.  
However, being around the gang has a somewhat bad influence on the child, and she begins to develop a cynical nature and a wide vocabulary of gambling terminology and slang. Bangles and Sorrowful, worried that Marky's acquired bad-girl attitude means she won't get adopted by a "good family", put on a party with gangsters dressed up as knights-of-the-round-table, to rekindle her former sweetness. Marky is unimpressed until they bring in the horse and parade her around on its back. Big Steve, returning to New York, frightens the horse which throws Marky, who is taken to hospital. Big Steve goes to the hospital to pay back Sorrowful for trying to steal his girlfriend, but is roped into giving Marky the direct blood transfusion she needs for her life-saving operation. Sorrowful, praying for Marky's survival, destroys the drug which, administered to the horse, would have helped it win the race but killed it soon after. Big Steve, told he has "good blood", and pleased to have given life for a change, forgives Bangles and Sorrowful. They plan to marry and adopt Marky.

Cast

Production

Temple, who had previously auditioned for the role of Marky prior to entering her Fox contract and failed to win the part, was loaned out to Paramount by Fox Film thanks in large part to maneuvering by her mother Gertrude. Her mother, recognizing the potential of the role, arranged for a secret meeting and second audition with the director Alexander Hall. This second audition was successful and Shirley Temple was loaned out to Paramount for $1,000 a week. Temple and Dell struck up a close friendship while filming the movie. The scene in which Temple is refusing her food and using rude language ("I don't want no mush" and "I used to be a sissy") had to be redone as Dell could not contain her laughter in the first take. This would be Dell's last completed film of her short career. Temple took Dell's death very hard.

Reception

The film was very popular at the box office.[ref]THE YEAR IN HOLLYWOOD: 1984 May Be Remembered as the Beginning of the Sweetness-and-Light Era
By DOUGLAS W. CHURCHILL.. New York Times (1923-Current file) York, N.Y 30 Dec 1934: X5. [/ref]
As a result of the film's success, Paramount offered Fox $50,000 for Temple's contract, which was declined.

Recognition

In 1998, Little Miss Marker was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

Remakes

The film was remade in 1949 as Sorrowful Jones with Bob Hope and Lucille Ball and again as Little Miss Marker in 1980 with Walter Matthau, Julie Andrews, Tony Curtis, Bob Newhart, Brian Dennehy, and Lee Grant.  Another remake was 1962's 40 Pounds of Trouble, starring Tony Curtis as a casino manager who is left with an eight-year-old girl.

Stage musical

Scott Ellis and David Thompson are working on a musical adaptation of the film to feature songs by Harold Arlen as its score.1

Other References

The plot and title of this movie are referenced by the book Little Myth Marker, part of Robert Asprin's MythAdventures series.








