[[Sweat lodge]]

CATEGORIES: Religious places of the indigenous peoples of North America, Native American religion, Ritual purification, Bathing, Lakota, Alternative medicine

The sweat lodge or sweat house (also called purification ceremony, ceremonial sauna,  or simply sweat) is a hut, typically dome-shaped and made with natural materials, used by North American Indians for ritual steam baths as a means of purification.  Scandinavian, Baltic and Eastern European cultures also have sweat lodges. There are several styles of structures used in different cultures; these include a domed or oblong hut similar to a wickiup, a permanent structure made of wood or stone, or even a simple hole dug into the ground and covered with planks or tree trunks.  Stones are typically heated and then water poured over them to create steam. In ceremonial usage, these ritual actions are accompanied by traditional prayers and songs.

World examples

Early occurrences can be found in the fifth century BC, when Scythians constructed pole and woolen cloth sweat baths.
"Vapour baths were in use among the Celtic tribes, and the sweat-house was in general use in Ireland down to the 18th, and even survived into the 19th century. It was of beehive shape and was covered with clay. It was especially resorted to as a cure for rheumatism." These structures were built of stone, and square or corbelled "beehive" versions are often found, mostly in the Irish and Gaelic-speaking areas of Ireland and Scotland, though most seem of relatively recent date. The method of construction, heating the structure, and usage was different from the North American examples, and they seem to have been regarded as therapeutic in function, like the sauna, and perhaps typically used by one person at a time, given their small size. Wicklow", by L. Price in The Journal of the Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, Vol. 82, No. 2 (1952), pp. 180-181, Published by: Royal Society of Antiquaries of Ireland, JSTOR
Native Americans in many regions employ the sweat lodge. For example, Chumash peoples of the central coast of California build sweat lodges in coastal areas in association with habitation sites.
When Finnish immigrants came to America in the 17th century, local Delaware natives called them "sweat lodge men" or "white-men-like-us" because of their habit of going to sauna. Because of that, the Finns got along with native peoples so their houses were not destroyed in the French and Indian Wars.
There are also numerous examples of ritual sweating without any ceremonial or mystical significance. Secular uses around the world include the indigenous people around the Bering Strait, ancient Greeks, ancient Romans, northern Finns and Laplanders, and the so-called "Turkish bath" in England.

Traditions

Rituals and traditions associated with sweating vary regionally and culturally. Ceremonies often include traditional prayers and songs. In some cultures drumming and offerings to the spirit world may be part of the ceremony, or a sweat lodge ceremony may be a part of another, longer ceremony such as a Sun Dance. Some common practices and key elements associated with sweat lodges include:

Etiquette

The most important part of sweat lodge etiquette is respecting the traditions of the culture in question.  It is important to know what is allowed and expected before entering a lodge. Traditional Peoples usually place a high value on modesty.  Women are usually expected to wear skirts and t-shirts, or short-sleeved dresses of a longer length. In some traditions, nudity is forbidden, as are mixed sex sweats. Some lodge leaders do not allow menstruating women.  Perhaps the most important piece of etiquette is gratitude.  It is important to be thankful to the purpose of the sweat, the people joining you in the lodge, and those helping to support the sweat lodge.

Risks

Physical effects

Even people who are experienced with sweats, and attending a ceremony led by a properly trained and authorized Native American ceremonial leader, could suddenly experience problems due to underlying health issues. It is recommended by Lakota spiritual leaders that people only attend lodges with authorized, traditional spiritual leaders.
There have been reports of lodge-related deaths resulting from overexposure to heat, dehydration, smoke inhalation, or improper lodge construction leading to suffocation.
If rocks are used, it is important not to use river rocks, or other kinds of rocks with air pockets inside them. Rocks must be completely dry before heating. Rocks with air pockets or excessive moisture could crack and possibly explode in the fire or when hit by water. Previously used rocks may absorb humidity or moisture leading to cracks or shattering.

Deaths

The following is a list of reported deaths related to sweat lodges:

Sedona deaths and Lakota Nation lawsuit

In October 2009, during a New Age retreat organized by James Arthur Ray, three people died and 21 more became ill while attending an overcrowded and improperly set up sweat lodge containing some 60 people and located near Sedona, Arizona. In response to these deaths, Lakota spiritual leader Arvol Looking Horse issued a statement reading in part:
On November 2, 2009, the Lakota Nation filed a lawsuit against the United States, Arizona State, James Arthur Ray, and Angel Valley Retreat Center site owners, to have Ray and the site owners arrested and punished under the Sioux Treaty of 1868 between the United States and the Lakota Nation."Lakota Nation files lawsuit against parties in sweat lodge incident", sedona. That treaty states that "if bad men among the whites or other people subject to the authority of the United States shall commit any wrong upon the person or the property of the Indians, the United States will (...) proceed at once to cause the offender to be arrested and punished according to the laws of the United States, and also reimburse the injured person for the loss sustained."
The Lakota Nation holds that James Arthur Ray and the Angel Valley Retreat Center have "violated the peace between the United States and the Lakota Nation" and have caused the "desecration of our Sacred Oinikiga (purification ceremony) by causing the death of Liz Neuman, Kirby Brown and James Shore". As well, the Lakota claim that James Arthur Ray and the Angel Valley Retreat Center fraudulently impersonated Indians and must be held responsible for causing the deaths and injuries, and for evidence destruction through dismantling of the sweat lodge. The lawsuit seeks to have the treaty enforced and does not seek monetary compensation.
Preceding the lawsuit, Native American experts on sweat lodges criticized the reported construction and conduct of the lodge as not meeting traditional ways ("bastardized", "mocked" and "desecrated").  Indian leaders expressed concerns and prayers for the dead and injured. The leaders said the ceremony is their way of life and not a religion, as white men see it. It is Native American property protected by U.S. law and United Nation declaration. The ceremony should only be in sanctioned lodge carriers' hands from legitimate nations. Traditionally, a typical leader has 4 to 8 years of apprenticeship before being allowed to care for people in a lodge, and have been officially named as ceremonial leaders before the community. Participants are instructed to call out whenever they feel uncomfortable, and the ceremony is usually stopped to help them. The lodge was said to be unusually built from non-breathable materials. Charging for the ceremony was said to be inappropriate. The number of participants was criticized as too high and the ceremony length was said to be too long.  Respect to elders' oversight was said to be important for avoiding unfortunate events. The tragedy was characterized as "plain carelessness", with a disregard for the participants' safety and outright negligence.



Notes






