[[Hummus]]

CATEGORIES: Arab cuisine, Levantine cuisine, Appetizers, Dips (food), Middle Eastern cuisine, Spreads (food), Legume dishes, Vegan cuisine, Hummus

Hummus () is a Middle Eastern and Arabic food dip or spread made from cooked, mashed chickpeas blended with tahini, olive oil, lemon juice, salt and garlic. 35.  Today, it is popular throughout the Middle East (including Turkey), North Africa (including Morocco), and in Middle Eastern cuisine around the globe.

Etymology

Hummus is an Arabic word (حمّص ḥummuṣ) meaning "chickpeas," and the complete name of the prepared spread in Arabic is 

History

Many cuisine-related sources describe hummus as an ancient food,mideastfood.com, Hummus 101. Retrieved 28 February 2008.com, More about hummus, "Hummus has existed for thousands of years.". Retrieved 5 May 2008.com Food - Hummus, "...". Retrieved 5 May 2008. or connect it to famous historical figures such as Saladin.co. Retrieved 9 November 2009. Indeed, its basic ingredients—chickpeas, sesame, lemon, and garlic—have been eaten in the region for millennia. 25, 61Brothwell & Brothwell passim
But in fact, there is no specific evidence for this purported ancient history of hummus bi tahina.straightdope... There's no way of knowing where it started...". Retrieved 5 May 2008. Though chickpeas were widely eaten in the region, and they were often cooked in stews and other hot dishes,e.g. a "simple dish" of meat, pulses and spices described by Muhammad bin Hasan al-Baghdadi in the 13th century, Tannahill p. 174 puréed chickpeas eaten cold with tahini do not appear before the Abbasid period in Egypt and the Levant.
The earliest known recipes for a dish similar to hummus bi tahina are recorded in cookbooks published in Cairo in the 13th century. 65 and a purée of chickpeas and tahini called hummus kasa appears in the Kitab Wasf al-Atima al-Mutada: it is based on puréed chickpeas and tahini, and acidulated with vinegar (though not lemon), but it also contains many spices, herbs, and nuts, and no garlic. It is also served by rolling it out and letting it sit overnight,Perry et al., p. 383 which presumably gives it a very different texture from hummus bi tahina.

Nutritional information

Hummus is high in iron and vitamin C and also has significant amounts of folate and vitamin B6. 115. The chickpeas are a good source of protein and dietary fiber; the tahini consists mostly of sesame seeds, which are an excellent source of the amino acid methionine, complementing the proteins in the chickpeas. Depending on the recipe, hummus carries varying amounts of monounsaturated fat.com Hummus is useful in vegetarian and vegan diets; like other combinations of grains and pulses, it serves as a complete protein when eaten with bread.

Serving methods

As an appetizer and dip, hummus is scooped with flatbread, such as pita. It is also served as part of a meze or as an accompaniment to falafel, grilled chicken, fish or eggplant. Garnishes include chopped tomato, cucumber, coriander, parsley, caramelized onions, sautéed mushrooms, whole chickpeas, olive oil, hard-boiled eggs, paprika, sumac, ful, olives, pickles and pine nuts (as photographed in the "History" section). Outside the Middle East, it is sometimes served with tortilla chips or crackers.
Hummus ful (pronounced ) is topped with a paste made from fava beans boiled until soft and then crushed. Hummus masubha/mashawsha is a mixture of hummus paste, warm chickpeas and tahini.

Syria and Lebanon

In Vegetarian Dishes from the Middle East, Arto der Haroutunian calls hummus, "One of the most popular and best-known of all Syrian dishes" and a "must on any mezzeh table."Arto der Hartoiunian  Vegetarian Dishes from the Middle East, London 1983, p.33. Syrians in Canada's Arab diaspora prepare and consume hummus along with other dishes like falafel, kibbe and tabouleh, even among the third and fourth-generation offspring of the original immigrants.

Israel

Hummus is a common part of everyday meals in Israel. Few other foods can be combined with a wide variety of meals consistently with the dietary laws. As a result of its popularity, Israelis elevated hummus to become a "national food symbol" and consume more than twice as much hummus as neighbouring Arab countries, according to figures by Tsabar Salads, a hummus manufacturer in Israel... into the Muslim quarter just to have a vital, really genuine good humous ," and noted that like many dishes considered to be Israeli national foods, hummus is actually Arab. 5-6: "Humous is Arabic. Falafel, our national dish, our national Israeli dish, is completely Arabic and this salad that we call an Israeli Salad, actually it's an Arab salad, Palestinian salad." However, he also said, commenting on Iraqi, Egyptian, Syrian or Yemeni food in Israel, that "Jews came from these countries to Israel and they brought their food with them". One of the fancier hummus versions available is hummus masabacha, made with lemon-spiked tahini garnished with whole chick peas, a sprinkling of paprika and a drizzle of olive oil. 66, Hummus is sold in restaurants, supermarkets and hummus-only shops (known in Hebrew as humusiot).The perfect hummus debate

Palestine and Jordan

For Palestinians and Jordanians, hummus has long been a staple food, often served warm, with bread, for breakfast, lunch or dinner - usually on Friday mornings. 204. All of the ingredients in hummus are easily found in Palestinian gardens, farms and markets, thus adding to the availability and popularity of the dish. In Palestinian areas, hummus is usually garnished, with olive oil, "nana" mint leaves, paprika, parsley or cumin. Retrieved 9 March 2008. A related dish popular in the region of Palestine and Jordan is laban ma' hummus ("yogurt and chickpeas"), which uses yogurt in the place of tahini and butter in the place of olive oil and is topped with pieces of toasted bread.

Packaged product

United States

By the end of the 20th century, hummus had emerged as part of the American culinary fabric. 269-271 In 2008, more than 15 million Americans consumed hummus on a regular basis. Hummus became a popular staple in American restaurants with the Armenian migration from Lebanon to Southern California and the East Coast after the Lebanese Civil War (1975-1990). 176. It was further popularized in the United States by Jews returning from visits in Israel and by Israeli expatriates.
According to a 2010 market research, hummus consumption in the United States has increased by 35 percent over a period of 21 months, with sales reaching nearly $300 million. In 2006, hummus was present in 12 percent of American households, rising to 17 percent by early 2009.
In November 2009, Gadi Lesin, President & CEO of the Israeli Strauss group food manufacturer said that market share of co-owned Sabra Dipping Company in the USA makes it the largest packaged hummus dip manufacturer in the world.

Controversy

In October 2008, the Association of Lebanese Industrialists petitioned to the Lebanese Ministry of Economy and Trade to request protected status from the European Commission for hummus as a uniquely Lebanese food, similar to the Protected Geographical Status rights held over regional food items by various European Union countries. Retrieved 10 December 2008.
Fadi Abboud, president of the Lebanese Industrialists Association, stated that "Israelis have usurped several Lebanese and oriental products".ali.lb/foodcampaignarticles.
As a response, food critic Janna Gur wrote: "The success of certain brands of Israeli hummus abroad may have been what brought about Abboud's anger", leading him to claim that Israel has been "stealing" their country's national dishes, like hummus, falafel, tabbouleh, and baba ghanouj. Retrieved 11 December 2008.
Also in response to Abboud's statement, Shooky Galili, an Israeli journalist specialising in food and who writes a blog dedicated to hummus, ... Hummus is a centuries old Arab dish — nobody owns it, it belongs to the region".
As of late 2009, the Lebanese Industrialists Association was still "preparing documents and proof" to support its claim."Lebanese score in hummus war with Israel", Associated Press, 24 October 2009

World record

In May 2010, the Guinness World Record for the largest dish of hummus in the world returned to Lebanon.





Bibliography

External Links

Further reading


