[[List of cities in Canada]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of cities in Canada

This is a list of incorporated cities in Canada, in alphabetical order categorized by province or territory. More thorough lists of communities are available for each province.

Capitals

 Alberta == 
To qualify as a city in Alberta, a sufficient population size (10,000 people or more) must be present and a majority of the buildings must be on parcels of land smaller than  A community is not always incorporated as a city even if it meets these requirements. The urban service areas of Fort McMurray and Sherwood Park are hamlets recognized as equivalents of cities, but remain unincorporated.  Nine towns are also eligible for city status but remain incorporated as towns.
Alberta has 17 cities.
Notes:

 British Columbia == 
In British Columbia, a community can be incorporated as a city if its population exceeds 5,000.
British Columbia has 49 cities. In March 2014, residents of the District of Maple Ridge voted in favour of changing to city status. The District of Maple Ridge has since requested the province to make the change official by September 14, 2014.
Notes:
 Manitoba == 
A community in Manitoba may seek city status once reaching a population of 7,500. Manitoba's newest city is Morden, which changed from town to city status on August 24, 2012.
Manitoba has 10 cities.
Notes:

 New Brunswick == 
New Brunswick has eight cities.
Notes:

Newfoundland and Labrador

Newfoundland and Labrador has three cities.
Notes:

Northwest Territories

As in the other two Canadian territories, the only incorporated city in the Northwest Territories is its capital, Yellowknife.

Nova Scotia

Nova Scotia no longer has any incorporated cities, as they were amalgamated into regional municipalities in the 1990s.

Nunavut

As in the other two Canadian territories, the only incorporated city in Nunavut is its capital, Iqaluit.
 Ontario == 
In Ontario, city status is conferred by the provincial government, generally upon the request of the incorporated municipality. A municipality may apply for city status anytime after its population surpasses 10,000. This status is not automatically conferred on a community that reaches this population target, but must be requested by the municipality and granted by the provincial Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing. Not all municipalities which reach this population target have pursued city designation. For example, Ajax, Oakville, Richmond Hill and Whitby, which all had populations greater than 10,000 in 2011, are still designated as towns. Once designated a city, however, a municipality does not lose this status even if its population later falls back below 10,000 (as, for example, Dryden). Ontario's newest city is Markham, which changed from town to city status on July 1, 2012.
Ontario has 51 cities.
Notes:

Prince Edward Island

Prince Edward Island has two cities.
Notes:

 Quebec == 
In Quebec, provincial law does not currently distinguish between towns and cities — one designation, ville, covers both types of communities regardless of size. A ville might be informally referred to as a town or a city in English, but this is an arbitrary and subjective distinction. Quebec does, however, distinguish between villes and municipalités.
Quebec has 222 villes.
Notes:

 Saskatchewan == 
In Saskatchewan, Section 39(1) of The Cities Act indicates a town must have a population of 5,000 or more
Saskatchewan has 16 cities.
Notes:

Yukon

As in the other two Canadian territories, the only incorporated city in the Yukon is its capital, Whitehorse. Dawson was also previously incorporated as a city, but when the criteria were changed in the 1980s, its status was reduced to that of a town due to population. Through special provision, however, it is officially the town of the city of Dawson.








