[[John Byrne (comics)]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, English cartoonists, English comics artists, English comics writers, English expatriates in Canada, English expatriates in the United States, Living people, People from West Bromwich

John Lindley Byrne (; born July 6, 1950) is a British-born comic-book writer and artist of comic books. Since the mid-1970s, Byrne has worked on many major American superheroes.
Byrne's better-known work has been on Marvel Comics' X-Men and Fantastic Four and the 1986 relaunch of DC Comics' Superman franchise. Coming into the comics profession exclusively as a penciler, Byrne began co-plotting the X-Men comics during his tenure on them, and launched his writing career in earnest with Fantastic Four (where he started inking his own pencils). During the 1990s he produced a number of creator-owned works, including Next Men and Danger Unlimited. He scripted the first issues of Mike Mignola's Hellboy series and produced a number of Star Trek comics for IDW Publishing.

Early life and career

Byrne was born in West Bromwich, West Midlands, England where along with his parents (Frank and Nelsie) he lived with his maternal grandmother. 1986) DC Comics While living there, prior to his family emigrating to Canada when Byrne was 8, he was first exposed to comics, saying in 2005,

His first encounter with Marvel Comics was in 1962 with Stan Lee and Jack Kirby's Fantastic Four #5."Avengers Assemble: Question of the Month," Avengers #233 (July 1983) Marvel Comics He later commented that "the book had an 'edge' like nothing DC was putting out at the time". Jack Kirby's work in particular had a strong influence on Byrne and he has worked with many of the characters Kirby created or co-created. Besides Kirby, Byrne was influenced by the naturalistic style of Neal Adams.
In 1970, Byrne enrolled at the Alberta College of Art and Design in Calgary. He created the superhero parody Gay Guy for the college newspaper, which poked fun at the campus stereotype of homosexuality among art students. Gay Guy is notable for featuring a prototype of the Alpha Flight character Snowbird. While there, he published his first comic book, ACA Comix #1, featuring "The Death's Head Knight".
Byrne left the college in 1973 without graduating. He broke into comics with a "Fan Art Gallery" piece in Marvel's promotional publication FOOM in early 1974
After the R0g-2000 story, Byrne went on to work on the Charlton books Wheelie and the Chopper Bunch, Space: 1999, and Emergency!, and co-created with writer Joe Gill the post-apocalyptic science-fiction series Doomsday + 1. Byrne additionally drew a cover for the supernatural anthology The Many Ghosts of Doctor Graves #54 (Dec. 1975).

Marvel Comics

Byrne said he broke into Marvel comics after writer Chris Claremont
 For many issues, he was paired with Claremont, with whom he teamed for some issues of the black-and-white Marvel magazine Marvel Preview featuring Star-Lord. The Star-Lord story was inked by Terry Austin, who soon afterward teamed with Claremont and Byrne on X-Men.

The Uncanny X-Men

Byrne joined Claremont beginning with The X-Men #108 (Dec. 1977). Byrne left The X-Men with #143 (March 1981). During his tenure on the series, The X-Men was promoted from a bimonthly to a monthly publication schedule, with a steady sales incline that continued long after Byrne left. 137: "The Uncanny X-Men remained something of a cult book, with a small but devoted following, but as the 1980s continued, sales went up and up. By mid-decade, it was consistently the top-selling comic book not simply at Marvel but in the entire American comics industry."
In the late 1970s, while serving as the regular penciller of X-Men, Byrne began penciling another superhero team title The Avengers. Working for the most part with writer David Michelinie, he drew issues #164-166 and 181–191. Byrne's nine-issue run of  Captain America, issues #247–255 (July 1980 - March 1981), with writer Roger Stern, included issue #250, in which the character mulled a run for the U.S. presidency,

Fantastic Four

Byrne's post-X-Men body of work at Marvel includes his five-year run on Fantastic Four (#232–293, July 1981–August 1986), which is generally considered a "second golden age" for the title.

Alpha Flight

In 1983, while still at the helm of Fantastic Four, Byrne began to write and draw Alpha Flight, starring a Canadian superhero team that had been introduced "merely to survive a fight with the X-Men." Though the series proved initially very popular, with its first issue selling 500,000 copies, (Archive requires scrolldown) Northstar's homosexuality was only hinted at during Byrne's tenure on the series.
In 1983 Byrne also co - wrote and pencilled Issues 1 and 2 of "The Further Adventures of Indiana Jones", a two part story arc titled "The Ikons of Ikammanen".
In 1985, after issue #28 of Alpha Flight, Byrne swapped series with Bill Mantlo, writer of The Incredible Hulk. According to Byrne, he discussed his ideas with editor-in-chief Jim Shooter ahead of time, but once Byrne was on the title, Shooter objected to them.  Byrne wrote and drew issues #314–319. The final issue of Byrne's run featured the wedding of Bruce Banner and Betty Ross. 227: "Dr. Bruce Banner first met Betty Ross in The Incredible Hulk #1 (May 1962) and finally married her in issue #319 by John Byrne."

DC

The Untold Legend of the Batman

In early 1980, Byrne did his first work for DC Comics, penciling the first issue of The Untold Legend of the Batman miniseries. Byrne penciled the first issue, which was inked by Jim Aparo after being intended for Terry Austin. This experience soured Byrne on DC for quite some time.

Superman

Near the end of his time at Marvel, Byrne was hired by DC Comics to revamp its flagship character Superman. 221. "In the six-issue miniseries entitled The Man of Steel, the mammoth task of remaking Superman fell to popular writer/artist John Byrne..." This was part of a company-wide restructuring of the history of the DC Universe and all of its characters following the limited series Crisis on Infinite Earths. Byrne's reworking of Superman in particular gained widespread media coverage outside the comic book industry, including articles in Time and The New York Times.
At the time, Byrne said, "I'm taking Superman back to the basics ... It's basically Siegel and Shuster's Superman meets the Fleischer Superman in 1986." Byrne significantly reduced Superman's powers (though he was still one of the most powerful beings on Earth), eliminated the Fortress of Solitude and super-dog Krypto, and had his foster parents the Kents still alive while Superman was an adult to enjoy their adopted son's triumphs as well as to provide him with support, grounding, and advice whenever he needed it.
Byrne did away with the childhood/teenage career as Superboy; in his revamped history, Clark Kent does not put on a costume and become a super-hero until adulthood. This approach to Kent's path to becoming Superman was later used in the action-adventure series Smallville on the WB Television Network and in the 2005 novel It's Superman by Tom De Haven.
In the Superman mythos, Byrne wrote Clark Kent as having a more aggressive and extroverted personality than previously depicted, even making him a top high-school football player. Byrne came up with explanations for how Superman's disguise works, such as the public simply does not realize that he has a secret identity since he is unmasked, that Superman would vibrate his face via his super speed in order to blur his image to photographers, and having Kent keep a weight training set around to explain how the human and presumably weaker Kent could have a frame as massive as Superman's. Byrne's Superman felt that his deepest roots were on Earth, and that his home planet of "Krypton is anathema to him". Other revisions included seriously reducing Superman's power level to ensure he is sufficiently challenged by threats, keeping Jonathan and Martha Kent alive into Clark's adulthood as major supporting characters and using Marv Wolfman's idea of making Lex Luthor a wealthy business owner in addition to a scientific genius with a deadly vendetta against the superhero.
Byrne's version of Superman debuted in the six-issue miniseries The Man of Steel (July–Sept. 1986), which described his origin and early career. Byrne penciled the six-issue DC Universe crossover miniseries Legends (Nov. 1986 – May 1987) during this time.  221. "DC's next big crossover showcased John Byrne's pencils on all six of the miniseries' issues. Entitled Legends, this new limited series was plotted by writer John Ostrander and scripted by Len Wein....." He wrote and drew two monthly Superman titles with the hero's present-day adventures: a new Superman title beginning with issue #1 (January 1987)Manning, "1980s", in Dolan, p. 226. "For the second time in his history, Superman's self-titled comic saw a first issue...a new series was introduced..." and Action Comics, in which, beginning with issue #584, Superman teamed up with other DC characters. The original Superman book was renamed The Adventures of Superman starting with issue #424 and was initially written by Marv Wolfman and drawn by Jerry Ordway, but the writing chores were taken over by Byrne after a year from issues #436–442 and 444). As 1988 marked the 50th anniversary year of Superman's creation, Byrne did more Superman-related projects while working on the core Superman monthly titles at the same time: he wrote the prestige format graphic novel, Superman: The Earth Stealers and three separate four-issue miniseries: The World of Krypton, The World of Metropolis, and The World of Smallville. He supplied the cover art for the March 14, 1988 issue of Time magazine and an interior spread featuring Superman, where his pencils were inked by Ordway.
Byrne spent about two years on the Superman titles before leaving. His dissatisfaction stemmed from his perception that there was a the lack of "conscious support" for him at DC. Furthering the rift between the company and the artist, was the fact that, the version of Superman which DC licensed for merchandising was contrary to Byrne's representation in the comic books! Though, today, Byrne's vision for and of the Man Of Steel has been borne true, in that many of Byrne's concepts for the character have since become "the norm," as witnessed throughout subsequent television and film adaptations. Byrne's influence can be seen in Lois & Clark: The New Adventures of Superman, the DC Animated Universe and Smallville,and in Bryan Singer's "Superman Returns," where Lois is trapped in a crashing plane, during its inaugural flight, only to be saved by Superman, thus reintroducing the Man Of Steel to the world. This scene is very reminiscent of Byrne's version in the comic book, where all the essential elements are the same, save for the single difference, Byrne has it happen to the Space Shuttle or "an experimental space-plane" rather than an average airplane. One can also glimpse Byrne's "Man Of Steel" in  the popular "come-back film" of 2013, "Man Of Steel," produced by Christopher Nolan and David Goyer. During interviews promoting the film, Goyer acknowledged Byrne's "Man Of Steel" series as an influence, especially in regards to Byrne's "Huxley-ian" approach to Kryptonian reproduction.

Return to Marvel

Star Brand

In 1986, Marvel began publication of a new line of superhero titles created by then-Editor-in-Chief Jim Shooter, which took place in a continuum removed from the Marvel Universe proper, called the New Universe.  In 1987, the New Universe line saw a revamp under new Editor-in-Chief Tom DeFalco, and Byrne took over writing and art-breakdowns on the line's flagship title, Star Brand (renamed The Star Brand during Byrne's term on the book). Byrne's run started with issue #11 and continued until the series' cancellation eight issues later upon Marvel's discontinuation of the New Universe line.

Avengers West Coast

In 1989, after leaving Superman, Byrne returned to work on a number of titles for Marvel Comics. His work on West Coast AvengersDeFalco "1980s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 240: "Writer/artist John Byrne produced the story arc that came to be known as 'Vision Quest' that ran through The West Coast Avengers #42-45." (issues #42–57, soon renamed Avengers West Coast) was contingent on his being allowed to do what he called "my Vision story." The Vision was a long-standing Marvel superhero and member of The Avengers, an android originally created by the villain Ultron constructed with the body of the original Human Torch. The Vision went on to join the team, marry his teammate the Scarlet Witch, and father two children by her. Byrne radically changed this, revealing that Ultron lied about the Vision's creation. The android Human Torch was found and joined the WCA. The Vision was disassembled and stripped of his emotions. The couple's twins were revealed to be pieces of the soul of the demon Mephisto. In addition to these changes, Byrne's run is remembered for the introduction of the Great Lakes Avengers, an eclectic group of new superheroes. 241: "Writer/artist John Byrne took a tongue-in-cheek approach to superheroics."

The Sensational She-Hulk

During She-Hulk's tenure with the Fantastic Four, she appeared in Marvel Graphic Novel #18 (Nov. 1985) in a story titled titled The Sensational She-Hulk, which Byrne wrote and illustrated. 241
On the request of editor Mark Gruenwald, Byrne wrote and drew a new series in 1989, The Sensational She-Hulk (maintaining the 1985 graphic novel's title). Gruenwald directed that it be significantly different from the character's previous series, The Savage She-Hulk. Byrne's take was comedic and the She-Hulk, who was aware she was in a comic book, regularly broke the fourth wall, developing a love-hate relationship with her artist/writer by criticizing his storylines, drawing style, character development, etc. Byrne left the book after writing and drawing the first eight issues. Byrne was asked for input on writer Dwayne McDuffie's She-Hulk: Ceremony limited series, and according to Byrne, most of his objections to the story and notations of errors were ignored, and his editor, Bobbie Chase, "was rewriting my stuff to bring it into line with" the story in Ceremony. Upon complaining to DeFalco, Byrne says he was fired from his series. He later returned to write and draw issues #31–50 under new editor Renée Witterstaetter.

Namor, the Sub-Mariner

Byrne started a new series, Namor, the Sub-Mariner in April 1990. "1990s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 248: "Comics superstar John Byrne revamped the classic Marvel character Namor in this new series that he both wrote and drew." Byrne's take on the undersea antihero Namor cast him as the head of a surface company, Oracle, Inc., in order to help keep the ocean unpolluted, and had Namor involved in corporate intrigue. Byrne wrote and drew the book for 25 issues, until new artist Jae Lee inspired a sharp change in the mood and plot of the book. Byrne wrote the book until issue #32.

Iron Man

Byrne took over writing Iron Man for issues #258–277 (July 1990-Feb. 1992), drawn by John Romita, Jr. and later by Paul Ryan. Byrne launched a second "Armor Wars" story arc, restored the Mandarin as a major Iron Man nemesis, and featured the 1950s "pre-superhero Marvel" monster Fin Fang Foom. During the course of his run, Byrne became the first writer to retcon Iron Man's origin, removing explicit ties to the Vietnam War (while maintaining a Southeast Asia setting), and linking Wong-Chu, the man who captured Tony Stark, to the Mandarin.Iron Man #267-268

Creator-owned works

In the early 1990s, Byrne began creating a series of original, creator-owned works for publisher Dark Horse Comics. This was during a general trend in the industry for established creators working for Marvel and DC to bring their original works to other publishers or create their own companies to publish the works themselves (one prominent example is Image Comics). A number of these creators, including Byrne, Frank Miller, Mike Mignola, and Art Adams, banded together to form the Legend imprint at Dark Horse.
Byrne's first title for Dark Horse was Next Men, a work he considered darker and more realistic than his previous work. The Next Men were five young people who were the product of a secret government experiment. Byrne said, "I thought I would see what I could do with superheroes in the 'real world' " and "explore the impact their existence would have." Byrne's other Dark Horse titles were Babe, and Danger Unlimited, an all-age readers book about a team of heroes in the future fighting an alien occupation of Earth.
The Next Men lasted until issue 30 in 1994, when Byrne ended the series, intending to return "in no more than six months." Byrne says he "did not count on....."
IDW, an independent publisher, revived John Byrne's Next Men in 2010 following a series of trade paperbacks that collected the first series. The original storyline that had a cliffhanger ending in 1995 was continued.

Later career

In later years, Byrne has worked on titles for Marvel, DC, and other publishers, including the 1992 prestige format graphic novel Green Lantern: Ganthet's Tale with science fiction author Larry Niven at DC. In 1990, Byrne wrote and drew a Batman 3-D graphic novel with 3-D effects by Ray Zone. 247. "The Caped Crusader leaped off the pages in all his red-and-blue glory in this over-sized eighty-page special crafted by 3-D expert Ray Zone..." He returned to the X-Men franchise at Marvel from 1991 to 1992, succeeding longtime writer Chris Claremont, who left after 17 years working on the various X-Men related titles. Byrne's return as the new writer was brief, as he only wrote Uncanny X-Men issues #281–285 and 288 with artist Whilce Portacio, and X-Men issues #4–5 with artist Jim Lee.
He wrote and drew another of DC's signature series, the long-running Wonder Woman, from 1995 to 1998. During that time, he elevated the superheroine to the status of GoddessManning, "1990s", in Dolan, p. 280. "It seemed Wonder Woman had breathed her last in Wonder Woman #124, thanks to writer and artist John Byrne." who then ascended to Mount Olympus as the Goddess of Truth. Byrne then spotlighted supporting characters such as Queen Hippolyta in their own adventures but restored the series' status quo in his last issue. 284. "Writer/artist John Byrne was leaving Wonder Woman..." He additionally took over New Gods vol. 4 at the end of 1996, as writer-artist of issues #12–15, continuing with it as the series was rebooted with a new #1 as Jack Kirby's Fourth World. That ran 20 issues from 1997 to 1998. During his tenure on the New Gods, Byrne was writer of the four-issue miniseries crossover Genesis, a storyline published weekly by DC Comics in August 1997. The series was drawn by Ron Wagner and Joe Rubinstein. Byrne wrote a Wonder Woman prose novel, Wonder Woman: Gods and Goddesses (1997, Prima Lifestyles, ISBN 0-7615-0483-4).
In the series Spider-Man: Chapter One, Byrne retold some of Spider-Man's earliest adventures, changing some key aspects. In late 1998, Byrne became writer of the flagship series, The Amazing Spider-Man, at the end of the series with issue #440, by which time Marvel had decided to relaunch the book. The "last" issue of The Amazing Spider-Man was #441 (November 1998), with Marvel re-initiating the series with a new issue #1 (Jan. 1999) with Howard Mackie as writer and Byrne as penciler. 246: ""This new series heralded a fresh start for the web-slinger's adventures." Byrne penciled issues #1–18 (from 1999 to 2000) and wrote #13–14. In 1999, Byrne, working with penciler Ron Garney wrote the first seven issues of a new Hulk series,Manning "1990s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 294: "Bruce Banner took to the road in an attempt to escape his past in this new series by writer John Byrne and artist Ron Garney." as well as the summer annual.
From 1999 to 2001, Byrne returned to the X-Men to write and drew X-Men: The Hidden YearsManning "1990s" in Gilbert (2008), p. 295: "gap between The X-Men #66 in 1970 and Giant-Size X-Men #1 in 1975 left fans to wonder what the originals were up to in all that time, a question that writer/artist John Byrne decided to answer in this new ongoing series." which ran for 22 issues. Byrne explained the title's cancellation by saying, "I was officially informed yesterday that, despite the fact that they are still profitable, several 'redundant' X-Titles are being axed." This disagreement factored in his decision to no longer work for Marvel Comics.
Like X-Men: The Hidden Years, some other works of this period involved characters and events in time periods other than the present and, in some cases, considered "skipped over" (Marvel: The Lost Generation), or alternate timelines (DC's Superman & Batman: Generations); a feature some of these have in common is to have characters who actually age during the course of the series, which is uncommon for characters in ongoing comics.
In early 2003, Byrne spent ten weeks as guest penciler on the syndicated newspaper strip Funky Winkerbean. Byrne did this as a favor for Winkerbean's creator, Tom Batiuk, who was recovering from foot surgery.Batiuk, Tom, statement in 
Most of his work in the first decade of the new millennium was for DC Comics: JLA (#94–99, the "Tenth Circle" story arc), Doom Patrol, Blood of the Demon, a five-issue arc of JLA Classified.  Superman: True Brit was a collaboration with former Monty Python member John Cleese and Kim Johnson, with art by Byrne and inker Mark Farmer. 315. "Comedy legend John Cleese joined forces with artist John Byrne, inker Mark Farmer and writer Kim Johnson for a unique take on the Superman story.  Superman: True Brit saw Kal-El's rocketship land on a farm..."  Byrne returned to Action Comics for issues #827–835 working with writer Gail Simone. Afterward, Simone and Byrne reteamed to launch The All-New Atom series in 2006, with Byrne pencilling the first three issues.
For publisher IDW, Byrne worked on the superhero series FX #1–6, written by Wayne Osborne, starting with the March 2008 issue. His other projects for the publisher include stories in the Star Trek universe and the Angel (TV series character) universe.
Byrne's Star Trek work included the final issue of the miniseries Star Trek: Alien Spotlight (February 2008); the self-described "professional fan fiction," Star Trek: Assignment Earth #1–5; Star Trek: Romulans #1–2, Star Trek: Crew (a Christopher Pike-era comic book focusing on the character of "Number One") started in March 2009; the final chapter of his Romulans story, a four-issue miniseries, Star Trek: Leonard McCoy, Frontier Doctor, set before Star Trek: The Motion Picture, and the second Assignment: Earth series.
His work on Angel included Angel: Blood and Trenches (set during World War I); an Angel vs Frankenstein one-shot; and an Andy Hallett tribute, Angel: Music of the Spheres and Angel vs Frankenstein II in 2008, 2009 and 2010 respectively.
In 2011, he worked on Jurassic Park: The Devils in the Desert, and Cold War (The Michael Swann Dossier).  He revived his Next Men series in 2010–2011, with the sequel series Aftermath.  Other work for IDW includes the 2012 miniseries Trio and the 2013 miniseries The High Ways and Doomsday.1. (Archive requires scrolldown.)

Controversies

Over the years, Byrne has gained a reputation as a controversial figure, and has himself noted that "as the people who have figured me out have said, I just don't suffer fools gladly."
In 1981, Jack Kirby began speaking publicly about his belief that he'd been deprived of fair credit and money while creating the majority of Marvel's top characters.  Byrne wrote an editorial declaring himself "proud" to be a "company man," and arguing that all creators should "live within the rules while they're around."  Steve Gerber and Kirby lampooned Byrne's position in Destroyer Duck, drawing him as a character called Booster Cogburn, possessing a removable spine and existing only to serve as a cog in the mammoth corporation that owned him. Erik Larsen created a villain in the 1990s for his Savage Dragon and Freak Force series, Johnny Redbeard/the Creator, who parodies Byrne; a massive cranium with atrophied appendages, he can bestow superpowers indiscriminately. "What Kirby Wanted," foreword to Savage Dragon Companion #1 (Image Comics, July 2002), p. 5.
In 1982, during a panel discussion at the Dallas Fantasy Fair, Byrne made unflattering comments about longtime comics writer and one-time Marvel Comics editor-in-chief Roy Thomas. After a transcript of the panel was published in The Comics Journal #75 (Sept. 1982), Thomas threatened a libel suit if Byrne did not apologize. In a letter printed in The Comics Journal #82 (July 1983), Byrne retracted his statements, claiming he was only repeating information from others, writing, "I acted only in the office of a parrot." Commentators have noted that Byrne's opinions have led to disputes with Peter David, and Larsen.
Gail Simone, who worked with Byrne on The All New Atom in 2006, described Byrne as "very opinionated; a lot of artists are opinionated, and I'm okay with that. Actually, I think John Byrne is brilliant and his forceful personality is part of that." (Archive requires scrolldown.)

Art style

Byrne has himself called the straight line "his least favorite artistic element". 46, Collins, 2001. ISBN 0-00-413411-7.
Ron Goulart has called Byrne's artwork "an eminently acceptable mix of bravura, complexity and storytelling clarity".
In Scott McCloud's book Understanding Comics, Byrne is charted along with other comics artists in the "Big Triangle". McCloud's placement of Byrne within it identifies his style as similar to Gilbert Hernandez and Jim Lee, making the point that Byrne's line style is naturalistic without being overly detailed.
Byrne is color blind for a narrow range of green and brown tones. During the first year that Byrne illustrated  Iron Fist, he believed that the protagonist's costume was brown.
Byrne's artistic style, his layouts and his storytelling have been sources of instruction and inspiration to many comics artists, including Todd McFarlane

Personal life

Byrne was married to photographer and actress Andrea Braun Byrne for 15 years. Braun's son from a previous marriage is Kieron Dwyer,

Awards

Byrne has been the recipient of multiple comic book awards, including Favourite Comicbook Artist Eagle Awards in 1978 and 1979, a 1980 Inkpot Award, and the 1993 Squiddy Award for Favorite Penciller. In 2008, Byrne was inducted into the Canadian Comic Book Creator Hall of Fame.

Selected bibliography

Charlton Comics

Dark Horse Comics

DC Comics

=Portfolios=

IDW

Marvel Comics

Novels

Newspaper strips

Webcomics





Interviews


