[[Enniskillen]]

CATEGORIES: Enniskillen, Towns in County Fermanagh, County towns in Northern Ireland, Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom, Post towns in Northern Ireland, Civil parishes of County Fermanagh, Former boroughs in Northern Ireland

Enniskillen () is a town and civil parish in County Fermanagh, Northern Ireland. It is located almost exactly in the centre of the county between the Upper and Lower sections of Lough Erne. It had a population of 13,599 in the 2001 Census. It is the seat of local government for Fermanagh District Council, and is also the county town of Fermanagh as well as its largest town.

History

The town's name comes from the Irish: Inis Ceithleann. This refers to Cethlenn, a figure in Irish mythology who may have been a goddess. It has been said that Ceithlenn got wounded in battle by an arrow and attempted to swim across the river but she never reached the other side. It has been anglicised many ways over the centuries — Iniskellen, Iniskellin, Iniskillin, Iniskillen, Inishkellen, Inishkellin, Inishkillin, Inishkillen, and so on.Placenames Database of Ireland
The town's oldest building is the Maguire's stone castle, built by Hugh the Hospitable who died in 1428. The first water-gate was built around 1580 by Cú Chonnacht Maguire, though subsequent lowering of the level of the lough has left it without water. The strategic position of the castle made it important for the English to capture it in 1593 for their Plantation of Ulster plans which was achieved by a Captain Dowdall. Maguire then laid siege to it and defeated a relieving force at the Battle of the Ford of the Bicuits at Drumane Bridge on the Arney River. Although the defenders were relieved, Maguire was in possession of the castle from 1595–8 and it wasn't till 1607 that it was finally captured by the English.
This was part of a wider campaign to bring the province of Ulster under English control; there had been a major siege of Enniskillen Castle in 1594. The Plantation of Ulster followed during which the lands of the native Irish were seized and handed over to planters loyal to the English Crown. The Maguires were supplanted by William Cole, originally from Devon, who was appointed by James I to build an English settlement there.
Captain Cole was installed as Constable and strengthened the castle wall and built a "fair house" on the old foundation as the centrepoint of the county town. The first Protestant parish church was erected on the hilltop in 1627. The Royal Free School of Fermanagh was moved onto the island in 1643. The first bridges were drawbridges and permanent bridges were not installed before 1688.
By 1689 the town had grown significantly. During the conflict which resulted from the ousting of King James II by his Protestant rival, William III, Enniskillen and Derry were the focus of Williamite resistance in Ireland, including the nearby Battle of Newtownbutler. "The Defence of Enniskillen". Derry and Enniskillen in the Year 1689. Library Ireland. Retrieved 24 May 2012.
Enniskillen and Derry were the two garrisons in Ulster that were not wholly loyal to James II, and it was the last town to fall before the siege of Derry.  As a direct result of this conflict Enniskillen developed not only as a market town but also as a garrison, which became home to two regiments.
The current site of Fermanagh College (now part of the South West College) was the former Enniskillen Gaol.  Many people were tried and hanged here in the square during the times of public execution. Part of the old Gaol is still used by the college.

Military history

Enniskillen is the site of the foundation of two British Army regiments:
The town's name (with the archaic spelling) continues to form part of the title to The Royal Irish Regiment (27th (Inniskilling) 83rd and 87th and Ulster Defence Regiment).

The Troubles

Enniskillen was the site of several events during The Troubles, the most notable being the Remembrance Day bombing in which 11 people were killed.

Miscellaneous

The Irish singer/songwriter Tommy Makem wrote a lighthearted song about the town, "Fare Thee Well, Enniskillen," covered by The Clancy Brothers and Tommy Makem and The Dubliners.
The Chieftains sing a song that mentions Enniskillen titled "North Amerikay".
Jim Kerr of Simple Minds was so moved by the results of the Enniskillen bombing in 1987 that he wrote new words to the traditional folk song "She Moved Through The Fair" and the group recorded it with the name "Belfast Child". The recording reached No. 1 in the UK Charts, Ireland and several other countries in 1989. The single was taken from the album "Street Fighting Years" and the single version was also published with the title "Ballad of the Streets". The video to the song was shot in black and white and displays poignant footage of children and the destruction of the bombing.
The Irish language novel Mo Dhá Mhicí by Séamus Mac Annaidh is set in Enniskillen.

Demographics

Enniskillen is classified as a "medium town" by the Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency (NISRA) (i.e. with population between 10,000 and 18,000 people). On census day (29 April 2001) there were 13,599 people living in Enniskillen.
For more details see: NI Neighbourhood Information Service

Climate

As throughout Britain and Ireland, Enniskillen experiences a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters. The nearest official Met Office weather station for which online records are available is at Lough Navar Forest, about 8.5 miles North West of Enniskillen. Data has also more recently been collected from Enniskillen Airport/ St Angelo, under 4 miles to the North of the town centre, which should, in time, give a more accurate representation of the climate of the Enniskillen area.
The absolute maximum temperature is 
The absolute minimum temperature is , reported during the record cold month of December 2010.
The warmest month on record at St Angelo was August 1995 with a mean temperature of .
Rainfall is high, averaging over 1500mm. 212 days of the year report at least 1mm of precipitation, ranging from 15 days during April, May and June, to 20 days in October, November, December, January and March.
The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is "Cfb" (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).Climate Summary for Enniskillen

Places of interest

The Diamond

"The Diamond" is the town square. It is located directly beside the Town Hall. Fermanagh.uk. Retrieved on 23 July 2013.artscouncil-ni. (Belfast, April 2002). Accessed online 12 April 2007 

International events

Enniskillen was chosen as the venue for the 39th G8 summit held on 17 and 18 June 2013. The gathering was the biggest international diplomatic gathering held in Northern Ireland. Among G8 leaders who attended were British Prime Minister David Cameron, United States President Barack Obama, German Chancellor Angela Merkel, and Russian President Vladimir Putin.
In recent years, Enniskillen has hosted an array of international events, most notably, stages of the World Waterski World Cup annually from 2005 to 2007, at the Broadmeadow. Despite its success, Enniskillen was not chosen as a World Cup Stop for 2008.
Also, a Pro wakeboard competition, 'Wakejam', took place between 27 and 29 July 2007, where top riders from around the world, as well as local riders, took part in the event, hosted by Erne Wakeboard Club (EWC).
In January 2009, Enniskillen hosted the ceremonial start of Rally Ireland 2009, the first stage of the WRC FIA World Rally Championship 2009 Calendar.
Enniskillen Airport is the host venue for Heli Challenge: The Premier Helicopter Championship]. Heli Challenge is an international competition, which tests the skill of some of the best helicopter pilots from across the British Isles. Enniskillen Airport has hosted Heli Challenge in 2009 & 2010. Heli Challenge will return in August 2011.
May 2009 saw the first International Seaplane Festival take place at the Share Centre in Lisnakea, as part of the Fermanagh Seaplane Festival, 10 Seaplanes from across Europe arrived to celebrate the beauty of the Fermanagh Loughs. The day before the festival a number of planes landed in the town of Enniskillen (Dramatic footage of it can be seen on YouTube).
In 2011, The Fermanagh Seaplane Festival returned, located at the original World War II Catalina base in RAF Killadeas on Lower Lough Erne. The Festival attracted two World War II Catalina's and went on to capture global media exposure(Confirmed 4.5million plus viewers) via a TV show called 'Dig WWII', hosted by presenter Dan Snow.
For the past two years, Enniskillen has played host to the Ireland Horizons Unlimited Travelers Meeting, an event that draws motorcyclists from across the country and across Europe. The 2010 HU Ireland meeting raised £506 for Motorcycle Outreach, through the sale of raffle tickets and the generous donation of prizes.

Notable people

The following are former or current residents of the town.

Common surnames

Most common surnames in Enniskillen according Irish Census 1901/1911: Maguire, Wilson, Johnston, Murphy, Irvine, McManus, Kelly, Elliott, Drumm, Smith, Doherty, Donnelly, Gallagher, Shannon, Smyth, Morrison, Keenan, Armstrong, Nolan, Bleakley, Love, Crawford, FitzPatrick, Boyd, Martin, Dolan, Stewart, Magee, Walker, Flanagan, Henderson, Cleary, Sweeney, Breen, Clarke, Nixon, Jones, Hynes, Corrigan, Reilly, Slavin, Dooris, Cassidy, Scott, McLoughlin, McCusker, Carney, Rooney, Leonard, Carrothers, McGovern, Dorothy, Quinn, Ward, Wadsworth, McCaffery, Palmer, Lunny, Harte, Kenny, Robinson, McDonagh, Lally, Montgomery, Maxwell, McCauley, Cox, Hassard, Curran, Haren, McNulty, McBride, McFarland, Fox, Dundas, Coulter, Forsythe, Brady, Parker, Gardiner, Hamilton, Campbell, McMullen, Mulligan, Duffy, Steele, Miller, Moore, Feely, McCaffrey, McKernan, Carleton, Monaghan, Gibson, Thompson, Latimer, Ritchie, Scollan, Cavanagh, Drumn, Barton, Gregg, Hogan, O'Donnell, McKeown, Jackson, McKenna, Hall, Dickson, Gildea, Carroll, Coalter, Connor, Hurst, Vaughan, Hueston, Cadden, Graham, Kennedy, Ford, Ross, Frith, Healy.

Education

There are numerous schools and colleges in and around the Enniskillen area, from primary level to secondary level, including some further education colleges such as the technical college.

Primary level

Secondary level

Colleges

Transport

Rail - historic

Railway lines from Enniskillen railway station linked the town with Derry from 1854, Dundalk from 1861, Bundoran from 1868 and Sligo from 1882.

Rail - current

The nearest railway station to Enniskillen is Sligo station which is served by trains to Dublin Connolly and is operated by Iarnród Éireann.  The Dublin-Sligo railway line has a two hourly service run by Irish Rail Official site – Timetables, bookings and operations
The connecting bus from Sligo via Manorhamilton to Enniskillen is route 66 operated by Bus Éireann.

Bus

Enniskillen has an extensive bus service; both Ulsterbus and Bus Éireann serve Fermanagh through the bus station in Enniskillen. Leydons Coaches operate route 930 linking Enniskillen to Swanlinbar, Bawnboy, Ballyconnell, Belturbet and Cavan. Leydons Coaches (11 February 2013). Retrieved on 23 July 2013. LakesCity route 950 provides a number of journeys each day to Dublin, Cavan and Donegal.ie/ LakesCity. Retrieved on 18 October 2013.

Air

Enniskillen has a World War II-era airport, Enniskillen/St Angelo Airport. The airport had scheduled flights in the past, but now serves mainly private traffic. The town is on the main A4/N16 route linking Belfast and Sligo, and on the main Dublin to Ballyshannon route, the N3/A46/A509.

Twinning

Enniskillen is twinned with Bielefeld, Germany. Enniskillen was originally twinned with Brackwede – a Bielefeld suburb – where the Inniskilling Dragoon Guards were stationed at the end of World War II; however, this suburb was incorporated into Stadt Bielefeld in 1973, the city with which Enniskillen is now officially twinned.

Image:River Erne in Enniskillen by Paride.JPG
Image:River Erne in Enniskillen2 by Paride.JPG
Image:Enniskillen by Paride.JPG








