[[Harry Mulisch]]

CATEGORIES: 1927 births, 2010 deaths, Dutch novelists, Dutch dramatists and playwrights, Dutch poets, Dutch Jews, Libris Prize winners, Writers from Amsterdam, People from Haarlem, Constantijn Huygens Prize winners, P. C. Hooft Award winners, Prijs der Nederlandse Letteren winners, Cancer deaths in the Netherlands, Dutch essayists, Commanders of the Order of the Netherlands Lion, Officers Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany

Harry Kurt Victor Mulisch  (29 July 1927 – 30 October 2010) was a Dutch writer. He wrote more than 80 novels, plays, essays, poems and philosophical reflections. These have been translated into more than 30 languages.
Along with Willem Frederik Hermans and Gerard Reve, Mulisch is considered one of the "Great Three" of Dutch postwar literature. His novel The Assault became a 1986 film, which won both a Golden Globe and an Academy Award. A 2007 poll revealed his 1992 novel The Discovery of Heaven as the "Best Dutch Book Ever". He was regularly thought of as a possible future Nobel laureate.

Life

Mulisch was born in Haarlem and lived in Amsterdam from 1958 until his death in 2010. Mulisch's father was from Austria-Hungary and emigrated to the Netherlands after the First World War. During the German occupation in World War II his father worked for a German bank, which also dealt with confiscated Jewish assets. His mother, Alice Schwarz, was Jewish. Mulisch and his mother escaped transportation to a concentration camp thanks to Mulisch's father's collaboration with the Nazis, but his maternal grandmother died in a gas chamber. Mulisch was mostly raised by his parents' housemaid, Frieda Falk. Mulisch said of himself, he did not just write about World War II, he was WWII.

Death

Mulisch died in 2010. His death occurred at his Amsterdam home and his family was with him at the time. Dutch prime minister Mark Rutte described his death as "a loss for Dutch literature and the Netherlands".

Works

Mulisch gained international recognition with the film The Assault (1986), based on his book of the same title (1982). It received an Oscar and a Golden Globe for best foreign movie and has been translated into more than twenty languages.
His novel The Discovery of Heaven (1992) is considered his masterpiece, it was voted "the best Dutch-language book ever" by Dutch readers in a 2007 newspaper poll."Harry Mulisch, Dutch Novelist, Dies at 83", The New York Times, 31 October 2010. "It is the book that shaped our generation; it made us love, even obsess, with reading," said Peter-Paul Spanjaard, 32, a lawyer in Amsterdam at the time of Mulisch's death. It was filmed in 2001 as The Discovery of Heaven by Jeroen Krabbé, starring Stephen Fry.
Among the many awards he received for individual works and his total body of work, the most important is the Prijs der Nederlandse Letteren (Prize of Dutch Literature, a lifetime achievement award) in 1995."Writer Harry Mulisch dies at 83", BBC News.

Themes in his work

A frequent theme in his work is the Second World War. His father had worked for the Germans during the war and went to prison for three years afterwards. As the war spanned most of Mulisch's formative phase, it had a defining influence on his life and work. In 1963, he wrote a non-fiction work about the Eichmann case: Criminal Case 40/61. Major works set against the backdrop of the Second World War are De Aanslag (The Assault), Het stenen bruidsbed, and Siegfried, the latter an attempt to examine why so many Germans responded to Hitler's charismaArts Journal website
Mulisch often incorporated ancient legends or myths in his writings, drawing on Greek mythology (e.g. in De Elementen), Jewish mysticism (in De ontdekking van de Hemel and De Procedure), well known urban legends and politics (Mulisch was politically left-wing, once signing a book "dedicated in admiration" to Fidel Castro). Mulisch's works are widely read.
In 1984 he delivered the Huizinga Lecture in Leiden, The Netherlands, under the title: Het Ene (the unifying principle).hum.edu/history/huizinga-lezing/archief/archief-1.html

Bibliography

Honours and awards

Honours

Awards

Planetoid

Mulisch was honored with a planetoid in his name on 12 October 2006 (see 10251 Mulisch)






