[[Epsilon]]

CATEGORIES: Greek letters, Vowel letters

Epsilon (uppercase . In the system of Greek numerals it has the value five. It was derived from the Phoenician letter He 20px|He. Letters that arose from epsilon include the Roman E and Cyrillic Е.
The name "epsilon" (, "simple e") was coined in the Middle Ages to distinguish the letter from the digraph αι, a former diphthong that had come to be pronounced the same as epsilon.
There is also a Latin epsilon or "open e", which looks similar to the Greek lowercase epsilon. It is encoded in Unicode as U+025B ("Latin small-letter open e", ) and is used as an IPA phonetic symbol. The lunate or uncial epsilon has also provided inspiration for the euro sign (€).
The lunate epsilon (ϵ) is not to be confused with the set membership symbol (∈); nor should the Latin uppercase epsilon (Ɛ) be confused with the Greek uppercase sigma (Σ).

History

Origin

The letter Ε was taken over from the Phoenician letter He (inline|x12px) when Greeks first adopted alphabetic writing. In archaic Greek writing, its shape is often still identical to that of the Phoenician letter. Like other Greek letters, it could face either leftward or rightward (inline|x14pxinline|x14px), depending on the current writing direction, but, just like in Phoenician, the horizontal bars always faced in the direction of writing. Archaic writing often preserves the Phoenician form with a vertical stem extending slightly below the lowest horizontal bar. In the classical era, through the influence of more cursive writing styles, the shape was simplified to the current E glyph.

Sound value

While the original pronunciation of the Phoenician letter He was . In the former role, it was later replaced in the classic Greek alphabet by Eta (Η), which was taken over from eastern Ionic alphabets, while in the latter role it was replaced by the digraph spelling ΕΙ.

Epichoric alphabets

Some dialects used yet other ways of distinguishing between various e-like sounds.
In Corinth, the normal function of Ε to denote .114. The letter Beta, in turn, took the deviant shape inline|x14px.
In Sicyon, a variant glyph resembling an X (inline|x14px) was used in the same function as Corinthian inline|x14px.138.
In Thespiai (Boeotia), a special letter form consisting of a vertical stem with a single rightward-pointing horizontal bar (inline|x12px) was used for what was probably a raised variant of .

Glyph variants

After the establishment of the  Some of them resembled a modern lowercase Latin "e", some a "6" with a connecting stroke to the next letter starting from the middle, and some a combination of two small "c"-like curves. Several of these shapes were later taken over into minuscule book hand. Of the various minuscule letter shapes, the inverted-3 form became the basis for lower-case Epsilon in Greek typography during the modern era.

Uses

International Phonetic Alphabet

In the International Phonetic Alphabet, the Latin epsilon .

Symbol

The uppercase Epsilon is not commonly used outside of the Greek language because of its similarity to the Latin letter E.
The Greek lowercase epsilon ε, the lunate epsilon symbol ϵ, or the Latin lowercase epsilon ɛ (see above) is used as the symbol for:

Unicode

These characters are used only as mathematical symbols. Stylized Greek text should be encoded using the normal Greek letters, with markup and formatting to indicate text style.

Initial

File:Lectionary 226 GA 0020b Epsilon.JPG|Initial epsilon in Lectionary 226, folio 20 verso
File:Lectionary 226 (GA) Epsilon 0064b.JPG|folio 64 verso
File:Lectionary 226 GA 0125b Epsilon.JPG|folio 125 verso



Further reading


