[[Karl-Otto Koch]]

CATEGORIES: 1897 births, 1945 deaths, People from Darmstadt, Buchenwald concentration camp personnel, Executed Nazi concentration camp personnel, People executed by Germany by firing squad, People from the Grand Duchy of Hesse, SS officers, German people executed by firing squad, Holocaust perpetrators, Recipients of the Iron Cross (1914), Recipients of the Iron Cross, 2nd class, Majdanek concentration camp personnel, Sachsenhausen concentration camp personnel, Nazi concentration camp commandants, People from Hesse executed in Nazi concentration camps, Deaths by firearm in Germany, Nazis executed by Nazi Germany

Karl-Otto Koch (August 2, 1897 – April 5, 1945), a Standartenführer (Colonel) in the German Schutzstaffel (SS), was the first commandant of the Nazi concentration camps at Buchenwald and Sachsenhausen. From September 1941 until August 1942 Koch served as the first commandant of the Majdanek concentration camp in occupied Poland also, stealing vast amounts of valuables and money from murdered Jews.

Life

Koch was born in  Darmstadt, Grand Duchy of Hesse on August 2, 1897. His father worked in local registrar's office and died when Karl was only eight years old. After completing  elementary school in 1912, Koch began studying business and  worked as a messenger and an apprentice in a bookkeeping department in a local factory. In 1916, he volunteered to join the army and fought on the Western Front until he was captured by the British in 1918. Koch spent the rest of the war as a POW and returned to Germany in 1919. As a soldier, he conducted himself well and was awarded the Iron Cross Second Class, the Observer's Badge and the Wound Badge in Black. Following World War I, Koch worked as an accounting supervisor in a bank and later in the same role in an insurance company. In 1931, Karl-Otto Koch joined the NSDAP and the Schutzstaffel.

Service with the SS

Koch served with several SS-Standarten until June 13, 1935, when he became commander of the Columbia concentration camp in Berlin-Tempelhof. In April 1936 he was assigned to the concentration camp at Esterwegen. Four months later he was moved to Sachsenhausen. On August 1, 1937, he was given command of the new concentration camp at Buchenwald. He remained at Buchenwald until September 1941, when he was transferred to the Majdanek concentration camp for POWs. That was largely due to an investigation based on allegations of his improper conduct at Buchenwald, which included corruption, fraud, embezzlement, drunkenness, sexual offences and a murder. Koch commanded the Majdanek camp for only one year; he was relieved from his duties after 86 Soviet POWs escaped from the camp in August 1942. Koch was charged with criminal negligence and transferred to Berlin, where he worked at the SS Personalhauptamt and as a liaison between the SS and the German Post-Office.

Prosecution and death

Koch's actions at Buchenwald first caught the attention of SS-Obergruppenführer Josias, Prince of Waldeck and Pyrmont in 1941. In glancing over the death list of Buchenwald, Josias had stumbled across the name of Dr. Walter Krämer, a head hospital orderly at Buchenwald, which he recognized because Krämer had successfully treated him in the past. Josias investigated the case and found out that Koch, in a position as the Camp Commandant, had ordered Krämer and Karl Peixof, a hospital attendant, killed as "political prisoners" because they had treated him for syphilis and he feared it might be discovered. Koch was executed by firing squad on 5 April 1945, one week before American allied troops arrived to liberate the camp.

Family

Koch first married in 1924 and had one son; however, his marriage ended in divorce 1931, due to his infidelity. On May 25, 1936 Koch married Ilse Koch née Margarete Ilse Köhler, with whom he had a son and two daughters. Köhler later became known as "The Witch of Buchenwald" (Die Hexe von Buchenwald), usually rendered more alliteratively in English as "The Bitch of Buchenwald." When Koch was transferred to Buchenwald, Ilse was appointed an Oberaufseherin (overseer) by the SS and thus had an active, official role in the atrocities committed there. She was known for extreme cruelty to prisoners.



Notes and references


