[[Jolt Cola]]

CATEGORIES: Cola brands, American soft drinks

Jolt Cola was a carbonated soft drink produced by Wet Planet Beverages. It was created in 1985 by C. J. Rapp as a highly caffeinated cola. Emigrant Savings Bank, the main creditor, then acquired the Jolt assets and relaunched the business.

In North America

Jolt Cola was a beverage originally made by The Jolt Company, Inc. Rochester, New York, which has since changed its name to Wet Planet Beverages. From the outset, Jolt's marketing strategy centered on the caffeine content, billing the drink as a means to promote wakefulness. The initial slogan was "All the sugar and twice the caffeine"; this slogan survived for 24 years.
In the fall of 1987, the company began marketing a low calorie version, called Jolt 25, which was sweetened with a mixture of sugar and NutraSweet, and had 25 calories per 12-ounce can.
Jolt Cola later diversified into additional flavors named Cherry Bomb, Citrus Climax, Orange Blast, White Lightning (grape), Red Eye, and Electric Blue.
In 2003, the name was licensed to a Hackensack, New Jersey company named Gumrunners, Inc., which manufactures a line of caffeinated gum and mints bearing the Jolt label and the slogan "Chew More, Do More." The gum comes in two flavors: Spearmint and Icy Mint.
In 2005, Jolt Cola revamped its product line. Jolt Cola changed its logo, and came in "battery" bottles, which make a loud popping sound when opened. The cans are 23.5 oz / 695 ml resealable aluminium bottles; the body of the bottle was similar to that of a standard aluminium can, but the top had a twist-off aluminum cap with a plastic gasket liner), and in smaller "Quick Fix" cans (8.4 oz / 250 ml single-use pull-tab aluminium cans, similar to those used for Red Bull) and "battery" cans (16 oz / 473 ml resealable aluminium cans with the same twist-off top as the Battery bottles). The Jolt Cola website claimed that the "Quick Fix" sizes were available at establishments that serve "adult beverages," for use as a mixer. The flavors of Jolt offered were also changed. Flavors offered were Cola, Blue Raspberry, Cherry Bomb (cherry cola), Silver (lemon-lime), Wild Grape, Orange Blast, Passionfruit (featuring a yellow can) and Ultra (a diet drink with Splenda as its artificial sweetener alongside guarana, ginseng, taurine, and vitamin B complex).
On September 28, 2009, The Jolt Company, Inc. filed Chapter 11 proceedings in the United States Bankruptcy Court in Rochester, New York and simultaneously filed a motion to permit sale of the company's assets through a court-approved sale. The restructured company has now opened headquarters in Moonachie, New Jersey. Production of the Rexam 'battery bottles' ceased, and non-resealable cans is the major focus in the U.S.

Jolt Energy

Since 2009, The Cherry Bomb, Silver and Passionfruit flavors have been discontinued while the diet Ultra flavor has been replaced with the Blue Zero Carb diet blue raspberry flavor.
Jolt Cola is still packaged in glass bottles under license by the 7 Up bottling company of California. These are sold on the West Coast, where laws are stricter to encourage use of refillable bottles.
The Jolt Company Inc. (once also known as Wet Planet Beverages) exists as a "sister" company to Boylan Bottling Works and its traditional "flavors" soft drinks. The company is primarily financed by Emigrant Capital of New York City.

Jolt Cola worldwide

thumb|right|175px|Retro cans of JoltJolt Cola is also manufactured under license in Chantilly, Pittsburgh, Australia, Sweden and formerly (and briefly) in the United Kingdom.  The German and Swedish supplier uses the old logos, branding and formulation, and only sells the original flavor. Jolt Cola is also available in the Netherlands and Finland. However, Jolt Cola Netherlands is a subsidiary of Jolt Cola Germany.
In Ireland, Jolt Cola is sold in 50 cl bottles in most Eurospars and Dunnes Stores, it is also very popular in universities and is sold in the Dublin Institute of Technology's (DIT) student unions.
In Sweden and The Netherlands, Jolt cola is heavily associated with LAN parties.
In Australia, ("bottled under the authority of the Jolt Company Inc. by Jolt Corporation Australia Pty Ltd, 1 Barrpowell Rd Welland" South Australia) Jolt is sold in the traditional cola flavor, as well as lime, root beer, cream soda, and orange flavors. It generally comes in 61,5 cL bottles, with 190 mg of caffeine. In 2006 bottle capacities were reduced to 60 cL (in some cases, without vendors being aware of the change). With a caffeine concentration of 3,2 g per 10 cL, these bottles contain a claimed 19,2 g.
In Canada and India Jolt cola is not available; however, Thums Up a similar product made by the Hindustan Coca-Cola Beverages Pvt. Ltd. can be found in India and some Indian Stores in Canada.
Jolt Cola was also available in Japan
Jolt was redistributed after the formula was modified by RG Cola distributor Eduardo Sanchez and Victoria Lambert.

In popular culture

Jolt Cola was featured in Steven Spielberg's film Jurassic Park in a scene which shows computer programmer Dennis Nedry's work station covered with Jolt Cola cans & bottles. It was also shown in several scenes in the film Hackers; in one scene, the characters Razor and Blade refer to it as, "Jolt Cola: The soft drink of the elite hacker." There is product placement of Jolt Cola in the movies Deep Impact, Cops and Robbersons, Hackers'' (film)'', Trust (film), Gremlins 2: The New Batch, Men at Work, Basket Case 2, 11:14, Due Date and Looney Tunes: Back in Action. It is also mentioned in Wayne's World 2, when Garth attributes a hallucination to his excessive intake of the drink.  Although the name was changed to "Volt Cola," Beavis and Butt-head clearly parodied the drink in the episode "Vaya con Cornholio". Vending machines in the video game Monster Madness dispense Jolt Cola to restore your character's health. In addition, David Foster Wallace references the Jolt Cola ad campaign in the short story "Mister Squishy," originally published in McSweeney's and collected in Oblivion: Stories. In a 2010 episode of the TV show 30 Rock, Tracy Jordan requests a can of Jolt Cola, which he states will be hard because it no longer exists. It's also in The Simpsons called Buzz Cola as a parody. Recently it was mentioned in From Dusk till Dawn: The Series when the character Richard Gecko says it is his favorite drink, and expresses disappointment in the discontinuation of the product.






