[[Bono]]

CATEGORIES: Bono, 1960 births, HIV/AIDS activists, Alternative rock singers, Grammy Award-winning artists, Golden Globe Award winning musicians, Honorary Knights Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Irish humanitarians, Irish male singers, Irish singer-songwriters, Irish tenors, Irish businesspeople, Irish philanthropists, Irish rock singers, Ivor Novello Award winners, Légion d'honneur recipients, Living people, Musicians from Dublin (city), Private equity and venture capital investors, U2 members, International opponents of apartheid in South Africa, Post-punk musicians, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Commandeurs of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, Anti-poverty advocates

Paul David Hewson (born 10 May 1960), known by his stage name Bono (), is an Irish singer-songwriter, musician, venture capitalist, businessman, and philanthropist. He is best recognized as the frontman of the Dublin-based rock band U2. Bono was born and raised in Dublin, Ireland, and attended Mount Temple Comprehensive School where he met his future wife, Alison Stewart, and the future members of U2. Bono writes almost all U2 lyrics, frequently using religious, social, and political themes. During U2's early years, Bono's lyrics contributed to their rebellious and spiritual tone. As the band matured, his lyrics became inspired more by personal experiences shared with the other members.
Outside the band, he has collaborated and recorded with numerous artists, is managing director and a managing partner of Elevation Partners,Billboard. and has refurbished and owns The Clarence Hotel in Dublin with The Edge. Bono is also widely known for his activism concerning Africa, for which he co-founded DATA, EDUN, the ONE Campaign and Product Red. He has organised and played in several benefit concerts and has met with influential politicians. Bono has been praised and criticised for his activism and involvement with U2. (24 February 2006). Bono Among Nobel Peace Prize Nominees. Associated Press. Retrieved 14 January 2007, from Bono Among Nobel Peace Prize Nominees. He was granted a knighthood by Queen Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom, and, with Bill and Melinda Gates, was named Time Person of the Year in 2005, among other awards and nominations. On 17 July 2013, the BBC announced that Bono had been made a Commandeur of the French Ordre des Arts et des Lettres (Order of Arts and Letters).

Early life

Bono was born in the Rotunda Hospital, Dublin, on 10 May 1960. Although Bono was the second child, he also attended Church of Ireland services with his mother and brother.
He went to the local primary Glasnevin National School. 8. Bono was 14 when his mother died on 10 September 1974 after suffering a cerebral aneurysm at her father's funeral. Many U2 songs, including "I Will Follow", "Mofo", "Out of Control", "Lemon" and "Tomorrow" focus on the loss of his mother.
Bono attended Mount Temple Comprehensive School, a multi denominational school in Clontarf. During his childhood and adolescence, Bono and his friends were part of a surrealist street gang called "Lypton Village". Bono met one of his closest friends, Guggi, in Lypton Village.
"Bono Vox" is an alteration of Bonavox, a Latin phrase which translates to "good voice". It is said he was nicknamed "Bono Vox" by his friend Gavin Friday. He initially disliked the name; however, when he learned it translated to "good voice", he accepted it. Hewson has been known as "Bono" since the late 1970s. Although he uses Bono as his stage name, close family and friends also refer to him as Bono, including fellow band members.
After he left school, his father Bob Hewson, gave him a time limit telling him he could live at home for one year but if he wasn't able to pay his own way, he would have to get a job or leave the house.

Personal life

Bono is married to Alison Hewson (née Stewart).
Bono is almost never seen in public without sunglasses. During a Rolling Stone interview he stated:

In 2002, he was listed as one of the 100 Greatest Britons in a poll conducted among the general public,
In the late 1980s or early 90s, Bono bought a top-floor duplex apartment in Manhattan's storied San Remo apartment building from Steve Jobs for $15 million. Jobs had had it renovated for his own use, but never moved in.
Bono's work as an activist, which is due largely to his Christian beliefs,Maddy Fry,  "Bono Biography". Retrieved 18 April 2014 began in earnest when, inspired by Live Aid, he traveled to Ethiopia to work in a feeding camp with his wife Alison and the charity World Vision, an Evangelical Christian humanitarian aid, development, and advocacy organisation.atu2. Retrieved 18 April 2014 With regard to Bono's 2013 declarations in interviews published and videotaped of his faith in Jesus Christ,Leah Klett,  he states that Christ was either who he said he was, or he is "a complete and utter nut case".[ref]Joe Kovacs, "U2's Bono: Yes, Jesus is the Son of God"
