[[Edgar Rice Burroughs]]

CATEGORIES: 1875 births, 1950 deaths, People from Tarzana, Los Angeles, Edgar Rice Burroughs, American fantasy writers, American science fiction writers, Writers from California, People from Chicago, Illinois, People from Oak Park, Illinois, Phillips Academy alumni, Pulp fiction writers, Science Fiction Hall of Fame inductees, United States Army soldiers, Writers from Chicago, Illinois, American people of English descent, 20th-century American novelists

{{Infobox writer 
| name        = Edgar Rice Burroughs
| image       = E-R-Burroughs.jpg
| alt         = Edgar Rice Burroughs
| caption     = Edgar Rice Burroughs 
| birth_date  = 
| birth_place = Chicago, Illinois, U.S.
| death_date  = 
| death_place = Encino, California, U.S.
| resting_place = Tarzana, California, U.S.
| occupation  = Novelist
| nationality = American
| period      = 1911–50
| genre       = Adventure novel, fantasy, lost world, sword and planet, planetary romance, soft science fiction, Western
| notableworks = 

Edgar Rice Burroughs (September 1, 1875 – March 19, 1950) was an American writer, best known for his creations of the jungle hero Tarzan and the heroic Mars adventurer John Carter, although he produced works in many genres.

Early life

Burroughs was born on September 1, 1875, in Chicago, Illinois (he later lived for many years in the suburb of Oak Park), the fourth son of businessman and Civil War veteran Major George Tyler Burroughs (1833–1913) and his wife Mary Evaline (Zieger) Burroughs (1840–1920). His middle name is from his paternal grandmother, Mary Rice Burroughs (1802–ca. 70)., 296 pp.
Burroughs was educated at a number of local schools, and during the Chicago influenza epidemic in 1891, he spent a half year at his brother's ranch on the Raft River in Idaho. He then attended the Phillips Academy in Andover, Massachusetts, and then the Michigan Military Academy. Graduating in 1895, and failing the entrance exam for the United States Military Academy (West Point), he ended up as an enlisted soldier with the 7th U.S. Cavalry in Fort Grant, Arizona Territory.  After being diagnosed with a heart problem and thus ineligible to serve, he was discharged in 1897.
Some seemingly unrelated short jobs followed. Some drifting and ranch work followed in Idaho. Then, Burroughs found work at his father's firm in 1899.  He married childhood sweetheart Emma Hulbert (1876-1944) in January 1900.  In 1904 he left his job and found less regular work; some in Idaho, later in Chicago.
By 1911, after seven years of low wages, he was working as a pencil sharpener wholesaler and began to write fiction. By this time, Burroughs and Emma had two children, Joan (1908–72), who would later marry Tarzan film actor James Pierce, and Hulbert (1909–91). During this period, he had copious spare time and he began reading many pulp fiction magazines. In 1929 he recalled thinking that


Career

Aiming his work at the pulps, Burroughs had his first story, Under the Moons of Mars, serialized by Frank Munsey in the February to July 1912 issues of The All-Story  Under the Moons of Mars inaugurated the Barsoom series. It was first published as a book by A. C. McClurg of Chicago in 1917, entitled A Princess of Mars, after three Barsoom sequels had appeared as serials, and McClurg had published the first four serial Tarzan novels as books.
Burroughs soon took up writing full-time and by the time the run of Under the Moons of Mars had finished he had completed two novels, including Tarzan of the Apes, published from October 1912 and one of his most successful series. In 1913, Burroughs and Emma had their third and last child, John Coleman Burroughs (1913–79).
Burroughs also wrote popular science fiction and fantasy stories involving Earthly adventurers transported to various planets (notably Barsoom, Burroughs's fictional name for Mars, and Amtor, his fictional name for Venus), lost islands, and into the interior of the hollow earth in his Pellucidar stories, as well as westerns and historical romances. Along with All-Story, many of his stories were published in The Argosy magazine.
Tarzan was a cultural sensation when introduced. Burroughs was determined to capitalize on Tarzan's popularity in every way possible. He planned to exploit Tarzan through several different media including a syndicated Tarzan comic strip, movies and merchandise. Experts in the field advised against this course of action, stating that the different media would just end up competing against each other.  Burroughs went ahead, however, and proved the experts wrong — the public wanted Tarzan in whatever fashion he was offered. Tarzan remains one of the most successful fictional characters to this day and is a cultural icon.
In either 1915 or 1919, Burroughs purchased a large ranch north of Los Angeles, California, which he named "Tarzana." The citizens of the community that sprang up around the ranch voted to adopt that name when their community, Tarzana, California was formed in 1927.. reputedly coming from the popularity of the first (silent) Tarzan of the Apes film, starring Elmo Lincoln, and an early "Tarzan" comic strip.
In 1923 Burroughs set up his own company, Edgar Rice Burroughs, Inc., and began printing his own books through the 1930s.

Personal life

Burroughs divorced Emma in 1934 and married the former actress  Florence Gilbert Dearholt in 1935, the former wife of his friend, Ashton Dearholt, adopting the Dearholts' two children. They divorced in 1942.
Burroughs was in his late 60s and a resident of Hawaii at the time of attack on Pearl Harbor. Despite his age he applied for and received permission to become a war correspondent, becoming one of the oldest U.S. war correspondents during World War II, and is mentioned in William Brinkley's  novel Don't Go Near the Water.
American film director Wes Anderson is Burroughs' great-grandson.
The Science Fiction Hall of Fame inducted Burroughs in 2003.

Death

After the war ended, Burroughs moved back to Encino, California, where, after many health problems, he died of a heart attack on March 19, 1950, having written almost 80 novels.

Selected works

Barsoom series

Tarzan series

Pellucidar series

Venus series

Caspak series

Moon series

These three texts have been published by various houses in one or two volumes. Adding to the confusion, some editions have the original (significantly longer) introduction to Part I from the first publication as a magazine serial, and others have the shorter version from the first book publication, which included all three parts under the title The Moon Maid..

Mucker series

Other science fiction

Jungle adventure novels

Western novels

Historical novels

Other works

Popular culture

Books on Edgar Rice Burroughs



Notes



Bibliography



Bibliography

Other


