[[Ununtrium]]

CATEGORIES: Chemical elements, Synthetic elements, Ununtrium

Ununtrium is the temporary name of a chemical element with the temporary symbol Uut and atomic number 113. Also known as eka-thallium or simply element 113, is an extremely radioactive synthetic element (an element that can be created in a laboratory but is not found in nature); the most stable known isotope, ununtrium-286, has a half-life of 20 seconds. Ununtrium was first created in 2003 by the Joint Institute for Nuclear Research in Dubna, Russia.
In the periodic table, it is a p-block transactinide element. It is a member of the 7th period and is placed in the boron group, although no chemical experiments have been carried out to confirm that it behaves as the heavier homologue to thallium in the boron group. Ununtrium is calculated to have some similar properties to its lighter homologues, boron, aluminium, gallium, indium, and thallium, although it should also show several major differences from them. Unlike all the other p-block elements, it is predicted to show some transition metal character.

History

Dubna–Livermore collaboration

The first report of ununtrium was in August 2003 when it was identified as an alpha decay product of element 115, ununpentium. These results were published on February 1, 2004, by a team composed of Russian scientists at Dubna (Joint Institute for Nuclear Research), and American scientists at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory:"Experiments on the synthesis of element 115 in the reaction 243Am(48Ca,xn)291-x115", Oganessian et al., JINR Preprints, 2003. Retrieved on 3 March 2008
The Dubna–Livermore collaboration has strengthened their claim for the discovery of ununtrium by conducting chemical experiments on the final decay product 268Db. In experiments in June 2004 and December 2005, this dubnium isotope was successfully identified by extracting the final decay products, measuring spontaneous fission (SF) activities and using chemical identification techniques to confirm that they behave like a group 5 element (as dubnium is known to be in group 5 of the periodic table). Both the half-life and decay mode were confirmed for the proposed 268Db which lends support to the assignment of the parent and daughter nuclei to ununpentium and ununtrium respectively."Results of the experiment on chemical identification of Db as a decay product of element 115", Oganessian et al., JINR preprints, 2004. Retrieved on 3 March 2008 Further experiments at Dubna in 2005 have fully confirmed the decay data for ununpentium and ununtrium, but in 2011, the IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party (JWP) did not recognize the two elements as having been discovered because current theory could not distinguish between group 4 and group 5 elements by their chemical properties with sufficient confidence, and the identification of the daughter dubnium isotope was the most important factor in confirming the discovery of ununpentium and ununtrium.

RIKEN

On July 23, 2004, a team of Japanese scientists at RIKEN bombarded a target of bismuth-209 with accelerated nuclei of zinc-70 and detected a single atom of the isotope ununtrium-278. They published their results on September 28, 2004:
Previously, in 2000, a team led by P. A. Wilk identified the decay product 266Bh as decaying with identical properties to what the Japanese team had observed, thus lending support for their claim. However, they also observed the daughter of 266Bh, 262Db, undergo alpha decay instead of spontaneous fission (which the Japanese team observed).
The RIKEN team produced a further atom on April 2, 2005, although the decay data were slightly different from the first chain, perhaps due to either the formation of a metastable state or an alpha particle escaping from the detector before depositing its full energy. Due to these inconsistencies in the decay data, the small number of ununtrium atoms produced, and the lack of unambiguous anchors to known isotopes, the JWP did not accept this as a conclusive discovery of ununtrium in 2011.
Most recently, production and identification of another 278Uut nucleus occurred at RIKEN on August 12, 2012.  In this case, a series of six alpha decays was observed, leading down to an isotope of mendelevium:
This decay chain differed from the previous observations at RIKEN mainly in the decay mode of dubnium, which was previously observed to undergo spontaneous fission, but in this case instead alpha decayed. Because the alpha decay of dubnium-262 to lawrencium-258 is well known, this provides unambiguous proof that element 113 is the origin of the chain.  The scientists on this team calculated the probability of accidental coincidence to be 10−28, or totally negligible.

Naming

Ununtrium is the lightest element that has not yet received an official name. Using Mendeleev's nomenclature for unnamed and undiscovered elements, ununtrium should be known as eka-thallium or dvi-indium. In 1979 IUPAC published recommendations according to which the element was to be called ununtrium (with the corresponding symbol of Uut), a systematic element name as a placeholder, until the discovery of the element is confirmed and a name is decided on. The recommendations are largely ignored among scientists, who call it "element 113", with the symbol of (113) or even simply 113.
Claims to the discovery of ununtrium have been put forward by both the Dubna and RIKEN teams. The IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party (JWP) will decide to whom the right to suggest a name will be given. In 2011, the IUPAC evaluated the 2004 RIKEN experiments and 2004 and 2007 Dubna experiments, and concluded that they did not meet the criteria for discovery.
On August 12, 2012, researchers at the RIKEN Nishina Center for Accelerator-Based Science in Japan, claimed to have synthesised "element 113" by colliding zinc nuclei (with 30 protons each) into a thin layer of bismuth (which contains 83 protons).  If the discovery gets approved by The IUPAC/IUPAP Joint Working Party (JWP), this will be the first time in history that a team of Asian physicists will get to name a new element.
The following names have been suggested by the above-mentioned teams claiming discovery:

Isotopes

 
 
Ununtrium has no stable or naturally-occurring isotopes. Several radioactive isotopes have been synthesized in the laboratory, either by fusing two atoms or by observing the decay of heavier elements. Six different isotopes of ununtrium have been reported with atomic masses 278 and 282–286; they all decay through alpha decay.

Stability and half-lives

All ununtrium isotopes are extremely unstable and radioactive; however, the heavier ununtrium isotopes are more stable than the lighter. The most stable known ununtrium isotope, 286Uut, is also the heaviest known ununtrium isotope; it has a half-life of 20 seconds. The isotope 285Uut has been reported to also have a half-life of over a second. The isotopes 284Uut and 283Uut have half-lives of 0.48 and 0.10 seconds respectively. The remaining two isotopes have half-lives between 0.1 and 100 milliseconds: 282Uut has a half-life of 70 milliseconds, and 278Uut, the lightest known ununtrium isotope, is also the shortest-lived known ununtrium isotope, with a half-life of just 0.24 milliseconds. It is predicted that even heavier undiscovered ununtrium isotopes could be much more stable: for example, 287Uut is predicted to have a half-life of around 20 minutes, close to two orders of magnitude more than that of 286Uut.
Theoretical estimates of alpha decay half-lives of isotopes of ununtrium are in good agreement with the experimental data. however, no known ununtrium isotope has been observed to undergo beta decay.
The stability of nuclei decreases greatly with the increase in atomic number after plutonium, the heaviest primordial element, so that all isotopes with an atomic number above 101 decay radioactively with a half-life under a day, with the exception of dubnium-268. No elements with atomic numbers above 82 (after lead) have stable isotopes.

Predicted properties

Ununtrium is the first member of the 7p series of elements and the heaviest boron group element on the periodic table, below boron, aluminium, gallium, indium, and thallium. It is predicted to show many differences from its lighter homologues: a largely contributing effect is the spin–orbit (SO) interaction. It is especially strong for the superheavy elements, because their electrons move much faster than in lighter atoms, at velocities comparable to the speed of light, which is where the differences arise from. The electron affinity of ununtrium is calculated to be around 0.68 eV; in comparison, that of thallium is 0.4 eV. The high electron affinity and electronegativity of ununtrium are due to it being only one electron short of the closed-shell valence electron configuration of flerovium (7s27p1/22).
The simplest possible ununtrium compound is the monohydride, UutH. The bonding is provided by the 7p1/2 electron of ununtrium and the 1s electron of hydrogen. However, the SO interaction causes the binding energy of ununtrium monohydride to be reduced by about 1 eV and the ununtrium–hydrogen bond length to decrease as the bonding 7p1/2 orbital is relativistically contracted. The analogous monofluoride (UutF) should also exist. Ununtrium should also be able to form the trihydride (UutH3), trifluoride (UutF3), and trichloride (UutCl3), with ununtrium in the +3 oxidation state. Because the 6d electrons are involved in bonding instead of the 7s ones, these molecules are predicted to be T-shaped and not trigonal planar. Although the polyfluoride anion  should be stable, the corresponding neutral fluoride UutF5 should be unstable, spontaneously decomposing into the trifluoride and elemental fluorine. Ununtrium(I) is predicted to be more similar to silver(I) than thallium(I): the Uut+ ion is expected to more willingly bind anions, so that UutCl should be quite soluble in an excess of hydrochloric acid or in ammonia while TlCl is not. Additionally, in contrast to the strongly basic TlOH, ununtrium(I) should instead form Uut2O, which would be weakly water-soluble and readily ammonia-soluble.
Ununtrium is expected to be much denser than thallium, having a predicted density of about 16 to 18 g/cm3, due to the relativistic stabilization and contraction of its 7s and 7p1/2 orbitals. This is because calculations estimate it to have an atomic radius of about 170 pm, the same as that of thallium, even though periodic trends would predict it to have an atomic radius larger than that of thallium due to it being one period further down in the periodic table. The melting and boiling points of ununtrium are not definitely known, but have been calculated to be 430 °C and 1100 °C respectively, exceeding the values for gallium, indium, and thallium, following periodic trends.



Notes






