[[Symphony No. 9 (Dvořák)]]

CATEGORIES: Symphonies by Antonín Dvořák, 1893 compositions, Compositions in E minor

The Symphony No. 9 in E minor, From the New World, Op. 95, B. 178 (), popularly known as the New World Symphony, was composed by Antonín Dvořák in 1893 while he was the director of the National Conservatory of Music of America from 1892 to 1895. It is by far his most popular symphony, and one of the most popular of all symphonies. In older literature and recordings this symphony was often numbered as Symphony No. 5. Neil Armstrong took a recording of the New World Symphony to the Moon during the Apollo 11 mission, the first Moon landing, in 1969.com, November 7, 2007

Instrumentation

This symphony is scored for an orchestra of the following :

Movements

The piece has four movements:

Influences

Dvořák was interested in Native American music and the African-American spirituals he heard in America. As director of the National Conservatory he had an African-American student, Harry T. Burleigh, later a composer himself, who sang traditional spirituals to him and said that Dvořák had absorbed their `spirit' before writing his own melodies. Snyder, `A great and noble school of music: Dvořák, Harry T. Burleigh, and the African American Spiritual,' in Tibbets, John C., Editor, Dvorak in America: 1892-1895, Amadeus Press, Portland, OR, 1993, p. 131. Dvořák stated:

The symphony was commissioned by the New York Philharmonic, and premiered on December 16, 1893, at Carnegie Hall conducted by Anton Seidl. A day earlier, in an article published in the New York Herald on December 15, 1893, Dvořák further explained how Native American music had been an influence on this symphony:

In the same article, Dvořák stated that he regarded the symphony's second movement as a "sketch or study for a later work, either a cantata or opera ... which will be based upon Longfellow's Song of Hiawatha''" (Dvořák never actually wrote such a piece). He also wrote that the third movement scherzo was "suggested by the scene at the feast in Hiawatha where the Indians dance".
In 1893, a newspaper interview quoted Dvořák as saying "I found that the music of the negroes and of the Indians was practically identical", and that "the music of the two races bore a remarkable similarity to the music of Scotland". Most historians agree that Dvořák is referring to the pentatonic scale, which is typical of each of these musical traditions.
In the Burghauser Catalogue, the first few measures of each movement of the symphony are shown. 299-300 Non-pentatonic elements, namely half-tone changes in pitch, are easily seen, although there are notable pentatonic themes in the symphony. Dvořák's American String Quartet is much more pentatonic, at least in the early measures of each movement. 302
In a 2008 article in The Chronicle of Higher Education, prominent musicologist Joseph Horowitz asserts that African-American spirituals were a major influence on Dvořák's music written in America, quoting him from an 1893 interview in the New York Herald as saying, "In the negro melodies of America I discover all that is needed for a great and noble school of music."[ref]

[/ref]
But insofar as the influence was by way of the pentatonic scale, it would apply more to the Quartet than to the Symphony.  Dvořák did, it seems, borrow rhythms from the music of his native Bohemia, as notably in his Slavonic Dances, and the pentatonic scale in some of his music written in America from African-American and/or Native American sources. Statements that he borrowed melodies are often made but seldom supported by specifics. One verified example is the song of the Scarlet Tanager in the Quartet.  Leonard Bernstein averred that the Symphony was truly multinational in its foundations. DGG 477 0002. Comments on the 2nd compact disc.
Dvořák was influenced not only by music he had heard, but by what he had seen, in America. He wrote that he would not have composed his American pieces as he had, if he had not seen America. Knopf, New York). It has been said that Dvořák was inspired by the American "wide open spaces" such as prairies he may have seen on his trip to Iowa in the summer of 1893. ix Notices about several performances of the symphony include the phrase "wide open spaces" about what inspired the symphony and/or about the feelings it conveys to listeners.

Reception

At the premiere in Carnegie Hall, the end of every movement was met with thunderous clapping and Dvořák felt obliged to stand up and bow. 132–133 This was one of the greatest public triumphs of Dvořák's career. When the symphony was published, several European orchestras soon performed it. Alexander Mackenzie conducted the London Philharmonic in the European premiere on June 21, 1894. Clapham says the symphony became "one of the most popular of all time" and at a time when the composer's main works were being welcomed in no more than ten countries, this symphony reached the rest of the musical world and has become a "universal favorite." It is performed of 1978 more often "than any other symphony at the Royal Festival Hall, London" and is in "tremendous demand in Japan."
Several themes from the symphony have been used widely in films, TV shows, anime, video games, and advertisements such as the campaign for Hovis bread during the 1970s and 1980s in the UK.

The song "Goin' Home"

The theme from the Largo was adapted into the spiritual-like song "Goin' Home", often mistakenly considered a folk song or traditional spiritual, by Dvořák's pupil William Arms Fisher, who wrote the lyrics in 1922.59; Glenn Watkins, Proof through the night: music and the Great War, Volume 1, University of California Press, 2003, p.273.; Franya J. Berkman, Monument Eternal: The Music of Alice Coltrane, Wesleyan University Press, 2010, p.88. Berkman, Monument Eternal: The Music of Alice Coltrane, Wesleyan University Press, 2010, p.88.



Further reading



|url=
|title=New World Symphony : Complete listing of the recordings
|publisher=MusicaBohemica
|language=French
}}

