[[Delta Air Lines]]

CATEGORIES: Delta Air Lines, Companies listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Airlines of the United States, IATA members, Air Transport Association members, Airlines established in 1928, Companies based in Atlanta, Georgia, OpenTravel Alliance, Companies that have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, SkyTeam

Delta Air Lines, Inc. is a major American airline, headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia. Regional service for the airline is served by Delta Connection.

History

Delta Air Lines was created as Huff Daland Dusters, Incorporated, an aerial crop dusting operation, on May 30, 1924 in Macon, Georgia. Formed with a Huff-Daland Duster, the first true crop duster, the plane was deployed to combat the boll weevil in 1925. Delta Air Corporation owned the plane (now in the Southern Museum of Flight). The company moved to Monroe, Louisiana in 1925.  Collett E. Woolman, one of the original directors, purchased the company on September 13, 1928, and renamed it Delta Air Service.  It began carrying passengers in late 1929. The single passenger sat in a chair placed in the bin where the pesticide was usually kept. The first routes were between Southeastern states. Zainaldin of the Georgia Humanities Council, "Delta Air Lines", The New Georgia Encyclopedia (updated May 31, 2007).
Delta grew through the addition of routes and the acquisition of other airlines. They replaced propeller planes with jets in the 1960s and entered international competition to Europe in the 1970s and across the Pacific in the 1980s. The logo of Delta Air Lines, originally unveiled in 1959, is reminiscent of the swept-wing design of the DC-8 airplanes. Often termed as the "widget" logo, the current version consists of two 3D triangles.

Predecessors

The current Delta Air Lines is the result of many airline mergers over a period of more than 80 years. The most recent merger was with Northwest Airlines on October 29, 2008 and at the time formed the world's largest airline. After approval of the merger, Northwest continued to operate as a wholly owned subsidiary of Delta until December 31, 2009 when both carriers' operating certificates were merged (the Delta certificate was kept).
Predecessor carriers forming the current Delta Air Lines include:

Defunct Delta subsidiaries

Operations

Headquarters and offices

Delta's corporate headquarters is located on a corporate campus on the northern boundary of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport, within the city limits of Atlanta. of land, an area containing the Delta headquarters. As of 1981 Delta would have had to begin paying $200,000 annually to the City of Atlanta in taxes. In September 1981 the airline sued the city, challenging the annexation on the basis of the constitutionality of the 1960 City of Atlanta annexation of the Hartsfield old terminal."Delta suing City of Atlanta." Associated Press at Rome News-Tribune. Wednesday September 2, 1981. p. 10A. Retrieved from Google News (6 of 29) on December 19, 2013. The City of Atlanta was only permitted to annex areas that are adjacent to areas already in the Atlanta city limits.
In addition to hosting Delta's corporate headquarters, Hartsfield-Jackson is also the home of Delta TechOps, Delta's Technical Operations Center, which is the airline's primary maintenance, repair and overhaul arm and the largest full-service airline MRO in North America, specializing in engines, components, airframe and line maintenance.
Delta maintains a large presence in the Twin Cities, with over 12,000 employees

Branding

Delta's current livery, "Upward & Onward", uses four colors. It features a "widget" (triangle) on each aircraft's vertical stabilizer to refer to Delta's origins as a carrier in the Mississippi Delta.
The previous livery, "Colors in Motion", used eight colors. Delta introduced its current branding in 2007 after it emerged from bankruptcy. The switch from the previous livery to the current livery removed one day from each aircraft's painting cycle, allowing the airline to save money. The airline took four years to repaint all of its aircraft into the current scheme, including aircraft inherited from Northwest Airlines. The triangle logo, known internally as "the Widget", was introduced in 1959. It was not part of the "Colors in Motion" livery, but returned with the current livery. 

Hub information

Current hubs

Delta has seven domestic hubs and three international hubs.

Former hubs

Former secondary hubs

Delta has closed two secondary hubs due to changing business needs.

Personnel

Between its mainline operation and subsidiaries, Delta employs approximately 80,000 people.

Employee relations

Delta's 12,000 mainline pilots are represented by the Air Line Pilots Association, International and are the union's largest pilot group.
Not counting the pilots and flight dispatchers, Delta is the only one of the five largest airlines in the United States, and one of only two in the top 9 (the other being JetBlue, which is completely non-union), whose staff is entirely non-union.

Destinations

Delta operates 4,932 flights per day. Delta Connection operates 2,533 daily flights.
Delta Air Lines is one of the few airlines that flies to all six inhabited continents. Others are British Airways, Emirates, Korean Air, Qantas, Qatar Airways, Singapore Airlines, South African Airways, and United Airlines. 

Hub city statistics

These statistics about each of Delta's hubs are current as of April 2014. (Ranked by daily departures).

Alliances

Delta was a founding member of the SkyTeam Alliance in 2000. In addition to SkyTeam partners, Delta Air Lines also has codeshare agreements with the following airlines as of December 2013:

Air France–KLM and Alitalia joint venture

Inherited from the Northwest-KLM relationship (which is older than any of the three major airline alliances including SkyTeam itself), Delta has a transatlantic joint venture with Air France-KLM and Alitalia. The program coordinates transatlantic operations, including ticket pricing, schedules, capacity, and revenue. On January 27, 2012, the European Commission launched an investigation into the impact of the joint venture on competition on the routes that it covers.

Joint venture with Virgin Atlantic

On December 11, 2012 Delta announced that it would spend $360 million to acquire a 49 percent stake in Virgin Atlantic.  These share were previously held by Singapore Airlines.  As a part of this agreement, both airlines would share the costs and revenues from all of the joint venture flights the airlines operated.  As of the announcement, the two airlines planned to operate a total of 31 roundtrip flights between the UK and North America, including nine daily roundtrip flights between London Heathrow and New York City airports (John F. Kennedy International Airport and Newark Liberty International Airport).delta.php?s=43&item=1822  The two airlines applied for antitrust immunity with the United States Department of Transportation and immunity was granted on September 23, 2013

Fleet

 The carrier operates the largest fleets of Boeing 757, Boeing 767, and Airbus A330 aircraft of any US airline. Delta operates the largest fleet of McDonnell Douglas MD-88 and McDonnell Douglas MD-90 aircraft in the world. Prior to its 2008 merger with Northwest Airlines, Delta's fleet was made up of solely Boeing and McDonnell Douglas aircraft; Airbus aircraft from Northwest joined the fleet after the merger.
Unlike other mainline US legacy carriers, Delta has decided that its best path to profitability is a strategy that utilizes older aircraft, and Delta has created a very extensive MRO (maintenance, repair and overhaul) organization, called TechOps, to support them. As of February 2014, the average age of a Delta airliner is 17 years; 
As part of its strategy to utilize less expensive used airplanes, On May 22, 2012, Delta announced an agreement to lease 88 Boeing 717s from Southwest Airlines that Southwest inherited from its acquisition of AirTran Airways as replacements for the DC-9 aircraft and some 50-seat regional aircraft. Deliveries should begin in mid-2013 replacing some of Delta's over 250 CRJ-100 and -200 aircraft.
Delta's strategy has reaped dividends, both in financial performance and in flight performance.  Delta claims a flight dispatch rate in 2013 of 99.7%; its fleet had 120 days without a single maintenance failure.  That included the month of October 2013, when Delta recorded no domestic flight cancellations.  Delta posted a profit of $2.7 billion, the highest of any US carrier in 2013.19
Delta officially retired the McDonnell Douglas DC-9 from its fleet on January 6, 2014; however, the DC-9 was used on an as needed basis until January 22, 2014 when the last DC-9 was removed from service.  Delta was the final US carrier operating the McDonnell Douglas DC-9.cnn.com/2014/01/11/travel/dc9-retirement/

Cabin

BusinessElite

BusinessElite is Delta's long-haul international business class. Passengers in the BusinessElite cabin receive complimentary meals, refreshments, alcoholic beverages, and an amenity kit. BusinessElite is also available on domestic transcontinental service between New York and Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Seattle–Tacoma International Airport.
Boeing 757-200 and certain Boeing 767-300ER aircraft configured with the BusinessElite cabin feature older recliner-style seating made by Recaro and BE Aerospace, respectively. BusinessElite seats on 767-300ERs have  of width. All seats are equipped with a personal, on demand In-Flight-Entertainment (IFE) system, universal power-ports, a movable reading light, and a folding work table. The BusinessElite seats ex-American Airlines/TWA 757-200s have electric recline, while those on ex-Northwest Airlines aircraft have mechanical recline. The ex-Northwest aircraft are planned to be converted back to a domestic configuration.
The flat-bed BusinessElite seats on 767-400ER aircraft (made by Contour Aerospace and designed by James Thompson) feature a space-saving design, with the bottom ends of the seats extending under the armrests of the suites in front when in the horizontal position. These seats are also currently being added to the 767-300ER fleet, which will be completed by 2013.
The BusinessElite cabin on Boeing 777 aircraft features sleeper suites made by Contour Aerospace and configured in a herringbone pattern with seats angled towards the aisle, while the 747-400 fleet (as of October 2012) features the Cirrus flat-bed sleeper suite made by Zodiac Seats U.S. (formerly Weber Aircraft LLC), designed by JPA Design Consultants, and configured in a reverse herringbone patterns with seats angled away from the aisle.  Unmodified Airbus A330 aircraft feature angled-flat BusinessElite seats made by BE Aerospace providing 
On November 5, 2012, Delta announced it would introduce a flat-bed BusinessElite product on its ex-American Airlines/TWA 757-200s.

First and Business Class (short and medium haul)

First Class is offered on all domestic aircraft, as well as Delta Connection aircraft with more than 50 seats. Seats range from  of pitch. Passengers aboard this class receive free snacks, drinks, and alcohol, with full meal service on flights 900 miles and longer. Certain aircraft also feature power-ports at each seat.  When a domestically configured aircraft operates on an international route, such as those to the Caribbean, the first class cabin is branded as Business Class.

Economy Comfort Class

Economy Comfort seats are installed on all Delta aircraft, as well as all two-cabin Delta Connection aircraft and feature  Additional amenities include priority boarding, complimentary spirits on international flights, and HBO programming. Customers can upgrade from standard economy class seats to Economy Comfort seats. Economy Comfort more closely aligns Delta's offerings with its Transatlantic joint venture partners as KLM also offers an Economy Comfort section of its Economy cabin. Air France offers Premium Economy l, which is not the same as Economy Comfort.

Economy Class

Economy Class is available on all aircraft with seats ranging from 
Economy class passengers receive complimentary snacks and non-alcoholic drinks domestically. Alcoholic beverages are also available for purchase. Complimentary meals and alcoholic drinks are provided on long-haul international flights. As part of Delta's EATS buy on board program, food is available for purchase on all domestic flights 
Delta operated a different buy on board program between 2003 and 2005. "Passengers find buy-on-board food hard to digest – Airlines are starting to feed fliers again when adjusted for inflation); the increase in alcohol prices did not occur on Song flights.

On-board amenities

Wi-Fi

On August 5, 2008, Delta announced it would be installing the Aircell mobile broadband network, Gogo, which enables customers traveling with Wi-Fi enabled devices, such as laptops, smartphones and PDAs, to access the Internet for a fee. Gogo was initially offered on Delta's fleet of McDonnell Douglas MD-88 and MD-90 aircraft but has expanded to the remaining domestic fleet, as well as Delta Connection aircraft with a first class cabin.

In-flight entertainment

=History=

In the 1960s audio programming was introduced where passengers wore headphones consisting of hollow tubes piping in music. These were installed in some Delta aircraft. Some early wide-bodied aircraft, including the Lockheed L-1011, Boeing 767-200, and 767-300 fleet, had movies projected on to the cabin bulkhead. Also during the late 1980s and early 1990s, CRT monitors over the aisles were added to the 757 fleet, making them the first narrowbody aircraft to feature video entertainment. The MD-90 introduced Delta's first IFE system with LCD monitors in 1995, and the 777 introduced Delta's first in-seat video system in 1999, initially using the Rockwell Collins Total Entertainment System. Delta's first all-digital IFE system with AVOD (Panasonic eFX) was first introduced in 2003 on Delta's former low-cost subsidiary, Song. The Rockwell Collins IFE system on the 777s was replaced by the Panasonic eFX system in 2007, followed by the Panasonic eX2 in 2011. The Panasonic eFX and eX2 systems are trademarked by Delta as Delta on Demand.
In the spring of 2010, Delta installed the Panasonic eFX AVOD system in Economy on six 767-300ERs that are used on routes that are 12 hours or longer.
On July 27, 2010, Delta announced that it would be the launch customer of the new eX2 AVOD system with the Eco 9i Integrated Smart Monitor, a new ultra-lightweight IFE system by Panasonic Avionics Corporation and Zodiac Seats U.S..  A different version of the Integrated Smart Monitor developed by Panasonic Avionics Corporation and BE Aerospace is currently being installed on the Airbus A330 fleet.  These seats will also be installed on the Boeing 757-300 and new Boeing 737-900ER fleet, and will replace the existing seats and monitors on the international Boeing 757-200 fleet.
In 2012, Delta began replacing the overhead CRT monitors on the pre-merger Delta 757-200 fleet with new LCD monitors.  This was completed in late 2012.
The 767-400ER fleet initially featured LCDs over the aisles, but were replaced in 2009 by the Panasonic eFX AVOD system when the last of the 767-400ERs were converted from domestic to international use. CRT projectors were originally featured in economy class on Boeing 767–300s, with the international 767-300ERs also featuring ceiling-mounted CRT displays over the aisles, which have since replaced by LCD monitors, and are now in the process of being converted to the eFX2 AVOD system.
When Delta's ex-TWA ETOPS 757s were first delivered, they featured a system made by Sony Transcom (a former subsidiary of Sony now sold to Rockwell Collins) system that was factory installed for TWA. The system featured overhead drop-down LCD monitors similar to Delta's non-Transcon 737-800s and 757-300s. Delta replaced the Sony Transcom system with the Panasonic eFX system featuring in-seat video and AVOD at the same time as the new BusinessElite seats and slimline economy class seats were installed.

=Current fleet=

Audio and video are available on all aircraft except for the Airbus A320, McDonnell Douglas MD-80 and MD-90, selected Boeing 757, and Delta Connection aircraft. Boeing 777-200ER, 777-200LR, and 747 aircraft, along with those 767-300 and A330 aircraft that have completed cabin modifications, feature the Panasonic eX2 system. Compared to the older eFX system, this offers greater storage capacity, as well as larger personal video screens.  This system includes supplemental LCD monitors over the aisles for displaying the safety video and moving map.
Domestic Boeing 767–300s, Boeing 737–700s, as well as selected transcontinental Boeing 757–200s and selected Boeing 737–800s using the Panasonic eFX system, also feature live television via Dish Network in both first class and economy.  Some Boeing 737-800s, as well as all Boeing 757–300s feature systems with drop-down LCD displays below the overhead bins.
All aircraft with AVOD feature Panasonic's iXplor moving map program.  737-800s with overhead video and the coach sections of 767-300ER aircraft with overhead video feature the Rockwell Collins Airshow moving map, which is often shown during takeoff and landing.  Other aircraft formerly equipped with the Rockwell Collins Airshow moving map included the Lockheed L-1011-250 and -500, McDonnell Douglas MD-11, and Boeing 767-400ER and 777-200ER.  The L-1011 and MD-11 fleet have since been retired, while the 767-400ER and 777-200ER have since had their Airshow systems replaced by the Panasonic iXplor system built into the eFX and eX2 AVOD systems.

Delta Sky Magazine

Delta Sky Magazine, and its online edition at www.com, are published by MSP Communications in Minneapolis, Minnesota.

SkyMiles

SkyMiles is the frequent flyer program of Delta Air Lines.

Sky Clubs

Delta Air Lines' airport lounges are called Sky Clubs. Membership options include one-day, 30-day, annual, and three-year memberships and can be purchased with either money or miles. International business class passengers get free access.
Features vary by location, but generally include free drinks (including alcoholic beverages), snacks and reading material. Wi-Fi is free for members and guests and is mostly provided by T-Mobile. Other benefits for Sky Club members include reciprocal lounge access with other SkyTeam members and Delta's other partners. Delta Air Lines has installed putting greens at select Sky Clubs. 
Originally, Delta's membership-based airport clubs were called Crown Room lounges, with Northwest's called WorldClubs.

SkyBonus

On November 27, 2001, Delta Air Lines launched SkyBonus, While enrolled businesses are able to earn points toward free travel, the travelling passenger is still eligible to earn SkyMiles during his or her travel.
In early 2010, Delta Air Lines merged its SkyBonus program with Northwest's similar Biz Perks program. 

Advertising slogans

Delta has had many slogans throughout its history:

Environmental initiatives

In 2008, Delta Air Lines was given an award from the United States Environmental Protection Agency's Design for the Environment (DfE) program for their use of PreKote, a more environmentally friendly, non-hexavalent chromium surface pretreatment on its aircraft, replacing hazardous chemicals formerly used to improve paint adhesion and prevent corrosion. In addition, PreKote reduces water usage by two-thirds and reduces wastewater treatment.
PreKote is also saving money by reducing the time needed to paint each airplane. With time savings of eight to ten percent, it will save an estimated more than $1 million annually.

Sponsorships

In popular culture

Deltalina

As part of the rebranding project, a safety video featuring a flight attendant showed up on YouTube in early 2008, getting over 1 million views and the attention of news outlets, specifically for the video's tone mixed with the serious safety message. The flight attendant, Katherine Lee, was dubbed "Deltalina" by a member of FlyerTalk for her resemblance to  Angelina Jolie. Delta had considered several styles for its current safety video, including animation, before opting for a video presenting a flight attendant speaking to the audience. The video was filmed on a Boeing 757."Delta's Red-Headed Flight Attendant a Hit on YouTube in Airline's Safety Video." Associated Press at Fox News. Sunday March 23, 2008.

Incidents and accidents

The following are major incidents and accidents that occurred on Delta Air Lines mainline aircraft. For Northwest Airlines incidents, see Northwest Airlines Incidents and Accidents. For Delta Connection incidents, see Delta Connection incidents and accidents.
Although Northwest Airlines Flight 253 was listed as a Northwest Airlines flight, the aircraft bore the Delta livery during the transitional period after the merger and therefore was reported in some media as a Delta flight.

Hijackings

There have been over a dozen attempted hijackings which resulted in no injuries and the surrender of the often lone hijacker. These incidents are not included. The following are notable hijackings because of fatalities or success in forcing the aircraft to fly to another country:








