[[The More the Merrier]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 films, American films, Black-and-white films, Columbia Pictures films, Films directed by George Stevens, Films featuring a Best Supporting Actor Academy Award winning performance, Films set in Washington, D.C., 1940s romantic comedy films

The More the Merrier is a 1943 American comedy film made by Columbia Pictures which makes fun of the housing shortage during World War II, especially in Washington, D.C.. The picture stars Jean Arthur, Joel McCrea and Charles Coburn. The movie was directed by George Stevens. The film was written by Richard Flournoy, Lewis R. Foster, Frank Ross, and Robert Russell, from "Two's a Crowd", an original story by Garson Kanin (uncredited).
This film was remade in 1966 as Walk, Don't Run, with Cary Grant, Samantha Eggar and Jim Hutton.

Plot

During World War II, retired millionaire Benjamin Dingle (Charles Coburn) arrives in Washington, D.C. as an adviser on the housing shortage and finds that his hotel suite will not be available for two days. He sees an ad for a roommate and talks the reluctant young woman, Connie Milligan (Jean Arthur), into letting him sublet half of her apartment. Comedy ensues when the two clumsily get in each other's way while arising and preparing for work. Connie makes things work by keeping to an exacting schedule, including eating breakfast, and leaving for work at a precise time.  Then Dingle runs into Sergeant Joe Carter (Joel McCrea), who has no place to stay while he waits to be shipped overseas. Dingle generously rents him half of his half.
When Connie finds out about the new arrangement, she orders them both to leave, but is forced to relent because she has already spent their rent money. Joe and Connie are attracted to each other, though she is engaged to high-paid bureaucrat Charles J. Pendergast (Richard Gaines). Connie's mother married for love, not security, and Connie is determined not to repeat her mistake. Dingle happens to meet Pendergast at a business luncheon and does not like what he sees. He decides that Joe would be a better match for his landlady.
One day, Dingle goes too far, reading aloud to Joe from Connie's private diary, including her thoughts about Joe. When she finds out, she demands they both leave the next day. Dingle accepts full blame for the incident, and Connie allows Joe to stay the few more days before he is to ship out to the fighting. Joe gives Connie an expensive suitcase as a surprise. 
Due to a nosy teenage neighbor, Joe is taken in for questioning as a suspected spy for the Japanese, and Connie is brought along as well. When Dingle and Pendergast show up to vouch for them, it comes out that Joe and Connie are living in the same apartment. They are eventually released, but the story reaches a reporter. Dingle advises the young couple to get married to avoid a scandal and then have it annulled later. They follow his advice and wed. However (as Dingle had foreseen), Connie's attraction to Joe overcomes her prudence.

Cast

As appearing in The More the Merrier, (main roles and screen credits identified):"Credits: The More the Merrier (1943)." Turner Classic Movies. Retrieved: August 24, 2013.

Production

With the original working title, Merry-Go-Round, principal photography took place for the film, from September 11 to December 19, 1942 with additional "inserts" filmed late January 1943. Working under a special three-film contract with Columbia Studios, George Stevens completed the last of directorial duties with The More the Merrier. The other two films were Penny Serenade (1941) and The Talk of the Town (1942). "Articles: The More the Merrier (1943)." Turner Classic Movies. Retrieved: August 24, 2013.
Under fire at Columbia for turning down too many projects, Jean Arthur and her husband Frank Ross invited a friend, Garson Kanin, to create a vehicle for Arthur and they paid him out of their own pocket. Kanin's "Two's a Crowd", with Robert W. Russell, co-writing, received Harry Cohn's go-ahead. Other titles considered included, "Washington Story", "Full Steam a Head", "Come One, Come All" and "Merry-Go-Round" which actually tested best with audiences. Testy Washington officials objected to the title and plot elements that "indicates frivolity on the part of Washington workers." The More the Merrier was finally approved as the title.

Reception

Bosley Crowther of The New York Times enjoyed The More the Merrier, calling the film "as warm and refreshing a ray of sunshine as we've had in a very late spring." Crowther, Bosley. "The More the Merrier (1943)." The New York Times, May 14, 1943. He praised all three leads, the writers, and the director, singling out Coburn as "the comical crux of the film" who "handles the job in fine fettle." TV Guide characterizes it as "a delightful and effervescent comedy marked with terrific performances" and praises Coburn as "nothing short of superb, stealing scene after scene with astonishing ease.""Review: The More the Merrier." TV Guide. Retrieved:  April 2, 2010.
Time Out Film Guide notes that, "despite a belated drift towards sentimentality, this remains a refreshingly intimate movie.""The More the Merrier (1943)." Time Out Film Guide. Retrieved: April 2, 2010.
It currently has a 100% fresh rating on the Rotten Tomatoes website, certifying it as fresh."The More the Merrier". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved: August 24, 2013.

Awards

Coburn won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor, while Arthur was nominated for Best Actress in a Leading Role. Other nominations included Best Director, Best Picture, Best Writing, Original Story and Best Writing, Screenplay.

DVD release

This film is available on Region 1 (USA/Canada).



Notes

Citations

Bibliography




