[[Woman of the Year]]

CATEGORIES: 1940s romantic comedy films, 1942 films, American films, Black-and-white films, English-language films, Films about journalists, Films directed by George Stevens, Films set in New York City, Films whose writer won the Best Original Screenplay Academy Award, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer films, United States National Film Registry films

Woman of the Year (1942) is a romantic comedy film starring Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn, directed by George Stevens and produced by Joseph L. Mankiewicz.
The film is about the relationship between an emancipated woman—chosen "Woman of the Year"—and her colleague-turned-husband, and their efforts to negotiate a path to marital bliss.
In 1999, this film was selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant".

Plot

Sam Craig (Spencer Tracy) and Tess Harding (Katharine Hepburn) are journalists for the New York Chronicle in the early 1940s with two drastically different backgrounds and worlds. Tess, the daughter of a diplomat (Minor Watson), is a political affairs columnist and polyglot educated in various prestigious European universities who has traveled the world.  Meanwhile, Sam is an everyman sportswriter.
A feud in their columns erupts over baseball, and their editor tells them that he will not stand for an intramural feud at his paper. Sam invites her on a date to a baseball game, and Tess inadvertently breaks the "men only" atmosphere of the press box. She is confused and unfamiliar with the rules of the sport. Tess then invites Sam to her apartment later that night, but what he thought would be a romantic occasion is actually a dinner party where none of the guests are speaking English.  Despite the seeming wide differences between their lives and personalities, the two fall in love.
After Sam and Tess marry, a conflict arises over Tess's priorities and Sam's place in her life.  They have several minor disagreements about not being together enough, but a bigger problem occurs when Tess volunteers to take on the care of a Greek refugee child, Chris (George Kezas), without consulting Sam.  When Sam initially believes Tess is pregnant with their child, he is thrilled, but upon meeting Chris, he is at first unconvinced about taking on an unrelated orphan with whom he cannot even communicate.  Still, he tries to befriend the boy as much as he can, and introduces him to sports.
Tess learns that she has received the award of "America's Outstanding Woman of the Year", to be awarded at a fancy ceremony. Sam decides to stay home to look after Chris, though Tess wants him to be beside her on her big night, and is embarrassed at the thought that the public will wonder where he is.  Sam says she can tell everyone he had more important plans, and Tess accidentally offends him by asking whether anyone would believe that Sam could find something more important to do. While Tess is at her ceremony, Sam returns the child to the orphanage and walks out on the marriage.  Tess only learns of this upon her return, when she goes to change for photographers only to discover Sam and Chris and their belongings are all missing.  She attempts to go reclaim Chris, but he refuses, because he wants to stay with his fellow refugees.
The next day, Tess receives an invitation, addressed to both of them, to go to the home of her prominent father and the world famous aunt who raised her (Fay Bainter).  However, Sam is covering a championship boxing match that evening and tells her he cannot go.  Tess arrives alone, only to be told that her aunt and her father are to be married that night, after 15 years of "making the same mistake" and saying nothing of their attraction. Listening to the words of the wedding ceremony encourages Tess to attempt a reconciliation with Sam.
She enters Sam's riverside home the next morning and starts to prepare breakfast. Eventually Sam is awakened by her noisy incompetence in the kitchen, and comes to watch her.  She proclaims her new intention of being nothing more than his wife and thinking only of his domestic needs, but he believes it is an insincere tactic to win him back. Trying to prove herself, Tess once again tries to cook breakfast, only to fail because she knows nothing of cooking.
Sam tells her this is the first time he is disappointed in her, faulting her for going to extremes.  He says to her he does not want Tess Harding or "just little Mrs. Craig", but instead, Tess Harding Craig.  Tess happily agrees, and they reconcile.  Gerald, Tess' inconsiderate secretary (Dan Tobin), arrives with a bottle of champagne and reminds Tess of her commitment to launch a ship. Sam takes Gerald outside, the bottle smashes, and Sam returns claiming to have "launched" Gerald.

Cast

Background and production

The outline for the film was developed by Garson Kanin, a close friend of Hepburn. Hepburn then passed the outline on to Joseph L. Mankiewicz at MGM, and said the price was $250,000 - half for her, half for the script. As a part of the deal, Hepburn was allowed to select her co-star and director (Tracy and Stevens).
Woman of the Year was the first of nine films Hepburn and Tracy made together. They met for the first time on the shoot. In the 1993 documentary Katharine Hepburn: All About Me, Hepburn herself says she was wearing high heels at the first meeting with Tracy and producer Joseph L. Mankiewicz, and said "I'm afraid I'm a bit tall for you, Mr. Tracy". Mankiewicz then responded, "Don't worry, Kate, he'll cut you down to size." It was during the filming of Woman of the Year that Hepburn and Tracy became romantically involved - a relationship that lasted until Tracy's death in 1967.
The film was originally shot with a different ending, but it proved unpopular at test screenings. The decision was made to change it, and the final fifteen minutes of the film were re-written and shot. The original ending of the film saw Sam go missing (after he had left the child at the orphanage) while he was meant to be writing an article about an upcoming boxing match. Tess decides to take over for him, and visits the gym to learn about the fight. Sam is found in a language school trying to learn French and Spanish, to "be important", and is shocked when he sees the article. He goes to the fight where he meets Tess. She insists that she did it to be a good wife, and says she will change and do all the things she is supposed to do. He says that he doesn't want either extreme, he just wants her to be "Tess Harding Craig" (like in the released ending.)
Ring Lardner Jr describes in Archive of America Television oral history interviews (2000) that changes made to the ending of the film were against the wishes of Katharine Hepburn, whilst both screenwriters were on vacation in New York.  These changes were made by Louis B. Mayer, producer Joseph L. Mankiewicz and director George Stevens. "She had to get her comeuppance for being too strong in a man's world so they wrote a scene where she tried to fix breakfast... and gets everything wrong", said Lardner. The screenwriters were given some room to rewrite the new ending on return from New York, and in the same interview Lardner recalls "some of the worst lines we rewrote, but we couldn't fix it, we couldn't change it fundamentally"Archive of American Television - EMMY TVLEGENDS Ring Lardner interview 2000

Reception

The film earned $1,935,000 in the US and Canada and $773,000 elsewhere during its initial release, making MGM a profit of $753,000.

Awards and honors

15th Academy Awards:
American Film Institute recognition:
In 1981, the movie was adapted into a successful Broadway musical of the same name, starring Lauren Bacall (who won a Tony Award for her work).

Gallery

File:Woman of the year 1.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 2.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 3.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 4.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 5.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 6.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 7.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 8.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 9.jpg|
File:Woman of the year 10.jpg
File:Woman of the year 11.jpg|






