[[Tissaphernes]]

CATEGORIES: 395 BC deaths, Achaemenid satraps of Lydia, Achaemenid military leaders, 445 BC births, 5th-century BC Iranian people, 4th-century BC Iranian people, Achaemenid satraps of Caria, Achaemenid satraps of Ionia

Tissaphernes (; Old Persian Čiθrafarnah > Mod. Persian Čehrfar) (died 395 BC)  was a Persian soldier and statesman. He was the grandson of Hydarnes.

Etymology

Chithrafarna (čiθra + farnah) "Shining  Fortune": čiθra is from the Proto-Indo-European adjective (s)koitrós 'bright';J. P. Mallory and D. Q. Adams, The Oxford Introduction to Proto-Indo-European and the Proto-Indo-European World (USA: Oxford University Press, 2006: ISBN 0-19-929668-5), p. 329.  farnah is equivalent to Avestan xvarənah 'fortune'.

Family

Tissaphernes was born in 445 BC, he belonged to an important Persian family; he was the grandson of Hydarnes, an eminent Persian general, who was the commander of the Immortals during the time of king Xerxes' invasion of Greece.

Early life

In 413 BC, Tissaphernes suppressed the rebellion of Pissuthnes, and had him arrested. As a reward, Tissaphernes was appointed as satrap of Lydia and Caria, and commander in chief of the Persian army in Asia Minor. When Darius II ordered the collection of the outstanding tribute of the Greek cities, he entered into an alliance with Sparta against Athens, which in 412 BC led to the conquest of the greater part of Ionia. But Tissaphernes was unwilling to take action and tried to achieve his aim by astute and often perfidious negotiations; Alcibiades persuaded him that Persia's best policy was to keep the balance between Athens and Sparta, and rivalry with his neighbor Pharnabazus of Hellespontic Phrygia still further lessened his energy. When, therefore, in 408 BC the king decided to support Sparta strenuously, Tissaphernes was removed from the generalship and limited to the satrapy of Caria, whereas Lydia and the conduct of the war were entrusted to Cyrus the Younger.

Civil war

On the death of Darius II in 404 BC, Artaxerxes II was crowned king of Persia. Tissaphernes, who found out about Cyrus the Younger's plan to assassinate his brother, informed the king about the conspiracy, who then had Cyrus imprisoned. But by the intercession of his mother Parysatis, Cyrus was pardoned and sent back to his satrapy. According to Plutarch, "his resentment for arrest made him more eagerly desirous of the kingdom than before."Plutarch. Ed. by A.H. Clough. "Artaxerxes," Plutarch's Lives. 1996. Project Gutenberg
With the desire for revenge, Cyrus gathered a large army and pretended to prepare an expedition against the Pisidians, a mountainous tribe in the Taurus.
In the spring of 401 BC, Cyrus united all his forces into an army now including Xenophon's "Ten Thousand", and advanced from Sardis without announcing the object of his expedition. By dexterous management and big promises, he overcame the misgivings of the Greek troops over the length and danger of the war; a Spartan fleet of 35 triremes sent to Cilicia opened the passes of the Amanus into Syria and conveyed to him a Spartan detachment of 700 men under Cheirisophus. However, Tissaphernes managed to warn Artaxerxes II, and gathered an army in haste; Cyrus advanced into Babylonia before he met with an enemy. In October 401 BC, battle ensued. Cyrus had 10,400 Greek hoplites (citizen-soldiers), 2,500 peltasts (light infantry), and an Asiatic army of approximately 10,000 under the command of Ariaeus.
Cyrus saw that the outcome depended on the fate of the king. He therefore wanted Clearchus of Sparta, the commander of the Greeks, to take the centre against Artaxerxes. Clearchus, out of arrogance, disobeyed. As a result, the left wing of the Persians under Tissaphernes was free to engage the rest of Cyrus' forces. Cyrus in the centre threw himself upon Artaxerxes but was slain. Tissaphernes claimed to have killed the rebel himself.
However, the Greek soldiers of Cyrus, who had heard about the news of his death, were in the middle of a massive empire with no food, no employer, and no reliable friends. They offered to make their Persian ally Ariaeus king, but he refused on the grounds that he was not of royal blood and so would not find enough support among the Persians to succeed. They then offered their services to Tissaphernes, but he refused, and they refused to surrender to him.
Tissaphernes was left with a problem: a large army of heavy troops that he could not defeat by frontal assault. He supplied them with food and, after a long wait, led them northwards for home, meanwhile detaching Ariaeus and his light troops from their cause. The senior Greek officers foolishly accepted the invitation of Tissaphernes to a feast. There they were made prisoner, taken before the king, and decapitated. As a reward for his loyalty, Artaxerxes gave Tissaphernes one of his own daughters in marriage and restored him as governor of Lydia and as the commander in chief of the Persian army in Asia Minor.ČIΘRAFARNAH, Rüdiger Schmitt), Encyclopaedia Iranica

Later life and death

After having arrived to Asia Minor, he now attacked the Greek cities, to punish them for their allegiance to Cyrus. This led to the war with Sparta in 399 BC. Tissaphernes, who once again had recourse to subtle diplomacy, was beaten by Agesilaus II on the Pactolus near Sardis in 395 BC; and at last the king yielded to the representations of Pharnabazus, strongly supported by the chiliarch (vizier) Tithraustes and by the queen-mother Parysatis, who hated Tissaphernes as the principal cause of the death of her favourite son Cyrus. Tithraustes was sent to execute Tissaphernes, who was lured to Ariaeus' residence in Colossae and slain in 395 BC.

Legacy

Encyclopædia Iranica says the following thing about his legacy:



Sources




