[[Antithesis]]

CATEGORIES: Figures of speech, Rhetoric

Antithesis (Greek for "setting opposite", from 

Description

A simple counting of the elements of dialectics (any formal system of reasoning that arrives at the truth by the exchange of logical arguments) is that of thesis, antithesis, synthesis. Hell is the antithesis of Heaven; disorder is the antithesis of order. It is the juxtaposition of contrasting ideas, usually in a balanced way. In rhetoric, it is a figure of speech involving the bringing out of a contrast in the ideas by an obvious contrast in the words, clauses, or sentences, within a parallel grammatical structure, as in the following:
Antithesis is sometimes double or alternate, as in the appeal of Augustus:

Other literary examples

Some other examples of antithesis are:

Biblical use of antitheses

Matthew's Antitheses is the traditional name given to a section of the Sermon on the Mount where Jesus takes six well known prescriptions of the Mosaic Law and calls his followers to do more than the Law requires. Protestant scholars since the Reformation have generally believed that Jesus was setting his teaching over against false interpretations of the Law current at the time. "Antithesis" was the name given by Marcion of Sinope to a manifesto in which he contrasted the Old Testament with the New Testament and defined what came to be known as Marcionism.
The Jewish Encyclopedia: Brotherly Love states:

Jesus' six antitheses are on six topics. In each of them, Jesus opens the statement with words to the effect: "You have heard it said......"
These antitheses only appear in Matthew. At the outset, Jesus made it clear that he greatly respects Old Testament Law in the Torah, and fulfilling the Law was one of his purposes for coming to Earth.
Daniel Harrington believes that the community for which Matthew wrote primarily but not exclusively Jewish Christians. If so, that may explain why Matthew could use Jewish rhetoric and themes without explanation. Harrington says that is not the case for 21st-century Americans and others who read the Gospel today. In the six antitheses Jesus either extends through the Commandment's scope by going to the root of the abuse (avoiding anger and lust to prevent murder and adultery) or going beyond a biblical commandment as in the case of divorce and oaths. Harrington writes that Matthew presents the six antitheses as examples of the principle that Jesus came not to abolish but to fulfill the Law and the Prophets. The Gospel of Matthew .  Liturgical Press, 2007. ISBN 978-0814659649


Murder

The first antithesis (vv. 21-22) attacks anger as the root of murder. The two loosely connected illustrations (23-24, 25-26) point out the value of reconciling with one's enemy. 


Adultery

The second antithesis (vv. 27-28) attacks lust as the root of adultery. The sayings about the right eye in the right-hand as causes of scandal (29-30) are further instances of going to the sources of sin. 


Divorce

The third antithesis (vv. 31-32) explains Jesus' prohibition of divorce as a way of avoiding the divorce procedure outlined in .


Oaths

The fourth antithesis (vv. 33-37) about oaths says to avoid oaths entirely so as never to swear falsely.


An eye for an eye

The fifth antithesis on non-retaliation (vv. 38-39a) also urges the followers of Jesus to not seek revenge through violence. The examples not only prohibit violence, but also require that brutality and force be met with goodness.


Love for enemies

The final antithesis (vv. 43-48) defines "neighbor". Here Jesus urges that love include even enemies instead of restricting love only to those who either can benefit us or who already love us.


Rhetorical Uses of Antithesis

Antitheses are used to strengthen an argument by using either exact opposites or simply contrasting ideas, but can also include both. They typically make a sentence more memorable for the reader or listener through balance and emphasis of the words. 2013

Famous Examples of Antithesis

Note that in these quotes, the words are arranged in a way that includes opposing ideas (live/perish, brothers/fools, do for you/do for your country, remember/forget). Antitheses are not used to say one thing and mean another, see irony. They are used to compare for emphasis.

Hegel and Antithesis

An antithesis is a component in Hegel's Triadic Structure, which is the original, fractal form of dialect. Antithesis is the second component and is to propel the affirmation of negation. It is designed to be the opposite of the first component, thesis, (antithesis) to add emphasis to the topic before being re-negated by the third component, synthesis. However, Hegel never actually used the terms thesis, antithesis, and synthesis.org: Hegel-by-HyperText Resources






