[[The Three Caballeros]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 animated films, 1940s musical films, American animated films, American children's films, Disney animated features canon, Donald Duck films, Films featuring anthropomorphic characters, Films set in Brazil, Films set in Mexico, Films shot in Technicolor, Films with live action and animation, Films set in Antarctica, Package films, Walt Disney Pictures films, Films directed by Clyde Geronimi, Films directed by Bill Roberts

The Three Caballeros is a 1945 American animated musical film produced by Walt Disney Productions. The film premiered in Mexico City on December 21, 1944. It was released in the United States on February 3, 1945 and in the UK that March. The seventh animated feature in the Walt Disney Animated Classics series, the film plots an adventure through parts of Latin America, combining live-action and animation. This is the second of the six package films released by Walt Disney Animation Studios in the 1940s.
The film is plotted as a series of self-contained segments, strung together by the device of Donald Duck opening birthday gifts from his Latin American friends. Several Latin American stars of the period appear, including singers Aurora Miranda (sister of Carmen Miranda) and Dora Luz, as well as dancer Carmen Molina.
The film was produced as part of the studio's good will message for South America. The film again starred Donald Duck, who in the course of the film is joined by old friend José Carioca, the cigar-smoking parrot from Saludos Amigos (1942) representing Brazil, and later makes a new friend in the persona of pistol-packing rooster Panchito Pistoles, representing Mexico. (The film was plagued by a severe case of white specks and access grain.)
It was severely edited and re-released in featurette form on April 15, 1977 to accompany a re-issue of Never a Dull Moment.

Film segments

The film consists of several segments, connected by a common theme. In the film, it is Donald Duck's birthday, and he receives three presents from friends in Latin America. The first present is a film projector, which shows him a documentary about birds. During the documentary, he learns about the Aracuan Bird, who received his name because of his eccentric song. The Aracuan also makes several appearances throughout the film.
The next present is a book given to Donald by José Carioca himself. This book tells of Bahia, which is one of Brazil's 26 states. José shrinks them both down so that they can enter the book. Donald and José meet up with several of the locals, who dance the samba. Donald ends up pining for one girl. After the journey, Donald and José leave the book.
Upon returning, Donald realizes that he is too small to open his third present. José shows Donald how to use magic to return himself to the proper size. After opening the present, he meets Panchito Pistoles, a native of Mexico. The trio take the name "The Three Caballeros" and have a short celebration. Panchito then presents Donald's present, a piñata. Panchito tells Donald of the tradition behind the piñata. José and Panchito then blindfold Donald, and have him attempt to break open the piñata, which eventually reveals many surprises. Donald ends the celebration by being fired away by firecrackers in the shape of a ferocious bull (the firecrackers are lit by José with his cigar).
Throughout the film, the Aracuan Bird appears at random moments. He usually bullies everyone, sometimes stealing José's cigar to make José jealous. His most famous gag is when he re-routes the train by drawing new tracks. He returns three or four years later in the 1948 Disney film Melody Time.
The film consists of seven segments:

The Cold-Blooded Penguin

This segment involves a penguin named Pablo, told by Professor Holloway, reproducing images of the penguins of Punta Tombo in Argentina along the coast of Patagonia, "Pablo the penguin" is so fed up with the freezing conditions of the South Pole that he would much rather leave for warmer climates.

The Flying Gauchito

This segment involves the adventures of a little boy from Uruguay in United States English version,  and from  Argentina in the Spanish version,  and his winged donkey, who goes by the name of Burrito (Spanish for 'little donkey').

Baía

This segment involves a pop-up book trip through the Brazilian state of Bahia (Baía), as Donald Duck and José Carioca meet up with some of the locals who dance a lively samba and Donald pining for one of the women, portrayed by singer Aurora Miranda.

Las Posadas

This is the story of a group of Mexican children who celebrated Christmas by re-enacting the journey of Mary, the mother of Jesus and Saint Joseph searching for room at the inn. "Posada" meant "inn", or "shelter", and their parents told them "no posada" at each house until they came to one where they were offered shelter in a stable. This leads to festivities including the breaking of the piñata, which in turn leads to Donald Duck trying to break his piñata as well.

Mexico: Pátzcuaro, Veracruz and Acapulco

Panchito gives Donald and José a tour of Mexico on a flying sarape. Several Mexican dances and songs are learned here. A key point to what happens later is that Donald seemed to be a "wolf" to the ladies again, hounded down every single one he saw, and tries to gain return affections, but once more fails. But he ends up kissing José while blindfolded.

You Belong To My Heart

The skies of Mexico City result in Donald falling in love with singer Dora Luz. The lyrics in the song itself play parts in the scenarios as to what is happening as well.

Donald's Surreal Reverie

A kiss, or several to be exact, lead to Donald going into the "Love is a drug" scene. This is similar to "Pink Elephants on Parade," for being a major "drunk" scene. Donald constantly envisions sugar rush colors, flowers, and Panchito and José popping in at the worst moments. The scene changes after Donald manages to dance with dancer Carmen Molina from state of Oaxaca, from the Isthmus of Tehuantepec. The two dance to the song "La Zandunga". Carmen begins by singing the song, with Donald "quacking" out the rest of the chorus. The "drunkenness" slows down for a moment, but speeds up again when a Mexican woman uses a conductor's baton to make cacti do just about anything while dancing "Jesusita en Chihuahua", a trademark song of the Mexican Revolution. This is a notable scene for live action and cartoon animation mixing, as well as animation among the cacti.
The scene is interrupted when Panchito and José spice things up for the finale, and Donald ends up battling a toy bull with wheels on its legs. The catch is that it is loaded with firecrackers and other explosives.

Production

Influence

Agustín Lara's song "You Belong to My Heart" was featured in a Disney short called Pluto's Blue Note (1947). It was later recorded by Bing Crosby. The Ary Barroso's song "Bahia" and the title song became popular hit tunes in the 1940s. The complete "Bahia" sequence was cut from the 1977 theatrical reissue of the film.
Some clips from this film were used in the "Welcome to Rio" portion of the Mickey Mouse Disco music video.
Don Rosa wrote two comic book sequels in 2000 and 2005 titled The Three Caballeros Ride Again and The Magnificent Seven (Minus 4) Caballeros respectively.
As of September 2006, Panchito and José Carioca have returned at Walt Disney World where they  appear for meet and greets. They can only be found outside the Mexico pavilion in World Showcase at Epcot. Donald also appears with them.
The 2011 Mickey's Soundsational Parade at Disneyland features all three Caballeros and the Aracuan Bird in one parade unit.

Cast and characters

Soundtrack

The film's original score was composed by Edward H. Plumb, Paul J. Smith, and Charles Wolcott.
|url=
| title =D23 Presents Ask Dave: June 12, 2012
| author =Dave Smith
| publisher =Disney D23
| accessdate =June 14, 2012
| archiveurl=
| archivedate =June 14, 2012
| quote =While written by Lacerda (1903-1958) and licensed by Disney, it was developed by Charles Wolcott and Lacerda was uncredited. The piece appears at the end of the Baia train sequence and just before the "Os Quindins de Ya-Ya" sequence. A pandeiro is a Brazilian version of a tambourine.
}}[/ref]
|url=
| author =Ernesto Acosta
| title =Distingue a Coahuila el "Jarabe Pateño"; es reconocido a nivel mundial
| work =zocalo.com
| date =August 19, 2009
| accessdate =March 22, 2012
}}[/ref]
|url=
| title =Ask Dave Lilongo
| author =Dave Smith
| publisher =D23
| accessdate =January 13, 2012
| archiveurl=
| archivedate =January 13, 2012
| quote ="Lilongo" was written by Felipe "El Charro" Gil, and copyrighted in the U.S. by the music publisher Peer International Corp. in 1946. It is in the Son Jarocho style, a traditional musical style of the southern part of the Mexican state of Veracruz. Gil was born in Misantla, Veracruz, in 1913, into a family of musicians, and he made a study of the music of the area.
}}[/ref] though it was first recorded in the U.S. in 1938. It is performed by Trío Calaveras in the film.

Nominations

The film received 2 nominations for Oscars in 1944Academy Awards Database 

Release

Critical response

The Three Caballeros received mixed reviews when it was released. Most critics were relatively perplexed by the "technological razzle-dazzle" of the film, thinking that, in contrast to the previous feature films up to this time, "it displayed more flash than substance, more technique than artistry."

Television

For the film's television premiere, The Three Caballeros aired as the ninth episode of the first season of ABC's Disneyland television series. Edited, shortened, and re-titled A Present For Donald for this December 22, 1954, broadcast and subsequent re-runs, Donald receives gifts from his friends for Christmas, instead of for his birthday as in the original.

Theatrical Re-releases

The Three Caballeros was  re-released in theaters on June 11, 1958; March 19, 1966; September 17, 1973; April 15, 1977; and November 30, 1981. For its 1977 re-issue, the film was edited significantly and re-released in featurette form, to accompany a re-issue of Never a Dull Moment.

Home video

Other media

One of the scenes of the former Mickey Mouse Revue features Donald, Jose and Panchito in the show, performing the movie's theme song. In the queue for Mickey's PhilharMagic, there is a poster for "Festival de los Mariachis," which also features the three protagonists.
They also appear in some of Disney's themed resorts, such as Disney's Coronado Springs Resort where one can find topiaries of the trio, and Disney's All-Star Music Resort where a fountain depicting the trio is the centrepiece of the Guitar-shaped Calypso Pool.
Fictional music group Alvin and the Chipmunks covered the title song, "The Three Caballeros," for their 1995 Disney-themed album When You Wish Upon a Chipmunk; however, The Walt Disney Company neither sponsored nor endorsed the album the song was featured on.
In February 2001, José and Panchito appeared in The Three Caballeros episode of House of Mouse series, voiced by Carlos Alazraqui (Pistoles) and Rob Paulsen (Carioca).
In April 2007, the film became the basis for a ride at the Mexican pavilion at Walt Disney World's Epcot named Gran Fiesta Tour Starring The Three Caballeros.
Along with many other Disney stars such as Peter Pan, Lilo and Stich, Alice and the White Rabbit, and others, Panchito, Jose, and Donald appear in the reopening of Disneyland's It's a Small World in the Mexican segment of the ride.








