[[Love Hina]]

CATEGORIES: Love Hina, 1998 manga, 2000 anime OVAs, 2000 anime television series, 2001 anime OVAs, 2002 anime OVAs, Bandai Entertainment anime titles, Comedy-drama anime and manga, Drama anime and manga, Funimation Entertainment, Sunrise (company), Harem anime and manga, Odex, Romance anime and manga, Romantic comedy anime and manga, Shōnen manga, Kodansha manga, Tokyopop titles, Winner of Kodansha Manga Award (Shōnen), Xebec (studio), Ecchi anime and manga

 is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Ken Akamatsu. It was originally serialized in Weekly Shōnen Magazine by Kodansha from October 21, 1998, to October 31, 2001, and was published in 14 tankōbon volumes by Kodansha. The series tells the story of Keitaro Urashima and his attempts to find the girl with whom he made a childhood promise to enter Tokyo University. The manga was licensed for an English language release in North America and the United Kingdom by Tokyopop, in Australia by Madman Entertainment, in Poland by Waneko and in Singapore by Chuang Yi. Two novelizations of Love Hina, written by two anime series screenwriters, were also released in Japan by Kodansha. Both novels were later released in North America and the United Kingdom by Tokyopop.
A twenty-four episode anime adaptation of the manga series, produced by Xebec, aired in Japan from April 19, 2000, to September 27, 2000. It was followed by a bonus DVD episode, Christmas and Spring television specials, and a three episode original video animation (OVA) entitled Love Hina Again. The anime series, special, and OVA were licensed for release in North America by Bandai Entertainment. In July 2007, the license was acquired by Funimation Entertainment, who released a boxset of the television series in February 2009. The series is also licensed in Australia by Madman Entertainment and in the United Kingdom by MVM Films.
The series has proved extremely popular around the world, both commercially and critically. In Japan, the manga sold over 16 million copies; over 1 million anime DVDs were also sold. The English release of the manga has been reprinted many times. Both anime and manga have received numerous industry awards in Japan and North America, as well as praise from critics.

Plot

The story is a shōnen comedy that takes place in the Kanagawa Prefecture, and centers on Keitaro Urashima and his attempts to fulfill a childhood promise that he made with a girl to enter Tokyo University together. However, he has forgotten the name of the girl he made the promise to and hopes to be accepted into Tokyo University in order to find her. After failing the entrance exam twice and his parents no longer willing to support him, he goes to stay at his grandmother's hotel, only to find that it has been converted to a female-only apartments.  He is about to be kicked out by the girls, when his aunt announced that his grandmother has given him the titles of the apartments, and he stays on as the manager of the family-owned girls' dorm .  Now he has to balance his new responsibilities with his attempts to pass the university entrance exam.
At Hinata House, Keitaro meets Naru Narusegawa, who is also studying to enter Tokyo University. Naru ranked first in the whole of Japan on the practice exams, and Keitaro convinces her to help him study. Keitaro accidentally reads a small section of Naru's diary and as the two grow closer through their studies, Keitaro becomes increasingly convinced that Naru may be the girl he made the promise with. On the second day of the Tokyo University exam, Keitaro asks Naru about the promise and is stunned when she tells him he is mistaken. Despite their studying, and Naru's mock exam results, they both fail the exams. The pair then have an argument and independently run off to Kyoto to clear their heads. While on their trip they settle their differences and meet Mutsumi Otohime, who lives in Okinawa and is also studying for the Tokyo University exams.
After returning from Kyoto, Keitaro and Naru eventually decide to retake the exams. After a while, Mutsumi moves to Tokyo, and the three begin to study together. During this period, Naru becomes convinced that Mutsumi is Keitaro's promised girl, but Mutsumi states that she made a childhood promise with Naru, not Keitaro. During the Tokyo University exams, Keitaro believes he has failed them once again and runs away before finding out his results. After learning of this, Naru chases after him without checking her exam results, and is eventually followed by the rest of the residents of Hinata House who announce that Keitaro and Naru both passed the exams along with Mutsumi. However, at the Tokyo University opening ceremony, Keitaro has an accident and is unable to attend the University for three months. After recovering from his injuries, Keitaro decides to study overseas with Noriyasu Seta. As Keitaro leaves, Naru finally confesses her true feelings to him at the airport and decides to wait for him to return.
When Keitaro returns, he and Naru finally begin to express their feelings for each other. After they deal with new obstacles, Grandma Hina returns to Hinata House and reveals Naru is the girl of Keitaro's promise. Four years later, a wedding ceremony (with a new girl, Ema Maeda presented) is held at Hinata House for Naru and Keitaro as they finally fulfill their childhood promise to each other.

Production

Initial sketches for the series were created between September and December 1997, after the completion of A.I. Love You.
Around six months before the start of serialization, character designs were still going through several revisions before being settled upon. Several characters underwent complete redesigns and name changes.
Throughout the run of the manga, the series used digital editing processes. After a rough sketch of a page was created, the page layout and basic detail were drawn and scanned into an Apple Macintosh. The major page elements were then shaded or filled with patterns, and elements that were drawn separately were added digitally to the page.
Both of these techniques lead to characters having white outlines when copied digitally onto the scene.

Media

Manga

The 123 chapters of Love Hina were originally serialized in Weekly Shōnen Magazine, beginning in the issue dated October 21, 1998, running weekly until its conclusion in the October 31, 2001 issue.
The series was licensed for an English language release in North America and the United Kingdom by Tokyopop, which released the 14 volumes between May 21, 2002, and September 16, 2003.
The series is also licensed for an English language release in Singapore by Chuang Yi and for regional language releases in France and Québec by Pika Édition, in Spain by Glénat, in Singapore by Chuang Yi, in Brazil by Editora JBC, in Mexico by Grupo Editorial Vid, in Poland by Waneko, in Greece by Compupress, in Germany in German, in Norway by Schibsted Forlag, in Sweden by Bonnier Carlsen and in Denmark by Egmont Manga & Anime.
Kodansha had also published a bilingual (English and Japanese) edition under the Kodansha Bilingual Comics label, with English texts translated by Giles Murray. Eight volumes were produced under the bilingual format but were removed from sale after the series was licensed by Tokyopop.

Anime

Love Hina was adapted into a 25 episode anime television series by Xebec, a division of Production I.G. The series aired on TV Tokyo April 19 through September 27, 2000. The series and bonus episode were directed by Yoshiaki Iwasaki, written by Shō Aikawa and featured character designs by Makoto Uno. 
In Japan, the television series was released on nine DVDs between August 3, 2000, and April 2, 2001, and sold over 1 million copies.
After the television series was completed, a Christmas special "
After the end of the television series, Love Hina Final Selection was released, containing a summary of the series and "Love Live Hina", a live concert featuring all of the main cast members.
The anime was later used as the source for a film comic, Love Hina Anime Comics, which told the anime story in comic form using stills from the show as the comic panels.

Light novels

Two novels have been written by the anime screenwriters and illustrated by Ken Akamatsu as side stories of the main series. 

Reference books

Two reference books for the manga series have been released for fans of the series. 
Two reference books have also been released for the anime series. Ani-Hina Ver.1 was released on August 4, 2000 and Ani-Hina Ver.2 was released on November 9, 2000. Each book contains character profiles, episode summaries, production sketches and details as well as interviews and information on the voice actors; each covers half of the anime series.

Video games

The series has seen several video games released across several platforms. The Game Boy Color received Love Hina Pocket on August 4, 2000, and Love Hina Party on January 26, 2001.

Soundtracks

Prior to the start of the anime, several image songs were recorded by the Anime cast members.
There have been several Love Hina soundtracks released.  was released on September 21, 2000 and contains all of the background music for the series as well as many vocal songs. "Love Hina — Winter Special Soundtrack" was released on January 24, 2001 and was followed by Love Hina — Spring Special Soundtrack on June 6, 2001. Love Hina Again Soundtrack was released on April 3, 2002.
Two collections of vocal songs featuring the female cast members were released, 

Reception

Love Hina won the Kodansha Manga Award for best shōnen title in 2001.
The series was well received by critics. Tony Chen, of Anime News Network (ANN), found it to be a funny series, though finding the 16+ rating appropriate due to the number of jokes involving sexual innuendo. He praised the beautiful artwork, feeling the "sexy and cute" female designs were perfect for the series and that Keitaro's design fit his dorky personality. Chen found Naru's regularly catching Keitaro making a mistake and calling him a pervert redundant and annoying.
ANN's Bamboo Dong praised the anime adaptation for being very intriguing and mixing "drama, romance, and slapstick comedy in a pleasing combination". She found the music "incredibly cute" and felt it was used in a way which contributed to many of the dramatic effects in the anime.
Chris Beveridge, of AnimeOnDVD.
The Love Hina Again OVA received more mixed reviews, with ANN's Zac Berthschy feeling it reversed part of the plot of the main anime series and never reached the same entertainment level as the television series. The character of Kanako, Keitaro's sister, was heavily criticized for being "one of the most annoying characters ever created even though she would have been better for Keitaro than Naru."






