[[Elementary algebra]]

CATEGORIES: Algebra, Elementary algebra

}}
Elementary algebra encompasses some of the basic concepts of algebra, one of the main branches of mathematics. It is typically taught to secondary school students and builds on their understanding of arithmetic. Whereas arithmetic deals with specified numbers,H.E. Slaught and N.J. Lennes, Elementary algebra, Publ. Allyn and Bacon, 1915, page 1 (republished by Forgotten Books) algebra introduces quantities without fixed values, known as variables.  Unlike abstract algebra, elementary algebra is not concerned with algebraic structures outside the realm of real and complex numbers.
The use of variables to denote quantities allows general relationships between quantities to be formally and concisely expressed, and thus enables solving a broader scope of problems. Most quantitative results in science and mathematics are expressed as algebraic equations.

Algebraic notation

256px 
 

Alternative notation

Concepts

Variables

Elementary algebra builds on and extends arithmeticThomas Sonnabend, Mathematics for Teachers: An Interactive Approach for Grades K-8, Publisher: Cengage Learning, 2009, ISBN 0495561665, 9780495561668, 759 pages, page xvii by introducing letters called variables to represent general (non-specified) numbers.  This is useful for several reasons.

Evaluating expressions

Algebraic expressions may be evaluated and simplified, based on the basic properties of arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and exponentiation). For example,

Equations

=Properties of equality=

=Properties of inequality=

Substitution

If x and y integers, rationals, or real numbers, then xy=0 implies x=0 or y=0. Suppose abc=0. Then, substituting a for x and bc for y, we learn a=0 or bc=0. Then we can substitute again, letting x=b and y=c, to show that if bc=0 then b=0 or c=0. Therefore if abc=0, then a=0 or (b=0 or c=0), so abc=0 implies a=0 or b=0 or c=0.
Consider if the original fact were stated as "ab=0 implies a=0 or b=0." Then when we say "suppose abc=0," we have a conflict of terms when we substitute. Yet the above logic is still valid to show that if abc=0 then a=0 or b=0 or c=0 if instead of letting a=a and b=bc we substitute a for a and b for bc (and with bc=0, substituting b for a and c for b). This shows that substituting for the terms in a statement isn't always the same as letting the terms from the statement equal the substituted terms. In this situation it's clear that if we substitute an expression a into the a term of the original equation, the a substituted does not refer to the a in the statement "ab=0 implies a=0 or b=0."

Solving algebraic equations

The following sections lay out examples of some of the types of algebraic equations that may be encountered.

Linear equations with one variable

Linear equations are so-called, because when they are plotted, they describe a straight line (hence linear). The simplest equations to solve are linear equations that have only one variable. They contain only constant numbers and a single variable without an exponent. As an example, consider:
To solve this kind of equation, the technique is add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of the equation by the same number in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation.  Once the variable is isolated, the other side of the equation is the value of the variable. This problem and its solution are as follows:

Linear equations with two variables

A linear equation with two variables has many (i.e. an infinite number of) solutions.Sinha, The Pearson Guide to Quantitative Aptitude for CAT 2/ePublisher: Pearson Education India, 2010, ISBN 8131723666, 9788131723661, 599 pages, page 195 For example:
This can not be worked out by itself. If I told you my son's age, then there would no longer be two unknowns (variables), and the problem becomes a linear equation with just one variable, that can be solved as described above.
To solve a linear equation with two variables (unknowns), requires two related equations. For example, if I also revealed that:
Now there are two related linear equations, each with two unknowns, which lets us produce a linear equation with just one variable, by subtracting one from the other (called the elimination method):Cynthia Y. Young, Precalculus, Publisher John Wiley & Sons, 2010, ISBN 0471756849, 9780471756842, 1175 pages, page 699
In other words, my son is aged 12, and as I am 22 years older, I must be 34. In 10 years time, my son will 22, and I will be twice his age, 44. This problem is illustrated on the associated plot of the equations.
For other ways to solve this kind of equations, see below, System of linear equations.

Quadratic equations

]]
where the symbol "±" indicates that both
are solutions of the quadratic equation.
Quadratic equations can also be solved using factorization (the reverse process of which is expansion, but for two linear terms is sometimes denoted foiling).  As an example of factoring:
Which is the same thing as
has no real number solution since no real number squared equals −1.
Sometimes a quadratic equation has a root of multiplicity 2, such as:
For this equation, −1 is a root of multiplicity 2. This means −1 appears two times.

Exponential and logarithmic equations

then, by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation, and then dividing both sides by 3 we obtain
whence
or
For example, if
then, by adding 2 to both sides of the equation, followed by dividing both sides by 4, we get
whence
from which we obtain

Radical equations

For example, if:
then

System of linear equations

There are different methods to solve a system of linear equations with two variables.

=Elimination method=

An example of solving a system of linear equations is by using the elimination method:
Multiplying the terms in the second equation by 2:
Adding the two equations together to get:
which simplifies to

=Substitution method=

Another way of solving the same system of linear equations is by substitution.
and multiplying by −1:
Adding 2 on each side of the equation:
which simplifies to
Using this value in one of the equations, the same solution as in the previous method is obtained.

Other types of systems of linear equations

=Unsolvable systems=

In the above example, it is possible to find a solution. However, there are also systems of equations which do not have a solution. An obvious example would be:
The second equation in the system has no possible solution. Therefore, this system can't be solved.
However, not all incompatible systems are recognized at first sight. As an example, the following system is studied:

=Undetermined systems=

And using this value in the first equation in the system:

=Over- and underdetermined systems=

Systems with more variables than the number of linear equations do not have a unique solution. An example of such a system is
Such a system is called underdetermined; when trying to solve it, one is lead to express some variables as functions of the other ones, but cannot express all solutions numerically.
Incidentally, a system with a greater number of equations than variables, in which necessarily some equations are linear combination of the others, is called overdetermined.








