[[Gardner Fox]]

CATEGORIES: 1911 births, 1986 deaths, 20th-century American novelists, American comics writers, Bill Finger Award winners, Golden Age comics creators, Jack Kirby Hall of Fame inductees, Will Eisner Award Hall of Fame inductees, Writers from Brooklyn

Gardner Francis Cooper Fox was an American writer best known for creating numerous comic book characters for DC Comics. Comic book historians estimate that he wrote over 4,000 comics stories.

Early life and career

Gardner F. Fox was born in Brooklyn, New York. He was raised Roman Catholic. Fox recalled being inspired at an early age by the great fantasy fiction writers. On or about his eleventh birthday, he "had gotten The Gods of Mars and The Warlord of Mars" by Edgar Rice Burroughs, books which "opened up a complete new world for me." In a time before comics existed, he "read all of Burroughs, Harold Lamb, Talbot Mundy," maintaining copies "at home in my library" some 50 years later.
Fox received a law degree from St. John's College and was admitted to the New York bar in 1935. He practiced for about two years, but as the Great Depression dragged on he began writing for DC Comics editor Vin Sullivan. Debuting as a writer in the pages of Detective Comics, Fox "intermittently contributed tales to nearly every book in the DC lineup during the Golden Age." He was also a frequent contributor of prose stories to the pulp science fiction magazines of the 1930s and 1940s.
A polymath, Fox sprinkled his strips with numerous real-world historical, scientific, and mythological references, once saying, "Knowledge is kind of a hobby with me." For instance, in the span of a year's worth of Atom stories, Fox tackled the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, the space race, 18th-century England, miniature card painting, Norse mythology, and numismatics. He revealed in letters to fan Jerry Bails that he kept large troves of reference material, mentioning in 1971, "I maintain two file cabinets chock full of stuff. And the attic is crammed with books and magazines...."

Books

During his career writing for DC Comics, Fox also wrote novels and short stories under a variety of male and female pseudonyms for a number of publishers, including Ace, Gold Medal, Tower, Belmont, Dodd Mead, Hillman, Pocket Library, Pyramid Books and Signet Books.
During the mid-to-late 1940s, and into the 1950s, Fox wrote a number of short stories and text pieces for Weird Tales and Planet Stories, and was also published in Amazing Stories and Marvel Science Stories. He wrote for a diverse range of pulp magazines, including Baseball Stories, Big Book Football Western, Fighting Western, Football Stories, Lariat Stories, Ace Sports, SuperScience, Northwest Romances, Thrilling Western, and Ranch Romances for a number of publishing companies.
Between 1944 and 1982, he wrote at least one novel a year (except 1950, 1951, and 1971), typically producing three per year – and published twelve in 1974 alone.

Comics

Golden Age

Fox's earliest stories for DC Comics featured Speed Saunders with art by Creig Flessel and later Fred Guardineer beginning at least with Detective Comics #4 (June 1937).
During World War II, Fox took over a variety of characters and books of several of his colleagues who had been drafted. He worked for numerous companies including Marvel Comics' 1940s predecessor, Timely Comics; Vin Sullivan's Magazine Enterprises, where he created Skyman; and at EC, where he served a brief stint as head writer. With the waning popularity of superheroes, Fox contributed western, science fiction, humor, romance, and funny animal stories.

=Batman=

In July 1939, just two issues after the character's debut by artist Bob Kane and writer Bill Finger, Fox wrote the first of his several tales of the Batman,
Fox returned to the Batman in 1964. (See below)

=Sandman=

In 1939, Fox and artist Bert Christman co-created the character of the Sandman, a gasmask-wearing costumed crime-fighter whose first appearance in Adventure Comics #40 (July 1939)Wallace "1930s" in Dolan, p. 25: "Writer Gardner Fox and artist Bert Christman established the gas-masked and trench-coated Sandman in Adventure Comics #40 in July 1940." was pre-empted by an appearance in New York World's Fair Comics.

=The Flash=

Fox is credited with writing the first three of six stories in the inaugural issue of Flash Comics (Jan. 1940), including the debut of the titular character, the Golden Age Flash. 30: "DC shattered the sound barrier with the debut of the Flash, a blindingly fast mystery man written by Gardner Fox and drawn by Harry Lampert." With a hero described as a "modern-day Mercury", the title feature saw college student Jay Garrick imbued with superhuman speed after inhaling hard water vapors. The character went on to appear in a host of forties comics, including All Star, Comic Cavalcade, The Big All-American Comic Book, and his own titles, Flash Comics and All-Flash.

=Hawkman=

Describing the origins of Hawkman, Fox recalled, "I was faced with the problem of filling a new book that publisher Max Gaines was starting... As I sat by the window I noticed a bird collecting twigs for a nest. The bird would swoop down, pick up the twig, and fly away. I thought, 'Wouldn't it be great if the bird was a lawman and the twig a crook!'"
Debuting as the third story in Flash Comics #1 (Jan. 1940) — "Fox's imagination transformed that bird into the soaring, mysterious Hawkman." With art by Dennis Neville,Wallace "1940s" in Dolan, p. 30: "In the same issue #1 Gardner Fox wrote the first story featuring Hawkman..." the origin of the 'Winged Wonder' saw archaeologist and collector Carter Hall reliving his past life as Prince Khufu in ancient Egypt, creating a costume (powered by Nth metal), confronting the reincarnation of Hath-Set, his former nemesis, and meeting his reincarnated love, Shiera Saunders.

=The Justice Society of America=

Regularly writing more than six stories in five titles per month, every month throughout the early 1940s, Fox continued to create new features.
At the time, DC Comics consisted of two discrete sub-companies, Max Gaines' All-American Publications and Harry Donenfeld & Jack Liebowitz's National Periodical Publications. Though he continued to script for National/Detective Comics, Inc., Fox became the head writer for All-American. While Fox's Dr. Fate (and other titles) was published by National; Sandman, Hawkman and the Flash were released by All-American. In Winter 1940, the third issue of All-American's All Star Comics debuted the Justice Society of America, the first superhero team in comics. Fox had worked on the Hawkman, Flash and Sandman features in All-Star for its first two issues (Summer and Autumn 1940), but from issue #3 (Winter), he assumed full writing duties for the issue, with all features by different artists working within the framing device wherein the characters were described as part of a "Justice Society".
In the pages of All-Star Comics #3, under the direction of editor Sheldon Mayer and with artists including E. E. Hibbard, Fox created the first superhero team, the Justice Society of America. 33: "DC took the 'greatest hits' premise of the comic to its logical conclusion in All Star Comics #3 by teaming the Flash, the Atom, Doctor Fate, Green Lantern, Hawkman, Hourman, Sandman, and the Spectre under the banner of the Justice Society of America for an ongoing series."

=Non-DC work=

Between 1940 and 1941, Fox wrote for the Columbia Comic Corporation, penning stories featuring characters including "Face," "Marvelo," "Rocky Ryan," "Spyman," and "Spymaster." For approximately three years (1947–50), Fox wrote for EC Comics, including scripts and text pieces which appeared in the famous The Crypt of Terror, The Vault of Horror and Weird Fantasy titles, as well as in the lesser-known Gunfighter, Happy Houlihans, Moon Girl, Saddle Justice and the new trend title Valor, among others.
Towards the end of the decade, and the start of the 1950s, he worked for Magazine Enterprises on features including "The Durango Kid," the first Ghost Rider, "Red Hawk," "Straight Arrow" and "Tim Holt," in whose comic the Ghost Rider appeared. Fox also wrote some of the required text pieces for Magazine Enterprises, which were required by the Post Office to qualify magazines and comics for cheaper postal rates.
Throughout the 1950s, Fox also wrote stories for Avon Comics, most notably tales of "Crom the Barbarian", and of "Kenton of the Star Patrol."

Silver Age

In the early 1950s, Fox wrote Vigilante in Action Comics, as well as Western stories in the pages of Western Comics and science-fiction stories for DC's Mystery in Space and Strange Adventures. 64:  "DC picked up on renewed public interest in science fiction by launching its first comic in the genre, the anthology series, Strange Adventures. The series kicked off its 244-issue run with an adaptation of the first color science fiction movie, Destination Moon (released that same month), written by Gardner Fox and drawn by Curt Swan." In 1953, he entered into correspondence with fan Jerry Bails, which initially focused on Bails' fondness for the Justice Society and All-Star Comics, but ultimately became a friendship that not only informed and influenced the dawning of comics' Silver Age, but also comics fandom, in which Bails played a key role.
In the mid-1950s, in the wake of the crackdown on comics which followed Fredric Wertham's Seduction of the Innocent and the United States Senate Subcommittee on Juvenile Delinquency hearings on the dangers of comic books, the content of comics faced radical overhauls and the imposition of the censoring Comics Code Authority body. In partial response to this shift, DC editor Julius Schwartz began a widespread reinvention/revival of many Golden Age heroes, and "Fox was one of the first writers... Schwartz called in to help." The Silver Age of heroes began in the pages of Showcase #4 (Oct. 1956) with a radically overhauled Flash character by writers Robert Kanigher and John Broome with penciler Carmine Infantino.
Fox scripted most of the Silver Age adventures of science-fiction hero Adam Strange, who debuted in Showcase #17 (Nov. 1958) with art by Mike Sekowsky. 91: "Adam Strange debuted in a three-issue trial starting with Showcase #17, which was written by Gardner Fox and featured art by Mike Sekowsky." The Adam Strange stories were co-plotted by Fox and the character's creator, Julius Schwartz.

=The Justice League of America=

Another of Fox's key Silver Age achievements saw him revive and revitalise the concept of the Justice Society as the Justice League of America, debuting in The Brave and the Bold #28 (Feb.-Mar. 1960). 99: "Editor Julius Schwartz had repopulated the superhero subculture by revitalizing Golden Age icons like Green Lantern and the Flash.." Swiftly spun off into their own title in Oct.-Nov. 1960, the Justice League would become the backbone of the DC Universe.

=Multiverse=

Fox's script for "Flash of Two Worlds!", from The Flash #123 (Sept. 1961), introduced the concept that the Golden Age heroes existed on a parallel Earth named Earth-Two. This event heralded more generally the concept of the DC Comics Multiverse,McAvennie "1960s" in Dolan, p. 103: "This classic Silver Age story resurrected the Golden Age Flash and provided a foundation for the Multiverse from which he and the Silver Age Flash would hail." a decades-long recurring theme of the DC Comics universe, allowing old and new heroes to co-exist and crossover. Gardner Fox is referenced in the story, it is claimed by Barry Allen that the reason there were comics about the old Flash in his world was due to a psychic link between worlds.

=Silver Age Batman=

In 1964, Schwartz was made responsible for reviving the faded Batman titles Fox and artist Carmine Infantino created Barbara Gordon as a new version of Batgirl in a story titled "The Million Dollar Debut of Batgirl!" in Detective Comics #359 (January 1967). 122 "Nine months before making her debut on Batman, a new Batgirl appeared in the pages of Detective Comics...  Hence, writer Gardner Fox and artist Carmine Infantino collaborated on 'The Million Dollar Debut of Batgirl!'" Fox's final Batman story, "Whatever Will Happen to Heiress Heloise?", was published in Detective Comics #384 (Feb. 1969).

Leaving DC

Fox stopped receiving work from DC in 1968, when the comics company refused to give health insurance and other benefits to its older creators. Fox, who had written a number of historical adventure, mystery and science fiction novels in the 1940s and the 1950s, began to produce novels full time, both under his own name and several pseudonyms. He produced a small number of comics during this period, but predominantly focused on novels, writing over 100 in genres such as science fiction, sword and sorcery, espionage, crime, fantasy, romance, western, and historical fiction.
Among his output was the modern novelisation of the Irwin Allen production of Jules Verne's Five Weeks in a Balloon, two books in the "Llarn" series; five books about the barbarian swordsman Kothar, starting in 1969 with the anthology Kothar—Barbarian Swordsman,
For Tower Books, he produced between thirteen and twenty-five "Lady from L.U.S.T." (League of Undercover Spies and Terrorists) novels between 1968 and 1975 under the name Rod Gray.

Later comics work

In the early 1970s, Fox briefly worked for DC's rival publisher, Marvel Comics, writing scripts for The Tomb of Dracula, Red Wolf, and the "Doctor Strange" feature in Marvel Premiere. In 1971, Skywald Publications reprinted some of his earlier work on titles such as Demona, Nightmare, Red Mask and Zanagar, and Fox also found work for Warren Publications on Creepy and Eerie during the same period.
Towards the end of his life, in 1985, he worked briefly for Eclipse Comics including on the science fiction anthology Alien Encounters.

Hobbies and achievements

During the course of his career, Fox can be definitely credited with around 1500 stories for DC Comics, making him the second most prolific DC creator (after Robert Kanigher) by a considerable margin over his nearest rival. In July 1971, Fox estimated he had written "fifty million words" over the course of his career to date.) "Jim Steranko & Gardner Fox at the 1971 Comic Art Convention Luncheon – July 1971" – Interviews by John Benson and Phil Seuling, (transcribed and edited by Benson) in 1972 Comic Art Convention Programme (Seuling, 1972) pp. 70–78
He was a member of a number of literary and genre organisations, including the Academy of Comic Book Arts and both the Authors Guild, the Authors League of America and the Science Fiction Writers of America. As a lawyer, he was also a member of the prestigious legal fraternity Phi Delta Phi.
A sports fan, he liked both "the Mets and the Jets," and (in 1971) had "season tickets to the St. John's games." A voracious reader, he stated, "I have two writers that I reread and reread. One that I'm sure nobody's every . I have every book he ever wrote. The other is the mystery writer John Dickson Carr, whose style I admire tremendously... and of course the old standbys – Merritt I always particularly liked – and Burroughs."

Awards

Fox won two 1962 Alley Awards – for Best Script Writer and for Best Book-Length Story ("The Planet that Came to a Standstill" in Mystery in Space #75), with penciler Carmine Infantino — as well as a 1963 Alley, for Favorite Novel ("Crisis on Earths 1 and 2" in Justice League of America #21–22, with penciler Mike Sekowsky), and the 1965 Alley for Best Novel ("Solomon Grundy Goes on a Rampage" in Showcase #55) with penciler Murphy Anderson.
He was honored at the New York Comic Art Convention in 1971, and received an Inkpot Award at the San Diego ComiCon in 1978. In 1982, at Skycon II, he was awarded the "Jules Verne Award for Life-time achievement."
In 1998, he was posthumously awarded a Harvey Award and entered into the Jack Kirby Hall of Fame; a year later, he was inducted into the Eisner Award Hall of Fame.
In 2007, Fox was one of the year's two recipients of the Bill Finger Award for Excellence in Comic Book Writing, given under the auspices of San Diego Comic-Con International.

Legacy

In 1967, Fox's literary agent, August Lenniger, suggested that Fox donate his notes, correspondence, and samples of his work to the University of Oregon as a tax write-off. Fox donated over fourteen boxes of comics, books, scripts, plot ideas, and fan letters dating back to the 1940s. Today, his records comprise the bulk of the university's Fox Collection.
The Guy Gardner character is named after Fox. In 1985, DC Comics named Fox as one of the honorees in the company's 50th anniversary publication Fifty Who Made DC Great.
Gardner Fox died on December 24, 1986. He was survived by his wife Lynda, his son Jeffrey, his daughter Lynda, and four grandchildren.
In 2002, the Cartoon Network aired an episode of the Justice League animated TV series titled "Legends", an homage to Fox's Justice Society and his annual Silver Age Justice Society/Justice League crossovers. The episode was dedicated to Fox. Additionally, in the episode titled "Paradise Lost", a TV news reporter refers to Hurricane Gardner.
In the sixth episode of the second season of Young Justice, during a disaster which destroys part of the city, the Flash directs a woman to a homeless shelter that is located between streets named Gardner and Fox.

Bibliography

DC Comics

Marvel Comics






