[[Maurice Richard]]

CATEGORIES: 1921 births, 2000 deaths, Canada's Sports Hall of Fame inductees, Canadian ice hockey coaches, Canadian ice hockey right wingers, Canadian people of French descent, Companions of the Order of Canada, French Quebecers, Hart Memorial Trophy winners, Hockey Hall of Fame inductees, Ice hockey people from Quebec, Lou Marsh Trophy winners, Members of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, Montreal Canadiens players, National Hockey League All-Stars, National Hockey League players with retired numbers, Officers of the National Order of Quebec, People from Ahuntsic-Cartierville, Quebec Nordiques coaches, Sportspeople from Montreal, Stanley Cup champions

Joseph Henri Maurice "Rocket" Richard, ; August 4, 1921 – May 27, 2000) was a Canadian professional ice hockey player who played 18 seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL) for the Montreal Canadiens. A prolific scorer, he was the first player in NHL history to score 50 goals in one season, accomplishing the feat in 50 games in 1944–45, and the first to score 500 career goals.  Richard retired in 1960 as the league's all-time leader in goals with 544. He won the Hart Trophy as the NHL's most valuable player in 1947, played in 13 All-Star Games and was named to 14 post-season NHL All-Star Teams.
Richard joined with Elmer Lach and Toe Blake to form the "Punch line", a high-scoring forward line of the 1940s. He was a member of eight Stanley Cup championship teams, including five straight between 1956 and 1960 and holding the role of team captain for the last four. In honour of his career, the Hockey Hall of Fame waived its customary five-year waiting period after retirement for eligibility, and inducted Richard into the hall in 1961. In 1975, he was inducted into Canada's Sports Hall of Fame. The Canadiens retired his sweater number 9 following his retirement and donated the Maurice "Rocket" Richard Trophy to the NHL in 1998 to serve as an award to the league's leading goal scorer.
An outspoken and intense player, Richard was renowned for his physical, and occasionally violent, style of play. He was involved in a vicious on-ice incident late in the 1954–55 season during which he struck a linesman.  NHL President Clarence Campbell suspended him for the remainder of the season – including the playoffs – which precipitated the Richard Riot in Montreal.  The riot, which has taken on near mythical qualities in the decades since, is sometimes cited as a precursor to Quebec's Quiet Revolution. Richard was a cultural icon among Quebec's francophone population; he was a central figure in Roch Carrier's short story The Hockey Sweater, itself a quintessential work of Canadian literature.  The province of Quebec honoured Richard with the first Quebec state funeral for a non-politician.

Early life

Joseph Henri Maurice Richard was born August 4, 1921, in Montreal. His parents, Onésime Richard and Alice Laramée, were originally from the Gaspé region of Quebec before moving to Montreal where they settled in the neighbourhood of Bordeaux.
Richard received his first pair of ice skates when he was four years old, and grew up skating on both local rivers and a small, backyard ice surface his father created.
At 16, Richard dropped out of school to work with his father as a machinist.
Off the ice, Richard was a quiet, unassuming youth who rarely spoke. He met his future wife Lucille when he was seventeen, and she nearly fourteen.  She was the younger sister of one of his teammates at Bordeaux, and her bright, outgoing personality complimented Richard's reserved nature.

Playing career

First Stanley Cup

Having recovered from his broken leg in time for the 1941–42 season, Richard returned to the QSHL Canadiens where he played 31 games and recorded 17 points before he was again injured: he suffered a broken wrist after becoming entangled with a defenceman and crashing into the net.
Injury sidelined Richard as his rookie season ended after only 16 games when he again suffered a broken leg.
Remaining healthy throughout the season, Richard appeared in 46 of Montreal's 50 games.  He led the Canadiens with 32 goals and finished third in team scoring with 54 points. He was named a second team All-Star following the season. It was the first of 14 consecutive years he was named a league all-star.

50 goals in 50 games

The 1944–45 NHL season was a record setting one for Richard. He first set a new mark for points in one game when he scored five goals and added three assists in a 9–1 victory over the Detroit Red Wings on December 28, 1944; his eight points broke the previous record of seven held by three players,
As Richard approached 50 goals for the season, opposition players resorted to increasingly violent efforts to prevent him from scoring. He had to fight past slashes, hooks and even players that draped themselves across his back. Richard went eight games without scoring and began Montreal's final regular season game, March 18 on the road against the Boston Bruins, with 49 goals. He finally reached the milestone by scoring with just 2:15 remaining in the game, a 4–2 Montreal win.
Richard's critics argued that his scoring record was the result of talent dilution brought about by the war; when many players returned in 1945–46, he won his second Stanley Cup with Montreal, but his goal output was nearly halved to 27. However Richard again reached lofty scoring totals by leading the league with 45 goals (in a 60-game season) in 1946–47, for which he won the Hart Trophy as the league's most valuable player.
As the reigning most valuable player, Richard sought a pay raise prior to the 1947–48 season. However, general manager Frank Selke refused and held firm even after Richard and team captain Émile Bouchard both held out of the preseason before capitulating and returning to the team once the season began in earnest.

All-time scoring leader

Richard missed over 20 games of the 1951–52 season due to injury,
The 1952–53 season began with Richard in close pursuit of Nels Stewart's all-time NHL record of 324 goals.
Richard led the league in goals for the fourth time in his career with 37 in 1953–54, then for a fifth time 1954–55 with 38 (shared with Bernie Geoffrion). He scored his 400th career goal on December 18, 1954, against Chicago.

Richard Riot


Opposition players continued to try and stop Richard via physical abuse, and he often retaliated with equal violence. The situation led to a running feud with NHL President Clarence Campbell.
Following two days of deliberation, Campbell announced that he had suspended Richard – who was leading the NHL's overall scoring race at the time – for the remainder of the regular season and the playoffs. In French Quebec, however, the suspension was viewed as an injustice, an unfair punishment given to a Francophone hero by the Anglophone establishment.  Richard's supporters reacted angrily to Campbell: He received several death threats and, upon taking his customary seat at the next Canadiens game, was pelted with vegetables, eggs and other debris by unruly fans. One fan threw a tear gas bomb at Campbell, which resulted in the Forum's evacuation and the game being declared a forfeit in Detroit's favour.  Fans fleeing the arena were met by a large group of demonstrators who had massed outside prior to the game's start.
The mob of over 20,000 people developed into a riot; windows and doors were smashed at the Forum and surrounding businesses. By the following morning, as many as 70 people had been arrested. He took to the radio the next day asking for calm: "Do no more harm. Get behind the team in the playoffs. I will take my punishment and come back next year and help the club and the younger players to win the Cup".
The suspension cost Richard the points title, which he lost to teammate Geoffrion by one point. Montreal fans booed Geoffrion when he surpassed Richard on the final day of the regular season.

Captain of a dynasty

True to his word, Richard led the Canadiens to a Stanley Cup championship in 1955–56. The season began with the arrival of his young brother Henri to the Canadiens roster.
Entering his 15th NHL season in 1956–57, Richard was named captain of the Canadiens by his teammates. He succeeded Émile Bouchard who retired prior to the season.
Richard reached a major scoring milestone early in the 1957–58 season.  In the first period of a 3–1 victory over Chicago on October 19, 1957, he became the first player in NHL history to score 500 goals in his career.
At age 37, Richard was the oldest player in the NHL in 1958–59.
The playoff goal was Richard's last, as on September 15, 1960, he announced his retirement as a player. He stated in his retirement speech that he had been contemplating leaving the game for two years, and admitted that at 39 years of age, the game had become too fast for him.

Playing style

Richard was nicknamed "Le Comet" early in his career. When teammate Ray Getliffe remarked that Richard "went in like a rocket" as he approached the opposition goal, a local sportswriter – The Montreal Star Goaltender Jacques Plante claimed it to be one of the most appropriate nickname given to an athlete.  He made note of the fierce intensity that often showed in Richard's eyes and compared it to "the rocket's red glare" referenced in "The Star-Spangled Banner". Glenn Hall agreed: "What I remember most about Rocket was his eyes. When he came flying toward you with the puck on his stick, his eyes were all lit up, flashing and gleaming like a pinball machine. It was terrifying".
The prime of Richard's career was played in the era immediately following the Second World War where battle-hardened players returned to the NHL and instilled a "gladiatorial" style of play that featured rugged, physical and often violent play.
A pure goal-scorer, Richard did not play with finesse, nor was he known for his passing. One of his teammates once remarked that "Maurice wouldn't even pass you the salt". Richard led the NHL in goals five times, but never in points. He was best known for dashing in toward the net from the blue line and was equally adept at scoring from his forehand or backhand. His exploits revived a Montreal Canadiens franchise that had struggled to draw fans in the 1930s. In addition to his 14 appearances on a post-season all-star team (eight on the first team, six on the second), Richard played in 13 consecutive NHL All-Star Games between 1947 and 1959.
Richard was still an active player when Gordie Howe overtook his career record for points.

Personal life

After serving as a good will ambassador for the Canadiens in the first three years following his retirement, Richard was named a vice-president in 1964.  However, he grew disgruntled with a role he felt was powerless and only honorary, and resigned one year later.
As Richard struggled both with the need to find new purpose to his post-retirement life and the fear of being forgotten,
Richard and his wife Lucille lived in Montreal where they raised seven children: Huguette, Maurice Jr., Norman, André, Suzanne, Polo and Jean. He died on May 27, 2000.

Legacy

Numerous honours were bestowed upon Richard throughout and following his career: The Canadian Press named him its male athlete of the year on three occasions, and in 1957, Richard won the Lou Marsh Trophy as Canada's athlete of the year. The Canadiens retired his sweater number 9 in 1960, while the Hockey Hall of Fame waived its five-year waiting period after retirement and inducted him in 1961. In 1967, he was one of the inaugural members of the Order of Canada,
While he was a popular player throughout Canada, Richard was an icon within Quebec. Author Roch Carrier explained the passion Richard elicited from the fans in his Canadian-classic short story The Hockey Sweater,
The Richard Riot has, in particular, achieved a mythical place in Canadian folklore.
In his book The Rocket: A Cultural History of Maurice Richard, historian Benoît Melançon disputes the importance of the riot, stating its perceived importance in history grew retroactively with Richard's myth.

Career statistics

Awards and honours








