[[Sentencing Project]]

CATEGORIES: Sentencing (law), 501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations, Non-profit organizations based in Washington, D.C., Political advocacy groups in the United States

Established as a national non-profit 501(c)3 organization in 1986, The Sentencing Project works for a fair and effective U.S. criminal justice system by promoting reforms in sentencing policy, addressing unjust racial disparities and practices, and advocating for alternatives to incarceration.
The Sentencing Project was founded to provide defense lawyers with sentencing advocacy training and to reduce the reliance on incarceration. Since that time, The Sentencing Project has become a leader in the effort to bring national attention to disturbing trends and inequities in the criminal justice system with a successful formula that includes the publication of groundbreaking research, aggressive media campaigns strategic advocacy for policy reform.

History

The Sentencing Project grew out of pilot programs established by Malcolm C. Young in the early 1980s. In 1981, Young became director of a project of the National Legal Aid and Defender Association (NLADA) designed to establish defense-based sentencing advocacy programs. These programs worked with defense attorneys to provide judges with sentencing proposals that contained an assessment of the defendant's social history and an individualized sentencing plan that was responsive to the needs of both victims and offenders. The NLADA project successfully developed sentencing advocacy programs in six cities over the next several years. In 1984, the project came under the sponsorship of the National Council on Crime and Delinquency, which continued until 1986.The Sentencing Project - About Us
In 1986, Malcolm C. Young incorporated The Sentencing Project as an independent organization to continue the program training and development work.  Through the mid-1990s The Sentencing Project provided training and technical assistance in sentencing advocacy to programs in more than 20 states.  Beginning in the late 1980s, The Sentencing Project became engaged in research and public education on a broad range of criminal justice policy issues. The organization is now considered a premier source of information and analysis, and serves as a resource for policymakers, academics, advocacy organizations, and media. The advocacy campaigns of The Sentencing Project have successfully contributed to significant sentencing and drug policy reforms at both the federal and state level. In 2005, long-time assistant director Marc Mauer became the executive director of The Sentencing Project. 

Accomplishments

Training and Program Development
The Sentencing Project provided technical assistance in program development and skills training for hundreds of staff engaged in defense-based sentencing advocacy for a period of 15 years beginning in 1986. This included annual conferences on sentencing advocacy beginning in 1989 and the formation of the National Association of Sentencing Advocates (NASA) in 1992. NASA functioned under the auspices of The Sentencing Project and served as a professional leadership and development association of staff engaged in sentencing advocacy and death penalty mitigation programs.History of Defense-Based Sentencing Advocacy and NASAMS
Research and Public Education
The Sentencing Project has produced a broad range of policy reports that have documented issues and trends in the U.S. justice system, and which have helped to shape public policy debate on key issues.  These have included:
The Sentencing Project also produces a range of briefing papers, fact sheets, and policy analyses on a regular basis. An annual report, The State of Sentencing, provides an overview of legislative measures adopted around the nation, and staff frequently contribute to academic and professional journals as well.The State of Sentencing 2011: Developments in Policy and Practice
Marc Mauer, executive director of The Sentencing Project, has published two books. Race to Incarcerate, first published in 1999, traces the evolution of the explosion in the prison population in recent decades, and was a semi-finalist for the Robert F. Kennedy Book Award. A second edition was published in 2006, and a graphic novel version was published in 2013.The New Press - Invisible Punishment: The Collateral Consequences of Mass Imprisonment
In celebration of the 25th anniversary of The Sentencing Project in 2011, the organization published a collection of essays, To Build a Better Criminal Justice System: 25 Experts Envision the Next 25 Years of Reform.  The publication features contributions from leading scholars, practitioners, and reform advocates.To Build a Better Criminal Justice System: 25 Experts Envision the Next 25 Years of Reform

Advocacy

The Sentencing Project has long been engaged in advocating for criminal justice and juvenile justice reform, including legislative advocacy, public education, and engagement with practitioners. At the federal level, highlights have included contributing to the adoption of the Fair Sentencing Act of 2010, which reduced the sentencing disparity between crack cocaine and powder cocaine offenses, and changes to the federal sentencing guidelines which reduced crack cocaine offense levels as well. Staff of The Sentencing Project have are frequently invited to testify before Congress, the United States Sentencing Commission, U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, and other agencies.
In the area of juvenile justice The Sentencing Project has been engaged in efforts to strengthen and enhance the mandate of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act, including approaches to reducing racial disparity in detention. The organization has also played a leading role in campaigns to end the practice of sentencing juveniles to life without parole, and submitted an amicus brief which was cited by the U.S. Supreme Court in its 2010 decision in Graham v. Florida that barred such penalties in non-homicide offenses.U.S. Supreme Court - Graham v. Florida
Support for reform at the state level has included engagement with policymakers and reform organizations on issues including sentencing policy, racial disparity, felony disenfranchisement, and juvenile justice. As documented by The Sentencing Project in Expanding the Vote: State Felony Disenfranchisement Reform, 1997-2010, 23 states enacted reforms to their disenfranchisement policies and practices between 1997 – 2010. In 2008, the states of Connecticut and Iowa each adopted such legislation, and in 2013, Oregon did so as well.Racial Impact Statements: Changing Policies to Address Disparities






