[[George Martin]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, Living people, A&R people, Alumni of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Echo Records artists, English record producers, Fleet Air Arm aviators, George Martin, Brit Award winners, Grammy Award-winning artists, Knights Bachelor, People educated at St Ignatius' College, Enfield, Parlophone employees, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, Royal Navy officers, Royal Navy personnel of World War II, Honorary Members of the Royal Academy of Music, Fellows of the Zoological Society of London, Conductors (music) awarded knighthoods, Composers awarded knighthoods

Sir George Henry Martin CBE (born 3 January 1926) is an English record producer, arranger, composer, conductor, audio engineer and musician. He is sometimes referred to as "the Fifth Beatle" in reference to his extensive involvement on each of the Beatles' original albums. He is considered one of the greatest record producers of all time, with 30 number one hit singles in the United Kingdom and 23 number one hits in the United States.
Influenced by a range of musical styles, encompassing Cole Porter and Johnny Dankworth, he attended the Guildhall School of Music and Drama from 1947 to 1950, studying piano and oboe. Following his graduation, he worked for the BBC's classical music department, then joined EMI in 1950. Martin produced comedy and novelty records in the early 1950s, working with the likes of Peter Sellers and Spike Milligan.
In a career spanning over six decades, Martin has worked in music, film, television and live performance. He has also held a number of senior executive roles at media companies and contributes to a wide range of charitable causes, including his work for the Prince's Trust and the Caribbean island of Montserrat.
In recognition of his services to the music industry and popular culture, he was made a Knight Bachelor in 1996.

Early years

When he was six, Martin's family acquired a piano that sparked his interest in music. After that, Martin explained that he had just picked it up by himself.
Despite Martin's continued interest in music, and "fantasies about being the next Rachmaninov", he did not initially choose music as a career. On 3 January 1948—while still at the Academy—Martin married Sheena Chisholm, with whom he had two children, Alexis and Gregory Paul Martin. He later married Judy Lockhart-Smith on 24 June 1966, and they also had two children, Lucy and Giles Martin.com. Retrieved: 23 September 2007

Parlophone

Following his graduation, he worked for the BBC's classical music department, then joined EMI in 1950, as an assistant to Oscar Preuss, the head of EMI's Parlophone Records from 1950 to 1955. Although having been regarded by EMI as a vital German imprint in the past, it was then seen as a joke and only used for EMI's insignificant acts.
Martin also produced numerous comedy and novelty records. Martin scored his first hit for Parlophone in 1952 with the Peter Ustinov single "Mock Mozart" - a record reluctantly released by EMI only after Preuss insisted they give his young assistant, Martin, a chance.  Later that decade Martin worked with Peter Sellers on several hits and thus came to know Spike Milligan, with whom he became a firm friend, and best man at Milligan's second marriage: "I loved the Goon Show, and issued an album of it on my label Parlophone, which is how I got to know Spike."
Other comedians Martin worked with included Joan Sims, Rolf Harris, Flanders and Swann and Shirley Abicair.
As a producer Martin recorded the two-man show featuring Michael Flanders and Donald Swann called At the Drop of a Hat, which sold steadily for twenty-five years, although Martin's breakthrough as a producer came with the Beyond the Fringe show, which starred Peter Cook, Dudley Moore, Alan Bennett and Jonathan Miller. Martin's work transformed the profile of Parlophone from a "sad little company" to a very profitable business.

The Beatles

Martin was contacted by Sid Coleman of Ardmore & Beechwood, who told him about Brian Epstein, the manager of a band he had met. He thought Martin might be interested in the group, even though they had been turned down by Decca Records among other major British labels. Until that time, although he had had considerable success with the comedy records and a number 1 hit with the Temperance Seven, Martin had had only minor success with pop music, such as "Who Could Be Bluer" by Jerry Lordan, and singles with Shane Fenton and Matt Monro. After the telephone call by Coleman, Martin arranged a meeting on 13 February 1962 with Brian Epstein. Martin listened to a tape recorded at Decca, and thought that Epstein's group was "rather unpromising", but liked the sound of Lennon and McCartney's vocals.Spitz (2005) p301
After another meeting with Epstein on 9 May at the Abbey Road studios, Martin was impressed with Epstein's enthusiasm and agreed to sign the unknown Beatles to a recording contract without having met them or seen them play live.
The Beatles auditioned for Martin on 6 June 1962, in studio three at the Abbey Road studios.
The Beatles' first recording session with Martin was on 4 September, when they recorded "How Do You Do It", which Martin thought was a sure-fire hit even though Lennon and McCartney did not want to release it, not being one of their own compositions.

As an arranger

Martin's musical expertise helped fill the gaps between the Beatles' raw talent and the sound they wanted to achieve. Most of the Beatles' orchestral arrangements and instrumentation (as well as frequent keyboard parts on the early records) were written or performed by Martin in collaboration with the band.
Martin's distinctive arranging work appears on many Beatles recordings. For "Eleanor Rigby" he scored and conducted a strings-only accompaniment inspired by Bernard Herrmann. On a Canadian speaking tour in 2007, Martin said his "Eleanor Rigby" score was influenced by Herrmann's score for the Alfred Hitchcock thriller, Psycho.
He contributed less-noted but integral parts to other songs, including the piano in "Lovely Rita",MacDonald (1994) pp189–190 the harpsichord in "Fixing a Hole", the organs and tape loop arrangement that create the Pablo Fanque circus atmosphere that Lennon requested on "Being for the Benefit of Mr. Kite!" (both Martin and Lennon played organ parts for this song), and the orchestration in "Good Night".
Martin arranged the score for the Beatles' film Yellow Submarine
Paul McCartney once commended Martin by saying: "George Martin was quite experimental for who he was, a grown-up."

As a composer

Beginning in the late 1950s, Martin began to supplement his producer income by publishing music and having his artists record it.  He used the pseudonyms Lezlo Anales and John Chisholm before settling on Graham Fisher as his primary pseudonym.
Martin has composed, arranged and produced film scores since the early 1960s, including the instrumental scores of the films A Hard Day's Night (for which he won an Academy Awards Nomination), Yellow Submarine and Live and Let Die.  Other notable movie scores include The Family Way, the John Schlesinger directed Honky Tonk Freeway, Pulp starring Michael Caine and Mickey Rooney and The Optimists of Nine Elms with Peter Sellers.
He also composed The David Frost Theme 'By George', Adagietto for Harmonica & Strings for Tommy Reilly, Theme One for BBC Radio 1, and Magic Carpet for The Dakotas.

The Beatles Anthology

Martin oversaw post-production on The Beatles Anthology (which was originally entitled "The Long and Winding Road") in 1994 and 1995, working again with Geoff Emerick."The Beatles Anthology" DVD 2003 (Special Features—Compiling The Anthology Albums—0:00:10) George Martin talking about The Anthology project. Martin decided to use an old 8-track analogue deck to mix the songs for the project—which EMI found out an engineer still had—instead of a modern digital deck. He explained this by saying that the old deck created a completely different sound, which a new deck could not recreate."The Beatles Anthology" DVD 2003 (Special Features: Compiling The Anthology Albums—0:03:14) George Martin talking about using an old 8-track desk for The Anthology project. He also said the whole project was a strange experience for him (with which McCartney agreed) as they had to listen to themselves chatting in the studio, 25–30 years previously."The Beatles Anthology" DVD 2003 (Special Features—Compiling The Anthology Albums—0:10:24) George Martin talking about how strange it was to listen to himself and the group chatting 30 years ago.
Martin stepped down when it came to producing the two new singles reuniting McCartney, Harrison and Starr, who wanted to overdub two old Lennon demos. Martin had suffered a hearing loss, and left the work to writer/producer Jeff Lynne of ELO fame.com. Retrieved: 23 September 2007"handed over further duties to ELO supremo Jeff Lynne" icons.uk. Retrieved: 23 September 2007

Cirque du Soleil and Love

In 2006, Martin and his son, Giles Martin, remixed 80 minutes of Beatles music for the Las Vegas stage performance Love, a joint venture between Cirque du Soleil and the Beatles' Apple Corps Ltd.co.uk. Retrieved: 21 September 2007 A soundtrack album from the show was released that same year.co.uk. Retrieved: 21 September 2007

Public image

Martin's contribution to the Beatles' work has received regular critical acclaim and has led to him being described as the "Fifth Beatle".
Despite Martin's experience in working with many different artists, he has been criticised for being perceived as putting too much attention on the Beatles. Howard Stern publicly criticised Martin for receiving too much credit for the group's success, though this was quickly refuted by others as "ill-judged".
John Lennon disparaged Martin's importance to the Beatles' music. In his 1970 interview with Jann Wenner, Lennon said, "James is another one of those people, who think they made us. They didn't. I'd like to hear Dick James' music and I'd like to hear George Martin's music, please, just play me some." Commenting specifically on "Revolution 9", Lennon said, "For Martin to state that he was 'painting a sound picture' is pure hallucination. Ask any of the other people involved. The final editing Yoko and I did alone."

Other artists

Martin has produced recordings for many other artists, including contemporaries of the Beatles, such as Matt Monro, Cilla Black, and Gerry & The Pacemakers, as well as The King's Singers, the band America, Retrieved: 21 September 2007
Martin also worked with the Mahavishnu Orchestra and Gary Glitter. He worked with Glitter before he was famous, and recorded several songs with him in the 1960s under the name of "Paul Raven". He also produced the 1974 album The Man In The Bowler Hat for the eccentric British folk-rock group Stackridge.net Retrieved on 19 September 2007 Martin worked with Paul Winter on his (1972) Icarus album, which was recorded in a rented house by the sea in Marblehead, Massachusetts. Winter said that Martin taught him "how to use the studio as a tool", and allowed him to record the album in a relaxed atmosphere, which was different from the pressurised control in a professional studio.edu Retrieved 8 November 2007 In 1979 he worked with Ron Goodwin to produce the album containing The Beatles Concerto, written by John Rutter. In 2010, Martin was the executive producer of the hard rock debut of Arms of the Sun, an all-star project featuring Rex Brown (Pantera, Down), John Luke Hebert (King Diamond), Lance Harvill, and Ben Bunker.com Retrieved 20 February 2010.
In 1991, Martin contributed the string arrangement and conducted the orchestra for the song "Ticket To Heaven" on the last Dire Straits studio album On Every Street.
In 1995, he contributed the horn and string arrangement for the song "Latitude" on the Elton John Made in England album, which was recorded at Martin's AIR Studios London.
In 1992, Martin worked with Pete Townshend on the musical stage production of Tommy.  The play would open on Broadway in 1993, with the original cast album being released that summer.  George Martin (not yet "Sir") would win the Grammy Award for Best Musical Show Album in 1993, as the producer of that album.

Associated Independent Recording (AIR)

Within the recording industry, Martin is noted for going independent at a time when many producers were still salaried staff—which he was until The Beatles' success gave him the leverage to start, in 1965, Associated Independent Recording, and hire out his own services to artists who requested him. This arrangement not only demonstrated how important Martin's talents were considered to be by his artists, but it allowed him a share in record royalties on his hits. airstudios. This studio was destroyed by Hurricane Hugo ten years later.com

Music from James Bond series

Martin has also directly and indirectly contributed to the main themes of three films in the James Bond series. Although Martin did not produce the theme for the second Bond film, From Russia with Love, he was responsible for the signing of Matt Monro to EMI just months prior to his recording of the song of the same title.com. Accessed 29 December 2007
Martin also produced two of the best-known James Bond themes. The first was "Goldfinger" by Shirley Bassey in 1964.co.uk. Accessed 29 December 2007 The second, in 1973, was "Live and Let Die" by Paul McCartney and Wings for the film of the same name. He also composed and produced the film's score''.

Books and audio retrospective

In 1979, he published a memoir, All You Need is Ears (co-written with Jeremy Hornsby), that described his work with the Beatles and other artists (including Peter Sellers, Sophia Loren, Shirley Bassey, Flanders and Swann, Matt Monro, and Dudley Moore), and gave an informal introduction to the art and science of sound recording. In 1993 Martin published Summer of Love: The Making of Sgt Pepper (published in the US as With a Little Help from My Friends: The Making of Sgt Pepper, co-authored with William Pearson),George Martin (1994)Summer Of Love genesis-publications. Retrieved: 23 September 2007 which also included interview quotations from a 1992 South Bank Show episode discussing the album. Martin also edited a 1983 book called Making Music: The Guide to Writing, Performing and Recording.
In 2001, Martin released Produced by George Martin: 50 Years In Recording, a six-CD retrospective of his entire studio career, and in 2002, Martin launched Playback, his limited-edition illustrated autobiography, published by Genesis Publications.com. Retrieved: 23 September 2007

Television

"The Rhythm Of Life"

In 1997–98, Martin hosted a three-part BBC co-produced documentary series titled "The Rhythm Of Life" in which he discussed various aspects of musical composition with professional musicians and singers, among them Brian Wilson, Billy Joel and Celine Dion.  The series aired on the Ovation television network in the United States.org.uk. Retrieved: 2 May 2013"The Rhythm of Life strikes a sweet note with Ovation" realscreen. Retrieved: 2 May 2013"All You Need Is ... 'The Rhythm of Life'" articles.com. Retrieved: 2 May 2013

"Produced by George Martin"

On 25 April 2011 a 90-minute documentary feature film co-produced by the BBC Arena team, Produced by George Martin, aired to critical acclaim for the first time in the UK. It combines rare archive footage and new interviews with, among others, Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr, Jeff Beck, Cilla Black and Giles Martin and tells the life story of George Martin from schoolboy born in the Depression to legendary music producer.  The film, with over 50 minutes of extra footage, including interviews from Rick Rubin, T-Bone Burnett and Ken Scott, was released world-wide by Eagle Rock Entertainment on DVD and Blu-ray on 10 September 2012.

Awards and recognition

Martin is one of a handful of producers to have number one records in three or more consecutive decades (1960s, 70s, 80s, and 90s). Others in this group include Phil Spector (1950s, 60s and 70s), Quincy Jones (1960s, 70s and 80s), Michael Omartian 1970s, 80s and 90s), and Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis (1980s, 90s, and 2000s). Billboard's Hottest Hot 100 Hits. Billboard Books, 2003 (3rd ed.), p. 106-128. Joel Whitburn's Top Pop Singles 1955 - 2012. Record Research, 2013 (14th ed.).

Selected non-Beatles hit records produced or co-produced by George Martin

Records produced by Martin have achieved 30 number one singles and 16 number one albums in the UK—plus 23 number one singles and 19 number one albums in North America.com/sir. Retrieved: 19 September 2007


Discography

Selected discography (as producer)

Notes






