[[Common Nightingale]]

CATEGORIES: Luscinia, National symbols of Iran, Birds of Africa, Birds of Asia, Birds of Europe, Birds of Ukraine, Animals described in 1831

The Common Nightingale or simply Nightingale (Luscinia megarhynchos), also known as Rufous Nightingale, is a small passerine bird best known for its powerful and beautiful song. It was formerly classed as a member of the thrush family Turdidae, but is now more generally considered to be an Old World flycatcher, Muscicapidae. It belongs to a group of more terrestrial species, often called chats.

Description

The Common Nightingale is slightly larger than the European Robin, at  length. It is plain brown above except for the reddish tail. It is buff to white below. Sexes are similar. The eastern subspecies L. m. hafizi and L. m. africana have paler upperparts and a stronger face-pattern, including a pale supercilium.  The song of the NightingaleBritish Library Sound Archive. British wildlife recordings: Nightingale, accessed 29 May 2013 has been described as one of the most beautiful sounds in nature, inspiring songs, fairy tales, opera, books, and a great deal of poetry. "The Female Sublime from Milton to Swinburne: Bearing Blindness", Manchester University Press, 2001, pp. 26–29 ISBN 0719057523

Distribution and habitat

It is a migratory insectivorous species breeding in forest and scrub in Europe and south-west Asia, and wintering in west Africa. It is not found naturally in the Americas. The distribution is more southerly than the very closely related Thrush Nightingale Luscinia luscinia. It nests on or near the ground in dense vegetation.  Research in Germany found that favoured breeding habitat of nightingales was defined by a number of geographical parameters. Wink, Michael (1973): " Die Verbreitung der Nachtigall (Luscinia megarhynchos) im Rheinland". Charadrius 9(2/3): 65-80. (PDF)
In the UK the bird is at the northern limit of its range which has contracted in recent years, placing it on the amber list for conservation. Despite local efforts to conserve its favoured coppice and scrub habitat, numbers fell by 53 per cent between 1995 and 2008.  
The European breeding population is estimated at between 3.2 and 7 million pairs, giving it green conservation status (least concern).  

Behaviour and ecology

Common Nightingales are so named because they frequently sing at night as well as during the day. The name has been used for more than 1,000 years, being highly recognisable even in its Anglo-Saxon form – 'nightingale'. It means 'night songstress'. Early writers assumed the female sang when it is in fact the male. The song is loud, with an impressive range of whistles, trills and gurgles. Its song is particularly noticeable at night because few other birds are singing. This is why its name includes "night" in several languages. Only unpaired males sing regularly at night, and nocturnal song is likely to serve to attract a mate. Singing at dawn, during the hour before sunrise, is assumed to be important in defending the bird's territory. Nightingales sing even more loudly in urban or near-urban environments, in order to overcome the background noise. The most characteristic feature of the song is a loud whistling crescendo, absent from the song of Thrush Nightingale. It has a frog-like alarm call.

Relationship with humans

The Common Nightingale is an important symbol for poets from a variety of ages, and has taken on a number of symbolic connotations. Homer evokes the Nightingale in the Odyssey, suggesting the myth of Philomela and Procne (one of whom, depending on the myth's version, is turned into a nightingale This myth is the focus of Sophocles' tragedy, Tereus, of which only fragments remain. Ovid, too, in his Metamorphoses, includes the most popular version of this myth, imitated and altered by later poets, including Chrétien de Troyes, Geoffrey Chaucer, John Gower, and George Gascoigne. T.S. Eliot's "The Waste Land" also evokes the Common Nightingale's song (and the myth of Philomela and Procne). Because of the violence associated with the myth, the nightingale's song was long interpreted as a lament.
The Common Nightingale has also been used as a symbol of poets or their poetry.
In Sonnet 102 Shakespeare compares his love poetry to the song of the Common Nightingale (Philomel):
During the Romantic era the bird's symbolism changed once more: poets viewed the nightingale not only as a poet in his own right, but as "master of a superior art that could inspire the human poet". For some romantic poets, the nightingale even began to take on qualities of the muse. Coleridge and Wordsworth saw the nightingale more as an instance of natural poetic creation: the nightingale became a voice of nature. John Keats' "Ode to a Nightingale" pictures the nightingale as an idealized poet who has achieved the poetry that Keats longs to write. Invoking a similar conception of the nightingale, Shelley wrote in his "A Defense of Poetry":
| first=Percy 
| last=Bysshe Shelley
| year=1903
| title=A Defense of Poetry
| edition=
| publisher=Ginn & Company
| location=Boston, MA
| page=11
| id=
| postscript=   }}[/ref]

Cultural depictions






