[[Electrocardiography]]

CATEGORIES: Cardiac electrophysiology, Cardiac procedures, Dutch inventions, Electrodiagnosis, Electrophysiology

Electrocardiography (ECG or EKG from  The recording produced by this noninvasive procedure is termed an electrocardiogram (also ECG or EKG).  It is possible to record ECGs invasively using an implantable loop recorder.
An ECG is used to measure the heart's electrical conduction system. (2011). Basic arrhythmias (7th ed.) 1-11 It picks up electrical impulses generated by the polarization and depolarization of cardiac tissue and translates into a waveform. The waveform is then used to measure the rate and regularity of heartbeats, as well as the size and position of the chambers, the presence of any damage to the heart, and the effects of drugs or devices used to regulate the heart, such as a pacemaker.
Most ECGs are performed for diagnostic or research purposes on human hearts, but may also be performed on animals, usually for diagnosis of heart abnormalities or research.

Medical uses

General symptoms indicating use of electrocardiography include:
It is also used to assess patients with systemic disease, as well as monitoring during anesthesia and critically ill patients.

Screening for coronary heart disease

The U.S. Preventative Services Task Force do not recommend either the ECG or any other cardiac imaging procedure as a routine screening procedure in patients without symptoms and those at low risk for coronary heart disease. This is because overuse of the procedure is more likely to supply incorrect supporting evidence for a nonexistent problem than to detect a true problem. Tests that falsely indicate the existence of a problem are likely to lead to misdiagnosis, the recommendation of invasive procedures, or overtreatment, and the risks associated with managing false information are usually more troublesome than not using ECG results to make a health recommendation in low-risk individuals.
Persons employed in certain critical occupations, such as aircraft pilots, or in certain environments, such as high altitudes,

Myocardial infarction

Characteristic changes seen on electrocardiography in myocardial infarction is included in the WHO criteria as revised in 2000. According to these, a cardiac troponin rise accompanied by either typical symptoms, pathological Q waves, ST elevation or depression or coronary intervention are diagnostic of myocardial infarction.

Pulmonary embolism

In pulmonary embolism, an ECG may show signs of right heart strain or acute cor pulmonale in cases of large PEs—the classic signs are a large S wave in lead I, a large Q wave in lead III and an inverted T wave in lead III (S1Q3T3).

Other patterns of disease

The following table mentions some pathological patterns that can be seen on electrocardiography, followed by possible causes.

Function

An ECG produces a pattern reflecting the electrical activity of the heart and usually requires a trained clinician to interpret it in the context of the signs and symptoms the patient presents with. It can give information regarding the rhythm of the heartBraunwald E. (Editor), Heart Disease: A Textbook of Cardiovascular Medicine, Fifth Edition, p. 108, Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders Co., 1997. ISBN 0-7216-5666-8. (whether or not the electrical impulse consistently arises from the part of the heart where it should and at what rate), whether that impulse is conducted normally throughout the heart, or whether any part of the heart is contributing more or less than expected to the electrical activity of the heart. It can also give information regarding the balance of salts (electrolytes) in the blood (e.g. hyperkalaemia) or even reveal problems with sodium channels within the heart muscle cells (Brugada syndrome).
It is one of the key tests performed when a heart attack (myocardial infarction or MI) is suspected; the ECG can identify whether the heart muscle has been damaged in specific areas, though not all areas of the heart are covered. The ECG cannot reliably measure the pumping ability of the heart, for which ultrasound-based (echocardiography) or nuclear medicine tests are used. It is possible for a human or other animal to be in cardiac arrest, but still have a normal ECG signal (a condition known as pulseless electrical activity).

Principles

The ECG device detects and amplifies the tiny electrical changes on the skin that are caused when the heart muscle depolarizes during each heartbeat. At rest, each heart muscle cell has a negative charge, called the membrane potential, across its cell membrane. Decreasing this negative charge toward zero, via the influx of the positive cations, Na+ and Ca++, is called depolarization, which activates the mechanisms in the cell that cause it to contract. During each heartbeat, a healthy heart will have an orderly progression of a wave of depolarisation that is triggered by the cells in the sinoatrial node, spreads out through the atrium, passes through the atrioventricular node and then spreads all over the ventricles. This is detected as tiny rises and falls in the voltage between two electrodes placed either side of the heart, which is displayed as a wavy line either on a screen or on paper. This display indicates the overall rhythm of the heart and weaknesses in different parts of the heart muscle.
Usually, more than two electrodes are used, and they can be combined into a number of pairs (For example: left arm (LA), right arm (RA), and left leg (LL) electrodes form the three pairs LA+RA, LA+LL, and RA+LL). The output from each pair is known as a lead. Each lead looks at the heart from a different angle. Different types of ECGs can be referred to by the number of leads that are recorded, for example 3-lead, 5-lead, or 12-lead ECGs (sometimes simply "a 12-lead"). A 12-lead ECG is one in which 12 different electrical signals are recorded at approximately the same time and will often be used as a one-off recording of an ECG, traditionally printed out as a paper copy. Three- and 5-lead ECGs tend to be monitored continuously and viewed only on the screen of an appropriate monitoring device, for example during an operation or whilst being transported in an ambulance. There may or may not be any permanent record of a 3- or 5-lead ECG, depending on the equipment used.

ECG graph paper

The output of an ECG recorder is a graph (or sometimes several graphs, representing each of the leads) with time represented on the x-axis and voltage represented on the y-axis. A dedicated ECG machine would usually print onto graph paper that has a background pattern of 1-millimeter squares (often in red or green), with bold divisions every 5 mm in both vertical and horizontal directions.
It is possible to change the output of most ECG devices but it is standard to represent each mV on the y axis as 1 cm and each second as 25 mm on the x-axis (that is a paper speed of 25 mm/s). Faster paper speeds can be used, for example, to resolve finer detail in the ECG. At a paper speed of 25 mm/s, one small block of ECG paper translates into 40 ms. Five small blocks make up one large block, which translates into 200 ms. Hence, there are five large blocks per second. A calibration signal may be included with a record. A standard signal of 1 mV must move the stylus vertically 1 cm, that is, two large squares on ECG paper.

Layout

By definition, a 12-lead ECG will show a short segment of the recording of each of the twelve leads. This is often arranged in a grid of four columns by three rows, the first column being the limb leads (I,II, and III), the second column the augmented limb leads (aVR, aVL, and aVF), and the last two columns being the chest leads (V1-V6). It is usually possible to change this layout, so it is vital to check the labels to see which lead is represented. Each column will usually record the same moment in time for the three leads and then the recording will switch to the next column, which will record the heart beats after that point. It is possible for the heart rhythm to change between the columns of leads.
Each of these segments is short, perhaps one to three heart beats only, depending on the heart rate, and it can be difficult to analyse any heart rhythm that shows changes between heart beats. To help with the analysis, some ECG machines will print one or two "rhythm strips" as well along the bottom of the ECG paper. This will usually be lead II (which shows the electrical signal from the atrium, the P-wave, well) and shows the rhythm for the whole time the ECG was recorded (usually 5–6 sec). It is usually possible to set the machine to print a number of leads continuously if further information regarding the rhythm is required.
The term "rhythm strip" may also refer to the whole printout from a continuous monitoring system, which may show only one lead and is either initiated by a clinician or in response to an alarm or event.

Leads

The term "lead" in electrocardiography causes much confusion because it is used to refer to two different things. In accordance with common parlance, the word lead may be used to refer to the electrical cable attaching the electrodes to the ECG recorder. As such, it may be acceptable to refer to the "left arm lead" as the electrode (and its cable) that should be attached at or near the left arm. Usually, 10 of these electrodes are standard in a "12-lead" ECG.
Alternatively (and some would say properly, in the context of electrocardiography), the word lead may refer to the tracing of the voltage difference between two of the electrodes and is what is actually produced by the ECG recorder. Each will have a specific name. For example "lead I" is the voltage between the right arm electrode and the left arm electrode, whereas "Lead II"  is the voltage between the right arm and the left leg. (This rapidly becomes more complex as one of the "electrodes" may in fact be a composite of the electrical signal from a combination of the other electrodes). Twelve of this type of lead form a "12-lead" ECG.
To cause additional confusion, the term "limb leads" usually refers to the tracings from leads I, II, and III rather than the electrodes attached to the limbs.

Placement of electrodes

Ten electrodes are used for a 12-lead ECG. The electrodes usually consist of a conducting gel, embedded in the middle of a self-adhesive pad onto which cables clip. Sometimes the gel also forms the adhesive.superboverseas.asp?id=104  WelchAllyn
