[[Mount Shasta]]

CATEGORIES: Mount Shasta, Mountains of Siskiyou County, California, Fourteeners of California, Cascade Volcanoes, Stratovolcanoes, Subduction volcanoes, Volcanoes of Siskiyou County, California, Sacred mountains, Native American mythology of California, Religious places of the indigenous peoples of North America, Hot springs of California, UFO-related locations, Protected areas of Siskiyou County, California, Visitor attractions in Siskiyou County, California, National Natural Landmarks in California, Shasta-Trinity National Forest

Mount Shasta (Karuk: Úytaahkoo or "White Mountain")The origin of the name "Shasta" is vague, perhaps from Russian (Чистая, meaning "white, clean, pure" or Счастье, meaning "happiness, luck, fortune, felicity"); the name might have been given to the mountain by the early Russian settlers in California. is a volcano located at the southern end of the Cascade Range in Siskiyou County, California. At  which makes it the most voluminous stratovolcano in the Cascade Volcanic Arc.[ref]
  </ref>
The mountain and its surrounding area are managed by the U.S. Forest Service, Shasta-Trinity National Forest.

Description

Mount Shasta is not connected to any nearby mountain and dominates the northern California landscape. It rises abruptly and stands nearly  authors,Muir, John 1838-1914.  Letters, 1874-1888, of a personal nature, about Mount Shasta. In: Bade, William Frederic.  The Life and Letters of John Muir.  New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1923. Vol. II, pp. 29-41, 49-50, 82-85, 219.   Two Volumes. Cited at Mt. Shasta Collection MS176. Retrieved 2008-04-08. and presidents.  Letter to Harrie Cassie Best, dated Nov. 12, 1908, White House. In: James, George Wharton 1858-1923.  Harry Cassie Best: Painter of the Yosemite Valley, California Oaks, and California Mountains.  1930? p. 18. Cited at Mt. Shasta Collection MS1032. Retrieved 2008-04-08.
The mountain consists of four overlapping volcanic cones which have built a complex shape, including the main summit and the prominent satellite cone of  Shastina, which has a visibly conical form. If Shastina were a separate mountain, it would rank as the fourth-highest peak of the Cascade Range (after Mt. Rainier, Rainier's Liberty Cap, and Mt. Shasta itself).
Mount Shasta's surface is relatively free of deep glacial erosion except, paradoxically, for its south side where Sargents Ridge

History

The oldest known human habitation in the area dates to about 7,000 years ago, and by about 5,000 years ago, there was substantial human habitation in the surrounding area.
At the time of Euro-American contact in the 1820s, the Native American tribes who lived within view of Mount Shasta included the Shasta, Okwanuchu, Modoc, Achomawi, Atsugewi, Karuk, Klamath, Wintu, and Yana tribes.
The historic eruption of Mount Shasta in 1786 may have been observed by Lapérouse, but this is disputed. Although perhaps first seen by Spanish explorers, the first reliably-reported land sighting of Mount Shasta by a European or American was by Peter Skene Ogden (a leader of a Hudson's Bay Company trapping brigade) in 1826.  In 1827, the name "Sasty" or "Sastise" was given to nearby Mount McLoughlin by Ogden. The name was transferred to present-day Mount Shasta in 1841, partly as a result of work by the United States Exploring Expedition.
Beginning in the 1820s, Mount Shasta was a prominent landmark along what became known as the Siskiyou Trail, which runs at Mount Shasta's base.  The Siskiyou Trail was located on the track of an ancient trade and travel route of Native American footpaths between California's Central Valley and the Pacific Northwest.
The California Gold Rush brought the first Euro-American settlements into the area in the early 1850s, including at Yreka, California and Upper Soda Springs.  The first recorded ascent of Mount Shasta occurred in 1854 (by Elias Pearce), after several earlier failed attempts.  In 1856, the first women (Harriette Eddy, Mary Campbell McCloud, and their party) reached the summit.
thumb|right|Clarence King exploring the Whitney Glacier in 1870.  This was the first glacier in the continental United States discovered and named. It was named for Josiah Whitney, head of the California Geological Survey. A book by California pioneer and entrepreneur James Hutchings, titled Scenes of Wonder and Curiosity in California, contained an account of an early summit trip in 1855. Hutchings The summit was achieved (or nearly achieved) by John Muir, Josiah Whitney, Clarence King, and John Wesley Powell.  In 1877, Muir wrote a dramatic popular article about an experience in which he survived an overnight blizzard on Mount Shasta by lying in the hot sulfur springs found near the summit.Snow-Storm on Mount Shasta
The 1887 completion of the Central Pacific Railroad, built along the line of the Siskiyou Trail between California and Oregon, brought a substantial increase in tourism, lumbering, and population into the area around Mount Shasta.  Early resorts and hotels, such as Shasta Springs, grew up along the Siskiyou Trail around Mount Shasta, catering to these early adventuresome tourists and mountaineers.
In the early Twentieth century, the Pacific Highway followed the track of the Siskiyou Trail to the base of Mount Shasta, leading to still more access to the mountain.  Today's version of the Siskiyou Trail, Interstate 5, brings thousands of people a year to Mount Shasta. 
February 13–19, 1959 the Mount Shasta Ski Bowl obtained the record of 
It was declared a National Natural Landmark in December 1976.

Religion and legends

The lore of some of the Klamath Tribes in the area held that Mount Shasta is inhabited by the Spirit of the Above-World, Skell, who descended from heaven to the mountain's summit at the request of a Klamath chief.  Skell fought with Spirit of the Below-World, Llao, who resided at Mt. Mazama by throwing hot rocks and lava, probably representing the volcanic eruptions at both mountains.
Italian settlers arrived in the early 1900s to work in the mills and as stonemasons and established a strong Catholic presence in the area. Many other faiths have been attracted to Mount Shasta over the years—more than any other Cascade volcano.
Mount Shasta has also been a focus for non-native American legends, centered on a hidden city of advanced beings from the lost continent of Lemuria. The legend grew from an offhand mention of Lemuria in the 1880s, to a description of a hidden Lemurian village in 1925. In 1931, Wisar Spenle Cerve wrote Lemuria: the lost continent of the Pacific, published by the Rosicrucians, about the hidden Lemurians of Mount Shasta that cemented the legend in many readers' minds.
In August 1987, believers in the spiritual significance of the Harmonic Convergence described Mount Shasta as one of a small number of global "power centers".

Geology

About 593,000 years ago, andesitic lavas erupted in what is now Mount Shasta's western flank near McBride Spring.  Over time, an ancestral Mount Shasta stratovolcano was built to a large but unknown height; sometime between 300,000 and 360,000 years ago the entire north side of the volcano collapsed, creating an enormous landslide or debris avalanche,  flow.
What remains of the oldest of Mount Shasta's four cones is exposed at Sargents Ridge on the south side of the mountain.  Lavas from the Sargents Ridge vent cover the Everitt Hill shield at Mount Shasta's southern foot. The last lavas to erupt from the vent were hornblende-pyroxene andesites with a hornblende dacite dome at its summit. Glacial erosion has since modified its shape.
The next cone to form is exposed south of Mount Shasta's current summit and is called Misery Hill. It was formed 15,000 to 20,000 years ago from pyroxene andesite flows and has since been intruded by a hornblende dacite dome.
There are many buried glacial scars on the mountain which were originally created in recent glacial periods ("ice ages") of the present Wisconsinian glaciation. Most have since been filled in with andesite lava, pyroclastic flows, and talus from lava domes.  Shastina, by comparison, has a fully intact summit crater indicating that Shastina developed after the last ice age. Shastina has been built by mostly pyroxene andesite lava flows.  Some 9,500 years ago, these flows reached about 
The last to form, and the highest cone, the Hotlum Cone, formed about 8,000 years ago. It is named after the Hotlum glacier on its northern face; its longest lava flow, the 
In the last 8,000 years, the Hotlum Cone has erupted at least eight or nine times. About 200 years ago the last significant Mount Shasta eruption came from this cone and created a pyroclastic flow, a hot lahar (mudflow), and three cold lahars, which streamed 

Volcanic hazards

During the last 10,000 years Mount Shasta has erupted an average of every 800 years but in the past 4,500 years the volcano has erupted an average of every 600 years. The last significant eruption on Mount Shasta may have occurred about two centuries ago.
Mount Shasta can release volcanic ash, pyroclastic flows or dacite and andesite lava. Its deposits can be detected under nearby small towns totaling 20,000 in population. Mount Shasta has an explosive, eruptive history. There are fumaroles on the mountain, which show that Mount Shasta is still alive.
The worst case scenario for an eruption is a large pyroclastic flow, such as what occurred in the 1980 eruption of Mount St. Helens. Since there is ice, such as Whitney Glacier and Mud Creek Glacier, lahars would also result. Ash would probably blow inland, perhaps as far as eastern Nevada. There is a small chance that an eruption could also be bigger resulting in a collapse of the mountain, as happened when Mount Mazama in Oregon collapsed to form what is now called Crater Lake, but this is of much lower probability.
The United States Geological Survey considers Mount Shasta a dormant volcano that will likely erupt in the future and rates it as a very high threat volcano.

In society

Many climbers attempt the summit of Mount Shasta. The summer climbing season runs from late April until October, although many attempts are made in the winter. In winter, Sargents Ridge and Casaval Ridge, to the east and west of Avalanche Gulch respectively, become the most traveled routes, to avoid avalanche danger. Mount Shasta is also a popular destination for backcountry skiing. Many of the climbing routes can be descended by experienced skiers, and there are numerous lower-angled areas around the base of the mountain.
The most popular route on Mount Shasta is Avalanche Gulch route, which begins at the Bunny Flat Trailhead and gains about .[ref]
  
</ref> 
The Casaval Ridge route is a steeper, more technical route on the mountain's southwest ridge that is best climbed when there's a lot of snow pack. This route tops out to the left (north) of the Red Banks, directly west of Misery Hill. So the final sections involve a trudge up Misery Hill to the summit plateau, similar to the Avalanche Gulch route.[ref]
  
</ref> 
No quota system currently exists for climbing Mt. Shasta and reservations are not required. However, climbers must obtain a Summit Pass and a Wilderness Permit to climb the mountain. Permits and passes are available at the Ranger Station in Mt. Shasta and the Ranger Station in McCloud, or climbers can obtain self-issue permits and passes at any of the trailheads 24 hours a day.[ref]
  
</ref>



Notes



 |issue= 3 |pages= 143–146 |url=  |accessdate= 
 |doi = 10.1130/0091-7613(1984)12<143:CDAFAM>2.0.CO;2
 |year= 1984|issn= 0091-7613|bibcode = 1984Geo....12..143C }}




