[[Some Like It Hot]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 films, 1950s romantic comedy films, American LGBT-related films, American screwball comedy films, American sex comedy films, Best Musical or Comedy Picture Golden Globe winners, Black-and-white films, Cross-dressing in film, English-language films, Films directed by Billy Wilder, Films featuring a Best Musical or Comedy Actor Golden Globe winning performance, Films featuring a Best Musical or Comedy Actress Golden Globe winning performance, Films set in Chicago, Illinois, Films set in Miami, Florida, Films set in 1929, Films set in the Roaring Twenties, Mafia comedies, United Artists films, United States National Film Registry films, Films that won the Best Costume Design Academy Award

Some Like It Hot is a 1959 American comedy film directed by Billy Wilder and starring Marilyn Monroe, Tony Curtis and Jack Lemmon. The supporting cast includes George Raft, Pat O'Brien, Joe E. Brown, Joan Shawlee  and Nehemiah Persoff.
In 2000, the American Film Institute listed Some Like It Hot as the greatest American comedy film of all time.

Plot

It is February 1929 in the city of Chicago. Joe is a jazz saxophone player, irresponsible gambler and ladies' man; his friend Jerry is a sensible jazz double-bass player. They accidentally witness the Saint Valentine's Day Massacre. When the gangsters, led by "Spats" Colombo, spot them, the two run for their lives. 
Penniless and in a rush to get out of town, the two musicians take a job with Sweet Sue and her Society Syncopators, an all-female band headed to Miami. Disguised as women and calling themselves Josephine and Daphne, they board a train with the band and their male manager, Bienstock. Before they board the train, Joe and Jerry notice Sugar Kane, the band's vocalist and ukulele player.
Joe and Jerry become enamored of Sugar and compete for her affection while maintaining their disguises. Sugar confides that she has sworn off male saxophone players, who have stolen her heart in the past and left her with "the fuzzy end of the lollipop". She has set her sights on finding a sweet, bespectacled millionaire in Florida. During the forbidden drinking and partying on the train, Josephine and Daphne become intimate friends with Sugar, and have to struggle to remember that they are girls and cannot make a pass at her.
Once in Miami, Joe woos Sugar by assuming a second disguise as a millionaire named Junior, the heir to Shell Oil, while feigning disinterest in Sugar. An actual millionaire, an aging mama's boy, the much-married Osgood Fielding III, tries repeatedly to pick up Daphne, who rebuffs him. Osgood invites Daphne for a champagne supper on his yacht. Joe convinces Daphne to keep Osgood occupied onshore so that Junior can take Sugar to Osgood's yacht, passing it off as his. Once on the yacht, Junior explains to Sugar that, due to psychological trauma, he is impotent and frigid, but that he would marry anyone who could change that. Sugar tries to arouse some sexual response in Junior, and begins to succeed. Meanwhile, Daphne and Osgood dance the tango till dawn. 
When Joe and Jerry get back to the hotel, Jerry explains that Osgood has proposed marriage to Daphne and that he, as Daphne, has accepted, anticipating an instant divorce and huge cash settlement when his ruse is revealed. Joe convinces Jerry that he cannot actually marry Osgood. 
The hotel hosts a conference for "Friends of Italian Opera", who are actually mobsters. Spats and his gang from Chicago recognize Joe and Jerry as the witnesses to the Valentine's Day murders. Joe and Jerry, fearing for their lives, realize they must quit the band and leave the hotel. Joe breaks Sugar's heart by telling her that he, Junior, has to marry a woman of his father's choosing and move to Venezuela.
After several chases, Joe and Jerry witness additional mob killings, this time of Spats and his crew. Joe, dressed as Josephine, sees Sugar onstage singing that she will never love again. He kisses her before he leaves, and Sugar realizes that Joe is both Josephine and Junior.
Sugar runs from the stage at the end of her performance and is able to jump into the launch from Osgood's yacht just as it is leaving the dock with Joe, Jerry, and Osgood. Joe tells Sugar that he is not good enough for her, that she would be getting the "fuzzy end of the lollipop" yet again, but Sugar wants him anyway. Jerry, for his part, comes up with a list of objections for why he and Osgood cannot get married, ranging from a smoking habit to infertility. Osgood dismisses them all; he loves Daphne and is determined to go through with the marriage. Exasperated, Jerry removes his wig and shouts, "I'm a man!" Osgood simply responds, "Well, nobody's perfect."

Cast

Production

Marilyn Monroe worked for 10% of the gross in excess of $4 million, Tony Curtis for 5% of the gross over $2 million and Billy Wilder 17.5% of the first million after breakeven and 20% thereafter.Tino Balio, United Artists: The Company The Changed the Film Industry, Uni of Wisconsin Press, 1987 p 170
The Florida segment, at the fictitious "Seminole Ritz", was filmed at the Hotel Del Coronado in Coronado, California.
The studio hired famed aerialist and female impersonator Barbette to coach Lemmon and Curtis on gender illusion for the film.[ref]
</ref>
Tony Curtis is frequently quoted as saying that kissing Marilyn Monroe was like "kissing Hitler". However, during a 2001 interview with Leonard Maltin, Curtis stated that he had never made this claim. In his 2008 autobiography, Curtis notes that he did make the statement to the film crew, but it was meant in a joking manner.
After working with Monroe on "The Seven Year Itch," Wilder swore he would never work with her again.  But was delighted after hearing she read the script and wanted to play the part.  "It's wonderful that Monroe wanted that part," he said in an interview.  "We had a big, big bomb there in that cannon that we could shoot off.  We would not have that sex thing."
Joe E. Brown was not the original choice for the role of Osgood.  It was not until Wilder and Diamond spotted him at a Los Angeles Dodgers game that the idea entered their minds.   As Wilder remembers, "There was a loudspeaker on the field behind home plate, and people talking, and now comes the next speaker and it's Joe E. Brown.  And I said, 'That's our guy, that's our guy!'  Nobody ever thought of him."
The famed final line of the film, "well, nobody's perfect," was only supposed to be used temporarily until Wilder and Diamond thought of what they thought would be a better line.  The line itself, suggested by Diamond, was thought of at the beginning of their discussion.  As revealed in "Conversations with Billy Wilder", a book of interviews between Billy Wilder and Cameron Crowe, Wilder said to Diamond, "Look, let's go back to your line, 'Nobody's perfect.'  Let's send it to the mimeograph department so that they have something, and then we're going to really sit down and make a real funny last line."

Reception

Some Like it Hot received widespread critical acclaim. Rotten Tomatoes reports a score of 98%, with an average score of 8.9 out of 10. Roger Ebert says about the movie, "Wilder's 1959 comedy is one of the enduring treasures of the movies, a film of inspiration and meticulous craft."
The film earned an estimated $7.2 million in rentals in the US and Canada during its first year of release, making it one of the biggest hits of the year."1959: Probable Domestic Take", Variety, 6 January 1960 p 34 However because so much of the profits were given away to key participants, UA only made $500,000 during the first year (compared to Wilder who earned $1.2 million, Monroe $800,000 and Curtis $500,000).

Accolades

The film was awarded an Academy Award for Best Costume Design, Black-and-White (Orry-Kelly) and was nominated for Best Actor in a Leading Role (Jack Lemmon), Best Art Direction-Set Decoration, Black-and-White (Ted Haworth, Edward G. Boyle), Best Cinematography, Black-and-White, Academy Award for Best Director and Best Writing, Screenplay Based on Material from Another Medium.

Soundtrack

Adaptations

An unsold television pilot was filmed by Mirisch Productions in 1961 featuring Vic Damone and Tina Louise. As a favor to the production company, Jack Lemmon and Tony Curtis agreed to film cameo appearances, returning as their original characters, Daphne and Josephine, at the beginning of the pilot. Their appearance sees them in a hospital where Jerry (Lemmon) is being treated for his impacted back tooth and Joe (Curtis) is the same O blood type.bfi.uk/sift/title/805149
In 1972, a musical play based on the screenplay of the film, entitled Sugar, opened on Broadway, starring Elaine Joyce, Robert Morse, Tony Roberts and Cyril Ritchard, with book by Peter Stone, lyrics by Bob Merrill, and (all-new) music by Jule Styne. A 1991 production of this show in London featured Tommy Steele and retained the original title. In 2002, Tony Curtis performed in a stage production of the film. He portrayed the character originally played by Joe E. Brown.





Further reading




