[[Albert, Prince Consort]]

CATEGORIES: Albert, Prince Consort, 1819 births, 1861 deaths, 11th Hussars officers, British Field Marshals, Chancellors of the University of Cambridge, German emigrants to the United Kingdom, Grenadier Guards officers, House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (United Kingdom), Knights Companion of the Order of the Star of India, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, Knights of St Patrick, Knights of the Garter, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Knights of the Thistle, People from Coburg, Princes of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, Princes of the United Kingdom, Scots Guards officers, University of Bonn alumni, Queen Victoria, Honorary Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Presidents of the Zoological Society of London, Presidents of the British Science Association, British royal consorts

Prince Albert of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha (Francis Albert Augustus Charles Emmanuel; later The Prince Consort; 26 August 1819 – 14 December 1861) was the husband of Queen Victoria of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland.
He was born in the Saxon duchy of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld to a family connected to many of Europe's ruling monarchs. At the age of 20 he married his first cousin, Queen Victoria, with whom he would ultimately have nine children. At first, Albert felt constrained by his position as consort, which did not confer any power or duties upon him. Over time he adopted many public causes, such as educational reform and a worldwide abolition of slavery, and took on the responsibilities of running the Queen's household, estates and office. He was heavily involved with the organisation of the Great Exhibition of 1851. Albert aided in the development of Britain's constitutional monarchy by persuading his wife to show less partisanship in her dealings with Parliament—although he actively disagreed with the interventionist foreign policy pursued during Lord Palmerston's tenure as Foreign Secretary.
He died at the early age of 42, plunging the Queen into a deep mourning that lasted for the rest of her life. Upon Queen Victoria's death in 1901, their eldest son, Edward VII, succeeded as the first British monarch of the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, named after the ducal house to which Albert belonged.

Early life

Albert was born at Schloss Rosenau, near Coburg, Germany, the second son of Ernest III, Duke of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld, and his first wife, Louise of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg..
Albert and his elder brother, Ernest, spent their youth in a close companionship scarred by their parents' turbulent marriage and eventual separation and divorce.
The brothers were educated privately at home by Christoph Florschütz and later studied in Brussels, where Adolphe Quetelet was one of their tutors.

Marriage

By 1836, the idea of marriage between Albert and his cousin, Victoria, had arisen in the mind of their ambitious uncle, Leopold, who had been King of the Belgians since 1831.. Alexander, on the other hand, was "very plain".
Victoria wrote to her uncle Leopold to thank him "for the prospect of great happiness you have contributed to give me, in the person of dear Albert ... He possesses every quality that could be desired to render me perfectly happy."
Victoria came to the throne aged just eighteen on 20 June 1837. Her letters of the time show interest in Albert's education for the role he would have to play, although she resisted attempts to rush her into marriage.
Albert returned to the United Kingdom with Ernest in October 1839 to visit the Queen, with the object of settling the marriage.
At first, he was not popular with the British public. He was perceived to be from an impoverished and undistinguished minor state, barely larger than a small English county.

Consort of the Queen

The position in which the prince was placed by his marriage, while one of distinction, also offered considerable difficulties; in Albert's own words, "I am very happy and contented; but the difficulty in filling my place with the proper dignity is that I am only the husband, not the master in the house."Albert to William von Lowenstein, May 1840, quoted in 
Within two months of the marriage, Victoria was pregnant. Albert started to take on public roles; he became President of the Society for the Extinction of Slavery (slavery had already been abolished throughout the British Empire, but was still lawful in places such as the United States and the colonies of France); and helped Victoria privately with her government paperwork.
After the 1841 general election, Melbourne was replaced as Prime Minister by Sir Robert Peel, who appointed Albert as chairman of the Royal Commission in charge of redecorating the new Palace of Westminster. The Palace had burnt down seven years before, and was being rebuilt. As a patron and purchaser of pictures and sculpture, the commission was set up to promote the fine arts in Britain. The commission's work was slow, and the architect, Charles Barry, took many decisions out of the commissioners' hands by decorating rooms with ornate furnishings that were treated as part of the architecture.
Albert and Victoria were shot at again on both 29 and 30 May 1842, but were unhurt. The culprit, John Francis, was detained and condemned to death, although he was later reprieved.
By 1844, Albert had managed to modernise the royal finances and, through various economies, had sufficient capital to purchase Osborne House on the Isle of Wight as a private residence for their growing family.
Unlike many landowners who approved of child labour and opposed Peel's repeal of the Corn Laws, Albert supported moves to raise working ages and free up trade..

Reformer and innovator

In 1847, Albert was elected Chancellor of the University of Cambridge after a close contest with the Earl of Powis,
That summer, Victoria and Albert spent a rainy holiday in the west of Scotland at Loch Laggan, but heard from their doctor, Sir James Clark, that his son had enjoyed dry, sunny days further east at Balmoral Castle. The tenant of Balmoral, Sir Robert Gordon, died suddenly in early October, and Albert began negotiations to take over the lease from the owner, the Earl Fife. They came to relish the privacy it afforded.
Revolutions spread throughout Europe in 1848 as the result of a widespread economic crisis. Throughout the year, Victoria and Albert complained about Foreign Secretary Palmerston's independent foreign policy, which they believed destabilised foreign European powers further. In a speech to the Society for the Improvement of the Condition of the Labouring Classes, of which he was President, he expressed his "sympathy and interest for that class of our community who have most of the toil and fewest of the enjoyments of this world".g. "The Condition of the Labouring Classes". The Times, 19 May 1848, p. 6. It was the "duty of those who, under the blessings of Divine Providence, enjoy station, wealth, and education" to assist those less fortunate than themselves.
A man of progressive and relatively liberal ideas, Albert not only led reforms in university education, welfare, the royal finances and slavery, he had a special interest in applying science and art to the manufacturing industry.
The Queen opened the exhibition in a specially designed and built glass building known as the Crystal Palace on 1 May 1851. It proved a colossal success.

Family and public life (1852–1859)

In 1852, a timely legacy from eccentric miser John Camden Neild made it possible for Albert to obtain the freehold of Balmoral, and as usual he embarked on an extensive program of improvements.
Albert involved himself in promoting many public educational institutions. Chiefly at meetings in connection with these he spoke of the need for better schooling.
Albert continued to devote himself to the education of his family and the management of the royal household..

Illness and death

Albert was seriously ill with stomach cramps in August 1859.
In 1861, Victoria's mother and Albert's aunt, the Duchess of Kent, died and Victoria was grief-stricken; Albert took on most of the Queen's duties, despite being ill himself with chronic stomach trouble.
By November, Victoria and Albert had returned to Windsor, and the Prince of Wales had returned to Cambridge, where he was a student. Two of Albert's cousins, King Pedro V and Prince Ferdinand of Portugal, died of typhoid fever.
When the Trent Affair—the forcible removal of Confederate envoys from a British ship by Union forces during the American Civil War—threatened war between the United States and Britain, Albert was gravely ill, but intervened to soften the British diplomatic response..

Legacy

The Queen's grief was overwhelming, and the tepid feelings the public had felt previously for Albert were replaced by sympathy..
Albert's body was temporarily entombed in St George's Chapel, Windsor Castle,.
All manner of objects are named after Prince Albert, from Lake Albert in Africa to the city of Prince Albert, Saskatchewan, to the Albert Medal presented by the Royal Society of Arts. Four regiments of the British Army were named after him: 11th (Prince Albert's Own) Hussars; Prince Albert's Light Infantry; Prince Albert's Own Leicestershire Regiment of Yeomanry Cavalry, and The Prince Consort's Own Rifle Brigade. He and Queen Victoria showed a keen interest in the establishment and development of Aldershot in Hampshire as a garrison town in the 1850s. They had a wooden Royal Pavilion built there in which they would often stay when attending reviews of the army.
Biographies published after his death were typically heavy on eulogy. Theodore Martin's five-volume magnum opus was authorised and supervised by Queen Victoria, and her influence shows in its pages. Nevertheless, it is an accurate and exhaustive account.

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Honours

British Empire
Foreign

Arms

On his marriage to Queen Victoria in 1840, Prince Albert was granted his own personal coat of arms, which was the royal coat of arms of the United Kingdom differenced with a three-point label bearing a red cross in the centre, quartered with the arms of Saxony. Prior to his marriage he used the arms of his father, undifferenced.
On his stallplate as a Knight of the Garter his coat of arms is ensigned by a royal crown and shows the six crests of the House of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha; these are from left to right: 1. "A bull's head caboshed Gules armed and ringed Argent, crowned Or, the rim chequy Gules and Argent" for Mark. 2. "Out of a coronet Or, two buffalo's horns Argent, attached to the outer edge of each five branches fesswise each with three linden leaves Vert" for Thuringia. 3. "Out of a coronet Or, a pyramidal chapeau charged with the arms of Saxony ensigned by a plume of peacock's feathers Proper out of a coronet also Or" for Saxony. 4. "A bearded man in profile couped below the shoulders clothed paly Argent and Gules, the pointed coronet similarly paly terminating in a plume of three peacock's feathers" for Meissen. 5. "A demi griffin displayed Or, winged Sable, collared and langued Gules" for Jülich. 6. "Out of a coronet Or, a panache of peacock's feathers Proper" for Berg.
The supporters were the crowned lion of England and the unicorn of Scotland (as in the Royal Arms) charged on the shoulder with a label as in the arms. Albert's personal motto is the German Treu und Fest (Loyal and Sure). This motto was also used by Prince Albert's Own or the 11th Hussars.
All of Albert's male-line descendants were entitled to bear an inescutcheon of the arms of Saxony at the centre of their respective coat of arms. The inescutcheon was placed, as Charles Boutell writes, as an "escutcheon of pretence that does not appear to be in accordance with either the spirit or the practical usage of true historical Heraldry". However in 1917, during the First World War, King George V abandoned heraldic references to the royal family's German heritage, and the Saxon shield was removed.

Issue

Prince Albert's 42 grandchildren included four reigning monarchs: King George V of the United Kingdom; Wilhelm II, German Emperor; Ernest Louis, Grand Duke of Hesse; and Charles Edward, Duke of Saxe-Coburg and Gotha, and five consorts of monarchs: Queens Maud of Norway, Sophia of Greece, Victoria Eugenie of Spain, and Marie of Romania, and Tsarina Alexandra of Russia. Albert's many descendants include royalty and nobility throughout Europe.

Ancestry





Sources

  | last = Ames
  | first = Winslow
  | year = 1968
  | title = Prince Albert and Victorian Taste
  | location = London
  | publisher = Chapman and Hall
  | url = 
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | last = Boutell
  | first = Charles
  | year = 1863
  | authorlink = Charles Boutell
  | title = A Manual of Heraldry, Historical and Popular
  | location = London
  | publisher = Windsor And Newton
  | isbn = 1-146-28954-5
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | last = Boutell
  | first = Charles
  | authorlink = Charles Boutell
  | last2 = Aveling
  | first2 = S. T.
  | year = 2010
  | origyear = 1890
  | title = Heraldry, Ancient and Modern: Including Boutell's Heraldry
  | location = London
  | publisher = Frederick Warne & Co
  | isbn = 1-146-15429-1
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | last = Cust
  | first = Lionel
  | year = 1907
  | authorlink = Lionel Cust
  | title = The Royal Collection of Pictures
