[[List of Governors of Florida]]

CATEGORIES: Lists of state governors of the United States, Governors of Florida, Lists of Florida politicians, State constitutional officers of Florida

The Governor of Florida is the head of the executive branch of government in the U.S. state of Florida, and the commander-in-chief of the state's military forces. art. IV, § 1a The governor has a duty to enforce state laws, and the power to either approve or veto bills passed by the Florida Legislature,FL Const. art. III, § 8 to convene the legislature,FL Const. art. III, § 3c and to grant pardons, except in cases of impeachment. art. IV, § 8
When Florida was first acquired by the United States, future president Andrew Jackson served as its military governor. Florida Territory was established in 1822, and five people served as governor over six distinct terms. The first territorial governor, William Pope Duval, served 12 years, the longest of any governor to date. Since statehood in 1845 there have been 43 people who have served as governor, one of whom served two distinct terms. Three state governors have served two full four-year terms: William D. Bloxham, in two stints; and Reubin Askew and Jeb Bush, who each served their terms consecutively. Bob Graham almost served two terms, as he resigned with only three days left. The shortest term in office belongs to Wayne Mixson, who served three days following the resignation of his predecessor.
The current governor is Rick Scott, who took office on January 4, 2011, following the 2010 election.

Governors

Military governor

Spanish Florida was acquired from Spain in the Adams–Onís Treaty, which took effect July 10, 1821. Parts of West Florida had already been assigned to Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi; the remainder and East Florida were governed by the commander of the military force that had helped secure American influence in the region.

Governors of the Territory of Florida

Florida Territory was organized on March 30, 1822, combining East and West Florida.

Governors of the State of Florida

The State of Florida was admitted to the Union on March 3, 1845. It seceded from the Union on January 10, 1861,
The first Florida Constitution, ratified in 1838, provided that a governor be elected every four years, who was not allowed to serve consecutive terms.1838 Const. art III, § 2 The secessionist constitution of 1861 would have reduced this to two years and removed the term limit,1861 Const. art. III, § 2 but the state fell to the Union before the first election under that constitution. The rejected constitution of 1865 and the ratified constitution of 1868 maintained the four-year term,1865 Const. art. III, § 21868 Const. art. V, § 2 though without the earlier term limit, which was reintroduced in the 1885 constitution.1885 Const. art. IV, § 2 The current constitution of 1968 states that should the governor serve, or would have served had he not resigned, more than six years in two consecutive terms, he cannot be elected to the succeeding term. art. IV, § 5 The start of a term was set in 1885 at the first Tuesday after the first Monday in the January following the election, where it has remained. art. IV, § 2
Originally, the president of the state senate acted as governor should that office be vacant.1838 Const. art III, § 18 The 1865 and 1868 constitutions created the office of lieutenant governor,1865 Const. art. III, § 191868 Const. art. V, § 15 who would similarly act as governor. This office was abolished in 1885, with the president of the senate again taking on that duty.1885 Const. art. IV, § 19 The 1968 constitution recreated the office of lieutenant governor, who now becomes governor in the absence of the governor. art. IV, § 3 The governor and lieutenant governor are elected on the same ticket.
Florida was a strongly Democratic state before the Civil War, electing only candidates from the Democratic and Whig parties. It elected three Republican governors following Reconstruction, but after the Democratic Party re-established control, 89 years passed before voters chose another Republican.






Other high offices held

Fourteen of Florida's governors have served higher federal offices, including one President of the United States, two Cabinet secretaries, and one ambassador. One served as Governor of North Carolina, and all fourteen were elected to the U.S. Congress, though only nine represented Florida, and only seven actually took their seats. One died before taking office, and the other was refused his seat by the U.S. Senate shortly after the American Civil War, because Florida had not yet been reconstructed. One governor (marked with *) resigned to take his seat in the Senate.

Living former governors

, Six former governors are alive. The most recent death of a former governor was that of Reubin Askew (1971–1979), on March 13, 2014.

Notes




