[[The Jetsons]]

CATEGORIES: 1960s American animated television series, 1962 American television series debuts, 1963 American television series endings, 1980s American animated television series, American Broadcasting Company network shows, American science fiction television series, Animated sitcoms, Archie Comics titles, Charlton Comics titles, DC Comics titles, Fictional families, Flying cars in fiction, Robots in television, First-run syndicated television programs in the United States, Gold Key Comics titles, Hanna-Barbera series and characters, Harvey Comics titles, Marvel Comics titles, CBS network shows, Kids WB original programs, Television series by Warner Bros. Television, The Jetsons, Television series revived after cancellation, Animated space adventure television series, English-language television programming, 2060s in fiction, Television series set in the 2060s

The Jetsons is an American animated sitcom produced by Hanna-Barbera, originally airing in primetime from 1962-1963, then later as part of the weekday/weekend morning programming block called The Funtastic World of Hanna-Barbera, until 1987. New episodes were produced from 1984-1987 as well. It was Hanna-Barbera's Space Age counterpart to The Flintstones.
While the Flintstones live in a world with machines powered by birds and dinosaurs, the Jetsons live in the year 2062 in a futuristic utopia (100 years in the future at the time of the show's debut) of elaborate robotic contraptions, aliens, holograms, and whimsical inventions. The original series comprised 24 episodes and aired on Sunday nights on ABC beginning September 23, 1962, with primetime reruns continuing through September 22, 1963. It debuted as the first program broadcast in color on ABC-TV. (Only a handful of ABC-TV stations were capable of broadcasting in color in the early 1960s.) 
In contrast, The Flintstones, while always produced in color, was broadcast in black-and-white for its first two seasons. Following its primetime run, the series aired on Saturday mornings for decades, starting on ABC for the 1963-64 season and then in future seasons on CBS and NBC.

Premise

The Jetsons are a family residing in Orbit City. The city's architecture is rendered in the Googie style, and all homes and businesses are raised high above the ground on adjustable columns. George Jetson lives with his family in the Skypad Apartments: his wife Jane is a homemaker, their teenage daughter Judy attends Orbit High School, and their early-childhood son Elroy attends Little Dipper School.  Housekeeping is seen to by a robot maid, Rosie, which handles chores not otherwise rendered trivial by the home's numerous push-button Space Age-envisioned conveniences.  The family has a dog named Astro, which talks with an initial consonant mutation in which every word begins with an "R", as if speaking with a growl.
George Jetson's workweek is typical of his era: an hour a day, two days a week.  Spacely has a competitor, Mr. Jetson commutes to work in an aerocar that resembles a flying saucer with a transparent bubble top. Daily life is leisurely, assisted by numerous labor-saving devices, which occasionally break down with humorous results. Despite this, everyone complains of exhausting hard labor and difficulties living with the remaining inconveniences.

Characters

Recurring characters

Voice cast

In later productions, Jeff Bergman has voiced George, Elroy, and Mr. Spacely. Bergman completed voice work as George and Spacely for Jetsons: The Movie (1990) after George O'Hanlon and Mel Blanc died during production. Controversially, Janet Waldo was replaced — after recording all of her dialogue — by then-popular singer Tiffany for Jetsons: The Movie. Lori Frazier has provided the voice of Jane Jetson in television commercials for Radio Shack.

Episodes

The show's original run consisted of 24 episodes that first aired on ABC from September 23, 1962 to March 17, 1963.  In 1984, Hanna-Barbera began producing new episodes specifically for syndication; by September 1985, the 24 episodes from the first season were combined with 41 new episodes and began airing in late afternoon time slots in 80 U.S. media markets, including the 30 largest.  The 41 new episodes were produced at a cost of $300,000 each, and featured all of the voice actors from the 1962–1963 show.  During 1987, 10 additional "season 3" episodes were also made available for syndication.

Theme song

The series' theme song, by composer Hoyt Curtin, became a pop hit in 1986.

Reception

After the announcement of the fall 1962 network television schedule Time magazine characterized The Jetsons as one of several new situation comedies (along with The Beverly Hillbillies, I'm Dickens... He's Fenster, and Our Man Higgins) that was "stretching further than ever for their situations";
Thirty years later, Time said: "In an age of working mothers, single parents and gay matrimony, George Jetson and his clan already seem quaint even to the baby boomers who grew up with them."

Differences between versions

Added Characters:
Other differences include the following:

Production Credits

1962-63 and 1985-88

Specials and film adaptations

Television films

Television specials

Theatrical releases

Live-action film

Paramount Pictures first tried to film a live-action version of The Jetsons in 1985, which was to be executive produced by Gary Nardino, but failed to do so.youtube. The result was Jetsons: The Movie, which was released in 1990.
In May 2007, director Robert Rodriguez entered talks with Universal Studios and Warner Bros. to film a live action film adaptation of The Jetsons for a potential 2009 theatrical release, having at the time discussed directing a film adaptation of Land of the Lost with Universal. Rodriguez was uncertain which project he would pursue next, though the latest script draft for The Jetsons by assigned writer Adam F. Goldberg was further along in development.

Further appearances

Hanna-Barbera related

Other projects

Comics

Video games

Home video releases

On June 28, 1990, Hanna-Barbera released six episodes from the show on home video.
The review of the DVD release from Entertainment Weekly said the show  "trots through surprisingly dated sitcom plots about blustery bosses, bad lady drivers, and Elvis Presleyesque teen idols, all greeted with laugh tracks" but points out "it's the appeal of the retro-prescient gadgets (recliner massagers, big-screen TVs, two-way monitors) that still carries the show."
On November 8, 2011, Warner Archive released The Jetsons: Season 2, Volume 2 on DVD in Region 1 as part of their Hanna–Barbera Classics Collection.  This is a Manufacture-on-Demand (MOD) release, available exclusively through Warner's online store and Amazon. Warner Archive will follow up by releasing Season 3 in the same way on May 13, 2014.tvshowsondvd.com/n/19748

Legacy





Further reading




