[[University of Stirling]]

CATEGORIES: People associated with the University of Stirling, University of Stirling, Buildings and structures in Stirling (city), Educational institutions established in 1967, Visitor attractions in Stirling (council area), 1967 establishments in Scotland

The University of Stirling is a campus university founded by Royal charter in 1967, on the Airthrey Estate in Stirling, Scotland. Stirling University is a plate glass university, along with Heriot-Watt University, the University of Dundee and the University of Strathclyde. These increased the number of universities in Scotland from four to eight. Stirling was however the only completely new institution of its kind established in Scotland since the University of Edinburgh was founded in 1582. 
The campus was selected from a shortlist of competing sites that also included Dumfries, Inverness, Ayr, Falkirk, Perth and Cumbernauld. The report's author, Lord Robbins, was later appointed the University's first Chancellor in 1968.

History and campus development

The main campus is situated around  
In 2002, the University of Stirling and the landscape of the Airthrey Estate was designated by the International Council on Monuments and Sites as one of the top 20 heritage sites of the 20th century within the UK.
The campus was originally designed by the Scottish architectural practice Robert Matthew Johnson Marshall in a low-rise, highly functional, modern style, envisaged to integrate with the contours of the surrounding landscape. 
When the University first received its Royal Charter on 13 November 1967, there were 164 undergraduate and 31 postgraduate students. By 2007 the university had produced around 45,000 graduates.
The principal administrative and teaching facilities were originally housed in the Pathfoot Building, which was completed in 1968 and subsequently saw several extensions over the years, including a Tropical Aquarium in 1979 and a Virology unit in 1987. In 1993 the Pathfoot Building was selected by the international conservation organisation DoCoMoMo as one of sixty key Scottish monuments of the post-war era. It was also voted as one of Prospect's 100 best modern Scottish buildings. A house for the University Principal was also completed in 1967. Designed by the architects Morris and Steedman, it was listed at category A in 2009. Pathfoot was later complemented by the Cottrell Building, which began development in 1970 and houses numerous lecture theatres, departmental offices, classrooms and computer labs. The Cottrell Building was further enhanced with the completion of the Courtroom extension in 1998 and in 2008/09 the entire building underwent a façade recladding project.
The University Library and Andrew Miller Building were completed in 1971.
A visit by Queen Elizabeth II to the site in 1972 caused considerable controversy; student protests against the Queen's visit were vociferous and, in some cases, fuelled by alcohol, and the disturbances were widely condemned in the press and the local community, where students were refused access to buses and other facilities for a time.
As the University has continued to expand since its inception, further development has taken place including; the world renowned Institute of Aquaculture opened by Princess Diana in 1982, the R.G. Bomont Building, which was completed in 1998, and houses the School of Nursing, Midwifery and Health, the Iris Murdoch building, opened in 2002 for The Dementia Services Development Centre, and the Colin Bell Building, completed in 2003 for the School of Applied Social Science.

Accommodation

In 2006, the University catered for nearly 9,000 students, around a third of whom live on-campus. There are several student Halls of Residence located on-campus, which include; Andrew Stewart Hall, A.K. Davidson Hall, Murray Hall, Geddes Court, Alexander Court and Muirhead House. There are also other halls of residence located off-campus, within Stirling city centre, including; Union Street and John Forty's Court. Students of over 80 nationalities are represented at the university, with 14 per cent of students coming from overseas.

Business links

The University has developed major industrial research links, with a large science park – Stirling University Innovation Park, located immediately adjacent to the main university campus. Innovation Park has grown since its initiation in 1993, and is now home to 40 companies engaging in various forms of research and development. 
The university also owns a highly successful International Conference Centre, Stirling Management Centre, which is located on campus, and is a purpose built conference and management training centre and the first Conference Centre of Excellence in Scotland. The University admits in its own published estates strategy that the sale of part of its campus to the Wang Laboratories computer manufacturer in the 1980s was a serious mistake. The sale was linked to the adoption by the University of Wang's computing system which was incompatible with other systems and eventually replaced. The site went through various owners and is now a food processing facility.

Controversies

The university chose not to defend a claim at an employment tribunal in 2009 in which it conceded it had unfairly dismissed a researcher who had complained that a member of the psychology department, Dr David Donaldson, had removed her name from a grant application and submitted it under his own. The university had rejected the researcher's complaint in its internal process. It subsequently promoted Donaldson to a professorship.  Donaldson issued a written apology to the researcher, and the university was required to pay her more than £10,000 in compensation.Melanie Newman, "Lecturer apologises to researcher for swapping names in grant application", Times Higher Education, 14 May 2009

Sport facilities

Stirling was designated as Scotland's University for Sporting Excellence by the Scottish Government in 2008. The University has its own 9-hole golf course and driving range, and a host of other sporting facilities are located in and around the campus. 
The Gannochy National Tennis Centre on the University campus is recognised as a national centre of excellence, and the campus also has an indoor 50-metre swimming pool, badminton and squash courts, a fitness centre, strength and conditioning centre, sports halls and all-weather playing fields available for student, staff and public use. 
The campus has been selected as the headquarters for a number of sports agencies including the Sportscotland Institute of Sport, the Commonwealth Games Council for Scotland, Scottish Swimming and Triathlonscotland. A new 50-metre swimming pool was completed in 2001 as part of the Scottish National Swimming Academy.  
Falkirk FC opened a football academy on campus in 2008, and the Scottish Women's National Football Academy opened in 2009. 
Scholarships are available in six core sports: football, golf, swimming and disability swimming, taekwondo, tennis and triathlon, which allow student athletes to prepare for international competition.
Stirling University Rugby Football Club (SURFC) is a Rugby union club based at The University of Stirling. The Stirling Clansmen American Football team has brought several National championships to the school after a successful program was built by student, Russ Nehmer. The football team is one of the most successful programs in the UK since 1998.

The Highland and Western Isles campuses

As well as the main campus in Stirling, the University also has campuses in Inverness and Stornoway which specialise in Nursing and Midwifery. The Highland site is on the outskirts of Inverness and within the grounds of Raigmore Hospital. The site has purpose-built teaching facilities and student accommodation, recently benefiting from its relocation to the new Centre for Health Science, officially opened in January 2007. 
The Highland Health Sciences Library is also on this campus, and caters for both the students and staff of the University as well as the employees of NHS Highland and its associated Trusts.
The Western Isles campus is located in Stornoway and the teaching accommodation is an integral part of the recently built Western Isles Hospital. This is a small campus site which also has student accommodation within the environs of the Western Isles Hospital.

Organisation

The university reorganised academically in January 2011 to 7 schools, incorporating 15 old departments. It has since added a Graduate School taking the number of Schools to 8:

School of Applied Social Science

The school consists of four departments: Sociology, Social Policy & Criminology, Social Work, Housing, and Dementia
In 2013, the school nominated Dame Judi Dench for an honorary doctorate in recognition of her services to the arts and the role she has played in highlighting the school's Dementia Services Development Centre.

School of Natural Sciences

The School has several accolades. The Institute of Aquaculture is the top rated aquaculture department in the United Kingdom

Teaching

Since its inception, Stirling has offered modular degree programmes allowing greater flexibility and choice. Stirling was the first United Kingdom university to introduce the system of two semesters rather than having three terms. The first semester lasts from mid-September to mid-December and the second from mid-February to the end of May.
There are now over 256 courses (including combination courses) at the undergraduate degree level. A wide variety of courses are also available at the postgraduate level.
Excellent teaching ratings for politics, accounting, finance, economics, sociology, religious studies, business studies, psychology and English language demonstrate Stirling's expertise in the arts and social sciences. Among the natural sciences, environmental science also achieved high ratings, its success reflected in the recently completed School of Biological and Environmental Sciences, with substantially refurbished facilities for both teaching and research. All but one of the subjects assessed for teaching quality were rated at least "highly satisfactory" and was ranked in the top ten in the UK for Teaching Assessment by The Times Higher Education Supplement. 
The Philosophical Gourmet report ranks Stirlings' joint graduate philosophy programme with the University of St Andrews as second in the UK and joint 13th in the English-Speaking world.

Research

Among Stirling University's specialist research centres are: the Cancer Care Research Centre; Scottish Network for Economic Methodology; Institute of Aquaculture; Centre for European Neighbourhood Studies; Centre for Environmental History and Policy; Stirling Media Research Institute; Social Work Research Centre; Centre for Social Research on Dementia; Scottish Addiction Studies; Scottish Network for Chronic Pain Research Centre; Scottish Centre for Information on Language, Teaching and Research; Centre for Lifelong Learning; and Institute for Retail Studies. The IRS publishes The International Review of Retail, Distribution and Consumer Research.
In the 2008 Research Assessment Exercise (RAE), 10 per cent of Stirling research was judged to be 'world leading' and a further three-quarters as 'internationally excellent' and 'internationally recognised'. The University was rated first in Scotland for Nursing and Midwifery; Education; Sports Studies; Communication, Cultural and Media Studies.
The University of Stirling's research publications database, STORRE, is a source of free, full-text access to the University's research outputs. STORRE holds a collection of research publications produced by University of Stirling authors and includes: journal articles, conference papers, book chapters and working papers. STORRE also holds all the University's research theses in full-text from September 2006 onwards (PhDs and Masters by Research) plus a collection of selected older theses.STORRE

Governance

Unlike the Ancient universities of Scotland, Stirling University's constitution is laid out in its Royal Charter, rather than the Universities (Scotland) Acts. The administrative structure is however broadly similar, with the University Court (governing and financial body) and the Academic Council (academic affairs) based upon the ancient model. In 2009 the University reviewed its Charter and Statutes to amend the procedures for discipline of academic staff.

University Court

The governing body of the University is the University Court. It has overall responsibility for the management of the University's resources, the ongoing strategic direction of the University and the approval of major developments. It also receives regular reports from Executive Officers on the day to day operation of the University's business. The Court meets four times over the course of the academic year. Stirling's University Court has a number of well known members including James Naughtie and Alistair Moffat.

Academic Council

Academic Council is the body which is responsible for the management of academic affairs, awarding of all degrees, and for the regulation and superintendence of the education, discipline and welfare of the students of the University. While the Court has the final responsibility for governing the University, on academic matters it will normally only act on the recommendation of Academic Council. The Council consists of various academics and is chaired by the Principal of the university.

Committees and Executive Officers

There are also a number of committees supporting both the Court and Academic Council, that make important decisions and investigate matters referred to them. Day to day management of the University is undertaken by the University Principal (who is also Vice-Chancellor). 
The role of Chancellor itself is largely honorific, the current Chancellor is James Naughtie. The current principal is Gerry McCormac, There are also several Deputy Principals, each with a specific remit. They play a major role in the day to day management of the university.

Student life

The students of the University are represented by University of Stirling Students' Union which was named "Best Students' Union in Scotland" by the Bar Entertainment and Dance Association in 2003. On its premises in the Robbins Centre it runs a variety of outlets including: Studio and Underground. The Union is affiliated to the National Union of Students.  
The Union supports a wide range of clubs and societies, with over 40 in total ranging from the Rock Society to Dance@SU. The Sports Union also supports some 40 sports clubs ranging from athletics to water polo via octopush, American Football and fencing.
Stirling University also has student-run media services. Brig has been the campus newspaper since 1969. Air3 Radio, was the first campus radio station in Scotland (previously URA – University Radio Airthrey – now Air3 Radio), and AirTV (formerly Videoworks) is a television station for students, set up in 2002.

Reputation and rankings

The Sunday Times University Guide 2014 placed the university 51st in a list of 121 UK universities.
The university was ranked among the Top 10 Universities in the Times Higher Education Supplement Award for the UK's Best Student Experience 2006
In The Times Good University Guide (June 2006), Accounting and Finance was listed as one of the Top 20 university departments in the UK for Accounting and Finance – one of only four Scottish departments to make the Top 20
Stirling was named Scottish University of the Year 2009 by Sunday Times

Notable academics and alumni

Academics

Alumni

Arts
Politics
Sport:
Other:






