[[Winamp]]

CATEGORIES: 1997 software, AOL, Digital audio, Jukebox-style media players, IPod software, Linux media players, Online music database clients, Podcasting software, Streaming software, Tag editors, Windows CD ripping software, Windows CD/DVD writing software, Windows media players

Winamp is a  media player for Windows, Android, and OS X developed by Justin Frankel and Dmitry Boldyrev by their company Nullsoft, which they later sold to AOL. Since version 2 it has been sold as freemium and supports extensibility with plug-ins and skins, and features music visualization, playlist and a media library, supported by a large online community.
Version 1 of Winamp was released in 1997, and grew quickly popular with over 3 million downloads, paralleling the developing trend of MP3 (music) file sharing. Winamp 2.0 was released on September 8, 1998. The 2.x versions were widely used and made Winamp one of the most downloaded Windows applications. By 2000, Winamp had over 25 million registered users.
A poor reception to the 2002 rewrite, Winamp 3, was followed by the release of Winamp 5 in 2003, and a later release of version 5.5 in 2007.

Features

History

Initial releases

Winamp was first released in 1997, when Justin Frankel and Dmitry Boldyrev, formerly students at the University of Utah, integrated their Windows user interface with the Advanced Multimedia Products "AMP" MP3 file playback engine. The name Winamp (originally spelled WinAMP) was a portmanteau of "Windows" and "AMP". The minimalist WinAMP 0.20a was released as freeware on April 21, 1997.
Its windowless menubar-only interface showed only play (open), stop, pause, and unpause functions. A file specified on the command line or dropped onto its icon would be played. MP3 decoding was performed by the AMP decoding engine developed by Advanced Multimedia Products co-founder Tomislav Uzelac, which was free for non-commercial use.
WinAMP 0.92 was released as a freeware in May 1997. Within the standard Windows frame and menubar, it had the beginnings of the "classic" Winamp GUI: dark gray rectangle with silver 3D-effect transport buttons, a red/green volume slider, time displayed in a green LED font, with trackname, MP3 bitrate and "mixrate" in green. There was no position bar, and a blank space where the spectrum analyzer and waveform analyzer would later appear. Multiple files on the command line or dropped onto its icon were enqueued in the playlist.

Winamp 1

Version 1.006 was released June 7, 1997 renamed "Winamp" (lower case). It showed a spectrum analyzer, and color changing volume slider, but no waveform display.  The AMP non-commercial license was included in its help menu.
According to Tomislav Uzelac, Frankel licensed the AMP 0.7 engine June 1, 1997. Frankel formally founded Nullsoft Inc. in January 1998 and continued development of Winamp, which changed from freeware to $10 shareware. In March, Uzelac's company, Advanced Multimedia Products (which by then had been merged into PlayMedia Systems), sent a cease-and-desist letter to Nullsoft, claiming unlawful use of AMP. Nullsoft responded that they had replaced AMP with Nitrane, Nullsoft's proprietary decoder, but Playmedia disputed this. 
Version 1.90, released March 31, 1998 was the first release as a general-purpose audio player, and documented on the Winamp website as supporting plugins, of which it included two input plugins (MOD and MP3) and a visualization plugin.
The installer for Version 1.91, released 18 days later, included wave, cdda, and Windows tray handling plugins, as well as the famous Wesley Willis-inspired DEMO.
By July 1998, Winamp's various versions had been downloaded over three million times.

Winamp 2

Winamp 2.0 was released on September 8, 1998. The 2.x versions were widely used and made Winamp one of the most downloaded pieces of software for Windows. The new version improved the usability of the playlist, made the equalizer more accurate, introduced more plug-ins and allowed skins for the playlist and equalizer windows.
PlayMedia filed a federal lawsuit against Nullsoft in March 1999. In May 1999, PlayMedia was granted an injunction by Federal Judge A. Howard Matz against distribution of Nitrane by Nullsoft, and the same month the lawsuit was settled out-of-court with licensing and confidentiality agreements. Soon after, Nullsoft switched to an ISO decoder from the Fraunhofer Gesellschaft, the developers of the MP3 format.
Winamp 2.10, released March 24, 1999 included a new version of the "Llama" demo.
Nullsoft was bought by AOL in June 1999 for US$80 million in stock.
Nullsoft relaunched the Winamp-specific winamp.
As of June 22, 2000 Winamp "surpassed 25 million registrants".

Winamp3

The next major Winamp version, Winamp3 (so spelled to include mp3 in the name and to mark its separation from the Winamp 2 codebase), was released on August 9, 2002. It was a complete rewrite of version 2, newly based on the Wasabi application framework, which offered additional functionality and flexibility. Winamp3 was developed parallel to Winamp 2, but "many users found it consumed too many system resources and was unstable (or even lacked some valued functionality, such as the ability to count or find the total duration of tracks in a playlist)". Winamp3 had no backward compatibility with Winamp 2 skins and plugins, and the SHOUTcast sourcing plugin was not supported.  No Winamp3 version of SHOUTcast was ever released.
In response to users reverting to Winamp 2, Nullsoft continued the development of Winamp 2 to versions 2.9 and 2.91 in 2003, even alluding to it humorously. The beta versions 2.92 and 2.95 were released with the inclusion of some of the functionality of the upcoming Winamp 5. During this period the Wasabi cross-platform application framework and skinnable GUI toolkit was derived from parts of the Winamp3 source code.  For Linux, Nullsoft released an alpha version of Winamp3 on October 9, 2001 but has not updated it despite continued user interest.

Winamp 5

The Winamp 2 and Winamp3 branches were later fused into Winamp 5. Nullsoft joked that "nobody wants to see a Winamp 4 skin" ('4 skin' being a pun on foreskin). It was also joked that "Winamp 5 is so good they skipped a number" and "Winamp 2+3=5,". Winamp 5 was based on the Winamp 2 codebase, with several Winamp3 features (e.g. modern skins) incorporated. Winamp 5.0 was released in December 2003.
From version 5.2 onwards, support for synchronizing with an iPod is built-in.

=Winamp 5.5=

Winamp 5.5: The 10th Anniversary Edition was released on October 10, 2007, ten years after the first release of Winamp (a preview version had been released on September 10, 2007). New features to the player included album art support, much improved localization support (with several official, localized Winamp releases, including German, Polish, Russian and French), and a unified player and media library interface skin.  This version dropped support for Windows 9x.
As of version 5.55, Winamp development is credited to Ben Allison (Benski) and Maksim Tyrtyshny.

=Winamp 5.6=

Winamp 5.6 features Android Wi-Fi support and direct mouse wheel support. Fraunhofer AAC Codec with VBR encoding support was implemented. Moreover, the option to write ratings to tags (for mp3, wma/wmv, ogg & flac) was added. Hungarian and Indonesian installer translations and language packs were added.
With the release of Winamp version 5.66 on November 20, 2013, AOL announced that Winamp.
Five days later, version 5.666 was released with the "Pro" & "Full" installers being one and the same, in the process removing OpenCandy, Emusic, AOL Search and AOL Toolbar from the installation bundle. This was announced to be the last release of Winamp from AOL/Nullsoft.

=Winamp 5.7=

There was a Winamp 5.7 beta program for an invite-based Winamp Cloud feature, which would let Winamp play a user's entire cloud stored music library across all supported devices. This feature would have allowed AOL to provide a music locker service that would essentially compete with other online music lockers. The beta program was cancelled months before the announcement to shutdown the Winamp project.

Acquisition by Radionomy

On November 20, 2013, AOL announced that on December 20, 2013, it would shut down Winamp. The following day, an unofficial report surfaced that Microsoft was in talks with AOL to acquire Nullsoft.

On other platforms

Android

Released as a beta product in October 2010, the Android version for OS 2.1 includes syncing with Winamp desktop (ver. 5.59 beta+) over USB or WiFi. It was received with some enthusiasm in the consumer blog press.

Mac OS

In October 2011, Winamp Sync for Mac was introduced as a beta release. It is the first Winamp version for the Apple Macintosh platform and runs under Mac OS X 10.6 and above. Its focus is on syncing the Winamp Library to Winamp for Android and the iTunes Music Library (hence the name, "Winamp Sync for Mac"). Nonetheless, a full Winamp Library and player features are included. The developer's blog states that the Winamp Sync for Mac Beta will pave the way for future Winamp-related development under Mac OS X.

Easter eggs

Winamp has historically included a number of Easter eggs: hidden features that are accessible via undocumented operations. One example is an image of Justin Frankel, one of Winamp's original authors, hidden in Winamp's About dialog box. The included easter eggs have changed with versions of Winamp, and over thirty have been documented elsewhere.

Derivative works

Unagi is the codename for the media playback engine derived from Winamp core technologies.  AOL announced in 2004 that Unagi would be incorporated into AOL Media Player (AMP), in development. After beta testing, AMP was discontinued in 2005, but portions lived on in AOL's Web-based player.





Further reading




