[[Email]]

CATEGORIES: Email, Internet terminology, American inventions, Electronic documents, History of the Internet, 1971 introductions

Electronic mail, most commonly referred to as email or e-mail since ca. 1993, is a method of exchanging digital messages from an author to one or more recipients. Modern email operates across the Internet or other computer networks. Some early email systems required that the author and the recipient both be online at the same time, in common with instant messaging. Today's email systems are based on a store-and-forward model. Email servers accept, forward, deliver, and store messages. Neither the users nor their computers are required to be online simultaneously; they need connect only briefly, typically to a mail server, for as long as it takes to send or receive messages.
Historically, the term electronic mail was used generically for any electronic document transmission. For example, several writers in the early 1970s used the term to describe fax document transmission. 56, No. 817 (Oct., 26, 1972), pages 218–221. Luckett, What's News: Electronic-mail delivery gets started, Popular Science, Vol. 202, No. 3 (March 1973); page 85 As a result, it is difficult to find the first citation for the use of the term with the more specific meaning it has today.
An Internet email messageUnless explicitly qualified, any technical descriptions in this article will refer to current Internet e-mail rather than to earlier email systems. consists of three components, the message envelope, the message header, and the message body. The message header contains control information, including, minimally, an originator's email address and one or more recipient addresses. Usually descriptive information is also added, such as a subject header field and a message submission date/time stamp.
Originally a text-only (ASCII) communications medium, Internet email was extended to carry, e.g. text in other character sets, multi-media content attachments, a process standardized in RFC 2045 through 2049. Collectively, these RFCs have come to be called Multipurpose Internet Mail Extensions (MIME). Subsequent RFC's have proposed standards for internationalized email addresses using UTF-8.
Electronic mail predates the inception of the Internet and was in fact a crucial tool in creating it,See  for early history of email, from origins through 1991. but the history of modern, global Internet email services reaches back to the early ARPANET. Standards for encoding email messages were proposed as early as 1973 (RFC 561). Conversion from ARPANET to the Internet in the early 1980s produced the core of the current services. An email sent in the early 1970s looks quite similar to a basic text message sent on the Internet today.
Email is an information and communications technology. It uses technology to communicate a digital message over the Internet. Users use email differently, based on how they think about it. There are many software platforms available to send and receive. Popular email platforms include Gmail, Hotmail, Yahoo! Mail, Outlook, and many others.yahoo.com/business_and_economy/business_to_business/communications_and_networking/internet_and_world_wide_web/email_providers/free_email/
Network-based email was initially exchanged on the ARPANET in extensions to the File Transfer Protocol (FTP), but is now carried by the Simple Mail Transfer Protocol (SMTP), first published as Internet standard 10 (RFC 821) in 1982. In the process of transporting email messages between systems, SMTP communicates delivery parameters using a message envelope separate from the message (header and body) itself.

Spelling

Electronic mail has several English spelling options that occasionally are the cause of vehement disagreement.
There is also some variety in the plural form of the term. In US English email is used as a mass noun (like the term mail for items sent through the postal system), but in British English it is more commonly used as a count noun with the plural emails.

Origin

The AUTODIN network provided a message service between 1,350 terminals, handling 30 million messages per month, with an average message length of approximately 3,000 characters. Autodin was supported by 18 large computerized switches, and was connected to the United States General Services Administration Advanced Record System, which provided similar services to roughly 2,500 terminals.S. Postal Service, National Academy of Sciences, Washington, D.C., 1976; pages 27–35.

Host-based mail systems

With the introduction of MIT's Compatible Time-Sharing System (CTSS) in 1961"CTSS, Compatible Time-Sharing System" (September 4, 2006), University of South Alabama, USA-CTSS. multiple users were able to log into a central systeman IBM 7094 from remote dial-up terminals, and to store and share files on the central disk.org
