[[James Doohan]]

CATEGORIES: 1920 births, 2005 deaths, Male actors from Vancouver, Canadian emigrants to the United States, Canadian expatriate male actors in the United States, Canadian people of Irish descent, Canadian male film actors, Canadian male television actors, Canadian male voice actors, Canadian memoirists, Canadian military personnel of World War II, Canadian science fiction writers, Operation Overlord people, Deaths from pneumonia, Deaths from Alzheimer's disease, People from Redmond, Washington, People from Sarnia, People with Parkinson's disease, Space burials, 20th-century Canadian male actors, 21st-century Canadian male actors, 20th-century Canadian novelists

James Montgomery "Jimmy" Doohan (; March 3, 1920 – July 20, 2005) was a Canadian character and voice actor best known for his role as Montgomery "Scotty" Scott in the television and film series Star Trek. Doohan's characterization of the Scottish Chief Engineer of the Starship Enterprise was one of the most recognizable elements in the Star Trek franchise, for which he also made several contributions behind the scenes. Many of the characterizations, mannerisms, and expressions that he established for Scotty and other Star Trek characters have become entrenched in popular culture.
Following his success with Star Trek, he supplemented his income and showed continued support for his fans by making numerous public appearances. Doohan inspired fans to pursue careers in engineering and other fields, as a result of his portrayal of Scotty.

Early life

Doohan was born in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. His father was a pharmacist, veterinarian, and dentist; his mother was a homemaker.com Doohan's father reportedly invented an early form of high-octane gasoline in 1923. Doohan's 1996 autobiography recounted his father's serious alcoholism. The family moved to Sarnia, Ontario, and Doohan attended high school at the Sarnia Collegiate Institute and Technical School (SCITS), where he excelled in mathematics and science. He enrolled in the 102nd Royal Canadian Army Cadet Corps in 1938.

Military service

At the beginning of the Second World War, Doohan joined the Royal Canadian Artillery. four in his leg, one in the chest, and one through his right middle finger. The bullet to his chest was stopped by a silver cigarette case. His right middle finger had to be amputated, something he would conceal during his career as an actor. Leonard McCoy, in The Final Frontier when Nyota Uhura brings him dinner on the bridge of the USS Enterprise-A, and in the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode "Relics", when the missing finger is clearly apparent as Scotty offers Captain Jean-Luc Picard a drink while on a re-creation of the original Enterprise bridge.
Doohan trained as a pilot (graduating from Air Observation Pilot Course 40 with 11 other Canadian artillery officers),
Although never actually a member of the Royal Canadian Air Force, Doohan was once labelled the "craziest pilot in the Canadian Air Force". A story from his flying years tells of Doohan slaloming a plane—variously cited as a Hurricane or a jet trainer—between mountainside telegraph poles to prove it could be done, which earned him a serious reprimand. (The actual feat was performed in a Mark IV Auster on Salisbury Plain north of RAF Andover in the late spring of 1945).

Early acting career

After the war, Doohan moved to London, Ontario for further technical education. After hearing a radio drama that he knew  he could do better, he recorded his voice at the local radio station, and learned about a drama school in Toronto. There he won a two-year scholarship to the Neighborhood Playhouse in New York City, where classmates included Leslie Nielsen, Tony Randall, and Richard Boone.
In 1946 he had several roles for CBC radio,
In the mid-1950s he appeared as forest ranger Timber Tom (the northern counterpart of Buffalo Bob) in the Canadian version of Howdy Doody. Coincidentally, fellow Star Trek cast member William Shatner appeared simultaneously as Ranger Bill in the American version. Doohan and Shatner both appeared in the 1950s Canadian science fiction series Space Command. Doohan also appeared in several episodes of Hawkeye and the Last of the Mohicans 1957-58.
For GM Presents, he played the lead role in the 1956 CBC TV drama Flight into Danger, then in 1960 "The Night they Killed Joe Howe". (Arthur Hailey rewrote the former into the novel Runway Zero-Eight, then adapted to Terror in the Sky.)
His credits included The Twilight Zone, GE True, Hazel, The Outer Limits, Bewitched, Fantasy Island, The Man from U.N.C.L.E. (1964) and Bonanza. In the Bonanza episode, "Gift of Water" (1962), he co-starred with actress Majel Barrett, Star Trek's Nurse Chapel. He was an assistant to the United States president in two episodes of Voyage to the Bottom of the Sea. He had an uncredited role in The Satan Bug (1965).  The movie "Man in the Wilderness" was filmed in Spain with Richard Harris in 1971.

Star Trek

Doohan developed a talent for accents as a child. He chose the name "Montgomery Scott" after his grandfather.
In later years Doohan would revisit this casting process at Star Trek conventions, demonstrating a variety of possible voices and characters.  When Roddenberry produced Star Trek: The Animated Series in the early 1970s, Doohan's ability to perform different voices was used by having him perform most "guest star" male roles in the series, including Robert April, which the show cited as the Enterprise's first captain. Doohan was the alien navigator Lieutenant Arex,
The Scott character, as conceived, would have been a semi-regular, but with fellow cast members Leonard Nimoy (Spock) and DeForest Kelley (Dr. McCoy), was elevated in importance to leads alongside William Shatner's Captain James T. Kirk. It was made clear that, owing to his high technological orientation, Lt. Cmdr. Scott was the third-in-command of the Enterprise, and at times the ship was left in his care. Scott was frequently used in subplots regarding disabled ship components (such as the dilithium crystals which regulated the warp drive, the transporter teleportation device, or just fiddling in the Jefferies tubes) and as a foil for Kirk's ambitious tactical approaches, which were said to strain the propulsion and/or defenses of the starship ("I cannae push it any faster, Captain!" or "I cannae guarantee that she'll hold up!"). In this capacity, Scott proved to be as much of a tinkerer, or improvisational engineer, as a high-tech specialist, often apparently holding the Enterprise together with little more than baling wire and his own spittle. In the end, many fans saw the Enterprise itself as the show's star, leaving Scott in an enviable position as her defender. For example, in "The Trouble With Tribbles", Scott stands idly by and even keeps Chekov from starting any trouble as a Klingon insults Kirk; however, Scott is finally provoked into violence when the Klingon insults the Enterprise herself.
Doohan was quoted as saying, "Scotty is ninety-nine percent James Doohan and one percent accent."  Using his considerable vocal skills, Doohan devised the Vulcan and Klingon language dialogue heard in Star Trek: The Motion Picture. Later, professional linguists, particularly Marc Okrand, expanded Klingon into a fully constructed language with a working grammar. In addition to playing Scotty, he also did many guest voices on Star Trek including:

After Star Trek

Doohan hoped that Star Trek would benefit his acting career.
Unlike some other members of the cast, Doohan relished meeting fans and was always ready to entertain with a story or a song. Most parts depended on his Trek fame and engineer reputation. He was Captain in the short-lived Saturday morning live-action kids' show, Jason of Star Command, and had a cameo in the made-for-TV movie Knight Rider 2000 as "Jimmy Doohan, the guy who played Scotty on Star Trek". In the TV series Homeboys in Outer Space, he was Pippen, a pun on Scotty and basketball star Scottie Pippen.
Other parts were not as plentiful. He was himself in an episode of The Ben Stiller Show. He played Damon Warwick, father of James Warwick, on the daytime soap opera, The Bold and the Beautiful. After knowing about cold fusion since 1989 from technical journals, he narrated for the video "Cold Fusion: Fire From Water", about the physics behind cold fusion. His last role was Clive Chives in the 1999 British film The Duke.
When the Star Trek franchise was revived, Doohan reprised his role of Scotty in seven Star Trek films and made a guest appearance on Star Trek: The Next Generation's 130th episode "Relics". Many of Doohan's film appearances did centre on the role of Scotty, such as a cameo in National Lampoon's Loaded Weapon 1, where he plays a policeman who tells his superior officer "I am giving it all she has got, Captain!" in the same accent he used in Star Trek. However, he refused to contribute to the Futurama episode "Where No Fan Has Gone Before" or allow his image to be used in it, and was "replaced" in the episode by the created character "Welshie" who was ultimately given the redshirt treatment.
Although he continued to work with William Shatner in the Star Trek movies, in private life Doohan didn't care for him, and was once quoted as saying, "I like Captain Kirk, but I can't say that I'm very fond of Bill", declining to be interviewed by Shatner for Shatner's first Star Trek: Memories book about the show. However, Doohan consented to be interviewed for William Shatner's second book, Star Trek: Movie Memories. Harper Collins: New York, 1994 At Doohan's final August 2004 convention appearance, Doohan and Shatner appeared to have mended their relationship.

Inspiration

Many fans told Doohan over the years that it was he who inspired them to choose engineering as a profession. Astronaut Neil Armstrong, an engineer before he participated in NASA's Apollo program, personally told Doohan on stage at Doohan's last public appearance, "From one old engineer to another, thanks, mate." In a later interview, this time for the first Trekkies film, Doohan related the story of a young fan who was contemplating suicide; Doohan says that he convinced her to attend his next convention appearance, and later found out that his encouragement and kind words had not only saved her life, but also inspired her to go back to school and become an electronics engineer.Doohan tells the anecdote in the 1997 documentary Trekkies, directed by Roger Nygard

Death

Doohan suffered from Parkinson's disease, diabetes mellitus, and pulmonary fibrosis in later life. In 2004 he was diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease.
On July 20, 2005, at 5:30 in the morning, Doohan died at his home in Redmond, Washington.
His ashes, 

Legacy

Scotty's exploits as the redoubtable Chief Engineer aboard the Enterprise inspired many students to pursue a career in engineering. Because of this, the Milwaukee School of Engineering granted Doohan an honorary degree in engineering.
Montgomery Scott was claimed by Linlithgow, Scotland in 2007 by a commemorative plaque from the West Lothian Council for Doohan's importance.Doohan us proud His birthplace is also attributed to Aberdeen

Personal life

Doohan was married three times. He had five children{–}Larkin, Deirdre, twins Christopher and Montgomery{–}with first wife Janet Young before a 1964 divorce. His marriage to Anita Yagel from 1967 to 1972 produced no children. In early 1974, he was introduced to 17-year-old fan Wende Braunberger at a theatre performance, later marrying that same year when she was 18 and he 54, on October 12, 1974. Star Trek actor William Campbell served as best man.  In July 2004, Doohan announced that he had been diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease in addition to his existing Parkinson's disease and diabetes, and would be withdrawing from public life.
His son, Christopher, appeared in Star Trek: The Motion Picture in 1979 and in the J. J. Abrams reboot Star Trek 2009. Simon Pegg was Scotty, and invited the Doohans to the premiere.  Chris Doohan plays Scotty in the 2013 web series "Star Trek Continues", for three vignettes, a first episode "Pilgrim of Eternity", and more planned.

Bibliography



Further reading




