[[Erdős number]]

CATEGORIES: Paul Erdős, Social networks, Mathematics literature, Mathematical humor, Separation numbers

The Erdős number () describes the "collaborative distance" between a person and mathematician Paul Erdős, as measured by authorship of mathematical papers.
The same principle has been proposed for other eminent people in other fields.



Paul Erdős (1913–1996) was an influential mathematician who spent a large portion of his later life living out of a suitcase, and writing papers with those of his colleagues willing to give him room and board. E. J. The structure of scientific collaboration networks. In: Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2001. ) than any other mathematician in history.
The idea of the Erdős number was created by the mathematician's friends as a tribute to his enormous output. Since then, it has gained prominence and several projects are devoted to studying connectivity among researchers, using the Erdős number as a proxy.oakland.21, with a standard deviation of 0.87 and a median of 3. The Erdős Number Project  Those values will necessarily increase over long time scales, as mathematicians with low  Erdős numbers pass away and become unavailable for collaboration. The American Mathematical Society provides a free tool to determine the Erdős Number of every mathematical author listed in the Mathematical Reviews catalogue.ams.html

Definition

To be assigned an Erdős number, someone must be a coauthor of a research paper with another person who has a finite Erdős number.  Paul Erdős has an Erdős number of zero. Anybody else's Erdős number is  is the lowest Erdős number of any coauthor.
Erdős wrote around 1,500 mathematical articles in his lifetime, mostly co-written. He had 511 direct collaborators;Erdős Number Project these are the people with Erdős number 1.  The people who have collaborated with them (but not with Erdős himself) have an Erdős number of 2 (9267 people as of 2010Erdos2, Version 2010, October 20, 2010.), those who have collaborated with people who have an Erdős number of 2 (but not with Erdős or anyone with an Erdős number of 1) have an Erdős number of 3, and so forth. A person with no such coauthorship chain connecting to Erdős has an Erdős number of infinity (or an undefined one).
There is room for ambiguity over what constitutes a link between two authors.  The Erdős Number Project web site says:
but they do not include non-research publications such as elementary textbooks, joint editorships, obituaries, and the like.  The "Erdős number of the second kind" restricts assignment of Erdős numbers to papers with only two collaborators.  "Erdös numbers of the second kind," in Facts about Erdös Numbers and the Collaboration Graph. The Erdős Number Project, Oakland University, USA. Retrieved July 25, 2009.
The Erdős number was most likely first defined in print by Casper Goffman, an analyst whose own Erdős number is 2. Goffman published his observations about Erdős' prolific collaboration in a 1969 article entitled "And what is your Erdős number?" See also some comments in an obituary by Michael Golomb.Erdős' obituary by Michael Golomb

Most frequent Erdős collaborators

While Erdős collaborated with hundreds of co-authors, there were some individuals with whom he co-authored dozens of papers. This is a list of the ten persons who most frequently co-authored with Erdős and their number of papers co-authored with Erdős (i.e. their number of collaborations).

Erdős in Mathematics

The median Erdős number among Fields medalists is as low as 3. The Erdős Number Project  Field medalists with Erdős number 2 include Atle Selberg, Kunihiko Kodaira, Klaus Roth, Alan Baker, Enrico Bombieri, David Mumford, Charles Fefferman, William Thurston, Shing-Tung Yau, Jean Bourgain, Richard  Borcherds and Terence Tao.

Erdős in Physics

Among the Nobel Prize Laureates in Physics, Albert Einstein and Sheldon Lee Glashow have an Erdős Number of 2. Nobel Laureates with an Erdős number of 3 include Enrico Fermi, Otto Stern, Wolfgang Pauli, Max Born, Willis E. Lamb, Eugene Wigner, Richard P. Feynman, Hans A. Bethe, Murray Gell-Mann, Abdus Salam, Steven Weinberg, Norman F. Ramsey, Frank Wilczek, David Wineland. Fields Medal-winning physicist Ed Witten has an Erdős number of 3.

Erdős in Chemistry

Nobel Prize laureates in Chemistry with an Erdős number of 3 include Lars Onsager, Kenichi Fukui, Herbert A. Hauptman, Walter Kohn.

Erdős in Medicine

Nobel Prize laureates in Medicine with an Erdős number of 3 include John Carew Eccles, Hamilton O. Smith, John E. Sulston.

Erdős in Mathematical Finance

Harry M. Markowitz is the only Nobel Prize laureate in Economics with an Erdős number of 2. Other Financial Mathematicians with Erdős number of 2 include David Donoho, Marc Yor, Henry McKean, Daniel Stroock, and Joseph Keller.
Nobel Prize laureates in Economics with an Erdős number of 3 include Kenneth J. Arrow, Herbert A. Simon, Gerard Debreu, James Mirrlees, Daniel Kahneman, Robert J. Aumann, Alvin E. Roth, Lloyd S. Shapley. Other Financial Mathematicians with Erdős number of 3 include Michael Harrison, Darrell Duffie, David Easley, Hélyette Geman, Peter Carr, Mark Pinsky, Pierre-Louis Lions, Robert Elliott, Bernt Oksendal, Hans Föllmer, and L. C. G. Rogers.

Erdős in Social Network Analysis

Sociologist Barry Wellman has an Erdős number of 3 via social network analyst and statistician Ove FrankBarry Wellman, Ove Frank, Vicente Espinoza, Staffan Lundquist and Craig Wilson. "Integrating Individual, Relational and Structural Analysis". 1991. Social Networks 13 (Sept.): 223-50. who collaborated with graph theorist Frank Harary." Journal of the American Statistical Association, 77, 380. (Dec., 1982), pp. 835-840.

Impact

Erdős numbers have been a part of the folklore of mathematicians throughout the world for many years. Among all working mathematicians at the turn of the millennium who have a finite  Erdős number, the numbers range up to 15, the median is 5, and the mean Erdős number is 4.65;  almost everyone with a finite Erdős number has a number less than 8.  Due to the very high frequency of interdisciplinary collaboration in science today, very large numbers of non-mathematicians in many other fields of science also have finite Erdős numbers.  For example, political scientist Steven Brams has an Erdős number of 2. In biomedical research, it is common for statisticians to be among the authors of publications, and many statisticians can be linked to Erdős via John Tukey, who has an Erdős number of 2.  Similarly, the prominent geneticist Eric Lander and the mathematician Daniel Kleitman have collaborated on papers,A dictionary-based approach for gene annotation. Comput Biol. 1999 Fall-Winter - PubMed ResultProf. Daniel Kleitman's Publications Since 1980 more or less and since Kleitman has an Erdős number of 1,[ref]
[/ref] a large fraction of the genetics and genomics community can be linked via Lander and his numerous collaborators.  Similarly, collaboration with Gustavus Simmons opened the door for 
Erdős numbers within the cryptographic research community, and many linguists have finite Erdős numbers, many due to chains of collaboration with such notable scholars as Noam Chomsky (Erdős number 4),My Erdős Number is 8, 2004.
According to Alex Lopez-Ortiz, all the Fields and Nevanlinna prize winners during the three cycles in 1986 to 1994 have Erdős numbers of at most 9.  
Earlier mathematicians published fewer papers than modern ones, and more rarely published jointly written papers.  The earliest person known to have a finite Erdős number is either Richard Dedekind (born 1831, Erdős number 7) or Ferdinand Georg Frobenius (born 1849, Erdős number 3), depending on the standard of publication eligibility.
Tompa proposed a directed graph version of the Erdős number problem, by orienting edges of the collaboration graph from the alphabetically earlier author to the alphabetically later author and defining the monotone Erdős number of an author to be the length of a longest path from Erdős to the author in this directed graph. He finds a path of this type of length 12.
Also, Michael Barr suggests "rational Erdős numbers", generalizing the idea that a person who has written p joint papers with Erdős should be assigned Erdős number 1/p. From the collaboration multigraph of the second kind (although he also has a way to deal with the case of the first kind)—with one edge between two mathematicians for each joint paper they have produced—form an electrical network with a one-ohm resistor on each edge. The total resistance between two nodes tells how "close" these two nodes are.
K. Dixit and colleagues argue that "for an individual researcher, a measure such as Erdős number captures the structural properties of network whereas the h-index captures the citation impact of the publications. One can be easily convinced that ranking in coauthorship networks should take into account both measures to generate a realistic and acceptable ranking." Several author ranking systems based on eigenvector centrality have been proposed already, for instance the Phys Author Rank Algorithm.

Variations

A number of variations on the concept have been proposed to apply to other fields.

Bacon number

The Bacon number (as in the game Six Degrees of Kevin Bacon) is an application of the same idea to the movie industry, connecting actors that appeared in a film together to the actor Kevin Bacon. Although this is the most well-known numbering system of this type, it was conceived of in 1994, 25 years after Goffman's article on the Erdős number.
A small number of people are connected to both Erdős and Bacon and thus have an Erdős–Bacon number, which combines the two numbers by taking their sum. One example is the actress-mathematician Danica McKellar, best known for playing Winnie Cooper on the TV series, The Wonder Years. 
Her Erdős number is 4McKellar's co-author L. Chayes published a paper with E.H. Lieb, who in turn co-authored a paper with D.J. Kleitman, a co-author of Paul Erdős. and her Bacon number is 2.[ref]Danica McKellar 
was in "The Year That Trembled" (2002) with James Kisicki , who  was in "Telling Lies in America" (1997)  with Kevin Bacon.[/ref] The lowest known
Erdős–Bacon number is three for Daniel Kleitman, a mathematics professor at MIT; his Erdős number is 1 and his Bacon number is 2. Kleitman, "My Career in the Movies,", Notices of the American Mathematical Society, 45, 502 (April 1998)
Generalizing this to Erdős-Bacon-Sabbath numbers can be done along the same principles as above. The lowest Erdős–Bacon-Sabbath number known is shared by physicist Stephen Hawking the EBS project - Stephen Hawking and inventor Ray Kurzweil,EBS project - Ray Kurzweil both of whom have an Erdős number of four, a Bacon number of two, and a Sabbath number of two.

Shusaku number

The Shusaku number represents the "distance" between a go player and Honinbo Shusaku, measured in Go opponents. Shusaku himself has the Shusaku number 0. If a player has played against Shusaku himself, that player would have a Shusaku number of 1, and so on.





Further reading




