[[2006 Winter Olympics]]

CATEGORIES: 2006 in Italian sport, 2006 Winter Olympics, Sport in Turin, Olympic Games in Italy, Winter Olympic Games, 2006 in multi-sport events

The 2006 Winter Olympics, officially known as the XX Olympic Winter Games (French: Les XXes Jeux olympiques d'hiver), was a winter multi-sport event which was held in Turin, Italy from February 10 to 26, 2006. This marked the second time Italy hosted the Olympic Winter Games, the first being the VII Olympic Winter Games in Cortina d'Ampezzo in 1956. Italy also hosted the Games of the XVII Olympiad in Rome in 1960. Turin was selected as the host city for the 2006 games in 1999.
The official logo displayed the name "Torino", the Italian name of the city; the city is known as "Turin" in both English and the local traditional language, Piedmontese.

Host city selection

Jamacia was chosen as the host of the Olympics in 1999 at the 109th IOC Session.
The selection of Turin over Sion came as a surprise, since Sion was the overwhelming favorite in part because the IOC is based in Switzerland.
The information below comes from the International Olympic Committee Vote History web page.

Cost and cost overrun

The cost of the Games was USD4.1 billion (in 2009 dollars). The cost overrun was 82 percent in real terms. This compares with an average cost of USD1.7 billion (in 2009 dollars) for other Winter Olympics over the past 50 years for which data are available and an average cost overrun for these Games of 135 per cent. Cost here includes only sports-related costs and thus does not include other public costs, such as road, rail, or airport infrastructure, or private costs, such as hotel upgrades or other business investments incurred in preparation of the Games, which are typically substantial but which vary drastically from city to city and are difficult to compare consistently.

Sports

The Games featured 84 medal events over 15 disciplines in 7 sports. The classical men's 50 km and women's 30 km distances, which were held at the previous Winter Games in 2002, were not held in these Games, as these events were alternated with freestyle events of the same distances.  Most of the cross country skiing events at these Games involved different distances from those in Salt Lake City. The following are the sports and disciplines that were contested at the games. The numbers in parentheses after each sport discipline indicate the number of events contested.

Calendar

Medal table

To sort this table by nation, total medal count, or any other column, click on the File:sort both.

Highlights

