[[Ellis Island]]

CATEGORIES: Ellis Island, Articles containing video clips, Artificial islands of the United States, Beaux-Arts architecture in New Jersey, Borders of New Jersey, Borders of New York, Edward Lippincott Tilton buildings, Exclaves in the United States, Geography of Hudson County, New Jersey, History museums in New Jersey, History museums in New York, History of immigration to the United States, History of New York City, Internal territorial disputes of the United States, Islands of New Jersey, Islands of New York City, Legal history of New Jersey, Manhattan, Museums in Hudson County, New Jersey, Museums in Manhattan, National Park Service National Monuments in New Jersey, National Park Service National Monuments in New York, Port of New York and New Jersey, Visitor attractions in Manhattan

Ellis Island, in Upper New York Bay, was the gateway for millions of immigrants to the United States as the nation's busiest immigrant inspection station from 1892 until 1954. The island was greatly expanded with land reclamation between 1892 and 1934. Before that, the much smaller original island was the site of Fort Gibson and later a naval magazine. The island was made part of the Statue of Liberty National Monument in 1965, and has hosted a museum of immigration since 1990. Long considered part of New York, a 1998 United States Supreme Court decision found that most of the island is in New Jersey. The south side of the island, home to the Ellis Island Immigrant Hospital, is closed to the general public and the object of restoration efforts spearheaded by Save Ellis Island.

Geography and access

Ellis Island is located in the Upper New York Bay, east of Liberty State Park and north of Liberty Island, in Jersey City, New Jersey with a small section that is territory of New York City enclaved within it.
Since September 11, 2001, the island is guarded by patrols of the United States Park Police Marine Patrol Unit. Public access is by ferry from either Communipaw Terminal in Liberty State Park or from Battery Park at the southern tip of Manhattan. The ferry operator, Hornblower Cruises and Events, also provides service to the nearby Statue of Liberty. Proposals made in 1995 to use it or replace it with a new bridge for pedestrians were opposed by the city of New York and the private ferry operator at that time.
The island was closed to the public after Hurricane Sandy in October 2012.

State sovereignty dispute

The island, largely artificially created through landfill, is situated on the New Jersey side of Upper New York Bay. The natural portion of the island, part of New York City, is surrounded by rest of the island in Jersey City.
The circumstances which led to an exclave of New York being located within New Jersey began in the colonial era, after the British takeover of New Netherland in 1664. An unusual clause in the colonial land grant outlined the territory that the proprietors of New Jersey would receive as being "westward of Long Island, and Manhitas Island and bounded on the east part by the main sea, and part by Hudson's river",The Duke of York's Release to John Lord Berkeley, and Sir George Carteret, 24th of June, 1664 rather than at the river's midpoint, as was common in other colonial charters.[ref]
</ref>
Attempts were made as early 1804 to resolve the status of the state line.[ref]
