[[Chicago Loop]]

CATEGORIES: Central business districts in the United States, Community areas of Chicago, Illinois, Financial districts, Shopping centers in Chicago, Illinois

The Loop is the central business district of Chicago, Illinois. It is one of the city's 77 officially designated community areas. The Loop is home to Chicago's commercial core, City Hall, and the seat of Cook County. The community area is bounded on the west and north by the Chicago River, on the east by Lake Michigan, and on the south by Roosevelt Road, although the commercial core has expanded into adjacent community areas. As a business center, the Loop hosts the Chicago Board of Trade and Chicago Mercantile Exchange. The Loop is home to Grant Park, the State Street shopping district, and the Art Institute of Chicago. Other major cultural institutions that call this area home include the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, the Lyric Opera of Chicago, the Goodman Theatre, the Joffrey Ballet, the central public Harold Washington Library, and the Chicago Cultural Center.
In what is now the Loop Community Area, on the south bank of the Chicago River, near today's Michigan Avenue Bridge, the U.S. Army erected Fort Dearborn in 1803. It was the first settlement in the area sponsored by the United States.

Etymology

It is believed the origin of the term loop is derived from the cable car turning loops in the downtown area, and especially those of two lines that shared a loop, constructed in 1882, bounded by Adams, Wabash, Wells, and Lake. Encyclopedia.org. Retrieved on 2013-07-21.Patrick T. Reardon. "It All Starts Downtown". Hartford Courant, July 26, 2004 (from the Chicago Tribune). Retrieved March 19, 2009.

Population

According to the 2010 census, 29,283 people live in the Loop. The median sale price for residential real estate was $710,000 in 2005 according to Forbes.

Attractions

Loop architecture has been dominated by high-rises since early in its history. Notable buildings include the Home Insurance Building, considered the first skyscraper (demolished in 1931); the Chicago Board of Trade Building, a National Historic Landmark; and Willis Tower, the tallest building. Some of the historic buildings in this district were instrumental in the development of high-rises. Chicago's street numbering system – dividing addresses into North, South, East and West quadrants, originates in the Loop at the intersection of State Street and Madison Street.
This area abounds in shopping opportunities, including the Loop Retail Historic District, although it competes with the more upscale Magnificent Mile area to the north, and with suburban shopping malls. It includes Chicago's former Marshall Field's department store location in the Marshall Field and Company Building; the original Sullivan Center Carson Pirie Scott store location (closed February 21, 2007); and Sears on State. Chicago's Downtown Theatre District is also found within this area, along with numerous restaurants and hotels.
Chicago has a famous skyline which features many of the tallest buildings in the world as well as the Chicago Landmark Historic Michigan Boulevard District. Chicago's skyline is spaced out throughout the downtown area, giving it a graceful bridgelike appearance. The Willis Tower, formerly known as the Sears Tower, the second tallest building in the Western Hemisphere, stands in the western Loop in the heart of the city's financial district, along with other buildings, such as 311 South Wacker Drive and the AT&T Corporate Center.
Chicago's third tallest building, the Aon Center, is located just south of Illinois Center.  The complex is at the east end of the Loop, east of Michigan Avenue. Two Prudential Plaza is also located here, just to the west of the Aon Center.
The Loop contains a wealth of outdoor sculpture, including works by Pablo Picasso, Joan Miró, Henry Moore, Marc Chagall, Magdalena Abakanowicz, Alexander Calder, and Jean Dubuffet. Chicago's cultural heavyweights, such as the Art Institute of Chicago, the Goodman Theatre, the Chicago Theatre, the Lyric Opera at the Civic Opera House building, and the Chicago Symphony Orchestra, are also in this area, as is the historic Palmer House Hilton hotel, found on East Monroe Street.
Chicago's lakefront, which is almost exclusively recreational park area from north to south, features Grant Park in this downtown area. Grant Park is the home of Buckingham Fountain, the Petrillo Bandshell, the Grant Park Symphony (where free concerts can be enjoyed throughout the summer), and Chicago's annual two-week food festival, the Taste of Chicago, where more than 3 million people try foods from over 70 vendors. A recent addition to Grant Park is the architecturally forward Millennium Park, which opened in the summer of 2004, featuring a Frank Gehry's Jay Pritzker Pavilion, Jaume Plensa's Crown Fountain and Anish Kapoor's Cloud Gate sculpture and spanning what were formerly open railyards on the city's lakefront.
The Chicago River, which delineates the area, also provides entertainment and recreational opportunities, including the annual dyeing of the river green in honor of St. Patrick's Day. Trips down the Chicago River, including architectural tours, by commercial boat operators are great favorites with both locals and tourists.

Government

The Loop is the seat of Chicago's government. It is also the government seat of Cook County, Illinois and houses an office for the governor of the State of Illinois.  The century old City Hall/County Building houses the chambers of the Mayor, City Council and County Board.
Across the street, the Richard J. Daley Center accommodates a famous Picasso sculpture and the state law courts.  Given its proximity to government offices, the Center's plaza serves as a kind of town square for celebrations, protests and other events.
The nearby James R. Thompson Center is the city headquarters for state government, with an office for the Governor.  Many state agencies have offices here, including the Illinois State Board of Education.
A few blocks away is the Everett McKinley Dirksen United States Courthouse housing federal law courts and other federal government offices.  This is the seat of the United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit. The Kluczynski Federal Building is across the street.  The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago is located on LaSalle Street in the heart of the financial district. The United States Postal Service operates the Loop Station Post Office at 211 South Clark Street.

Fire Department

The Chicago Fire Department operates 3 Fire Stations in the Loop District:

Neighborhoods

In addition to the government, financial, theatre and shopping districts, these neighborhoods are also part of the Loop community area.

New Eastside

The New Eastside is a mixed-use district bordered by Michigan Avenue to the west, the Chicago River to the north, Randolph Street to the south, and Lake Shore Drive to the east. It encompasses the entire Illinois Center and Lakeshore East is the latest lead-developer of the 1969 Planned Development #70, as well as separate developments like Aon Center, Prudential Plaza, Park Millennium Condominium Building, Hyatt Regency Chicago, and the Fairmont Hotel. The area has a triple-level street system and is bisected by Columbus Drive. Most of this district has been developed on land that was originally water and once used by the Illinois Central Railroad rail yards. The early buildings in this district such as the Aon Center and One Prudential Plaza used airspace rights in order to build above the railyards. The New Eastside Association of Residents (NEAR) has been the recognized community representative (Illinois non-profit corporation) since 1991 and is a 501(c)(3) IRS tax-exempt organization.
The triple-level street system allows for trucks to mainly travel and make deliveries on the lower levels, keeping traffic to a minimum on the upper levels. Through north-south traffic uses Middle Columbus and the bridge over the Chicago River. East-west through traffic uses either Middle Randolph or Upper and Middle Wacker between Michigan Avenue and Lake Shore Drive.

Printer's Row

Printer's Row, also known as Printing House Row, is a neighborhood located in the southern portion of the Loop community area of Chicago. It is centered on Dearborn Street from Congress Parkway on the north to Polk Street on the south, and includes buildings along Plymouth Court on the east and Federal Street to the west. Most of the buildings in this area were built between 1886 and 1915 for house printing, publishing, and related businesses. Today, the buildings have mainly been converted into residential lofts. Part of Printer's Row is an official landmark district, called the Printing House Row District.

South Loop

Dearborn Station at the south end of Printers Row, is the oldest train station still standing in Chicago; it has been converted to retail and office space. Most of the area south of Congress Parkway between Lake Michigan and the Chicago River, excepting Chinatown, is referred to as the South Loop. Perceptions of the southern boundary of the neighborhood have changed as development spread south, and the name is now used as far south as 26th Street.
The neighborhood includes former railyards that have been redeveloped as new-town-in-town such as Dearborn Park and Central Station. Former warehouses and factory lofts have been converted to residential buildings, while new townhouses and highrises have been developed on vacant or underused land.  A major landowner in the South Loop is Columbia College Chicago, a private school that owns 17 buildings.
South Loop is zoned to the following Chicago Schools: South Loop School and Phillips Academy High School. Jones College Prep High School, which is a selective enrollment prep school drawing students from the entire city, is also located in the South Loop.
The South Loop was historically home to vice districts, including the brothels, bars, burlesque theaters, and arcades. Inexpensive residential hotels on Van Buren and State Street made it one of the city's Skid Rows until the 1970s. One of the largest homeless shelters in the city, the Pacific Garden Mission, was located at State and Balbo from 1923 to 2007, when it moved to 1458 S. Canal St.Pacific Garden Mission, Chicago Tribune

Historic Michigan Boulevard District

The Loop also contains the Chicago Landmark Historic Michigan Boulevard District, which is the section of Michigan Avenue opposite Grant Park and Millennium Park.

Economy

The Loop, along with the rest of downtown Chicago, is the second largest commercial business district in the United States, after New York City's Midtown Manhattan.  Its financial district near LaSalle Street is home to the CME Group's Chicago Board of Trade and Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
Aon Corporation maintains its headquarters in the Aon Center. In addition, United's parent company, United Continental Holdings, also has its headquarters in 77 West Wacker."Board of Directors." United Continental Holdings. Retrieved October 3, 2010. Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association has its headquarters in the Michigan Plaza complex."Contact Us." Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. Retrieved December 23, 2009. Sidley Austin and Morton Salt are both headquartered in the Loop."Chicago." Sidley Austin. Retrieved December 17, 2009."Contact Us." Morton Salt. Retrieved December 23, 2009.
The Chicagoland Chamber of Commerce is located in an office in the Aon Center, the French-American Chamber of Commerce in Chicago has an office in 35 East Wacker, the Netherlands Chamber of Commerce in the United States is located in an office at 303 East Wacker Drive, and the US Mexico Chamber of Commerce Mid-America Chapter is located in an office in One Prudential Plaza.
Previously the grocery store company Red & White had its headquarters in the Loop. October 26, 1953. ISSN 0024-3019. 123 (advertisement). Retrieved from Google Books on November 6, 2011. "RED & WHITE CORPORATION • 308 WEST WASHINGTON STREET CHICAGO 6, ILLINOIS""cjcompmed00026-0002-color." Canadian Journal of Comparative Medicine. November 1937. Retrieved November 6, 2011. "Chicago:..., 208 West Washington Street,..." McDonald's was headquartered in the Loop until 1971, when it moved to Oak Brook, Illinois. "Inside Hamburger Central." Chicago Tribune. January 9, 1972. G18. Retrieved September 17, 2009. When Bank One Corporation existed, its headquarters were in the Bank One Plaza (now Chase Tower)."Contact Information." Bank One Corporation. April 10, 2001. Retrieved March 31, 2010. When Amoco existed, its headquarters were in the Amoco Building (now the Aon Center)."Contacts." Amoco. February 12, 1998. Retrieved March 31, 2010.

Diplomatic missions

Several countries maintain consulates in the Loop. They include Argentina,

Education

Colleges and universities

Roosevelt University, Columbia College Chicago, and Tribeca Flashpoint Media Arts Academy are all located in the Loop. DePaul University also has a campus in the Loop. The University of Notre Dame runs its EMBA program its the Chicago Campus in the Loop.
National-Louis University is located in the historic Peoples Gas Building on Michigan Avenue across the street from the Art Institute of Chicago.  The School of the Art Institute of Chicago, one of the nation's largest independent schools of art and design, is headquartered in Grant Park.
Harold Washington College is a City Colleges of Chicago community college located in the Loop. Adler School of Professional Psychology is a college located in the Loop.
Robert Morris University (Illinois) is located here.  Argosy University has its head offices on the thirteenth floor of 205 North Michigan Avenue in Michigan Plaza.  Trinity Christian College offers an accelerated teaching certification program at 1550 S. State Street in the South Loop.
Spertus Institute, a center for Jewish learning & culture, is located at 610 S. Michigan Ave.  Graduate level courses (Master and Doctorate) are offered in Jewish Studies, Jewish Professional Studies and Non-profit Management.  Also housed in the Spertus building is Meadville Lombard Theological School which is affiliated with the Unitarian Universalist Association, a liberal, progressive seminary offering graduate level theological and ministerial training.

Primary and secondary schools

Chicago Public Schools serves residents of the Loop. Its main administrative offices are in the 125 South Clark Street."Board meeting schedule." Chicago Public Schools. Retrieved November 7, 2009."125 South Clark Street." MB Real Estate. Retrieved November 7, 2009.
Some residents are zoned to the South Loop School, while some are zoned to the Ogden School."Near North/West/Central Elementary Schools." Chicago Public Schools. Retrieved November 7, 2009. Some residents are zoned to Phillips Academy High School, while others are zoned to Wells Community Academy High School."West/Central/South High Schools." Chicago Public Schools. Retrieved November 7, 2009.
Jones College Prep High School, is also located here.
Muchin College Prep, a Noble Network of Charter Schools, is also located here, in the heart of Chicago on State Street.

Notable landmarks in the Loop

Gallery








