[[Zinedine Zidane]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, Living people, 1998 FIFA World Cup players, 2002 FIFA World Cup players, 2006 FIFA World Cup players, AS Cannes players, Association football midfielders, European Footballer of the Year winners, Expatriate footballers in Italy, Expatriate footballers in Spain, FC Girondins de Bordeaux players, FIFA 100, FIFA Century Club, FIFA World Cup-winning players, FIFA World Player of the Year winners, France international footballers, French expatriate footballers, French expatriates in Italy, French expatriates in Spain, French people of Algerian descent, French people of Kabyle descent, French Muslims, French humanitarians, Internet memes, Juventus F.C. players, Kabyle people, La Liga footballers, Officiers of the Légion d'honneur, Ligue 1 players, Sportspeople from Marseille, Real Madrid C.F. players, Serie A footballers, UEFA Euro 1996 players, UEFA Euro 2000 players, UEFA Euro 2004 players, UEFA European Championship-winning players, World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners

Zinedine Yazid Zidane ("Brazil 0 France 1: Zidane regains mastery to tame Brazil" The Independent. Retrieved 17 November 2013"Brazil's Fans Lament Demise of the Beautiful Game" New York Times. Retrieved 17 November 2013"Defending champion bounces back from World Cup flop to try again" Sports Illustrated. Retrieved 17 November 2013
At club level, Zidane won the La Liga title and the UEFA Champions League with Real Madrid, two Serie A league championships with Juventus and an Intercontinental Cup and a UEFA Super Cup each with both aforementioned sides. His 2001 transfer from Juventus to Real Madrid set a world record fee of £46 million (€75 million). On the international stage with France, Zidane won the 1998 FIFA World Cup, scoring twice in the final, and UEFA Euro 2000 where he was named Player of the tournament. The World Cup triumph made him a national hero in France, and he received the Légion d'honneur in 1998.
Zidane has won the FIFA World Player of the Year three times, a feat achieved by only Ronaldo and Lionel Messi, and the Ballon d'Or once. He was Ligue 1 Player of the Year in 1996, Serie A Footballer of the Year in 2001 and La Liga Best Foreign Player in 2002. Following the 2006 World Cup where he received the Golden Ball as Player of the tournament, Zidane retired from football.

Early life and career

Zinedine Zidane was born on 23 June 1972 in La Castellane, Marseille in southern France. Zidane is of Kabyle Berber descent. His parents, Smaïl and Malika, emigrated to Paris from the village of Aguemoune in the Berber-speaking region of Kabylie in northern Algeria in 1953 before the start of the Algerian War. The family, which had settled in the city's tough northern districts of Barbès and Saint-Denis, found little work in the region, and in the mid-1960s moved to the northern Marseille suburb of la Castellane in the 16th arrondissement of Marseille. In 1972, Zidane was born there as the youngest of five siblings. His father Smaïl worked as a warehouseman at a department store, often on the night shift, while his mother was a housewife. The family live a reasonably comfortable life by the standards of the neighborhood, which was notorious throughout Marseille for its high crime and unemployment rates.
It was in Castellane that Zidane had his earliest introduction to football, joining in at the age of five in football games that the neighbourhood's children played on the Place Tartane, an 80-by-12-yard plaza that served as the main square of the housing complex.
At the age of ten, Zidane got his first player's license after joining the junior team of a local club from Castellane by the name of US Saint-Henri. After spending a year and a half at US Saint-Henri, Zidane joined SO Septèmes-les-Vallons when the Septèmes coach Robert Centenero convinced the club's Director to get Zidane.
Zidane stayed with Septèmes until the age of fourteen, at which time he was selected to attend a three-day training camp at the CREPS (Regional Centre for Sports and Physical Education) in Aix-en-Provence, one of several such footballing institutes run by the French Football Federation. It was here that Zidane was spotted by AS Cannes scout, and former player, Jean Varraud who recommended him to the training center director of the club.

Club career

Cannes

Zidane went to Cannes for a six-week stay, but ended up remaining at the club for four years to play at the professional level. Having left his family at the age of fourteen to join Cannes, he was invited by Cannes director Jean-Claude Elineau, to leave the dormitory he shared with 20 other trainees and to come and stay with him and his family. Zidane later said that it was in living with the Elineaus that he found equilibrium.
It was at Cannes where Zidane's first coaches noticed that he was raw and sensitive, prone to attack spectators who insulted his race or family. "ZZ Top".  The Guardian. Retrieved 24 April 2014 His first coach, Jean Varraud, encouraged him to channel his anger and focus on his own game. Zidane spent his first weeks at Cannes mainly on cleaning duty as a punishment for punching an opponent who mocked his ghetto origins. The occasional violence that he would display throughout his career was shaped by an internal conflict of being a French-Algerian suspended between cultures, and surviving the tough streets of La Castellane where he grew up.
Zidane made his professional debut with Cannes on 18 May 1989 at the age of sixteen in a French Division 1 match against Nantes."Zidane swansong", BBC Sport He scored his first goal for the club on 10 February 1991Agence France-Press from 10 February 1991 also against Nantes in a 2–1 win. After the match during a party for all the Cannes players, Zidane was given a car by Cannes chairman Alain Pedretti, who had promised him one the day he scored his first goal for the club. Zinedine Zidane: A diamond in the rough. FIFA magazine Portrait, September 2006, p. 16. On the pitch, Zidane displayed extraordinary technique on the ball, offering glimpses of the talent that would take him to the top of the world game. In his first full season with Cannes, the club secured its first ever European football berth by qualifying for the UEFA Cup after finishing fourth in the league. This remains the club's highest finish in the top flight since getting relegated for the first time from the first division in the 1948–49 season.

Bordeaux

Zidane was transferred to Girondins de Bordeaux in the 1992–93 season, winning the 1995 Intertoto Cup, In 1996, Zidane received the award for Ligue 1 Player of the Year. " Zidane 'The best player ever in History'. p. 34

Juventus

After a series of consistently outstanding performances for both Bordeaux and France, Zidane had offers to join Europe's top clubs in the spring of 1996, deciding on a move to UEFA Champions League winners Juventus during the close season.V.K.S. Radhesh. "2002 World Cup Football Super Stars". p. 20. Sura Books Zidane's impact in Italy was immediate, and won the 1996–97 Serie A title and the 1996 Intercontinental Cup. In 2001, Zidane was named Serie A Foreign Footballer of the Year for the second time.

Real Madrid

In 2001, Zidane joined Real Madrid for a world record fee of 150 billion Italian lire.

The next season, Zidane helped Real Madrid to win the 2002–03 La Liga and was named the FIFA World Player of the Year for the third time. In 2004, fans voted him as the best European footballer of the previous 50 years in UEFA's fiftieth-anniversary Golden Jubilee Poll.
While Zidane's final season of club football ended without a trophy, he enjoyed success on a personal note by scoring his first hat-trick against Sevilla FC in a 4–2 win in January 2006. On 7 May 2006, Zidane, who had announced his plans to retire after the 2006 World Cup,[ref]

