[[Mountain West Conference]]

CATEGORIES: Mountain West Conference, Organizations based in Colorado Springs, Colorado, Sports in the Western United States, Organizations established in 1999, Articles which contain graphical timelines

The Mountain West Conference is one of the collegiate  athletic conferences affiliated with the NCAA Division I FBS (formerly I-A). The MW officially began operations in July 1999. Geographically, the MW covers a broad expanse of the Western United States, with member schools located in California, Colorado, Hawaii, Idaho, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming. Craig Thompson has served as Commissioner of the MW since its founding in 1999.
The charter members of the MW included the U.S. Air Force Academy, Brigham Young University, Colorado State University, San Diego State University, the University of New Mexico, the University of Nevada at Las Vegas, the University of Utah, and the University of Wyoming. Before forming the Mountain West Conference, seven of its eight charter members had been longtime members of the Western Athletic Conference. Half of these had been charter members of that conference from 1962. Overall, each school that has ever been a member of the MW spent at least three years in the Western Athletic Conference before joining the Mountain West. The 2013-14 academic year will be the 15th anniversary season of the MW.

History

The WAC expanded from 10 to 16 schools for the 1996 academic year, absorbing three teams from the defunct Southwest Conference — Rice University, Southern Methodist University, and Texas Christian University — adding two from the Big West Conference — San Jose State University and the University of Nevada, Las Vegas — and also bringing in the University of Tulsa, an NCAA football independent and otherwise a member of the Missouri Valley Conference. However, the expanded WAC was soon wracked by tension between the established and new members. The final straw came in spring 1998, when Brigham Young University and the University of Utah proposed a permanent split into two eight-team divisions.  Previously, the WAC's 16 teams had been divided into four four-team "quadrants," two of which rotated between the Mountain and Pacific Divisions every two years.  This would have forced some schools into an unnatural alignment because of the geographic distribution of the conference. The U.S. Air Force Academy was the most strident opponent of this proposal, threatening to become an independent. Soon after the proposal by BYU and Utah, the presidents of Air Force, BYU, Colorado State, Utah, and Wyoming met at Denver International Airport to discuss their future, and they agreed to break away from the WAC to form a new conference.
They invited the WAC members New Mexico, San Diego State, and UNLV, to join them in what became the Mountain West Conference. The next move for the MW came in 2005, when the conference added TCU, who had spent the previous four seasons in Conference USA.
On June 11, 2010, Boise State University agreed to join the conference as its tenth member. On June 17, 2010, Utah announced it would be leaving the Mountain West to join what would become the Pacific-12 Conference. On August 18, 2010, amidst rumors that Brigham Young was considering leaving the Mountain West to go independent in football and rejoin the Western Athletic Conference in all other sports, the Mountain West Conference officially extended invitations to California State University, Fresno and the University of Nevada, Reno. Fresno State and Nevada accepted and would become the tenth and eleventh members of the league. These changes would leave the Mountain West Conference with 10 teams for the 2012 football season.
The MW champion has qualified for a BCS bowl four times since the BCS formula was tweaked to allow non-BCS conferences to play in BCS bowls if ranked in the top 12; however, two of the three schools that qualified are no longer with the conference.
On October 14, 2011, the Mountain West and Conference USA announced a plan for a football only alliance. although the Mountain West and C-USA will now apparently remain separate legal entities.
On May 2, 2012, San Jose State and Utah State agreed to join the conference for the 2013-14 academic year. On December 31 of that year, Boise State announced that it had backed out of its previously announced move to the Big East for football and the Big West for other sports, and would remain in the MW.
On January 16, 2013, San Diego State accepted an offer to remain/return to the Mountain West Conference in all sports. Keeping SDSU in the conference gives the Mountain West 12 football members, allowing for a Championship Game to be held. The first championship game took place on December 7, 2013.Mountain West planning title game with 'addition' of SDSU

Member schools

Current members

=Full members=

=Football-only member=

Former members

Membership timeline

DateFormat  = yyyy
ImageSize   = width:800 height:auto barincrement:20
Period      = from:1999 till:2016
TimeAxis    = orientation:horizontal
PlotArea    = right:5 left:5 bottom:50 top:5 #> to display a count on left side of graph,  use "left:20" to suppress the count, use "left:20"Colors =  id:barcolor
          id:line     value:black
          id:bg       value:white
          id:Full value:rgb(0.742,0.727,0.852) # Use this color to denote a team that is a member in all sports
          id:FullxF value:rgb(0.551,0.824,0.777) # Use this color to denote a team that is a member in all sports except for football
          id:AssocF value:rgb(0.98,0.5,0.445) # Use this color to denote a team that is a member for football only
          id:AssocOS value:rgb(0.5,0.691,0.824) # Use this color to denote a team that is a member in some sports, but not all (consider identifying in legend or a footnote)
PlotData=
   width:15 textcolor:black shift:(5,-5) anchor:from fontsize:s
