[[Fox Sports Networks]]

CATEGORIES: Fox Sports Networks, SportsChannel, Prime Sports Network, Television channels and stations established in 1996, Companies based in Los Angeles, California, 1996 establishments in the United States

Fox Sports Networks (formerly known as Fox Sports Net) is the collective name for a group of regional sports networks in the United States that are primarily owned and operated by the Fox Entertainment Group division of 21st Century Fox.

History

Beginnings

At the dawn of the cable television era, many regional sports networks (RSNs) vied to compete with the largest national sports network, ESPN. The most notable were the SportsChannel networks, which went on the air in 1976 with the original SportsChannel (now MSG Plus) in the New York City area and later branched out into Chicago and Florida; Prime Network, which went on the air in 1983 with the charter member being Home Sports Entertainment (now Fox Sports Southwest) and later branched out onto the West Coast as "Prime Sports"; and SportSouth, an RSN operated by the Turner Broadcasting System.
In 1996, News Corporation, which launched the over-the-air general-interest Fox Broadcasting Company network in 1986, entered into a joint venture with TCI's Liberty Media and rebranded their Prime Network affiliates as "Fox Sports Net." In 1996, Fox bought SportSouth and renamed it "Fox Sports South". In 1997, the Fox/Liberty joint venture purchased a 40% interest in Cablevision's sports properties including the SportsChannel America networks, Madison Square Garden, the New York Knicks and the New York Rangers. In early 1998, SportsChannel America joined the Fox Sports Net family. Only SportsChannel Florida was not rebranded at this time and would not join FSN until 2000.

On-screen graphics

FSN has often been the testing ground for the innovations that Fox comes up with graphically and the source of inspiration that other networks have for their graphics. The FSN networks were the first U.S. sports channel to introduce the bar score/time graphic on the top of the screen (initially known as the FoxBox). Since FSN came up with the top-screen bar graphic, many other major networks have abandoned the corner box graphic in favor of the bar.

=2001-mid-2005=

FSN first used the scoring banner for most of its broadcasts beginning in 2001. The banner then was simpler than today's. It featured a transparent black rectangle, a baseball diamond graphic for baseball broadcasts on the far left, the team abbreviations in white with their scores in yellow boxes (the white boxes were used on some broadcasts until 2002). Then the quarter or inning, time or number of outs, pitch count/speed (baseball broadcasts), and the FSN logo on the far right. Until sometime in 2004, the logo was rendered as "FOX SPORTS NET" with the "FOX" in a white box, which was later changed to blue. In middle of July 2003, Fox Sports Net adopted new graphics for its baseball broadcasts, then later expanded them to college football, hockey, and basketball broadcasts, despite retaining the banner. Early in 2004, the logo was changed to reveal the FSN pillbox logo and "FOX SPORTS NET" in black; in July of that year, the "FOX SPORTS NET" was replaced with the region. Eventually, Fox Sports Net simply became known as FSN in September of that year.
FSN's parent network used this score banner but with a different graphics package from 2001 to 2003, although the parent network's baseball broadcasts continued to use these graphics during the 2004 season except during the playoffs.
Starting in September 2004, Fox Sports Net became known simply as FSN, but the name Fox Sports Net also remained in common use until recent years, when the new name "Fox Sports Local" became used to refer to its regional networks.

=2005–Mid-2008=

In the middle of June 2005, the banner was given a cosmetic upgrade, despite this, the graphics used since July 2003 were still being used. The team abbreviations became white or black in the team's main color (depending on color contrast), and the scores are now in white boxes. The scores would flash, making a futuristic computer sound, whenever the scores change. On the baseball broadcasts, the diamond graphic on the far left would flash, circling the bases with a graphic below the banner with the words "HOME RUN" and the team's or player's name shown in electronic lettering. Also with the baseball broadcasts, the diamond graphic changed between 2005 and 2006. The FSN logo on the far right was also now in a black oval-like shape with the region name rendered in white.
In a 2005 deal, Fox sold its interest of Madison Square Garden and the teams that play there back to Cablevision. In exchange, Fox gained complete ownership of Fox Sports Ohio and Fox Sports Florida. Cablevision gained full ownership of Fox Sports Chicago and Fox Sports New York. Cablevision also gained a 50% interest in Fox Sports New England (Comcast owned 50%). Fox and Cablevision retained joint ownership of Fox Sports Bay Area. Fox Sports Chicago ceased operations in 2006, after losing the regional television rights to professional sports teams in 2004 to the newly launched Comcast SportsNet Chicago. In April 2007, Cablevision sold its interest in the New England and Bay Area networks to Comcast, and they joined Comcast SportNet in July 2007 and March 2008 respectively. Fox Sports New York (now MSG+) continues to carry Fox Sports programming.

=2008-2011=

For the 2008 college football season, the scoring banner went back to a box on the top-left portion of the screen, featuring text in a Collegiate-style font, with similarities to the text style of Big Ten Network's and Fox's current graphic styling. The box changes to the colors of the team possessing the ball, with down information in the top portion of the box and a text box with information such as punt hangtime extending from the bottom, and the size of the possessing team's scoring area expands with the possession arrow. The box flips over to indicate a score, and no FSN branding is seen onscreen beyond the local network's logo in the top-right hand corner. After the debut, variations of the package began to be implemented during other major league events shown on FSN affiliates, beginning with NHL telecasts on October 11, 2008,  NBA telecasts on October 28 (initially using a smaller box for scores in the bottom-right for the 2008-09 season, but switching to a horizontal "strip" design for the 2009-2010 season), and MLB games on both FSN and the Fox network upon the beginning of the new season in April 2009.
A new plain-text logo design also debuted with the new graphics for FSN owned-and-operated affiliates, featuring "FS" lettering in bold, followed by the region name (or a team name during major league events, also colored in the respective team's colors). The word "Net" was also dropped from the station names as well. The new logo was only implemented by Fox-owned FSN affiliates; DirecTV Sports Networks' affiliates debuted the new graphics but maintained the previous "pillbox" logo, and FSN New York and Comcast's affiliates rebranded under their own brands, MSG Plus and Comcast SportsNet, before the FSN relaunch.
In 2010, FSN affiliates also began to increase use of the standard Fox Sports brand through various means, such as using the standard Fox Sports microphone flags, debuting localized versions of the Fox Sports frontcap before live broadcasts, and incorporating the Fox Sports logo into a new logo animation for the network's bug. In 2011, some FSN networks also followed the lead of the Fox network by framing its broadcasts for the 16:9 aspect ratio (which moves the logo bug into the extreme right corner of the high definition image, and moves the corner score box to the extreme left) and letterboxing the widescreen image on its standard definition feeds.

=2011-present=

Since the start of the 2011 MLB season, Fox's regional sports networks and national programming have used presentation identical to that of national Fox Sports telecasts. Affiliates owned by DirecTV Sports Networks rebranded as Root Sports at the start of the MLB season as well, phasing in a graphics package designed by Troika Design Group—however, in-game graphics still used the previous, metallic FSN graphics until the following season.
At the beginning of September 2012, Fox Sports introduced an updated logo across all of its properties, including its regional networks. The "FS" abbreviation was dropped entirely, with all FSN logos updated to incorporate the Fox Sports logo with the region or team name below it.

Headquarters

Fox Sports Networks is headquartered in the Westwood neighborhood of Los Angeles, California. Its master control facilities are based in both Los Angeles, and Houston, Texas. In February 2005, Fox's then-parent company News Corporation (which spun off most of its entertainment properties into 21st Century Fox in July 2013) became 100 percent owner of Fox Sports Networks, after swapping assets with Cablevision Systems Corporation, but was still identified in its copyright tag as "Fox Sports Net/National Sports Partners" (the name has since changed to "National Sports Programming"). Fox Sports Networks also utilizes Stage 19 at Universal Studios Florida, following Nickelodeon Studios' closure in 2005.

Networks

Owned-and-operated

Affiliates

Former networks

Comcast SportsNet

From its inception in 1997 until July 31, 2012, Comcast had an agreement to carry select Fox Sports Net programming on most of its networks. The CSN networks carrying FSN programming were Comcast SportsNet Bay Area, California, Chicago, Mid-Atlantic, New England and Philadelphia.
As of September 2012, Fox began syndicating select FSN college football games to broadcast stations in some of these markets. For the 2013 season Fox discontinued this practice. Comcast Sports Net Mid-Atlantic resumed airing select FSN-produced ACC games. However, FSN programming has not returned to any other CSN network. MASN2 now airs most other FSN programming in the Baltimore/Washington market. NESN has replaced CSN New England as the Boston affiliate. FSN programming is currently not shown in the Chicago, Philadelphia, and San Francisco markets.

Fox College Sports (FCS)

Fox Sports Networks also offers Fox College Sports (formerly Fox Sports Digital Networks) for digital cable subscribers. These are three channels (marked Atlantic, Central, and Pacific) that provide programming (primarily collegiate and high school sports, plus minor league sports) that would be carried from each individual FSN network, as well as each affiliate's regional sports reports and individually produced programming (such as coaches shows, team magazines, and documentaries). More or less, these three networks are condensed versions of the 22 FSN-affiliated networks, including Comcast SportsNet Mid-Atlantic, though the channels also show international events that fit too oddly on FSN or Fox Soccer, such as the Commonwealth Games, World University Games and the FINA World Swimming Championships.
The three FCS channels offer the FSN feeds from the following channels, including live Big 12 Conference football, Pacific-12 Conference football and basketball and Atlantic Coast Conference basketball. They also rerun shows originally produced by and shown on the networks listed:
Fox College Sports also shows Independent Women's Football League games, high school games, college magazine shows, and college coach's shows. Fox College Sports' partner channel is Big Ten Network.

Programs broadcast nationwide

Programming strategy

The programming strategy that most FSN networks have adopted is to acquire the play-by-play broadcast rights to major sports teams in their regional market (this does not include NFL games, since the league's contracts require all local games to be aired on broadcast television). In addition to local play-by-play coverage, FSN networks create pregame shows, postgame shows, and weekly "magazine" shows centered on the teams to attract additional viewers. In some markets, FSN competes directly with other regional sports networks for the right to air this team-specific programming.
FSN has competed directly with ESPN in the area of acquiring rights to collegiate sports at the conference level. One notable agreement is with the Pacific-12 Conference, in which packages of football and men's basketball regular season games are aired across all FSN networks in the Pac-12 region. Every game (except the final) of the Pacific-12 Conference Men's Basketball Tournament is aired on FSN, as are a few Pac-12 matches in minor sports (such as baseball and volleyball).
Besides play-by-play, a common set of FSN programming was available to all its regional sports networks, most notably The Dan Patrick Show, The Best Damn Sports Show Period and Final Score (TBDSSP and Final Score ceased production, while The Dan Patrick Show moved to the NBC Sports Network). Until August 2012, in some of its regions, the competing Comcast SportsNet carried FSN programming on their channels.
Until 2008, FSN's national sports telecasts were marketed under the FSN name; after a number of FSN affiliates re-branded or re-aligned themselves with other RSN chains (such as FSN New England and FSN Bay Area becoming Comcast SportsNet, FSN New York becoming MSG Plus, and DirecTV Sports Networks' affiliates becoming Root Sports), these national programs began to use more generic branding with fewer references to FSN or Fox. However, they have since reverted to carrying Fox branding.

National prime time programming

In addition to regional programming, the Fox Sports Networks have some national prime time programming such as The Best Damn Sports Show Period and Chris Myers Interviews. FSN has tried to compete with ESPN in original programming, most notably in 1996, when FSN debuted the Fox Sports National Sports Report, a 30-minute sports news program designed to compete with ESPN's SportsCenter. The program originally began as a two-hour program, but was steadily cut back as ratings dropped and costs increased. FSN hired popular former SportsCenter anchor Keith Olbermann and used him to promote the show heavily, but ratings continued to slide. The last edition of the National Sports Report aired in February 2002. In some markets, FSN airs the Regional Sports Report, usually headlined with the name of the region covered, such as the Midwest Sports Report or Detroit Sports Report. The regional reports began in 2000 to complement the national sports report, but many regional reports were cut in 2002 due to increasing costs.Fox Sports Net cancels 'National Sports Report'

Live national play-by-play

Other sports

Other shows

In addition, FSN airs an extensive lineup of poker shows, including Poker Superstars Invitational Tournament and MansionPoker. Recently, the World Poker Tour broadcast its seventh season on FSN as well.

Defunct programs

These programs once aired on FSN, but have since been cancelled:
On July 3, 2006, FSN debuted FSN Final Score, the first national sports news program on the network since the cancellation of the National Sports Report. FSN veterans Van Earl Wright, Barry LeBrock, and Andrew Siciliano have been joined by newcomers Greg Wolf and Danyelle Sargent. Rick Jaffe, the show's executive producer, promised that the half-hour program will focus on showing game highlights, without additional analysis or interviews. The program changed its name to simply Final Score on April 23, 2008.

Pay-per-view

On November 10, 2006, FSN distributed its first pay-per-view event.  Evander Holyfield, former heavyweight boxing champion, defeated Fres Oquendo in a unanimous decision at the Alamodome in San Antonio, Texas. The fight was also distributed free of charge on the FoxSports.

High definition

A 720p high definition simulcast is available for all Fox Sports regional affiliates. All sports programming on is broadcast in a format optimized for 16:9 widescreen displays, with graphics now framed within a widescreen safe area rather than the 4:3 safe area, intended to be shown in a letterboxed format for standard definition viewers.

Americans in Focus

In 2008, FSN launched a public service initiative called Americans in Focus, with the sponsorship support of Farmers Insurance. This initiative consists of one-minute vignettes profiling persons of non-Caucasian ethnicity. Americans in Focus launched in February 2008 for Black History Month and continued all through September and October for Hispanic Heritage Month. Focus returned in February 2009 for Black History Month, then again in March 2009 for Asian Pacific American Heritage Month. After that, the series was discontinued and the companion website was shut down.








