[[Taut-line hitch]]

The taut-line hitch is an adjustable loop knot for use on lines under tension.  It is useful when the length of a line will need to be periodically adjusted in order to maintain tension.  It is made by tying a rolling hitch around the standing part after passing around an anchor object.  Tension is maintained by sliding the hitch to adjust size of the loop, thus changing the effective length of the standing part without retying the knot.
It is typically used for securing tent lines in outdoor activities involving camping, by arborists when climbing trees,

Naming

The adjustable loop forms of the rolling hitch and Magnus hitch, in addition to being called either of those two names, have also come to be known variously as the taut-line hitch, tent-line hitch, rigger's hitch, adjustable hitch, or midshipman's hitch.  These knots are generally shown as being based on one of three underlying hitches: two variants of the rolling hitch (ABOK #1734 and #1735) and the Magnus hitch (#1736).
These three closely related hitches have a long and muddled naming history that leads to ambiguity in the naming of their adjustable loop forms as well.  The use of the Ashley reference numbers for these inconsistently named hitches can eliminate ambiguity when required.  See the image to the right for an illustration of these related knots.
An early use of the taut-line hitch name is found in Howard W. Riley's 1912 Knots, Hitches, and Splices, although it is shown in the rolling hitch form and suggested for use as a stopper. As collected in Documents of the Assembly of the State of New York, 136th Session, 1913, Vol. 19, No. 29, Part 5.

Tying

#1855

Ashley uses the name midshipman's hitch for this variation.  Based on rolling hitch #1735, this version is considered the most secure but may be more difficult to adjust after being heavily loaded.
left|550px  

#1856

Based on rolling hitch #1734, this version is the one most often seen named taut-line hitch, typically in non-nautical sources.  It is the method currently taught by the Boy Scouts of America.
left|550px  

#1857

Based on Magnus hitch #1736, this is exactly as above but with the final hitch in the opposite direction.  It can be more tricky to snug-up, since both lines emerge from the same side of the hitch, but it has less tendency to twist under load.
left|550px  

Adjusting

Once snug and set, the hitch can be adjusted as needed.  To tighten the line with respect to a load attached to the standing part, the user can grasp the standing part with one hand inside of the loop and pull towards the anchor object.  The hitch may be grasped with the other hand and as slack develops within the loop, the hitch slid away from the anchor object, taking up the slack and enlarging the loop.  To loosen, the hitch may be slid toward the anchor object, making the loop smaller and lengthening the standing part.

Security

Although the three variations are similar they do have distinct properties when put to use.  AshleyAshley(1944), p. 298 and others  Ashley states #1857 has less tendency to twist.
These hitches may not hold fast under all conditions and with lines made from particularly stiff or slick modern fibers (e.g. polypropylene) these hitches can be difficult to make hold at all.  Sometimes they can be made more secure by using additional initial wraps and finishing half-hitches.






