[[Míchel (footballer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Madrid, Spanish footballers, Madrilenian footballers, Association football midfielders, La Liga footballers, Segunda División footballers, Real Madrid Castilla footballers, Real Madrid C.F. players, Liga MX footballers, Spain youth international footballers, Spain under-21 international footballers, Spain amateur international footballers, Spain international footballers, 1986 FIFA World Cup players, UEFA Euro 1988 players, 1990 FIFA World Cup players, Spanish expatriate footballers, Expatriate footballers in Mexico, Spanish football managers, La Liga managers, Rayo Vallecano managers, Real Madrid Castilla managers, Getafe CF managers, Sevilla FC managers, Superleague Greece managers, Olympiacos F.C. managers, Expatriate football managers in Greece, Spanish television presenters

José Miguel González Martín del Campo, commonly known as Míchel (; born 23 March 1963), is a Spanish retired footballer who played as a right midfielder, and the current coach of Olympiacos F.C. in the Superleague Greece.
He was most noted for his stellar crossing ability, also contributing with a fair share of goals.
Míchel gained nearly 70 caps for Spain from 1985 to 1992, and represented the nation in two World Cups (scoring four goals in the 1990 edition) and one European Championship. He started working as a manager in 2005.

Club career

The son of a footballer who had to retire from the game at 27 after a road accident, Míchel was born in Madrid and joined Real Madrid at the age of thirteen,Real Madrid fans biography  his technique and physicality on the pitch quickly standing out. He moved quickly through the ranks to the first team, appearing – and scoring – once in the 1981–82 season, in a 2–1 away win against CD Castellón on 11 April 1982.
A member of the renowned Quinta del Buitre, which also featured Emilio Butragueño, Miguel Pardeza, Rafael Martín Vázquez and Manuel Sanchís, Míchel never played less than 31 La Liga contests from 1985 to 1994. After helping Castilla CF to the second division title in 1984, he was instrumental in the capital side's conquests, which included six leagues and two consecutive UEFA Cups; he opened the score in the 1985 final of the latter competition, against Videoton FC.
In 1989 Míchel announced he would leave Real Madrid after having signed with an Italian s, but this never came to pass and he ended up staying until 1996. In his penultimate season he suffered a severe knee injury which rendered him unavailable for most of the successful league campaign, but still bounced back for a final solid year, after which he left for Club Celaya in Mexico – where Butragueño was also playing – shortly after the arrival at Madrid of president Lorenzo Sanz. He retired from football in 1997.
Míchel's career was not without incident: in 1988 he was hit by a bottle while on the pitch and, three years later, he was sanctioned by UEFA for using an unorthodox method of disrupting the concentration of Colombian Carlos Valderrama, in a game against Real Valladolid. The presiding judge in the case noted that "manipulating in public that of your neighbour which is a gift given exclusively to males by nature" violated a federation rule protecting a player's dignity.Míchel "palpa" a Valderrama (Míchel "feels" Valderrama) 
In the summer of 2005, after working as a sports commentator with RTVE after his retirement (still active, he had already worked in the capacity at the 1994 World Cup) and also writing articles for Madrid's Marca, Míchel was appointed manager of Rayo Vallecano.
On 27 April 2009 Míchel was appointed as coach of top flight strugglers Getafe CF, until the end of the season. He replaced former FC Barcelona midfielder Víctor Muñoz,Michel announced as new Getafe coach; Goal.
Míchel was appointed at Sevilla FC on 6 February 2012, replacing fired Marcelino García Toral and signing until the end of the season.Míchel, nuevo entrenador del Sevilla (Míchel, new Sevilla coach); Marca, 6 February 2012 
Míchel signed for Olympiacos F.C. in the Superleague Greece on 1 February 2013, penning a contract until June 2015.

International career

Míchel made his debut for the national team on 20 November 1985 against Austria, going on to appear in a further 65 internationals and scoring 21 goals (only missed a callup due to injury).José Miguel Martín González del Campo, 'Míchel' – International Matches; at RSSSF
He played in the 1990 FIFA World Cup, netting a hat-trick against South Korea in Spain's second game (3–1)Spain – South Korea 3–1 (1–1); Planet World Cup, 17 June 1990 and also a penalty against Belgium in the nation's final group game. After Javier Clemente's arrival as national boss he was deemed surplus to requirements and never called again, although only 29.
All national categories added, Míchel received exactly 100 caps.

International goals

Honours

Player

Manager

Individual

Club statistics







