[[Eight-ball]]

CATEGORIES: Pool (cue sports), Sports originating in the United States

right|thumb|200px|One of numerous proper  or, more rarely, bigs and littles or highs and lows) is a pool (pocket billiards) game popular in much of the world, and the subject of international professional and amateur competition. Played on a pool table with six pockets, the game is so universally known in some countries that beginners are often unaware of other pool games and believe the word "pool" itself refers to eight-ball. The game has numerous variations, including Alabama eight-ball, crazy eight, last pocket, misery, Missouri, 1 and 15 in the sides, rotation eight ball, soft eight, and others. Standard eight-ball is the second most competitive professional pool game, after nine-ball and for the last several decades ahead of straight pool.
Eight-ball is played with 16 balls: a , the players are assigned either the group of solid balls or the stripes once a ball from a particular group is legally pocketed. The ultimate object of the game is to legally pocket the eight ball in a called pocket, which can only be done after all of the balls from a player's assigned group have been cleared from the table.

History

The game of eight-ball is derived from an earlier game invented around 1900 (first recorded in 1908) in the United States and initially popularized under the name "B.B.C. Co. Pool" (a name that was still in use as late as 1925) by the Brunswick-Balke-Collender Company. This forerunner game was played with seven 

Standardized Rules of Play

American-style eight-ball rules are played around the world by professionals, and in many amateur leagues. Nevertheless, the rules for eight-ball may be the most contested of any billiard game. There are several competing sets of "official" rules. The non-profit World Pool-Billiard Association (WPA) – with national affiliates around the world, some of which long pre-date the WPA, such as the Billiard Congress of America (BCA) – promulgates standardized rules as Pool Billiards – The Rules of Play for amateur and professional play. Meanwhile, many amateur leagues, such as the American Poolplayers Association (APA) / Canadian Poolplayers Association (CPA), and the Valley National Eight-ball Association (VNEA, international in scope despite its historic name), use their own rulesets (most of them at least loosely based on the WPA/BCA version), while millions of individuals play informally using colloquial rules which vary not only from area to area but even from venue to venue.
A summary of the international rules follows (see the WPA/BCA or other leagues' published rules, which conflict on minor points, for more details).

Equipment

The table's playing surface is approximately  models are sometimes also used.
There are seven . The balls are usually colored as follows:

Setup

To start the game, the ".

Break

One person is chosen (by a predetermined method, e.g., coin flip, win or loss of previous game, or  and become the breaker, or elect to play from the current position of the balls.
According to World Standardized Rules, if the 8 ball is pocketed on the break without , with the balls as they lie. (For regional amateur variations, such as pocketing the 8 on the break being an instant win or loss, see "Informal rule variations", below.)

Turns

A player (or team) will continue to shoot until committing a  anywhere on the table, unless the foul occurred on the break shot, as noted previously.

Pocketing the 8 ball

Once all of a player's or team's group of object balls are pocketed, they may attempt to sink the 8 ball. To win, the player (or team) must first designate which pocket they plan to sink the 8 ball into and then successfully pot the 8 ball in that called pocket.  If the 8 ball falls into any pocket other than the one designated or is knocked off the table, or a foul (see below) occurs and the 8 ball is pocketed, this results in loss of game. Otherwise, the shooter's turn is simply over, including when a foul such as a scratch occurs on an unsuccessful attempt to pocket the 8 ball. In short, a World Standardized Rules game of eight-ball, like a game of nine-ball, is not over until the ", and in some leagues, such as APA, such a foul is a loss of game. This is not the case in World Standardized Rules, nor in some other leagues that use those rules or a variant of them, e.g. VNEA beginning with the 2008/2009 season, and BCAPL), and USAPL.

Winning

Any of the following results in a game win:

Fouls

Informal rule variations

Canada

In Canada there are a similar level and types of variation as in the US (see below).  One particularly common feature of Canadian bar pool is the "hooked yourself on the 8" rule — failure to hit the 8 ball when one is shooting for the 8 is a loss of game, unless one was hooked () foul if one pockets one's called shot but also pockets another ball incidentally, even if it is one's own (however, if that secondary pocketing was also called, the shot is legal, regardless of the order in which the balls were dropped).

Latin America

The  (it is not considered to matter), and the rack itself may be made of rubber, and flexible, making a tight rack physically impossible to achieve. Other than the 8 ball, other balls may be placed far more randomly than players in other areas would tolerate, with large clusters of solids together, and stripes with each other.
In most of Latin America, including Mexico, shots are un-", behind the headstring).
A common Latin American variant of " shots on the 8.
In some parts of Latin America, especially South America, the 1 ball often must be pocketed in the right side pocket (relative to the end of the table one breaks from), and the 15 ball must be pocketed in the other side pocket (left).  This rule probably developed to make it harder to run out after the first shot. Position play takes a larger role in this variation, and a player's strategy must necessarily initially revolve around getting the 1 or 15 in and preventing this opponent from doing likewise. When racking the balls for this variation, the 1 and 15 balls are placed behind the 8 ball at the center of the rack, the 1 ball on the left and the 15 ball on the right (from the racker's perspective). Latino last-pocket is virtually the only version of eight-ball played in Mexico, other than in the Mexico–United States border area.
In Mexico, a minority of players rack with the 8 ball rather than the apex ball on the foot spot, a trait in common with British blackball/8-ball pool.  Pocketing the 8 ball on the  diamonds, due to the influence of coyote, a Mexican variant of Chicago; foot-spot spotting is neither common nor uncommon.)  Pool itself is not considered a very serious game in the country other than in the northern states; in most of Mexico, three-cushion billiards is the serious game, while pool is mostly played by youths, by groups of friends (including many young women) as a bar game to pass the time, and by older working-class men as an after-work activity. In many recreation halls, dominoes is more popular than pool.
In many bars in Brazil (and not an official rule), a foul is generally punished by pocketing the lowest-numbered ball of the opponent. In that case, the cue ball remains where it stopped, as ball-in-hand is not commonly used. Additionally, in the case of scratching the cue ball, the opponent places the cue ball in , indicating some British snooker and/or blackball influence.

New Zealand

New Zealand eight-ball in many respects is closer to British blackball, but with numbered balls being used. " of blackball may or may not be followed; this depends on individual players and/or pubs.
The "nomination" rule is unique to New Zealand: A player ". However, the shooter is not permitted to pot (pocket) such a nominated ball – doing so results in a loss of game.

North Africa

In North African countries (as in Latin America, but reversed), both the 1 and 15 balls must be pocketed in the sides, the 15 on the right and 1 on the left (relative to the end of the table one breaks from). The North African version of the informal game is always played "" is a very common rule in addition to last-pocket.

United Kingdom

Pool is popularly played in two forms, traditionally it is played on a smaller table than the USA with smaller balls, different shaped, smaller pockets and a white ball slightly smaller than the other balls or "Object Balls". American pool tables are also common in the UK, competitions are more commonly use Nine Balls rules; the tables themselves are often referred to as Nine Ball tables, with Nine Ball being played extremely rarely on the more common, traditional, smaller UK tables. The two most common competitive rule sets used on the traditional tables are Eight-Ball Pool (replacing old EPA rules) and Blackball.wpa-pool.asp?id=117&pagetype=rules Most amateurs play 'pub rules', meaning the rules played at that venue.
The two main rule sets have features about them which most amateurs find offensive. Eight-Ball rules permit intentional fouls; despite opponents being awarded two visits for a standard foul causing an intentional foul, or not trying to play a legal shot, it is seen as unfair play and distasteful. In Blackball rules two shots following a foul do not carry, meaning the first shot is a Free Shot rather than two visits, a player takes their Free Shot and then play returns to normal. As most pub rules are based around Old EPA rules, in which two visits are awarded (rather than a free shot) amateurs are often unhappy with this difference in Blackball, although it is in no way as offensive as intentional fouls which are illegal in Blackball and result in loss of frame. Both Eight-Ball rules and Blackball require a player to either pot on their visit, or drive any ball, including the white, into a cushion after hitting an object ball, or else giving a foul. Although this rule, and the precise specifics of it are somewhat a mouthful, amateur players usually find the rule acceptable and see it primarily as a way to prevent "tucking up", whereby a player does not attempt to pot and instead just rolls up to their object to use it to snooker their opponent; tucking up is seen as unsporting and cowardly so being forced to play harder shots is quite welcomed.
There are several sets of rules which use a combination of many others in an attempt to find a balance between Blackball rules, which are seen as more aggressive than Eight-Ball rules, and Eight-Ball rules which are often referred to, quite detrimentally, as chess.
Many other varieties of rules are played, in particular when more than two players are involved 'Killer Pool' is common, where players start with a certain number of lives and lose one if they fail to pot; these games are often played for small amounts of money.

Pakistan

During game play, if the player fails to hit a ball of his designated group or he hits the opponent's ball with the cue ball, then the opponent receives 2 shots unless the opponent has pocketed all his balls and only the 8 ball remains, then the opponent will only get one shot. In case of such a foul, the game continues with the player playing the cue ball at the place where it stopped. If a Scratch occurs, then the opponent plays Ball-in-Hand but he is only allowed to place it anywhere in the D however he can play the cue ball in any direction. Knocking a ball (apart from the cue ball) off the table carries no penalty. Instead the misplaced ball is returned to its original place and the game continues.

India

If a Foul or a Scratch is occurred while playing the 8 ball, as long as opponents has at least 1 ball of his group present on the Table and the 8 ball is not pocketed the game continues and the opponent gets the chance, If the cue ball is scratched, the opponent player gets 2 chances, but the ball has to be placed behind the break line, but if a foul occurs, the cue ball continues to stay there and the opponent gets 2 chances before the opponent can play(irrespective of if the player pots any of his balls in the first chance). the opponent also gets 2 chances if a player scratches. But if a player has only 8 ball left and the opponent sink his last solid/stripe ball with cue ball and if there is no ball in hand rule the player loses the game. And if the 8 ball is the only ball on the table and if the player commits any kind of foul the game is over and the opponent wins.

United States

Most commonly of all in American  in detail, as to what balls and bank/kick cushions will be involved in the shot, with the shot considered a turn-ending (but not ball-in-hand) foul if not executed precisely as planned (and a loss of game if the "foul" shot pocketed the 8 ball).[ref]See for example: 
 Many other blogs and offline personal writings can confirm this author's take on the matter, but little authoritative has been written on the subject, as "bar pool" is of little consequence in the world of organized pool.[/ref] Contrariwise, some Americans hold that nothing other than the 8 ball has to be called in any way — "" counts.
In informal amateur play in most areas, the table will only be considered open if no balls were pocketed, or an equal number of stripes and solids were pocketed, or the cue ball was ) to be re-shot by the original breaker.
Fouls, in common bar pool, that are not cue ball scratches generally only cause loss of turn, with cue ball left in place (even if it is .  Regionally, there is a great deal of bar pool variation in the handling of fouls while shooting at and/or pocketing the 8 ball. In some cases any foul while shooting at but not pocketing the 8 is a loss of game, in others only a foul while otherwise successfully pocketing the 8, and in yet others only certain fouls, such as also sinking an opponent's ball or touching the 8 ball and scratching.
What is considered a foul further diverges from established, published rulesets. Scoop-under , though few players realize it).  When a cue ball is frozen or near-frozen to an object ball, shooting it dead-on, in line with both balls, is a foul in formal rulesets (as another kind of double-hit), but is generally tolerated in bar pool.
Other US bar pool oddities varying from area to area include:  Knocking the cue ball off the table on the break may be an instant loss; scratching on the break may be an instant loss; pocketing the 8 ball on the break (without scratching) may be either an instant win or instant loss (the latter being a rare variant); no safeties may be allowed at all – all shots may be required to be at least vaguely plausible attempts to pocket a legal ball; all jump shots may be banned;  can be accurately called); failure to hit one of one's own object balls (or the 8 if shooting for the 8) may be considered a "table scratch" that gives the opponent a shot in-hand from behind the head string; failure to hit the 8 if shooting for the 8 may be a loss of game; and a "split" shot, where the cue ball appears to simultaneously strike a legal ball and an opponent's object ball, may be considered a legal shot, as long as it is called as a split shot, and the hit is in fact simultaneous to the naked eye.
"; either player may suggest bank-the-eight at any time before or during the game, and the other may accept or refuse; all other rules apply as usual. Playing bank-the-eight may be considered rude if there is a long line of players waiting to use the table.
A similarly-motivated variant is "); all other rules apply as usual.  This variant is popular in Mexico.
Due probably to the influence of nine-ball, in which the 1 ball must be the apex ball of the rack, most American bar players traditionally rack a game of eight-ball with the 1 ball in this position. Racking is also typically done solid-stripe-solid-stripe-solid along the two sides of the rack, resulting in solids being on all three corners. This is not a legal rack in World Standardized Rules, nor any other notable league ruleset other than APA.

Derivative games and variants

British-style variant

In the United Kingdom, eight-ball pool (and its internationally standardized variant blackball) as an overall rather different version of the game has evolved, influenced by English billiards and snooker, and has become popular in amateur competition in Britain, Ireland, Australia, and some other countries. As with American eight-ball, there are multiple competing standards bodies that have issued international rules. Aside from using unnumbered object balls (except for the 8), UK-style tables have pockets just larger than the balls, and more than one type of , and many other details.
The English Pool Association  is recognized by the Sports Council as the governing body for pool including blackball in England.

Eight-ball rotation

The hybrid game eight-ball rotation is a combination of eight-ball and rotation, in which the players must pocket their balls (other than the 8, which remains last) in numerical order.








