[[Infanta Cristina, Duchess of Palma de Mallorca]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Living people, Spanish infantas, House of Bourbon (Spain), New York University alumni, Complutense University of Madrid alumni, Dukes of Palma de Mallorca, Sailors at the 1988 Summer Olympics, Olympic sailors of Spain, Nobility from Madrid, Spanish expatriates in Switzerland, Grand Crosses of the Order of Charles III, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic, Dames Grand Cordon of the Order of the White Elephant, Grand Cordons of the Order of Leopold (Belgium), Grand Cordons of the Order of the Precious Crown, Grand Crosses of the Order of Adolphe of Nassau, Grand Crosses of the Order of Christ (Portugal), Grand Crosses of the Order of Honour (Greece), Grand Crosses of the Order of Prince Henry, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Quetzal, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Falcon, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Orange-Nassau, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav, Supreme Classes of the Order of the Virtues, Members of the Order of Tri Shakti Patta, First Class, Grand Cordons of the Order of the Star of Jordan, Grand Crosses of the Order of José Matías Delgado, Bands of the Order of the Aztec Eagle, Grand Cross of the Order of the Sun (Peru), Spanish duchesses

|-
|
|}
Infanta Cristina of Spain, Duchess of Palma de Mallorca (Cristina Federica Victoria Antonia de la Santísima Trinidad de Borbón y de Grecia; born 13 June 1965), is the younger daughter of King Juan Carlos and Queen Sofía of Spain.  she was seventh in the line of succession to the Spanish throne, after her siblings, Felipe and Elena, and their children.

Birth

Cristina was born in Madrid and was baptized into the Church at the Palacio de La Zarzuela by the Archbishop of Madrid. Her godparents were Alfonso, Duke of Anjou and Cádiz, and Infanta Maria Cristina of Spain.

Education

She received her secondary education at Santa María del Camino School and she graduated from the Universidad Complutense de Madrid in 1989 with a degree in political science. She continued her studies at New York University, obtaining a master's degree in international relations in 1990. In 1991, she gained practical experience working at the UNESCO headquarters in Paris.
The Infanta is fluent in Spanish, Catalan, English and Greek.

Marriage and children

She married team handball player Iñaki Urdangarín in Barcelona on 4 October 1997, at which time her father conferred on her the title Duchess of Palma de Mallorca for life.
The couple have four children, all born in Barcelona:
They lived in Washington, D.C. from 2009 to 2012, where her husband worked for Telefónica.  In August 2013 she moved with her four children to Geneva, Switzerland, to take a job with the Caixa Foundation, while her husband, who is the subject of an embezzlement investigation, remained in Barcelona.blogspot.html

Activities in Spain and abroad

She carries out many institutional, cultural, academic and welfare activities in Spain and abroad, especially in European and Latin American countries.
As Honorary President of the Spanish Committee of UNESCO, she has maintained her links with this international organization and with several of its projects, especially educational ones, with a focus on activities to protect the natural and artistic heritage. In October 2001, she was appointed Goodwill Ambassador to the United Nations for the 2nd World Assembly on Ageing. She is also a member of the Dali Foundation Board of Trustees.
She supports a number of welfare bodies and participates personally in courses on adapted sailing for disabled people. She is the President of the International Foundation for Disabled Sailing.
She's also been a member of the Bilderberg group since 2001, with her parents.

Corruption inquiry

Her husband was investigated from early 2012 on suspicion of  fraudulently obtaining millions in public funds. In April 2013, Infanta Cristina was formally named as a suspect in the case by the judge in charge.

Sports and participation in the Olympics

She practices a number of sports including skiing, but her favorite is sailing. She has taken part in many national and international events and was a member of the Spanish Olympic sailing team at the Seoul Games in 1988 where she was standard bearer in the opening parade.

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles

The Infanta's style and title in full:  Su alteza real Doña Cristina Federica Victoria Antonia de la Santísima Trinidad, Infanta de España, Duquesa de Palma de Mallorca (Her Royal Highness Doña Cristina Federica Victoria Antonia de la Santísima Trinidad, Infanta of Spain, Duchess of Palma de Mallorca).

Honours

See also List of honours of the Spanish Royal Family by country

Arms

Ancestry








