[[Atomium]]

CATEGORIES: 1958 works, Buildings and structures in Brussels, Visitor attractions in Brussels, World's Fairs in Brussels, World's Fair architecture in Belgium

The Atomium is a building in Brussels originally constructed for Expo '58, the 1958 Brussels World's Fair.  Designed by the engineer André Waterkeyn and architects André and Jean Polak,Official website it stands  diameter stainless steel clad spheres are connected so that the whole forms the shape of a unit cell of an iron crystal magnified 165 billion times.
Tubes connect the spheres along the 12 edges of the cube and all eight vertices to the centre. They enclose escalators and a lift to allow access to the five habitable spheres which contain exhibit halls and other public spaces. The top sphere provides a panoramic view of Brussels. CNN named it Europe's most bizarre building.

Renovation

Renovation of the Atomium began in March 2004; it was closed to the public in October, and remained closed until February 18, 2006. The renovations included replacing the faded aluminium sheets on the spheres with stainless steel. To help pay for renovations, the old aluminium was sold to the public as souvenirs. A triangular piece about 2 m long sold for €1,000.duoh.com/blog/comments/the_atomium_restored/

Three of the four uppermost spheres lack vertical support and hence are not open to the public for safety reasons, although the sphere at the pinnacle is open to the public. The original design called for no supports; the structure was simply to rest on the spheres. Wind tunnel tests proved that the structure would have toppled in an 80 km/h wind (140 km/h winds have been recorded in Belgium). Support columns were added to achieve enough resistance against overturning.

Worldwide copyright claims

SABAM, Belgium's society for collecting copyrights, has claimed worldwide intellectual property rights on all reproductions of the image via the United States Artists Rights Society (ARS). For example SABAM issued a demand that a United States website remove all images of them from its pages. The website responded by replacing all such images with a warning not to take photographs of the Atomium, and that Asbl Atomium will sue if you show them to anyone.S. copyright law Title 17, Chapter 1, Section 120, you will still be sued." Sabam confirmed that permission is required.100 "photoshoppers" wanted to erase copyright building Simon Aughton, MacUser News, 21 April 2008, '"Since its creation, the Atomium is a copyrighted monument and any reproduction of its image in a publication or on a website must be accompanied by a prior authorisation request to the rightholders or to Sabam,"a spokeswoman said.'
Ralf Ziegermann remarkedThe Cartoonist, Ralf Ziegermann, 5 January 2008 on the complicated copyright instructions on Atomium's website specific to "private pictures". 600 pixels wide / 72 dpi), are free from copyrights. However, the copyright © Sabam 2008 - www.be must be mentioned." The organisers of Belgian heritage, Anno Expoexpo58.the balls of Brussels (web archive), embe, 10 April 2008 (English)Anno-Expo,  (Dutch) SABAM responded that they would make an exception for 2008 and that people could publish private photographs for one year only on condition they were for non-commercial purposes.
Anno Expo later announced they had censored part of their own report due to "complications" and referred to a meeting they had with SABAM.Sabam in het nauw, Christophe Callewaert, 9 April 2008 (Dutch)
On February 23, 2009 Axel Addington, Web Content Manager for Atomium, e-mailed a clarification to the Glass Steel and Stone web site, which some years earlier redacted its photographs of the Atomium after being threatened.  He stated, "The royalties are perceived (sic) by the descendants of André Waterkeyn, the engineer who conceived Atomium in 1955, and not by the A.S.B.L Atomium. So, you've probably been sued by the SABAM (Belgian Copyright Company) because of the Waterkeyn Family."
From the Atomium's website, the current copyright restrictions exempt private individuals under the following conditions,Atomium.
  This is the case where photographs are taken by private individuals and shown on private websites for no commercial purpose (the current trend for photo albums).
 In accordance with legislation, usage rights for the image of the Atomium would naturally extend to 4th October 2075, in other words, the seventieth anniversary of André Waterkeyn's death.






