[[E. B. White]]

CATEGORIES: 1899 births, 1985 deaths, Cornell University alumni, American essayists, American poets, Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal winners, Newbery Honor winners, Pulitzer Prize winners, World federalists, Writers from Maine, The New Yorker people, Writers of style guides, Deaths from Alzheimer's disease, 20th-century American novelists, American people of Scottish descent

Elwyn Brooks "E. B." White (July 11, 1899 – October 1, 1985), was an American writer. He was a contributor to The New Yorker magazine and a co-author of the English language style guide, The Elements of Style, which is commonly known as "Strunk &   White". He also wrote books for children, including Charlotte's Web, Stuart Little and The Trumpet of the Swan. Charlotte's Web was voted the top children's novel in a 2012 survey of School Library Journal readers, not for the first time.

Life

White was born in Mount Vernon, New York, the youngest child of Samuel Tilly White, the president of a piano firm, and Jessie Hart White, the daughter of Scottish-American painter William Hart. and Quill and Dagger societies and Phi Gamma Delta (FIJI).
White worked for the United Press (currently the United Press International) and the American Legion News Service in 1921 and 1922, and then became a reporter for The Seattle Times in 1922 and 1923. He then worked for two years with the Frank Seaman advertising agency as a production assistant and copywriter
A few years later in 1929, White and Angell were married. They had a son, Joel White, a naval architect and boat builder, who owned Brooklin Boat Yard in Brooklin, Maine. Katharine's son from her first marriage, Roger Angell, has spent decades as a fiction editor for The New Yorker and is well known as the magazine's baseball writer.
James Thurber described White as being a quiet man, disliking publicity, who during his time at The New Yorker would slip out of his office via the fire escape to a nearby branch of Schrafft's to avoid visitors whom he didn't know. 
White died on October 1, 1985, suffering from Alzheimer's disease, at his farm home in North Brooklin, Maine.

Career

He published his first article in The New Yorker magazine in 1925, then joined the staff in 1927 and continued to contribute for around six decades. Best recognized for his essays and unsigned "Notes and Comment" pieces, he gradually became the most important contributor to The New Yorker at a time when it was arguably the most important American literary magazine. From the beginning to the end of his career at The New Yorker, he frequently provided what the magazine calls "Newsbreaks" (short, witty comments on oddly worded printed items from many sources) under various categories such as "Block That Metaphor". He also served as a columnist for Harper's Magazine from 1938 to 1943.
In 1949, White published Here Is New York, a short book based upon a Holiday magazine article that he had been asked to write. The article reflects the writer's appreciation of a city that provides its residents with both "the gift of loneliness and the gift of privacy", and concludes with a dark note touching upon the forces that may destroy the city that the writer loves. This prescient "love letter" to the city was re-published in 1999 on the one hundredth anniversary of his birth, with an introduction by his stepson, Roger Angell.
In 1959, White edited and updated The Elements of Style. This handbook of grammatical and stylistic guidance for writers of American English had been written and published in 1918 by William Strunk, Jr., one of White's professors at Cornell. White's rework of the book was extremely well received, and further editions of the work followed in 1972, 1979, and 1999; an illustrated edition followed in 2005. The illustrator, Maira Kalman, is a contributor to The New Yorker. That same year, a New York composer named Nico Muhly premiered a short opera based on the book. The volume is a standard tool for students and writers and remains required reading in many composition classes. The complete history of The Elements of Style is detailed in Mark Garvey's Stylized: A Slightly Obsessive History of Strunk & White's The Elements of Style.
In 1978, White won a special Pulitzer Prize citing "his letters, essays and the full body of his work"."Special Awards and Citations". The Pulitzer Prizes. Retrieved December 2, 2013. Other awards he received included a Presidential Medal of Freedom in 1963 and memberships in a variety of literary societies throughout the United States.
The 1973 Canadian animated short, The Family That Dwelt Apart, is based on his short story of the same name and is narrated by White.

Children's books

In the late 1930s, White turned his hand to children's fiction on behalf of a niece, Janice Hart White. His first children's book, Stuart Little, was published in 1945, and Charlotte's Web appeared in 1952. Stuart Little initially received a lukewarm welcome from the literary community due in part to reluctance to endorse it on the part of Anne Carroll Moore, the retired but still powerful children's librarian from the New York Public Library. However, both books went on to receive high acclaim.
White received the Laura Ingalls Wilder Medal from the U.S. professional children's librarians in 1970, recognizing his "substantial and lasting contributions to children's literature". At the time it was awarded every five years. That year he was also the U.S. nominee and a highly commended runner-up for the biennial, international Hans Christian Andersen Award, as he was again in 1976. Also in 1970, White's third children's novel was published, The Trumpet of the Swan. In 1973 it won the Sequoya Award from Oklahoma and the William Allen White Award from Kansas, both selected by students voting for their favorite book of the year.
In 2012, School Library Journal sponsored a survey of readers which identified Charlotte's Web as top children's novel ("fictional title for readers 9–12"). The librarian who conducted it observed that "it is impossible to conduct a poll of this sort and expect novel to be anywhere but #1".

Awards and honors

Books






