[[The Weather Channel]]

CATEGORIES: The Weather Channel, 1982 meteorology, American television networks, Bain Capital companies, Blackstone Group companies, Cobb County, Georgia, English-language television stations in the United States, Meteorological companies, NBCUniversal networks, NBCUniversal, Private equity portfolio companies, Television channels and stations established in 1982, Atlanta, Georgia

The Weather Channel is an American basic cable and satellite television channel that is owned as a joint venture between NBCUniversal, and investment firms The Blackstone Group and Bain Capital. The channel broadcasts weather forecasts and weather-related news, along with documentaries and entertainment programming related to weather. The channel's headquarters are located in Cumberland, Georgia, near Atlanta.
In addition to its programming on the cable channel, TWC also provides forecasts for terrestrial and satellite radio stations, newspapers, and websites, and maintains an extensive online presence at weather. Content from The Weather Channel is available for purchase from the NBCUniversal Archives.
As of August 2013, The Weather Channel was received by approximately 99,926,000 pay television households (87.50% of households with a television) in the United States, making it the most common cable channel in the country.

History

The Weather Channel was founded on July 18, 1980,USPTO filings: First Use (not First Use in Commerce date on various filings, including filing w/ serial number 73369821) by former WLS-TV/Chicago chief meteorologist and Good Morning America forecaster John Coleman and then-president of the channel's original owner Landmark Communications (now Landmark Media Enterprises), Frank Batten. It was launched on May 2, 1982.

Current

The Weather Channel uses special proprietary equipment that inserts local forecast and weather alert information if it is viewed on a cable television provider. The original WeatherStar technology has been upgraded on larger cable systems to the IntelliStar, which incorporates "Vocal Local" to announce current conditions, weather bulletins and detailed local forecasts. Subscribers of satellite, IPTV and some smaller cable providers originally saw only a roundup of local TWC forecasts for major cities across the U.S., as well as satellite and radar images, and severe weather watch and warning maps when active. However, satellite customers with newer systems or interactive receivers have the choice of 'roundups' or local forecasts. For both cable and satellite viewers, popular and smooth jazz music plays in the background during these segments. The original WeatherStar technology is still in use by small cable companies that cannot afford to upgrade to the IntelliStar.
The Weather Channel operates a service based on modified versions of the WeatherStar technology called Weatherscan, a separate channel which constantly displays local and regional conditions, and forecasts, along with The Weather Channel's logo and advertisements.
TWC's sister channels in Canada are the English language The Weather Network and the French language MétéoMédia, which use similar technology that is currently in use in the United States. TWC also runs websites in Brazil (Canal do Tempo), the United Kingdom (Weather Channel), France (Météo 123) and Germany (Wetter 123). Apart from its stake in the Weather Network/MétéoMédia, TWC only runs its U.S. channel, although it does produce international forecasts.
A definitive history of the network, The Weather Channel: The Improbable Rise of a Media Phenomenon, by Frank Batten and Jeffrey L. Cruikshank, was published by Harvard Business Press in May 2002, in honor of TWC's 20th anniversary.

=Sale to NBCUniversal=

On January 3, 2008, Landmark Communications put up The Weather Channel and its assets for sale. The sale was finalized on September 12, 2008. NBC Universal also owned NBC Weather Plus, a rival service which was carried by and featured content from its local affiliates; that service announced its discontinuation three months later. Subchannels carrying Weather Plus have since switched to The Local AccuWeather Channel, kept the Weather Plus engine, or switched affiliations to other networks such as This TV or the Retro Television Network; some have shut down entirely.
From November 2008 to February 2009, The Weather Channel laid off seven longtime on-camera meteorologists: Kristina Abernathy, Eboni Deon, Kristin Dodd, Rich Johnson, Cheryl Lemke, Mark Mancuso and Dave Schwartz. With the exception of Deon, all had been on the air for more than ten years, and three of them had been employed by the network for more than twenty years. In July 2010, The Weather Channel terminated Bill Keneely, the last of the original on-camera meteorologists who appeared on the network's first broadcasts in 1982. In December 2010, the network also laid off on-camera meteorologist Nicole Mitchell; Mitchell would file a lawsuit against The Weather Channel in 2012, alleging that she had been terminated because the new owners disapproved of the time required by her simultaneous duties as a Captain in the U.S. Air Force Reserve as one of the "Hurricane Hunters" team. Such reserve duties are protected by U.S. law (Mitchell now serves as the chief meteorologist at Al Jazeera America who also employs Eboni Deon).
Inevitably, the merger of NBC on-air meteorologists began in May 2009. Former NBC Weather Plus meteorologist Todd Santos joined The Weather Channel on May 2 of that year. Al Roker of NBC's Today began hosting a one-hour morning program called Wake Up With Al, alongside meteorologist Stephanie Abrams later in the summer. However, for New York City-based forecasting operations (those utilized for MSNBC and CNBC forecasts, for instance), the former NBC Weather Plus forecasting, radar and graphics systems remain in place, with banners changed to fit The Weather Channel's graphics scheme. On September 10, 2009, The Weather Channel co-founder Frank Batten died."Video Submission Agreement." The Weather Channel.
In January 2012, David Kenny took over as CEO of The Weather Channel, replacing former AOL executive Mike Kelly, who had been appointed as the channel's CEO in the summer of 2009. Although all operations, sales support and marketing and the bulk of employees are located in the headquarters in Atlanta, David Kenny declined to move there, and continues to live and work from his home in Boston,
In 2014, Dave Schwartz appeared on The Weather Channel again,

=International versions=

Over the years, attempts to broadcast international versions of TWC (apart from Canada's The Weather Network/MétéoMédia and the Australian version of The Weather Channel) failed. TWC also operates websites for online localized forecasts in Brazil, France, Germany, India, Latin America, and the United Kingdom, but some of these sites apparently have not been developed further since 2003. The Weather Channel also shares radar and forecasts with The Weather Network, particularly for The Weather Channel's Canadian forecasts.

Local on the 8s

Since its inception, The Weather Channel has incorporated local forecasts using WeatherStar computers installed at cable headends. Until 1995, the forecasts had aired at various times each hour, but are currently shown at times ending in "8", hence the title of the local forecasts is "Local on the 8s" (though local forecasts are reduced to once every half-hour when non-forecast programs are aired, which now comprise the majority of the broadcast day). With the introduction of the current IntelliStar system, traffic information was also incorporated alongside local weather information, in areas where traffic.
The WeatherStar systems also utilize a Lower Display Line (LDL) on the bottom of the screen during all programming (until November 2013, it had been limited to only local forecasts and national programming while being removed from the screen during commercial breaks), providing current conditions for a specific location and two or three towns within 15 miles, almanac data and forecasts on cable headends using the IntelliStar system and only current conditions, and forecasts on cable headends using WeatherStar XL and older models. WeatherStar units also allow cable providers to scroll text messages when in use, including the capability to broadcast severe weather advisories and warnings when severe weather occurs in a given area, displaying warnings for the county in which the WeatherStar system's cable headend is located and surrounding counties in the immediate area.

Other services

The Weather Channel HD

The Weather Channel HD is a 1080i high definition simulcast feed of The Weather Channel that launched on September 26, 2007. DirecTV was the first provider to add the HD feed. At that time, no programming was actually presented in high definition, except for a national "satellite" version of the "Local on the 8s". The channel premiered its first high definition programs on October 1, 2007, with the debuts of Epic Conditions and WeatherVentures; these were followed by the premiere of When Weather Changed History on January 6, 2008.
Throughout the final months of 2007 to the early months of 2008, various cable providers began adding The Weather Channel HD to their channel lineups, including those in the Boston, Massachusetts, Austin, Texas, San Antonio, Texas and Baton Rouge, Louisiana markets.
TWC began broadcasting studio programming in high definition on June 2, 2008. The new HD studio features various environmentally friendly technologies. , all of TWC's programming (with the exception of It Could Happen Tomorrow, Full Force Nature, and older episodes of Storm Stories) is currently broadcast in HD.

The Weather Channel on Demand

The Weather Channel on Demand is the channel's video-on-demand service. Unlike the linear television channel and its sister website, the service does not provide national or local weather forecasts, and only offers select episodes of original series and specials previously seen on the network.

Weatherscan

Weatherscan (originally called Weatherscan Local from 1999 to 2003) is a digital cable and satellite channel that operates as a sister network of The Weather Channel. Launched in 1999, Weatherscan is available on some cable providers in the United States, often on their digital cable lineups, though it is available in fewer markets than The Weather Channel; some providers, however, place the channel on their basic cable tier alongside The Weather Channel. A separate feed for satellite subscribers on Dish Network launched in the summer of 2010.
Weatherscan's forecast products are generated by an IntelliStar unit at the cable provider's headend, which is configured differently than the IntelliStars used by The Weather Channel, in that different graphics and additional weather products are featured and that the service airs an uninterrupted, rolling local weather format with information being shown on a continuous loop. Similar to the now-defunct NBC Weather Plus, Weatherscan displays an "L"-bar that provides current conditions and weather forecasts for a particular location and the surrounding area at all times during programming, with weather information also being shown on a smaller screen surrounding the "L"-bar.

Radio and newspaper presence

The Weather Channel provides forecasts for satellite radio provider Sirius XM Radio in the United States. Both services run regional forecasts on one station and operate several combined local weather and traffic stations for major metropolitan areas.
TWC also has content partnerships with a number of local U.S. radio stations to provide local forecasts, using announcers separate from the television channel. For some affiliates, The Weather Channel provides a limited amount of live coverage during local severe weather events (with the Georgia-based announcers connected via ISDN). Distribution of TWC radio content is currently handled by Dial Global.
Similarly, TWC also provides weather reports for a number of newspapers around the United States. This included a half-page national forecast for USA Today that it provided content for until September 2012, when rival AccuWeather replaced The Weather Channel as the paper's forecast provider. TWC's forecasts were replaced with those provided by AccuWeather on the USAToday.

Online services

TWC provides numerous customized forecasts for online users through its website, weather. It also provides WAP access for mobile phone users, desktop widgets for quick reference by computer users, and customized weather feeds for individual websites Cell phone customers are also able to have local forecasts sent to their mobile handsets from TWC via SMS by sending a text message with their ZIP code to 42278, which spells "4cast". The Weather Channel also provides weather forecasts for other services including Yahoo!.
In addition, The Weather Channel maintains apps for the iPhone, iPad, Android, Kindle Fire, and Windows mobile and tablet platforms. TWC formerly maintained two versions of its mobile applications: a free version that incorporates advertising and a pay version called "TWC Max" that does not feature advertising, the latter was discontinued in favor of an all ad-supported model on January 6, 2014. Aside from location-based weather forecast information, the apps provide radar maps, and tropical and seasonal updates, as well as social media related functions that track weather-related Twitter messages and allow users to send Facebook friends severe weather alerts.
In July 2012, The Weather Channel purchased competing weather website Weather Underground. While TWC had already has had success with its own mobile apps, it plans to use Weather Underground's large network of digital forecasting and tracking websites to bolster its digital growth. Weather Underground operates separately from The Weather Channel and continues to provide its own forecasts, though its website incorporates some weather news and video content from TWC.

Programming

Weather forecast programming made up TWC's entire schedule prior to its incorporation of weather-related original programming in 2000 (with few breakaways from its forecast programs prior to then, outside of the educational program The Weather Classroom). The number of hours devoted to TWC's in-studio forecast programs have steadily eroded since then, though its studio programs still air prominently within its morning schedule and air intermittently during the afternoon and nighttime hours.
The Weather Channel also broadcasts original weather-related documentary and entertainment series, and specials (known as "long-form programs", although TWC's individual forecast programs last between one and four hours, compared to the "long-form" entertainment programs of a half-hour or one hour in length); these programs typically run from 8 p.m.-4 a.m. Eastern Time on weekdays and 2 p.m.-4:30 a.m. Eastern Time on weekends. Long-form programs are also interspersed alongside forecast programs on TWC's afternoon and nighttime schedule.

Movies

On October 30, 2009, The Weather Channel, in a move deemed controversial by many longtime viewers, began airing weather-related movies on Friday nights. The first feature to be broadcast by the channel was The Perfect Storm.
After December 2009, these weekly movies were discontinued for the time being in favor of running Weather Center, which already aired throughout primetime during the rest of the work week. Despite the controversy, the Friday night film block resumed on March 26, 2010 with Into Thin Air: Deaths on Everest under the title "Flick and a Forecast." The Weather Channel meteorologist Jen Carfagno and MSNBC contributor Touré co-hosted the film block. During the broadcasts, the Lower Display Line that normally appears on TWC shows to provide local weather information (with breakaways during forecast and most long-form programs only for commercial breaks) was removed, appearing only a few times each hour during the film as a substitute for the standard "Local on the 8s" segments, with a TWC logo bug appearing at other times during the film when the LDL was not on-screen.
While the films shown within the "Flick and a Forecast" block were weather-related in some form, some films featured (such as Misery and Deep Blue Sea) had only a minimal tie to weather. NewsBlues reported the cancellation of the movie block on May 31, 2010; its removal was due in part to viewer criticism of movies being shown on what is intended as a news and information channel, as well as a snafu that occurred during a tornado outbreak in April 2010 that led a scheduled movie to be aired instead of wall-to-wall severe weather coverage. The "Flick and a Forecast" presentations were then replaced by an additional hour of Weather Center and a two-hour block of long-form original programs.

Current on-air staff

Branding

Logos

The Weather Channel's original and most recognized logo was a blue rectangular box with rounded edges that debuted with TWC's first broadcast on May 2, 1982. This logo was revised in 1996, with the corners made less rounded and the logo becoming slightly flat. The weather. On August 15, 2005, the logo was overhauled again; the logo became a straight-edged square with no white trim on the edge and "The Weather Channel" text is now in title-case and left-justified, similar to its Canadian sister channel The Weather Network. A 25th anniversary logo used in 2007 featured a white square edged in blue connected to the current logo with the text "25 YEARS" inside it in blue.
Since the purchase of The Weather Channel by NBCUniversal in 2008, the network has participated in the "Green is Universal" campaign, which occurs twice a year, usually being in April and November. The network's logo changes to a shade of green to showcase its support of being environmentally friendly.

Network slogans

=Hurricane, severe weather, and winter coverage slogans=

==Hurricane coverage slogans==

==Severe weather coverage slogans==

==Winter storm coverage slogans==

Controversies and criticism

2007 global warming controversy

The website Capital Weather published an interview with WJLA-TV meteorologist Brian van de Graaff. In this interview, van de Graaff stated:
On December 21, 2006, Dr. Heidi Cullen reacted to this by posting "Junk Controversy not Junk Science" in a blog on The Weather Channel's website. In her blog, Dr. Cullen reacted by stating:
Global warming was voted #1 in The Weather Channel special 100 Biggest Weather Moments.

Programming controversies

The channel's original format was akin to that of a news and information cable network. Since the creation of the series Atmospheres in 2000 and Storm Stories in 2003, The Weather Channel has seen a gradual transition toward a mix of weather forecast programming and weather-related entertainment programming that paralleled the launch of sister network Weatherscan, the evolution of the always-on "L" bar/weather ticker, the development of weather. Currently, The Weather Channel broadcasts a large proportion of its non-forecast content on weekends with fourteen hours of the channel's weekend lineup consisting of non-forecast programming, along with eleven hours of non-forecast programming each weekday. The decision to show movie and series content related to weather has caused criticism from many viewers and those in the media, who have blasted The Weather Channel for deviating from its format of running weather information 24 hours a day to run more infotainment programming.
The controversy further escalated on April 30, 2010, when The Weather Channel went ahead with airing the 1992 film Wind (a film about yachting that had little to do with weather, contrary to its name) at the same time a tornado outbreak was occurring in Missouri and Arkansas. Meteorologist Jim Cantore publicly stated on his Twitter profile that he was "severely misled" into believing the channel would cancel the movie in favor of tornado coverage and issued a public apology for the incident. I want to apollogize to all of you. I was SEVERELY mislead. Was told we were bagging the "movie" to do what this network was created for.. Twitter. Retrieved May 1, 2010. TWC continued showing the movie while it was giving special "dual-feed" updates to Intellistar units in the area, but much of the affected area was rural and had legacy STAR systems (WeatherSTAR Jr.'s, 4000s or XLs) or satellite that did not support the dual-feed feature.
In November 2013, the channel introduced a new initiative of "weather all the time" in response to the criticism; all long-form programming (which was rebranded under the tagline Natural Drama) will now have direct relevance to weather-related subjects, and the network also promised to interrupt programming either regionally or nationally during major weather events; in addition, The Weather Channel extended the display of its Lower Display Line to commercial breaks and through entire broadcasts of its long-form programs (similar to the 2004 expansion of ESPN's "BottomLine" ticker through the duration of most programs).

Cable and satellite carriage disputes

=Dish Network carriage dispute=

On May 20, 2010, Dish Network announced that it was dropping The Weather Channel at midnight Eastern Time that day in favor of its own similar weather information channel, The Weather Cast. The carriage dispute was over the rates that The Weather Channel asked Dish Network to pay: from 11 cents per subscriber per monthStelter, Brian (2010-05-22). Weather Channel's Move Beyond Forecasts May Be Costly. The New York Times. Retrieved May 22, 2010. to 12 cents,Dish Network is dropping The Weather Channel. The Weather Channel news release (2010-05-20). Retrieved May 22, 2010. a nine percent increase, totaling $140,000 per month. The dispute was also over the shift of The Weather Channel's programming format from an information-based channel to an entertainment-based service. Despite the earlier announcement that The Weather Channel would be dropped, the channel was never officially removed from Dish Network. The Weather Cast was discontinued in anticipation of a Weatherscan-based service that would provide local weather information for Dish Network customers. The financial terms of the deal were not disclosed. The proposed movie scheduled for the Friday after the deal was struck (May 28), Gorillas in the Mist, was dropped in favor of a six-hour marathon of Tornado Road.

=DirecTV carriage dispute=

DirecTV removed The Weather Channel from its lineup at 12 a.m. Eastern Time on January 14, 2014, after the two parties were unable to come to terms on a new carriage agreement;DirecTV customers lose The Weather Channel, USA Today (via the Associated Press), January 14, 2014. as a result, DirecTV became the first major pay television provider to drop the channel in its history. Two weeks before the channel's carriage agreement was set to expire on December 31 (after which the deadline for a new carriage deal was extended by two weeks), the satellite provider began carrying WeatherNation TV (the successor to The WeatherCast) on channel 361 on December 16, 2013 – placing the channel next to The Weather Channel's slot on channel 362;
The Weather Channel's chief executive officer David Kenny stated that it offered DirecTV the best rate for its programming (according to SNL Kagan, The Weather Channel's average carriage fee currently is 13¢ per subscriber), and blasted the removal of the channel by the satellite provider stating that it was putting profits ahead of public safety. Representatives for DirecTV stated that it added WeatherNation TV in response to subscriber complaints regarding the number of reality programs on The Weather Channel, which it estimated had amounted to 40% of its daily schedule (WeatherNation TV, which outside of its carriage by DirecTV is primarily carried on broadcast television stations as a main channel affiliation or a digital multicast service, does not run programming outside of forecasts with the only interruption in its weather coverage coming from affiliates that carry children's programs to fulfill FCC educational programming requirements). DirecTV stated that weather information is also available through broadcast television stations carried as part of its local channel tier, as well as the provider's designated emergency channels.
Weather Channel fought back by airing commercials encouraging people to not go to DirecTV and recently a parody of DirecTV's popular "When You..." ad campaign.
On April 8, 2014, The Weather Channel and DirecTV both settled on a new agreement (the TWC decided to alter its programming lineup by trimming half of its reality programming during the weekdays in response to DirecTV subscribers' complaints), with TWC returning to DirecTV on channel 362 the following day. Local weather using the red button didn't return to The Weather Channel until May 2, 2014.

Winter storm naming

In the fall of 2012, The Weather Channel began to assign names to major winter storm systems. The channel's management stated the decision to start naming notable winter storms came as a way to more easily spread knowledge and raise awareness. By naming winter storms, TWC stated that the public would find it easier to follow storm information, social media will be able to refer to and discuss the storm, and people will have an easier time referring to the storm after it occurs.
It named a nor'easter that hit the East Coast of the United States in November 2012 after the Greek goddess Athena. During the 2012–13 season, The Weather Channel named 27 winter storms: Athena, Brutus, Caesar, Draco, Euclid, Freyr, Gandolf, Helen, Iago, Jove, Khan, Luna, Magnus, Nemo, Orko, Plato, Q, Rocky, Saturn, Triton, Ukko, Virgil, Walda, Xerxes, Yogi, Zeus, and Achilles.
Multiple factors are taken into consideration when deciding whether or not to name a winter storm. This includes, but is not limited to, predicted snowfall and other precipitation, wind speeds, and the timing of the storm.
The Weather Channel has provided the reasoning behind their decision to name certain storms, in particular Athena,
In response, the National Weather Service announced on November 7, 2012, that it would not recognize The Weather Channel's names for winter storms, stating in a press release that it "does not use the name of winter storms in its products." Similarly, references to the names are generally limited on TWC-provided forecasts seen on NBC's news programs.

In popular culture








