[[Sarnia]]

CATEGORIES: Sarnia, Populated places on the Great Lakes, Port settlements in Ontario, Canadian border cities

Sarnia is a city in Southwestern Ontario, Canada, and had a 2011 population of 72,366. Sarnia is located on the eastern bank of the junction between the Upper and Lower Great Lakes where Lake Huron flows into the St. Clair River, which forms the Canada-United States border, directly across from Port Huron, Michigan. The city's natural harbour first attracted the French explorer La Salle, who named the site "The Rapids" when he had horses and men pull his 45-tonne barque "Le Griffon" up the almost four-knot current
This was the first time anything other than a canoe or other oar-powered vessel had sailed into Lake Huron,
The complex of refining and chemical companies is called Chemical Valley and located south of downtown Sarnia.
Culturally, Sarnia is a large part of the artistic presence in Southern Ontario. 

Name

The name "Sarnia" is Latin for Guernsey, which is a  British Channel Island.

History

First Nations peoples have lived, hunted, and traveled across the area for at least 10,000 years, as shown by archaeological evidence on Walpole Island.
During the 1600s and 1700s, The Three Fires Confederacy controlled much of the area known as the hub of the Great Lakes, which included the Canadian shore where Sarnia is now located. During this time, it maintained relations with many of the First Nations, including Huron, Sioux, and Iroquois, as well as the countries of Great Britain and France. In fact, their trading partners, the Huron, welcomed La Salle and the Griffon in 1679 after he sailed into Lake Huron. The Ontario Heritage Trust erected a sign under the Bluewater Bridge in commemoration of the voyage, as shown by the photo of the sign.
Because of this beginning of the incursion of Europeans into the area, the members of the Confederacy helped shape the development of North America throughout the 18th Century, becoming a center of trade and culture.
After the War of 1812, the first Europeans in the area were French settlers loyal to the British Crown who moved north from Detroit.  They successfully traded with the Three Fires Confederacy, which contributed to the growth of the area.  The tunnel was an engineering marvel in its day, achieved through the development of original techniques for excavating in a compressed air environment.
Canada Steamship Lines formed in 1913 from many previous companies that plied the waters of the St. Clair River.  One of these companies was Northwest Transportation Company of Sarnia, which was founded in 1870.  Sarnia officially became a city as of 7 May 1914.
Sarnia's grain elevator, which is the sixth largest currently operating in Canada,
While there had been a petroleum industry in the Sarnia area since 1858, the establishment of Polymer Corporation in 1942 to manufacture synthetic rubber during World War II was a great success and began Sarnia's rise as a major petrochemical centre.
On 1 January 1991, Sarnia and the neighbouring town of Clearwater were amalgamated as the new city of Sarnia-Clearwater. The amalgamation was originally slated to include the village of Point Edward, although that village's residents resisted and were eventually permitted to remain independent of the city. On 1 January 1992, the city reverted to the name Sarnia.
Sarnia's population experienced a continual growth from 1961 to 1991, with a 1991 population of 74,376. In 2001 the population had declined by approximately 3,000. Since 2001 Sarnia's population has been growing slowly, with a 2011 population count of 72,366.city.on.pdf, City of SarniaStatistics Canada 2011 census  Despite these modest gains, an April 2010 report "Sarnia-Lambton's Labour Market" states:  "Large petrochemical companies are the community's main economic drivers. Over the recent past, several plants have shutdown, and of those still in operation, increased automation and outsourcing has led to significantly fewer workers.".

Geography

Sarnia is located on the eastern shore of Lake Huron at its extreme southern point where it flows into the St. Clair River. Most of the surrounding area is flat, and the elevation ranges from 

Neighbourhoods

Wiltshire Park, Woodland, Oak Acres, Wees Beach, Oakwood Corners, Woodrow Shores, and Blackwell, are part of the North End of Sarnia, which begins immediately north of Ontario Highway 402 and terminates at the shore of Lake Huron.  Coronation Park, Heritage Park, College Park, The Tree Streets, and Sherwood Village are some of the neighbourhoods south of the highway.

The village of Blue Water was built to house workers and their families in Chemical Valley during the construction of Polymer Corporation and at one point had nearly 3,000 residents. In 1961, all the residents were relocated, mostly to the North End, to make way for expansion of the chemical industry. The village was demolished, and all that remains now is an historical marker at the corner of Vidal Street and Huron Avenue. This neighbourhood was largely forgotten until historian Lorraine Williams penned two books about it and was instrumental in the dedication of the plaque.


Climate

Sarnia has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb), Sarnia averages 112.0 cm of snow per year, while London averages 194.3.
The lake creates a seasonal lag, and compared to the rest of Canada and inland Ontario, Sarnia has a noticeably longer warm period following summer.  Destructive weather is very rare in the area but has occurred, such as the tornado event of 1953.

Demographics

In the 2011 Census, the City of Sarnia had a population of 72,366, an increase of 1.3% from the 2006 Census. With a land area of 
In 2011, Sarnia had an overwhelmingly white population; only 
The median age in Sarnia is 44.5 which is older than the Canadian median of 40.95,

Economy and infrastructure

The Sarnia-Lambton Workforce Development Board states in its March 2011 Labour Market Report that: "Even though employment in both the petrochemical and agricultural industries has declined significantly in recent years, these two industries remain central drivers of the Sarnia Lambton economy."
When World War II threatened tropical sources of natural latex for rubber, Sarnia was selected as the site to spearhead development of synthetic petroleum-based rubbers for war materials, and Polymer Corporation was built by Dow Chemical at the request of the Government of Canada.
Dow ceased operations at its Sarnia site in 2009. The plant was decommissioned, and the land has been sold to neighbouring TransAlta Energy Corporation.
Chemical Valley and the surrounding area are home to 62 facilities and refineries.
Sarnia is the location of Enbridge's Sarnia Photovoltaic Power Plant. The facility went into full commercial operation in December 2009, with 20 MW of power. As of September 2010, the plant was the largest photovoltaic (PV) solar power generation facility in the world, putting out 97 MW.
The 80-acre Western University Research Park, Sarnia-Lambton Campus was established in 2003 by the University of Western Ontario as a joint initiative with the County of Lambton and the City of Sarnia.
In 2012 BioAmber began construction of North America's first biosuccinic acid plant at the Bio-Industrial Park. The company has since announced that it  plans to double the original size of this $80 million plant."The Observer", 2 April 2012 Solutions4C02 is developing a 50,000 square foot demonstration facility at the Bluewater Energy Park. This company captures waste gas/water streams to process into value-added co-products."The Observer", 10 January 2012 PlantForm Corporation, a Canadian biotech startup company  producing ultra-low-cost therapeutic antibody drugs, opened an office at the Western University Research Park in 2011,"The Observer", 27 September 2011 and the KmX Corporation began work on a pilot plant at the park in Summer 2012, for the production of  biobutanol."The Observer", 20 July 2012

Retail and hospitality

Sarnia has two large malls: Lambton Mall with 72 stores, and the Bayside Centre with 9 stores, and several government and medical services.

Transportation

The Blue Water Bridge links Sarnia and its neighbouring village of Point Edward to the city of Port Huron in the United States. It spans the St. Clair River, which connects Lake Huron to Lake St. Clair. The bridge's original three-lane span, opened in 1938, was twinned on 22 July 1997,
Public transportation within the City of Sarnia, including conventional bus transit, transportation of people with disabilities, transportation support for major events, and charter services, is provided by Sarnia Transit.

Health care

Sarnia is served by Bluewater Health, a hospital with 188 acute care beds, 70 complex continuing care beds and 27 rehabilitation beds.

Culture

Music, theatre, and arts

Sarnia's musical and theatrical presence in Southern Ontario is significant.  The International Symphony Orchestra plays at the Imperial Theatre for an annual season lasting from September to April. In addition to symphonic concerts, the Imperial Theatre offers year-round dramatic productions;
Canadian composer and music educator Raymond Murray Schafer was born in Sarnia and developed his radical schizophonia techniques there.
Besides the single museum in Sarnia proper, six other museums in the local area document Sarnia's history, including its legacy as the home of the North American Oil Industry.
During the Christmas season, the city of Sarnia presents the annual "Celebration of Lights" in Centennial Park. The event was created in 1984 by Dr. Wills Rawana and a committee funded by the retail chain Hudson's Bay, and the national telecommunications company Telus.

Attractions

There are over 100 parks in Sarnia,
The largest recreational park in Sarnia is Germain Park, which incorporates five baseball diamonds, four soccer fields, an outdoor pool, and the Community Gardens. As a memorial to Canadian aviators who gave their lives in World War II, one of the remaining Canadair Sabres in Canada is on display in the park,
Centennial Park was opened on Dominion Day in 1967, as part of Canada's centenary celebrations.
Sarnia has one remaining museum within its city limits: "Stones 'N Bones", which  houses over 6,000 exhibits. The collection includes rocks, artifacts, fossils, and bones from all over the world.
The city's sandy fresh water beaches are a popular tourist attraction, while the sheltered harbour houses marinas for recreational  sailing. Since 1925, the  Mackinac race from Sarnia/Port Huron to Mackinac Island at the north end of the lake has been the highlight of the sailing season, drawing more than 3,000 sailors each year
.
Sarnia's fresh-cut fries are another popular tourist attraction, and thousands of visitors annually visit the chip trucks parked under the Bluewater Bridge. Niagara-based cookbook author and food e-magazine publisher Lynn Ogryzlo visited the chip trucks in August 2012 and stated ""I was blown away by Sarnia," not only by the city's waterfront, where the chip trucks are located, but also by the chip trucks themselves.

Sports

Sarnia is home to the Sarnia Legionnaires ice hockey team, which plays in the Greater Ontario Junior Hockey League. The team is successor to the Sarnia Legionnaires (1954–1970), who won five Western Jr.'B' championships and four Sutherland Cups during 16 seasons in the Ontario Hockey Association.
Sarnia has a successful tradition in Canadian football. As members of the Ontario Rugby Football Union, the local team Sarnia Imperials twice  won the Grey Cup, in 1934 and 1936.
The Sarnia-born world champion curler Steve Bice played as alternate for the Glenn Howard rink in the 2007 Tim Hortons Brier and 2007 Ford World Men's Curling Championship, winning both times.

Government

Sarnia City Council consists of nine elected members: the Mayor, four members from the city, and four members from the county. The Mayor and all Council members are elected to four-year terms. The four Lambton County Council members serve both County and City Council.
The current mayor, Mike Bradley, has held the position since December 1988 and is the longest-serving mayor in the city's history.
At the provincial level, Sarnia is located within the Sarnia—Lambton provincial electoral district, represented in 2013 by Bob Bailey, a member of the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario.
Over the past 50 years, Sarnia's voters have proven to be remarkably moderate, and the party affiliation of its Members of Parliament, both provincial and federal, has swung back and forth between the Liberal and Progressive Conservative parties. 
 <ref></ref>

Education

The Lambton Kent District School Board is responsible for the 13 elementary and four secondary public schools (Northern Collegiate Institute and Vocational School, Alexander MacKenzie Secondary School, Sarnia Collegiate Institute & Technical School, and St. Clair Secondary School) located within Sarnia's boundaries.
The St. Clair Catholic District School Board is responsible for the city's seven elementary and two secondary Catholic schools (St. Christopher's and St. Patrick's). In 2014, St. Patrick's and St. Christopher's are scheduled to merge, under the St. Patrick's name, on St. Christopher's North Sarnia site.
The Conseil scolaire de district des écoles catholiques du Sud-Ouest represents the two French Catholic schools in the city, Saint-François-Xavier and Saint-Thomas-d'Aquin, while the Conseil Scolaire de District du Centre Sud-Ouest operates two French public schools, the elementary École Les Rapides and the secondary École Secondaire Franco-Jeunesse.  There are also two independent Christian elementary schools in Sarnia—Sarnia Christian School and Temple Christian Academy

.
Lambton College, which offers two-year programs and diplomas, is one of Ontario's 21 colleges of applied arts and technology. It has a full-time enrolment of 3,500 and a part-time enrolment of about 8,000.

Media

There are four radio stations that originate from Sarnia, although other stations rebroadcast their signal there, notably CKTI-FM, a First Nations produced station from Kettle Point, and CBEG-FM, a simulcast of CBC Radio One from Windsor, Ontario.
Sarnia does not have a network television station of its own, although it has a community channel on Cogeco, which is the cable television provider in Sarnia.
The city's main daily newspaper is the Sarnia Observer, owned by Osprey Media, a division of Sun Media, itself a division of Quebecor.

Notable people

Among Sarnia's distinguished residents are Chris Hadfield, who has flown two space shuttle missions and served as commander of the International Space Station.  The Nobel laureate George Andrew Olah moved to Sarnia  from his native Hungary to join Dow Chemical in 1957.






