[[ChatZilla]]

CATEGORIES: Mozilla Application Suite, Mozilla add-ons, Free Internet Relay Chat clients, Unix Internet Relay Chat clients, Internet Relay Chat clients, Windows Internet software, Mac OS software, Instant messaging clients for Linux, Unix Internet software, Cross-platform software, 2000 software, Software using the Mozilla license, Software that uses XUL

ChatZilla is an IRC client for Mozilla-based browsers such as Firefox, introduced in 2000. It is cross-platform open source software which has been noted for its consistent appearance across platforms, CSS appearance customization and scripting.

Early history

On April 20, 1999, it was reported that Mozilla, at the time the open-source arm of AOL's Netscape Communications division, had announced the commencement of "an instant messaging and chat project with the stated goal of supporting a wide variety of chat protocols, including the venerable Internet Relay Chat." Other companies were also developing chat systems. "'We recognize that there's a lot of interest in the instant messaging space,' said AOL spokesperson Catherine Corre, referring to the Mozilla project. 'This is a recognition of the interest in that area.'" 
Named "ChatZilla," the client was available in development form in May 2000 for the Netscape 6.01 browser, and Mozilla 0.8.

Features

ChatZilla runs on any platform on which a Mozilla-based browser can run, including Mac OS X, Linux, and Microsoft Windows, and provides a "consistent user interface across the board."
It contains most general features of IRC clients, including connecting to multiple servers at once, maintaining a built-in list of standard networks, searching and sorting of available channels, chat logging, Direct Client-to-Client ("DCC") chat and file transfers, and user customization of the interface. 
ChatZilla includes automatic completion of nicknames with the Tab key, and appends a comma if the nickname is the first word on a line. It also provides completion of /commands with the Tab key, and a "quick double-Tab" presents a list of available commands based on what's been typed so far. 18.  
The text entry window can be "single line", in which the Enter key sends the composed text, or "multiline" in which allows composing larger text sections with line breaks, and the Ctrl-Enter key combo sends the text block. 19. 
JavaScript is used for running scripts which 
can be controlled by the user: by selecting from the View menu, dragging a link to a .Golbeck, p. 20.  DCC is supported which allows users to transfer files and chat directly between one another.  The sender of each message is shown to the left of the text as a link - clicking the link opens a private chat window to that user.
ChatZilla is included with SeaMonkey 
in addition to being available for download to other Mozilla-based browsers such as Firefox as an extension.

Plugins

ChatZilla offers many plugins, which extend the functionality in the user-experience of the add-on. Some of these plugins include:

Reception

Reviews of ChatZilla have varied from enthusiastic, in the case of users familiar with IRC, to  unimpressed, for reviewers more accustomed to other chat client user interfaces.  A 2003 review in Computers for Doctors of Mozilla 1.0, referred to IRC client applications as "not very user-friendly, and the same goes for ChatZilla. You won't find any pop-up icons, or happy little noises telling you somebody wants to chat." 
In 2004, Jennifer Golbeck, writing in IRC Hacks, pointed out its cross-platform consistency, and found it "quick and easy to start using", and has "great support for changing the appearance of chat windows with motifs...(CSS files)."
In a 2008 overview of extensions for Firefox in Linux Journal, Dan Sawyer described ChatZilla as an "oldie-but-goodie", "venerable," "with all the trimmings," "handsomely organizes chat channels, logs, has an extensive built-in list of available channels, supports DCC chats and file transfers, and has its own plugin and theming architecture." The application "implements all the standards very well, and for those who prefer to keep desktop clutter to a minimum but still enjoy fighting with random strangers on IRC, ChatZilla is a must-have."








