[[Will Self]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, Alumni of Exeter College, Oxford, English journalists, English novelists, English people of American descent, English people of Jewish descent, English republicans, English satirists, English short story writers, People educated at University College School, Postmodern writers, Psychogeographers, People from East Finchley, 20th-century British novelists, 21st-century British novelists

William Woodard "Will" Self (born 26 September 1961) is an English author, journalist and television personality.
Self is the author of nine novels, five collections of shorter fiction, three novellas and five collections of non-fiction writing. His work has been translated into 22 languages, and his novel Umbrella was shortlisted for the Man Booker Prize. His subject matter often includes mental illness, illegal drugs and psychiatry.
Self is a regular contributor to publications including Playboy, The Guardian, Harpers, The New York Times and the London Review of Books. He currently writes two fortnightly columns for New Statesman, and over the years he has been a columnist for The Observer, The Times and the Evening Standard. His columns for Building Design on the built environment, and for the Independent Magazine on the psychology of place brought him to prominence as a thinker concerned with the politics of urbanity.
Self is a regular contributor on British television, initially as a guest on comic panel shows such as Have I Got News For You and Shooting Stars, but latterly appearing on political programmes such as Newsnight and Question Time. He is also a frequent contributor to BBC Radio 4.

Early life

William "Will" Woodard Self was born and raised in North London, between the suburbs of East Finchley and Hampstead Garden Suburb. Hunter Hayes - Google Books His father was from an Anglican family and his mother was Jewish.Will Self Book Extract: An Essay On Electricity Self is a paternal descendant of minister Nathaniel Woodard, hence his middle name.M. Hunter Hayes Understanding Will Self, p.10 As a child, Self spent a year living in Ithaca, Upstate New York.
Self's parents separated when he was nine, and divorced when he was eighteen. Despite the intellectual encouragement given by his parents, he was an emotionally confused and self-destructive child, harming himself with cigarette ends and knives before getting into drugs."Living Will"
Self was a voracious reader from a young age. At ten an interest in science fiction grew, with notable works such as Frank Herbert's Dune, J. G. Ballard and Philip K. Dick reflecting the precociousness of Self's reading. Into his teenage years, Self claimed to have been "overawed by the canon", stifling his ability to express himself. Nevertheless, Self's dabbling with drugs grew in step with his prolific reading. Self started smoking marijuana at the age of twelve, graduating through amphetamines, cocaine, and acid to heroin, which he started injecting at eighteen. Finney From: Postmodern Culture  Volume 11, Number 3, May 2001 
Self attended University College School, an independent school for boys in Hampstead in North London. 
Of Self's background Nick Rennison has written that he:
 is sometimes presented as a bad-boy outsider, writing, like the Americans William S Burroughs and Hubert Selby Jr, about sex, drugs and violence in a very direct way. Yet he is not some class warrior storming the citadels of the literary establishment from the outside, but an Oxford educated, middle-class metropolitan who, despite his protestations to the contrary in interviews, is about as much at the heart of the establishment as you can get, a place he has occupied almost from the start of his career.M. Hunter Hayes Understanding Will Self, p12 

Career

After graduating from Oxford, Self worked for the Greater London Council, including a period as a road sweeper, whilst living in Brixton. He then pursued a career as a cartoonist for the New Statesman and other publications and as a stand-up comedian. He moved to the Gloucester Road, London area around 1985. In 1986 he entered a treatment centre in Weston-super-Mare, where he claimed that his heroin addiction was cured. In 1989, "through a series of accidents", he "blagged" his way into running a small publishing company.Paris Review – Larger Than Life: An Interview with Will Self, Jacques TestardThe Book of Jobs
The publication of his short story collection The Quantity Theory of Insanity brought him to public attention in 1991. Self was hailed as an original new talent by Salman Rushdie, Doris Lessing, Beryl Bainbridge, A. S. Byatt, and Bill Buford. In 1993 he was nominated by Granta magazine as one of the 20 "Best Young British Novelists".No 242: Will Self The Guardian (1959-2003) (UK) 16 Sep 1993: A3.
Self joined The Observer as a columnist in 1995. He gained negative publicity in 1997 when he was sent to cover the election campaign of John Major and was caught by a rival journalist using heroin on the Prime Minister's jet, and was fired as a result. At the time, he argued "I'm a hack who gets hired because I do drugs". He joined The Times as a columnist in 1997. In 1999 he left The Times to join the Independent on Sunday until 2001. He joined the Evening Standard in 2002.
He has made many appearances on British television, especially as a panellist on Have I Got News for You and as a regular on Shooting Stars. Since 2008 Self has appeared five times on Question Time. Since 2007, Self has stopped appearing in Have I Got News for You, stating the show has become a pseudo-panel show.
Since 2009 Self has written two alternating fortnightly columns for the New Statesman. The Madness of Crowds explores social phenomena and group behaviour, and in Real Meals he reviews high street food outlets.
In 2012, Self was appointed Professor of Contemporary Thought at Brunel University. The book was later placed on the prize shortlist.

Literary style

According to M. Hunter Hayes, Self has given his reason for writing as follows: "I don't write fiction for people to identify with and I don't write a picture of the world they can recognise. I write to astonish people."M. Hunter Hayes Understanding Will Self, p.1 "What excites me is to disturb the reader's fundamental assumptions. I want to make them feel that certain categories within which they are used to perceiving the world are unstable."Project MUSE - Will Self's Transgressive Fictions
The influences on his fiction mentioned most frequently include J. G. Ballard whom he considers "a great mentor", William Burroughs and Hunter S. Thompson. He has cited influences such as Jonathan Swift, Alasdair Gray, Franz Kafka, Lewis Carroll, Joseph Heller and Louis-Ferdinand Céline as formative influences on his writing style.
Zack Busner is a recurring character in the fiction of Will Self, appearing in the short story collections The Quantity Theory of Insanity, Grey Area, Dr. Mukti and Other Tales of Woe, as well as in the novels Great Apes, The Book of Dave and Umbrella. Busner is a psychiatrist and psychoanalyst practising in London, and is prone to self-promotion at the expense of his patients. He is often the antagonist of the stories he appears in, although not always with villainous intent.
Among his admirers is the American critic Harold Bloom. Journalist Stuart Maconie has described him as "that rarity in modern cultural life, a genuine intellectual with a bracing command of words and ideas who is also droll, likeable and culturally savvy."Stuart Maconie. "My People". Radio Times 2–8 February 2013, p.125

Personal life

Self's mother died in 1988. He was married from 1989 to 1997 to Kate Chancellor. They have two children, a son Alexis and a daughter Madeleine. They lived together in a terraced house just off the Portobello Road. In 1997, Self married journalist Deborah Orr, with whom he has sons Ivan and Luther. Self has stated that he has abstained from drugs, except for caffeine and nicotine, since 1998."Will Self's slow walk into downtown New York" International Herald Tribune, 7 December 2006
He has described himself as a Psychogeographer and modern flâneur and has written about walks he has taken.
Self is 6' 5" tall,The Calgary Herald (Alberta)  July 23, 2006 Sunday  Final Edition  Meaning of Masculinity: It's the subject of almost everything Will Self writes collects and repairs vintage typewriters and smokes a pipe;Will Self - Tatler he claims that a psychologist once described him as schizoid personality and borderline personality.455. His brother is the author and journalist Jonathan Self. He lives in Stockwell, South London.

Awards

Works

Novels

Short story collections

Non-fiction

Self has also compiled several books of work from his newspaper and magazine columns which mix interviews with counter-culture figures, restaurant reviews and literary criticism.

Television






