[[Digital Research]]

CATEGORIES: Digital Research, Companies established in 1976, Defunct software companies of the United States, Companies based in Monterey County, California, Novell

Digital Research, Inc. (a.k.a. DR or DRI; originally Intergalactic Digital Research) was the company created by Dr. Gary Kildall to market and develop his CP/M operating system and related products. It was the first large software company in the microcomputer world. Digital Research was based in Pacific Grove, California.
The company's operating systems, starting with CP/M for 8080/Z80-based microcomputers, were the de facto standard of their era, as MS-DOS and MS Windows came later. DR's product suite included the original CP/M and its various offshoots; DR-DOS which was a MS-DOS compatible version of CP/M, and MP/M, the multi-user CP/M. The first 16-bit system was CP/M-86, which was to be unsuccessful in competition with MS-DOS. There followed Concurrent CP/M, a single-user version of the multi-tasking MP/M-86 featuring "virtual consoles" from which applications could be launched to run concurrently. Successive revisions of this system, which gradually supported MS-DOS applications and the FAT filesystem, were labelled Concurrent DOS, Concurrent DOS XM and Concurrent DOS 386.
In May 1983 the company announced that it would offer PC DOS versions of all of its languages and utilities. In 1985, soon after the introduction of the Intel 80286, Digital Research introduced a real-time system, initially called Concurrent DOS 286 and subsequently FlexOS. This exploited the greater memory addressing capability of the new CPU to provide a more flexible multi-tasking environment. There was a small but powerful set of system APIs, each with a synchronous and an asynchronous variant. Pipes were supported, and all named resources could be aliased by setting Environment variables. This system was to enjoy enduring favour in point-of-sale systems and was adopted by the IBM 4690 OS.
Digital Research was purchased by Novell in 1991, primarily for Novell to gain access to the operating system line.
DR produced a selection of programming language compilers and interpreters for their OS-supported platforms, including C, Pascal, COBOL, Forth, PL/I, PL/M, CBASIC, BASIC, and Logo. They also produced a microcomputer version of the GKS graphics standard (related to NAPLPS) called GSX, and later used this as the basis of their GEM GUI. Less known are their application programs, limited largely to the GSX-based DR DRAW, Dr. Halo for DOS and a small suite of GUI programs for GEM.

CP/M-86 and DOS

At the time IBM Personal Computer was being developed, DR's CP/M was the dominant operating system of the day. IBM asked DR to supply a version of CP/M written for the Intel 8086 microprocessor as the standard operating system for the PC, which would use the code-compatible Intel 8088 chip.  DR, uneasy about making such an agreement with IBM, refused.
Microsoft seized this opportunity to supply an OS, in addition to other software (e.g. BASIC) for the new IBM PC.  When the IBM PC arrived in late 1981, it came with PC DOS, which was developed from 86-DOS, which Microsoft had acquired for this purpose.  By mid-1982, it was marketed as MS-DOS for use in hardware-compatible non-IBM computers.  This one decision resulted in Microsoft becoming the leading name in computer software.
This story is detailed from the point of view of Microsoft and IBM in the PBS series Triumph of the Nerds,Triumph of the Nerds, PBS and from the point of view of Gary Kildall's friends and coworkers in The Computer Chronicles.The Computer Chronicles
Digital Research developed CP/M-86 as an alternative to MS-DOS and it was made available through IBM in early 1982.  DR later created an MS-DOS clone with advanced features called DR-DOS, which pressured Microsoft to further improve its own DOS.
The competition between MS-DOS and DR-DOS is one of the more controversial chapters of microcomputer history. Microsoft offered the best licensing terms to any computer manufacturer that committed to selling MS-DOS with every system they shipped, making it uneconomical for them to offer systems with another OS, since the manufacturer would still be required to pay a license fee to Microsoft for that system. This practice led to a US Department of Justice investigation, resulting in a decision in 1994 that barred Microsoft from "per-processor" licensing.
DRI (and later its successor Caldera, Inc.) accused Microsoft of announcing vaporware versions of MS-DOS to suppress sales of DR-DOS.
Microsoft refused to support DR-DOS in Windows. In one beta release of Windows 3.1, Microsoft included code that detected DR-DOS and displayed a warning message, although this code was not included in the final version of Windows 3.1. It is said that other versions of Windows deliberately crashed the system if DR-DOS was detected so as to give the impression that DR-DOS was unstable. These activities came to light when the discovery process of the subsequent lawsuit uncovered emails from senior Microsoft executives that showed this time bomb plant was part of a concerted program to drive DRI out of the PC operating systems business.
DRI's successor Caldera raised these disputes in a 1996 lawsuit, but the case was settled without a trial. As a condition of the settlement Microsoft paid Caldera $150 million ($) and Caldera destroyed all documents it had produced in connection with the case.  Although a costly settlement to Microsoft, this eliminated the most damning evidence of Microsoft's anti-trust behaviors, and allowed Microsoft to control and dominate this sector of the marketplace without concerns about any further serious competitor.






