[[Gilligan's Island]]

CATEGORIES: Gilligan's Island, 1960s American television series, 1964 American television series debuts, 1967 American television series endings, American television sitcoms, Black-and-white television programs, CBS network shows, English-language television programming, Television series by MGM Television, Television series by Warner Bros. Television, Television series set on islands

Gilligan's Island is an American sitcom created and produced by Sherwood Schwartz and originally produced by United Artists Television. The situation comedy series featured Bob Denver, Alan Hale, Jr., Jim Backus, Natalie Schafer, Russell Johnson, Tina Louise, and Dawn Wells. It aired for three seasons on the CBS network from September 26, 1964, to April 17, 1967. Originally sponsored by Philip Morris & Company and Procter & Gamble, the show followed the comic adventures of seven castaways as they attempted to survive (and in a later movie escape from) the island on which they had been shipwrecked. Most episodes revolve around the dissimilar castaways' conflicts and their failed attempts (invariably Gilligan's fault) to escape their plight.
Gilligan's Island ran for a total of 98 episodes. The first season, consisting of 36 episodes, was filmed in black-and-white. These episodes were later colorized for syndication. The show's second and third seasons (62 episodes) and the three television movie sequels were filmed in color.
The show enjoyed solid ratings during its original run, then grew in popularity during decades of syndication, especially in the 1970s and 1980s when many markets ran the show in the late afternoon after school. Today, the title character of Gilligan is widely recognized as an American cultural icon.

Premise

The two-man crew of the charter boat S. S. Minnow and five passengers on a "three-hour tour" from Honolulu run into a tropical storm and are shipwrecked on an uncharted island somewhere in the Pacific Ocean.The episode "The Pigeon" places the island approximately 

Characters

Episodes

Pilot episode

Due to the three significant character and casting changes between the pilot episode and the first series, the pilot was not shown when the first series was aired in 1964.
Four of the original seven pilot characters were identical to those of the series (including the actor/actress cast for each role): Gilligan, the Skipper, and the two Howells.
The three remaining original pilot characters differed from those of the series (including the actor/actress cast): In the pilot, the Professor was instead a high school teacher played by John Gabriel; Ginger the movie star was instead Ginger, a practical secretary with red hair, played by Kit Smythe; and Mary Ann the Kansas farm-girl was instead Bunny, a stereotypically cheerful "dumb blonde" secretary, played by  Nancy McCarthy.
The pilot's opening and ending theme songs, two similar Calypso-styled tracks written by John Williams and performed by Sherwood Schwarz himself impersonating Sir Lancelot with differing lyrics, were quite different from those of the actual series. The short scenes during the opening theme song (which is longer than the series opening theme song) include Gilligan taking the Howells' luggage to the boat before cast-off and Gilligan attempting to give a cup of coffee to the Skipper during the storm that would ultimately maroon the boat.
After the opening theme song and opening credits end, the pilot proper begins with the seven castaways waking up on the beached SS Minnow and continues with them performing various tasks including exploring the island, attempting to fix the transmitter, building huts, and finding food. Contrary to some descriptions, no detailed accounts of the pilot characters' backgrounds were written into the pilot storylines. The pilot then ends with the ending theme song and ending credits.
Lastly, the background music and even the laugh tracks of the pilot appear all but identical to those used during the series.

First broadcast episode

The first episode actually broadcast, "Two on a Raft," is sometimes wrongly referred to as the series pilot. This episode begins with the same scene of Gilligan and the Skipper awakening on the boat as in the pilot (though slightly differently cut, to eliminate most shots of the departed actors) and continues with the characters sitting on the beach listening to a radio news report about their disappearance. There is no equivalent scene or background information in the pilot, except for the description of the passengers in the original theme song. Rather than re-shooting the rest of the pilot story for broadcast, the show just proceeded on. The plot thus skips over the topics of the pilot; the bulk of the episode tells of Gilligan and the Skipper setting off on a raft to try to bring help but unknowingly landing back on the other side of the same island.
The scene with the radio report is one of two scenes that reveal the names of the Skipper (Jonas Grumby) and the Professor (Roy Hinkley); the names are used in a similar radio report early in the series. The name Jonas Grumby appears nowhere else in the series except for an episode in which the Maritime Board of Review blames the Skipper for the loss of the ship. The name Roy Hinkley is used one other time when Mr. Howell introduces the Professor as Roy Huntley and the professor corrects him, to which Mr. Howell replies, "Brinkley, Brinkley."
The plot for the pilot episode would eventually be recycled into that season's Christmas episode, "Birds Gotta Fly, Fish Gotta Talk", in which the story of the pilot episode, concerning the practical problems on landing, is related through a series of flashbacks. Footage featuring characters that had been recast was reshot using the current actors. For scenes including only Denver, Hale, Backus, and Schafer the original footage was reused.

Last broadcast episode

The last episode of the show, "Gilligan the Goddess", aired on April 17, 1967, and ended just like the rest, with the castaways still stranded on the island. It was not known at the time that it was the last episode, as a fourth season was expected but then cancelled. Sylvia Stoddard. St Martin's Paperbacks. 1996, p. 306–7
In its last year Gilligan's Island was the lead-in program for the CBS Monday night schedule. It was followed for the first sixteen weeks by the sitcom Run, Buddy, Run. The timeslot from 7:30 to 8:30 Eastern was filled in the 1967–1968 season by Gunsmoke, moved from its traditional Saturday 10 pm timeslot.

Typical plots

The shipwrecked castaways want to leave the remote island, and various opportunities present themselves. They typically fail owing to some bumbling error committed by Gilligan (with the exception of "The Big Gold Strike", where everyone except Gilligan is responsible for their failed escape). Sometimes this would result in his saving the others from some unforeseen flaw in their plan.
Recurring elements center on one of five primary themes. The first deals with life on the island. A running gag is the castaways' ability to fashion a vast array of useful objects from bamboo and other local material. Some are simple everyday things, while others are stretches of the imagination. Russell Johnson noted in his autobiography that the production crew enjoyed the challenge of building these props. Some bamboo items include framed huts with thatched grass sides and roofs, along with bamboo closets strong enough to withstand hurricane-force winds and rain; the communal dining table and chairs, pipes for Gilligan's hot water, a stethoscope, and a pedal-powered car. Many scenes occur at the dining table, where the castaways enjoy a large number of dishes that Ginger and Mary Ann prepare while the radio provides entertainment. Gilligan and the Skipper often catch fish, and the island has a good supply of fresh water to drink and to prepare refreshing tropical drinks with. Naturally, despite their obvious skill and inventiveness, the castaways never quite manage to put together a functional raft out of bamboo (or repair the hole in their original ship), although in the television movie Rescue from Gilligan's Island they do end up tying their huts together and using that as a raft for escape.
The second theme involves visitors to the "uncharted" island. One challenge to a viewer's suspension of disbelief is the frequency with which the castaways are visited by people who do nothing to assist them. Some have hidden motives for not assisting the castaways. Others are simply unable to help, incompetent, or are prevented from sending messages by Gilligan. Bob Denver, Jim Backus, and Tina Louise each had feature episodes in which look-alikes come to the island (who were, of course, played by themselves in dual roles). The island itself is also home to an unusual assortment of animal life, some native, some visiting.
The third recurring theme is the use of dream sequences in which one of the castaways "dreams" he or she is some character related to that week's storyline. All of the castaways would appear as other characters within the dream. In later interviews and memoirs, almost all of the actors stated that the dream episodes were among their personal favorites.
The fourth recurring theme is a piece of news concerning the castaways arriving from the outside world that causes discord among them. Then a second piece of news arrives that says the first was incorrect. An exception to the latter part of this statement is the episode "The Postman Cometh", where Gilligan and the Skipper hear over the radio that Mary Ann's boyfriend eloped and the three single men try to cheer her up by wooing her; Mary Ann actually lied about having a boyfriend, and she created a romance with "a real creep" so that the others would think she had someone waiting for her back home.
The fifth recurring theme is the appearance or arrival of strange objects, like a WWII mine or a "Mars Rover" that the scientists back in the USA think is sending them pictures of Mars, and in one episode a meteorite.
Much of the slapstick comedic sequences between Hale and Denver were heavily inspired by Laurel and Hardy particularly by Hale breaking the fourth wall by looking directly into the camera expressing his frustration with Denver's clumsiness as Oliver Hardy often did.nytimes.html?_r=0

Theme song

The music and lyrics for the theme song, "The Ballad of Gilligan's Isle", were written by Sherwood Schwartz and George Wyle. One version was used for the first season and another for the second and third. In the original song, the Professor and Mary Ann, originally considered "second-billed co-stars", were referred to as "and the rest," but with the growing popularity of those characters, their names were inserted into the lyrics. The "Gilligan" theme song underwent this one major change thanks to star Bob Denver, who personally went to the studio and asked that Johnson and Wells be added to the theme song's opening credits. When the studio at first refused, saying it would be too expensive to reshoot, Denver insisted, even saying that if Johnson and Wells weren't included, he wanted his name out of the song as well. The studio caved in, and "the Professor and Mary Ann" were added.* 
[/ref]
The first season version was recorded by The Wellingtons.
The show's original pilot episode featured a calypso theme song by future film composer John Williams, and different lyrics. The original length of the voyage was "a six-hour ride", not "a three-hour tour".
The band Little Roger and the Goosebumps recorded "Gilligan's Island Stairway," a parody of Led Zeppelin's "Stairway to Heaven", substituting the words to the Gilligan's Island theme song.

Production

Filming of the show took place at the CBS Radford Studios complex in Studio City, Los Angeles California.
Cave scenes were shot in Newport Beach, California, across from the southern tip of the Balboa Peninsula, in a park just off Ocean Boulevard.
The rock jetties at the entrance of Newport Bay can be seen during the opening theme during the line "A 3-Hour Tour" as the Minnow heads out to sea. Also, the marina shown in the opening shot is the Alamitos Bay Marina in Long Beach, California.
Four different boats played the part of the S.S. Minnow. One was used in the opening credits and rented in Ala Wai Yacht Harbor in Honolulu, Hawaii. Another boat, the Bluejacket, was used in the opening credits shown during the second and third seasons and eventually turned up for sale on Vancouver Island in August 2006, after running aground on a reef in the Hecate Strait on the way south from Alaska. One boat was used for beach scenes after being towed to Kauai in Hawaii. The fourth Minnow was built on the CBS Studios set in the second season.
The final day of filming of the scenes of the pilot episode was Friday, November 22, 1963, the day of the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. The cast and crew found out about the assassination late that morning, Hawaii time.Id. Between the filming of scenes, they crowded around a radio, listening to news bulletins.Id. A reminder of the tragedy appears in the opening sequence of the show's first season, when the theme song is played. As the Minnow is leaving the harbor and heading out to sea, an American flag flying at half staff can be seen briefly in the background.Id.''First season opening sequence of Gilligan's Island From YouTube.
The United States Coast Guard occasionally received telegrams from concerned citizens, who apparently did not realize it was a scripted show, pleading for them to rescue the people on the deserted island. The Coast Guard would simply forward these telegrams to producer Sherwood Schwartz.

Cancellation

During the 1966–1967 television season, Gilligan's Island aired on Monday nights at 7:30 p.m. Even though the sitcom's ratings had fallen out of the top 30 programs, during the last few weeks of its third season, the series was still doing very well and more than holding its own against its chief competitor, The Monkees, which aired at the same time on NBC-TV. Therefore, CBS assured Sherwood Schwartz that Gilligan's Island would definitely be picked up for a fourth year. 
However, under pressure from network president William S. Paley and his wife Babe, along with many network affiliates and longtime fans of Gunsmoke (which had been airing late on Saturday nights), to reverse its threatened cancellation, CBS rescheduled the western series to an earlier time slot on Monday evenings at 7:30 p.m. As a result, Gilligan's Island was unceremoniously cancelled at practically the last minute even though the cast members were all on vacation. Some of the cast had bought houses based on Sherwood Schwartz's verbal confirmation that the series would be renewed for a fourth season." Sylvia Stoddard. St Martin's Paperbacks. 1996, p. 306

Nielsen ratings/Television schedule

Film sequels

In a 1978 made-for-television movie, Rescue from Gilligan's Island, the castaways do successfully leave the island, but have difficulty reintegrating back into society. During a reunion cruise on the first Christmas after their rescue, fate intervenes and they find themselves wrecked on the same island at the end of the film. It starred the original cast except for Tina Louise, who refused to participate due to her disputes with the producers and was replaced by Judith Baldwin. The plot involved Soviet agents seeking a memory disc from a spy satellite that landed on the island and facilitated their rescue. Gilligan and the Skipper "rescue" Mary Ann right as she is about to marry her longtime fiancé, which contradicts the series where it was established that Mary Ann had no boyfriend after having made up a story about a boyfriend to keep the others from feeling sorry for her. Her madeup boyfriend was someone she knew on the mainland that was dreadful. His name is Horace Higginthbottom.
In a 1979 sequel, The Castaways on Gilligan's Island, they are rescued once again, and the Howells convert the island into a getaway resort with the other five castaways as "silent partners". Ginger was again played by Judith Baldwin. This sequel was intended as a pilot for a possible new series in which the castaways would host new groups of tourists each week, using the all-star cast anthology format made popular by Fantasy Island and The Love Boat. The series never materialized, though the premise was the basis of a short-lived 1981 series titled Aloha Paradise.
In a second sequel, The Harlem Globetrotters on Gilligan's Island (1981), villains played by Martin Landau and then-wife Barbara Bain (who also appeared together on Mission: Impossible and Space: 1999) try to take over the island to gain access to a vein of Supremium, a valuable but volatile element. This time, Ginger was played by Constance Forslund. They are thwarted by the timely intervention of the Harlem Globetrotters. Jim Backus, who was in poor health at the time, only appeared at the very end, arriving back on the island. David Ruprecht played the role of Thurston Howell IV, even though the series had established that the Howells were childless. Unlike the previous two movies, The Harlem Globetrotters on Gilligan's Island utilized a laugh track like the original series.

Spin-offs

The New Adventures of Gilligan was a Filmation-produced animated remake that aired on ABC Saturday Morning from September 7, 1974, to September 4, 1977, for 24 episodes (16 installments airing in 1974–75 and eight new ones combined with repeats in 1975–76). The voices were done by the original cast except for Ginger and Mary Ann (both were voiced by Jane Webb). An additional character was Snubby the Monkey.
Gilligan's Planet was an animated science fiction version produced by Filmation and starring the voices of the Gilligan's Island cast, save for Tina Louise (Dawn Wells voiced both Mary Ann and Ginger). In a follow-up to The New Adventures of Gilligan, the castaways escape from the island by building a spaceship, and get shipwrecked on a distant planet. Only 12 episodes aired on CBS between September 18, 1982, and September 3, 1983. In one episode, they travel to an island, get shipwrecked there, and Gilligan observes, "First we were stranded on an island, then we were stranded on a planet, and now we're stranded on an island on a planet."

Appearances in other TV shows

ALF featured an episode in 1987 called "The Ballad of Gilligan's Island" in which the alien dreams he is on the island after getting familiar with the show and meets the featured castaways. Bob Denver, Alan Hale, Dawn Wells, and Russell Johnson portray darkly-skewed versions of their characters after being stuck on the island for 23 years. During ALF's dream, it was shown that Gilligan was getting tired of being called "Little Buddy" and the Professor argues with Skipper on how his ideas to get off the island being ruined were Gilligan's fault. The Howells are explained as having set up a camp on the other side of the island with no references to Ginger. Skipper puts ALF to work digging a hole for their mini-golf course (the opposite of ALF's order from Willie Tanner to fill in the lagoon he dug in his backyard) to compete with the Howells' golf course. The Professor was also shown to have successfully made a television where they watch sitcom versions of the Tanner Family.
Baywatch season 2 episode 16 "Now sit back and you'll hear a tale" (1992) features Bob Denver and Dawn Wells as Gilligan and Mary Ann as part of Eddie's dream.
In an unaired episode of the short-lived 1997 CBS sitcom Meego, Gilligan, the Professor, and Mary Ann all appear, played by the original actors, and Gilligan yells, "We've been trapped here for 35 years". This episode did not air in the US because CBS canceled the series after six episodes aired.
Roseanne (which was shot on the same Studio City sound stage as Gilligan's Island) had an episode titled "Sherwood Schwartz: A Loving Tribute". Part of the episode is a fantasy sequence parodying this series. Most of the regular/recurring Roseanne cast portrayed the Gilligan's Island characters:
During the end credits, Tina Louise, Bob Denver, Russell Johnson and Dawn Wells appeared as their Roseanne character counterparts. Sherwood Schwartz also appeared as himself, although his appearance is edited out in syndication.

Reunions and documentaries

Good Morning America featured a Gilligan's Island reunion presided over by guest host Kathie Lee Gifford on November 26, 1982. This was the first time that the entire cast had been reunited (including Tina Louise), even though Jim Backus was not able to be physically present. He was able to join the cast, though, via a live video remote from Los Angeles, California.
The original cast members (along with Sherwood Schwartz) reunited on television for one last time, on a 1988 episode of The Late Show with Ross Shafer.
Gilligan's Island: Underneath the Grass Skirt is a 1999 documentary featuring Denver and Louise.
E! True Hollywood Story presented a backstage history of the show in 2000, featuring interviews with some of the stars or their widows.
Surviving Gilligan's Island (2001) was a docudrama in which Bob Denver, Dawn Wells, and Russell Johnson reminisce about the show.

Clones, parodies, etc.

Syndication

Currently, syndication is handled by Warner Bros. Television (under Turner Entertainment Co., who in 1986 acquired UA's share of the series as part of the classic MGM library). It has aired on TBS from 1990-2003, where it also aired with colorization on season one for a while. TNT aired it at some point in the '90s, and also aired the colorized season one. Nick@Nite later aired the series from 2000-2001. It then shifted to TV Land, where it aired from 2001-2003. Then, in 2004, it quietly aired on Hallmark Channel, where it was once again removed this time for an unknown reason. As of September 2, 2013, the program runs in prime-time from Monday-Thursday nights at 8/7c on Me-TV, with an additional airing on Sunday mornings at 11/10c.
Following Russell Johnson's death in January 2014, the show began airing again on TV Land weekday evenings at 7/6c.

DVD releases

Warner Home Video released all three seasons of Gilligan's Island on DVD in Region 1 between 2004 and 2005. The Complete First Season features all 36 episodes unedited with the original theme song. And, unlike other releases of older sitcoms, the episodes are in their original black-and-white format. The special features include the rare pilot episode with commentary with creator Sherwood Schwartz, and three other featurettes.
The Complete Second Season includes all 32 season two episodes and mentions in an interesting way that this season is in color. Bonuses for this set include: a season two intro with Russell Johnson and Sherwood Schwartz and audio commentary on the season's third episode, "The Little Dictator".
The Complete Third Season includes all 30 season three episodes and uses words from the theme song on the back: "Just sit right back... for the final season!" Special features include a season intro with Russell Johnson and Sherwood Schwartz, commentary on the season's fourth episode, "The Producer", guest starring Phil Silvers, and a fifteen-minute documentary entitled Gilligan's Island: A Pop Culture Phenomenon.
The Complete Series Collection contains all the same bonuses and featurettes, no added features for a complete series box set. All these releases were double-sided discs, and came in box sets.
In April 2012, the series was re-issued new DVD releases, with six episodes per disc and six discs per season, except for season 3, which only has five.

Film remake

Rights to the series were purchased, with an eye towards creating a movie scheduled for release March 30, 2012. I can't take this much excitement at my age." Sherwood Schwartz also said he would love to see Michael Cera as Gilligan and Beyoncé Knowles as Ginger. Schwartz died on July 12, 2011. Whether the film will go on without him is unknown at this point. Cera has stated that he has never been asked to play the part, nor does he have any interest in the role.
On December 17, 2013, Deadline.Bros Sets 'Gilligan's Island' As Star Feature Vehicle For Josh Gad

Ginger or Mary Ann?

The question of which of these two characters men prefer has endured long after the end of the series. The question has inspired commercials,Budweiser Ginger or Mary Ann Retrieved on 2011-09-07 essays, videos, and a sermon.)





Notes
Bibliography
 | last = Denver
 | first = Bob
 | authorlink = Bob Denver
 | title = Gilligan, Maynard & Me
 |date=November 1993
 | publisher = Carol Publishing Corporation
 | location =
 | language =
 | isbn = 0-8065-1413-2
}}
 | last = Green
 | first = Joey
 | authorlink = Joey Green
 | title = Unofficial Gilligan's Island Handbook
 |date=April 1988
 | publisher = Warner Books
 | isbn = 0-446-38668-5
}}
 | last = Johnson
 | first = Russell
 | authorlink = Russell Johnson
 | coauthors = Steve Cox
 | title = Here on Gilligan's Isle
 | edition = 1st edition
 |date=July 1993
 | publisher = Perennial
 | isbn = 0-06-096993-8
}}
 | last = Schwartz
 | first = Sherwood
 | authorlink = Sherwood Schwartz
 | title = Inside Gilligan's Island: A Three-Hour Tour Through The Making Of A Television Classic
 | date = April 15, 1994 | publisher = St. Martin's Griffin
 | isbn = 0-312-10482-0
}}
 | last = Stoddard
 | first = Sylvia
 | title = TV Treasures&nbsp;– A Companion Guide to Gilligan's Island
 |date=May 1996
 | publisher = St. Martin's Paperbacks
 | location = New York
 | isbn = 0-312-95797-1
}}




