[[Epistle to the Hebrews]]

CATEGORIES: Epistle to the Hebrews, Judeo-Christian topics, Pauline-related books, Works of unknown authorship, New Testament books, Canonical epistles

Epistle to the Hebrews, or "Letter to the Hebrews," is the traditional name of a text that the Greek manuscripts of the New Testament simply called "To the Hebrews" (ΠΡΟΣ ΕΒΡΑΙΟΥΣ).''The Greek New Testament'', Edited by Kurt Aland, Matthew Black, Carlo M. Martini, Bruce M. Metzger, and Allen Wikgren, in cooperation with the Institute for New Testament Textual Research, 2nd edition, United Bible Societies, 1973
Scholars of Greek consider its writing to be more polished and eloquent than any other book of the New Testament. Since the earliest days of the Church, the authorship and canonicity have been debated. Presumably once known and respected by the epistle's readers, the author became unknown and today is often described as unknowable. The book has earned the reputation of being a "masterpiece". Introducing the New Testament: a historical, literary, and theological survey. Baker Academic, 2009. ISBN 978-0-8010-2868-7 It also has been described as an "intricate" New Testament book. Eschatology and Exhortation in the Epistle to the Hebrews. Tübingen: Mohr Siebeck, 2007. ISBN 978-3-16-149215-0
Scholars believe Hebrews was written for Jewish Christians who lived in Jerusalem. Its purpose was to exhort Christians to persevere in the face of persecution. The central theme of the epistle is the doctrine of the Person of Christ and his role as mediator between God and humanity. The writer of the Letter to the Hebrews was committed to the spiritual well-being of its recipients.
The epistle opens with an exaltation of Jesus as "the radiance of God's glory, the express image of his being, and upholding all things by his powerful word".  The epistle presents Jesus with the titles "pioneer" or "forerunner", "Son" and "Son of God", "priest" and "high priest". You Are a Priest Forever: Second Temple Jewish Messianism and the Priestly Christology of the Epistle to the Hebrews. (STDJ 74; Leiden/Boston: Brill, 2008). ISBN 978-90-04-14987-8
The epistle casts Jesus as both exalted Son and high priest, a unique dual Christology. "Confession of the Son of God in the Exordium of Hebrews". Journal for the Study of the New Testament,  30.4 (2008) Scholars argue over where Hebrews fits in the 1st century world. Despite numerous publications on this epistle, scholarly discussion has failed to yield a definitive consensus on most issues. One author says conclusions on most questions, including the one concerning authorship, should be avoided. Cosmology and Eschatology in Hebrews The Settings of the Sacrifice.  Cambridge University Press, 2008. ISBN 978-0-521-88323-8
Although traditionally called the "Letter to the Hebrews", its author refers to it as a "word of exhortation",  to describe a sermon.

Composition

New Testament and Second Temple Judaism scholar Eric Mason argues that the conceptual background of the priestly Christology of the Epistle to the Hebrews closely parallels presentations of the messianic priest and Melchizedek in the Qumran scrolls. While not enough is known about Hebrews or its background, its dependence on any early Jewish tradition cannot be proved. In both Hebrews and Qumran a priestly figure is discussed in the context of a Davidic figure; in both cases a divine decree appoints the priests to their eschatological duty; both priestly figures offer an eschatological sacrifice of atonement. Although the author of Hebrews was not directly influenced by Qumran's "Messiah of Aaron",Oegema, Gerbern S. "You Are a Priest Forever" book review. Catholic Biblical Quarterly,  Oct 2009, Vol. 71 Issue 4, p904-905. these and other conceptions did provide "a precedent... to conceive Jesus similarly as a priest making atonement and eternal intercession in the heavenly sanctuary".

Authorship

By the end of the first century there was confusion over the author's identity. Clement of Rome, Barnabas, the Apostle Paul, and other names were proposed have suggested Luke the Evangelist, Clement of Rome, Apollos and Priscilla as possible authors.
Though no author is named, the original King James Version of the Bible titled the work "The Epistle of Paul the Apostle to the Hebrews". However, the KJV's attribution to Paul was only a guess, and not a very good one according to recent majority scholarship. Its vastly different style, different theological focus, different spiritual experience—all are believed to make Paul's authorship of Hebrews increasingly indefensible. At present, neither modern scholarship nor church teaching ascribes Hebrews to Paul.
Because of its anonymity, it had some trouble being accepted as part of the Christian canon, being classed with the Antilegomena. Eventually it was accepted as scripture because of its sound theology, eloquent presentation, and other intrinsic factors. In antiquity, certain circles began to ascribe it to Paul in an attempt to provide the anonymous work an explicit apostolic pedigree.: Hebrews. Hermeneia; Philadelphia: Fortress, 1989, pp. 1–6.
In the 4th century, Jerome and Augustine of Hippo supported Paul's authorship: the Church largely agreed to include Hebrews as the fourteenth letter of Paul, and affirmed this authorship until the Reformation. Scholars argued that in the 13th Chapter of Hebrews, Timothy is referred to as a companion. Timothy was Paul's missionary companion in the same way Jesus sent disciples out in pairs of two. Also, the writer states that he wrote the letter from "Italy", which also at the time fits Paul."Introduction to the Letter to the Hebrews".  Roger. "The Book of Hebrews". Christian Resource Institute.  Accessed 17 Mar 2013]
Many scholars now believe that the author was one of Paul's pupils or associates, citing stylistic differences between Hebrews and the other Pauline epistles. "Epistle to the Hebrews". The Catholic Encyclopedia.  Vol. 7. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. Web: 30 Dec. 2009. Recent scholarship has favored the idea that the author was probably a leader of a predominantly Jewish congregation to whom he or she was writing.
Believing the author to have been Priscilla, Hoppin posits that the name was omitted either to suppress its female authorship, or to protect the letter itself from suppression. Priscilla's Letter: Finding the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews. Lost Coast Press, 2009. ISBN 978-1882897506
Also convinced that Priscilla was the author of Hebrews, Gilbert Bilezikian, professor of biblical studies at Wheaton College, remarks on "the conspiracy of anonymity in the ancient church," and reasons: "The lack of any firm data concerning the identity of the author in the extant writings of the church suggests a deliberate blackout more than a case of collective loss of memory."
A.J. Gordon ascribes the authorship of Hebrews to Priscilla, writing that "It is evident that the Holy Spirit made this woman Priscilla a teacher of teachers". Originally proposed by Adolf von Harnack in 1900,Adolph von Harnack, "Probabilia uber die Addresse und den Verfasser des Habraerbriefes, " Zeitschrift fur die Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft und die Kunde der aelteren Kirche (E. Preuschen, Berlin: Forschungen und Fortschritte, 1900), 1:16–41. Harnack's reasoning won the support of prominent Bible scholars of the early twentieth century. Harnack believes the letter was written in Rome—not to the Church, but to the inner circle. In setting forth his evidence for Priscillan authorship, he finds it amazing that the name of the author was blotted out by the earliest tradition. Citing , he says it was written by a person of "high standing and apostolic teacher of equal rank with Timothy". If Luke, Clemens, Barnabas, or Apollos had written it, Harnack believes their names would not have been obliterated. Zarephath, N.J.: Pillar of Fire, 1955, pp 187–182.
Donald Guthrie's commentary The Letter to the Hebrews (1983) mentions Priscilla by name as a suggested author.: Eerdmans, 1983, reprinted 1999, p. 21
However, the author's use of the masculine gender participle when referring to himself in Hebrews 11:32 ("And what shall I more say? for the time would fail me to tell of Gideon, and of Barak, and of Samson, and of Jephtha; of David also, and Samuel, and of the prophets") makes it less likely it could be Priscilla or any other woman.
In the 3rd century, Origen wrote of the letter, "Men of old have handed it down as Paul's, but who wrote the Epistle God only knows".

Date

The use of tabernacle terminology in Hebrews has been used to date the epistle before the destruction of the temple, the idea being that knowing about the destruction of both Jerusalem and the temple would have influenced the development of the author's overall argument to include such evidence. Therefore, the most probable date for its composition is the second half of the year 63 or the beginning of 64, according to the Catholic Encyclopedia. Another argument in favor of an early dating is that the author seems unfamiliar with the Eucharist ritual (had the author been familiar, it would have served as a great example). The group of Seven (proto-Christianity), the church of Antioch (Jewish Christianity), Paul of Tarsus (embryonic Gentile Christ...

Audience

Traditional scholars
It sets before the Jew the claims of Christianity—to bring the Jew to the full realization of the relation of Judaism to Christianity, to make clear that Christ has fulfilled those temporary and provisional institutions, and has thus abolished them."Introduction to Hebrews". The New Analytical Bible and Dictionary of the Bible (KJV).  Chicago: John A. Dickson Publishing Co., 1950. p. 1387
Some had stopped assembling together, and this was possibly due to persecution. "Hebrews 1–8", William L. Lane (Word Biblical Commentary, 1991), Introduction p. lvii 

Purpose for writing

Those to whom the author of Hebrews is writing seem to have begun to doubt whether Jesus could really be the Messiah for whom they were waiting, because the Messiah was prophesied in the Old Testament to come as a militant king and destroy the enemies of his people. Jesus, however, came as a mere man who suffered and even died under crucifixion. And although he was seen resurrected, he still left the earth and his people, who now face persecution rather than victory. The books of Hebrews solves this problem by arguing that the old Testament also foretold that the Messiah would be a priest (although of a different sort that the traditional Levitical priests) and Jesus came to fulfill this role. His role of a king is yet to come, and so those who follow him should be patient and not be surprised that they suffer for now.
Some scholars today believe the document was written to prevent apostasy. Some have interpreted apostasy to mean a number of different things, such as a group of Christians in one sect leaving for another more conservative sect, one of which the author disapproves. Some have seen apostasy as a move from the Christian assembly to pagan ritual. In light of a possibly Jewish-Christian audience, the apostasy in this sense may be in regard to Jewish-Christians leaving the Christian assembly to return to the Jewish synagogue. The author writes, "Let us hold fast to our confession".
The book could be argued to affirm special creation. It affirms that God by His Son, Jesus Christ, made the worlds. "God..... 


Style

Hebrews is a very consciously "literary" document. The purity of its Greek was noted by Clement of Alexandria, according to Eusebius (Historia Eccl. , VI, xiv), and Origen of Alexandria asserted that every competent judge must recognize a great difference between this epistle and those of Paul (Eusebius, VI, xxv).
This letter consists of two strands: an expositional or doctrinal strand, 
Hebrews does not fit the form of a traditional Hellenistic epistle, lacking a proper prescript. Modern scholars generally believe this book was originally a sermon or homily, although possibly modified after it was delivered to include the travel plans, greetings and closing. 
Hebrews contains many references to the Old Testament—specifically to its Septuagint text.

Christology

From The Interpreter's Bible 1955
 
 "We may sum up our author's Christology negatively by saying that he has nothing to do with the older Hebrew messianic hopes of a coming Son of David, who would be a divinely empowered human leader to bring in the kingdom of God on earth; and that while he still employs the figure of a militant, apocalyptic king ... who will come again..., this is not of the essence of his thought about Christ.
 
"Positively, our author presents Christ as divine in nature, and solves any possible objection to a divine being who participates in human experience, especially in the experience of death, by the priestly analogy. He seems quite unconscious of the logical difficulties of his position proceeding from the assumption that Christ is both divine and human, at least human in experience although hardly in nature. " TIB XI p. 588The Interpreter's Bible:  The Holy Scriptures in the King James and Revised Standard versions with general articles and introduction, exegesis, and exposition for each book of the Bible in twelve volumes, George Arthur Buttrick, Commentary Editor, Walter Russell Bowie, Associate Editor of Exposition, Paul Scherer, Associate Editor of Exposition, John Knox Associate Editor of New Testament Introduction and Exegesis, Samuel Terrien, Associate Editor of Old Testament Introduction and Exegesis, Nolan B. Harmon Editor, Abingdon Press, copyright 1955 by Pierce and Washabaugh, set up printed, and bound by the Parthenon Press, at Nashville, Tennessee, Volume XI, Philippians, Colossians, Thessalonians, Pastoral Epistles First and Second Epistles to Timothy, and the Epistle to Titus, Philemon, Hebrews and Exegesis by John Knox





Further reading



Online translations of the Epistle to the Hebrews:
Related articles:

