[[Edna St. Vincent Millay]]

CATEGORIES: 1892 births, 1950 deaths, 20th-century American poets, 20th-century women writers, Accidental deaths from falls, Accidental deaths in New York, American feminist writers, American librettists, American opera librettists, American women poets, American women writers, Bisexual feminists, Bisexual women, Bisexual writers, Formalist poets, LGBT people from Maine, LGBT people from New York, LGBT writers from the United States, People from Camden, Maine, People from Greenwich Village, New York, People from Rockland, Maine, Pulitzer Prize for Poetry winners, Sonneteers, Vassar College alumni, Writers from Maine, Writers from New York, LGBT poets

Edna St. Vincent Millay (February 22, 1892 – October 19, 1950) was an American lyrical poet and playwright. She received the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry in 1923, the third woman to win the award for poetry,Pulitzer site and was also known for her feminist activism and her many love affairs. She used the pseudonym Nancy Boyd for her prose work. The poet Richard Wilbur asserted, "She wrote some of the best sonnets of the century."Millay, Edna St. Vincent. Selected Poems. Harper Collins, 1991

Early life

Millay was born in Rockland, Maine, to Cora Lounella Buzelle, a nurse, and Henry Tollman Millay, a schoolteacher who would later become a superintendent of schools.  Her middle name derives from St. Vincent's Hospital in New York, where her uncle's life had been saved just before her birth. The family's house was "between the mountains and the sea where baskets of apples and drying herbs on the porch mingled their scents with those of the neighboring pine woods." In 1904, Cora officially divorced Millay's father for financial irresponsibility, but they had already been separated for some years. Cora and her three daughters, Edna (who called herself "Vincent"), Norma Lounella (born 1893), and Kathleen Kalloch (born 1896), moved from town to town, living in poverty. Cora travelled with a trunk full of classic literature, including Shakespeare and Milton, which she read to her children. The family settled in a small house on the property of Cora's aunt in Camden, Maine, where Millay would write the first of the poems that would bring her literary fame.
The three sisters were independent and spoke their minds, which did not always sit well with the authority figures in their lives. Millay's grade school principal, offended by her frank attitudes, refused to call her Vincent. Instead, he called her by any woman's name that started with a V. At Camden High School, Millay began developing her literary talents, starting at the school's literary magazine, The Megunticook.  At 14 she won the St. Nicholas Gold Badge for poetry, and by 15, she had published her poetry in the popular children's magazine St. Nicholas, the Camden Herald, and the high-profile anthology Current Literature. While at school, she had several relationships with women, including Edith Wynne Matthison, who would go on to become an actress in silent films.Millay biography from the Academy of American Poets
Millay entered Vassar College in 1913 when she was 21 years old, later than usual. She had relationships with several fellow students during her time there.

New York City

After her graduation from Vassar in 1917, Millay moved to New York City. She lived in a number of places in Greenwich Village, including a house owned by the Cherry Lane Theatre
Millay was openly bisexual.  Counted among her close friends were the writers Witter Bynner, Arthur Davison Ficke, and Susan Glaspell, as well as Floyd Dell and the critic Edmund Wilson, both of whom proposed marriage to her and were refused.

Career

Millay's fame began in 1912 when she entered her poem "Renascence" in a poetry contest in The Lyric Year.  The poem was widely considered the best submission and when it was ultimately awarded fourth place, it created a scandal which brought Millay publicity. The first-place winner Orrick Johns was among those who felt that "Renascence" was the best poem, and stated that "the award was as much an embarrassment to me as a triumph."  A second-prize winner offered Millay his $250 prize money.
Her 1920 collection A Few Figs From Thistles drew controversy for its novel exploration of female sexuality and feminism. Vincent. A few Figs from Thistles  In 1919 she wrote the anti-war play Aria da Capo which starred her sister Norma Millay at the Provincetown Playhouse in New York City. Millay won the Pulitzer Prize for Poetry in 1923 for "The Ballad of the Harp-Weaver";Millay, Edna St. Vincent,  "The Ballad of the Harp-Weaver" she was the third woman to win the poetry prize, after Sara Teasdale (1918) and Margaret Widdemer (1919)..
In January 1921, she went to Paris, where she met and befriended the sculptor Thelma Wood.
In 1923 she married 43-year-old Eugen Jan Boissevain (1880–1949), the widower of the labor lawyer and war correspondent Inez Milholland, a political icon Millay had met during her time at Vassar. A self-proclaimed feminist, Boissevain supported her career and took primary care of domestic responsibilities. Both Millay and Boissevain had other lovers throughout their twenty-six-year marriage. For Millay, a significant such relationship was with the poet George Dillon. She met Dillon at one of her readings at the University of Chicago in 1928 where he was a student. He was fourteen years her junior, and the relationship inspired the sonnets in the collection Fatal Interview (published 1931).
In 1925, Boissevain and Millay bought Steepletop near Austerlitz, New York, which had been a 
During the first war Millay had been a dedicated and active pacifist; however, from 1940 she supported the Allied Forces, writing in celebration of the war effort and later working with Writers' War Board to create propaganda, including poetry."Edna St. Vincent Millay" Vassar Encyclopaedia, Vassar College Her reputation in poetry circles was damaged by her war work. Merle Rubin noted: "She seems to have caught more flak from the literary critics for supporting democracy than Ezra Pound did for championing fascism."  In the New York Times, Millay mourned the Czechoslovak city of Lidice, the site of a Nazi massacre:

     The whole world holds in its arms today
     The murdered village of Lidice, 
     Like the murdered body of a little child.<ref Name= "NYT"/>

In 1943 Millay was the sixth person and the second woman to be awarded the Frost Medal for her lifetime contribution to American poetry.
Boissevain died in 1949 of lung cancer, and Millay lived alone for the last year of her life.

Death and Steepletop legacy

Millay died at her home on October 19, 1950. She had fallen down stairs and was found approximately eight hours after her death. Her physician reported that she had suffered a heart attack following a coronary occlusion.  She was 58 years old.
Millay's sister Norma and her husband, the painter and actor Charles Frederick Ellis, moved to Steepletop after Millay's death. In 1973, they established Millay Colony for the Arts on the seven acres around the house and barn.  After the death of her husband in 1976, Norma continued to run the program until her death in 1986. At 17, the poet Mary Oliver visited Steepletop and became a close friend of Norma. Oliver eventually lived there for seven years and helped to organize Millay's papers. of Steepletop, with the intention to add the land to a nearby state forest preserve. The proceeds of the sale were to be used by the Edna St. Vincent Millay Society to restore the farmhouse and grounds and turn it into a museum. The museum has been open to the public since summer 2010, and guided tours of Steepletop and Millay's gardens are available from the end of May through the middle of October. Parts of the grounds of Steepletop, including the Millay Poetry Trail that leads to her grave, are now open to the public year-round.

Works

Millay wrote five verse dramas early in her career, including Two Slatterns and a King and The Lamp and the Bell, a poem written for Vassar College about love between women. She was commissioned by the Metropolitan Opera House to write a libretto for  an opera composed by Deems Taylor. The result, The King's Henchman, drew on the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle's account of Eadgar, King of Wessex, and was described as the most effectively and artistically wrought American opera ever to reach the stage. Within three weeks, her publishers had run through four editions of the book.
Her pacifist verse drama Aria da Capo, a one-act play written for the Provincetown Players, is often anthologized.  It aired live as an episode of Academy Theatre in 1949 on NBC.
"Euclid alone has looked on Beauty bare" (1922)  is an homage to the Geometry of Euclid. et al. (2006). Mathematics and the Aesthetic. New York: Springer. p. 111. "Renascence"Millay, Edna St. Vincent. "Renascence" and "The Ballad of the Harp-Weaver"Millay, Edna St. Vincent. "The Ballad of the Harp-Weaver" are often considered her finest poems. On her death, The New York Times described her as "an idol of the younger generation during the glorious early days of Greenwich Village ... One of the greatest American poets of her time." Thomas Hardy said that America had two great attractions: the skyscraper and the poetry of Edna St. Vincent Millay.

Publications

The following comprises works published during her lifetime:

=Poetry collections=

=Plays=

=Films=



Further reading




