[[Head cheese]]

CATEGORIES: Cold cut, Offal, Hungarian cuisine, German cuisine, Romanian cuisine, Bulgarian cuisine, Cuisine of the Southern United States, Chilean cuisine, Scottish cuisine, Czech cuisine, Slovak cuisine, Finnish cuisine, Polish cuisine, Smoked meat

Head cheese or brawn is a cold cut that originated in Europe. A version pickled with vinegar is known as souse. Head cheese is not a dairy cheese, but a terrine or meat jelly made with flesh from the head of a calf or pig, or less commonly a sheep or cow, and often set in aspic. The parts of the head used vary, but the brain, eyes, and ears are usually removed. The tongue, and sometimes even the feet and heart, may be included.
Head cheese may be flavored with onion, black pepper, allspice, bay leaf, salt, and vinegar. It is usually eaten cold or at room temperature as a luncheon meat. It can also be made from quality trimmings from pork and veal, adding gelatin to the stock as a binder.
Historically, meat jellies were made of the cleaned (all organs removed) head of the animal, which was simmered to produce stock, a peasant food made since the Middle Ages. When cooled, the stock congeals because of the natural gelatin found in the skull. The aspic may need additional gelatin, or more often, reduction to set properly.

Terminology

The term head cheese is used in North America,

In Europe

In Asia

In Australia

In Australia, it is known as brawn or Presswurst. It is usually seen as something of an old-fashioned dish, although various large firms, such as Don and KR Castlemaine produce it.

In the Caribbean

Souse is pickled meat and trimmings usually made from pig's feet, chicken feet or cow's tongue, to name a few.[ref]Sinful alterations ruin boxed chocolates
Edition March 27, 2002 page D.04 Toronto Star[/ref] The cooked meat or trimmings are cut into bite-sized pieces and soaked in a brine made of water, lime juice, cucumbers, hot pepper, salt and specially prepared seasonings. It is usually eaten on Saturday mornings, especially in St. Vincent and Barbados. In Trinidad and Tobago, it is served or sold at most social gatherings, such as parties, all-inclusive fetes and sporting competitions. 

In Latin America

Head cheese is very popular and is usually referred to as queso de cabeza in Chile and Colombia, and queso de puerco in Mexico. In Peru, Ecuador and Costa Rica, it is also known as queso de chancho. It is known as queso de Cerdo in Uruguay and Argentina. In Panama, it is known as sao (from Caribbean English souse), made with pig's feet and prepared the same way as in the Caribbean; it is a dish from the Caribbean coast, where most of Panama's West Indian community lives.
 By Carl Franz, Carl Franz, Lorena Havens, Steve Rogers, Lorena Havens</ref>

In North America



Notes and references


