[[Stand by Me (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1986 films, 1980s drama films, American adventure films, American comedy-drama films, American coming-of-age films, American teen drama films, Columbia Pictures films, Films based on short fiction, Films based on works by Stephen King, Films directed by Rob Reiner, Films set in 1959, Films set in Oregon, Films shot in California, Films shot in Oregon, Road movies

Stand by Me is a 1986 American coming of age drama comedy film directed by Rob Reiner. Based on the novella The Body by Stephen King, the title is derived from the Ben E. King song of the same name, which plays over the end credits. The films tells the story of four boys who go on a hike across the countryside to find the missing body of a dead kid.

Plot

After reading a newspaper article about the death of his old friend, author Gordie Lachance recalls a childhood journey to find the body of a missing boy near the town of Castle Rock, Oregon, over Labor Day weekend in September 1959. Young Gordie is a quiet, bookish boy with a penchant for writing and telling stories. He is rejected by his father after the death of his football-star older brother Denny, who had paid more attention to Gordie than his parents did.
Gordie spends his time with three friends: Chris Chambers who is from a family of criminals and alcoholics and is usually stereotyped accordingly, even though he does not conform to the perceptions and stigmas attached to his family; Teddy Duchamp who is eccentric and physically scarred after his mentally unstable father held his ear to a stove; and Vern Tessio who is overweight, timid, and often picked on.
Vern overhears his older brother Billy and his friend Charlie Hogan talking about finding the body of Ray Brower, who was killed after being struck by a train. Brower was a boy whose disappearance and subsequent police search was a big news story in Castle Rock. Gordie, Chris, Teddy, and Vern decide to embark upon a hiking journey following the local rail line to see if they can find Ray's body and become local heroes.
The boys set out, first encountering Milo Pressman and his dog Chopper when they pause to fill their canteens from a well located in Milo's junkyard. They then walk along a train bridge and Vern and Gordie are nearly run over by a passing train. At the end of the day, the boys set up camp and Gordie tells the boys a story that he made up. Later on in the night, Chris reveals to Gordie his fear of being stereotyped as a criminal and never making anything of himself. They continue by taking a short-cut through a swamp only to discover that it is infested with leeches. While desperately removing them from each other, Gordie faints after finding one in his underpants, causing the other boys to wonder if they should go on. Gordie ends up being the decisive one, knowing that they have put in too much work not to see the body.
They locate the body and it reminds Gordie that his father liked his brother better than him. At this point, local bully "Ace" Merrill and his gang consisting of "Eyeball" Chambers, Vince Desjardins, Charlie Hogan, Billy Tessio and two other hoodlums show up in their cars to take the body, but Gordie threatens Ace with a handgun that Chris brought. Gordie decides that no one will get credit for finding the dead body and reports it via an anonymous phone call to the authorities. The boys hike back to Castle Rock and say goodbye to each other.
Gordie states that Vern later married straight out of high school, had four children and became a forklift driver at a local lumber yard. Teddy tried to join the Army, but was refused entry because of his poor eyesight and ear injury. He eventually served jail time and now was doing odd jobs around Castle Rock. Chris was able to stick it out and get by in the advanced classes with Gordie and later moved out of Castle Rock and became a lawyer. However, as revealed in the opening scene, Chris was recently stabbed and killed when he attempted to intervene in a fight in a fast food restaurant. Gordie then finishes his memoir, and takes his son and his son's friend swimming.

Cast

Production

In a 2011 interview with NPR, Wil Wheaton attributed the film's success to the director's casting choices:
Parts of the film were shot in Brownsville, Oregon, which stood in for the fictional town of Castle Rock. Scenes that include the mailbox baseball and the junkyard scenes were filmed in Veneta, Oregon. The junkyard is still in operation. The campout/standing-guard scene was filmed in Eugene, Oregon, just a few miles from Veneta. The general store is in Franklin, Oregon, just north of Veneta. Scenes along the railroad tracks were shot near Cottage Grove, Oregon, along the right-of-way of the Oregon, Pacific and Eastern Railway, now used as the Row River National Recreation Trail. The scene where the boys outrace a locomotive across a trestle was filmed at Lake Britton on the McCloud River Railroad, near McArthur-Burney Falls Memorial State Park, California.

Title

In March 1986, Columbia Pictures, concerned that the original title The Body was misleading, renamed the film Stand by Me. According to screenwriter Raynold Gideon, "... Rob came up with Stand by Me, and it ended up being the least unpopular opinion."Stand By Me DVD Booklet, Columbia TriStar Home Video, 2000

Music

The film's musical score was composed by Jack Nitzsche. On August 8, 1986, a soundtrack album was released containing many of 1950s classic rock songs featured in the film.

Reception

Stand by Me has received nearly universal acclaim, receiving a 91% rating on Rotten Tomatoes.Stand by Me at Rotten Tomatoes
Stephen King indicated, on the special features of the 25th anniversary Blu-ray set, that this was the first successful translation to film of any of his works.

Accolades

Nominations

Legacy

In 1987, following the success of Stand by Me, Rob Reiner co-founded a movie and television production company and named it Castle Rock Entertainment after the fictional setting of the story. Interview with Rob Reiner. Archive of American Television (November 29, 2004).
On July 24, 2010, a 25th Anniversary Celebration of the filming of Stand by Me was held in Brownsville, Oregon. The event included a cast and crew Q&A session, an amateur blueberry pie eating contest, and an outdoor showing of the film.






