[[Golden Eagle]]

CATEGORIES: Aquila (genus), African raptors, Animals described in 1758, Arctic birds, Birds of Asia, Birds of Canada, Birds of Europe, Birds of Mexico, Birds of the United States, Holarctic fauna, Birds of Western Sahara, Eagles, National symbols of Mexico, Birds of Ukraine



The Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) is one of the best-known birds of prey in the Northern Hemisphere. It is the most widely distributed species of eagle. Like all eagles, it belongs to the family Accipitridae. These birds are dark brown, with lighter golden-brown plumage on their napes. Immature eagles of this species typically have white on the tail and often have white markings on the wings. Golden Eagles use their agility and speed combined with powerful feet and massive, sharp talons to snatch up a variety of prey (mainly hares, rabbits, marmots and other ground squirrels).
Golden Eagles maintain home ranges or territories that may be as large as . They build large nests in high places (mainly cliffs) to which they may return for several breeding years. Most breeding activities take place in the spring; they are monogamous and may remain together for several years or possibly for life. Females lay up to four eggs, and then incubate them for six weeks. Typically, one or two young survive to fledge in about three months. These juvenile Golden Eagles usually attain full independence in the fall, after which they wander widely until establishing a territory for themselves in four to five years.
Once widespread across the Holarctic, it has disappeared from many areas which are now more heavily populated by humans. Despite being extirpated from or uncommon in some its former range, the species is still fairly ubiquitous, being present in sizeable stretches of Eurasia, North America, and parts of North Africa. It is the largest and least populous of the five species of true accipitrid to occur as a breeding species in both the Palearctic and the Nearctic. The Wellfleet Press (1986), ISBN 978-1555214722.
For centuries, this species has been one of the most highly regarded birds used in falconry, with the Eurasian subspecies having been used to hunt and kill prey such as Gray Wolves (Canis lupus) in some native communities. Due to its hunting prowess, the Golden Eagle is regarded with great mystic reverence in some ancient, tribal cultures.
The Golden Eagle is one of the most extensively studied species of raptor in the world in some parts of its range, such as the Western United States and the Western Palearctic.

Description

The Golden Eagle is a very large, dark brown raptor with broad wings, ranging from  The sexes are similar in plumage but are considerably dimorphic in size. Females are rather larger than males with the differences increasing as the body size increases across the races. The large Himalayan Golden Eagles females are about 37% heavier and nearly 9% longer in wing length than the males of the race compared with the small Japanese Golden Eagles where females are a relatively modest 26% heavier and around 6% longer in wing length than males.
Adults are primarily dark brown in color, with a paler, typically golden color (the source of the species' common name) on the back of the crown and nape, and some grey on the inner-wing and tail. There are subtle differences in coloration among the races, described below. Unlike in other Aquila species, where the tarsal feathers are typically of a similar color to the rest of the plumage, the tarsal feathers of Golden Eagles tend to be paler, ranging from light golden to white. In addition, some full-grown birds (especially in North America) have white "epaulettes" on the upper part of each scapular feather tract. As in many acciptrids, the bare portion of the feet are yellow. This species moults gradually beginning in March or April until September or October each year. Moulting usually decreases in winter. Moult of the contour feathers begins on the head and neck region and process along the feather tracts in a general anterior-posterior direction. Feathers on head, neck, back and scapulars may be replaced annually. With large feathers of the wing and tail, moult beginning with innermost feather and proceeds outwards in a straightforward manner known as "descendant" moult.
The juvenile Golden Eagle is similar to the adult but tends to be darker, appearing black on the back especially in East Asia. Compared to adults, juveniles have a more unfaded color. Young birds are white for about two-thirds of their tail length ending with a broad, black terminal band. Occasionally, juvenile eagles have white patches on the remiges at the bases of the inner primaries and the outer secondaries, forming a crescent marking on the wings which tend to be divided by darker feathers. Rarely, juvenile birds may have only trace amounts of white on the tail. Compared to the relatively consistently white tail, the white patches on the wing are extremely variable and some juveniles have almost no white visible. Juveniles of less than 12 months of age tend to have the most extensive amount of white to the plumage. By their second summer, the white underwing coverts are usually replaced by a characteristic rusty-brown color. By the third summer, the upper-wing coverts are largely replaced by dark brown feathers, however not all feathers moult at once giving many juvenile birds a grizzled pattern. The tail also follows a similar pattern of maturation. Due to the amount of variability in different individuals, juvenile eagles cannot be reliably aged on sight alone. 1988. Age determination of Golden Eagles, Aquila chrysaetos. Bar Fagelvard, 47: 321-334. Many Golden Eagles still have white on the tail during their first attempt at nesting.H. & Lish, J.W. 2006. Thinking about feathers: adaptations of golden eagle retrices. Journal of Raptor Research, 40: 1-28. The final adult plumage is not fully attained until the birds are between 5 and a half and 6 and a half years old.

Voice

While many accipitrids are not known for their strong voices, Golden Eagles have a particular tendency for silence, even while breeding. 1976. Eagles of the World. David and Charles, ISBN 0360003184. Some vocalization, however, has been recorded, and these normally are centering around the nesting period. The voice of the Golden Eagle is considered weak, high and shrill, even being emphatically described as "quite pathetic" and "puppy-like", and as somewhat incongruous considering the formidable size and nature of the species. Most known vocalization seem to function as contact calls between eagles, sometimes adults to their offspring, occasionally territorial birds to intruders and rarely between a breeding pair. In Western Montana, nine distinct calls were noted: a chirp, a seeir, a pssa, a skonk, a cluck, a wonk, a honk and a hiss.

Flight physiology

Golden Eagles are sometimes considered the most superlative fliers among eagles and perhaps among all raptorial birds. They are equipped with broad, long wings with somewhat finger-like indentations on the tips of the wing. Golden Eagles are unique among their genus in that they often fly in a slight dihedral, which means the wings are often held in a slight, upturned V. When they must engage in flapping flight, Golden Eagles appear at their most labored but this flight method is generally less common than soaring or gliding flights. Flapping flight usually consists of 6–8 deep wing-beats, interspersed with 2 to 3 second glides. While soaring the wings and tail are held in one plane with the primary tips often spread. when diving after prey. Although less agile and maneuverable, the Golden Eagle is apparently quite the equal and possibly even the superior of the Peregrine Falcon's stooping and gliding speeds. F. 1934. Speed of a Golden Eagle's flight. Nature 140:325-326. This places the Golden Eagle as the one of the two fastest moving living animals on earth. Although most flight in Golden Eagles has a purpose (i.e. territoriality, hunting, etc.), some flights (such as those by solitary birds or between well-established breeding pairs) seems to function merely as acts of playfulness.S. 1988. Golden eagle: Aquila chrysaetos. In: Palmer RS (Ed.). Handbook of North American birds. Volume 5. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. pp. 180-231.

Confusion species

Size readily distinguishes this species from most other raptors when it is seen well. Most other raptors are considerably smaller. Buteo hawks, which are perhaps most similar to the Golden Eagle in structure among the species outside of the "booted eagle" group, are often amongst the larger very common raptors. However, a mid-sized Buteo is dwarfed by a Golden Eagle, as an adult female eagle has a wingspan of about twice the width and weighs around five times more. Buteos are also usually distinctly paler below, although some species occur in "dark morphs" which can be even darker than a Golden Eagle. Bna.cornell. Retrieved on 2012–08–22. Only some Old World vultures and the California Condor (Gymnogyps californianus) (among the other raptorial birds this eagle co-exists with) are distinctly larger than the Golden Eagle, with longer, broader wings, typically held more evenly in a slower, less forceful flight and often have dramatically different color patterns. The Turkey Vulture (Cathartes aura) are a potential confusion species in North America from a great distance, as they are a large species that (like the Golden Eagle) often fly with a pronounced dihedral but are easily separated by their less controlled, forceful flying style and their smaller, thinner body, much smaller head and, at closer range, their slaty black-brown color and silvery wing secondaries.  Compared to Haliaeetus eagles, the Golden Eagle has wings that are only somewhat more slender but are more hawk-like and lack the flat, plank-like wing positioning seen in the other genus. Large Northern Haliaeetus usually have a larger bill and larger head which more distinctly protrudes than that of a Golden Eagle's in flight. The tail of the Golden Eagle is longer on average than those of Haliaeetus eagles, appearing to be two or three times the length of the head in soaring flight as opposed to the other eagles where the head is often more than twice the length of the tail. Confusion is most likely between juvenile Haliaeetus and Golden Eagles since the adult Golden has a more solidly golden-brown coloration and all Haliaeetus eagles have obvious distinctive plumages as adults. Haliaeetus eagles are often heavily streaked in their juvenile phase. Juvenile Golden Eagles can show large patches of white to the wings and tail that are quite different than the random, sometimes large and splotchy-looking distribution of white typical of juvenile Haliaeetus.
Distinguishing the Golden Eagle from other Aquila eagles in Eurasia is potentially a greater identification problem. This identification may rely on the Golden's relatively long tail and patterns of white or gray on the wings and tail. Other Aquila eagles do not generally fly in a pronounced dihedral as do Golden Eagles. At close range, the golden to rufous nape-shawl of the Golden Eagle is distinctive from other Aquila. Most other Aquila eagles are darker looking in plumage, although the smaller Tawny Eagle (A. rapax) is often paler than the Golden Eagle (overlap in range verified only in Bale Mountains, Ethiopia). Among Eurasian Aquila, the adult Eastern Imperial (A. heliaca) and Spanish Imperial Eagle (A. adalberti) come closest to attaining similar sizes as Golden Eagles but this species pair are distinguished by their relatively longer neck, flatter wings in flight, white markings on their shoulder forewing-coverts, paler cream-straw colored nape patch and generally darker coloration. Juvenile Imperial Eagles are much paler overall (caramel-cream in the Spanish; cream and tawny streaks in the Eastern) and are not likely to be confused. Steppe Eagles (A. nipalensis) can also be nearly Golden Eagle-sized but are more compact and smaller headed than a Golden Eagle with little color variation to their dark earth-brown plumage but for juvenile birds which have distinctive cream-colored bands running through their coverts and secondaries. Verreaux's Eagle (A. verreauxii) are most similar in size and body shape to the Golden, with the Verreaux's being slightly longer overall but marginally less heavy and long-winged than the Golden Eagle. The plumage is very distinctly different, however, as Verreaux's Eagles are almost entirely jet-black but for some striking, contrasting white on the wing primaries, shoulders and upper-wing. This closely related species is known to co-occur with the Golden Eagle only in the Bale Mountains of Ethiopia. Other booted eagles in the Golden Eagle's range are unlikely to be confused, due to the differences in size and form. Among the Aquila genus, only the long-winged and tailed Wedge-tailed Eagle (A. audax) of Australasia notably exceeds the Golden Eagle in average wingspan and length. However, the Wedge-tailed Eagle is a slightly less heavy bird.

Taxonomy and systematics

This species was first described by Linnaeus in his 1758 Systema naturae as Falco chrysaetos."Falco cera lutea, pedibus lanatis, corpore fusco ferrugineo vario, cauda nigra basi cinereo-undulata." – "A raptor with yellow cere, [feathered tarsometatarsus, body dusky brown variegated with rusty, tail black with ashy-waved base." (Linnaeus 1758) Since birds were grouped largely on superficial characteristics at that time, many species were grouped by Linnaeus in the Falco genus. The type locality was given simply as "Europa"; it was later fixed to Sweden. It was moved to the new genus Aquila by French ornithologist Mathurin Jacques Brisson in 1760.
The Golden Eagle is part of a broad group of raptors called "booted eagles" which are defined by the feature that all species have feathering over their tarsus, unlike many other accipitrids which have bare legs. Included in this group are all species described as "hawk eagles" including the genera Spizaetus and Nisaetus, as well as assorted monotypical genera such as Oroaetus, Lophaetus, Stephanoaetus, Polemaetus, Lophotriorchis and Ictinaetus. The genus Aquila is distributed across every continent but for South America and Antarctica. Up to 20 species have been classified in the genus but the taxonomic placement of some of the traditional species has been questioned as of late. Traditionally, the Aquila eagles have been grouped superficially as largish, mainly brownish or dark-colored booted eagles that vary little in transition from their juvenile to their adult plumages. Genetic research has recently indicated the Golden Eagle is included in a clade with Verreaux's Eagle in Africa as well as the Gurney's Eagle (A. gurneyi) and the Wedge-tailed Eagle (clearly part of an Australasian radiation of the lineage). This identification of this particular clade has long been suspected based on similar morphological characteristics amongst these large-bodied species. More surprisingly, the smaller, much paler-bellied sister species Bonelli's Eagle (A. fasciatus) and African Hawk-Eagle (A. spilogaster), previously included in the Hieraaetus genus, have been revealed to be genetically much closer to the Verreaux's and Golden Eagle lineage than to other species traditionally included in the Aquila genus.

Subspecies and distribution

There are six extant subspecies of Golden Eagle that differ slightly in size and plumage. Individuals of any race are somewhat variable and the differences between subspecies are clinal, especially in terms of body size. Other than these characteristics, there is little variation across the range of the species. Some recent studies have gone so far as to propose that only two subspecies be recognized based on genetic markers: Aquila chrysaetos chrysaetos (including A. c. homeyeri) and A. c. canadensis (including the races A. c. japonica, A. c. daphanea and A. c. kamtschatica)., & Sauer-Gürth, H. 2004. Phylogenetic relationships in diurnal raptors based on nucleotide sequences of mitochondrial and nuclear marker genes. Pages 483-495 in Raptors worldwide (R. D. Chancellor, and B.-U. Meyburg, Eds.). World Working Group on Birds of Prey/MME-BirdLife Hungary, Berlin and Budapest.
The larger Middle Pleistocene Golden Eagles of France (and possibly elsewhere) are referred to a paleosubspecies Aquila chrysaetos bonifacti, and the huge specimens of the Late Pleistocene of Liko Cave (Crete) have been named Aquila chrysaetos simurgh (Weesie, 1988). D. M. 1988. The Quaternary avifauna of. Crete, Greece. Palaeovertebrata, 18: 1-94 Similarly, an ancestral Golden Eagle, with a heavier, broader skull, larger wings and shorter legs when compared to modern birds, has been found in the La Brea Tar Pits of southern California. 1947. An ancestral Golden Eagles a question in taxonomy. Auk, 64: 287-291.

Habitat

Golden Eagles are fairly adaptable in habitat but often reside in areas with a few shared ecological characteristics. They are best suited to hunting in open or semi-open areas and search them out year-around. Native vegetation seems to be attractive to them and they typically avoid developed areas of any type from urban to agricultural as well as heavily forested regions. In desolate areas (i.e. the southern Yukon), they can occur regularly at roadkills and garbage dumps. W. & Frey, R. 1981. Raptor monitoring program, 1980 report. Kluane National Park, YT. The largest numbers of Golden Eagles are found in mountainous regions today, with many eagles doing a majority of their hunting and nesting on rock formations. However, they are not solely tied to high elevations and can breed in lowlands if the local habitats are suitable. Below are more detailed description of habitats occupied by Golden Eagles in both continents where they occur.

Eurasia

In the Arctic fringe of the great continent, Golden Eagles occur along the edge of the tundra and the taiga from the Kola peninsula to Anadyr in eastern Siberia, nesting in forests and hunting over nearby arctic heathland. Typical vegetation is stunted, fragmented larch woodland merging into low birch-willow scrub and various heathland. In the rocky, wet, windy maritime countries of the British Isles and western Scandinavia, the Golden Eagle is a mountain-dwelling bird. These areas include upland grasslands, blanket bog and sub-Arctic heaths but also fragmented woodland and woodland edge, including boreal forests. In Western Europe, Golden Eagle habitat is dominated by open, rough grassland, heath and bogs, in places enlivened by rocky ridges, spurs, crags, scree, slopes and grand plateaux. In Sweden, Finland, the Baltic States, Belarus and almost the entire distribution in Russia all the way to the Pacific Ocean, Golden Eagles occur sparsely in lowland taiga forest. These areas are dominated by stands of evergreens such as pine, larch and spruce, occasionally supplemented by birch and alder stands in southern Scandinavia and the Baltic States. This is largely marginal country for Golden Eagles and they occur where tree cover is thin and abuts open habitat. Golden Eagle taiga habitat usually consists of extensive peatland formations caused by poorly drained soils. In central Europe, Golden Eagles today occur almost exclusively in the grand mountain ranges, such as Pyrenees, Alps, Carpathians and the Caucasus. Here, the species nests near the tree line and hunt subalpine and alpine pastures, grassland and heath above. Golden Eagles also occur in moderately mountainous habitat along the Mediterranean Sea, from Iberia and the Atlas Mountains in Morocco, to Greece, Turkey and Kurdistan. This area is characterized by low mountains, Mediterranean maquis vegetation and sub-temperate open woodland in various stages of degradation. The local pine-oak vegetation, with a huge variety of Sclerophyllous shrubs are well-adapted to prolonged summer draughts. From Kurdistan and the southern Caspian Sea to the foothills of the Hindu Kush Mountains in Afghanistan, the typical Golden Eagle habitat is temperate desert-like mountain ranges surrounded by steppe landscapes interspersed with forest. Here the climate is colder and more continental than around the Mediterranean. Golden Eagles occupy the alpine ranges from the Altai Mountains and the Pamir Mountains to Tibet, in the great Himalayan massif, and northwestern China, where they occupy the Tien Shan range. In these mountain ragnes, the species often lives at very high elevations, living above tree line at more than  above sea-level in Khumbu in May 1975., & Inskipp, T. 1991. A guide to the birds of Nepal, 2nd edition. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C. In the mountains of Japan and Korea, the Golden Eagle occupies deciduous scrub woodland and carpet-like stands of Siberian Dwarf Pine (Pinus pumila) that merge into grasslands and alpine heathland. The Golden Eagle occurs in mountains from the Adrar Plateau in Mauritania to northern Yemen and Oman where the desert habitat is largely bereft of vegetation but offers many rocky plateaus to support both the eagles and their prey. In Israel, their habitat is mainly rocky slopes and wide wadi areas, chiefly in desert and to a lesser extent in semi-desert and Mediterranean climates, extending to open areas. 1996. The Birds of Israel. Academic Press, London. In Northeastern Africa, the habitat is often of a sparse, desert-like character and is quite similar to the habitat in Middle East and the Arabian peninsula. In Ethiopia's Bale Mountains, where the vegetation is more lush and the climate is clearly less arid than in Northeastern Africa, the Golden Eagle occupies verdant mountains.

North America

The ecozones occupied by Golden Eagles are roughly concurrent with those of Eurasia. In western and northern Alaska and northern Canada to the Ungava Peninsula in Quebec, the eagles occupy the Arctic fringe of North America (the species does not range into the true high Arctic tundra), where open canopy gives way to dwarf-shrub heathland with cottongrass and tussock tundra. In land-locked areas of the sub-Arctic, Golden Eagles are by far the largest raptor. From the Alaska Range to Washington and Oregon, it is often found in high mountains above the tree line or on bluffs and cliffs along river valleys below the tree line. J. and J. A. Curatolo. 1982. Notes on Golden Eagle productivity and nest site characteristics, Porcupine River, Alaska, 1979-1982. Raptor Research, 16: 123-127. R., D. N. Weir, and M. H. Dick. 1991. Birds of the Kilbuck and Ahklun Mountain Region, Alaska. U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish & Wildlife Service, North American Fauna 76, Washington, D.C. In Washington state, Golden Eagles can be found in clear-cut sections of otherwise dense coniferous forest zones with relatively little annual precipitation. From east of the Canadian Rocky Mountains to the mountains of Labrador, the Golden Eagle is found in small numbers in boreal forest peatlands and similar mixed woodland areas. In the foothills of the Rocky Mountains in the United States are plains and prairies where Golden Eagles are widespread, especially where there's a low human presence. Here, grassland on low rolling hills and flat plains are typical, interrupted only by cottonwood stands around river valleys and wetlands where the eagles may build their nests. Golden Eagles also occupy the desert-like Great Basin from southern Idaho to northern Arizona and New Mexico. In this habitat, trees are generally absent other than junipers with vegetation being dominated by sagebrush (Artemisia) and other low shrub species. Although the vegetation varies a bit more, similar habitat is occupied by Golden Eagles in Mexico. H. & Craig, E.H. 1984. Results of a helicopter survey of cliff nesting raptors in a deep canyon in southern Idaho. Raptor Research, 18 :20-25. M., Knick, S.T., Vekasy, M. S., Schueck, L. S. & Zarriello, T.J. 1997. Spatial use and habitat selection of Golden Eagles in southwestern Idaho. Auk 114: 673-687. A. 1981. Distributional status of Falconiformes in west central Arizona-with notes on ecology, reproductive success and management. U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, Phoenix District Office, Phoenix, AZ. However, Golden Eagles are typically absent in North America from true deserts like the Sonora Desert, where annual precipitation is less than . L. 1988. Atlas of wintering North American birds; an analysis of Christmas Bird Count data. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL. Golden Eagles occupy the mountains and coastal areas of California and Baja California in Mexico where hot, dry summers and moist winters are typical. The Golden Eagles here often nest in chaparral and oak woodland, oak savanna and grassland amongst low rolling hill typified by diverse vegetation. G., Jackman, R.E. Brown, T. L., Gilardi, J. G., Driscoll, D. E. & Culp, L. 1995. A pilot Golden Eagle population study in the Altamont Pass Wind Resource Area, California. Predatory Bird Research Group, University of California, Santa Cruz. In the Eastern United States, the species once bred widely in the Appalachian Plateau near burns, open marshes, meadows, bogs and lakes. R. 1971. The breeding status of the Golden Eagle in the Appalachians. American Birds, 25: 3-7. J. 1974. ''Status of the Osprey, Bald Eagle, and Golden Eagle in the Adirondacks''. New York Fish & Game Commission Journal, 21: 18-31. In Eastern North America, the species still breeds on the Gaspe Peninsula, Quebec. Until 1999, a pair of Golden Eagles were still known to nest in Maine but they are now believed to be absent as a breeding bird from the Eastern United States. The Golden Eagles who breed in eastern Canada winter on montane grass and heath fields in the Appalachian Plateau region, especially in Pennsylvania, New York, West Virginia, Maryland and Virginia. Most sightings in the Eastern United States recently are concentrated within or along southwestern border of the Appalachian Plateau (30% of records) and within the Coastal Plain physiographic region (33% of records). A. and S. L. Vana. 1984. Distribution of wintering Golden Eagles in the eastern United States. Wilson Bulletin, 96: 692-701.
Though they do regularly nest in the marsh-like peatland of the boreal forest, Golden Eagles are not generally associated with wetlands and, in fact, they can be found near some of the most arid spots on earth. In the wintering population of Eastern United States, however, they are often associated with steep river valleys, reservoirs, and marshes in inland areas as well as estuarine marshlands, barrier islands, managed wetlands, sounds, and mouths of major river systems in coastal areas. These wetlands are attractive due to a dominance of open vegetation, large concentrations of prey, and the general absence of human disturbance. In the midwestern United States, they are not uncommon during winter near reservoirs and wildlife refuges that provide foraging opportunities at waterfowl concentrations. A. 1991. Central plains buteos and Golden Eagle. Pages 60-68 in Proceedings of the Midwest raptor management symposium and workshop. (Pendleton, B. G., Ed.) National Wildlife Federation, Washington, D.C.

Dietary biology

The Golden Eagle is one of the most powerful predators in the avian world. One author described it as "the pre-eminent diurnal predator of medium-sized birds and mammals in open country throughout the Northern Hemisphere". Golden Eagles usually hunt during daylight hours, but were recorded hunting from one hour before sunrise to one hour after sunset during the breeding season in southwestern Idaho. C., Harper, J.H. & Phipps, K.B. 1978. Habitat use and hunting strategies of Prairie Falcons, Red-tailed Hawks, and Golden Eagles. Fin. Rep. Western Illinois University, Macomb. The hunting success rate of Golden Eagles was calculated in Idaho, showing that, out of 115 hunting attempts, 20% were successful in procuring prey. would need favorably high windy conditions to be lifted. 1962. Comparisons of the weight-lifting capacities of a House Finch and a Golden Eagle. Auk, 79: 485.R., Imler, R.H. & Arnold, L.W> 1964. The American Eagles and their Economic Status. USDI, Fish and Wildlife Service, Washington. 1973. Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos. Habitat management of unique or endangered species. USDI Bureau of Land Management Tech. Note 239.

Hunting methods

At least seven main hunting techniques are known to be utilized by the species, with many individual variations and the ability in most mature eagles to quickly (and sometimes cleverly) vary back and forth between methods depending on the circumstance. The first described is "high soar with glide attack", where the Golden Eagle soars at least  above the ground so they do not break the sky-line when observed from the ground and they can hug the contours of the earth below. This method is useful for hunting colonial (often burrowing) prey such as ground squirrels, densely populated leporids or birds found in concentrations, such as breeding grouse or even seabirds. The individual prey item is apparently selected in a manner of seconds before the strike. 1985. Hunting behavior of Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos migrating in southwestern Alberta. Canadian Field Naturalist, 49: 383-385. If the first attempt fails, the eagle may fly around and attempt to ambush the prey again. The next hunting method is the "glide attack with tail-chase", which commences with a low-angled stoop some distance from the quarry. The prey is then chased closely, whether a hare running evasively or a grouse in flight. The key to success is eagle's agility and the prey's inability to find cover. In one case, a flying Greater Sage-Grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) was caught by a pair of eagles using this technique.C. 1937. Life histories of North American Birds of Prey. Part 1. U.S. National Museum Bulletin, 167: 1-109. The next major hunting method is "low flight with slow descent attack". In this, the Golden Eagle quarters low below the earth and then gradually swoops down on the prey. This is used for slow-moving prey, such as tortoises and hedgehogs, or any prey item with a general absence of escape behavior. This includes any potentially dangerous prey items, such as rattlesnakes and foxes.R. 1988. The Golden Eagle in Southeastern Yugoslavia. Lotus, 38/39: 95-135. When hunting mammalian carnivores, the eagle may hover for some time over the potential prey and not press the attack unless the mammal looks down. The next is the "low flight with sustained grip attack", which is used for hunting ungulates. Here, the Golden Eagle flies over a herd of ungulates which in turn often huddle or break into run. The eagle then selects it prey (typically young animals, though sometimes infirm or exceptionally healthy grown animals) and lands on prey's back or neck, talons gripping firmly attempting to pierce vital organs or cause shock via a crushing grip to bone and cartilage. The hunting eagle typically rides its prey for several minutes with wings outstretched and flapping to maintain balance until the prey collapses, either as result of exhaustion, shock or internal injury. The final major hunting method is the "walk and grab attack", in which the eagle walks on the ground and attempts to pull its prey out of cover. This has been used for pulling jackrabbits out of brush but has even been utilized to grab the young of large prey (i.e. deer, sheep and badgers) literally right out from under their mother's legs.-central Utah: 08:30–12:00 and 14:45–18:30Smith, D. G. & Murphy, J.R. 1973. Breeding ecology of raptors in the eastern Great Basin of Utah. Brigham Young University Science Bulletin, Biological Series, 18: 1-76., Burles, D. & Hoefs, M. 1984. Observation of Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos predation Dall Sheep Ovis dalli dalli lambs. Canadian Field Naturalist, 98: 252-254. Tandem hunting may be done regularly, especially with larger prey items. R.M. 1968. Golden Eagle hunting tactics. Blue Jay 26:78-80. Reportedly, while hunting in pairs, the male Golden Eagle flies in front of the female at a higher elevation and usually initiates the attack. Breeding pairs have been recorded hunting jackrabbits cooperatively with one individual following the other at different elevations above the ground. The initial pursuer diverts the prey's attention by stooping while the second flies in unseen to make the kill. C. 1916. The Golden Eagle in Cochise County, Arizona. Oologist 33:2-10. R. 1972. Nesting behavior of the Golden Eagle, Aquila chrysaetos, in San Diego County, California. Master's Thesis. University of California, Riverside. A study in Idaho showed that the success rate was lower during tandem hunting (9%) than during solo hunting (29%), but this may have been due to the more difficult nature of the prey targeted during tandem hunts. As a whole birds are reportedly more difficult prey to capture than mammals, so hunting success rates may be lower where birds outrank mammals in importance as prey. Golden Eagles are not above scavenging for carrion. In fact, it makes up a significant portion (sometimes a majority) of the diet in winter, when ground squirrels are in hibernation and rabbits and hares tend to be at population lows. In the Greater Yellowstone area, the Golden Eagle was one of the most frequent scavengers to attend wolf kill-sites in winter but, unlike Common Ravens (Corvus corax) and Bald Eagles, were not frequent at kills left out by human hunters. C., Stahler, D. R., Crabtree, R. L., Smith, D. W., & Getz, W. M. 2003. Resource dispersion and consumer dominance: scavenging at wolf‐and hunter‐killed carcasses in Greater Yellowstone, USA. Ecology Letters, 6(11): 996-1003. In many parts of the range (i.e. Alberta, Scotland, Spain, etc.) carrion was readily fed to the young during the breeding season. A. 1977. Summer food habits of Golden Eagles in southwestern Alberta. Canadian Field-Naturalist, 91: 296-298.A., Eguia, S., Blazquez, M., Moleon, M. & Botella, F. 2010. Unexpected role of ungulate carcasses in the diet of Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos in Mediterranean mountains. Bird Study, 57: 352-360.

Prey

Golden Eagles are opportunists and virtually any animal of a reasonable size may be predated if encountered. Well over 400 species of vertebrate have been recorded as prey. Prey selection is largely determined by the local availability and abundance of prey species. They normally prefer wild, native prey but can easily adapt to domesticated and/or exotic animals, most often when the prey returns to a feral state. This is most apparent on islands that have very few (or no) native land mammals, such as Corsica in Italy, Santa Rosa and Santa Cruz Islands in California and many of the Inner and Outer Hebrides of Scotland., Thibault, J., Torre, J., Bayle, P. & Vigne, J. 2001. The diet of young Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos in Corsica: Foraging in a Man-Made Mammal Fauna. Ardea, 89: 527-533.W. & Latta, B.C. 2009. Food Habits of Nesting Golden Eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) on Santa Cruz and Santa Rosa Islands, California. Proceedings of the 7th California Islands Symposium, Arcata, CA; C.C. and D.K. Garcelon (eds.): 255-268. Most analysis of dietary habits of raptors results from examining the prey remains around an active eyrie at the end of the breeding season (September or October), based on pellets, skeletons and skins found. This method is not comprehensive for prey analysis, as particularly small prey may leave no trace and it cannot take into account the prey selected by wintering adults and highly nomadic juvenile eagles (both of which are believed to include a higher level of carrion and large prey items). However, since eye-witness accounts of hunting and close monitoring of prey brought to the nest are both rare and likely to disturb the eagles, this is the best known method of studying the eagle's prey. Studies have revealed that the average Golden Eagle nest contains 3.57 species of prey, although there is considerable variation in the dietary breadth across the range, ranging from an average of 11.2 species in the French Pyrenees to a mere 1.4 in Alaska. 1981. L'Aigle Royal Aquila chrysaetos dans les Pyrenees Francaises. Resultats de 5 ans d'observations. L'Oiseau et R.F.O., 51: 89-100. In general, the dietary breadth is greater in Eurasia than it is in North America, where eagles frequently only need to hunt two or three species throughout the nesting cycle. This is a moderate dietary breadth by the standards of the Aquila genus, and not remarkable when compared to some other raptors. & Kochert, M.N. 1988. Dietary response of three raptor species to changing prey densities in a natural environment. Journal of Animal Ecology, 57: 37-48. Overall prey weight has ranged from 
The most significant group of prey for Golden Eagles is mammals. In 59 studies of the breeding season diet across the range, 63.2% of prey remains were of mammals. The diet in North America is particularly skewed towards mammals with roughly 84% of  prey items being mammalian. After mammals, other birds were most significant, comprising about 26.8% of prey. Reptiles compromised about 7% of prey from across the range, with other prey groups compromising the remaining 3%. All the diverse groups of prey are examined below, using mainly the aforementioned 59 dietary studies.

=Leporids=

The family Leporidae (rabbits and hares) is easily the most significant prey group, comprising about 32% of prey known to be taken by Golden Eagles. Twelve out of sixteen dietary studies in North America showed leporids as the most common prey group, in some areas comprising over 75% of prey remains.H. & Hawks, S.J. 1982. Food habits of nesting Golden Eagles in northeast California and northwest Nevada. Raptor Research, 16: 110-115.H., Mikesic, D.G., White, J.N., Shaffer, S., DeLong, J.P., Blakemore, M.R. & Blakemore, C.R. 2009. Prey remains in nests of Four Corners Golden Eagles: 1998-2008. Western Birds 40:301–306. In the northern Rocky Mountains and Northern Plains areas, the main prey species are the White-tailed Jackrabbit (Lepus townsendii) and the Mountain Cottontail (Sylvilagus nuttallii). In the Southwest, the Great Basin, and most of California, the main prey species are the Black-tailed Jackrabbit (Lepus californicus) and the Desert Cottontail (Sylvilagus audubonii), the former being especially important, comprising about a quarter of North America prey items in a 1976 study. In two studies in southern Idaho, the Black-tailed Jackrabbit and the two cottontails dominated the diet, comprising over 70% of nest remains.W. 1983. A comparison of direct observations and collections of prey remains in determining the diet of Golden Eagles. Journal of Wildlife Management, 47: 360-368.N. 1972. Population status and chemical contamination in Golden Eagles in southwestern Idaho. Masters in Science thesis. University of Idaho, Moscow.  More locally other jackrabbits and cottontails may be taken in smaller numbers. The Snowshoe Hare (Lepus americanus) is thought to be the dominant prey species in the boreal forests of Canada but there have been no dietary studies conducted there. The Snowshoe and the larger Arctic Hare (Lepus arcticus) are some of the most significant prey species in Alaska, though in one central Alaskan nest they were secondary to ptarmigan and nests in Denali National Park included only 0.4% leporid remains. 1944. The Wolves of Mt. McKinley (Golden Eagle- Chapter 8). U.S. Fauna Series No 5, Washington.F. 1974. Foods at a Golden Eagle nest in central Alaska. Condor, 76: 356-357. Nests in Alberta and Washington had almost no leporid remains as well.V. & Knight, R.L. Food Habits of Golden Eagles in Eastern Washington. Murrelet, 64: 73-77.L. & Erickson, A.W. 1978. Marmots as a food source of Golden Eagles along the Columbia River. Murrelet, 59: 28-30.
19 out of 45 studies in the Palearctic listed leporids as the most common family of prey for Golden Eagles. Important prey species include the Mountain Hare (Lepus timidus) (in the Scottish Highlands and the French Alps), the European Rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus) (in the Scottish Highlands, Sicily, the Apennine Mountains, Switzerland, Spain, the Central Massif of France and the French Alps), the Brown Hare (Lepus europaeus) (in Switzerland, the Apennine Mountains, the French Alps and Armenia), the Japanese Hare (Lepus brachyurus) (in Japan), the Cape Hare (Lepus capensis) (in Mali and Niger) and the Ethiopian Highland Hare (Lepus starcki) (in the Bale Mountains)Delibes, M., Calderon, J. & Hiraldo, F.1975. Seleccion de presa y alimentacion el Coto Donata durante la crianza de los pollos. Donana acta Vertebrata, 5: 35-60. 1987. Seasonal variation in the feeding habits of a pair of Golden Eagles in Navarra. In: L'Aigle Royal en Europe (ed. S Michel), 107-117.N., Bauer, K.M. & Bezzel, E. 1971. Handbuch der Vogel Mitteleuropas. Band 4. Falconiformes. Akademische Verlagsgesellschaft, Frankfurt. & Choisy, J.P. 1982. L'Aigle Royal Aquila chrysaetos dans les Alpes Meridonales Francaises de 1964 a 1980. Essai sur la distribution, les effectifs, le regime alimentaire et la reproduction. Bievre, 4: 1-32. & Petretti, F. 1980. Ecologica dell'Aquila Reale negli Appennini. Rivista Italiana di Ornitholgia, 50: 127-142. Ragni, B. & Amertano, L. 1987. L'Aigle Royal dans le partie centrale Des Appennins. In: L'Aigle Royal en Europe (ed. S. Michel), pp. 29-32. Actes du Premier Colloque International, Arvieux.S. & Klem, D. 1999. Handbook of the Birds of Armenia. Armenia Corporation, ISBN 0965742938. 1984. Food habits of the Golden Eagle in Japan. Aquila chrysaetos, 2: 1-6., Giarratana, S. & Favara, R. 1987. L'Aigle Royal en Sicile. In: L'Aigle Royal en Europe (ed. S. Michel), pp. 33-36. Actes du Premier Colloque International, Arvieux., & Goar, J.L. 2004. Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos in Niger. Alauda 72:151-152., Barrau, C. & Goar, J.L. 1999. The Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) in the Bale Mountains, Ethiopia. The Raptor Research Foundation, 33 (2): 102-109. In some areas leporids are secondary prey, such as Scandinavia, where the Mountain Hare comprised about 20% of prey items, the maximum known being 28.4% in Northern Finland. & Rajala, P. 1966. Diet of the Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos during the nesting period in the Finnish reindeer husbandry area. Suomen Rista, 19: 7-19. The Tolai Hare (Lepus tolai) was a secondary prey item in Mongolia, making up around 21% of prey. The European Rabbit appears to be secondary in Hungary, where it comprised 14.3%. 2002. The Status of the Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) in Hungary. Journal of Raptor Research, 36(1 Supplement): 18-19.
The estimated typical range of weights of hares hunted by Golden Eagles is , are habitually hunted, the prey may be dismembered before being brought to the nest. Across the Golden Eagle's range, hares and rabbits are generally known to be hunted via either "high soar with glide attack" or "contour flight with short glide attack". Leporids are basically solitary animals but they can occur at high densities, such as when jackrabbits are at their peak numbers in brushy areas of Western North America or (historically at least) rabbits in similar brush habitats on the Iberian peninsula. The goal of the Golden Eagle while hunting hares and rabbits is to catch the prey when it is foraging out in the open. If the leporid becomes aware of the eagle's descent upon them more than a few seconds before the strike, they invariably break into a fast, hopping run. Once contact is made, rabbits and hares will often kick or try to bite the eagle but escape is unlikely once they are pinned to the ground. In some case they are able to reach vegetative coverage and, if the said cover is sufficiently deep and dense, the eagle cannot pursue them any further. Although rare, Golden Eagles have been known to use the "walk and grab attack" to pull a leporid out of its cover. Many hunts in Scotland of Mountain Hare involve a somewhat lengthy tail chase. If the Golden Eagle is able to intercept a rabbit or hare far out in the open, a twisting and turning tail chase frequently occurs but the odds of survival for the prey are smaller the farther they are from coverage. On occasion, breeding pairs have been observed hunting jackrabbits together, where in one will stoop on a gathering of them while the other waits out of sight and assaults one of the jackrabbits being made to run.

=Ground squirrels=

After the leporids, the next most significant group in the diet of Golden Eagles is the ground squirrels. They comprise about 11.2% of the prey taken by this species across the range. In areas where leporids are scarce, this group of rodents seems to become more prominent. In many parts of the Golden Eagle's range, ground squirrels are rare or absent, such as the British Isles, the Iberian Peninsula and some portions of central Eurasia. Nonetheless, about half of the large Spermophilus group, all species of prairie dog, three out of four species of antelope squirrel and nearly all the species of marmot has been found as Golden Eagle prey. Nests in Denali National Park in Alaska included, among a sampling of 690 remains, contained 84.2% Arctic Ground Squirrels (Spermophilus parryii). Studies in Alaska have shown that the other major prey species in Alaska, the Willow Ptarmigan and the Snowshoe Hare, follow a 8 to 11 year population cycle. The locally abundant ground squirrels have less dramatic population variations and come out of hibernation in mid to late May (shortly after the eagles return from migration). The Alaskan Arctic Ground Squirrel appears to be eaten supplementally in peak years but then fill the primary niche when the ptarmigan and hare populations crash.L. & Adams, L.G. 1999. Reproductive characteristics of migratory Golden Eagles from Alaska. Journal of Wildlife Management, 70: 717-722.L. 2002. Patterns in nesting area occupancy and reproductive success of Golden Eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) in Denali National Park and Preserve, Alaska, 1989-99. Journal of Raptor Research, 36 (1 supplement): 50-54. In Alberta, Columbian Ground Squirrels (Spermophilus columbianus) (occasionally supplemented by other species like Yellow-bellied Marmots) were the primary prey species, making up 84% of the diet of eagles nesting there. In the French Alps, the most significant prey species is the Alpine Marmot (Marmota marmota) at 68.9% out of a sampling of 198 from 6 nests. 1987. Contribution a une meilleure connaissance du regime alimentaire de l'Aigle Royal en periode de reproduction pour les Alps de Sud et la Provence, In: L'Aigle Royal en Europe (ed. S. Michel) pp. 118-123. Actes due Premier Colloque International, Arvieux. This is also the main prey species in the Italian Alps above the tree line, comprising 49.7% of a sample size of 79 from 12 nests. & Sergio, F. 2001. Regional conservation priorities for a large predator: golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) in the Alpine range. Elsevier Science Ltd. Biological Conservation 103 (2002): 163–172. In the Caspian Sea area of Kazahkstan, Yellow ground squirrels (Spermophilus fulvus) are the most important mammalian prey at 23.4% of a sampling of 468 from 36 nests.V., Kovalenko, A.V., Levin, A.S. & Pazhenkov, A.S. 2011. Eagles of the Aral-Caspian Region,Kazakhstan. Raptors Conservation, 22: 92-152. Along Coastal California, California Ground Squirrels (Spermophilus beecheyi) replace Black-tailed Jackrabbits (which are scarce there) as the primary prey species. G., R. E. Jackman, T. L. Brown, D. E. Driscoll, and L. Culp. 1998. A population study of golden eagles in the Altamont Pass Wind Resource Area: population trend analysis 1997. Report to National Renewable Energy laboratory, Subcontract XAT-6-16459-01. Predatory Bird Research Group, University of California, Santa Cruz. In Washington state, where the Golden Eagle inhabits mainly forest openings made by humans, the Yellow-bellied Marmot (Marmota flaviventris) is the main prey species, making up 41.8% of a sampling of 47 from 2 nests and 40.3% of a sampling of 315 from 74 nests. In many other areas, ground squirrels are secondary prey, usually ranking after lagomorphs in dietary significance. This is especially true in the contiguous Western United States outside of Washington state and coastal California where they often register as second, third or even fourth most represented family by remains. Prairie dogs feature only as supplemental prey for breeding Golden Eagles but wintering eagles reportedly prey heavily on colonies of Black-tailed Prairie Dogs (Cynomys ludovicianus).A. Winter raptor use of prairie dog towns in the Denver, Colorado vicinity. Proceedings 4th International Urban Wildlife Symposium. Shaw et al., Eds. 2004Jones, S. R. 1989. Populations and prey selection of wintering raptors in Boulder County, Colorado. Although rare, tree squirrels have turned up as prey in some eagle nests in both North America and Eurasia.
Ground squirrels are generally quite social animals and some species even live in cohesive colonies. All ground squirrels live in burrows, which in species like prairie dogs can be quite elaborate. The "contour flight with short glide attack" is essentially the one and only hunting technique used by Golden Eagles on ground squirrels. Ground squirrels usually forage within running distance of one of their burrow entrances, so it is essential for the Golden Eagle to have a surprise factor. Eagles will not enter burrows, unlike some mammalian carnivores that eat ground squirrels. When they hunt ground squirrels, Golden Eagles seem to choose their victim in the last few seconds before they strike. Most of the ground squirrels targeted by the eagles are quite small, with the entire Spermophilus group and some prairie dogs weighing under  in spring and about twice that by fall, which is roughly the highest weight feasible for a flying eagle to carry. Although they may locally target large numbers of juveniles, in other cases they may dismember an adult marmot after a kill so they are able to carry it to the nest. In the Alps, it is believed to be advantageous for eagles to nest below the meadows that host their Alpine Marmot prey so they can fly downhill, a much easier flying method while carrying a heavy load than flying uphill.

=Grouse=

Although absent or rare in some areas where the Golden Eagle occurs, this is by far the most significant family of birds in the diet of Golden Eagles, making up 10.3% of their known prey. In Scandinavia and the Baltic States, grouse are the primary prey for these eagles, comprising between 47.6% and 63.3% of their diet,Nystrom, J., Ekenstedt, J., Angerbjörn, A, Thulin, L., Hellstrom, P. & Dalén, L. Golden Eagles on the Swedish mountain tundra – diet and breeding success in relation to prey fluctuations. Ornis Fennica, 83: 145–152., Huhtala, K. & Rajal, P. 1984. Diet and breeding success of the Golden Eagle in Finland 1958-82. Annales Zoologici Fennici, 21: 283-286.V., Systad, G.H., Jacobsen, K.O.,Nygard, T. & Bustnes, J.O. 2007. The occurrence of reindeer calves in the diet of nesting Golden Eagles in Finnmark, northern Norway. Ornis Fennica 84: 112–118. and displacing mammals altogether. The main prey species in most of this sizeable area is the largest species of grouse, the Western Capercaillie (Tetrao urogallus), supplemented by its cousins, the Black Grouse (Tetrao tetrix) and the Hazel Grouse (Tetrastes bonasia). However in the northernmost parts of Scandinavia, these are replaced by the smaller Willow Ptarmigan (Lagopus lagopus) and Rock Ptarmigan (Lagopus muta). A study in Belarus showed grouse were the most common family of prey at 47.8% of the eagle diet.V. 1990. Birds of prey and ornithological monitoring, Communication of the Baltic Commission for Study of Bird Migration, 22: 92-101. In Estonia, the prey base is more varied, but grouse were still the most represented bird family, comprising 18.1%. 1946. Om Kungsornens Aquila chrysaetos ut bredning och biologi i Estland. Var Fagelvarld, 5: 64-80. The Red Grouse, a race of Willow Ptarmigan (Lagopus lagopus scotica), and the Rock Ptarmigan (also called just Ptarmigan) occur heavily in the Golden Eagle's diet in parts of Scotland, up to 47.8% in one study. One paper in Alaska showed that the two ptarmigan species (primarily the more abundant Willow) made up 49.1% of the remains in a Golden Eagle pair's nest, making it the only known study in North America where birds were more prevalent in the diet than mammals. Other reports from Alaska show the Willow Ptarmigan as secondary prey. In some other areas, grouse are taken only as supplemental prey. A study in the Italian Alps revealed grouse made up 19.4% of nest remains and were the most common avian prey. In eastern Washington state, Sooty Grouse (Dendragapus fuliginosus) was the second most significant prey species (at 13%) after Yellow-bellied Marmot. Considered globally, it is likely that every species of grouse is prey of the Golden Eagle at least somewhere.
Golden Eagles generally hunt grouse using the "contour flight with short glide attack" method, since grouse are often found in small groups. The usual response of the grouse is to take off in flight. If it is able to surprise the grouse, the eagle has a split second to grab the prey before it flies off. The eagle will frequently abandon the hunt after the grouse has flown, since it is unlikely to overtake such prey in the air unless it gains height over its quarry very quickly, although it may be able to gain the appropriate height to tail chase a grouse or even catch it while flying high using the "high soar with vertical stoop attack". In Idaho a juvenile eagle was observed dropping a rock near a Dusky Grouse (Dendragapus obscurus), possibly attempting to spook it into flight so it could be overtaken from a flying height advantage. D. (2012). Juvenile Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) Drops Rock near Dusky Grouse (Dendragapus obscurus). Journal of Raptor Research, 46(4), 407-407. Although eagles equally attack both male and female grouse, when cock grouse display on "leks" in spring, they may be more distracted and easily found. Grouse tend to be prey of modest size for Golden Eagles, many species weighing little more than  In Sweden, most of the capercaillie remains appeared to be those of the more modestly sized adult females.

=Pheasants=

In generally warmer areas of the Eurasian continent, the diverse pheasant family replaces the grouse as the significant group of birds in the Golden Eagle's diet. Across the range, pheasants make up 5.7% of the diet of this species. Unlike grouse, pheasants are not known to comprise more than half of the nest remains in any study, but they can be important nonetheless. This is especially true in Spain, where most studies show that the pheasants at 22.8-28.7% of the diet, mainly the Red-legged Partridge (Alectoris rufa), are the second most prominent prey species after the European Rabbit, with the Red-legged Partridge and the Rabbit collectively making up to more than 90% of the prey remains in several nests there. The Red-legged species, along with the Rock Partridge (Alectoris graeca) and Grey Partridge (Perdix perdix), are the leading prey group in the French Pyrenees at 15.8% of a sampling of 114 from 10 nests. In Hungary, the Common Pheasant (Phasianus colchicus) appears to be the favored prey species, making up 26.6% of the prey of a sampling of 49 from 4 nests there. In Japan, the Copper Pheasant (Syrmaticus soemmerringii) is the second most common single prey species, making up 17.8% of the remains (sample size of 967 from 5 nests). In the Caspian Sea area of Kazakhstan, the most common bird species (and third most common overall prey species) is the Chukar (Alectoris chukar), representing 19.5% of a sampling of 468 from 36 nests. Chukar and Caspian Snowcock (Tetraogallus caspius) are reportedly the primary avian prey species in Armenia. In the Himalayan region, two very large pheasants, the Himalayan Monal (Lophophorus impejanus) and the Himalayan Snowcock (Tetraogallus himalayensis), are reportedly among the most significant prey for eagles. Moorland Francolin (Scleroptila psilolaemus) were reportedly the most common bird prey species in Ethiopia's Bale Mountains, comprising 10% among a sample size of 49 at 4 nests. North America has fewer native pheasants species but introduced species such as Grey Partridge, Ring-necked Pheasant and, especially, Chukar are readily hunted (native quail seem to be largely or entirely ignored as prey by Golden Eagle, perhaps because of their small size or dense thicket-dwelling habits). L. 1968. The ecology and breeding biology of the Golden Eagle in southwestern Idaho and southeastern Oregon. draft no. 2. U.S. Department of the Interior, Burrough of Sport Fish & Wildlife. Washington, D.C. B. 1971. Prey utilization by nesting Golden Eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) in central Utah. Master's Thesis. Brigham Young University. Provo, UT. The Chukar is the most significant bird species in the diet in Nevada (at 5.4%) and the second most significant bird species in Washington state (at 11.8%). One native North American "pheasant" known to be occasionally hunted is the Wild Turkey (Meleagris gallopavo), the largest species of galliform. The Golden Eagle is the only major avian predator of adult turkeys. The hunting techniques used on pheasants are probably similar to those used for grouse. Pheasants hunted by Golden Eagles are also similar in size in grouse. Alectoris sp. weigh around  Breeding pairs of eagles have been known to hunt turkeys cooperatively. W., Van Hoozer, C. & Marburger, R.G. 1964. Wild Turkey behavior affected by the presence of Golden Eagles. Wilson Bulletin, 76 :384-385.

=Ungulates=

The contribution of ungulates to the diet of Golden Eagles has long been the most controversial and debated aspect of the species' whole biology. In total, deer comprise about 4.97% of all Golden Eagle food, bovids about 4.92%, pigs about 0.71% and pronghorns less than that. The occasional hunting by eagles of domestic stock and preferred game species has been used as the justification for population control. Sheep farmers in Scotland have historically claimed that up to 80% of deaths in their flocks were caused by eagles. 1984. Scavenging and predation upon sheep and lambs in West Scotland. Journal of Applied Ecology, 21: 843-868. Leslie Brown claimed, to the opposite extreme, that it was "physically impossible" for a Golden Eagle to kill any ungulate scaling several times their own weight. The truth lies somewhere in between. Almost all predation on live ungulates is directed at lambs, fawns or kids and these mostly in the first few months of life. 1987. Eagles as predators on livestock and deer. Fauna Norvegica Series C, Cindus, 10: 95-102. Once they exceed a certain size, it is not practical for breeding eagles to predate the growing ungulates, not only due to the difficult and dangerous nature of the kill but also the fact it would be too heavy to carry to the nest. Sheep are sometimes eaten in considerable numbers, especially in the Inner and Outer Hebrides of Scotland (25.9% and 26.8% of nest remains respectively). Differentiating whether a lamb has been caught and killed while alive or scavenged as a carcass is possible if the remains are in good condition. In one examination of 10 such remains in nests in Scotland, it was found that 3 lambs had been taken alive and 7 after they had died. & Maddox, J.G. 1974. Causes of mortality among young Scottish Blackface lamb. Veterinary Record, 95: 575. This suggests the majority of lambs are taken as carrion, which is reinforced by the fact that much ungulate carrion found around active nest sites in Scotland is already in a malodorous and putrid state. Domestic goats (Capra aegagrus hircus) are occasionally predated as well. Goats slightly outnumbered sheep in the diet of eagles breeding on Corsica, with both domesticated animals making up 20.5% of the diet there and being the most important food source. In North America, lambs and goats were found to comprise less than 1.4% of all prey items. V. 1969. Population status of the Golden Eagle in south-central Montana. Master's Thesis. Univ. of Montana, Missoula. In Montana, it was found that most predation on lambs by Golden Eagles was committed by juvenile eagles or eagles that failed to breed (which have no need to carry prey to a nest). There it was found that the hunting of domestic stock peaks during wet, cold springs that seemed to adversely effect the local abundance of jackrabbits.R. & O;Gara, B.W. 1987. Methods of controlling Golden Eagle depredation on domestic sheep in southwestern Montana. Journal of Raptor Research, 21: 85-94. Pigs (including feral and domestic varieties) are occasionally taken, especially in insular populations. Studies showed pigs (most certainly taken as carrion) made up to 13.3% of the diet in Corsica and 43.1% on Santa Cruz Island, California. Few wild pigs co-exist with Golden Eagles but Wild Boar (Sus scrofa) (likely only as piglets or carrion) have been taken in Bulgaria.G. 2009. Diet of the Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) (Aves: Accipitridae) in Sarnena Sredna Gora mountains (Bulgaria). Ecologica Balkanica, 1: 95-98.
Of wild species of ungulate, deer are the preferred prey family. In a study in the Italian Alps, the most common prey species of all was the European Roe Deer (Capreolus capreolus), which made up 32.2% of nest remains. The Roe Deer was also a prominent prey item in the French Pyrenees (14.9%) and Switzerland (14.6%), respectively. In several parts of the Scottish Highlands, Red Deer (Cervus elaphus) are eaten with some regularity, the maximum representation there being 22.3% of prey remains in the Northwest Highlands. In North America, several deer species, but mainly Mule Deer (Odocoileus hemionus) fawns, were significant in the diet in Washington state (14.3%) and California (12.7%).W. & Davies, R.W. 2009. Range Use and Containments of Golden Eagles in Washington. Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife Program; Wildlife Science Division. Around the Himalayas, the small White-bellied musk deer (Moschus leucogaster) is reportedly a favorite prey item (though no quantitative analysis are known). In the near Arctic regions of Scandinavia, reindeer (Rangifer tarandus) of both semi-domestic and wild stock are fed on with some regularity; one study in northern Sweden found reindeer formed 11.4% of prey items. In the northernmost stretches of Alaska, Golden Eagles are more scarce than in equivalent areas of Scandinavia and only occasionally hunt wild reindeer. A., Valkenburg, P., Squibb, R. C., Dale, B. W., & Zarnke, R. L. 2011. Natality and calf mortality of the Northern Alaska Peninsula and Southern Alaska Peninsula caribou herds. Rangifer, 23(5): 161-166. However, Golden Eagles were reportedly the most prolific predator of neonatal calves from the Porcupine caribou (Rangifer tarandus granti) herd of central Alaska. E., & McNeil, P. 2002. Summer ecology of the porcupine caribou herd. Porcupine Caribou Management Board. Partial moose (Alces alces) remains have been found at a nest in Sweden. Live fawns and carrion probably comprise most of the Golden Eagle's consumption of deer (certainly in larger-bodied species such Red Deer). Among wild bovids, eagles are reportedly the main predator of Saiga Antelope (Saiga tatarica) calves in Mongolia and are regularly reported to take Chamois (Rupicapra rupicapra) and Alpine Ibex (Capra ibex) calves in Europe., Young, J.K., Berger, J., Fine, A.E., Lkhagvasuren, B., Zahler, P. & Fuller, T.K. 2013. Factors affecting survival and cause-specific mortality of saiga calves in Mongolia. Journal of Mammalogy, 94: 127-136. 1966. Der Alpensteinbock Capra ibex (L.) in seinem Lebensraum - ein ökologischer Vergleich. Herre, W. and Röhrs, M. 1-85. Hamburg. Mammalia depicta. Mongolian gazelles (Procapra gutturosa) comprised about 15% of the remains found at a nest in Mongolia. Up to 7 wild species of goat, 5 other wild species of sheep and at least 2 wild gazelle species are confirmed Golden Eagle prey. In North America, Pronghorn (Antilocapra americana) are occasionally hunted. D. & Alldredge, A.W. 1996. Golden Eagle predation on pronghorns in Wyoming's Great Divide Basin. Journal of Raptor Research, 30: 157-159.
The main method of predation used on ungulates is the "low flight with sustained grip attack", which can take between a few seconds to at least 15 minutes to kill the prey., respectively. 2005. Wedge-tailed Eagle. CSIRO Publishing, ISBN 9780643093140

=Other mammals=

Mice, rats and related species occasionally comprise an important portion of the Golden Eagle's diet, making up 3.05% of prey throughout the range. Most mouse-sized mammals are too small to serve as regular prey, but in marginal habitats they can become more important, with studies revealing they sometimes form more than 10% of nest remains. Species preyed on include the North American Deer Mouse (Peromyscus maniculatus) on Santa Rosa Island and the Santa Cruz Islands, the Norway lemming (Lemmus lemmus) in northern Sweden, the Brown Rat (Rattus norvegicus) in the northern highlands of Scotland, Great Gerbils (Rhombomys opimus) in the Caspian Sea region of Kazahkstan, and grass rats (especially Blick's grass rat, Arvicanthis blicki) and the Big-headed mole rat (Tachyoryctes macrocephalus) in the Bale Mountains.
Mammalian carnivores can compete for some of the same prey as Golden Eagles but can also themselves become prey, the main prey family of carnivores being the canids (dog family). 12 species of canid are known to have been hunted by Golden Eagles and they collectively make up about 2.8% of the diet from all surveyed Golden Eagle nests. For the most part, foxes are the preferred prey, usually as juveniles though foxes of any age or condition, including adult male Red Foxes (Vulpes vulpes) heavier than the eagles themselves, may be hunted., Mech, D. & Sillero-Zubiri, C. (eds.). 2004. Canids: Foxes, Wolves, Jackals and Dogs: Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan. World Conservation Union, ISBN 2831707862. Across much of both species' ranges, Red Fox co-exist with Golden Eagles and eagles hunt them in small numbers. Red Foxes make up 13.5% of nest remains in Sicily and 5.9% in the Republic of Macedonia. 1987. L'Aigle Royal en Macedone. In: L'Aigle Royal in Europe, pp. 37-39. In a nest in Mongolia, Corsac Fox (Vulpes corsac) were surprisingly the main prey species, making up 38% of sampled remains. Kit Fox (Vulpes macrotis), Swift Fox (Vulpes velox), Gray Fox (Urocyon cinereoargenteus) and Island Fox (Urocyon littoralis) are readily predated in North America. & White, P.J. Predation on endangered San Joaquin kit foxes by larger canids. Journal of Mammalogy 76:723–729. 1998. Causes and rates of mortality of swift foxes in western Kansas. Journal of Wildlife Management, 62: 1300–1306. The other family of carnivores that turns up with some regularity in the Golden Eagle's diet are the mustelids, at about 2.3% of the diet. Everything in this diverse family from Least Weasels (Mustela nivalis), the smallest mammalian carnivore, to Wolverines (Gulo gulo), the largest terrestrial mustelid, have turned up as prey in Golden Eagle nests., Zuskinova, M. & Kornan, I.J. 2003. Štátna ochrana prírody Slovenskej republiky Banská Bystrica Správa Tatranského národného parku: PROGRAM ZÁCHRANY; orla skalného (Aquila chrysaetos Linnaeus, 1758). Liptovský Mikuláš. The members of this family which are most regularly hunted are probably the martens, such as the American Marten (Martes americanus), Pine Marten (Martes martes) and Beech Marten. The young of larger species are also occasionally hunted in Scotland and Ireland, including Eurasian Otters (Lutra lutra) and Eurasian Badgers (Meles meles). Similarly, amongst Wolverines, "young and inexperienced" specimens are usually targeted as prey by Golden Eagles.G., Messick, J.P. & Melquist, W.E. 1981. The wolverine in northwestern Montana. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 59: 1286-1301. In North America, full-grown large mustelids, including American Badgers (Taxidea taxus) and Fishers (Martes pennanti), have also turned up as prey. Luke Hunter. Princeton University Press (2011), ISBN 9780691152288 The largest percentage of mustelids was 13.2% in a nest in central Alaska. Mustelids, mainly martens, turned up in large numbers in the French Alps where they made up 10.1% of nest remains.
Cats are rarer in the eagle diet, forming 3.4% of nest remains in the French Alps and 2.2% in the Republic of Macedonia. Mainly domestic cats (Felis catus) are taken but Wildcats (Felis silvestris) are also known to be hunted. Rarely, the Bobcat (Lynx rufus) have been reported as prey in North America and the remains from the much larger Eurasian Lynx (Lynx lynx) (age undetermined) have been found in a nest in Sweden. A handful of accounts from North America and Scandinavia describe Golden Eagles hunting and flying off with small cubs of American Black (Ursus americanus) and Brown Bears (Ursus arctos), of an estimated weight of  The only other family of mammals to be important in the Golden Eagle's diet is the hedgehogs, though these are only known as prey in Europe. The European Hedgehog (Erinaceus europaeus) appears to be the most important prey species on the Swedish island of Gotland, making up 42.5% of sampled nest remains. & Wiss, L.-E. 1992. Diet of the Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos (L.) in Gotland, Sweden during the breeding season. Ornis Fennica, 69: 39-44. In Estonia, the Southern white-breasted hedgehog (Erinaceus concolor) was the most significant prey species (28.6%). The latter species was also the most important mammalian prey (13.8%) in the a small study in the Sarnena Sredna Gora Mountains of Bulgaria.
Other mammals which in some locations comprise a minor diet component include dormice, pocket gophers, moles,Austruy, J. & Cugnasse, J. 1981. L'Aigle Royal Aquila chrysaetos dans le Massif Central. Non Oiseaux, 36: 133-142. raccoons,Mollhagen, T.R., Wiey, R.W. & Packard, R.L. 1972. Prey remains in Golden Eagle nests: Texas and New Mexico. Journal of Wildlife Management, 36: 784-792. horses, kangaroo rats, porcupines, shrews, pikas, and chinchillas. Over the whole of the Golden Eagle's range these prey items comprise less than 1% of nest remains, though this figure can be higher locally.

=Other birds=

Although quantitatively outnumbered by mammals, birds are the most diverse class of prey in the Golden Eagle's diet, as more than 200 species have been identified at eagle nests. Little analysis has gone into how regularly Golden Eagles will attack the nestling and fledglings of other birds, although it has been interpreted that this behavior is not uncommon. Nestling-aged Rock Pigeons (Columba livia) have been observed as prey in Golden Eagle nests. S. 1985. Golden Eagle banding in the South Saskatchewan River Valley. North American Bird Bander, 10: 110-114. The first record of a Golden Eagle eating eggs was recorded when a Golden Eagle was observed consuming Canada Goose (Branta canadensis) eggs in eastern Idaho.L. & Marzluff, J.M. 1997. A Golden Eagle Eats wild Canada Goose Eggs. The Raptor Research Foundation, 31 (3): 288-289. After large galliforms, the next most significant group of prey among birds is the corvid family, making up 4.1% of the diet from around the range. Most prevalent among these are magpies and the large-bodied Corvus (crow and raven) genus. On Santa Rosa and Santa Cruz Islands in California, Common Raven became the most common prey species after feral pigs were eradicated from the latter, making up 24% of a 454 sample size from 14 nests. The Raven was also the most prevalent bird prey in central Arizona, in a sampling of 1154 from 119 nests.L. & Grubb, T.G. 1986. Prey remains from Golden Eagle nests in central Arizona. Western Birds, 17: 87-89. The Black-billed Magpie (Pica hudsonia) was an important prey item in Washington state, making up 9.7% of the remains there, and was the most significant avian prey in Montana. In 10 studies in Europe, corvids made up more than 5% of the prey remains, usually represented by Carrion Crows/Hooded Crows (Corvus corone/cornix), Rooks (Corvus frugilegus), Alpine Chough (Pyrrhocorax graculus), Ravens or Eurasian Magpies (Pica pica). Smaller species such as jays and nutcrackers only occasionally turn up as prey, mainly in North America, though the Eurasian Jay (Garrulus glandarius) has also been known as prey. The next best represented family of birds are the waterfowl, making up approximately 1.4% of the Golden Eagle's breeding season diet. Waterfowl of all sizes from Green-winged Teal (Anas crecca) to Trumpeter Swans (Cygnus buccinator), Tundra Swans (Cygnus columbianus)Dunn M.L., 1986. Golden Eagle and swans at Pungo. Chat, 50: 43. and Mute Swans (Cygnus olor) have been successfully hunted by Golden Eagles. Full-grown swans can weigh well over  and are probably the largest birds habitually hunted by Golden Eagles. Moderately sized species, including larger Anas ducks such as Mallards (Anas platyrhynchos) and geese such as Bean Goose (Anser fabalis) are perhaps most often recorded. Waterfowl are mostly recorded during the nesting season in Northern Europe, comprising 15.4% of prey in Gotland and 14.4% of prey in Belarus. In some years at Malheur-Harney Lakes Basin in Oregon, Anas ducks can make up to 20% of the prey consumed by the locally nesting eagles.P., Johnstone, R.S. & Littlefield, C.D. 1982. Nesting history of Golden Eagles in Malheur-Harney Lakes Basin, southeastern Oregon. The Raptor Research Foundation, 16: 116-122. Mostly in the United States, wintering Golden Eagles may become habitually predators of wintering and migrating groups of waterfowl, with species such as Canada Geese, Cackling Geese (Branta hutchinsii), Snow Geese (Chen caerulescens), and Ross's Geese (Chen rossii). Since geese are found in large concentration when seasonal conditions require it, these species can be hunted with relative ease., Gauthier, G., & Reed, A. (2005). Survival of young greater snow geese (Chen caerulescens atlantica) during fall migration. Auk, 122(2): 479-496. R., Dunn, J. P., & Raveling, D. G. (1994). Predator-prey interactions between eagles and cackling Canada and Ross' geese during winter in California. Wilson Bulletin, 272-288. Waterfowl are typically hunted using the "contour flight with short glide attack" technique, in order to surprise the prey before it can take flight or dive. In one case, a Golden Eagle was able to capture a Mallard as it took off in flight. Other water birds are generally less frequent prey but may become regular in the diet in marsh-like Northern regions and coastal areas. Scotland, being surrounded by coasts and possessing quite a wet climate, often hosts water birds which become prey such as colonies of petrels (largely Northern Fulmar (Fulmarus glacialis)), making up to 17% of the recorded prey in 26 nests with a 119 sample size in the Outer Hebrides), migrating throngs of sandpipers and plovers (up to 5.9% and 2.8% in 25 nest in the northern Inner Hebrides) and gulls (making up a whopping 23% of prey recorded in 25 nests in the West-Central Highlands). Among shorebirds, usually only larger types such as godwits, curlews, Tringa sp., stone-curlews and oystercatchers turn up as prey as smaller species are probably too flighty and agile to catch., & Collins, P. 2001. RAPTOR ATTACK METHODS AND THE RESPONSE OF LITTLE CURLEW NUMENIUS MINUTUS TO DISTURBANCE AT BROOME, NORTH-WESTERN AUSTRALIA. Stilt, 61. Eurasian Cranes (Grus grus) are regularly predated in Northern Europe, turning up at 6.8% of nests in Estonia and 5.8% of nests in southern Finland. Hooded Cranes (Grus monacha) are reportedly prey for Golden Eagles in China., Fawen, Q., Xianglin, L., Chunzhu, X., & Jianzhang, M. (2005). Preliminary report on breeding habit of hooded crane {Grus monacha} in Xiaoxing'an Mountains. Dong wu xue bao. Demoiselle Cranes (Anthropoides virgo) have been caught in mid-air as they migrate over the Himalayas and both Sandhill (Grus canadensis) and Whooping Cranes (Grus americana) may be hunted in North America., "Cranes of the World: Demoiselle Crane (Anthropoides virgo)" (1983). Cranes of the World, by Paul Johnsgard. Paper 13. H., K. R. Clegg, J. C. Lewis, and E. Spaulding. 1999. Golden Eagle predation on experimental Sandhill and Whooping cranes. Condor 101:664-666. The last known breeding pair of Golden Eagles in Maine (which did not return after 1999) were reported to hunt an unusually large number of herons, specifically Great Blue Herons (Ardea herodias) and American Bitterns (Botaurus lentiginosus). Elsewhere, herons are basically negligible in the diet. Other water birds recorded as prey include cormorants (up to 8.6% of the recorded prey in Santa Rosa and Santa Cruz Islands), auks, grebes and loons.
Other raptorial birds can sometimes become semi-regular prey, such as various hawks which are recorded largely in North America at locations such as Oregon (8.8% of prey remains) and Arizona. Owls may be hunted occasionally across almost the entire range (maximum being 2.9% in Oregon) and, more rarely, so may the falcons. Rock Pigeons may be hunted regularly in some parts of the Golden Eagle's range (other pigeons and doves have been recorded as prey but are typically rare in the diet). The common feral pigeon was the second most prevalent prey species in Sierra Espuña Regional Park in Spain, making up 18.8% of a sampling of 99 from 5 nests. The species was also prevalent in Slovakia, making up 7.4% of remains at nests there. Non-corvid passerines are usually ignored as prey but large thrushes such as Song Thrush (Turdus philomelos), Mistle Thrush (Turdus viscivorus) and Common Blackbird (Turdus merula), are semi-regularly recorded prey in Europe. This family is most prevalent in Sicily, making up 8.1% of a sampling of 74 from 10 nests there, 7.7% in Central Spain and 7.2% in the French Alps. The smallest-bodied bird family recorded as semi-regular prey are pipits. Meadow Pipits (Anthus pratensis) are the most represented species and are taken mainly in Scotland, making up to 3.5% of prey in the Inner Hebrides. G. 1987. Observations on the post‐fledging period of the Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos in England. Ibis, 129(1): 92-96. Other bird families rarely recorded as Golden Eagle prey (making up less than 1% of prey in all studied nests) include starlings (maximum being 4.8% in the French Alps, negligible elsewhere), larks (maximum is 2.3% in the West-Central Highlands of Scotland), emberizid sparrows (up to 1.7% in central Alaska), woodpeckers (up to 1.5% in Alberta), cuckoos, bustards, icterids, shrikes and finches.

=Reptiles and amphibians=

Snakes are the most common group of reptiles in the Golden Eagle's diet, making up about 2.9% of the remains from all studied Golden Eagle nests, though this figure can be much higher in parts of the range, as shown by studies in Japan (27.5%), Sicily (25.7%, one snake species), Arizona (14.9%, one snake species), Kazakhstan (9.7%, one snake species), and the French Pyrenees (9.7%). Usually colubrid snakes (sometimes called "harmless snakes") are hunted but venomous species are also occasionally taken, especially the Prairie Rattlesnake (Crotalus viridis) in North America and the European Adder (Vipera berus) in Europe.
In some areas tortoises are more important in the diet than snakes, and they displace mammals and birds as the most important prey group in most of Southeastern Europe as well as the Caucasus. Hermann's tortoises (Testudo hermanni) and Greek tortoises (Testudo graeca) made up 55.4% of the prey in two nests in Bulgaria and 52.9% of the prey in 19 nests in the Republic of Macedonia. The same species are also prevalent in the diet of eagles from Greece, but no quantitative analysis is known from that country. Russian Tortoises (Agrionemys horsfieldii) made up 31.9% of the prey in 5 nests in Turkmenistan and 25.4% of the prey in 36 nests in Kazakhstan.S. 1973. Some landscape-ecological characteristics of feeding of Buteo rufinus, Aquila heliaca and Aquila nipalensis north of the Aral Sea. Bulletin of MOIP Otdel; Biological, 78: 30-37. When hunting tortoise, Golden Eagles use a unique technique: they pick up the tortoise and fly up to at least  above the rocky ground, then drop the tortoise onto the terrain below in the hope of smashing open its hard shell. The only other bird species confirmed to hunt vertebrates in this way is the Lammergeier (Gypaetus barbatus), although gulls may use a similar technique on hard-shelled prey such as mussels. The larger Desert Tortoise (Gopherus agassizii) of North America has occasionally turned up as prey there. 2009. Turtles of the United States and Canada. Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 563. Other turtles have been reported as being hunted, such as painted turtles (Chrysemys picta) in Washington state and baby Loggerhead sea turtles (Caretta caretta) in Corsica, but essentially are a negligible part of the diet.
Lizards turn up with some regularity as prey in some of the hotter, drier portions of the Golden Eagle's range. In Europe, lizards made up to 13% of the prey remains in the French Pyrenees and 12.7% in the Italian Apennines. Fairly large lizards, including the monitor lizard, make the most significant contribution to the Golden Eagle diet., Farhadinia, M.S. & Absalan, H. 2008. Habitat Use of Long-Legged Buzzard Buteo rufinus in Miandasht Wildlife Refuge, Northeastern Iran. Podoces, 3 (1/2): 67-72. The most important lizard prey in Europe is the Lacerta genus, i.e. the Ocellated Lizard (Lacerta lepida)., & López, P. 1996. Avian predation on a large lizard (Lacerta lepida) found at low population densities in Mediterranean habitats: an analysis of bird diets. Copeia, 1996 (3): 722-726. Spiny-tailed lizards of the genus Uromastyx are also of particular note in the Golden Eagle's diet; they are reportedly the single most important prey for Golden Eagles in Northeast Africa. In the particularly sparse Negev Desert of Israel, the Egyptian Spiny-tailed Lizard (Uromastyx aegyptia) apparently comprised 89% of the diet, the most a single species has been reported to dominate a Golden Eagle's diet locally. & Mendelssohn, H. 1996. The Long-term Effect of Precipitation on the Breeding Success of Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos homeyeri in the Judean and Negev Deserts, Israel. Meyburg. B-U. & R. D. Chancellor eds. Eagle Studies, World Working Group on Birds of Prey (WWGBP), Berlin, London & Paris.C. 2008. Uromastyx Lizards in Israel. NDF Workship Case Studies: Reptiles and Amphibians.
Amphibians, specifically Rana frogs, have been reported in only two locations across the Golden Eagle's range: in the French Pyrenees, where they made up 2.7% of the diet, and the West-Central Highlands of Scotland, where they made up 0.7%.

=Other prey=

Fish have not been mentioned as prey in Eurasia in dietary studies of nesting Golden Eagles. However, they have been reported in nests in North America. The two largest known reports are from coastal California and along the Porcupine River in Alaska, with fish making up 3.6% and 3.5% of the diets, respectively. T. 1992. ''Golden Eagles feeding on fish''. Journal of Raptor Research, 26: 36-37. Most reported species are trout and salmon from the Salmo and Oncorhynchus genera, although other species have also been hunted, including suckers (Catostomus), Sacramento perch (Archoptiles interruptus) and the Northern Pike (Esox lucius). Fish have apparently been captured in Scotland on rare occasions, although they have not been reported in the breeding season diet. Golden Eagles have been observed around the Sea of Okhotsk (especially along Northern Japan) to join large numbers of White-tailed Eagles (Haliaeetus albicilla) and Steller's Sea Eagles (Haliaeetus pelagicus) in winter to scavenge and capture various, locally abundant fish amongst ice-floes. Perhaps the most improbable prey reported in the Golden Eagle's diet are insects. They've been reported in small quantities in the French Pyrenees, the Italian Alps and Bulgaria. There is no information on how Golden Eagles capture insects or what kind of insects they hunt, although slower, larger, terrestrial insects like large beetles seems likely.

Interspecific predatory relationships

One of the most fascinating, though relatively little studied, aspects of the Golden Eagle's biology is how it interacts with other predators in a natural environment, especially other large predatory birds. The Golden Eagle is a powerful hunter with few avian rivals in size or strength, although what it gains in these areas it loses somewhat in its agility and speed. Golden Eagles are avian apex predators, meaning a healthy adult is not generally preyed upon. There are several other large birds of prey that inhabit the Northern Hemisphere that may be attracted to the same prey, habitats and nesting sites as the Golden Eagles. Two examples are the Common Raven and Peregrine Falcon (Falco peregrinus) as these are two fairly large-bodied, mostly predatory birds that co-exist with Golden Eagles in almost every part of their range, although the former occurs in much larger numbers and the latter has a much larger natural distribution in more varied habitats. Both the Raven and the Peregrine are often attracted to much the same precipitous habitat as the Golden Eagle. However, both are generally dominated by the much larger eagle and will actively avoid nesting in the same area as a Golden Eagle pair.A. 1962. Breeding density of the Peregrine Falco peregrinus and Raven Corvus corax. Ibis, 104: 13-39. 1982. Cliff nesting raptors of the Kisaralik River, western Alaska, In: Raptor Management and Biology in Alaska and Western Canada (Eds. W.N. Ladd & P.F. Schempf), pp 138-152. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, Anchorage. G. and R. G. Bromley. 1988. Interrelationships within a raptor guild in the central Canadian arctic. Canadian Journal of Zoology, 66: 2275-2282. Ravens and Peregrine Falcons have both been robbed of food on a few occasions by Golden Eagles. V. 1994. Relationships of raptors wintering on the places of salmon spawning on the Kurilsky Lake (South Kamchatka). Pages 96-106 in Modern Ornithology 1992. (Kurochkin, E. N., Ed.) Nauka Publishing, Moscow. 1987. Peregrine Falcon predation on ducks in Alberta and British Columbia. Journal of Wildlife Management, 156-159. M., L. S. Schueck, M. Vekasy, B. A. Kimsey, M. McFadzen, R. R. Townsend, and J. O. McKinley. 1994. Influence of military training on the behavior of raptors in the Snake River Birds of Prey National Conservation Area. Pages 41-112 in Snake River Birds of Prey National Conservation Area, research and monitoring, annual report 1994. (Steenhof, K., Ed.) U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, Boise District, Boise, ID. Both species have turned up widely in the diet of Golden Eagles, much more so the Raven than the Peregrine., Rizzolli, F., Marchesi, L., & Pedrini, P. 2004. The importance of interspecific interactions for breeding‐site selection: peregrine falcons seek proximity to raven nests. Ecography, 27(6): 818-826. However, these conspecific species follow no set "rules". Ravens often vigorously and successfully displace Golden Eagles from their nesting territories. 2007. The Mind of the Raven: Investigations and Adventures with Wolf-Birds. Harper Perennial, ISBN 0061136050 Peregrine Falcons have also displaced Golden Eagles from their nesting territories and, in one instance in Utah, even killed a Golden Eagle that had breached the area of their nest. In another case, a Peregrine Falcon kleptoparasitized a Willow Ptarmigan from a Golden Eagle. 1993. The Peregrine Falcon, Second Edition. T. & A.D. Poyser. London. In a study of 4 cliff-nesting raptor species in Spain, the Golden Eagle was not observed to engage in agnostic encounters with the other species but the Peregrine Falcons but were dominated by and occasionally killed by a relatively small race of Eurasian Eagle-Owls (Bubo bubo hispanus). E., Martínez, J. A., Zuberogoitia, I., Zabala, J., Redpath, S. M., & Calvo, J. F. 2008. The effect of intra-and interspecific interactions on the large-scale distribution of cliff-nesting raptors. Ornis Fennica, 85(1). 13-21. Both Ravens and Peregrine Falcons appear to easily outmaneuver Golden Eagles in flight.
Other raptors, large and small, are often outright dominated by Golden Eagles. In Eurasia, the relative paucity of mid-sized Buteo species is thought to be due to the radiation of large Aquila eagles that already occupied the large raptor niche and outcompeted them. In North America, where there are no Aquila eagles other than the Golden Eagle, Buteo species are more diverse with at least 3 large hawks (the Red-tailed, Swainson's (Buteo swainsoni) and Ferruginous Hawks (Buteo regalis)) that occur in similar habitats and sometimes eat similar prey as both each other and Golden Eagles. On occasion, Golden Eagles will kleptoparasitize or even predate these three Buteos. L., & Andersen, D. E. 1997. Habitat use and time budgeting by wintering ferruginous hawks. Condor: 888-893. Other small to medium-sized diurnal raptors are known to occasionally be hunted by Golden Eagles, including Ospreys (Pandion haliaetus),Lafontaine, A.R. & Fowler, J.H. 1976. Golden Eagle preys on Osprey. Auk, 93: 390-391. Black Kite (Milvus migrans), Hen Harriers (Circus cyaneus), Eurasian Sparrowhawks (Accipiter nisus), Cooper's Hawks (Accipter cooperii), Northern Goshawks (Accipiter gentilis), Red-shouldered Hawks (Buteo lineatus), Common Buzzards (Buteo buteo), Long-legged Buzzards (Buteo rufinus), Upland Buzzards (Buteo hemilasius), Rough-legged Buzzards, Eurasian Kestrels (Falco tinnunculus), American Kestrels (Falco sparverius), Merlins (Falco columbarius),Tommeraas, P. J. 1993. Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos killed a Merlin Falco columbarius, robbed a Wigeon Anas penelope nest and probably hunted Ring Ouzels Turdus torquatus in their nesting territories. Fauna Norvegica Series, 16: 85 - 88. Prairie Falcons and Gyrfalcons (Falco rusticolus). Occasionally, Golden Eagles may even boldly predate these smaller species during migration in mid-flight, as was recorded at Hawk Mountain Sanctuary with a Red-shouldered Hawk. 1947. Golden Eagle Captures a Red-shouldered Hawk. Auk, 64: 317-318. It is thought that on rare occasions, more nimble, smaller raptors like Rough-legged Buzzards and Harriers can kleptoparatisize Golden Eagles.P. & Sherrod, S.K. 1974. Interactions between corvids and a Golden Eagle on a pheasant kill. Auk, 91: 180-181. Interestingly, Northern Goshawks in Scandinavia rely on grouse to about the same extent as Golden Eagles there and even hunt in similar forest edge habitata there. However, the goshawks primarily hunt neonatal and fledgling grouse (30% and 53% of their take of grouse) rather than adult grouse (17% of their prey) in late summer when grouse dominate other birds in their diet, whereas the eagles seem to mainly adult grouse and hunt them aseasonally. 2005. The Goshawk (Poyser Monographs). Buteo Books, London. ISBN 978-0713665659. Similarly, Hen Harriers may become somewhat specialized at taking young Red Grouse, whereas the eagles are more likely to take adults. M. (991. The impact of hen harriers on red grouse breeding success. Journal of Applied Ecology, 28(2), 659-671.
Due to the potential danger to themselves and their offspring, almost every other type of raptorial bird readily mobs Golden Eagles. Gyrfalcons, skuas, and Buteos like Rough-legged Buzzards, which are normally fierce competitors with each other, have worked together to group-mob Golden Eagles that have passed their adjacent nesting areas. Occasionally smaller raptors, especially large falcons, will drive eagles to the ground. The eagle typically ignores attacks from smaller species or at least leaves their home ranges, but will occasionally roll and extend talons toward chasing individual often without displaying active predatory behavior. If physical contact occurs, it sometimes ends in injury, death and/or consumption of the attacking species. G. 1983. Golden Eagle killing mobbing Carrion Crows. British Birds, 76: 312. Remarkably, the nest defense by Golden Eagles themselves is often rather passive towards other raptorial birds, perhaps since other species may fear predation on themselves if they approach a Golden Eagle territory. There are exceptions to this, however, when particularly bold, large raptorial birds seemingly range too far into a pair's home range. One pair of Golden Eagles killed but did not eat 3 Great Horned Owls (Bubo virginianus), implying that they were killed in nest defense and not in predation. In one of the few cases of a Golden Eagle killing but not eating another large raptor, an adult Golden Eagle was observed killing a Ferruginous Hawk which apparently came too close to its nest.
Golden Eagles, being habitual scavengers at carrion, come into conflict with scavenging birds as well. They may encounter corvids at carrion sites and the large passerines are often highly cautious, either feeding some distance from the eagle or waiting until the eagle is done eating, lest they be predaceously grabbed. Occasionally, however, corvids may behave more boldly around Golden Eagles. In one case, a group of three Black-billed Magpies were observed to rob a Golden Eagle of its prey. S. 1933. Three magpies rob a Golden Eagle. Condor, 35:161. Golden Eagles also usually dominate both New World and Old World vultures. Smaller species like Black Vulture (Coragyps atratus) in North America and Egyptian Vulture (Neophron percnopterus) in Eurasia are known to be occasionally hunted by Golden Eagles. S. & Fraser, J.D. 1986. Predation on Black and Turkey Vultures. Wilson Bulletin, 98: 600-601. 2007. Egyptian Vultures (Neophron percnopterus) Attack Golden Eagles (Aquila Chrysaetos) to Defend their Fledgling. Journal of Raptor Research, 41: 339-340. Besides the Steller's Sea Eagle, the larger species of Old World vulture and the California Condor (Gymnogyps californianus) are the only noticeably larger raptorial birds that a Golden Eagle may encounter. The relationship between these large vultures and Golden Eagles can be highly contentious, with most sources favoring victory for the eagle due to its more aggressive disposition, much stronger feet and sharp talons. In one case, a colony of Griffon Vulture (Gyps fulvus) was exceptionally able to displace a pair Golden Eagles from a cliff where they were trying nest so they could nest there themselves. 1909. My Life among the Wild Birds of Spain. London, John Bule, Sons & Danielsson Ltd. On the other hand, a 5-year-old Griffon Vulture reintroduced into the wild in Bulgaria was thought to have been killed by a Golden Eagle. & Bonchev, L. 2012. Reintroduction of Griffon Vulture Gyps fulvus in Kotel Mountain, Bulgaria. Fund for wild Flora and Fauna, Blagoevgrad. The Golden Eagle is a potential predator of the Lammergeier which is often attracted to much the same habitat and prey as the eagle but often feeds largely on bone marrow from carcasses., Heredia, R., Razin, M. & Hernandez, M. 2008. Sources of variation in mortality of the Bearded Vulture Gypaetus barbatus in Europe. Bird Conservation International, 18: 1-10. It has been observed that both Golden Eagles and Lammergeiers will readily pirate food away from each other. & Bertran, J. 2003. Interspecific and Intraspecific Kleptoparasitic Interactions of the Bearded Vulture (Gypaetus barbatus) at Nesting Areas. The Raptor Research Foundation, 37 (2): 157-160. In the Southwestern United States, several conflicts between huge California Condors and Golden Eagles have been observed. At carrion, victory during conflicts can go either way apparently. F. R. and N. J. Schmitt. 2002. California Condor (Gymnogyps californianus). in The Birds of North America, no. 619. (Poole, A. and F. Gill, Eds.) The Birds of North America, Inc. Philadelphia, PA. 2006. Pete Dunne's Essential Field Guide Companion: A Comprehensive Resource for Identifying North American Birds. Hougton-Mifflin Harcourt, ISBN 0618236481. Recent observation have suggested that the critically endangered condors do not seem to actively defend their nesting territories from Golden Eagles but have been recorded gaining incidental protection from Prairie Falcons and Common Ravens, which both aggressively displaced the eagles from their own adjacent territories.F.R., Ramey, R.R. & Sibley, F.C. 1986. Nest-site biology of the California Condor. Condor 88: 228-241). The Golden Eagle is considered an occasional predator of California Condors (especially fledglings) but there seems to be little in the way of eye-witness accounts to confirm this. It is possible that (as in the Bulgarian Griffon Vultures) the California Condors have lost their natural cautiousness around eagles due to having been reintroduced from captivity.J., Snyder, N.F.R., Beissinger, S.R., Clendenen, D.A. & Wiley, J.W.. 2000. Demography of the California Condor: implications for reestablishment. Conservation Biology NatureServe. 2010. NatureServe Explorer: An Online Encyclopedia of Life application.
Owls, which may have dissimilar periods of activity, are not entirely exempt from Golden Eagle predation either. A case of kleptoparasitism by a Golden Eagle on a Great Horned Owl has been recorded. D. 1920. Golden Eagle and Horned Owl. Oologist 37:122.
In the Palearctic, the Golden Eagle co-exists with several other large raptorial birds called eagles. Unlike in their relationship with smaller raptors, Golden Eagles are rarely reported to hunt other eagle species. Most conflicts between different eagles are over kills or carrion, though some species will defend nesting territories from each other. When it comes to carrion and kills, usually the "aggressor" (that is the eagle who initiates the agnostic behavior) is victorious over the other eagle.J. & Gjershaug, J.O. 1998. Inter- and intra-specific dominance relationships and feeding behaviour of Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos and Sea Eagles Haliaeetus albicilla at carcass. Ibis, 140: 295-301. Considering that that they overlap considerably in both distribution and prey selection, there is remarkably almost no known accounts from Eurasia of Golden Eagles behaving aggressively with other Aquila eagles. This is possibly due to segregated habitat preferences amongst these species, with Lesser and Greater Spotted Eagles being essentially woodland or wooded wetland-dwelling birds, Spanish and Eastern Imperial Eagles inhabiting fragmented, open woods and Steppe Eagles generally living in flat, often treeless steppe and desert-like habitats. In central Asia, where Golden Eagles and other Aquila species are rare or absent, Steppe Eagles sometimes nest in mountainous rock formations like Golden Eagles. Compared to these eagles, the Bonelli's Eagle appears to have a more contentious relationship with Golden Eagles, as they are often attracted to similar prey (largely rabbits and gamebirds) and occur in abutting habitats. The larger Golden Eagle is apparently dominant and, in at least one case, has killed and consumed a Bonelli's., & Pleguezuelos, J. M. 2000. Influence of prey densities in the distribution and breeding success of Bonelli's eagle (Hieraaetus fasciatus): management implications. Biological Conservation, 93(1): 19-25., Real, J., Tinto, A. & Zozaya, E.L. 2007. An adult male Bonelli's eagle (Hieraaetus fasciatus) eaten by a subadult golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos). Journal of Raptor Research, 41(4): 338. The two species defend their territories from one another exclusively, in the same way they defend them from others of their own species. Both will use nests built by the other species, more so the Golden using Bonelli's nests than vica versa. 1981. Relaciones interespecificas y coexistencia entre el Aguila Real Aquila chrrysaetos y el Aguila Perdicera Hieraaetus fasciatus en Sierra Morena central. Ardeola, 28: 67-87. Further east, in Israel, Bonelli's and Golden Eagles are competitors as well. In the dry, barren Negev Desert, Golden Eagles nests were found  and the Bonelli's Eagle easily outnumbered them. Apparently, the Bonelli's Eagle exceptionally outcompeted its larger cousin here due to a subtle topographic variation in the habitat. Still, in areas without unnatural human pressures, the gradation between these species is still adequate enough that they can exist without serious negative effect on either population., Pizarro, M., Ontiveros, D., & Pleguezuelos, J. M. 2009. The coexistence of the eagles Aquila chrysaetos and Hieraaetus fasciatus increases with low human population density, intermediate temperature, and high prey diversity. In Annales Zoologici Fennici (Vol. 46, No. 4, pp. 283-290). Finnish Zoological and Botanical Publishing. In Japan, Golden Eagles were observed to hunt Mountain Hawk-Eagles (Nisaetus nipalensis), despite the fact that the local race of hawk eagle is around the same mass as a Japanese Golden Eagle. Dunning Jr. (Editor). CRC Press (1992), ISBN 978-0-8493-4258-5., & Imamori, T. 2008. Cases of attack by Golden Eagles (Aquila chrysaetos japonica) on Mountain hawk-Eagles (Spizaetus nipalensis) for the purpose of hunting. Aquila Chrysaetos 22:32-37. The Bale Mountains of Ethiopia is arguably the richest biosphere the Golden Eagle is known to inhabit and there, this species may potentially interact with more than 10 other eagle species and nearly 30 other accipitrid species, including both migratory and resident breeding species. These are often supported by an exceptionally diverse, dense population of rodents there. The Bale Mountains Golden Eagles were recorded kleptoparatisizing Steppe Eagles, Augur Buzzard (Buteo augur), Pallid Harrier (Circus macrourus) and Lanner Falcons (Falco biarmicus) and the eagles were themselves kleptoparatisized by Steppe Eagles on three occasions. The Golden Eagles were also observed to chase Tawny and Steppe Eagles out of their nesting territories. In the Bale Mountains, the Golden Eagle overlaps with perhaps its closest living relative, the Verreaux's Eagle. The Golden Eagles appear to vigorously defend their territories from the Verreaux's Eagles and, as in its relationship with the Bonelli's, the two species appear to maintain exclusive territories. Several chases involving the Golden chasing Verreaux's were witnessed but only one where a Verreaux's chased off the Golden. Despite several reported agnostic interactions, no other raptors were found as prey in the Bale Mountains nests of Golden Eagles.
Perhaps the most formidable raptorial birds that the Golden Eagle co-exist with are the large Northern Haliaeetus sea or fish eagles. Two species, the White-tailed Eagle and the Bald Eagle, overlap in distribution frequently with Golden Eagles. Both are marginally heavier on average than the Golden, especially the White-tailed Eagle, which tends to have a slightly longer wingspan as well. There are many differences in the dietary biology of these species as they primarily eat fish, occasionally supplemented by water birds or other semi-aquatic prey, and obtain more of their food via scavenging of dead or injured animals or via kleptoparasitism than Golden Eagles do. They also prefer nesting in large trees by the shore of a body of water, often in lowland areas, quite different from the upland, often mountainous nesting habitat preferred by Golden Eagles. J., Pearce‐Higgins, J., Whitfield, D. P., Grant, J. R., MacLennan, A., & Reid, R. 2010. Comparative nest habitat characteristics of sympatric White‐tailed Haliaeetus albicilla and Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos in western Scotland. Bird Study, 57(4): 473-482. However, conflicts between the great eagles do occur, especially at carrion or kills. In most cases, the Golden Eagle is reportedly dominant over White-tailed Eagles at food, reportedly being more aggressive and a more agile and swift flier. However, in some cases, White-tailed Eagles have dominated Golden Eagles at carrion or kills. 1977. White-tailed Eagle, Haliaeetus albicilla, robbing Golden Eagle, Aquila chrysaetos, of its prey. Var Fagelvarld, 36: 54. of one another. All observed conflicts in the Kazakhstani woods were amongst others of their own species.E., Bragin, E.A., Knick, S.T. & Smith, A.T. (2003). Coexistence in a multispecies assemblage of eagles in central Asia. Condor, 105: 538-551. On the Scottish Isle of Mull, Golden and White-tailed Eagles also nested in close proximity without any observed aggressive encounters. P., Evans, R. J., Broad, R. A., Fielding, A. H., Haworth, P. F., Madders, M., & McLeod, D. R. A. 2002. Are reintroduced White-tailed Eagles in competition with Golden Eagles?. Scottish Birds, 23(1): 36-45. The Steller's Sea Eagle co-exists with Golden Eagles in coastal Japan and Russia. This species is the heaviest living eagle and may weigh twice as much as the small-bodied Japanese Golden Eagles. Occasionally, both Golden and White-tailed Eagles join Steller's Sea Eagles to feed on fish caught along ice floes in the Sea of Okhotsk. The Steller's, being more aggressive in disposition than its Bald and White-tailed cousins, appears dominant over Golden Eagles here and has been photographed repeatedly displacing them from fish. ARKive. Retrieved on 2012–08–21. NWF. Retrieved on 2012–08–21. The smaller Pallas's Sea Eagle (Haliaeetus leucoryphus) also overlaps in range with Golden Eagles but there is no published information on their relationship.
Mammalian carnivores are potential competitors with Golden Eagles for food. Foxes may prey on the same species in a given area but, as they are occasionally hunted by the eagles and are mainly nocturnal, they tend to avoid direct conflicts. Though rare, Golden Eagles may sometimes pirate prey from various species of fox. 1959. Pirates and predators, the piratical and predatory habits of birds. Oliver and Boyd, London, U.K. In North America, Coyotes (Canis latrans) may engages in agnostic interactions with Golden Eagles. Despite being around three times as heavy, lone coyotes are seemingly dominated by Golden Eagles at many carrion or kill sites. D. 1980. Coyote-Golden Eagle interactions at an ungulate carcass. J. Mammal. 61:376-377. 1980. Eagle-coyote incident. Blue Jay 38:47-48. S., Everatt, K. T., & Andresen-Everatt, L. M. 2009. Kleptoparasitism of a coyote (Canis latrans) by a golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) in Northwestern Canada. Northwestern Naturalist, 90(1): 53-55. In the Greater Yellowstone, Golden Eagles were ranked as the second most dominant scavenger at wolf kills during winter (when bears are hibernating) after coyote packs but above Bald Eagles. In one instance, a healthy adult male coyote was attacked and killed by a Golden Eagle. This coyote weighed  Grizzly Bear (Ursus arctos horribilis) have also reportedly killed and eaten Golden Eagle nestlings in Denali National Park. The Grizzly is reportedly one of the few mammals to trigger a strong aggressive reaction from the parent eagles when spotted close to the nest, as eagles have been observed to strike the bruins about the head and neck with their talons.L. and D. Keeler pers. comm.

Activity and movements

Despite the dramatic ways in which they attain food and interact with raptors of their own and other species, the daily life of Golden Eagles is often rather uneventful. In Idaho, adult male Golden Eagles where observed to sit awake on a perch for an average of 78% of daylight, whereas adult females sat on nest or perched for an average of 85% of the day. W. and T. C. Edwards, Jr. 1989. Territory size, activity budget, and role of undulating flight in nesting Golden Eagles. Journal of Field Ornithology, 60: 43-51. During the peak of summer in Utah, hunting and territorial flights occurred mostly between 9:00 and 11:00 am and 4:00 and 6:00 pm, with the remaining 15 or so hours of daylight spend perching or resting. When conditions are heavily anticyclonic, there is less soaring during the day. During winter in Scotland, Golden Eagles soar frequently during in order to scan the environment for carrion. In the more wooded environments of Norway during autumn and winter, much less aerial activity is reported, since the eagles tend to avoid detection by actively contour-hunting rather than looking for carrion. 1987. Territorial behavior of Golden Eagles in Western Norway. British Birds, 80: 361-376. Golden Eagles are believed to sleep through much of the night. Although usually highly solitary outside of the bond between breeding pairs, exceptionally cold weather in winter may cause eagles to put their usual guard down and perch together. The largest known congregation of Golden Eagles was observed on an extremely cold winter's night in eastern Idaho when 124 individuals were observed perched closely along a line of 85 power poles. H. & Craig, E.H. 1984. Large concentration of roosting Golden Eagles in southwestern Idaho. Auk 101:610-613.

Migration

Most populations of Golden Eagles are sedentary, but the species is actually a partial migrant. Golden Eagles are very hardy species, being well adapted to cold climates, however they cannot abide declining available food sources in the northern stretches of their range. Eagles raised at latitudes greater than 60° N are usually migratory, though a short migration may be untaken by those who breed or hatch at about 50° N.L., Douglas, D.C. & Collopy, M.W. 2008. Movements of golden eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) from interior Alaska during their first year of independence. Auk, 125(1): 214-224. During migration, birds often use soaring-gliding flight during migration, rather than powered flight. In Finland, most banded juveniles move between  in older birds. In the dry Southwestern United States, Golden Eagles tend to move to higher elevations once the breeding season is complete. In North Africa, populations breeding at lower latitudes, like Morocco, are mostly sedentary, although some occasionally disperse after breeding to areas outside of the normal breeding range., Bergier, P. & Beaubrun, P. 1985. Present distribution and status of raptors in Morocco. Pages 83-101 in Conservation studies on raptors (I. Newton, and R. D. Chancellor, Eds.). International Council for Bird Preservation, Cambridge, UK.

Territoriality

Territoriality is believed to be the primary cause of interactions and confrontations between non-paired Golden Eagles. Golden Eagles maintain some of the largest known home ranges (or territories) of any bird species but there is much variation of home range size across the range, possibly dictated by food abundance and habitat preference. Home ranges in most of the range can vary from . 46% of undulating displays in Montana occurred shortly after the juvenile eagles left their parents range, suggesting that some residents defend and maintain territories year-round. R. 1982. What is the function of undulating flight display in Golden Eagles? The Raptor Research Foundation, 16: 103-109. Elsewhere it is stated that home ranges are less strictly maintained during winter but hunting grounds are basically exclusive. In Israel and Scotland, aggressive encounters peaked from winter until just before egg-laying and were less common during the nesting season. 1989. Aspects in the ecology and biodynamics of the Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos homeyeri) in the arid regions of Israel. Master's Thesis. Tel Aviv Univ. Tel Aviv, Israel. Threat displays include undulating flight and aggressive direct flapping flight with exaggerated downstrokes. H. 1979. Development of behavior in the Golden Eagle. Wildlife Monographs, 70: 1-94. Most displays by mature Golden Eagles (67% for males and 76% for females) occur, rather than around the nest, at the edge of their home ranges. In Western Norway, most recorded undulating flight displays occur during the pre-laying period in late winter/early spring. Display flights seem to be triggered by the presence of other Golden Eagles. The use of display flights has a clear benefit in that it lessens the need for physical confrontations, which can be fatal. Usually, non-breeding birds are treated aggressively by the Golden Eagle maintaining their home range, normally being chased to the apparent limit of the range but with no actual physical contact. The territorial flight of the adult Golden Eagle is sometimes preceded or followed by intense bouts of undulating displays. The invader often responds by rolling over and presenting talons to the aggressor. Rarely, the two eagles will lock talons and tumble through the air; sometimes fall several revolutions and in some cases even tumble to the ground before releasing their grip. 1982. Spatial organization and dynamics of a population of Golden Eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) in the central Alps. Ornithol. Beob. 79:163-211. 1987. Territorial behaviour of Golden Eagles in western Norway. British Birds, 80: 361-376. In some parts of the Alps, the Golden Eagle population has reached the saturation point in appropriate habitat and apparently violent confrontations are more common than in other parts of the range. 1996. The Golden Eagle in the Grisons: Long-term studies on the population ecology of Aquila chrysaetos in the centre of the Alps. Ornithol. Beob. Beiheft 9:1-167. Golden Eagles may express their aggression via body language while perched, typically the adult female when confronted by an intruding eagle: the head and body are upright, feathers on head and neck are erect; the wings may be slightly spread and beak open; often accompanied by intense gaze. They then often engage in a similar posture with wings spread wide and oriented toward the threat; sometimes rocking back on tail and even flopping over onto the back with talons extended upward as defense. Such behavior may be accompanied by wing slap against the threatening intruder. When approached by an intruder, the defending eagle turns away, partially spreads tail, lowers head, and remains still; adults on the nest may lower head and "freeze" when approached by a person or a helicopter. Females in Israel displayed more than males and mostly against interspecific intruders; males apparently displayed primarily as part of courtship. Five of 7 aggressive encounters at carcasses during winter in Norway were won by females; in 15 of 21 conflicts, the younger bird dominated an older conspecific. However, obvious juvenile eagles (apparent to the adult eagles due to the amount of white on their wings and tail) are sometimes allowed to penetrate deeply into a pair's home range and all parties commonly ignore each other. H. and A. Watson. 1964. The Golden Eagle in relation to its food supply. Ibis 106:78-100. In North Dakota, it was verified that parent eagles were not aggressive towards their own young after the nesting period and some juveniles stayed on their parents territory until their 2nd spring and then left by their own accord.O'Toole, L. T., Kennedy, P. L., Knight, R.L. & McEwen, L. C. 1999. Postfledging behavior of Golden Eagles. Wilson Bulletin, 111: 472-477.

Reproduction

Golden Eagles usually mate for life. A breeding pair is formed in a courtship display. This courtship includes undulating displays by both in the pair, with the male bird picking up a piece of rock and dropping it only to enter into a steep dive and catch it in mid-air, repeating the maneuver 3 or more times. The female takes a clump of earth and drops and catches it in the same fashion. Small sticks may also be used in this display. Compared to the Bald Eagle, Golden Eagles do not repeat courtship displays annually (which are believed to strength pair bonds) and rarely engage in talon-locking downward spirals. Golden Eagles typically build several eyries within their territory and use them alternately for several years. Their nesting areas are characterized by the extreme regularity of the nest spacing. & Rothery, P. 1986. Regularity in spacing of Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos nests used within years in northeast Scotland. Ibis, 131: 336-348. In 9 studies of annual nest spacing, the average minimum distance between nests range from . Due to the consistency of use by Golden Eagle pairs, population densities change generally happens only quite gradually.

Nest requirements

Golden Eagle seem to prefer to build their nests on cliffs where they are available. 1982. Raumorganisation und Dynamik einer Population des Steinadlers Aquila chrysaetos 'm den Zentralalpen. Der Orinthologische Beobachter, 79: 163-211. Nests are generally located at around half of the maximum elevation of the surrounding land. This height preference may be related to having the ability to transport heavy prey downhill rather than uphill. A massive benefit to cliff nests is that they tend to be largely or entirely inaccessible to mammalian predators on foot (including humans). In Spain, studies revealed the preferred sites of Golden Eagle nests were on inaccessible cliffs at a great distance from tracks, roads and villages.A., Cellabos, O. & Fernandez, C. 1989. Factors influencing the distribution and abundance of seven cliff nesting raptors: a multivariate study. In: Raptors in the Modern World (Eds. Meyerburg & Chancellor), pp. 542-552. WWGBP, London, Berlin & Paris. 95.6% of 410 nests built in Scotland were on cliffs. & Dennis, R.H. 1992. Nest site selection by Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos in Scotland. British Birds, 85: 469-481. Similarly, in Bulgaria, Italy, Switzerland, France and Yugoslavia, more than 90% of Golden Eagles nests were located on cliffs., Petrov, T., Profirov, L., Yankov, P. & Gavrailov, S. 1989. Distribution and nature-defensive status of the Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos chrysaetos (L., 1758) in Bulgaria. Bulletin of South Bulgaria, 25: 75-87. & Fasce, L. 1984. L'Aquila Reale in Talia: Ecologia e Conservazione. Lega Italian Porotezione Uccelli, Serie Scientifica, Parma. Greek nests are mostly on cliff ledges, but in the Evros District, nearly 30% of the population nests on trees, mostly pines., & Akriotis, T. 1997. The birds of Greece. Christopher Helm Ltd., A & C Black, London. Rural, arid areas of Europe such as the Iberian peninsula, Provence in France and the Apennines in Italy, fire combined with pastoral activity has maintained suitable nesting sites at relatively low elevations. In the Spanish Pyrenees, however, nest were found at up to  away from large clearcuts or fields. Ground nest are rare in Scotland but not uncommon in the United States, especially in arid areas of states such as Nevada, North Dakota and Wyoming. Ground nests typically occur on lofty hills where have little ground vegetation and require adults to have a good protective all-around view. J., R. J. Oakleaf, J. M. Laughlin, and J. L. Page. 1976. Nesting ecology of Golden Eagles in Elko County, Nevada. Technical Note 281. U.S. Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, Denver, CO. P., L. R. Hanebury, and R. L. Phillips. 1983. Raptor inventory of coal areas in western North Dakota. Report prepared for U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service, Bismarck Field Office, Bismarck, ND. Other exceptional nest sites known in North America have included river banks,Phillips, R. L., A. H. Wheeler, J. M. Lockhart, T. P. McEneaney, and N. C. Forrester. 1990. Nesting ecology of Golden Eagles and other raptors in southeastern Montana and northern Wyoming. Technical Report 26. U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish & Wildlife Service, Washington, D.C. abandoned gold dredges and electrical transmission towers.
Both heavy rain and excessive heat can potentially kill nestlings, so Golden Eagles often place their nests to suit the local climate. In Northern areas, such as Alaska, sun exposure (Southern orientation) may help nesting success, while those nesting in hot, lowland Utah and arid regions of Israel were mainly northerly facing to keep the nest out of the hot glare of the sun.A. & White, C.M. 1976. Directional exposure of Golden Eagle nests. Canadian Field-Naturalist, 90: 356-359. Almost all established breeding Golden Eagles build more than one nest. A typical range of nests per pair is between 2 and 5. In Sweden, pairs on average built 2.4 of them. There is an average of about 4.5 nests per pair in Scotland. In Idaho, there was an average of 6 nests per pair. In more exceptional cases, up to 13 nests have built by a single pair in Scotland and up to 12 by a single pair in Idaho. Some pairs utilize alternate nest sites every year, others apparently rarely use alternate nests. Some Golden Eagle pairs may not use a nest for up to six years after its construction. Golden Eagle nests usually consist of heavy tree branches, upholstered with grass when in use. As is typical of a large accipitrid, the nests of Golden Eagles are very large. However, they are smaller on average than Bald Eagle nests. G. and W. L. Eakle. 1987. Comparative morphology of Bald and Golden eagle nests in Arizona. Journal of Wildlife Management, 51: 744-748. In Kazakhstan, Golden Eagle nests were similar in size to White-tailed Eagle nests. In the Isle of Mull in Scotland, however, White-tailed Eagle nests were slightly larger as they used thicker, larger sticks lined with grass that make a more massive nest than the isle's Golden Eagle nests, which used thinner sticks or heather and lined their nest with woodrush. In Arizona, Golden Eagle nests averaged  in width. H. 1986. Extremely tall eagle nests. National Geographic. 2:517-519. Certain other animals—too small to be of interest to the huge raptor—sometimes use the nest as shelter or even as a nest for themselves, for the incidental protection offered. This has mainly been associated with Eurasian Wren (Troglodytes troglodytes) in Europe, though has also been recorded remarkably with Ring Ouzels (Turdus torquatus) and Pine Martens, both of which have been recorded as prey for Golden Eagles elsewhere in Europe. In a similar situation, Little Curlews in northeastern Siberia apparently gain some protection from predators by nesting close to Golden Eagle eyries. V., Leonovitch, V. V., & Veprintsev, B. N. 1982. The Little Curlew Numenius minutus in Siberia. Ibis, 124(3), 302-319. In each case, the natural predators of these animals are just the right size for Golden Eagle prey, and therefore avoid active eyries. Related species such as Eastern Imperial and Bonelli's Eagles have been observed to nest in abandoned Golden Eagle nests, as well as distantly related or unrelated raptors including White-tailed Eagles, Lammergeiers, Gyfalcons and Peregrine Falcons.A. 1990. Bird life of mountains and upland. University Press, Cambridge., & García, D. 1999. Nest use, interspecific relationships and competition for nests in the Bearded Vulture Gypaetus barbatus in the Pyrenees: influence on breeding success. Bird Study, 46(2): 224-229.

Mating and egg-laying

Mating and egg-laying timing for Golden Eagle is variable depending on the locality. Copulation normally lasts 10–20 seconds. Mating seems to occur around 40–46 days before the initial egg-laying. Unusual mating systems of three birds have been recorded in Scotland and Sweden, usually the third being an immature of either sex. These may simply reflect a relatively unstable period of population adjustment. Occasionally, pairs have been recorded copulating outside of the context of fertilization, possibly for pair maintenance and displacement activity. In Japan, a pair was seen mating 46 days before egg laying and in the United States 55 days after egg-laying., Sekiyama, F. Obara, N., Tamura, G. & Sakaguchi, G. 1988. Breeding biology of a pair of Golden Eagles in the Kitakami Mountains. Aquila chrysaetos, 6: 14-23.H. & Powers, L. 1982. Mating behaviour in the Golden Eagle in non-fertilization context. Journal of Raptor Research, 16: 134-136. The date of egg laying has been directly correlated by the latitude where the pair lives. In the U.S., egg laying can be from anywhere between January and September, though is usually in March or later. In Scotland, egg-laying occurs in March to mid-April. The earliest median laying date in 25 international studies was December 3 in Oman; the latest median date of egg-laying was May 7 in sub-Arctic Alaska.D. & Brown, M.R. 1982. Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos breeding in Oman, eastern Arabia. Bulletin of the British Ornithologists' Club, 102: 41-42. Egg laying starts in the dry season as early as late November around Mali and Niger while the median egg laying date in southwestern Morocco is January 15. & Maynaud, N. 1962. Les Oiseaux du Nord-Ouest de l'Afrique. Lechevalier, Paris. In Ethiopia, the estimated range of egg-laying dates ranged from October 24 to January 5. The median egg laying day in Arctic Russia was May 1. In the Kilbuck and Ahklun Mountains area, three pairs had eggs hatched from May 14 to 23, and young fledged from July 8 to August 10 with a median date of July 23 for 11 nests. Two nests on the Kisaralik River still contained young on July 24, and four nests contained young from 16 to 21 July.B.J. McCaffery fide Petersen et al. op cit. Clutches have been recorded range in size from 1 to 4 eggs, though two is the norm around the range. Records of single egg clutches are fairly common in Europe, with 3 being rare there but seemingly more common in North America, where up to 12% of clutches include 3 eggs. A 4 egg clutch is considered exceptional. The lowest mean clutch size known from surveys is 1.82 eggs in the Altai Mountains of Russia.A. & Irisov, N.L. 1998. On distribution and biology of Golden Eagle in Altai. Modern Ornithology. Moscow, pp. 139-156. A mean of 48 clutches from Algeria and Tunisia showed an average of 1.89 eggs per nests, with a range of 1 to 3. The female laid an average number of eggs of 1.99 in 332 clutches from 8 studies in 5 of the Western United States. The largest mean clutch size across the range was 2.1 in Montana. In the wild, eggs are typically laid at 3 to 5 day intervals, with records in captivity of intervals of up to 7 or 10 days. 1970. Egg laying and incubation by American Golden Eagles, Aquila chrysaetos canadensis, at Topeka Zoo. International Zoo Yearbook, 10 :26-29. 1972. First breeding by American Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos canadensis at Topeka Zoo. International Zoo Yearbook, 12: 136-138. The eggs vary from all white to white with cinnamon or brown spots and blotches. Scottish eggs averaged . C. 1930. Notes on the Golden Eagle in southern California. Condor 32:121-123. The incubation period lasts from 41 to 45 days, averaging about 42.4 days, with previously reported claims of as low as 33 days from North America now known to be erroneous. Females do a majority of, but not all, of the incubating and largely attain their own food up to the stage of egg-laying, after which they are typically fed by the male. The female may continue to grab most of their own food in areas where carrion is easily assessable. If made to forage excessively during the incubation stage by a non-attentive mate, the female may abandon the nesting attempt.W., 1984. Parental care and feeding ecology of Golden Eagle nestlings. Auk, 101 (4): 753-760. In Idaho, the female did 84% of the incubation during the day, with the male doing about 16%. At night, the female generally appears to do all of the incubating.J. 1981. Role of male Golden Eagle during incubation. British Birds, 74: 309-310. In Japan, the female did 90% of the observed incubating.

Early life

The Golden Eagle chick may be heard from within the egg 15 hours before it begins hatching. After the first chip is broken off of the egg, there is no activity for around 27 hours. After this period, the hatching activity accelerates and the shell is broken apart in 35 hours. The chick is completely free in 37 hours.H. 1979. Development of behaviour in the Golden Eagle. Widlife Monographs, No. 70. Upon hatching, the chicks are covered in fluffy white down. One day after hatching, chicks will weigh  was brought. 1967. Quantified estimates of predation by a Golden Eagle population. Journal of Wildlife Management, 31: 496-501.M. 1976. The food habits, status and ecology of nesting Golden Eagles in the Trans-Pecos region of Texas. Masters of Science thesis. Ross State University, Alpine, Texas. For the first 30 days or so, the nestlings are fully dependent on their parents to feed them but after that period, they start standing around the edge of the nest and practice food tearing. When the first chick is an average of 29 days old, the female first start perching off the nest and at 40 days of age, she stops perching on the nest platform. From 50 days onward, dark brown plumage sprouts from the same sockets as the down and plumage changes become more subtle. The feet go from flesh-colored at hatching to grey to black, thence finally to yellow. When they are around 20 days or so old, as the structure of their wing develops, the nestlings start wing flapping and the frequency and intensity of this behavior increases considerably by 40 days old. Fledging occurs at 66 to 75 days of age in Idaho and 70 to 81 days in Scotland.

Cainism

"Cainism", as it is sometimes called, or siblicide is inarguably the most controversial and confusing aspect of the Golden Eagles' reproductive biology. 1988. Offspring quality and the evolution of cainism. Ibis, 130: 339-357. This is the habitual behavior in the nest of the oldest hatchling to attack and usually kill their young siblings. In fact, this behavior is quite common, not only in large accipitirids but also in unrelated raptorial birds such as skuas and owls. Cainism is frequent, even typical in species of the Aquila genus. The traditionally classified genus can be broken down into two groups: facultative cainists (wherein fewer than 90% of known nests do the oldest nestling attack and kill their younger siblings) and obligate cainists (wherein more than 90% of nests do the older kill the younger siblings). The Golden Eagle is part of the facultative cainists group, along with the Wedge-tailed, Eastern Imperial, Steppe and Greater Spotted Eagles. The obligate cainists are two tropical species, the Verreaux's and the Tawny Eagle, and one temperate-climate-dwelling species, the Lesser Spotted-Eagle. Other Aquila eagles seem to roughly fall into the tropical species being obligate cainists vs temperate species being facultative cainists categories., making the largest chick easily dominant and giving the youngest practically no chance of survival. The oldest Golden Eagle hatchling may start acting aggressively to its younger sibling(s) as soon as it or they hatch. Within the first two days, this often escalates into "bill-stabbing" wherein the younger sibling is jabbed around their neck or the middle of their body until a gapping, fatal wound is created. If it is not directly killed, the younger sibling may starve to death, which may be an even more common occurrence. It is apparently common for the younger, weaker siblings to stop begging for food after sibling aggression starts and the parent eagles do not feed the nestlings unless they beg. In some cases, the young nestlings are physically forced from the nest entirely by their older sibling. & Chiba, K. 1988. Observations of sibling competition and the post-fledging return of a Golden Eaglet to the eyrie. Aquila chrysaetos 6:28-29. It is possible that cainism is more common when the older hatchling happens to be a female but, in many cases of males hatching first, they are still larger than the younger siblings and often do dominate and kill them whether male or female. 1989. Sex ratios of fledgling Golden Eagles. Auk, 106 :520-521. In one nest in Idaho and one in Montana, the oldest sibling was reported to eat their younger siblings, the only verified instances of cannibalism in Golden Eagles. Although the brooding mothers, otherwise famous for the high level of their parental care, is fully aware of the sibling aggression, in no raptorial bird species are they known to intervene when cainism occurs. After the young are about 20 days old, the amount of aggression between siblings (if both survive) decreases and both chicks can usually fledge, though aggression may again increase shortly before fledging.

Fledging and ensuing years

The first attempted flight departure can be abrupt, with the young jumping off and using a series of short, stiff wing-beats to glide downward or being blown out of nest while wing-flapping. The initial flight often includes a short flight on unsteady wings followed by an uncontrolled landing. J. 1969. Nesting ecology and behavior of the Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos. Brigham Young University Science Bulletin., Biological Series 10:4-15. Young eagles stay within  of their original nest site, sometimes attacking and even killing older Golden Eagles pairs if they occupy the area. R. & McGrady, M.J. 1999. Dispersal of Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos in Scotland. Ringing & Migration, 19: 169-174.

Reproductive success

Generally breeding success seems to be greatest where prey is available in abundance. In Central Utah, 57% of eggs successfully hatched out of 87 eggs from 44 clutches. G. & Murphy, J.R. 1979. Breeding responses of raptors to jackrabbit density in the eastern Great Basin Desert of Utah. The Raptor Research Foundation, 13: 1-14. In Idaho, 65% of 282 eggs from 145 clutches successfully hatched, and in Montana, 86% of 28 eggs from 14 clutches hatched. V. 1969. Population status of the Golden Eagle in south-central Montana. Master's Thesis. University of Montana, Missoula. In Scotland, the highest breeding success of Golden Eagles was in the Eastern Highlands where heather moorland still abundant, bearing plentiful Red Grouse and Mountain Hare. The jackrabbit follows a 10-year cycle where it peaks and crashes. In Idaho, 100% of observed nests produced at least one fledgling when the jackrabbits peaked in the late 1970s through the early 1980s and then at the low point in the mid to late 1980s, the nests produced on average only 0.2 fledglings. Similarly, in central Utah jackrabbit numbers were correlated with average number of young reared by 16 Golden Eagle pairs. Here the average number of young ranged from 0.56 in 1967 to 1.06 in 1969 to 0.31 in 1973.R. 1975. Status of the Golden Eagle in central Utah 1967-1973. Raptor Research Report, 3: 91-96. In Sweden, nesting success rose noticeably in years where the hunting bag (estimated quantity of prey) rose. 1983. Habitat and nest site features of Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos (L.) in Sweden. Swedish Wildlife Research, 12: 131-163. After viral hemorrhagic pneumonia (VHP) killed off many rabbits in Spain, the average breeding success of Golden Eagles in Northern Spain dropped from 0.77 in 1982-1989 to 0.38 by 1990-1992. 1993. Effect of the viral haemorrhagic pneumonia of the wild rabbit on the diet and breeding success of the Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos (L.) . Revue d'écologie, 48(3): 323-329. In Belarus, the average brood size is reportedly 1.8 whereas the average number of fledglings is 1.1.V. 1990. Breeding ecology of the Golden Eagle (Aquila chrysaetos) in northern Belarus. Soobshcheniya Pribaltiiskoi Komissii po Izucheniyu Migratsii Ptits Akademiya Nauk Estonskoi SSR 22:130-154. As previously mentioned, adverse weather can affect breeding success. In the exceptionally stormy and cold spring of 1984 in Montana, 71% (10 out of 14) studied nests failed.L., Wheeler, A.H., Forrester, N.C., Lockhart, J.M. & McEneaney, T.P. 1990. Nesting ecology of Golden Eagles and other raptors in southeastern Montana and northern Wyoming. Fish and Wildlife Technical Report No. 2. WSDI, Washington. A long period of exceptionally rainy, cold springs in Scotland reportedly resulted in a 25% reduction of fledging pairs being produced. Rather than directly killing the nestlings, stormy, wet weather probably causes the most harm to productivity due to the hampering of the parents ability to hunt.R., Fielding, A.K., Whitfield, D.P. & Reid, R. 2009. Diet and breeding success in Golden Eagles: implications for land management. Report by Haworth Conservation to Scottish Natural Heritage. In arid areas, heavier rainfall has the opposite effect and actually improves nesting success. Rainy years in the deserts of Israel, which provide more Brown Hares and Chukars to hunt, were more successful years for breeding. & Mendelssohn, H. 1996. The long-term effect of precipitation on the breeding success of Golden Eagles in the Judean and Negev Deserts, Israel. In: Eagle Studies, pp. 517-522. WWGBP, Berlin, London and Paris. While siblicide is estimated to claim about 80% of second hatchlings among Golden Eagles, in some parts of the range, the survival rate in successful nests is higher. In ideal habitats in North America (Northwestern United States and Alaska), 38 to 56% of nests produce a second fledging. Populations at northern end of range have smaller broods (brood size being about 12% smaller) and produce fewer fledglings (population productivity being about 25% smaller) than those in temperate areas, as has been revealed by contrasting studies of Alaska to Idaho.

Longevity

Golden Eagles are fairly long-living birds in natural conditions. The survival rate of raptorial birds tends to increase with larger body size, with a 30-50% annual loss of population rate in small falcons/accipiters, a 15-25% loss of population rate in medium-sized hawks (i.e. Buteos or kites) and a 5% or less rate of loss in eagles and vultures. The oldest known wild Golden Eagle was a bird banded in Sweden which was recovered 32 years later. The longest-lived known wild Golden Eagle in North America was 23 years and 10 months. K. 1997. Longevity records of North American birds, Version 97.1. Patuxent Wildlife Rescue Center, Bird Banding Laboratory. Laurel, MD. The long-lived known captive Golden Eagle, a specimen in Europe, survived to 46 years of age. The estimated adult annual survival rate on the Isle of Skye in Scotland is around 97.5%.M. & Birkhead, T.R. 1983. Avian ecology. New York: Chapman & Hall When this extrapolated into an estimated lifespan this results in 39 and half years as the average for adult Golden Eagles in this area, which is probably far too high an estimate. Survival rates are usually much lower in juvenile eagles than in adult eagles. In the western Rocky Mountains, 50% of Golden Eagles banded in the nest died by the time they were 2 and a half years and an estimated 75% died by the time they were 5 years old.R. 2002. Encounters of Golden Eagles banded in the Rocky Mountain West. Journal of Field Ornithology, 73: 27-32. Near a wind turbine facility in west-central California, estimated survival rates, based on conventional telemetry of 257 individuals, were 84% for first-year eagles, 79% for 1- to 3-year-olds and adult floaters and 91% for breeders; with no difference in survival rates between sexes. Survival rates may be lower for migrating populations of Golden Eagles.L., Collopy, M.W. & Lindberg, M.S. 2006. Survival probability and mortality of migratory juvenile Golden Eagles from Interior Alaska. Journal of Wildlife Management, 70: 717-722. A 19-34% survival rate was estimated for juvenile eagles from Denali National Park in their first 11 months. The average life expectancy of Golden Eagles in Germany is 13 years, extrapolated from a reported mere 92.5% survival rate. & Funfstuck, H.-J. 1994. Brut biologie und Populations dynamic des Steinadlers Aquila chrysaetos im Werdenfelser Land/Oberbayern. Acta Ornithologica, 3: 5-32.

Natural mortality

Natural sources of mortality are largely reported in anecdotes. On rare occasions, Golden Eagles have been killed by competing predators or by hunting mammalian carnivores, including the aforementioned Wolverine, Snow Leopard, Cougar, Brown Bear and White-tailed Eagle attacks. Most competitive attacks resulting in death probably occur at the talons of other Golden Eagles. Nestlings and fledglings are more likely to be killed by another predator than free-flying juveniles and adults. It has been suspected that Golden Eagle nests may be predated more frequently by other predators (especially birds, which are often the only other large animals that can access a Golden Eagle nest without the assistance of man-made climbing equipment) in areas where Golden Eagles are regularly disturbed at the nest by humans. Jeff Watson believed that Common Raven occasionally eats Golden Eagle eggs but only in situations where the parent eagles have abandoned their nesting attempt. However, there are no confirmed accounts of predation by other bird species on Golden Eagle nests. Occasionally, Golden Eagles may killed by their prey in self-defense. There is an account of a Golden Eagle dying from the quills of a North American Porcupine (Erethizon dorsatum) it had attempted to hunt. 1922. Golden Eagle Aquila chrysaetos and porcupine. Auk, 39: 258-259. On the Isle of Rùm in Scotland, there are few cases of Red Deer trampling Golden Eagles to death, probably the result of a hind having intercepted a bird that was trying to kill a fawn.A. 1989. Eagles. Whittet Books, London. Although usually well out-matched by the predator, occasionally other large birds can put up a formidable fight against a Golden Eagle. An attempted capture of a Great Blue Heron by a Golden Eagle resulted in the death of both birds from wounds sustained in the ensuing fight. 1964. A recollection of an encounter between a Golden Eagle and a Great Blue Heron. Blue Jay, 22: 55. There is at least one case in Scotland of a Golden Eagle dying after being "oiled" by a Northern Fulmar, a bird whose primary defense against predators is to disgorge an oily secretion which may inhibits the predator's ability to fly. 1971. Oil and the eagle: an unsolved riddle. Country Life, December: 1639. Of natural sources of death, starvation is probably under-reported. 11 of 16 dead juvenile eagles which had hatched in Denali National Park had died of starvation. Of 36 deaths of Golden Eagles in Idaho, 55% were possibly attributable to natural causes, specifically 8 (26%) from unknown trauma, 3 (10%) from disease and 6 (19%) from unknown causes.R. 1984. Trap and poison mortality of Golden and Bald Eagles. Journal of Wildlife Management, 48: 1173-1179. Of 266 Golden Eagle deaths in Spain, only 6% were from unknown causes that could not directly attributed to human activities., Ferreiro, E. & Garza, V. 1990. El Aquila Real Aquila chrysaetos en Spana: distribution, reproduccion y conservacion. ICONA, Madrid. Avian cholera caused by bacteria (Pasteurella multocida) infect eagles that eat waterfowl that have died from cholera. The protozoan Trichomonas sp. caused the deaths of 4 fledglings in a study of wild golden eagles in Idaho. Several further diseases that contribute to Golden Eagle deaths have been examined in Japan. & Yamazaki, T. 1988. Diseases of Golden Eagles: a review. Aquila Chrysaetos, 6: 36-40. A captive eagle died from two malignant tumors - one in the liver and one in the kidney.R. 1998. Metastatic cholangiocellular carcinoma and renal adenocarcinoma in a golden eagle (Aquila chrysaetos). Avian Pathology 27(3):321-325.

In human culture

As early as recorded history, mankind was fascinated by the eagle. Most early recorded cultures regarded the Golden Eagle with reverence. It was only after the Industrial Revolution, when sport-hunting became widespread and commercial stock farming became internationally common, that humans started to widely regard Golden Eagles as a threat to their livelihoods. This period also brought about the firearm and industrialized poisons, which made it easy for humans to kill the evasive and powerful birds. The following are various reportages of the significance of eagles, many likely pertaining to the Golden Eagles, in early cultures and older religions as well as national and military insignias.

Falconry

Golden Eagles can be trained for falconry. Some wolves apparently prove particularly challenging quarry, as there is the tale of one that injured by 11 eagles successive eagles but foiled their attempts – killing each one – until it was finally dispatched thanks to the efforts of a twelfth eagle.

Heraldry and myth

The Golden Eagle is the most common national animal in the world, with five nations—Albania, Germany, Austria, Mexico and Kazakhstan—making it the national animal. It is also a common motif in the national symbols of countries that have not officially made it the national animal or national bird. The reasons for this are various, but among the nations that use the Golden Eagle as or in a state symbol, there are two clear traditions that help explain the modern usage. Among European countries, the Golden Eagle was the model for the aquila, the most prominent symbol of the Roman legions and more generally the Roman civilization that had such a powerful impact on Western culture; furthermore, some Roman traditions were carried on by the Byzantine Empire in the Southern and Eastern of Europe and the Holy Roman Empire in Central and Western Europe, transmitting the use of the Golden Eagle to several modern states. This association of the Golden Eagle with Rome has also led to the adoption of similar symbols in other countries; for instance, the adoption of the related and physically similar Bald Eagle as the national bird of the United States was inspired by the conception of the United States as a modern reincarnation of the Roman Republic, a theme that recurs in other elements as well (including the prevalence of neoclassical architecture in American public buildings and the use of Roman terminology—such as naming the upper house of Congress the Senate—to hark back to the Roman model). In perhaps one of the Golden Eagle's more unfortunate respresentations in human culture, Adolf Hitler used a Golden Eagle regularly as a symbol for the Nazi Party, including large monuments or statues on buildings and bridges as well as the pins worn on lapels of Nazi officers. In this case, the eagle was used as to stir up nationalism, since it was a longtime symbol (Hoheitszeichen) for the German Empire dating back centuries in use for the Coat of arms of Prussia.
Another large tradition of using the Golden Eagle can be found in the Arab world, where the eagle is historically a symbol of power in Arabic poetry, and was according to legend the personal emblem of Saladin. The specific depiction of Golden Eagle legendarily considered to be Saladin's was adopted by the Arab nationalist movement, and currently appears on the arms of Egypt, Iraq, and Palestine; it had previously appeared on the arms of the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (1967–1990) and on the arms of the Libyan Arab Republic (1970–1972). The current emblem of Yemen displays a Golden Eagle, but it is not that of Saladin. In Japanese culture, the main representation of eagles in mythology is Tengu, a monster human-bird possibly modeled on an eagle and given its mountain dwelling habits, perhaps partially inspired by Golden Eagles. Tengu is described as a bipedal creature with a long nose-beak, wings and a fan with 12 wooden ribs, resembling tail feathers, though is sometimes is illustrated as far more human-like than bird-like. Mischievous and powerful, Tengu is mainly the protector of the mountains, is able to foretell the future, creates winds and even attack people who try to harm the mountainous landscape.

Religion

Eagles are often prominent in The Bible, though are sometimes mixed with carrion birds and are not specifically identifiable to species. As the most widespread eagle in the Middle East and Eurasia, certainly many said references must pertain to the Golden Eagle. The use of eagles seems generally heavier in the Torah or the Old Testament than in the New Testament. In biblical times, eagles and other meat-eating birds were banned from being eaten since their diet was considered unsavory. However, eagles are mentioned in the Bible as being admired for their swiftness,2 Book of Samuel 1:23; Jeremiah 4:13. great physical powerRevelations 8:13. and their seemingly endless endurance. Eagles are one of four dimensions of creation,Revelations 4:7 as a messenger of God,Revelations 8:13 and a skilled predator. For example, due to the perceived high level of parental care, eagles were associated with protection and even paralleled to God carrying the Israelites out of Egypt.Deuteronomy 32: 11-12; Job 39: 27-28
Earlier Eurasian cultures and faiths also feature eagles quite prominently. In Hellenistic religion, the golden eagle is the signature bird of the god Zeus, a connection most notable in the myth of Ganymede, where the god adopted the form of a golden eagle to kidnap the boy, as well as the eagle-like daimon Aetos Dios . At least a few sources also associate it with Helios. In Norse mythology, the Golden Eagle sits atop Yggdrasil, the great ash tree that runs through the universe. A squirrel, Ratsatosk, carries messages and insults between the eagle at the crown and a serpent gnawing at the tree roots.G. (Ed.). 2002. The Times World Mythology. Times Books, London. In many cultures, eagles were viewed as a link between terrestrial mankind and celestial deities.A. 1958. The Folklore of Birds. Collins, London. Eagles were particularly prominent in Roman culture. Many banners, coins and insignias from Rome feature eagles. In Roman religion, the eagle was both the symbol and the messenger of the Roman sky-god, Jupiter. When an emperor died, his body was burned in a funeral pyre and an eagle was released above his ashes to carry his soul to the heavens. Somewhat surprisingly, eagles play a small role in Celtic mythology. 1998. Oxford Dictionary of Celtic Myth and Legend. Oxford University Press, Oxford and New York. In Celtic stories, eagles are often characters who have transformed from human to bird form. One of the most prominent eagle-related Celtic myths is that of Llew Llaw Gyffes who escaped death at the hands of a hunter who spears him by taking an eagle's form and killing the hunter. 1992. Animals in Celtic Life and Myth. Routledge, London and New York. When the Roman Empire blended with Celtic tradition, many symbols feature both eagles and the Celtic sun gods.

In North America

Because of the nature-based culture, religions and lifestyles of the people living there, eagles were often even more prominent in ancient North America than in Eurasia. The eagle is a sacred bird in some of the cultures there and the feathers of the eagle are central to many religious and spiritual customs, especially among some Native Americans in the United States and First Nations in Canada, as well as among many of the peoples of Mesoamerica. Some Native American peoples revere eagles as sacred and the feathers and other parts of Bald and Golden Eagles were prominent possessions amongst tribes. Feathers are often worn on Native American headdresses and have been compared to the Bible and crucifix of Christianity. Eagle feathers were also used to construct prayer sticks, doctors' rattles and medicine pipes. Per Thomas E. Mails: "in the mind of the Plains warrior in the 18th and 19th century, the male Golden Eagle flew above all the creatures of the world and saw everything. Nothing matched his courage and swiftness, and his talons had the strength of a giant's hand. The eagle was very holy."Mails, T.E. 1991. The Mystic Warriors of the Plains. Mallard Press, Lombard, IL. The tail feathers of juvenile Golden Eagle feathers have often been used in various Native ceremonies and are used to honor noteworthy achievements, great strength and healing abilities and qualities such as exceptional leadership and bravery. The Golden Eagle is thought to be the origin of the Thunderbird legends of the southwestern United States, In the Cheyenne, Golden Eagles are referred to, in addition to "Thunderbird", as "bird father", "war eagle", "striped eagle" and "prairie eagle". The "eagle dance" is an important part of Sioux tradition, wherein the participants would dance around, mimicking the motions of a flying eagle while chanting the equivalent of "The eagles are flying, the eagles are flying. The eagles are here, the eagles are here…" No Native warrior would be allowed to kill an eagle for his feathers until he had proven his bravery in battle with other tribes. Per Mails, "It has been claimed that the Indian warrior would rather part with his horse, his tipi or even his wife, than lose his eagle feathers in battle, since to have this happen would be to make dishonor and loss of status in the eyes of his entire tribe". The warriors were not allowed to use weapons when capturing eagles for their feathers. The most common method to capture Golden Eagles was to lay a trap, consisting of an earth-colored tarp, with a dead jackrabbit on it, over a pit containing a crouching warrior. When the eagle came to land on the tarp, the warrior would grab the eagle by the top of its feet to pull it in and kill it. Apparently, if the warrior failed to grab the eagle properly it sometimes resulted in serious injury to the human. In the Hopi tribe, one of two eagle nestlings (it was strictly forbidden to capture one unless there was two nestlings in the nest) would be captured and raised with great care, until it reached an age where it could be killed and harvested for its feathers.J. 1900. Property rights among the Hopi. American Anthropologist, 2: 600-707. 
Current United States eagle feather law (50 CFR 22) stipulates that only individuals of certifiable Native American ancestry enrolled in a federally recognized tribe are legally authorized to obtain eagle feathers for religious or spiritual use. Thus, the supply of eagle material for traditional ceremonial use can be guaranteed and ceremonial eagle items can be passed on as heirlooms by their traditional owners without the restrictions that would usually apply. Commercial trade in Golden Eagles or their feathers or body parts is not legalized by these exceptions. USFWS-SR (2001), USFWS-OLE (2004a,b), e-CFR (2008)

Postage stamps

The Golden Eagle is the eighth-most common bird depicted on postage stamps with 155 stamps issued by 71 stamp-issuing entities.

Other

J.R.R. Tolkien used an image of an immature Golden Eagle from T. A. Coward's 1919 work The Birds of the British Isles and Their Eggs for an illustration depicting Bilbo Baggins awaking next to Gwaihir, a giant eagle of Middle-earth.
American aircraft manufacturer Cessna manufactured its Model 421 series of aircraft between the late 1960s and mid-1980s, calling the type the Golden Eagle.

Status and conservation

At one time, the Golden Eagle lived in a great majority of temperate Europe, North Asia, North America, North Africa, and Japan. Although widespread and quite secure in some areas, in many parts of the range Golden Eagles have experienced sharp population declines and have even been extirpated from some areas. The total number of individual Golden Eagles from around the range is estimated to range somewhere between 170,000 and 250,000 while the estimated total number of breeding pairs ranges from 60,000 to 100,000.D.; Beardmore, C.J.; Berlanga, H.; Blancher, P.J.; Bradstreet, M.S.W.; Butcher, G.S.; Demarest, D.W.; Dunn, E.H.; Hunter, W.C.; Inigo-Elias, E.E.; Martell, A.M.; Panjabi, A.O.; Pashley, D.N.; Rosenberg, K.V.; Rustay, C.M.; Wendt, J.S.; Will, T.C. 2004. Partners in flight: North American landbird conservation plan. Cornell Lab of Ornithology, Ithaca, NY. Few other eagle species are as numerous, though some species like Tawny Eagle, Wedge-tailed Eagle and Bald Eagle have total estimated populations of a similar size to the Golden Eagle's despite having distributions which are more restricted. The world's most populous eagle may be the African Fish Eagle (Haliaeetus vocifer), which has a stable total population estimated at 300,000 individuals and is found solely in Africa. On a global scale, the Golden Eagle is not considered threatened by the IUCN.

Eurasia

In Europe, there are an estimated 6,000 to 10,000 breeding pairs. There was a great decline in Central Europe where they are now essentially restricted to the Apennine, Alps, and Carpathian Mountains. The strongholds in the continent are Spain, which holds an estimated 1,300 breeding pairs, Norway, which holds an estimated 860 to 1,040 breeding pairs and European Russia, which holds an estimated 500 to 1,000 breeding pairs. 2004. Birds in Europe: Population estimates, trends and conservational status. Birdlife International (Bird Conservation Series 12), Cambridge. Other European countries with stable and sizable populations include Italy, with an estimated 476-541 pairs, Switzerland, with 300-310 pairs and Romania, with an estimated 85-130 pairs. The following nations are thought to have Golden Eagle populations that are increasing: Bulgaria with 150-170 pairs, Denmark with 1 known breeding pair, Finland with an estimated 300-350 pairs, France with approximately 390-460 pairs, Hungary with 3-5 known pairs, Ireland with 2 current pairs and Poland with approximately 35-40 pairs., A. Dutsov, B. Nikolov, B. Borisov, G. Stoyanov, G. Gradev, D. Georgiev, D. Popov, D. Domuschiev, D. Kirov, E. Tilova, I. Nikolov, I. Ivanov, K. Dilchev, K. Popov, N. Karaivanov, N. Todoov, P. Shurulinkov, R. Stanchev, R. Aleksov, R. Tsonev, S. Dalakchieva, S. Ivanov, S. Marin, S. Stajkov, S. Nikolov, and H. Nikolov. 2004. Breeding totals of the ornithofauna Bulgaria. Green Balkans, Plovdiv, Bulgaria. The following nations are thought to have decreasing Golden Eagle populations: Albania with about 50-200 pair, Croatia with approximately 90-110 pairs, England with no known current pairs, Greece with an estimated 100-200 breeding pairs and Latvia with somewhere around 5-10 pairs., J. Kralj, V. Tutis, and D. Cikovic. 2003. Red Data Book of birds of Croatia. Ministarstvo zastite okolisa i prostornog uredenja, Zagreb, Croatia. Several other European countries have a small number of Golden Eagles with less than 50 breeding pairs but with populations that are generally considered stable. Despite their large population there, the Golden Eagle was considered near threatened in Spain in a 2003 report. & Del Moral, J.C. 2003. Águila Real, Aquila chrysaetos. In Martí R, Del Moral JC eds, Atlas de las Aves Reproductoras de España. Dirección General de Conservación de la Naturaleza-Sociedad Española de Ornitología, Madrid: 188-189. One of the authors of the previous study asserted that the population had increased in 2008 by perhaps 20% in Spain since the last survey in the late 1990s. C. 2009. The Golden Eagle: breeding population in 2008 and census method. Seguimiento de Aves 32:1-185. In Belarus, the population has reportedly declined considerably due to trapping, poisoning and the draining and development of upland bogs. The Golden Eagle is considered Critically Endangered in the Czech Republic, where it was once quite common in the Beskydy and Krkonoše Mountains until logging hit the area hard around the time of World War II. All recent breeding attempts by the species in the Czech Republic are believed to have been unsuccessful. Birds of the Czech Republic. London, 2000. 336 pp.
In Britain, the last comprehensive survey of Golden Eagles took place in 2003, and found 442 occupied territories. A less thorough survey in 2007 showed that in addition to large numbers of territories in the Scottish Highlands and the Inner and Outer Hebrides, there were a handful of birds in southern Scotland and northern England. The Golden Eagle is classified as bird of "High Conservation Concern" in Ireland.BirdWatch Ireland 2008
Fewer estimates are known from Asia and North Africa. A stronghold population is in mountainous Turkey, where the large population included an estimated 2,000-3,000 breeding pairs persist. In Japan, there is an estimated 175-260 breeding pairs, with a total population of approximately 500 individuals. One study stated that food shortages and decreases in suitable foraging habitat are assumed to be responsible for an observed decline in population size and reproductive success in Japan. 2008. The population of Golden Eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) in Toyama Prefecture and their critical condition. Aquila Chrysaetos 22:1-9. In the Koreas, the Golden Eagle is known to be rarely observed and, in 2010, only 10 were seen in South Korea during winter birding censuses. Little is known in terms of population numbers elsewhere in Eurasia, with the IUCN estimating between 100 and 10,000 individuals each in China and in Russia, numbers that suggest the species occurs very sparsely in these massive countries. 2009. Birds of East Asia: eastern China, Taiwan, Korea, Japan, eastern Russia. Christopher Helm, London. In North Africa, the main occurrence is in Morocco, which is estimated to hold 200 to 500 breeding pairs. There appear to much fewer in other North African countries, with small, scattered populations in Algeria, Tunisia and Egypt, areas where no immature-plumaged eagles were observed in 2005.-M. 2006. The decline of raptors in West Africa: long-term assessment and the role of protected areas. Ibis 148:240-254.

North America

In North America the situation is not as dramatic. It appears the greatest density of Golden Eagles anywhere in the world occurs in the Western United States and Western Canada.  In total, the contiguous Western United States may hold up to 30,000 individual Golden Eagles, with a total of 70,000 to 100,000 individuals estimated across all of North America. In 1981, it was estimated that there were 63,242 wintering individual Golden Eagles in the 16 Western United States (excluding Alaska). R., A. D. Miller, and R. N. Lehman. 1981. Suggested practices for raptor protection on power lines-the state of the art in 1981. Raptor Research Report, 4: 1-111. However, there has still been a noticeable decline in some areas.

Threats

In modern times, almost all threats to Golden Eagles are attributable, directly or indirectly, to human activities. C., L. Sileo, and N. J. Thomas. 1995. Causes of eagle deaths. Pages 68 in Our living resources. (LaRoe, E. T., G. S. Farris, C. E. Puckett, P. D. Doran, and M. J. Mac, Eds.) U.S. Department of the Interior, National Biological Services, Washington, D.C. In fact, all Aquila eagles in Eurasia face the same human-sourced threats as the Golden Eagle: habitat change, persecution, poisoning (often directed at other species) and collisions with man-made objects. Certainly the most widespread unintentional threat to Golden Eagles by humans is urbanization and human-population growth which have made areas historically used by eagles unsuitable both in terms of habitat and prey availability. Habitat destruction in North American had, by the late 19th century, already driven Golden Eagles from some regions they used to inhabit. has been planted as such. Afforestation requires removal of sheep and the fencing out or shooting deer, both important sources of carrion for Golden Eagles. Foraging areas of Golden Eagles have been confirmed to not include afforested areas., Ratcliffe, D.A. & Roxburgh, R. 1985. The numbers, breeding, success and diet of Golden Eagles in southern Scotland in relation to changes in land use. Biological Conservation, 33: 1-17.
Death by collisions with man-made structures and objects can be serious local issue. Electrocution or collision with power lines has become an increasingly significant cause of mortality since the early 20th century. Apparently, juveniles birds are more susceptible than adults, being generally less cautious and physically adept.C. 1981. Large raptor electrocution and power pole utilization: a study in six western states. Ph.D. thesis. Brigham Young University, Prova, Utah. Due to attempts to perch on or by flying into power lines, a total of 134 and 115 Golden Eagles were killed by power lines in the western United States in 1972 and '73, with a peak of 66 in Utah in 1972.L. & Nickerson, P.R. 1975. Raptor electrocutions. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 3: 79-81. Today, Golden Eagles still regularly meet their demise due to power lines in the United States and the species was considered the bird-of-prey in North America most likely to killed by them.N. 2001. Raptor electrocution on powerlines: current issues and outlook. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 29: 804-817. 266 examined Golden Eagle deaths from 1980 to 1990 in Spain showed that 14 of the deaths (5%) were from electrocution and 57 (21%) were from wire collision. Compared to the United States and Spain, in some other parts of the range such as Scotland and Scandinavia, electrocutions and wire-collisions are rare due to fewer high power-poles in the desolate areas that the Golden Eagles occupy. Controversially, the US Fish and Wildlife Service has permitted that a "wind-farmer" in central Oregon could legally cause the incidental killing of Golden Eagles by large wind turbines. Such turbines have set up as an alternative source of energy but are often fatal for high-flying birds such as raptors. G., & Rugge, L. 2000. Avian risk behavior and fatalities at the Altamont Wind Resource Area. National Renewable Energy Laboratory NREL, Golden, Colorado. Wind turbine blades appear to move slowly from a distance but at close range move so quickly as to appear a nearly invisible blur. It is estimated that up to 70 Golden Eagles may be killed locally by turbines each year in west-central California, almost all of them being juveniles as opposed to adults which tend to remain on their home ranges that largely occur outside of the wind farm area.S. News. Usnews.msn. Retrieved on 2012–08–22. There are mounting concerns of the effect of wind turbines in Europe as well, since construction of new ones are increasing in Scotland and Spain., Domínguez, J., & Rodríguez, L. 2009. Using probability of occurrence to assess potential interaction between wind farms and a residual population of golden eagle Aquila chrysaetos in NW Spain. Biodiversity and Conservation, 18(8): 2033-2041. Collisions with automobiles rarely claim Golden Eagle lives, though instances of this can increase in desolate areas during winter, when road-side prey or carrion may attract the eagles. In the Diablo Range, California, 5% of 61 radio-tagged birds died from vehicle collisions. Where disturbance is regular, breeding failure for Golden Eagles is significantly more frequent. This was certainly inferred in the 1982 Scottish breeding bird survey when disturbances were heavy in the Highlands. Sheep farmers and egg-collectors are the leading cause of disturbances at the nests. Recreation, forest management and development projects such as road construction, mining or power generation are other potential sources of disturbances. When disturbed by humans at the nest, the parents frequently leave their nest for a period of up to two hours, reduced provisioning rates, endangered eggs or young to predation, as well as overheating, chilling or desiccation.W. & Joness, J.L. 1981. Criteria for Golden Eagle, Ferruginous Hawk and Prairie Falcon nest site protection. Journal of Raptor Research, 15: 12-18. Human intrusion within . This study showed that Golden Eagles were more sensitive to human disturbance during winter than several other raptor species, including Bald Eagles.L., Knight, R.L., Stegall, L. & Craig, G.R. 1993. Responses of wintering grassland raptors to human disturbance. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 21: 461-468.
The intentional killing of Golden Eagles has been a huge conservation hurdle for the species. While illegal in most countries today, hunting, trapping and poisoning may still occur clandestinely across almost the entire range. During 1948, in Carter County, Montana, 286 Golden Eagles were shot and killed in the month of March alone. At the time $5 was offered by the Montana Fish and Game Commission for each eagle killed, a bounty initiated by pressure from sportsmen and ranchers who believed that eagles were killing large numbers of sheep and "antelopes". 1952. Food Habits of the Golden Eagle. Journal of Wildlife Management, 16: 457-459. Approximately 20,000 Golden Eagles were killed from light aircraft in the Southwestern United States in the 1940s, with the rate of such shooting in Texas having continued at over a thousand a year (5,000 from 1942 to 1947). L. 1986. Current issues concerning the management of Golden Eagles in western U.S.A. Pages 149-156 in Birds of prey Bulletin no. 3. (Chancellor, R. D. and B. U. Meyburg, Eds.) World Working Group on Birds of Prey and Owls, Berlin, Germany. In the United States, the Golden Eagle was given federally protected status in 1963. Allegedly, in 1972, over 800 Golden Eagles were shot from aircraft in Wyoming and Colorado. E. 1996. Eagle's plume. Scribner, New York. In Switzerland more than 100 Golden Eagles were reportedly shot each decade until the species was legally protected in 1953. In Scotland, many estate managers would pay gamekeepers to hunt down any and kill all eagle species in the 1800s and early 1900s. On one estate in Caithness, Scotland, allegedly 295 eagles (including both Golden and White-tailed Eagles) were shot and trapped from the years of 1820 to 1826.A. 1983. The Return of the Sea Eagle. University Press, Cambridge. Occasionally, Golden Eagles may be caught in trap lines laid out to capture mammalian predators. Today, some authorities believe many game managers still try to deliberately destroy the contents of nests in spring or intentionally disturb the eagles during their nesting process. In a study conducted in Scotland, areas were broken down between low disturbance areas (with a low human presence and limited history of persecution), moderate areas (where minor disturbances occur, mainly unintentionally from hill-walkers or rarely intentionally by egg-collectors) or severe disturbance areas (where persecution, heavy disturbance and considerable egg-collecting is believed to still occur). In low disturbance areas, about 45% of nests failed, in moderate disturbance areas about 74% failed and in severe disturbance areas 93% of nesting attempts failed. & Dennis, R.H. 1992. Nesting site selection by Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos in Scotland. British Birds, 85: 469-481. 73 out of 147 inaccessible nesting sites in this study (50%) produced fledglings, whereas more accessible nests produced fledglings in only 21 out of 68 nests (31%). The Golden Eagle became legally protected in 1980 in Spain but the species is still regularly killed there today. In 266 Golden Eagle deaths from 1980 to 1990, 59% (157 specimens) had died from shooting or trapping and 8% (21 specimens) died from poisoning.
Poisoning, both intentional and unintentional, is perhaps the most insidious man-made threat to Golden Eagles. The usual targets of carrion-poisoning are species such as Coyotes, Red Fox and Gray Wolves, which are considered pest that threaten livestock (a charge usually vastly exaggerated by the human imagination). However, Golden Eagles are occasionally targeted as well for the same reasons. The main cause of mortality for Golden Eagles in Britain has been poisoning, with a number of 51 eagles verified to be killed by poisoning from 1980 to 2008 probably being far lower than the actual amount killed as such.P., Fielding, A.H., McLeod, D.R.A. & Haworth, P.F. 2004. The effects of persecution on the population dynamics of Golden Eagles in Scotland. Biological Conservation, 118: 249-259. A disproportionate amount of Golden Eagle poisonings in Scotland from 1981 to 2000 were linked to grouse moors (where grouse are kept for the pleasure of shooting) and were probably cases of gamekeepers deliberately poisoning eagles and foxes to keep their stock of grouse high.P., McLeod, D.R.A., Watson, J., Fielding, A.H. & Haworth, P.F. 2003. The association of grouse moor in Scotland the illegal use of poisons to control predators. Biological Conservation, 114: 157-163. It is estimated that the adult survival rate is reduced by 3 to 5% in Scotland by intentional poisonings. In the 1980s, California Ground Squirrels, due to the perception among cattle rangers that they are agricultural pests, were poisoned by the anticoagulant rodenticide, Chlorophacinone. In turn, the poisonings caused Golden Eagles, as one of the major natural predator of California Ground Squirrels, to die in turn.J. 1994. Suspected poisioning of Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos by chlorophacinone. In: Raptor conservation today (Eds. Meyburg & Chancellor) pp. 775-776, WWGBP, London. At least 10 individuals died in 1971 from eating Thallium(I) sulfate – laced Pronghorn set out by sheep ranchers in Wyoming; despite public outcries, poisoning by sheep ranchers continued into the 1980s. In the 20th century, organochloride and heavy metal poisonings were also commonplace, but these have declined thanks to tighter regulations on pollution. In southern Idaho, 10 out of 17 Golden Eagles examined were found to have had exposure to lead.H., Connelly, J.W., Craig, E.H. & Parker, T.L. 1990. Lead concentrations in Golden and Bald Eagles. Wilson Bulletin, 102: 130-133. As a whole, the Golden Eagle is less susceptible than most raptors to organochlorine pesticides because of mammal-feeding habits, as opposed to predominantly bird-eating species like Peregrine Falcons and fish-eating species like Bald Eagles, both of which had huge population declines in the 20th century due to the use of pesticides like DDT . Eggs from Golden Eagle nests that were collected after 1946 in North America had shell thicknesses similar to (of less than a 10% difference) those collected in earlier years. W. and J. J. Hickey. 1972. Eggshell changes in certain North American birds. Proceedings of the International Ornithological Congress, 15: 514-540. However, in Scotland egg shell thickness did decrease by around 10% from 1951 to 1965.A. 1970. Changes attributable to pesticides in egg-breakage frequency and eggshell thickness in some British birds. Journal of Applied Ecology, 7: 67-107. A dead Golden Eagle collected on the island of Lewis had the highest concentration of organochlorine known from a modern bird in Scotland. & Galbraith, E.A. 1991. Organochlorines and mercury in the eggs of Golden Eagles Aquila chrysaetos from Scotland. Ibis, 133: 115-121. The higher effects of organochlorines in Scotland may be due to the fact that birds there consume a relatively high quantity of seabirds, as opposed to North America, where this practice is rare.
The reason why Golden Eagles are intentionally killed is usually due to the fear of loss of livestock and game species. As previously described, most feeding on ungulates is probably only as a carrion. The findings of virtually every study of losses of stock to Golden Eagles has revealed that the actual amount of livestock killed by the eagles is negligible and financial restitution from conservation organizations should not be necessary, including those studies funded by the farming organizations or governmental programs seeking to justify the "control" of Golden Eagles. In Scotland, studies have revealed that an estimated 0.5-8% of lamb mortality is attributable to Golden Eagle predation. This equates to the raptors killing about 0.15-2.4% of a given flock of sheep. Starvation and accidents are actually the primary cause of lamb deaths in Scotland, with occasional fox, crow and dog predation also occurring.D. The breeding density of the Golden Eagle and Fox in relation to food supply in Wester Ross, Scotland. Scottish Naturalist, 7: 67-77.F. 1986. Report on eagle predation on lambs in the Glenelg Area in 1986. Report to Natural Conservancy Council, Inveress. On the Western Isles of Scotland, a closely studied relationship between the nesting Golden Eagles and the local sheep flocks showed that 1 to 3% of lamb deaths were attributable to this species. & Hartley, G. 2004. Investigation into Golden Eagle predation of lambs on Benbecula in 2003. Scottish Agricultural Science Agency, Edinburgh. In North America, sheep predation is generally even rarer than in Eurasia but some flocks of sheep in Montana have experienced a relatively heavy rate of loss, more than 10% in some cases, determined to be caused by Golden Eagle predation in harsh-weather years that lower the numbers of jackrabbits and cottontails. Some organizations have attempted to relocate Golden Eagles from areas where lamb predation was semi-regular. In Montana, over 400 eagles (most seemingly migratory specimens) were relocated at a cost of over $100,000. Similarly, 16 breeding eagles were relocated in Wyoming after relatively heavy levels of lamb depredation. In each case, relocation has failed as the eagles find their way back to their own home ranges or wintering grounds in a matter of a few weeks, showing that the eagles have a strong homing ability.L., Cummings, J.L. & Berry, J.D. 1991. Response of breeding Golden Eagles to relocation. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 19: 430-434. In northern Norway, among 36 deaths out of 263 first-year, radio-collared lambs in a free ranging sheep flock died, 17 from wolverine predation, 8 were from disease, 5 from Golden Eagle predation, 3 from Eurasian lynx predation and 2 from Red fox predation.T., Mystrud, I. & Lynnebakken, T. 2001. Mortaliy of lambs in free-ranging domestic sheep (Ovis aries) in northern Norway. Journal of Zoology, London, 254: 195-202. In Sweden, the hunting of semi-domestic reindeer by Golden Eagles has been analyzed. Of an estimated 120,000 reindeer born every year in that nation, Golden Eagles are reported to kill less than 500 of them, amounting to less than 0.4% loss. 1990. The Golden Eagle, Aquila chrysaetos, in Sweden: distribution, population and threats. Vår Fågelvärld 49:337-348. Jeff Watson advocated that, instead of trying to kill the Golden Eagle, that sheep-farmers should encourage population growth in prey like rabbits, hares and ground squirrels, as Golden Eagles will generally ignore livestock if wild prey is abundant.

Conservation

The Golden Eagle is not threatened at the species level but efforts need to be taken to prevent extinctions from many northern countries. The primary efforts undertaken to conserve the species have been, in order of prevalence from highest to lowest: conservation education and awareness, policy protection, directed land management, legislation and law enforcement and the provision of indentures. In Scotland, only 3 out of 16 regions in Scotland occupied by Golden Eagles since 1982 have been deemed favorable for conservation status, based upon the extent of local persecution, prey abundance and habitat change. The United Kingdom has put in place deterrent legislation to prevent behavior around the nest with the potential to cause harm and acts of willful harm to White-tailed Eagles and some have advocated using the same policies for Golden Eagles. Education in this region mainly is undertaken by the Royal Society for Protection of Birds (RSPB). To curb the destructive practice of afforestation, some locals have switched to planting native Caledonian pine forests instead, likely resulting in much less harm to the native fauna possibly including Golden Eagles.J., Petty, S.J., & McLeod, D.R.A. 2004. Potential impact of new native forests on golden eagles in Scotland. Scottish Natural Heritage Commissioned Report No. 18. Scottish Natural Heritage, Edinburgh. While conservation efforts in Scotland have previously included the setting aside Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs), these are usually too small to benefit Golden Eagles. More recently, the United Kingdom government has instead taken from governmental policies enacted in Continental Europe the idea of Special Protection Areas (SPAs), which offers strong legal protection of single species. Potentially more than  on either side of the pole attachment or, especially if the previous modifications are not feasible, install raised perches at the top of the power pole. W. & Nelson, P. 1977. Power lines and birds of prey. Pages 228-242 in World Conference on Birds of Prey: report of proceedings, Vienna 1975 (R. D. Chancellor, Ed.). International Council for Bird Preservation, London. In Spain, the issue of electrocutions is more intractable because all pylons were made out of metal, which makes them much more dangerous to wildlife flying into them. 1993. El Aquila Imperial. Quercus, Madrid.

The Golden Eagle's effect on conservation-dependent species

On the conservation front, the Golden Eagle is itself unintentionally contributing to the conservation crisis of another animal, the Island Fox, a small insular relative of the Gray Fox found only in the Channel Islands of California. Golden Eagles did not start nesting in these islands until the 1960s. The predominant theory on why they did not previously occupy them was that territorial Bald Eagles deterred them until DDT use decimated the local Bald Eagle population. 2006. The role of lethal control in managing the effects of apparent competition on endangered prey species. Wildlife Society Bulletin, 34(4): 1220-1224. This critically endangered canid had evolved without major natural predators but the large breeding population of Golden Eagles in California has spilled in numbers over to the islands and is there feeding partially on the foxes, whose already declining population cannot support sustained predation. Iucnredlist. Retrieved on 2012–08–22. Also in North America, attempts to reintroduce endangered Whooping Cranes by mixing them with flocks of Sandhill Cranes have been largely unsuccessful in part due to natural predators picking off the unnaturally unwary birds. Although the chief predator has been Bobcats, Golden Eagles are one of the other predators that are habitually killing the birds. The Golden Eagle may be a competitor and, rarely, a predator of the recently reintroduced California Condors in central Arizona and southern California, but the pressure exerted by the eagles on condors are seemingly minor, especially in contrast to manmade conservation issues for the species such as lead poisoning from bullets left in hunter-killed ungulate carcasses. In Scotland, the common Hen Harrier has been the subject of much unfavorable attention due to the fact that it is a habitual predator of the chicks of Red Grouse, a subspecies considered to be near threatened in the nation. One of the methods to control Harrier numbers has been proposed is to encourage a population increase of Golden Eagles, which may also hunt grouse but are unlikely to cull young grouse and tend to outcompete and sometimes hunt the harriers themselves.S., Amar, A., Hoccom, D.G., Knott, J. & Wilson, J.D. 2009. Resolving the conflict between driven-grouse shooting and conservation of Hen Harriers. Journal of Applied Ecology, 46: 950-954.



Further reading




