[[Tony Hawk]]

CATEGORIES: Tony Hawk, 1968 births, 20th-century American male actors, 20th-century American businesspeople, 21st-century American male actors, 21st-century American businesspeople, Male actors from California, American businesspeople, American philanthropists, American skateboarders, Businesspeople from California, Living people, Sportspeople from Carlsbad, California, Sportspeople from San Diego, California, X-Games athletes, American male film actors, American male television actors

Anthony Frank "Tony" Hawk (born May 12, 1968), nicknamed "The Birdman", is an American former professional skateboarder and actor. Hawk is well known for completing the first documented 900 and for his licensed video game titles, distributed by Activision.
In 2002, he created the "Boom Boom HuckJam", an extreme sports exhibition and tour that was launched in Las Vegas. Throughout his career, Hawk has made numerous appearances in films, other media, and his own series of video games. He has also been involved in various philanthropic activities, including his own Tony Hawk Foundation that helps to build skateparks in underprivileged areas. In 2014, Hawk was labeled as one of the 'Most influential skateboarders of all-time' by Fox Weekly.

Early life

Hawk was born on May 12, 1968 in Carlsbad, California, to Nancy and Frank Peter Rupert Hawk, and was raised in San Diego, California. and school advisors recommended placing him in advanced classes.
His parents supported his skateboarding because it served as an outlet for his excessive energy, and as Hawk's skills developed, he became a professional skateboarder at age fourteen. Hawk was the National Skateboard Association world champion for twelve consecutive years.
Hawk attended Jean Farb Middle School from 1980 to 1981, and eventually returned for the show, Homecoming with Rick Reilly, where he set up a ramp and did a demonstration.

Professional skateboarding

X Games

Sponsors

As of January 2012, Hawk is sponsored by Birdhouse, Independent, Quiksilver, Bones,
and Nixon.

The 900

On July 27, 1999, Hawk was the first skater to land a "900", a trick involving the completion of two-and-a-half mid-air revolutions on a skateboard; Hawk was successful on his twelfth attempt. After completing the trick, Hawk commented, "This is the best day of my life."

Indian vert demo

Following an invitation from his sponsor, Quiksilver, Hawk assembled a group of vert skateboarders to perform, in 2012, the first-ever vert demonstration to have occurred in India. While in India, the group visited Gandhi's house, the skateboarders were greeted by a very excited young audience and the 540-degree maneuver was executed during the skateboarding demonstration—the Indian trip was published on Hawk's RIDE YouTube channel on February 4, 2013.

Retirement from the sport

In 1999, Hawk retired from professional competitions, but he still tours North America to do personal skate shows.
Hawk was invited to President Barack Obama's June 2009 Father's Day celebration and skated in the hallways of the nearby Old Executive Office Building which is on the White House grounds. This marked the first time ever someone skateboarded on the White House grounds with permission from officials.

Entrepreneur

Boom Boom HuckJam

In 1998, Hawk started a show tour, featuring freestyle motocross, skateboarding, and BMX. It started in Las Vegas and then on to 31 cities around the U.S. and eventually to Six Flags amusement parks.

Video game series

A video game series based on his skateboarding debuted in 1999. Since then, the series has spawned 16 titles, including main series titles, spin-offs, and repackages. The latest game of the series is Tony Hawk's Pro Skater HD, a compilation of the first two Pro Skater titles.
Hawk's role in the series was usurped by customizable player characters in later installments, and in all gameplay modes except the story mode. 15. He appeared as a kid in the Backyard Sports series Backyard Skateboarding.

Amusement park ride

A series of amusement park rides known as Tony Hawk's Big Spin were built in three Six Flags parks in 2007 and 2008.

RIDE Channel

In January 2012, Hawk launched the online YouTube channel, RIDE Channel. In the welcome video, Hawk explained:
 
 ... I'm proud to announce the launch of our new YouTube channel—it's called "RIDE". I've teamed up with some of the best people in the skate industry; we are rolling out over twenty-two different shows over the course of the year. Shows like, "Hand in Hand", which basically features different successful musicians and artists and people from all walks of life who have been inspired by skating ... this is something we've always wanted to, and it's finally a reality, and it's here on YouTube...
As part of the RIDE Channel, a show called "Tony's Strange Life" features Hawk interviewing a variety of people, not just skateboarding figures,

Film and television appearances

In 1986, Tony Hawk was a featured skateboarder and skater-double for Josh Brolin in the movie Thrashin'. In 1987 Tony made a brief appearance in the movie Police Academy 4: Citizens On Patrol with David Spade. In 1989, he appeared as a skateboarder in Gleaming the Cube. In 2002, he appeared in Neal H. Moritzs's and Christopher Gilcrest's film xXx playing the role of one of Xander Cage's stuntman friends, and later in the movie, a skateboarder at a party. In 2004 he played himself in the Australian skateboarding movie Deck Dogz. In 2006, Tony Hawk appeared in a cameo on the film Drake & Josh Go Hollywood as himself. Hawk has had a cameo in the movie The New Guy. Hawk appeared in Jackass: The Movie with Mat Hoffman and Bam Margera, skateboarding in a fat suit and Jackass Number Two, while skateboarding through an obstacle course. He was also in Jackass 3D. Tony appears in the film following the 2006 Gumball Rally, 3000 Miles, again with Bam Margera. He also plays the police officer who arrests Ryan Dunn in the movie Haggard: The Movie. Hawk also made a brief cameo appearance in Lords of Dogtown as an astronaut, where he is shown comically falling off the skateboard as he is a "rookie". He voiced himself in the 2006 animated movie Tony Hawk in Boom Boom Sabotage, where he is kidnapped by circus freaks.
Hawk was featured as an extra in the "Weird Al" Yankovic video "Smells like Nirvana". He can be seen sitting in the bleachers during the crowd sweep near Dick Van Patten.  He also made a cameo appearance in the Simple Plan music video for "I'm Just a Kid", he can be seen, in a crowd, watching kids at a high school skating.
On television, he has also appeared in Action, What I Like About You, The Suite Life of Zack & Cody, The Tom Green Show, The Naked Brothers Band, Zeke and Luther, and All That. Hawk was a guest on the kid's show on Nickelodeon, Yo Gabba Gabba. In 2000, he played himself in Max Steel. He also guest voiced on The Simpsons episode "Barting Over", where he played himself, along with fellow San Diegans Blink-182. In the episode, Hawk lends Homer a new board from his brand where complete rookies are able to perform at the top levels. He ends up having a comical play off with him after Homer begins to show him up. On the PBS Kids show Cyberchase, he guest starred as Slider's long-lost father, Coop. In the CSI: Miami episode "Game Over" he played a game programmer who was murdered. In 2008, he played on Million Dollar Password. Hawk also played on Fox's Are You Smarter Than a 5th Grader. Tony Hawk helped design the world famous Canvey Island skate park in 1982 and has hosted Cartoon Network's "Hall of Game" sports award show on February 25, 2011. Hawk was on Take Two With Phineas and Ferb. Hawk appeared on the internet cooking show Epic Meal Time on October 28, 2011 to celebrate the show's one-year anniversary, where he can be seen in the final scene eating a deep-fried pizza cake. Hawk reappeared on another Epic Meal Time video on July 20, 2013, as a guest on the educational cooking show "Handle It". Hawk assisted Harley Morenstein (Sauce Boss) in cooking egg rolls. The video features promotion for Hawk's own YouTube channel, "Ride Channel".  He also guest starred on the ABC comedy Last Man Standing. He played himself in an episode of Rocket Power.
Hawk has recently appeared in the TV series Breaking In, The High Fructose Adventures of Annoying Orange, The Cleveland Show, Sesame Street, and So Random!.imdb.com/name/nm0005000/
Hawk also had a recent appearance in the movie Parental Guidance, as himself. In 2013, he and Eric Koston appeared as reporters in an episode of The Aquabats! Super Show!, another series by Yo Gabba Gabba! creator and longtime friend of Hawk's, Christian Jacobs. He also appeared in Disney's Zeke & Luther as himself.

Philanthropy

Hawk launched the Tony Hawk Foundation, which has given away more than US$3.4 million to help build over 400 skateparks around the US. The Foundation supports projects in low-income areas and helps underprivileged kids. In 2007, Hawk, Andre Agassi, Muhammad Ali, Lance Armstrong, Warrick Dunn, Jeff Gordon, Mia Hamm, Andrea Jaeger, Jackie Joyner-Kersee, Mario Lemieux, Alonzo Mourning, and Cal Ripken, Jr. founded the charity, "Athletes for Hope", an organization that aims to inspire all people to volunteer and support their communities through the actions of professional athletes.

Influence

In December 2011, Hawk was identified by Transworld Skateboarding magazine as the second most influential skateboarder of all time, between Rodney Mullen, third, and Mark Gonzales, first.
In January 2013, professional skateboarder, John Cardiel, identified by Transworld Skateboarding as the eleventh most influential skateboarder of all time, listed Hawk as one of his personal all-time skateboarding influences, alongside Gonzales, Christian Hosoi and Sacramento's skateboarders. Cardiel explained, "... the insane 540s with no hands, and, just like, all his tricks; he had the ramps, all his ramps, all the ramps he had—I thought that was insane. Tony Hawk's the best."
In an interview for the online series "Free Lunch", produced by Hawk's RIDE Channel, professional skateboarder Andrew Reynolds stated:
 
 ... and then Tony's just, like, Tony Hawk—he's like, basically, to me it says, "You can be a skater and take over everything and be, you know ... and use skateboarding to be ... a businessman, a ... role model to young people", um, he's just the best. And, he called my house when I was fifteen, and was, like, "Do you wanna do something with us?", not knowing anything about me. Yeah, Tony's the man, sure, he's the best.
In 2012 Reynolds recruited Hawk's son Riley to his skateboard deck company, Baker, explaining
 
 ... I was just, kinda like, "it's kinda touchy, you know what I mean, like?" It's kinda weird, you know? Tony's kid, he rides for Birdhouse. But I look at it, like, I picture him on Baker, you know what I mean? So we just approached Tony, "Yeah, we wanna talk to Riley about maybe gettin' some Baker boards, or something like that." And Tony's like, "Man, he's rippin', he's nineteen years-old, he can, you know, it's really up to him. You guys talk to him, you know?" So we just kinda said, "You wanna get some boards?", he's like, "I'm down, man!" And I look at it, like, there would be no Baker without Tony and Birdhouse. I know it's an ongoing process, you know? Tony quits to start Birdhouse; I quit to start Baker; my guys quit to start a new brand, you know? It's just an ongoing thing.

Personal life

Hawk married Cindy Dunbar in April 1990. The couple divorced in 1993.
Hawk married Erin Lee in 1996. They had two sons, Spencer (born March 26, 1999) and Keegan (born July 18, 2001). Lee and Hawk divorced in 2004.
Hawk married Lhotse Merriam on January 12, 2006, on the island of Tavarua, Fiji.

Filmography

Videos






