[[Tom Tomorrow]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Living people, American bloggers, American editorial cartoonists, American political writers, Political blogs, People from Wichita, Kansas, Pseudonymous artists, Herblock Prize winners

Tom Tomorrow is the pen name of editorial cartoonist Dan Perkins. His weekly comic strip This Modern World, which comments on current events, appears regularly in over 90 newspapers across the U.S. and Canada as of 2006,

Career

In 1998 Perkins was asked by editor James Fallows to contribute a bi-weekly cartoon to U.S. News and World Report, but was fired less than six months later, reportedly at the direction of owner Mort Zuckerman.
In 1999, Perkins had an animation deal with Saturday Night Live and produced three animated spots that were never aired.  In 2000 and 2001 his online animated series was the top-billed attraction in Mondo Media's lineup of mini-shows, in which the voice of Sparky the Penguin was provided by author and Jeopardy champion Bob Harris.
In December, 2007, Keith Olbermann devoted the closing segment of an episode of his show to a reading of "Bill O'Reilly's Very Useful Advice for Young People," a two-page cartoon/cover story by Perkins for the Village Voice.
In 2009, Village Voice Media, publishers of 16 alternative weeklies, suspended all syndicated cartoons across their entire chain.  Perkins lost twelve client papers in cities including Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York and Seattle,

This Modern World

This Modern World  debuted in 1990 in SF Weekly. While it often ridicules those in power, the strip also focuses on the average American's support for contemporary leaders and their policies, as well as the popular media's role in shaping public perception.
In addition to any politicians and celebrities depicted, the strip has several recurring characters:

Personal life

Perkins, a longtime resident of both San Francisco, California, and Brooklyn, New York, currently lives in New Haven.

Books

There have been several cartoon anthologies of This Modern World published:
The anthologies were published by St. Martin's Press until Hell in a Handbasket, when Perkins switched to Tarcher. The Future's So Bright I Can't Bear to Look was published by Nation Books. Too Much Crazy was published by Soft Skull Press. The World of Tomorrow was published by TopatoCo and is exclusively available at their website.
The Very Silly Mayor, a picture book for children aged 4–8, was published in September 2009 by Ig Publishing.

Awards

Perkins received the Robert F. Kennedy Award for Excellence in Journalism in 1998 and 2003.  He began his blog, also called This Modern World, in September 2001.



Further reading




