[[BLT]]

CATEGORIES: Sandwiches, American sandwiches, British sandwiches, Bacon dishes

A BLT (Bacon, Lettuce, and Tomato) is a type of bacon sandwich. The standard BLT is made up of five ingredients: bacon, lettuce, tomato, mayonnaise, and bread. The BLT evolved from the tea sandwiches served before 1900 at a similar time to the club sandwich, although it is unclear when the name BLT became the norm.

Recipe

While there are variations on the BLT, the essential ingredients are bacon, lettuce, tomato, mayonnaise and bread. The quantity and quality of the ingredients are matters of personal preference. The bacon can be well cooked or tender, but as it "carries" the other flavours, chefs recommend using higher quality meat; in particular, chef Edward Lee states "Your general supermarket bacon is not going to cut the mustard".
Iceberg lettuce is a common choice because it does not add too much flavour whilst adding crunch. Food writer Ed Levine has suggested that BLT does not require lettuce at all, as it is "superfluous", a suggestion that Jon Bonné, lifestyle editor at MSNBC, described as "shocking". Michele Anna Jordan, author of The BLT Cookbook, believes the tomato is the key ingredient and recommends the use of the beefsteak tomato as it has more flesh and fewer seeds.
The mayonnaise used significantly influences the flavour of the BLT. The bread can be of any variety, white or wholemeal, toasted or not, depending on personal preference. A popular Southern California variation is the BLAT (Bacon Lettuce Avocado & Tomato). Though usually served on toasted Sourdough bread, one can still find the 1970s hippie version: dense grain bread, bacon, lettuce, avocado, tomato and alfalfa sprouts.

Variations

The sandwich has a high sodium and fat content, and has been specifically targeted by UK café chains in an effort to reduce salt and fat.co. In 2009, seven large cafe chains in the UK made a commitment to reducing salt and fat through similar substitutions.
left|thumb|Two slices of mock bacon awaiting L and TThe BLT has been deconstructed into a number of forms, for example Edna Lewis and Scott Peacock created a BLT salad in The Gift of Southern Cooking, by cutting the ingredients into 
Vegans and vegetarians may replace bacon with tempeh as meat analogue instead.lunchboxbunch.html This recipe is called TLT (Tempeh, Lettuce, and Tomato).tofurky.html Alternatively they can use mock bacon.

History

Although the ingredients of the BLT have existed for many years, there is little evidence of BLT sandwich recipes prior to 1900. In the 1903 Good Housekeeping Everyday Cook Book, a recipe for a club sandwich included bacon, lettuce, tomato, mayonnaise and a slice of turkey sandwiched between two slices of bread.
The BLT became popular after World War II because of the rapid expansion of supermarkets, which allowed ingredients to be available year-round. The initials, representing "bacon, lettuce, tomato", likely began in the American restaurant industry as shorthand for the sandwich, but it is unclear when this transferred to the public consciousness.  The coexistence of the shortened version and the full name suggests this was a period of transition as the abbreviation was popularized.

Popularity

According to food historian John Mariani, it is the second most popular sandwich in the US, after the ham sandwich, and a poll by OnePoll in 2008 showed that it was the "nation's favourite" sandwich in the UK.

BLT in culture

In 1963, pop art sculptor Claes Oldenburg created a giant BLT sandwich sculpture, currently on display at the Whitney Museum of American Art.
In 2003, a record for the world's largest BLT was created by Michele Anna Jordan, measuring 
In 2004, the New Statesman reported that the sandwich chosen by a politician as his "favourite" is loaded with political symbolism. For example, it suggested that a chicken tikka sandwich would be a "gentle nod to an imperial past and a firm statement of a multicultural present and future". The article went on to explain that the then Leader of the Opposition William Hague had accused the then Prime Minister Tony Blair of being a hypocrite with regards to food, telling one portion of society that his favourite meal was fish and chips and another that it was a fresh fettuccine dish. The conclusion of the article was that Blair chose the BLT as his favourite sandwich, which appeals to all classes.






