[[Sven-Göran Eriksson]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, 20th-century Swedish people, 21st-century Swedish people, Living people, 2002 FIFA World Cup managers, 2006 FIFA World Cup managers, 2010 FIFA World Cup managers, ACF Fiorentina managers, A.S. Roma managers, Degerfors IF managers, England national football team managers, Expatriate football managers in China, Expatriate football managers in England, Expatriate football managers in Italy, Expatriate football managers in Mexico, Expatriate football managers in Portugal, Guangzhou R&F F.C. managers, IFK Göteborg managers, Ivory Coast national football team managers, Manchester City F.C. managers, Mexico national football team managers, Notts County F.C. non-playing staff, Örebro University alumni, People from Sunne Municipality, Premier League managers, Serie A managers, S.S. Lazio managers, Swedish autobiographers, Swedish expatriate football managers, Swedish expatriates in England, Swedish expatriates in Portugal, Swedish football managers, Swedish people of Finnish descent, U.C. Sampdoria managers, UEFA Cup winning managers, UEFA Euro 2004 managers, UEFA Pro Licence holders, Västra Frölunda IF players

Sven-Göran Eriksson ( is a Swedish football manager and former player.
Eriksson won 17 major trophies as a manager, with a variety of league clubs in Sweden, Portugal and Italy, between 1979 and 2000, and became the first manager to win league-and-cup doubles in three different countries. He later managed the national teams of England, Mexico and Côte d'Ivoire, and three clubs in England. He is currently the manager of Chinese Super League club Guangzhou R&F.
He has worked in nine different countries; Sweden, Portugal, Italy, England, Mexico, Ivory Coast, Thailand, the United Arab Emirates and China.

Playing career

Born in Sunne and raised in Torsby, in Värmland, Eriksson had an unremarkable playing career playing as a right-back in the lower divisions of Swedish football.

Management career

Degerfors IF

Having retired as a player, Eriksson received an offer to become Tord Grip's assistant at Degerfors. He led the team to the playoffs in 1977 and 1978, winning the latter and promotion to Swedish Football Division 2.

IFK Göteborg

His success with assistant manager Tom Chadney by his side attracted the attention of much larger clubs, and Eriksson was appointed manager of IFK Göteborg on 1 January 1979. The move was such a surprise that many of the players had never even heard of him. Göteborg lost their first three games and Eriksson offered to resign but the players convinced him to stay and the team's form improved. They finished second in the Allsvenskan and won the Svenska Cupen for the first time in the club's history, defeating Åtvidabergs FF 6–1 in the final. Although results had improved, the team's style did not make him popular. He put results ahead of style, emphasised tactical awareness, work-rate and reigned in the team's old cavalier style. As a consequence, the average attendance fell by 3,000 to 13,320. Like Grip, he was influenced by Houghton and Hodgson and played a 4–4–2 with zonal marking and heavy pressing.
Göteborg finished third in the 1980 season and second again in 1981. The following season, they won the "treble". The team won the League and subsequent playoff, the Svenska Cupen, defeating Östers IF 3–2 in the final.
Eriksson's international breakthrough came during the spring of 1982, when he led IFK Göteborg to the first ever UEFA Cup for a Swedish club, defeating FC Valencia in the quarterfinals and 1. FC Kaiserslautern in the semifinals. Awaiting them in the finals were Hamburger SV. At Nya Ullevi stadium in Gothenburg, Göteborg managed to score a late deciding goal, and took a 1–0 score with them to the away fixture, which they won 3–0, and with it, the 1981–82 UEFA Cup by an aggregate score of 4–0. His club's success sparked interested his skills from other clubs, leading him to leave IFK Göteborg in August 1982.

Benfica

Eriksson's European success led to him being head-hunted by Portuguese club Benfica. Eriksson joined Benfica on 1 September 1982.

Roma

Eriksson joined Roma on 1 July 1984. He was not as immediately successful at the Giallorossi as he had been before, but he still won a Coppa Italia in 1986. Eriksson left the club on 6 May 1987.

Fiorentina and return to Benfica

Eriksson was manager of Fiorentina from 1 July 1987. Eriksson stint with the club was trophyless. Eriksson moved back to Benfica for a second stint in 1989. Eriksson led the Portuguese side to the final of the European Cup (losing to Milan 1–0) in 1990, and another League title in 1991. Eriksson left the club in June 1992.

Sampdoria

In 1992, Eriksson returned to Italy with Sampdoria. where he managed to win another Coppa Italia in 1994. Eriksson left in June 1997.

Lazio

In 1997, Eriksson agreed to leave Sampdoria at the end of the season to manage Blackburn Rovers. Later on that year, however, he went back on his word and opted to stay in Italy and become the new manager at Lazio. Eriksson took over Lazio on 1 July 1997.

England manager

=2002 FIFA World Cup=

Following the resignation of England manager Kevin Keegan after a home loss to Germany in October 2000, The Football Association specifically pursued Eriksson as his replacement. Eriksson had initially agreed to take over after the expiration of his contract in summer 2001, but decided to resign his post at Lazio early and he officially began his England duties in January of that year. Eriksson was the first foreign manager to be appointed coach of the England national team.
Eriksson turned around England's bid for qualification for the 2002 FIFA World Cup with several crucial wins over lesser opposition before his first real test — England's rematch with Germany in Munich on 1 September 2001. England crushed their long-time rivals 5–1. Despite this, England still needed a late equaliser at home to Greece to qualify automatically. At the Finals, England drew with Sweden, defeated their other longtime rivals Argentina 1–0, and drew with Nigeria to qualify in second place from the four-team group. They went on to defeat Denmark 3–0 in the Round of 16 before losing 2–1 to 10-man Brazil, who went on to win the tournament.

=UEFA Euro 2004=

After winning their first qualifying match in Slovakia, England drew at home with Macedonia and were then booed off by their fans after losing a friendly to Australia. England, however, won their next five qualifiers and, needing a point from the last game to qualify, drew 0–0 in Turkey to top the group.
In their first match in the finals, England were winning 1–0 against France after 90 minutes but lost after Zinedine Zidane scored twice in injury time. A 3–0 victory over Switzerland and a 4–2 victory over Croatia, however, meant England still qualified for a quarter-final against the hosts Portugal. There, Michael Owen gave England an early lead but Hélder Postiga equalised. England had a Sol Campbell goal disallowed before losing on penalties.

=2006 FIFA World Cup qualifying=

Regardless of the antipathy to Eriksson expressed by some in the English media, the England team professed total confidence in him and threatened to strike during one media driven campaign to oust him. He was also backed by the official England Fan organisations. It may be due to that unprecedented support that the FA renewed and extended Eriksson's contract by two further years to include UEFA Euro 2008. On 7 September 2005, Eriksson's England team lost a World Cup qualifying match against Northern Ireland 1–0, the first time that England had lost to that team since 1972 and one of only five competitive games lost during Eriksson's tenure. Although it was England's first ever defeat in a World Cup or European Championship qualifying match under Eriksson, it brought his position under unprecedented pressure and he was criticized, both by some fans and by BBC commentators, for his alleged lack of charisma and tactical awareness. Criticism continued as England scraped a 1–0 victory over Austria in a game which saw David Beckham controversially sent off. Some of the criticism from within the media was answered however, as England put in a much improved performance, despite the absence of Beckham through suspension and Sol Campbell and Steven Gerrard through injury, in a 2–1 win against Poland. When the FA declared that Eriksson was to be "released" at the end of the 2006 World Cup tournament, the official England Fan organisation undertook an unprecedented "Save Our Sven" campaign that was also engaged in by several British newspapers. The decision was made, however, and Eriksson's tenure was terminated, costing the FA a year of penalty payment damages that saw Eriksson unemployed for 12 months at the FA's considerable expense.

=Successor announced=

In 2006, Eriksson was recorded saying he would be willing to leave England to manage Aston Villa if England won the World Cup, after being duped into believing that a wealthy Arab would buy the club and wanted him as manager. The wealthy "Arab" was in fact the "Fake Sheikh" Mazher Mahmood, an undercover News of the World reporter.
On 23 January, The Football Association announced that Eriksson would leave his job after the 2006 FIFA World Cup, and it was thought that the News of the World allegations played a part in this decision. This was later denied by both parties, with Eriksson explaining that there was a prior arrangement to terminate his contract immediately after the World Cup. The announcement that Eriksson was to depart from the job as England team coach was met with extensive protests and a "Save Our Sven" campaign from the Official England Fan organisation backed by several British national newspapers.
Following a lengthy period of public and media speculation as to his successor the FA announced on 4 May 2006 that Steve McClaren, Eriksson's assistant, would take over the reins after the World Cup.

=2006 FIFA World Cup finals=

England finished top of Group B at the finals, beating Paraguay and Trinidad and Tobago, before a 2–2 draw with Sweden, although the English press considered their performances far from satisfactory.
In the second round, a David Beckham trademark free kick was enough to see Eriksson's England past Ecuador in a lacklustre 1–0 encounter. Eriksson, however, once again fell to nemesis Luiz Felipe Scolari's Portugal. They defeated England 3–1 on penalties with the score 0–0 after extra time, with Beckham lost to injury and Wayne Rooney sent off for stamping on Ricardo Carvalho. The result was Eriksson's third successive exit in a major tournament quarter-final. In his farewell speech, Eriksson wished England well and singled out Rooney for special praise, advising the press not to blame the youngster's dismissal for England's exit.

=England manager summary=

Eriksson improved England's FIFA World Ranking from 17th place in January 2001 to 5th place in July 2006, reaching 4th during the 2006 World Cup, and was rated by the FA as England's second most successful manager after Alf Ramsey. He is the only England manager — other than the short-lived Terry Venables and current head coach Roy Hodgson — who has never failed to guide England to the last eight in a major tournament. Alf Ramsey's men failed to qualify for the 1974 World Cup. Don Revie failed to guide England to qualification at either the 1976 European Championships or the 1978 World Cup.  Ron Greenwood's England side was eliminated in the 12-team second group stage of the 1982 World Cup. Bobby Robson's team failed to qualify for the 1984 European Championships. Graham Taylor's men failed to reach the finals of the 1994 World Cup. Glenn Hoddle's team was eliminated in the Round of 16 at the 1998 World Cup. Kevin Keegan's team was eliminated in the group stage of Euro 2000. Steve McClaren failed to qualify for Euro 2008. Fabio Capello's team was eliminated in the round of 16 at the 2010 World Cup.
Under Eriksson, England achieved the highest point percentage in major tournament matches of all time for an England manager, losing only three competitive games (excluding extra-time) and achieved top qualifying place in all three International tournaments. Only Brazil matched England's record of reaching the quarter-final in tournaments in 2002, 2004, and 2006. Coincidentally, the same manager, Luiz Felipe Scolari, knocked England out of all three of these tournaments, first with Brazil and then twice with Portugal.
Eriksson is the only England manager never to have led an England team out at their permanent home venue of the old Wembley Stadium or the new Wembley Stadium. Wembley was closed for redevelopment the same month that the FA asked him to take over, October 2000, and he resigned before the new Wembley Stadium was opened.

Manchester City

In July 2007, virtually a year to the day that he left the England job, Eriksson was confirmed as the new manager of Manchester City after signing a three-year contract worth £2 million a year plus bonuses.
Before the season started, he signed striker Rolando Bianchi for £8.8 million, along with midfielders Gelson Fernandes, Geovanni, Martin Petrov, and Elano; and defenders Vedran Ćorluka and Javier Garrido.
On 19 August, Manchester City beat league champions Manchester United to go top of the Premier League after three games without conceding a goal. Eriksson received the Premier League's Manager of the Month award for August. The club stayed in the top six throughout the rest of 2007, and were third throughout October and November, but fell to seventh on 12 January 2008 after winning only one of their previous five games.
In Spring 2008, Shinawatra claimed that he would replace Eriksson after only one full season, because of an "avalanche of very poor results which is unacceptable at this level." This resulted in an outcry from Manchester City fans who coordinated an SOS ("Save Our Sven") campaign — similar to the Official England Fan's campaign in the spring of 2006 — including a well attended march from the City centre to Eastlands Stadium and a flood of letters to the club and the Manchester Evening News. The failure to react to public and fan demands resulted in high volume of fans cancelling or not renewing their season tickets. Also, the team announced that they would go on strike. Eriksson rejected any interference and also persuaded his players against potentially damaging their careers by an all out strike. In the last game of the season, Manchester City suffered an 8–1 loss to Middlesbrough, the biggest defeat of Eriksson's career. Many concluded that the team had "gone on strike" as a symbolic protest during the game, although a red card for Richard Dunne after 15 minutes made the game difficult for City.
Manchester City ended in ninth place in the league, one place away from the UEFA Cup 2008–09 qualifying positions. Manchester City subsequently qualified through the extra place awarded to the Premier League for finishing as the highest placed team who hadn't already qualified for a European competition in the UEFA Fair Play League for 2007–08.
Eriksson became the first Manchester City manager since 1969–70 to win both league derby games against Manchester United and also achieved the club's joint highest Premier League point total, 55.
On 2 June 2008, Manchester City confirmed by club statement that they had parted company with Eriksson by "mutual consent", with Eriksson still having two years left on his contract. Following news of his departure, the City supporters' groups organised a petition with around 14,000 signatures which was handed to the club.

Mexico national football team

On 3 June 2008, he was officially signed to become the manager of the Mexican national team.
On 20 August 2008, he debuted as manager of the Mexican National team in a CONCACAF World Cup qualifier versus Honduras. Mexico went on to win 2–1. On the next matches some results were poor, as Mexico tied with Canada and lost to Jamaica and Honduras.
Also during August 2008, a British actor and comedian Derek Williams aka "Svenalike" was flown into Mexico City for a series of media stunts and the filming of a special feature for Mexico's Azteca TV broadcast corporation. The first stunt was mis-reported by a journalist employed by a rival media group and the news that a Sven-double had used "fake passes and forged documents" to gain entry to Mexico's Olympic stadium was on TV and in most newspapers around the world. The story was revealed to be false when all the Mexican soccer officials reported being completely fooled by the look-alike/sound-alike double but that the whole stunt had been revealed to them immediately after filming and that the incident had been "amazing" and "great fun". The absence of all and any fake documents was confirmed within the televised special feature of the reported incident and many other filmed fake-Sven stunts a few days later.
On 11 February 2009, Eriksson was put under further pressure as his side lost 2–0 to the United States. Calls for him to quit or be sacked were heard from the fans while the English club Portsmouth were rumoured to be interested in making him their new manager. This link was strengthened by reports of members from the Portsmouth board flying to Mexico City to discuss contract offers with Eriksson and a possible compensation settlement with the Federación Mexicana de Fútbol Asociación. In early March, Eriksson continued to deny that he would leave Mexico and return to manage Portsmouth, insisting that he would remain and help Mexico qualify for the World Cup.

Notts County

On 22 July 2009, Eriksson was appointed as Director of Football at English League Two team Notts County following that club's takeover by Middle East consortium Munto Finance with Eriksson getting a reported, but unconfirmed, £2m a year deal. It is believed his contract was based on the future success of the club with a large percentage share holding making up his contract. Eriksson later said that he was attracted by the consortium's plans to take the world's oldest league club to the top of the Premiership, and believed that they had the finance and commitment to do that. Large-scale investment in new facilities were promised, and Sol Campbell and Kasper Schmeichel joined the club from Premier League teams. Campbell, however, played only one game before departing and Schmeichel was released at the end of the season.
The consortium attempted to involve Eriksson in the running of the North Korean team, taking him to Pyongyang in October 2009.  This came to nothing, however, with Eriksson later saying that his efforts were wasted as he was unable to contact anyone on the North Korean side.
County's large debts, including an unpaid tax bill, emerged in November 2009. Eriksson waived a multi-million payoff in order to assist the takeover therefore chairman Trew described him as an "absolute gentleman". Notts County went up as League 2 Champions at the end of the season.

Côte d'Ivoire national team

On 28 March 2010, he became the manager of Côte d'Ivoire.
As there were no reported negotiations of an extension to Eriksson's contract between his agent and the Fédération Ivoirienne de Football, his contract ended on 25 June.

Leicester City

He was appointed manager of Leicester City on 3 October 2010 as the Foxes sat in the relegaton zone of the Championship.
Eriksson spent big in a bid for promotion in the summer of 2011, including multi-million pound transfer fees on Matt Mills and Jermaine Beckford.

Bangkok and Dubai

In an interview with Yorkshire Radio on 8 February 2012, the chairman of English Championship club Leeds United, Ken Bates, revealed that Eriksson had applied for the vacant managerial position at the club after the dismissal of Simon Grayson. Bates went on to state that his application was unsuccessful. Goal. 8 February 2012. Retrieved 8 February 2012 On 3 September 2012, Eriksson was unveiled as the Technical Director of BEC Tero Sasana, a team in the Thai Premier League... Sven takes job in Bangkok with Thai club Tero Sasana, Daily Mail, 3 September 2012. Aftonbladet. 27 October 2012. Retrieved 28 October 2012
On 17 November 2012, Norwegian media reported that Eriksson was in talks with Vålerenga Fotball about the possibility of taking over the soon-to-be-available manager job for the Oslo-based club. A meeting between the two parties was held on 21 November in Oslo but no deal was made. In December, negotiations between Eriksson and the Football Federation of Ukraine, who had offered him the position of head coach of Ukraine's national football team, did not bear fruit. On 18 January 2013, the club however reported, that Eriksson declined the offer to join 1860.tsv1860.de/aktuell/news/sven-goeran-eriksson-wird-kein-loewe
On 21 January 2013, Eriksson became technical director of Dubai-based club Al Nasr SC in the UAE Pro-League.

Guangzhou R&F

On 4 June 2013, Guangzhou R&F, a club who plays in the Chinese Super League, announced Eriksson as their new head coach on a 19-month contract lasting until December 2014. He comes up against former Italy manager Marcello Lippi in the city's derby matches, as the World Cup winner is manager of local rival Guangzhou Evergrande.

Personal life

Eriksson's autobiography My Story, was published in November 2013.

Managerial statistics

List of Seasons

 
 

Managerial Honours








