[[Baden-Baden]]

CATEGORIES: Baden-Baden, Karlsruhe (region), Towns in Baden-Württemberg, Spa towns in Germany

Baden-Baden is a spa town in the German state of Baden-Württemberg in southwestern Germany (district capital is the city of Karlsruhe). It is located in the northern foothills of the Black Forest, on the banks of the Oos River in close proximity to France and Switzerland.

History

The German word, Baden, translates as "bathing, to bathe or baths". The springs of Baden-Baden were known to the Romans under Roman emperor Hadrian. The bath-conscious Caracalla, once came here to ease his arthritic aches.
The town was named "Baden" (without the repetition) in the Middle Ages. The town fell into ruin but reappeared in 1112 as the seat (until 1705) of the Margraviate of Baden. From the 14th century to the end of the 17th, Baden-Baden was the residence of the margraves of Baden, to whom Baden-Baden gave its name. The margraves first dwelled in the old castle, the ruins of which still occupy the summit above the town, but, in 1479, they moved to the new castle, which is situated on the hillside nearer to the town. During the Thirty Years' War and the Nine Years' War, Baden-Baden suffered severely from the various combatants, especially from the French, who pillaged it in 1643 and left it in ashes in 1689. The margrave Louis William, popularly known as Türkenlouis, moved to Rastatt in 1706.
During the Second Congress of Rastatt (1797–1799), Baden-Baden was rediscovered as a spa town. The popularity of the city as a spa dates from the early 19th century, when the Prussian queen visited the site to improve her health. Johannes Brahms' local residence, the Brahmshaus, can still be visited today.
In 1931, the town of Baden-Baden was officially given its double name, which is the short form for "Baden in Baden" (i.e., Baden in the state of Baden). This was already in common use to distinguish the town from Baden bei Wien ("Baden near Vienna") and Baden, Switzerland. In both World Wars, the town escaped destruction. After World War II, Baden-Baden became the headquarters of the French occupation forces in Germany.
Under the supervision of the French Air Force, a military airfield was constructed at Söllingen between the Black Forest and the Rhine River, 

Sights

File:Baden-Baden - Altstadt.jpg|Old Town of Baden-Baden
File:View of Baden-baden.jpeg|The Florentinerberg (Florentine Hill) with the New Castle (top right), the Caracalla Spa (bottom right), and the Friedrichsbad (bottom left)
File:Stiftskirche Baden-Baden.JPG|Stiftskirche in Baden-Baden
File:Kurhaus Baden-Baden.jpg|Kurhaus with casino in Baden-Baden
File:KurhausBadenBaden.JPG|The Trinkhalle with the mineral water spring
File:Brenners.jpg|Brenner's Park-Hotel & Spa
File:Russische Kirche Bad fcm.jpg|Russische Kirche, an orthodox church in Baden-Baden
File:Friedrichsbad Neues Schloß und Kirche der Klosterschule vom Heiligen Grab in Baden-Baden.JPG|Friedrichsbad (Frederick's bath), New Castle and Klosterschule vom Heiligen Grab (Abbey school)
File:Hohenbaden hb.JPG|The "Old castle" (Hohenbaden)

Tourism

Baden-Baden is a German spa town. The city offers many options for sports enthusiasts; Golf and tennis are both popular in the area. Horse races take place each May, August and October at nearby Iffezheim. The countryside is ideal for hiking and mountain climbing. In the winter Baden-Baden is a skiing destination.
The springs of Baden-Baden have been known for more than 2,000 years, and their composition
The Spielbank casino is more than 200 years old and the oldest of its type to have written The Gambler after he lost his money and even his shirt here. The rooms were designed in the style of a French château.
The Russian writer Ivan Turgenev based his novel Smoke (1867) in Baden-Baden, describing it as a place where the Russian nobility spend time.
There is an 18-hole golf course in Fremersberg.
Much of the Joseph Losey movie The Romantic Englishwoman (1975) was filmed on location in the town, with the Brenner's Park Hotel featuring particularly prominently. The Bollywood movie Dil To Pagal Hai (1997) was the first Indian movie to be shot in Baden-Baden.
From 23 to 28 September 1981, the XIth Olympic Congress took place in the Kurhaus in Baden-Baden. The England football team were based near Baden-Baden at Hotel Bühlerhöhe (Schwarzwaldhochstraße) during the 2006 FIFA World Cup.

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

Baden-Baden is twinned with:

Climate

Climate in this area has mild dfferences between highs and lows, and there is adequate precipitation year round.  The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is "Cfb" (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).Climate Summary for Baden Baden

Notable people





Further reading



}}

