[[Nixon Doctrine]]

CATEGORIES: Vietnam War, History of the foreign relations of the United States, Presidency of Richard Nixon, 1969 in the United States, 1969 in international relations, Foreign policy doctrines of the United States

The Nixon Doctrine (also known as the Guam Doctrine)  was put forth during a "Silent Majority" speech in a press conference in Guam on July 25, 1969 by U.S. President Richard Nixon. According to Gregg Brazinsky,Gregg Brazinsky, author of "Nation Building in South Korea: Koreans, Americans, and the Making of a Democracy" Nixon stated that "the United States would assist in the defense and developments of allies and friends," but would not "undertake all the defense of the free nations of the world." This doctrine meant that each ally nation was in charge of its own security in general, but the United States would act as a nuclear umbrella when requested. The Doctrine argued for the pursuit of peace through a partnership with American allies. The Nixon Doctrine implied the intentions of Richard Nixon shifting the direction on international policies in Asia, especially aiming for "Vietnamization of the Vietnam War."

Contents

In Nixon's own words (Address to the Nation on the War in Vietnam November 3, 1969):
The Doctrine was also applied by the Nixon administration in the Persian Gulf region, with military aid to Iran and Saudi Arabia. According to author Michael Klare,author of Blood and Oil: The Dangers and Consequences of America's Growing Petroleum Dependency (New York: Henry Holt, 2004) application of the Nixon Doctrine "opened the floodgates" of U.S. military aid to allies in the Persian Gulf, and helped set the stage for the Carter Doctrine and for the subsequent direct U.S. military involvement of the Gulf War and the Iraq War. 
Not only for Middle East regions, but it applied to other Asian countries such as Philippines, Thailand, South Vietnam, South Korea, and others which might be threatened by Communist aggression. For example, Nixon Doctrine was applied to Foreign Policy of the United States on South Korea, and 20,000 of 61,000 American soldiers were evacuated from Korea until June, 1971.

Background

When Richard Nixon became the President of the United States in 1969, US combat troop involvement in the Vietnam War had been continuing for almost four years. It had so far resulted in a sacrifice of more than 30,000 Americans and countless Vietnamese civilians and soldiers.

Doctrine In practice

Nixon was president when a resolution of the Vietnam War was essentially mandatory due to growing public opinion in favor of withdrawal; Of those over 50 years old, 61% expressed that belief, compared to 49% of those between 21 and 29 years old, even if tacit abandonment of the SEATO Treaty was ultimately required, resulting in a complete communist takeover of South Vietnam despite previous US guarantees. Cruel April: The Fall of Saigon. W.W. Norton & Company, 1990. (originally published in 1987 in French)
US retreat from unconditional defense guarantees to lesser allies in general was driven as much by financial concernsThe Gold Battles Within the Cold War: American Monetary Policy and the Defense of Europe, 1960–1963. Francis J. Gavin, University of Texas at Austin as by policy re-examination of strategic and foreign policy objectives, reflected in Nixon's goals of detente and nuclear arms control with the Soviet Union, and establishment of formal diplomatic relations with Communist China. As a consequence of this shift, direct sales of weaponryResource: Stockholm International Peace Research Institute to nations no longer under the nuclear umbrella of previous US security guarantees dramatically increased as US guarantees were withdrawn.
In the Persian Gulf region, the US turned to Saudi Arabia and Iran as "twin pillars" of regional stability:
 Oil increases in 1970 and 1971 would allow to fund both states with this military expansion. Total arms transfers from the United States to Iran increased from $103.6 million in 1970 to $552.7 million in 1972; those to Saudi Arabia increased from $15.8 million in 1970 to $312.4 million in 1972. The United States would maintain its small naval force of three ships in the Gulf, stationed since World War II in Bahrain, but would take on no other formal security commitments. 



Further reading


