[[East Carolina University]]

CATEGORIES: Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, East Carolina University, Educational institutions established in 1907, Greenville, North Carolina, Oak Ridge Associated Universities, Education in Pitt County, North Carolina, Public universities, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges in North Carolina, University of North Carolina, Buildings and structures in Pitt County, North Carolina, 1907 establishments in North Carolina

East Carolina University is a public, coeducational, doctoral/research university in Greenville, North Carolina, United States. Named East Carolina University by statute and commonly known as ECU or East Carolina, the university is the third-largest university in North Carolina and the fastest-growing campus in the University of North Carolina system for six consecutive years.
Founded on March 8, 1907 as a teacher training school, today East Carolina is listed by Forbe's Magazine as a "Best Buy" and 181st among "national universities" by U.S. News & World Report.  It has historical academic strengths in education, nursing, business, music, theater, and medicine, and offers over 100 Bachelor degree programs, 85 master's degrees, 21 doctoral programs, Doctor of Medicine, Doctor of Dental Medicine, and 62 certificates.
East Carolina has grown from 

History

Public Laws of North Carolina, 1907, Chapter 820 titled An Act to Stimulate High School Instruction in the Public Schools of the State and Teacher Training is the official law chartering East Carolina Teachers Training School (ECTTS) on March 8, 1907 by the North Carolina General Assembly. A change of name to East Carolina College in 1951 reflected this expanded mission. Over the objections of Governor Dan K. Moore, who opposed the creation of a university system separate from the Consolidated University of North Carolina, ECC was made a regional university effective July 1, 1967, and assumed its present name, East Carolina University. The university did not remain independent for long; on July 1, 1972, it was incorporated into the University of North Carolina System, the successor to the Consolidated University. Today, ECU is the third–largest university in North Carolina with 21,589 undergraduate and 5,797 graduate students, including the 308 medicine and 52 dental students.

Campus

East Carolina is separated into three distinct campuses: Main Campus, Health Sciences Campus, and West Research Campus. It owns two sports complexes: Blount Recreational Sports Complex and North Recreational Complex. It owns a field station in New Holland, North Carolina.

Main

The main campus, also known as the east campus, is about  The distinct feature of the main campus is the mall, which is a large tree–laden grassy area where many students go to relax. In the middle of the mall is the replica of the cupola on the original Austin building.

=Athletic fields=

The varsity athletics fields are located south of the College Hill residential neighborhood.  Fourteenth Street divides College Hill to the north, with the athletic fields to the south. Charles Boulevard borders the fields to the west and Greenville Boulevard borders it to the south.  A residential neighborhood and Elmhurst Elementary School are the eastern borders.  The northern portion of the area sits Dowdy-Ficklen Stadium, Minges Coliseum and Minges Natatorium, along with parking.  The Murphy Center, which is the primary strength and conditioning, and banquet building, is located between Dowdy-Ficklen and Minges Coliseum.
East Carolina has spent $92 million on athletic projects from 1998-2011.  Including the proposed projects, this is increased to $145 million.

Health Sciences

The Health Sciences campus is situated beside Vidant Medical Center (VMC). VMC, a 861–bed flagship Level I Trauma Center, serves as the academic medical center for The Brody School of Medicine.

West Research

West Research Campus lies on approximately 

=Institutes & Centers=

The Brody School of Medicine at East Carolina University
East Carolina Heart Institute
Leo W. Jenkins Cancer Center
Family Medicine Center
Small Business Institute 
Institute for Coastal Science and Policy
Center for Sustainable Tourism
Center for Natural Hazards
Center for GIScience
Center for Applied Computational Studies
Lost Colony Center for Science & Research

Community Service Learning Centers

The School of Dental Medicine proposes to create 10 community service learning centers to be located in rural and underserved areas throughout the state of North Carolina. The fourth-year students will be learning and providing care for the community for one year in these community centers.  Five community centers have been announced.  They are located in Ahoskie, Elizabeth City, Lillington, Spruce Pine and Sylva. The other locations will be announced at a future time.ecu.cfm?ID=1878

Field Station for Coastal Studies

The field station is located in New Holland, North Carolina. The area serves as a field station for the coastal studies, coastal resource management, and biology programs. 
It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1980. Mattamuskeet Wildlife Refuge.

North Recreational Complex

North Recreational Complex (NRC) is an athletic complex located on a 
Phase II opened in August 2011, with the grand opening occurring on September 15, 2011.  This phase includes a 

UNC Coastal Studies Institute

Main page: UNC Coastal Studies Institute
The UNC Coastal Studies Institute (UNC-CSI) is an inter-university, marine research institute located on Roanoke Island along the Croatan Sound on the Outer Banks, established in 2003 focusing on Estuarine Ecology and Human Health, Coastal Processes and Engineering, Public Policy and Coastal Sustainability, and Maritime Heritage.

Colleges and schools

ECU is home to nine undergraduate colleges, a graduate school, and four professional schools. The oldest school is the modern day College of Education.  The University offers 16 doctoral degree programs, 4 first professional degree programs, 76 master's degree programs, and 102 bachelor's degree programs.
The liberal arts college at East Carolina University is the Thomas Harriot College of Arts and Sciences.
The College of Business is a professional school consisting of five departments with undergraduate concentrations in each, plus a Master of Business Administration and Master of Science in Accounting program. The College's beginnings came in 1936 when the Department of Commerce was organized. It later changed to the Department of Business Education, and then to the Department of Business. Finally, in 1960, the School of Business was formed.
The College of Education is the oldest and largest college at ECU. It houses and administers all of the education majors and an international open access journal, the Journal of Curriculum and Instruction. There are 17 undergraduate degree programs, 22 graduate degree programs, six advanced certifications and the Doctor of Education program.  The College prepares more professionals for North Carolina schools than any other university in the state. The College scored higher than other North Carolina universities when the state board evaluated teacher education programs in 2006. In addition, the Institution of Higher Education Performance Report showed ECU was first in the number of graduates who were employed in public schools across the state.
The College of Fine Arts and Communication comprises four schools that range from dance to design and broadcast journalism. The college officially opened on July 1, 2003, but can trace its roots to ECU founding; the school hired art and music professionals in 1907 to train teachers.
The College of Health and Human Performance is made up of three departments and handles all of the recreational and exercise degrees at East Carolina University. It took on its name in 2003, but traces its legacy to the Department of Physical Education in 1930. It was the 1930 East Carolina Teachers College Planning Document number two priority. In 1938, the Department of Physical Education was established and Physical education became a specialty area for high school teachers.
The College of Human Ecology houses four departments and one school along with two institutes. It was first incorporated in 1968 and started to admit students in 1971.
The College of Technology and Computer Science comprises four departments.   The college offers nine degrees including engineering, computer science, construction management, design, distribution and logistics, industrial engineering technology, information and computer technology, and industrial technology.
The College of Allied Health Sciences encompasses the health science majors outside of nursing. The school offers over 15 majors. All of the health sciences majors are located in the Allied Health Sciences building which is on the Health Sciences Campus beside The Brody School of Medicine. It was established in the 1967–68 school year.
The College of Nursing is a professional school that offers one undergraduate degree, Bachelor of Science in Nursing. The school was created in 1959 and now offers Bachelor of Science, Masters, and Ph.D programs. The college has over 100 faculty teaching the students everything about the nursing field while practicing in the under-served Eastern North Carolina.
The Graduate School consist of 85 master's degree, 21 doctoral programs and 62 certificates. It coordinates the graduate offerings of all departments in the nine colleges. The School also runs the non–professional degree programs of the professional School of Medicine. The school offers 17 master's degree in 
Accounting, Arts, Business Administration, 
Construction Management, Education, Environmental Health, Fine Arts, Library Science, Music, Nursing, Occupational Therapy, Public Administration, Public Health, School AdministrationScience, Social Work and Teaching.  It also offers four doctoral degrees in Audiology, Education, Philosophy and  Physical Therapy.
The Brody School of Medicine is a professional school at the university.  It consists of seven graduate majors, plus the Doctor of Medicine, all located on the Health Sciences Campus.  The first appropriations were approved in 1974, with the first medical students arriving in 1977.  The medical school is one of four in North Carolina.
The School of Dental Medicine is a professional school at the university.  The school graduates one degree, Doctor of Dental Medicine.  It will also have two residencies in Advanced Education in General Dentistry and Dental General Practice.  The school also will offer a specialty program in Pedodontics.  It was founded on February 24, 2006 at the East Carolina Board of Trustees meeting. The facilities are located on the Health Sciences Campus and will house the first three years of education.  Dental students will complete their final year at ECU Community Service Learning Centers to be located throughout the state. The School of Dental Medicine is one of two dental schools in the state.

Research

Randolph Chitwood, a cardiothoracic surgeon with East Carolina, performed the first minimally invasive robotic-assisted mitral-valve heart surgery in the United States. East Carolina researchers also developed an electronic fluency device called SpeechEasy; the device is designed to improve the fluency of a person who stutters by changing the sound of the user's voice in his or her ear.
A faculty member at Brody School of Medicine developed the standard procedure for gastric bypass surgery. Through the ECU Metabolic Institute, researchers first discovered that 80% of type 2 diabetic patients who underwent this procedure had a reversal of the disease. The Biofeedback Lab is currently developing techniques to help service members recover from posttraumatic stress disorders and traumatic brain injuries they received in Afghanistan and Iraq.  The in vitro fertilization program is ranked first in North Carolina and fourth overall in the United States. Jason Bond, a scientist in the Department of Biology, discovered many new species of spiders, including Myrmekiaphila neilyoungi and Aptostichus stephencolberti.
During an archaeological dig on Hatteras Island in 1998, archaeologists discovered a 10-carat gold English signet ring from the 16th century, among other artifacts. The discovered ring was the first material connection between The Lost Colony on Roanoke Island and the Algonquian peoples on Croatan Island. In 2011, underwater archaeologists raised the anchors of the Queen Anne's Revenge, the flagship vessel of Blackbeard, near Beaufort.

Libraries

J.Y. Joyner Library is the main library located beside the Mall on the main campus. It holds nearly 1.9 million bound volumes, 2.1 million pieces of microform, 532,000 government documents, and more than 24,000 journal subscriptions. The library, which houses the East Carolina manuscript collection, is the largest library east of Raleigh. It is one of the leading repositories in the nation for modern naval and maritime history. It also holds materials related to North Carolina, the tobacco industry, worldwide missionary activities, and American military history. The library is the official repository of the records of the United States Coast Guard Auxiliary. The J. Edgar Hoover Collection on International Communism contains many items dealing with communism worldwide.  The Rare Book Collections has items dating from 1589, including a 1733 Edward Moseley map, the first to comprehensively map the colony of North Carolina and the only original copy in the United States.
The Music Library is a branch of Joyner Library located on the first floor of A.J. Fletcher Music Center. It houses approximately 93,000 items, including the entire audio recording collection.
The William E. Laupus Library is the medical and health library for East Carolina. It is the primary library for the Brody School of Medicine, the College of Nursing, the College of Allied Health Sciences, and the School of Dental Medicine. It holds approximately 160,000 volumes (print and non–print) and 10,000 current print, non–print, and electronic serial titles. In 2006, it moved to the Health Sciences Building on the Health Sciences campus. The library is named for Dr. Laupus, a former Dean of Brody School of Medicine.

Student life

Greek life

There are ten social sororities at the East Carolina Campus, most of which own a house located at or near 5th or 10th Street. There are currently 16 social fraternities at East Carolina. The majority are located off or near 5th Street or 10th Street. Of the 16 social fraternities, seven currently do not own a house. Greek life started in 1958 with the introduction of four social fraternities: Kappa Alpha Order, Lambda Chi Alpha, Pi Kappa Alpha, and Theta Chi.  Two years later, eight of the nine social sororities were founded.
National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) has a presence on campus, as well. There are four historically black sororities and five historically black fraternities.  There are over 18 honor and 13 service or religious fraternities or sororities at ECU.

Athletics

ECU's sports teams, nicknamed the Pirates, compete in NCAA Division FBS as a full–member of the 12 team Conference USA. The Pirates will soon join the Big East in upcoming seasons. Jeff Compher is the Athletic Director.

Diversity

The EDC Mini-grant Project-The Office of Equity, Diversity, and Community Relations developed this project to improve East Carolina University's number of diversity studies, programs, and groups. This project intends to supply resources and funds towards diversity proposals offered by students, campus organizations, faculty, and staff. These programs include monitoring cultural awareness educational seminars, to improve departmental climate, to recruit diverse students, for research for curriculum improvement, among others.ecu.cfm

Administration

There have been six presidents and seven Chancellors in the university's history.
The University of North Carolina Board of Governors are the policy-making body legally charged with "the general determination, control, supervision, management, and governance of all affairs of the constituent institutions." It has 32 voting members who are elected by the General Assembly for four-year terms.

Rankings

East Carolina is currently classified by U.S. News & World Report as a National University in its first-tier rankings. 
In the 2012 edition of U.S. News & World Report, The Brody School of Medicine is ranked 10th in the country for primary care physician preparation, 13th in the rural medicine specialty and 14th in family medicine.
The College of Business is named one of the best business schools according to The Princeton Review for the fifth year in a row.
In 2009,  the university was awarded the Patriot Award. The Patriot Award recognizes employers who go above and beyond what the law requires in supporting their employees who serve in the National Guard or reserves.

Songs

Hail to Thy Name So Fair  is the alma mater at East Carolina University. It first appeared in the 1940-41 East Carolina Teachers College (ECTC)Student Handbook.  It was written by Harold A. McDougle ('44) who became a part-time instructor in the Music Department from 1946-47.  The Marching Pirates perform the song during all home football and basketball games.  At every home football game, after the National Anthem is played by the band, the Alma Mater is played followed by the E.C. Victory song.  At the end of football games, the football team walks to the student section to sing the Alma Mater and E.C. Victory song in unison.

Notable people

Pirate graduates have been influential in teaching, business, and the arts. The most notable teaching alumnus is Ron Clark, a teacher, author, and founder of the Ron Clark Academy in Atlanta, Georgia.  Scott Avett of the folk-rock band The Avett Brothers earned degrees in 1999 and 2000.ecu.cfm Henry "Gizmo" Williams, Canadian Football League inductee, graduated from East Carolina University.






