[[Carl Michael Bellman]]

CATEGORIES: 1740 births, 1795 deaths, Musicians from Stockholm, Swedish composers, Swedish-language poets, Uppsala University alumni, 18th-century Swedish people

Carl Michael Bellman (; 4 February 1740 – 11 February 1795) was a Swedish poet, songwriter, composer and performer. Bellman is a central figure in the Swedish song tradition and remains a powerful influence in Swedish music, as well as in Scandinavian literature, to this day.
Bellman is best known for two collections of poems set to music, Fredman's songs (Fredmans sånger) and  Fredman's epistles (Fredmans epistlar). Each consists of about 70 songs. The general theme is drinking, but the songs wonderfully combine words and music to express feelings and moods ranging from humorous to elegiac, romantic to satirical.
Bellman's patrons included the King, Gustav III of Sweden, who called him the master improviser. Bellman has been compared to  Shakespeare, Beethoven, Mozart, and Hogarth, but his gift, using elegantly baroque classical references in comic contrast to sordid drinking and prostitution, which are at once regretted and celebrated, is unique.
Bellman's songs continue to be performed and recorded by musicians from Scandinavia and in other languages including Italian, French, Russian and English.

Life and work

Bellman was born in Stockholm. His main works are Fredman's songs (Fredmans sånger) and  Fredman's epistles (Fredmans epistlar), each including some 70 songs, many of which are about sociable drinking, or were designed and are still used for such drinking. But this aspect of his songs is not the main reason he has become such an icon in the Scandinavian song tradition. Bellman was a master of rhyme and rhythm, with a wonderful sense for combining words and music. He wrote songs that were innovative and original in form (parodying and refreshing contemporary literary styles was one of his specialities), as well as challenging in subject matter.
On the surface, his songs centre to a large extent around themes like the joy of inebriation and the pursuit of sexual pleasure. Against this backdrop, however, he manages to elucidate the tender and fleeting themes of love, death, and the elusive qualities of the "present", the here-and-now, in a unique and moving manner. His songs reflect aspects of the life of the common man in 18th century Stockholm, but by his composition Gustafs skål, an informal royal anthem, he had also acquired the patronage of King Gustav III of Sweden.
King Gustav III called Bellman "Il signor improvisatore" ('Master Improviser').
Bellman has been compared with poets and musicians as diverse as ShakespeareHägg, 1996. page 149. and Beethoven. page 6. Kleveland notes that he has been called "Swedish poetry's Mozart, and Hogarth", observing that
Paul Britten Austin says instead simply that:Britten Austin, 1967, page 11
As for the songs, Britten Austin writes:
Some of the recurring characters in his songs are the clockmaker Jean Fredman, the prostitute Ulla Winblad, the ex-soldier, now alcoholic Mowitz and Fader Berg, a virtuoso on several instruments. Some of these were based on living models, others probably not. His songs often make references to Greek and Roman mythological characters such as the ferryman Charon and the God of wine and pleasure, Bacchus, brought for comic effect into Stockholm's surroundings.
Bellman mostly played the cittern,

Poetry and song

Bellman was understood as a great humorist by his contemporaries. He achieved this through incongruity, with what at a casual glance seems to be lofty biblical style or delicate pastoral poetry, but is in fact populated with drunks and whores, talking of life in taverns and excursions around Stockholm, frequently ending with allusions to sexual intercourse. For example, Blåsen nu alla! (All blow now!), begins with the sight of Venus crossing the water, as in François Boucher'sTriumph of Venus, but when she disembarks, Bellman quickly transforms her into a lustful Ulla Winblad. Similarly, the ornate and civilized minuet melody of Ach du min Moder (Alas, thou my mother) contrasts starkly with the text, which is about Fredman lying with a hangover in the gutter outside a pub, complaining bitterly about life. page 61Hägg, 1996. pages 156-157. Characters such as Ulla Winblad (her surname means vineleaf) recur through the Epistles; Britten Austin comments that
Bellman was also an effective entertainer and mimic. He had the gift of being able to

Legacy

Major interpreters of Bellman's songs include Fred Åkerström and Cornelis Vreeswijk.Hägg, 1996. page 162. Other recordings have been made by modern Swedish artists including Evert Taube and his son Sven-Bertil Taube, and as rock music by Joakim Thåström, Candlemass or Marduk. They are also performed as choral music and as drinking songs.
Bellman has been translated into English, most notably by Paul Britten Austin, and into German, for example by Hannes Wader. German Communist leader Karl Liebknecht liked to sing Bellman in Swedish. Hans Christian Andersen was one of the first to translate Bellman into Danish.
Bellman's songs have also been translated and recorded in Icelandic (by Bubbi), Italian, French, Finnish (for instance by Vesa-Matti Loiri), Russian, Chuvash and Yiddish. English interpretations have been recorded by William Clauson, Martin Best,  Sven-Bertil Taube, Roger Hinchliffe and Martin Bagge.
There are a number of books in English with translations of Bellman's work.  The authors include Charles Wharton Stork,Stork, 1917. Hendrik Willem van Loon,Van Loon and Castagnetta, 1939. Paul Britten Austin,Britten Austin, 1999. and historian Michael Roberts. In English the most thorough treatment of Bellman's life is also by Paul Britten Austin.



Selected works

Bibliography

English

Swedish

Notes





Swedish
English
Translations
Streaming audio
Videos


