[[Swaffham]]

CATEGORIES: Swaffham, Breckland, Market towns in Norfolk, Wind farms in England, Towns in Norfolk, Civil parishes in Norfolk, Post towns in the PE postcode area

Swaffham is a market town and civil parish in the English county of Norfolk. The town is situated  west of Norwich.
The civil parish has an area of  and in the 2001 census had a population of 6,935 in 3,130 households. For the purposes of local government, the parish falls within the district of Breckland. Census population and household counts for unparished urban areas and all parishes. Retrieved December 2, 2005.

History

Its name came from Old English Swǣfa hām = "the homestead of the Swabians"; some of them presumably came with the Angles and Saxons.
By the 14th and 15th centuries Swaffham had a flourishing sheep and wool industry As a result of this prosperity, the town has a large market place. The Market Cross here was built by George Walpole, 3rd Earl of Orford and presented to the town in 1783. (1979) Ribbons from the Pedlar's Pack p126 ISBN 0-9506728-0-7 On the top is the statue of Ceres, the Roman goddess of the harvest.
About 8 km to the north of Swaffham can be found the ruins of the formerly important Castle Acre Priory and Castle Acre Castle.
On the west side of Swaffham Market Place are several old buildings which for many years housed the historic Hamond's Grammar School, as a plaque on the wall of the main building explains. The Hamond's Grammar School building latterly came to serve as the sixth form for the Hamond's High School (now The Nicholas Hamond Academy), but that use has since ceased. Harry Carter, the Grammar School's art teacher of the 1960s, was responsible for a great number of the carved village signs that are now found in many of Norfolk's towns and villages, most notably perhaps Swaffham's own sign commemorating the legendary Pedlar of Swaffham,The Pedlar of Swaffham. More English Fairy Tales by Joseph Jacobs (1894). Retrieved on 2007-03-27The Pedlar of Swaffham. Old City – Names and Legends. Retrieved on 2007-03-27Animation which is in the corner of the market place just opposite the old school's gates.Howard Carter Retrieved 22 July 2011
Until 1968 it had a railway station on the Great Eastern Railway line from King's Lynn. Just after Swaffham, the line split into two, one branch heading south to Thetford, and the other east towards Dereham. The railways were closed as part of the Beeching Axe, through the possibility of rebuilding a direct rail link from Norwich to King's Lynn via Swaffham is occasionally raised.
The Swaffham Museum contains an exhibition on local history and local geology as well as an Egyptology room charting the life of Howard Carter.Swaffham Museum Retrieved 22 July 2011

Ecotech Centre

Today the town is known for the presence of two large Enercon E-66 wind turbines, and the associated Ecotech Centre.Ecotricity. Swaffham-I  and Swaffham-II.  Retrieved February 10, 2006. One wind turbine, an  Enercon E66/1500 with 1.5 MW generation capacity, 67 metres nacelle height and 66 metres rotor diameter, which was built in 1999,The Windpower. These have now been joined now by a further eight turbines at North Pickenham.
The centre hosted the 2008 British BASE jumping championships; contestants jumped from the roof of the observation deck.

Sport and leisure

Swaffham has a Non-League football club Swaffham Town F.C. who play at Shoemakers Lane.

Climate

As with the rest of the British Isles and East Anglia, Swaffham experiences a maritime climate with cool summers and mild winters. The nearest Met Office weather station to provide local climate data is RAF Marham, about 5.5 miles west of the town centre. Temperature extremes in the Swaffham-Marham area range from  

Kingdom (TV series)

In the summer of 2006, location filming was done in the town for the ITV1 series Kingdom, starring Stephen Fry. In Kingdom the town is called Market Shipborough. The pub The Startled Duck in the TV series is better known as The Greyhound Inn in which the Earl of Orford created the first coursing club open to the public in 1776.History of Greyhounds: 18th and 19th Centuries
Kingdom's office is filmed in Oakleigh House, near the town square (formerly the house of the Head Master of Hamond's Grammar School), with the coastal scenes filmed at Wells-next-the-Sea on the north Norfolk coast.

Roads

The east-west A47 Birmingham to Great Yarmouth road now avoids the town, using a northerly bypass opened in 1981. The A1065 Mildenhall to Fakenham road still passes through the centre of the town on its north-south route, intersecting with the A47 at a grade separated junction north of the town. OS Explorer Map 236 – King's Lynn, Downham Market & Swaffham. ISBN 0-319-21867-8.

Notable people






