[[East Coast of the United States]]

CATEGORIES: East Coast of the United States, Coasts of the United States, Regions of the United States, Eastern United States, Northeastern United States, Southeastern United States, Regions of the Southern United States

The East Coast of the United States is the easternmost coast of the United States along the Atlantic Ocean. The states which have shoreline on the East Coast are, from north to south, the U.S. states of Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida.

Toponymy and composition

The name of the United States East Coast derives from the idea of the United States as having two distinct coastlines, one at its west and one at its east. Other terms to refer to this area by cardinal direction include the term Eastern Seaboard and simply East Coast. The region is also commonly referred to as the Atlantic Coast or Atlantic Seaboard due to the coastline being against the Atlantic Ocean.
The fourteen states which have shoreline on the East Coast are, from north to south, the U.S. states of Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, and Florida.

Colonial history

Twelve of the original Thirteen Colonies of the United Kingdom in North America that later become the original states of the United States, each founded between 1607 (Virginia) and 1733 (Georgia), lay along the East Coast.

Climate and physical geography

The seaboard is susceptible to hurricanes in the Atlantic hurricane season, officially running from June 1 to November 30, although hurricanes can occur before or after these dates.
The East Coast is a low-relief, passive margin coast. Gabler, James F. Petersen, L. Michael Trapasso, and Dorothy Sack It has been shaped by the Pleistocene glaciation as far south as New York, with offshore islands Nantucket, Block Island, Fishers Island, Long Island and Staten Island the result of terminal moraines. The coastal plain broadens southwards, separated from the Piedmont districts by the Atlantic Seaboard fall line of the East Coast rivers, often marking the head of navigation, prominent sites of cities.

Demographics

In 2010, the population of the states which have shoreline on the East Coast was estimated at 112,642,503 (36% of the country's total population).2010 Census: Resident Population Data

Transportation

The primary Interstate Highway along the East Coast is Interstate 95.S. Route 1 (Atlantic Highway),U.S. 1: Fort Kent, Maine to Key West, Florida, Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, updated April 7, 2011 



Notes




