[[Wart (character)]]

CATEGORIES: Characters created by Shigeru Miyamoto, Fictional frogs and toads, Fictional amphibians, Anthropomorphic characters in video games, Video game characters who use magic, King characters in video games, Mario enemies, Male characters in video games, Nintendo antagonists, The Legend of Zelda series characters, Video game articles that need to differentiate between fact and fiction, Video game bosses, Video game characters introduced in 1987, Fictional dictators

Wart, also known as King Wart, is a fictional character from Nintendo. He is an anthropomorphic frog king who is the main antagonist and last boss of Nintendo's NES game, Super Mario Bros. 2.  In Japan, where a previous version of the game was earlier released for the Famicom, under the title Yume Kōjō: Doki Doki Panic, the character is known by his Japanese name, Mamu (マム, Mamū).

Background

Wart is the leader of his militaristic dictatorship, known as the 8 bits or the 8 bit Club. He is a past evil nemesis of Mario, Luigi, Toad, and Princess Toadstool.
According to the instruction manual of Super Mario All-Stars, his plan involves enslaving and imprisoning the inhabitants of "Subcon" (the world featured in Super Mario Bros. 2). He also creates his own monsters with a device known as the Dream Machine. The inhabitants of Subcon call Mario for help, spurring the events that occur in Super Mario Bros. 2.

Concept and creation

Wart is the creation of Nintendo designer and producer Shigeru Miyamoto. Miyamoto had created Wart as an evil main villain — an oversized frog with claws and fangs, with a white belly.
Since Yume Kōjō: Doki Doki Panic and Super Mario Bros. 2, Wart had the same appearance. Wart's appearance is sightly different elsewhere, looking more like a Koopa-like crocodile in the Nintendo Comics or a toad in The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening.
In the remake of Super Mario Bros. 2, Super Mario Advance, Wart is voiced by Charles Martinet, who voices Mario and Luigi in other video games. The voice acting was relatively limited to various frog noises and a few phrases like "Ah, ribbit!".
Wart is known to be prideful, rude and menacing, his goal is to rule over Subcon and becoming its king. In BS Super Mario USA, he is shown as being very jealous of Mario. However, Wart has a somewhat calmer attitude towards Link.

Appearances

Origin

Wart made his debut appearance in Yume Kōjō: Doki Doki Panic where he plays a role of a main villain and final boss of the game. The game was made into Super Mario Bros. 2 when released in North America. While many characters were changed into Mario series characters, Wart still remains the game's antagonist. In the game, he appoints himself ruler of the area named Subcon, and starts enslaving the population. However, Wart is defeated by either Mario series characters or Yume Kōjō: Doki Doki Panic characters, depending on the version, and the respective inhabitants then castigate him.

Cameos

Wart has made a number of other cameos in other games and media over the years. Wart appeared in The Legend of Zelda: Link's Awakening, in a dream world known as Koholint Island, where he uses his Japanese name, Mamu. He teaches Link the Frog's Song of Soul by paying him 300 Rupees. Afterwards, he leaves his place with a note stating that he has gone on tour.
He returns again in for BS Super Mario USA, Satellaview. Wart can be found in every tube while being in Subspace, where his room are similar to that of the prequel's last level, Mario must fight him. He is also mentioned very briefly in Mario Superstar Baseball in a Shy Guy's bio and in Super Paper Mario a "Cyborg Wart" appears in a character's comic book.
Wart made two appearances in Valiant Comics's Nintendo Comics System imprint. In Cloud Nine he abducts King Toadstool and tries to flood the Mushroom Kingdom, and in Tanooki Suits Me he appears as a prospective buyer of several priceless pieces of artwork Bowser had stolen from the Mushroom Castle's Royal Art Gallery. Under the guise of a friendly skateboarder, Wart also makes a minor appearance in the Nintendo Adventure Book Doors to Doom, when Mario and Luigi become lost in Subcon after travelling through a warp zone. Wart looked thin and more like a crocodile.

Reception

IGN editor Lucas M. Thomas thought Wart deserved a spot as a character in Super Smash Bros. Brawl or in a Mario spinoff series, despite conceding not a likely candidate for the former.






