[[Python reticulatus]]

CATEGORIES: Pythonidae, Reptiles of Brunei, Reptiles of Cambodia, Reptiles of Indonesia, Reptiles of Laos, Reptiles of Malaysia, Reptiles of Burma, Reptiles of the Philippines, Reptiles of Thailand, Reptiles of Vietnam, Megafauna of Eurasia, Fauna of Borneo

Python reticulatus, also known as the (Asiatic) reticulated python, but normally grow to an average of 3–6 m (10–20 ft). They are the world's longest snakes and longest reptile, but are not the most heavily built. Like all pythons, they are nonvenomous constrictors and normally not considered dangerous to humans.  Although large specimens are powerful enough to kill an adult human, attacks are only occasionally reported.
An excellent swimmer, Python reticulatus has been reported far out at sea and has colonised many small islands within its range. The specific name, reticulatus,  is Latin meaning "net-like", or reticulated, and is a reference to the complex color pattern. 1986. Reptiles – Their Latin Names Explained. Poole, UK: Blandford Press. ISBN 0-7137-1704-1.

Description

thumb|left|P. reticulatus head This species is the largest snake native to Asia. More than a thousand wild reticulated pythons in southern Sumatra ranged in length from  after not having eaten for 3 months. Widely published data of specimens that were reported to be several feet longer have not been confirmed.
Even the specimen once widely accepted as the largest-ever "accurately" measured snake, that being Colossus, a male kept at the Highland Park Zoo (now Pittsburgh Zoo & PPG Aquarium) in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, during the 1950s and early 1960s, with a peak reported length of 
Numerous reports have been made of larger snakes, but since none of these were measured by a scientist nor any of the specimens deposited at a museum, they must be regarded as unproven and possibly erroneous. In spite of what was for many years a standing offer of $50,000 for a live, healthy snake over  long by the New York Zoological Society (NYZS), known since 1993 as the Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS), no attempt to claim this reward was ever made. 1997. Tales of Giant Snakes: A Historical Natural History of Anacondas and Pythons. Krieger Pub. Co. ISBN 0-89464-995-7.
The color pattern is a complex geometric pattern that incorporates different colors. The back typically has a series of irregular diamond shapes flanked by smaller markings with light centers. In this species' wide geographic range, much variation of size, color, and markings commonly occurs.
In zoo exhibits the color pattern may seem garish, but in a shadowy jungle environment amid fallen leaves and debris it allows them to virtually disappear. Called disruptive coloration, it protects them from predators and helps them to catch their prey. 1987. Living Snakes of the World in Color. New York: Sterling Publishers. 480 pp. ISBN 0-8069-6460-X.
The smooth dorsal scales are arranged in 69-79 rows at midbody. There are deep pits on 4 anterior upper labials, on 2 or 3 anterior lower labials, and on 5 or 6 posterior lower labials.A. 1893. Catalogue of the Snakes in the British Museum (Natural History). Volume I., Containing the Families..... Trustees of the British Museum (Natural History). (Taylor and Francis, Printers.) London. xiii + 448 pp. + Plates I.- XXVIII. (Python reticulatus, pp. 85-86.)

Geographic range

Reticulated pythons are found in Southeast Asia from the Nicobar Islands, northeast India, Bangladesh, Burma, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, Malaysia, and Singapore, east through Indonesia and the Indo-Australian Archipelago (Sumatra, the Mentawai Islands, the Natuna Islands, Borneo, Sulawesi, Java, Lombok, Sumbawa, Sumba, Flores, Timor, Maluku, Tanimbar Islands) and the Philippines (Basilan, Bohol, Cebu, Leyte, Luzon, Mindanao, Mindoro, Negros, Palawan, Panay, Polillo, Samar, Tawi-Tawi). The original description does not include a type locality. Restricted to "Java" by Brongersma (1972).
Three subspecies have been proposed,[ref]
