[[Creative destruction]]

CATEGORIES: Innovation economics, Technological change, Business ethics, Theories of history, Sociocultural evolution, Austrian School, Marxism

Creative destruction (German: schöpferische Zerstörung) , sometimes known as Schumpeter's gale, is a term in economics which has since the 1950s become most readily identified with the Austrian American economist Joseph Schumpeter's theory of economic innovation and business cycle. 
Creative destruction describes the "process of industrial mutation that incessantly revolutionizes the economic structure from within, incessantly destroying the old one, incessantly creating a new one."
The German Marxist sociologist Werner Sombart has been credited with the first use of these terms in his work Krieg und Kapitalismus ("War and Capitalism", 1913). 
[/ref] In the earlier work of Marx, however, the idea of creative destruction or annihilation (German: Vernichtung) implies not only that capitalism destroys and reconfigures previous economic orders, but also that it must ceaselessly devalue existing wealth (whether through war, dereliction, or regular and periodic economic crises) in order to clear the ground for the creation of new wealth.
In Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (1942), Joseph Schumpeter developed the concept out of a careful reading of Marx's thought (to which the whole of Part I of the book is devoted), arguing (in Part II) that the creative-destructive forces unleashed by capitalism would eventually lead to its demise as a system (see below). Despite this, the term subsequently gained popularity within free-market economics as a description of processes such as downsizing in order to increase the efficiency and dynamism of a company. The Marxian usage has, however, been retained and further developed in the work of social scientists such as David Harvey, Marshall Berman, and Manuel Castells.

History

In Marx's thought

Although the modern term "creative destruction" is not used explicitly by Marx, it is largely derived from his analyses, particularly in the work of Werner Sombart (whom Engels described as the only German professor who understood Marx's Capital), and of Joseph Schumpeter, who discussed at length the origin of the idea in Marx's work (see below).
In The Communist Manifesto of 1848, Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels described the crisis tendencies of capitalism in terms of "the enforced destruction of a mass of productive forces":
A few years later, in the Grundrisse, Marx was writing of "the violent destruction of capital not by relations external to it, but rather as a condition of its self-preservation". In other words, he establishes a necessary link between the generative or creative forces of production in capitalism and the destruction of capital value as one of the key ways in which capitalism attempts to overcome its internal contradictions:
In the Theories of Surplus Value ("Volume IV" of Das Kapital, 1863), Marx refines this theory to distinguish between scenarios where the destruction of (commodity) values affects either use values or exchange values or both together.p. 200 The destruction of exchange value combined with the preservation of use value presents clear opportunities for new capital investment and hence for the repetition of the production-devaluation cycle:
|last=Marx
|first=Karl
|authorlink=Karl Marx
|title=Theories of Surplus-Value: "Volume IV" of Capital
|volume=2
|pages=495–96
|url=
|year=1969
|origyear=1863
}} For further explanation of these quotations see 
[/ref]
Social geographer David Harvey sums up the differences between Marx's usage of these concepts and Schumpeter's: "Both Karl Marx and Joseph Schumpeter wrote at length on the 'creative-destructive' tendencies inherent in capitalism. While Marx clearly admired capitalism's creativity he ... strongly emphasised its self-destructiveness. The Schumpeterians have all along gloried in capitalism's endless creativity while treating the destructiveness as mostly a matter of the normal costs of doing business".

Other early usage

In philosophical terms, the concept of "creative destruction" is close to Hegel´s concept of sublation. In German economic discourse it was taken up from Marx's writings by Werner Sombart, particularly in his 1913 text Krieg und Kapitalismus:Sombart, W., 1913, Krieg und Kapitalismus, (War and Capitalism) Leipzig: Duncker & Humblot, p. 207
It has been argued that Sombart's formulation of the concept was influenced by Eastern mysticism, specifically the image of the Hindu god Shiva, who is presented in the paradoxical aspect of simultaneous destroyer and creator. Conceivably this influence passed from Johann Gottfried Herder, who brought Hindu thought to German philosophy in his Philosophy of Human History (Ideen zur Philosophie der Geschichte der Menschheit) (Herder 1790–92), specifically volume III, pp. 41–64. via Arthur Schopenhauer and the Orientalist Friedrich Maier through Friedrich Nietzsche´s writings. Nietzsche represented the creative destruction of modernity through the mythical figure of Dionysus, a figure whom he saw as at one and the same time "destructively creative" and "creatively destructive". In the following passage from On the Genealogy of Morality (1887), Nietzsche argues for a universal principle of a cycle of creation and destruction, such that every creative act has its destructive consequence:
Other nineteenth-century formulations of this idea include Russian anarchist Mikhail Bakunin, who wrote in 1842, "The passion for destruction is a creative passion, too!"The Reaction in Germany, From the Notebooks of a Frenchman, October 1842 Note, however, that this earlier formulation might more accurately be termed "destructive creation", and differs sharply from Marx's and Schumpeter's formulations in its focus on the active destruction of the existing social and political order by human agents (as opposed to systemic forces or contradictions in the case of both Marx and Schumpeter).

Schumpeter

Joseph Schumpeter

The expression "creative destruction" was popularized by and is most associated with Joseph Schumpeter, particularly in his book Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, first published in 1942. Already in his 1939 book Business Cycles, he attempted to refine the innovative ideas of Nikolai Kondratieff and his long-wave cycle which Schumpeter believed was driven by technological innovation. Three years later, in Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy, Schumpeter introduced the term "creative destruction", which he explicitly derived from Marxist thought (analysed extensively in Part I of the book) and used it to describe the disruptive process of transformation that accompanies such innovation:
|last=Schumpeter
|first=Joseph A.
|authorlink=Joseph Schumpeter
|title=Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy
|url=
|accessdate=23 November 2011
|year=1994
|publisher=Routledge
|location=London
|pages=82–83
|isbn=978-0-415-10762-4
|origyear=1942
}}[/ref]
In Schumpeter's vision of capitalism, innovative entry by entrepreneurs was the disruptive force that sustained economic growth, even as it destroyed the value of established companies and laborers that enjoyed some degree of monopoly power derived from previous technological, organizational, regulatory, and economic paradigms. However, Schumpeter was pessimistic about the sustainability of this process, seeing it as leading eventually to the undermining of capitalism's own institutional frameworks:
Schumpeter nevertheless elaborated the concept, making it central to his economic theory, and it was later taken up as a major doctrine of the so-called Austrian School of free-market economic thought.

Examples

thumb|right|Polaroid instant cameras have disappeared almost completely with the spread of digital photography." He wrote, "The Illinois Central not only meant very good business whilst it was built and whilst new cities were built around it and land was cultivated, but it spelled the death sentence for the old agriculture of the West."Schumpeter, J. A. (1949): The historical approach to the analysis of business cycles, in Essays: On Entrepreneurs, Innovations, Business Cycles, and the Evolution of Capitalism, New Brunswick, N.J. and London: Transaction, p. 349. As quoted by "Schumpeter and Regional Innovation" by Esben S. Andersen. Chapter for Handbook of Regional Innovation and Growth. (ed. P. Cooke, Elgar Publ.)
Companies that once revolutionized and dominated new industries – for example, Xerox in copiersSurviving the Gales of Creative Destruction: The Determinants of Product Turnover, John M. de Figueiredo & Margaret K. Kyle, 12 September 2004. or Polaroid in instant photography have seen their profits fall and their dominance vanish as rivals launched improved designs or cut manufacturing costs. In technology the cassette tape replaced the 8-track, only to be replaced in turn by the compact disc, which was undercut by MP3 players, which will in turn eventually be replaced by newer technologies. Companies which made money out of technology which becomes obsolete do not necessarily adapt well to the business environment created by the new technologies.
One such example is the way in which online ad-supported news sites such as The Huffington Post and Zero Hedge are leading to creative destruction of the traditional newspaper.  The Christian Science Monitor announced in January 2009Creative Destruction and Innovation in The News Industry John Gaynard's blog, January 21, 2009. that it would no longer continue to publish a daily paper edition, but would be available online daily and provide a weekly print edition. The Seattle Post-Intelligencer became online-only in March 2009.  Traditional French alumni networks, which typically charge their students to network online or through paper directories, are in danger of creative destruction from free social networking sites such as Linkedin and Viadeo.
In fact, successful innovation is normally a source of temporary market power, eroding the profits and position of old firms, yet ultimately succumbing to the pressure of new inventions commercialised by competing entrants. Creative destruction is a powerful economic concept because it can explain many of the dynamics or kinetics of industrial change: the transition from a competitive to a monopolistic market, and back again. It has been the inspiration of endogenous growth theory and also of evolutionary economics. Nelson, Katherine Nelson Technology, institutions, and innovation systems. Research Policy 31 (2002), pp. 265–272.
David Ames Wells (1890), who was a leading authority on the effects of technology on the economy in the late 19th century, gave many examples of creative destruction (without using the term) brought about by improvements in steam engine efficiency, shipping, the international telegraph network, and agricultural mechanization.

Criticisms

Creative destruction can cause temporary economic distress,
However, some believe that in the long term society as a whole (including the descendants of those who experienced short-term hardship) enjoys a rise in overall quality of life due to the accumulation of innovation. For example, 90% of Americans were farmers in 1790, while 2.6% of Americans were farmers in 1990.A History of American Agriculture 1776–1990 United States Department of Agriculture.  Over those 200 years farm jobs were destroyed by exponential productivity gains in agricultural technology and replaced by jobs in new industries.  Present day farmers and non-farmers alike enjoy much more prosperous lifestyles than their counterparts in 1790.A History of American Agriculture 1776–1990 United States Department of Agriculture.
In terms of individuals recovering from obsolescence caused by creative destruction, when a small entity lacks sufficient resources to retrain, this can lead to an absorbing state which may persist due to information asymmetries that restrict borrowing.  Small entities or individuals may prefer in such cases to obtain insurance, (particularly if they are risk-averse), although again this may be a problem due to adverse selection.  Large entities may wish to drive smaller entities to an absorbing state as an anticompetitive practice.
(See also Kreps et al.'s solution to Selten's chainstore paradox) (This can also be conceptualized as raising the stakes in no-limit poker). Consequently, it may be more efficient for the overall economy to provide insurance (perhaps even mandatory insurance in order to obtain a "pooling equilibrium"), since insurance can give small entities and individuals sufficient resources to have the activation energy needed to retrain and escape the absorbing state.

Later developments

Ludwig Lachmann

David Harvey

Geographer and historian David Harvey in a series of works from the 1970s onwards (Social Justice and the City, 1973;) ensue, often impelling technological innovation. Such innovation, however, is a double-edged sword:
Globalization can be viewed as some ultimate form of time-space compression, allowing capital investment to move almost instantaneously from one corner of the globe to another, devaluing fixed assets and laying off labour in one urban conglommeration while opening up new centres of manufacture in more profitable sites for production operations. Hence, in this continual process of creative destruction, capitalism does not resolve its contradictions and crises, but merely "moves them around geographically".

Marshall Berman

In his 1987 book All That is Solid Melts into Air: The Experience of Modernity, particularly in the chapter entitled "Innovative Self-Destruction" (pp. 98–104), Marshall Berman provides a reading of Marxist "creative destruction" to explain key processes at work within modernity. The title of the book is taken from a well-known passage from The Communist Manifesto. Berman elaborates this into something of a Zeitgeist which has profound social and cultural consequences:
Here Berman emphasizes Marx's perception of the fragility and evanescence of capitalism's immense creative forces, and makes this apparent contradiction into one of the key explanatory figures of modernity.

Manuel Castells

The renowned sociologist Manuel Castells, in his trilogy on The Information Age: Economy, Society and Culture (the first volume of which, The Rise of the Network Society, appeared in 1996), reinterpreted the processes by which capitalism invests in certain regions of the globe, while divesting from others, using the new paradigm of "informational networks". In the era of globalization, capitalism is characterized by near-instantaneous flow, creating a new spatial dimension, "the space of flows". Castells explicitly links these arguments to the notion of creative destruction:
| issn = 0091-7729
| volume = 33
| issue = 1
| pages = 18–29
| last = Harding
| first = Robert
| title = Manuel Castells' Technocultural Epoch in "The Information Age"
| journal = Science Fiction Studies
| date = March 2006
| jstor = 4241406
}}[/ref]

Others

In 1992, the idea of creative destruction was put into formal mathematical terms by Philippe Aghion and Peter Howitt, giving an alternative model of endogenous growth compared to Paul Romer's expanding varieties model.
In 1995, Harvard Business School authors Richard L. Nolan and David C. Croson released Creative Destruction:  A Six-Stage Process for Transforming the Organization.  The book advocated downsizing to free up slack resources, which could then be reinvested to create competitive advantage.
More recently, the idea of "creative destruction" was utilized by Max Page in his 1999 book, The Creative Destruction of Manhattan, 1900–1940.  The book traces Manhattan's constant reinvention, often at the expense of preserving a concrete past. Describing this process as "creative destruction," Page describes the complex historical circumstances, economics, social conditions and personalities that have produced crucial changes in Manhattan's cityscape.
In addition to Max Page, others have used the term "creative destruction" to describe the process of urban renewal and modernization. T.C. Chang and Shirlena Huang referenced "creative destruction" in their paper Recreating place, replacing memory: Creative Destruction at the Singapore River. The authors explored the efforts to redevelop a waterfront area that reflected a vibrant new culture while paying sufficient homage to the history of the region.
The term "creative destruction" has been applied to the arts. Alan Ackerman and Martin Puncher (2006) edited a collection of essays under the title Against Theater: Creative destruction on the modernist stage. They detail the changes and the causal motivations experienced in theater as a result of the modernization of both the production of performances and the underlying economics. They speak of how theater has reinvented itself in the face of anti-theatricality, straining the boundaries of the traditional to include more physical productions, which might be considered avant-garde staging techniques.
Neoconservative author Michael Ledeen argued in his 2002 book The War Against the Terror Masters that America is a revolutionary nation, undoing traditional societies: "Creative destruction is our middle name, both within our own society and abroad. We tear down the old order every day, from business to science, literature, art, architecture, and cinema to politics and the law." His characterization of creative destruction as a model for social development has met with fierce opposition from paleoconservatives.
Creative destruction has also been linked to sustainable development. The connection was explicitly mentioned for the first time by Stuart L. Hart and Mark B. Milstein in their 1999 article Global Sustainability and the Creative Destruction of Industries,

Alternative name

Per the following text, this process is also known as Schumpeter's Gale:

Media reflections of creative destruction

The film Other People's Money (1991) provides contrasting views of creative destruction, presented in two speeches regarding the takeover of a publicly traded wire and cable company in a small New England town. One speech is by a corporate raider, and the other is given by the company CEO, who is principally interested in protecting his employees and the town.





Further reading


