[[She Bop]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 singles, Cyndi Lauper songs, Songs with feminist themes, Songs written by Cyndi Lauper, LGBT-related songs

"She Bop" is a song by American singer Cyndi Lauper, released as the  third single from her album She's So Unusual. It reached number three on the U.S. Billboard Hot 100 chart in September 1984. Worldwide, the song is her most commercially successful single after "Time After Time", and reached number 46 on the UK Singles Chart and number 6 on the ARIA Singles Chart. "She Bop" was her third consecutive Top 5 on the Hot 100.

Song information

The song was considered controversial, as it dealt with the subject matter of masturbation. It was also included on the Parents Music Resource Center's "Filthy Fifteen" list, due to its sexual lyrics;  this led to the creation of the Parental Advisory sticker.  (Other songs on the "Filthy Fifteen" list included tracks by Madonna, Prince, and AC/DC.) In an interview on The Howard Stern Show, Lauper stated that she recorded the vocals of the song while nude.
Lauper said she wanted little kids to think the song was about dancing, and to understand the real meaning as they got older. She never directly stated in the song what the meaning of the song was, so it could receive airplay.
The single has been released in over 32 variations across the world, the most common being a two track 7" vinyl single (with varying covers) and a two track 12" vinyl single (also with varying covers).
Lauper recorded a slow ballad version of the song for her album The Body Acoustic.
Lauper stated at a concert during her 2013 She's So Unusual anniversary tour that she recorded the song topless in a dark room and tickled herself under her arms which is why there is her laughter on the track.

Chart performance

"She Bop" was released on July 2, 1984 and became a success. The single debuted on the Billboard Hot 100 at #52 in the issue dated July 21, 1984,

Music video

An accompanying music video aired heavily on MTV and featured Lauper as a quirky sexual liberator leading the brainwashed masses to their own liberation. (This was done in metaphor showing teenagers as fast-food consuming zombies.) There were many double entendres indicating the song's true meaning, including a magazine that Lauper is staring at titled "Beefcake" and other sexual meanings such as the "self-service" sign and three gas pumps with the signs Good, Better and Nirvana in the cartoon part of the video, the vibrating motorcycle, the "masterbingo" part of the video with "Uncle Siggy" Sigmund Freud as host, and Lauper wearing blackout glasses with a white cane in several scenes of the video.  In fact, the video doesn't go as far as the lyrics, as the magazine referenced in the song ("... Nor did the lyrical reference come out of the blue: Lauper has stated that finding a copy of Blueboy lying around in the recording studio provided the impetus for writing "She Bop."
The music video was directed by Edd Griles.mvdbase.php?id=16169 Mark Marek was in charge of the animated sections of this music video, and the cover of the US 12" version.discogs.com/Cyndi-Lauper-She-Bop/release/531814

Official versions

US/UK 7" Single
US 12" Single
UK 12" Single

Cover versions

Charts and certifications

Charts

Certifications

Awards and nominations






