[[Hadleigh, Suffolk]]

CATEGORIES: Civil parishes in Suffolk, Towns in Suffolk, Babergh

Hadleigh is an ancient market town and civil parish in South Suffolk, East Anglia, situated between the larger towns of Sudbury and Ipswich. The headquarters of Babergh District Council are located in the town, which at the 2001 census had a population of 7,235.

History

Guthrum, King of the Danes, is said to be buried in the grounds of St Mary's Church in the town.D. Dumville and M. Lapidge (eds) Annals of St. Neots Cambridge 1984 He was defeated by King Alfred at  the battle of Edington in 878.
Hadleigh was one of the East Anglian towns that derived its prosperity from its wool and cloth industries. It has a 15th-century timber-framed Guildhall and many fine examples of timber and brick listed buildings, some with highly detailed 17th century plasterwork or "pargeting". Most of these buildings can be found in the High Street, Angel Street, Benton Street, and the immediately surrounding area.
The town has a total of 246 listed buildings.

Religion

The Anglican church of St Mary the Virgin is an active parish church in the archdeaconry of Ipswich in the Diocese of St Edmundsbury and Ipswich. Its earliest parts date from medieval times. On 26 April 1950 the church was designated a Grade I listed building by English Heritage. The Grade I designation is the highest of the three grades and is for buildings that are "of exceptional interest, sometimes considered to be internationally important."
The deanery, a highly distinctive brick building next to the church, is also a Grade I listed building.
Like its near neighbour, East Bergholt, Hadleigh was known during the 16th century for its Protestant radicalism. Rowland Taylor, a preacher from the town, and his curate, Richard Yeoman, were martyred during the reign of Queen Mary I. The Oxford Movement was said to have been founded in 1833 following a meeting in the deanery.
As well as the Anglican church, the town also supports a United Reformed Church, a Baptist chapel, a Salvation Army congregation and a Roman Catholic church.
In April 2011 the historic clock bell in the Anglican church was silenced by a pair of nesting jackdaws.

Culture

The Hadleigh Show, first held in 1840 and also known as 'the May Show', is one of the oldest agricultural shows in East Anglia.
The noted 20th century painter and plantsman Cedric Morris moved to Hadleigh in the 1930s, establishing the East Anglian School of Painting and Drawing at Benton End, a rambling farmhouse on the edge of the town. 59–60
The BBC television series Lovejoy was partly filmed in Hadleigh for its first two series.

Sport and leisure

Hadleigh has a Non-League football club Hadleigh United F.C. who play at Millfield.
The town's bowls and cricket clubs are among the oldest in Suffolk. The bowls club was founded in 1754.

Economy

Suffolk is home to several manufacturers, including Jim Lawrence Handcrafted Home Furnishings,
The Brett Works site, off Pound Lane, was for some years the home of Brett Valley Joinery and was later allocated by Babergh District Council as a potential site for a new foodstore. Supermarket giant Tesco has made a number of controversial proposals for the building of a store in the town. Their latest proposal, for development of the Pound Lane site, was rejected by the council in July 2011.

Notable people





| title = East Anglian Film Archive: "Hadleigh" search results – eafa.uk
| url =
| accessdate =1 May 2012}}

