[[Kea]]

CATEGORIES: Birds of New Zealand, Parrots, Nestor, Onomatopoeias, Endemic fauna of New Zealand, Māori words and phrases, Animals described in 1856

The Kea ( long, it is mostly olive-green with a brilliant orange under its wings and has a large, narrow, curved, grey-brown upper beak. The Kea is the world's only alpine parrot. Its omnivorous diet includes carrion, but consists mainly of roots, leaves, berries, nectar, and insects. Now uncommon, the Kea was once killed for bounty due to concerns by the sheep-farming community that it attacked livestock, especially sheep. It received full protection only in 1986., Morris, R. (2000) Field Guide To New Zealand Wildlife. Auckland: Harper Collins. (ISBN 1-86950-300-7)
The Kea nests in burrows or crevices among the roots of trees. Kea are known for their intelligence and curiosity, both vital to their survival in a harsh mountain environment. Kea can solve logical puzzles, such as pushing and pulling things in a certain order to get to food, and will work together to achieve a certain objective. (1 hour documentary)

Taxonomy and naming

The Kea was described by ornithologist John Gould in 1856. (1856). On two new species of birds (Nestor notabilis and Spatula variegata) from the collection of Walter Mantell, Esq. Proceedings of the Zoological Society of London, 94–95. Its specific epithet, the Latin term notabilis, means "noteworthy". The common name is from Māori, probably representing the screech of the bird. Updated 1 March 2009. Retrieved 21 January 2010. The term "Kea" is both singular and plural.
The genus Nestor contains four species: the New Zealand Kaka (Nestor meridionalis), the Kea (N. notabilis), the extinct Norfolk Kaka (N. productus), and the extinct Chatham Kaka (N. sp.). All four are thought to stem from a "proto-Kākā", dwelling in the forests of New Zealand five million years ago.
A gathering or group of Kea is called a circus.

Description

The Kea is a large parrot about . Juveniles generally resemble adults, but have yellow eyerings and cere, an orange-yellow lower beak, and grey-yellow legs. plate 23.

Distribution and habitat

The Kea is one of ten endemic parrot species in New Zealand.
The Kea ranges from lowland river valleys and coastal forests of the South Island's west coast up to the alpine regions of the South Island such as Arthur's Pass and Aoraki/Mount Cook National Park, closely associated throughout its range with the southern beech (Nothofagus) forests in the alpine ridge. Apart from occasional vagrants, Kea are not found in the North Island, although fossil evidence suggests a population lived there over 10,000 years ago.R.N. Holdaway and T.H. Worthy (1993). First North Island fossil record of kea, and morphological and morphometric comparison of kea and kaka, Notornis, 40(2), 95–108
The population was estimated at between 1,000 and 5,000 individuals in 1986,Anderson, R. (1986) Keas for keeps. Forest and Bird, 17, 2–5 contrasting with another estimate of 15,000 birds in 1992. and Diamond, J. (1992). Population Estimates of kea in Arthur's Pass National Park, Notornis 39, 151–160. Both estimates rely upon assumptions. The Kea's widespread distribution at low density across inaccessible areas prevents accurate estimates., Kemp, J. (1999) Conservation ecology of Kea (Nestor notabilis). Report. WWF New Zealand.

Interactions with humans

The Kea's notorious urge to explore and manipulate makes this bird a pest for residents and an attraction for tourists. Called "the clown of the mountains",  it will investigate backpacks, boots, or even cars, often causing damage or flying off with smaller items.  Kea have been kept as pets before being protected, but rarely, since they were difficult to capture and destructive when in captivity.
People commonly encounter wild Kea at South Island ski areas. The Kea are attracted by the prospect of food scraps. Their curiosity leads them to peck and carry away unguarded items of clothing or to pry apart rubber parts of cars — to the entertainment and annoyance of human observers. They are often described as "cheeky". A Kea has even been reported to have made off with a Scottish man's passport while he was visiting Fiordland National Park. Retrieved 22 January 2010.
Some people believe that the unbalanced diet resulting from feeding Kea human foods has a detrimental effect on the birds' health. The Department of Conservation also suggest that the time savings resulting from a more calorie-rich diet will give Kea more free time to investigate and hence damage things at campsites and car parks.
The birds' naturally trusting behaviour around humans has also been indicated as a contributing factor in a number of recent incidents at popular tourist spots where Kea have been purposely killed.

Lifespan

Mortality is high among young Kea, with less than 40% surviving their first year. Kea Factsheet, Kea Conservation Trust, April 2009. Retrieved 22 January 2010. The median lifespan of a wild subadult Kea has been estimated at five years, based on the proportion of Kea seen again in successive seasons in Arthur's Pass, and allowing for some emigration to surrounding areas. Around 10% of the local Kea population were expected to be over 20 years of age. The oldest known captive Kea was 50 years old in 2008.

Breeding

At least one observer has reported that the Kea is polygynous, with one male attached to multiple females. The same source also noted that there was a surplus of females. R. (1962). The life of the Kea. Canterbury Mountaineer 31, 120–123.
Kea are social and live in groups of up to 13 birds.M.H. (1970) Observations on population, movements and food of the kea, Nestor notabilis, Notornis, 17, 105–114. Isolated individuals do badly in captivity, but respond well to mirror images. Bond (1989) Note on the lasting responsiveness of a kea Nestor notabilis toward its mirror image, Avicultural Magazine 95(2):92–94.
In one study, nest sites occur at a density of one per 4.4 km²., Kemp, J. (1999) Conservation ecology of kea (Nestor notabilis). Report. WWF New Zealand. The breeding areas are most commonly in southern beech (Nothofagus) forests, located on steep mountainsides. Breeding at heights of 1600 m above sea level and higher, it is one of the few parrot species in the world to regularly spend time above the tree line. Nest sites are usually positioned on the ground underneath large beech trees, in rock crevices, or dug burrows between roots. They are accessed by tunnels leading back 1 to 6 m into a larger chamber, which is furnished with lichens, moss, ferns, and rotting wood. The laying period starts in July and reaches into January. R. (1960). Keas at Arthur's Pass. Notornis 9, 39–58. Two to five white eggs are laid, with an incubation time of around 21 days, and a brooding period of 94 days. Collins, London (ISBN 0-00-212022-4)

Diet

An omnivore, the Kea feeds on more than 40 plant species (table), beetle larva, other birds (including shearwater chicks), and mammals (including sheep and rabbits). It has been observed breaking open shearwater nests to feed on the chicks after hearing the chicks in their nests. Birds of open country – kea digging out a shearwater chick, Te Ara – the Encyclopedia of New Zealand, Ministry of Culture and Heritage. Updated 20 November 2009. Accessed 22 January 2010. The Kea has also taken advantage of human garbage and "gifts" of food.K., Fijn, N., Huber, L. (2006) Limited spread of innovation in a wild parrot, the kea (Nestor notabilis). Animal Cognition, 9, 173–181.  In captivity, the bird is fond of butter, nuts, apples, carrots, grapes, mangoes, figs, bread, dairy products, ground meat, and pasta.
The controversy about whether the Kea preys on sheep is long-running. Sheep suffering from unusual wounds on their sides or loins were noticed by the mid-1860s, within a decade of sheep farmers moving into the high country. Although some supposed the cause was a new disease, suspicion soon fell on the Kea. James MacDonald, head shepherd at Wanaka Station, witnessed a Kea attacking a sheep in 1868, and similar accounts were widespread. B. (1906). Notes on the Flesh-eating Propensity of the Kea (Nestor notabilis).  Transactions of the Royal Society of New Zealand, 39, 71–89. Prominent members of the scientific community accepted that Kea attacked sheep, with Alfred Wallace citing this as an example of behavioural change in his 1889 book Darwinism. Despite substantial anecdotal evidence of these attacks, others remained unconvinced, especially in later years. For instance, in 1962, animal specialist J.R. Jackson concluded, while the bird may attack sick or injured sheep, especially if it mistook them for dead, it was not a significant predator.R. (1962). Do kea attack sheep? Notornis 10, 33–38. In 1993, however, its nocturnal assaults were captured on video, proving that at least some Kea will attack and feed on healthy sheep. The video confirmed what many scientists had long suspected, that the Kea uses its powerful, curved beak and claws to rip through the layer of wool and eat the fat from the back of the animal. Though the bird does not directly kill the sheep, death can result from infections or accidents suffered by animals when trying to escape.
There were also anecdotal reports of Kea attacking rabbits, dogs, and even horses.
The Kea has been observed feeding on the following plants:
thumb|right|Kea on forest edge

Threats and conservation

Together with local councils and runholders, the New Zealand government paid a bounty for Kea bills because the bird preyed upon livestock, mainly sheep. R. (1906) Notes on the Natural History of the Kea, with Special Reference to its Reputed Sheep-killing Propensities.  Transactions of the Royal Society of New Zealand, 39, 271–305. R. (1907) Additional Notes on the Kea. Transactions of the Royal Society of New Zealand, 40, 534–537 and Plates XXXII-XXXIV. It was intended that hunters would kill Kea only on the farms and council areas that paid the bounty, but some hunted them in national parks and in Westland, where they were officially protected. More than 150,000 were killed in the hundred years before 1970, when the bounty was lifted. (1996) The Book of the Kea. Auckland: Hodder Moa Beckett. (ISBN 0-340-600039) In the 1970s, the Kea received partial protection after a census counted only 5,000 birds. The government agreed to investigate any reports of problem birds and have them removed from the land., Bond, A. (1999) Kea. Bird of paradox. The evolution and behavior of a New Zealand Parrot. Berkeley; Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press. (ISBN 0-520-21339-4) It was not until 1986 that it was given full protection under the Wildlife Act 1953.
A study of Kea numbers in Nelson Lakes National Park showed a substantial decline in the population between 1999 and 2009, caused primarily by predation of Kea eggs and chicks.
Lead poisoning, mostly from building materials, is also a significant cause of premature deaths among Kea.
Toxins used to control invasive pest mammals such as stoats and possums have also been implicated in Kea deaths. For example, 7 Kea were found dead following an aerial possum control operation at Fox Glacier in July 2008
Despite being classified as Nationally Endangered in the New Zealand Threat Classification System and in 2008, two Kea were shot in Arthur's Pass and stapled to a sign.

Cultural references

The kea featured on the reverse side of the New Zealand $10 note between 1967 and 1992, when it was replaced with the whio.





 

