[[University of La Verne]]

CATEGORIES: University of La Verne, Independent Colleges of Southern California, Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference, Universities and colleges affiliated with the Church of the Brethren, Universities and colleges in the San Fernando Valley, Educational institutions established in 1891, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Schools accredited by the Western Association of Schools and Colleges, San Gabriel Valley, 1891 establishments in California

The University of La Verne is a private not-for-profit university located in La Verne, California, United States, about  east of Los Angeles. Founded in 1891, the university is composed of the College of Arts & Sciences, College of Business & Public Management, College of Education and Organizational Leadership, College of Law, and a Regional Campus Administration that oversees seven regional campuses. It awards both undergraduate and graduate degrees. Many of their classes are taught at smaller campuses throughout the greater Los Angeles area.

History

The University of La Verne was founded in 1891 as Lordsburg College by members of the Church of the Brethren, a German Christian sect originating from the Schwarzenau Brethren. Historically, the Brethren are considered one of the "peace churches", like the Quakers and the Mennonites. A Profile of the Church of the Brethren. Elgin, IL: Brethren Press. See also Bowman, Carl (2008), Portrait of a People: The Church of the Brethren at 300. Elgin, IL: Brethren Press
Both the surrounding agricultural community and the College were renamed La Verne in 1917. The College reorganized in 1977 as the University of La Verne. At present, the structure of the University consists of the College of Arts and Sciences, the College of Business and Public Management, the College of Education, the College of Law, and Regional Campuses.
The school conferred its first master's degree in 1965 and began an adult education program in 1969. ULV awarded its first doctorate in 1979. In 1981, the University founded a campus in Orange County and has since opened campuses throughout southern California, including on some military bases. Despite its Church of the Brethren heritage the university describes itself as non-sectarian.laverne.edu/chaplain/religious-life-at-la-verne/

Campus heritage

Founders Hall on the main campus contains reminders of the university's Christian heritage. The founding plaque, placed in 1927, states that the university is "dedicated..." In the top level of stacks at Wilson Library, the LaVerne founding fathers are shown in the costume of the Brethren. The cornerstone of the main building reads: "Christ Jesus Himself is the chief corner stone." Slots on the Board of Trustees are still held for members of the Brethren. The baccalaureate ceremony is held at the local Church of the Brethren, and the holder of the post of campus minister must be a member of the Church of the Brethren.Herb Hogan and Gladdys Muir's The University of La Verne: A Centennial History: 1891–1991 (1990)

Campus locations

Military satellite campuses:

Academics

La Verne Online offers select programs through online coursework and some programs offer student choice on whether to take a class on campus or online; some of the programs which participate are:
Programs include:
The Elvin and Betty Wilson Library—La Verne's main library—contains over 193,000 volumes and access to over 70 academic databases.

College of Law

The University of La Verne College of Law was founded in 1970 and is currently located in Ontario, California. In February 2006, the College of Law was provisionally accredited by the American Bar Association, allowing students to take the bar exam and become practicing attorneys in any U.S. jurisdiction.
In June 2011, the American Bar Association denied the University of La Verne full ABA accreditation.
On August 29, 2011, the school announced it received accreditation from the Committee of Bar Examiners of the State Bar of California.
In March 2012, the ABA again granted provisional approval.

Athletics

La Verne offers 19 intercollegiate athletic teams—10 sports for men and nine for women. The ULV Leopards are a member of the Southern California Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (SCIAC) and compete at the NCAA Division III level.
La Verne has captured numerous SCIAC Championships, and has claimed NCAA team titles in baseball (1995), Men's Volleyball (1999)

Accreditation and memberships

The University of La Verne is accredited by the Accrediting Commission for Senior Colleges and Universities of the Western Association of Schools and Colleges (WASC).
Military Memberships

Council of Civilian and Military Educators (CCME)

National Association of Institutions for Military Education Services (Naimes)

Western Association of Veteran Education Specialists (Waves)
Psychology

The Doctorate in Clinical-Community Psychology is accredited by the American Psychological Association.
Public Administration

The Master of Public Administration program is accredited by the National Association of Schools of Public Affairs and Administration (NASPAA).
Teaching/Education

Credential programs are approved by the California Commission on Teacher Credentialing (CCTC).

Publications

Notable alumni






