[[Edam cheese]]

CATEGORIES: Dutch cheeses, Cow's-milk cheeses, Edam-Volendam

Edam ( Company website.

Content

Most "young" Edam cheese sold in stores has a very mild flavor, slightly salty or nutty, and  almost no smell when compared to other cheeses.  As the cheese ages, its flavor sharpens, and it becomes firmer.  It has a significantly lower fat-content than many other traditional cheeses; fat comprises as little as 28 percent of the cheese. Modern Edam is softer than other cheeses, such as Cheddar, due to its low fat-content. However, it is not quite as suitable for toasting as are certain other cheeses, such as Cheddar.

Accompaniments

Mild Edam goes well with fruit such as peaches, melons, apricots, and cherries. Aged Edam is often eaten with traditional "cheese fruits" like pears and apples. Like most cheeses, it is commonly eaten on crackers and bread, and may be eaten with crackers following the main course of a meal as a dessert of "cheese and biscuits". Pinot gris, dry Riesling, semidry Riesling, Champagne, Chardonnay and Shiraz/Syrah are some recommended wines to accompany this cheese.com. Retrieved April 8, 2010.

Popularity

Edam cheese is popular in North America, the Nordic countries, and many other countries around the world. In Spain and many Latin American countries, the cheese was long considered a delicacy. In the Mexican state of Yucatan, it is prepared as queso relleno (stuffed cheese). A ball of cheese is cut in half and carved out; it is then stuffed with a mixture seasoned ground meat, raisins, capers and olives. Finally, it is braised in chicken stock, and served sliced with the chicken stock that has been thickened with cornstarch and spiced tomato sauce.  Yucatan Today. Retrieved 2013-02-05.  It is the most common cheese used in Czech republic and also very often used as base of the popular snack ()Vyprážaný syr  AuthenticSlovakia.  Retrieved 2010-11-13.
where it may be served with a slice of ham (),Slovak Food   Retrieved 2010-11-10. and always with tartar sauce (tatárska omáčka) or mayonnaise. In the Philippines, Edam is better known as queso de bola. Edam is especially popular during the Christmas season, when it is customary for Filipinos to serve and dine with family and friends during the nochebuena feast, or the Christmas Eve meal. It is commonly served with  jamón and pan de sal. Our one-of-a-kind 'queso de bola'. Philippine Daily Inquirer.  Its is also associated with Christmas in Sweden due to its red color, and is often found on the Christmas "Julbord" buffet.

In popular culture

Edam has been treated dramatically and humorously in a variety of cultural art forms. In the novel All Quiet on the Western Front, the main character believes its red outer covering is a sign of impending death. It is a wine flavor nuance in Sideways






