[[Martha Plimpton]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, Actresses from New York City, American child actresses, American film actresses, American stage actresses, American television actresses, Drama Desk Award winners, Obie Award recipients, People from Manhattan, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Primetime Emmy Award winners, Living people

Martha Campbell Plimpton (born November 16, 1970) is an American stage, screen and film actress, singer and former model. Her feature film debut was in The River Rat (1984) before rising to prominence in the Richard Donner film The Goonies (1985). She has also appeared in The Mosquito Coast, Running on Empty (1988), Parenthood (1989) and Small Town Murder Songs (2011).
She is recognized on Broadway for her roles in The Coast of Utopia  (2006–2007), Top Girls (2007–2008), Pal Joey (2008–2009) and Shining City (2006–2007). She has performed in theatre productions of The Playboy of the Western World, A Midsummer Night's Dream, The Glass Menagerie, The Sisters Rosensweig, and Uncle Vanya.
Plimpton most recently played Virginia Chance on the FOX television series Raising Hope, which earned her a Primetime Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series. She has received a further two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series, as well as three Tony Award nominations.

Early life

Plimpton was born Martha Campbell Carradine and, despite the different spelling, cartoonist Bill Plympton.plymptoons.html "But through my beautiful and talented cousin, Martha Plimpton (the star of Broadway), David, her uncle, was kind enough to do a starring voice in my wonderful film "Hair High." She attended the Professional Children's School in Manhattan. "So Odd, but Lately in Classic Fashion", The New York Times, November 25, 2007. Retrieved November 25, 2007. "ON a break from rehearsals for "Cymbeline" at Lincoln Center Martha Plimpton dashed outside for a cigarette and immediately ran into a classmate from her alma mater, the nearby Professional Children's School." Her first stage appearance was when her mother brought her on stage in costume for the curtain call of the short-lived Broadway play The Leaf People."Working in the Theatre" – April 2004 panel discussion at American Theatre Wing

Career

1980s

Plimpton began her career as a model, securing an early 1980s campaign for Calvin Klein, making an impression as a sophisticated but tomboyish little girl. She made her screen debut in 1981, when at age 11 she had a small part in the film Rollover. In 1984, she appeared in the Deep South drama The River Rat opposite Tommy Lee Jones. Her breakthrough performance was as Stef Steinbrenner in the 1985  film The Goonies. She also appeared that year on the television sitcom Family Ties.
This began a trend of Plimpton being typecast in the role of a rebellious tomboy, beginning with her critically lauded performance as the Reverend Spellgood (Andre Gregory)'s daughter in the 1986 film The Mosquito Coast, starring Harrison Ford. The critically praised but commercially unsuccessful 1987 film Shy People (co-starred with Barbara Hershey and Jill Clayburgh) was followed by a performance in the 1988 ensemble comedy Stars and Bars. This was released shortly before Running on Empty, an Academy Award-nominated film starring River Phoenix, for which she was nominated for a Young Artist Award.
She began a career trend, making small independent film appearances with supporting roles in big-budget films. She appeared in the 1989 Woody Allen film Another Woman; that year, she co-starred with Jami Gertz as a cancer patient in the German film Zwei Frauen (released in America as Silence Like Glass). The film was nominated for Outstanding Feature Film at the German Film Awards. Plimpton shaved her head to play a cancer patient in Zwei Frauen, and her reputation for playing rebellious teenagers secured her the role of the indignant teenage daughter (who shaves her head) of Dianne Wiest in Parenthood.  Plimpton appeared with Joaquin Phoenix (then credited as Leaf Phoenix), who portrayed her brother. Parenthood grossed over $126 million and received two Academy Award nominations, her most successful movie appearance since The Goonies.

1990s

In 1991, Plimpton appeared in the Robert De Niro film Stanley & Iris in a supporting role. She also appeared in theTV movie A Woman At War as the lead, Helene Moskiewicz alongside Eric Stolz.
In 1992, Plimpton appeared as a lesbian terrorist in the independent film Inside Monkey Zetterland. She played the starring role in the film Samantha.
The success of Samantha garnered Plimpton a variety of roles in 1993. She appeared with Cuba Gooding, Jr., in the television film Daybreak and was a part of the largely improvised television film Chantilly Lace. She had a featured role in the big-budget films Josh and S.A.M. and played the lead in the critically blasted film adaptation of the Carolyn Chute novel The Beans of Egypt, Maine. Plimpton also appeared as herself in the independent film My Life's in Turnaround, a movie about filmmakers trying to make a movie.
Plimpton continued to appear in featured roles in both independent films and mainstream movies from 1994 through 1997, most notably as a close friend of radical feminist Valerie Solanas in the film I Shot Andy Warhol.
In 1997, the Showtime Network cast Plimpton as the female lead in the television film, The Defenders: Payback. This show was a retooling of the classic television show by the same name, and the characters were descendants of Lawrence Preston, a role reprised by actor E.G. Marshall. The intent was to spin the program off as a series akin to Law & Order, but Marshall died in 1998. Two more episodes (The Defenders: Choice of Evils and The Defenders: Taking the First) were aired that year. The decision was made to not continue production (despite high ratings and critical praise) due to Marshall's death. 
Plimpton became involved with The Steppenwolf Theatre Company in Chicago, appearing in Hedda Gabler (2001) among others. This also happened with the 1999 film, 200 Cigarettes. In 1999, Plimpton played a recurring role in the television drama ER as Meg Corwyn.

2000s

In 2001, she co-starred with Jacqueline Bisset in The Sleepy Time Gal, and nominated for the Grand Jury Prize at Cannes Film Festival.
In 2002, she appeared in the documentary Searching for Debra Winger and nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award
From October 2006 until May 2007, she was in The Coast of Utopia, a trilogy of plays by Tom Stoppard at the Lincoln Center. For her work she won a Drama Desk Award and was nominated for a Tony award. In October 2007 Plimpton completed a starring role in A Midsummer Night's Dream on Broadway in New York City. She then began rehearsing for the play Cymbeline. She co-founded a production company, Everything is Horrible, which has produced short films for the internet.
Plimpton received her second nomination for a Tony Award in 2008, Best Performance by a Featured Actress In a Play, for her work in Top Girls at the Biltmore Theater.
In November 2008, she earned rave reviews as Gladys Bumps in the Roundabout Theatre Company production of the  Rodgers and Hart musical Pal Joey on Broadway and garnered her third consecutive Tony nomination, for Best Featured Actress in a Musical.
Plimpton appeared in the 2008 Entertainment Weekly photo issue spread as one of "The Hardest Working Actors In Showbiz."  she appears In the spread with Lance Reddick, Celia Weston, John Slattery, Bobby Cannavale, James Rebhorn, Lynn Cohen, Matt Servitto and Bob Balaban. Plimpton said in the write-up "I went to jury duty the other day, and somebody said, 'You always play drug addicts!' I've played a few on TV, and I imagine because the shows get replayed, it seems like more. But yeah, people tend to see me as this pregnant teenage heroin addict."

2010s

In November 2009, Plimpton signed on for the Fox sitcom Raising Hope. The show premiered on September 21, 2010, receiving strong reviews for  Plimpton and the pilot. The New York Times called Raising Hope "the most promising" of "the best new fall shows," and said "Plimpton isn't the only reason 'Raising Hope' could be the best new sitcom of the season, but she is the main reason."New York Times review of Raising Hope On July 14, 2011, Plimpton was nominated for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for her portrayal as Virginia Chance in Raising Hope and submitted the episode "Say Cheese" on her behalf.
Plimpton performed "God Bless America" during the seventh inning stretch of Game 3 of the 2010 World Series in Texas on Fox, October 30, 2010.
On December 15, 2010, Chicago's Steppenwolf Theatre announced that Plimpton will be the guest of honor at their second-annual "Salute to Women in the Arts".
In 2010, starred in Ed Gass-Donnelly's independent, the crime thriller Small Town Murder Songs, and was given a trophy for best actress by the Whistler Film Festival.

Activism

Plimpton has been politically active since she was a teenager, marching for women's reproductive freedom. She has lobbied Congress on behalf of Planned Parenthood and has spoken out for women's reproductive rights at campuses and rallies across the country. Martha "will work to see that a woman's right to physical self-determination becomes the standard in America for as long as it takes." She is one of the founders of "A Is for..."  Plimpton also served as a surrogate for the 2012 Obama reelection campaign, traveling the country to represent the campaign.Facebook

Other work

Plimpton is friends with singer Lucy Wainwright Roche. In 2008, she performed a duet with Roche on the E.P. 8 More singing the Bruce Springsteen song Hungry Heart. In 2010, she sang another Springsteen song, this time Thunder Road, on the public radio program Studio 360 with Kurt Andersen,  accompanied by whistler Eric Gilliland.
Plimpton sits on the board of directors of The Players,
In January 2010, she performed a one-woman show, Martha Plimpton Sings? for the Lincoln Center's American Songbook program. included songs "Jolly Coppers on Parade", "Woman Is the Nigger of the World", and The Smiths's "Ask" tied together with humorous monologues.
Plimpton also narrates audiobooks, notably the novels Diary by Chuck Palahniuk and Mrs. Kimble by Jennifer Haigh.

Media references

She is referenced in the Lawrence Arms song "Light Breathing (Me and Martha Plimpton in a Fancy Elevator)," a song detailing the singer unexpectedly stepping into an elevator with her, unable to overcome shyness to strike up a conversation.

Personal life

Plimpton is a member of the Carradine family.imdb.com/name/nm0000588/bio
Plimpton's high-profile relationship with River Phoenix, including their appearance together at the Academy Awards, overshadowed her work. The relationship ended due to her objection to Phoenix's recreational drug use, from which he died in 1993.
Plimpton was engaged to stage actor Jon Patrick Walker in March 1995. The couple were planning to wed in April 1996, according to Plimpton's spokeswomen. Shortly thereafter, the couple announced they would not be proceeding with their nuptials.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre

Broadway

The Public Theater's Shakespeare in the Park

Steppenwolf Theatre Company

Off Broadway

Seattle Repertory Theatre

New York Philharmonic

Awards and recognition

Plimpton has garnered three consecutive Tony Award nominations: In 2007 for Best Featured Actress in a Play for her role in Top Girls, in the same category in 2008 for Coast of Utopia, and for Best Featured Actress in a Musical in 2009 for Pal Joey. In 2002, she received an Emmy Award nomination for her performance in Law & Order: Special Victims Unit. She received a Primetime Emmy Award nomination in 2011 for Best Lead Actress in a Comedy in the first season of Raising Hope. She submitted the episode "Say Cheese." Plimpton won the 2012 Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series as Patti Nyholm on The Good Wife.
Plimpton won the 2001 Obie Award for Outstanding Performance for Hobson's Choice. She also won the Drama Desk Award and the Outer Critic's Circle Award for Best Featured Actress in a Play in 2008 for her role in Coast of Utopia, and was nominated  for a Drama Desk Award in 2009 for Pal Joey.
In film, Plimpton was nominated for three Young Artist Awards: Exceptional Performance by a Young Actress for Goonies, Best Young Female Superstar in Motion Pictures for The Mosquito Coast, and Best Young Actress in a Motion Picture for Running on Empty. She was nominated for an Independent Spirit Award in the Best Supporting Female category for her performance in Shy People.






