[[National Express Group]]

CATEGORIES: Companies established in 1972, Bus groups in the United Kingdom, Companies listed on the London Stock Exchange, National Express Group companies, Transport operators of the United Kingdom

National Express Group plc () is a multinational public transport company headquartered in Birmingham that operates bus, coach, train and tram services in the United Kingdom, United States, Canada, Spain, Portugal and Morocco and long-distance coach services across Europe. It is listed on the London Stock Exchange and is a constituent of the FTSE 250 Index.

History

In 1972 the state owned National Bus Company decided to bring together the scheduled coach services operated by its bus operating companies under one brand. Initially branded as National, the National Express brand was first used in 1974.
With the privatisation of the National Bus Company in the 1980s, National Express was subject to a management buyout in March 1988. The management team began to diversify, and in 1989 purchased Crosville WalesArriva Buses Wales history Arriva but its financial performance began to deteriorate from early 1990. A new management team took over the company in July 1991, with the backing of development and venture capital investors. The new team refocused the group on its core activities and sold Crosville Wales to British Bus.5 to 3.7 In October 1991 it purchased Speedlink, an operator of coach services between Gatwick and Heathrow Airports. In December 1992 National Express Group plc was floated on the London Stock Exchange. The prospectus stated the objectives of the company were to refocus and improve the profitability of the core coach business, to develop new products and services within its existing operations, and to acquire new businesses in the passenger transport market.

Acquisitions & Disposals

In 1993 Scottish Citylink, Eurolines and East Midlands Airport were acquired. This began the brand family of Travel ... local bus operations. Bournemouth Airport was acquired in April 1995.Bournemouth Airport History Bournemouth Airport
In April 1996 National Express commenced operating its first UK rail franchises, Gatwick Express and Midland Mainline. Other franchises won in 1997 were Silverlink, Central Trains and ScotRail. To comply with a Competition Commission ruling on it winning the ScotRail franchise, National Express sold the Scottish Citylink operation to Metroline in August 1998.gov.uk 29 May 1998History of Metroline Metroline
In February 1997 Taybus Public Transport was acquired and rebranded Travel Dundee.Travel Dundee - celebrating 10 years Travel Dundee news 23 February 2007
In September 1998 Crabtree-Harmon, the seventh largest student transportation bus company in the United States was acquired, with 82 school bus contracts mainly in Missouri, but also in other Midwest states including Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Oklahoma and Utah. In February 1999 Robinson Bus Service was purchased followed in August 1999 by Durham Transportation. These acquisitions placed National Express as one of the top three United States school bus operators.National Express buys US school bus firm The Independent 17 August 1999
In May 1999 National Express purchased Australia's largest private bus operator, National Bus Company. Westbus also had a London coach operation.National Express Group Awarded Three Franchises National Express corporate news June 1999Nation Express takes root in Melbourne Railway Gazette 1 October 2000
In July 2000 Prism Rail was purchased adding the c2c, Wales & Borders, Wessex Trains and West Anglia Great Northern franchises to National Express' portfolio.National Express £165m rail coup This is Money 17 July 2000National Express buys Prism for £166m The Telegraph 19 July 2000National Express buys Prism for £166m The Guardian 19 July 2000
In December 2002 National Express handed in its Victorian rail franchises having been unable to renegotiate financial terms with the State Government.National Express walks out of Australian rail service The Telegraph 17 December 2002Nat Express pull back Down Under The Telegraph 3 September 2004
In February 2004 the London bus operations of Connex were purchased and rebranded Travel London.National Express Group Announced as Preferred Bidder for New Greater Anglia Franchise Strategic Rail Authority press release 22 December 2003 In September 2004 National Express sold its Melbourne bus operations to Ventura Bus Lines, and Brisbane and Perth bus operations to Connex.New Westbus owners guarantee jobs, services Sydney Morning Herald 22 August 2005ComfortDelGro Cabcharge company profile ComfortDelGro Cabcharge
In June 2005 the London bus arm of Tellings-Golden Miller was purchased and also rebranded Travel London. Alsa's operations in South America and China were retained by the previous owners.National Express in Spanish Deal BBC News 11 October 2005
In April 2007 National Express acquired Continental Auto, the second largest bus and coach operator in Spain.National Express acquires Continental Auto National Express 27 April 2007
In November 2007 South East England coach operator The Kings Ferry was purchasedThe Group buys Kings Ferry Travel Group National Express 12 November 2007 and an airport to hotel shuttle service in London branded Dot2Dot was launched.National Express gives up on Dot2Dot busandcoach.com 3 November 2008
In November 2007 National Express announced plans to re-brand all of their operations under a new unified National Express identity. It coincided with the appointment of a group director for all UK operations and relocation of the head office from London to Birmingham, bringing all operations under a single strategic management structure. Day to day management remains within individual companies.Buses Magazine December 2007, Ian Allen Publishing
In December 2007 National Express East Coast commenced operating the InterCity East Coast franchise.National Express Group plc agreement to sell Travel London National Express 21 May 2009
In February 2013 National Express was awarded two regional rail contracts in Germany by the Verkehrsverbund Rhein-Ruhr authority to commence in December 2015.National Express celebrates German rail success National Express 7 February 2013National Express plans German invasion The Telegraph 7 February 2013

Default on East Coast rail franchise

On 1 July 2009, the Department for Transport announced that it would take the National Express East Coast franchise into public ownership at the end of the year after National Express announced it would not invest any further funds into the franchise, effectively declaring it planned on defaulting. Also in November 2009 the government announced that National Express East Anglia would not be granted a three-year extension that it had otherwise qualified for, because of the East Coast default.National Express loses East Anglia franchise three years early The Telegraph 26 November 2009

Operational safety concerns

On 3 January 2007 a speeding National Express coach overturned on the M4/M25 slip road, leaving three passengers dead. The driver was jailed for five years.
In July 2009, a junior transport minister, the Gillingham MP Paul Clark, spelt out a series of concerns to National Express in a letter following a meeting with an employee of National Express East Coast who lives in his constituency. The worker claimed that due to reduced maintenance checks, some trains were in use with defective brakes, an allegation strongly denied by the company, which said it would "never compromise on safety". He wrote: "As a result of reduced maintenance checks, 'some long-haul sets trains are in use with brake defects'. Increasing cuts in staff combined with an increasing pressure to ensure that trains run safely has resulted in fears among staff that a major accident is 'just around the corner'." Passengers, he added, "have been 'poisoned' as a result of coffee machines not being cleaned correctly, with cleaning fluids left in situ". The minister said he was "shocked and appalled at the information with which I've been provided. You will understand that these allegations are exceptionally serious".
School bus drivers in the US have raised concerns about the safety of the buses run by Durham, a subsidiary of National Express and the second largest operator of school bus services in North America. According to representatives of Durham bus drivers, fluid leaks, tires that need to be replaced, black mold and non-functional emergency equipment are regular concerns, whilst workers continued to operate buses while sick because they cannot afford to miss a day of work and drivers are not paid for all the time they work. 

Offers for the company

With the company's finances under stress largely as a result of having overbid for the National Express East Coast rail franchise, National Express became a takeover target in 2009. In June 2009 a takeover offer from fellow transport operator FirstGroup was rejected.
National Express agreed to allow the Cosmen/CVC consortium to undertake due diligence in September 2009. The deadline for offers was subsequently extended to 16 October 2009.Statement regarding possible offer National Express corporate news 25 September 2009
On 16 October 2009 the Cosmen/CVC consortium withdrew their offer.Publication of Prospectus National Express 11 November 2009

Operations

National Express' operations are summarised below:National Express Group: Our businesses National Express

UK & Europe

=Bus & coach operations=

The bus and coach services operated by the group are:

==Bus operations==

==Coach operations==

=Railway & tram operations=

The railway and tram services operated by the group are:

==Railway operations==

==Tram operations==

USA & Canada

=Bus & coach operations=

==Bus operations==

Former operations

UK & Europe

=Bus & coach operations=

==Bus operations==

In May 2009 National Express sold some of their bus operations to Abellio:

==Coach operations==

=Railway & Tram operations=

==Railway operations==

Rail franchises lost in refranchising were:

==London & Continental Railways==

National Express had a 17.5% shareholding in London & Continental Railways from its formation in September 1994 until it was nationalised by the UK Government in 2009. London & Continental Railways was responsible for building the High Speed 1 project. National Express also held a 40% stake in the Inter-Capital and Regional Rail consortium which held the management contract for the UK arm of the Eurostar operation, London & Continental Railway's subsidiary Eurostar International Limited from 1998 to 2010.

Airports

In the 1990s National Express moved into the privatisation of airports, purchasing East Midlands Airport, Bournemouth Airport, and Humberside Airport. In a move to concentrate on bus and rail provision, Humberside was sold to Manchester Airports Group in 1999 followed by Bournemouth and East Midlands in February 2001.Manchester Airports Group Annual Report 31 March 2001 Manchester Airport GroupManchester Airport spreads its wings BBC News 19 February 2001
Until November 2007 the group also operated Stewart International Airport in New Windsor, New York. However, the lease was sold to the public Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.4th Major Hub for Air Traffic moves ahead New York Times 25 January 2007

Australian operations

=Bus & coach=

Australian bus companies previously operated by the Group include:

=Railway & tram=

In 1999 the Group gained the Australian franchises M>Train, M>Tram and V/Line Passenger, following the privatisation of rail and tram services by the Government of Victoria. After incurring large losses and being unable to renegotiate the franchise contracts, the operations were handed back to the State Government. M>Train was re-let to Connex and M>Tram to KDR Melbourne. V/Line became a government-owned corporation.

USA & Canada

=Bus & coach operations=

==Bus operations==








