[[Cataract]]

CATEGORIES: Ophthalmology, Eye, Vision, Aging-associated diseases, Blindness, Disorders of lens

A cataract is a clouding of the lens inside the eye which leads to a decrease in vision. It is the most common cause of blindness and is conventionally treated with surgery. Visual loss occurs because opacification of the lens obstructs light from passing and being focused on to the retina at the back of the eye.
It is most commonly due to biological aging, but there are a wide variety of other causes. Over time, yellow-brown pigment is deposited within the lens and this, together with disruption of the normal architecture of the lens fibers, leads to reduced transmission of light, which in turn leads to visual problems.
Those with cataracts commonly experience difficulty in appreciating colors and changes in contrast, driving, reading, recognizing faces, and coping with glare from bright lights.

Signs and symptoms

Signs and symptoms vary depending on the type of cataract, though there is considerable overlap. People with nuclear sclerotic or brunescent cataracts often notice a reduction of vision. Those with posterior subcapsular cataracts usually complain of glare as their major symptom.
The severity of cataract formation, assuming that no other eye disease is present, is judged primarily by visual acuity test. The appropriateness of surgery depends on a patient's particular functional and visual needs and other risk factors, all of which may vary widely.

Causes

Age

Age is the most common cause.

Trauma

Blunt trauma causes swelling, thickening and whitening of the lens fibers. While the swelling normally resolves with time, the white color may remain. In severe blunt trauma, or injuries which penetrate the eye, the capsule in which the lens sits can be damaged. This allows water from other parts of the eye to rapidly enter the lens leading to swelling and then whitening, obstructing light from reaching the retina at the back of the eye. Following electrical injuries, cataracts may develop in 0.7 to 8%.

Radiation

Ultraviolet light, specifically UV-B, has been shown to cause cataracts and there is some evidence that sunglasses worn at an early age can slow its development in later life.  Finally, electric and heat injuries denature and whiten the lens itself as a result of direct protein coagulation. This is the same process through which the clear albumin of an egg becomes white and opaque after cooking. These types of cataracts are often seen in glass blowers and furnace workers. See Glassblower's cataract.
Lasers of sufficient power output are known to damage the eyes and skin. Also see Laser safety.

Genetics

The genetic component is strong in the development of cataracts, most commonly through mechanisms that protect and maintain the lens. The presence of cataracts in childhood or early life can occasionally be due to a particular syndrome.
Examples of  Chromosome abnormalities associated with cataracts include: 1q21.1 deletion syndrome, Cri-du-chat syndrome, Down syndrome, Patau's syndrome, Trisomy 18 (Edward's syndrome) and Turner's syndrome.
Examples of Single-gene disorder include: Alport's syndrome, Conradi's syndrome, Myotonic dystrophy, Oculocerebrorenal syndrome or Lowe syndrome

Skin diseases

The skin and the lens have the same embryological origin and can be affected by similar diseases. Those with Atopic dermatitis and Eczema will occasionally develop shield ulcers cataracts. Ichthyosis is an autosomal recessive disorder associated with cuneiform cataracts and nuclear sclerosis. Basal-cell nevus and Pemphigus have similar associations.

Drug use

Cigarette smoking has been shown to lead to a two-fold increase in the rate of nuclear sclerotic cataracts and a three-fold increase in posterior subcapsular cataracts.

Medications

Some drugs, such as corticosteroids, can induce cataract development.

Other diseases

Classification

Cataracts may be partial or complete, stationary or progressive, or hard or soft.  The main types of age-related cataracts are nuclear sclerosis, cortical, and posterior subcapsular.
Nuclear sclerosis is the most common type of cataract and involves the central or 'nuclear' part of the lens. Over time, this becomes hard or 'sclerotic' due to condensation of lens nucleus and deposition of brown pigment within the lens. In advanced stages it is called brunescent cataract. This type of cataract can present with a shift to nearsightedness and causes problems with distance vision while reading is less affected.
Cortical cataracts are due to opacification of the lens cortex (outer layer). They occur when changes in the water content of the periphery of the lens causes fissuring. When these cataracts are viewed through an ophthalmoscope or other magnification system, the appearance is similar to white spokes of a wheel pointing inwards. Symptoms often include problems with glare and light scatter at night.
Posterior subcapsular cataracts are cloudy at back of the lens adjacent to the capsule (or bag) in which the lens sits. Because light becomes more focused toward the back of the lens, they can cause disproportionate symptoms for their size.
A mature cataract is one in which all of the lens protein is opaque while the immature cataract has some transparent protein. In the hypermature cataract, also known as Morgagnian cataract the lens proteins have become liquid. Congenital cataract, which may be detected in adults, has a different classification and includes lamellar, polar, and sutural cataract.
Cataracts can be classified by using Lens Opacities Classification System III.  In this system, cataracts are classified based on type as nuclear, cortical, or posterior.  The cataracts are further classified based on severity on a scale from 1 to 5.  Research has demonstrated that the LOCS III system is highly reproducible.

Prevention

Risk factors such as UV-B exposure and smoking can be addressed but are unlikely to make large difference to visual function. Although there has been no scientifically proven means of preventing cataracts, wearing ultraviolet-protecting sunglasses may slow the development.

Treatment

Surgical

Cataract removal can be performed at any stage and no longer requires ripening of the lens. Surgery is usually 'outpatient' and performed using local anesthesia. Approximately 90% of patients can achieve a corrected vision of 20/40 or better after surgery.
Several recent evaluations found that surgery can only meet expectations when there is significant functional impairment from poor vision prior to surgery. Visual function estimates such as VF-14 have been found to give more realistic estimates than visual acuity testing alone.
Phacoemulsification is the most widely used cataract surgery today. This procedure uses ultrasonic energy (U/S) to emulsify the cataract lens. Phacoemulsification typically comprises five steps:
Extracapsular cataract extraction (ECCE), consists of removing the lens manually, but leaving the majority of the capsule intact. The lens is expressed through a 10–12 mm incision which is closed with sutures at the end of surgery. Extracapsular extraction is less frequently performed than phacoemulsification but can be useful when dealing with very hard cataracts or other situations where emulsification is problematic. Manual small incision cataract surgery (MSICS) has evolved from extracapsular cataract extraction. In MSICS, the lens is removed through a self-sealing scleral tunnel wound in the sclera which, ideally, is watertight and does not require suturing. Although "small", the incision is still markedly larger than the portal in phacoemulsion. This surgery is increasingly popular in the developing world where access to phacoemulsification is still limited.
Intracapsular cataract extraction (ICCE) is rarely performed. The lens and surrounding capsule are removed in one piece through a large incision while pressure is applied to the vitreous membrane. The surgery has a high rate of complications.

Post-operative care

The post-operative recovery period (the period after cataract extraction is done) is usually short. The patient is usually ambulatory on the day of surgery but is advised to move cautiously and avoid straining or heavy lifting for about a month. The eye is usually patched on the day of surgery and at night using an  eye shield is often suggested for several days after surgery.
In all types of surgery, the cataractous lens is removed and replaced with an artificial lens, known as intraocular lens, which stays in the eye permanently. Intraocular lenses are usually monofocal, correcting for either distance or near vision, however, multifocal lenses may be implanted to improve near and distance vision simultaneously, but these lenses may increase the chance of unsatisfactory vision.

Complications

Serious complications of cataract surgery are retinal detachment and endophthalmitis. In both cases, patients will notice a sudden decrease in vision. In endophthalmitis, patients will often describe pain. Retinal detachment frequently presents with unilateral visual field defects, blurring of vision, flashes of light or floating spots.
The risk of retinal detachment was estimated as approximately 0.4% within 5.5 years, corresponding to a 2.3x risk increase compared to naturally expected incidence, older studies reporting a substantially higher risk. The incidence is increasing over time in approximately linear manner and the risk increase lasts for at least 20 years after the procedure. Particular risk factors are younger age, male sex, longer axial length and complications during surgery. In highest risk group of patients the incidence of pseudophakic retinal detachment may be as high as 20%.
The risk of endophthalmitis occurring after surgery is less than 1 in 1000.
Corneal oedema and cystoid macular oedema are less serious but more common and occur because of persistent swelling at the front of the eye in corneal oedema or back of the eye in cystoid macular oedema.  They are normally the result of excessive inflammation following surgery and in both cases, patients may notice blurred, foggy vision.  They normally improve with time and with application of anti-inflammatory drops. The risk of either occurring is around 1 in 100.
Posterior capsular opacification, also known as after cataract, is a condition in which months or years after successful cataract surgery, vision deteriorates or problems with glare and light scattering recur.  This is usually due to thickening of the back or posterior capsule surrounding the implanted lens, so-called ' posterior lens capsule opacification'.  Growth of natural lens cells remaining after the natural lens was removed may be the cause, and the younger the patient, the greater the chance of this occurring.  Management involves cutting a small, circular area in the posterior capsule with targeted beams of energy from a laser, a procedure called YAG laser capsulotomy, after the type of laser used.  The laser can be aimed very accurately and the small part of the capsule which is cut falls harmlessly to the bottom of the inside of the eye.  This procedure leaves sufficient capsule to hold the lens in place but removes enough to allow light to pass directly through to the retina.  Serious side effects are rare.

Epidemiology

