[[University of Calgary]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1966, University of Calgary, Consortium for North American Higher Education Collaboration, Universities in Canada, 1966 establishments in Canada

The University of Calgary (or UCalgary) is a public research university located in Calgary, Alberta, Canada. Founded in 1966 (after operating as the Calgary branch of the University of Alberta since 1945) the University of Calgary is composed of 14 faculties and more than 85 research institutes and centres.
More than 25,000 undergraduate and 6,000 graduate students are currently enrolled. The University of Calgary has graduated over 155,000 alumni in 152 countries, including the current Prime Minister of Canada, Stephen Harper, and Canadian astronaut Robert Thirsk.
The University of Calgary is one of Canada's top research universities (based on the number of Canada Research Chairs) and is a member of the U15 (the 15 most research-intensive universities in Canada).
The University of Calgary is the birthplace of a number of important inventions, including the neurochip.
The main campus is located in the north-west quadrant of Calgary, near the Bow River, and covers more than 200 hectares or 494.2 acre.
The U of C is a member of the Alberta Rural Development Network.

History and overview

Early history

The University of Calgary was established in 1966, yet its roots date back more than half a century earlier to the establishment of the Normal School in Calgary in 1905. The Alberta Normal School was established in Calgary to train primary and secondary school teachers in the new province.
Calgary strove to have an institute of higher learning with degree conferring powers which led to the University of Alberta opening a branch in Calgary in 1945. The University of Alberta Calgary Branch eventually gained full autonomy in 1966 and became the University of Calgary.
The university was modeled on the American state university (similar to the University of Alberta), with an emphasis on extension work and applied research. The governance was modeled on the provincial University of Toronto Act of 1906 which established a bicameral system of university government consisting of a senate (faculty), responsible for academic policy, and a board of governors (citizens) exercising exclusive control over financial policy and having formal authority in all other matters. The president, appointed by the board, was a link between the bodies to perform institutional leadership.
In the early 20th century, professional education expanded beyond theology, law and medicine. Graduate training based on the German-inspired American model of specialized course work and the completion of a research thesis was introduced. The policy of university education initiated in the 1960s responded to population pressure and the belief that higher education was a key to social justice and economic productivity for individuals and for society. The University of Calgary launched its program in architecture in 1971. The University of Calgary tartan is associated with the university and with its pipe band.
The university's first president, Herbert Stoker Armstrong, held a strong belief that "although the university is accountable to the society that supports it, the university must insist on playing a leadership role in intellectual matters if it is to be worthy of the name."
During the late 1960s, the University of Calgary saw a massive construction boom. Construction on campus included Blocks F and G of Calgary Hall, Blocks C and D of the Engineering Building, the lab of the Kananaskis Centre, a research, training, and service unit, and the opening of the new University Theatre in Calgary Hall. In addition, Banff Centre (originally known as The Banff School of Fine Arts) became affiliated with the University of Calgary. The School of Social Welfare was also established. Total full-time enrolment in 1966 exceeded 4000 students and there were 355 academic members of staff.

Today

The University of Calgary's Child Development Centre is Alberta's first building designed and constructed to LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) standards, the North American benchmark for environmentally high-performance buildings. The facility, which houses the university's second child-care facility and a full continuum of researchers, clinicians and frontline workers, is dedicated to child health. The building officially opened in October, 2007.
In 2011, an addition of rare neurology books dated over 500 years have been added to the MacKimmie library collection. The collection broadens the neuroscience educational experience and digitizing the collection enables people around the world to share in the resource. The collection includes an original copy of the 1953 Nature paper where Nobel winners James D. Watson and Francis Crick first described the discovery of the double helix structure of DNA. It also includes the rare first neurological text written in the 1600s by Thomas Willis, the man who coined the term neurology and is known as the 'father of neurology'. The collection is valued at approximately $600,000.
Canada's fifth veterinary school, the University of Calgary Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, was opened in mid-2008. Research and graduate education programs will be focused on areas of strength and importance in Alberta and will fall in line with the college's areas of emphasis: production animal health, equine health, ecosystem and public health and investigative medicine. The first class of Doctor of Veterinary Medicine (DVM) students started classes in the fall of 2008.

Academics

Profile

The university offers 150 programs in post-secondary education awarding bachelors, masters, and doctorate (PhD) degrees. The University of Calgary has developed a wide range of undergraduate and graduate programs. The University of Calgary also encourages multi-disciplinary programs, meaning students can combine their interest areas and create an education that suits them. The campus has an area of 2.13 km2 (200 hectares)and hosts 15 faculties, 55 departments and 36 research institutes and centers (see Canadian university scientific research organizations). The teaching staff is 2,596. The university employs 2,777 management, professional and support staff. This puts the staff at 5,363, making it one of Calgary's largest employers.
With the economic boom in Alberta, the government has promised $4.5 billion to post-secondary institutions in the province.

=Urban Alliance=

The university maintains a research partnership with the City of Calgary, the Urban Alliance.

Faculties and college

The University of Calgary's faculties include the Werklund School of Education, the Schulich School of Engineering, the Haskayne School of Business, Kinesiology, a medical school (MD), a law school (Juris Doctor), and, starting in 2008, Western Canada's second veterinary school. The Faculty of Environmental Design offers a program in architecture accredited by the Canadian Architectural Certification Board at both the bachelor level (B.) and the master's level (M.).raic.htm Architecture Canada
The university has 14 faculties and one affiliated college:

Library system

MacKimmie library was the first library to open at the University of Calgary in 1966. Since then, 5 different library branches have been opened in order to provide students with a greater amount of literary choice in many subjects. In addition, the University of Calgary will be the first library system in North America to contain a video game library.

=Specialty libraries=

The library system at the University of Calgary consists of seven library branches:
The Taylor Family Digital Library replaced, as the university's primary facility, the MacKimmie Library, which is no longer a library.

=Taylor Family Digital Library=

The Taylor Family Digital Library (TFDL) is an innovative convergence of libraries, historical archives, arts museum, scholarly publishing, and student academic support services. The TFDL was officially launched on October 20, 2011.ucalgary. In addition, The TFDL will offer books and online resources, a large Learning Commons with café, workrooms, film and audio rooms, editing and recording suites, multimedia labs, quiet study areas, and seminar and consultation space for academic growth.
Don and Ruth Taylor, longtime friends and supporters of the University of Calgary, donated $25 million in December, 2006 to help build the new digital library. In recognition of this generous gift, the Board of Governors of the University named the library the Taylor Family Digital Library (TFDL).
In addition, the gift from the Taylor Family will be used to create the Taylor Quadrangle, a green space in the centre of campus adjacent to the TFDL. Such quadrangles often serve as iconic meeting places for the entire university community, for both informal and formal gatherings.

Rankings and reputation

Rankings

Webometrics Ranking of World Universities, which ranks universities on their presence on the Internet, ranks the University of Calgary 73rd in the USA and Canada category and 98th in the world. It is ranked 6th in Canada.
Research Infosource ranks the top 50 research universities in Canada each year. In its 2009 ranking Calgary was 6th.researchinfosource.pdf
Academic Ranking of World Universities ranks the university 7-8 in the national category.
Calgary's Haskayne School of Business has for years dominated the Inter-Collegiate Business Competition (I.C.B.C.), hosted annually by Queen's University. For much of the competition's lifetime, the teams representing Haskayne have come out on top each year by winning first in the majority of the competition's case study categories, including accounting, business policy, debating, ethics, finance, human resources, marketing, and MIS.Inter-Collegiate Business Competition 2006 Rankings
The University of Calgary ranks 8th in the medical-doctoral category of Maclean's annual university rankings.  However, the rankings have been met with criticism. The University of Calgary and other universities have argued that Maclean's Magazine takes data out of context and is an inaccurate reflection of performance. In 2006, 21 Canadian universities along with the University of Calgary, many being part of the leading group of research universities known as the U15, opted out of the rankings.U of C Gauntlet - Opting out of Maclean's ranking  Other universities opting out in 2006 included Alberta, UBC, Carleton, Dalhousie, Lethbridge, Manitoba, McMaster, Montréal, Ottawa, Simon Fraser University, University of Toronto and Queen's.
The University of Calgary is ranked 16th in QS InfoSource's 2013 ranking of the world's universities founded since 1962.
In the category, for 2013, of the top 100 universities under the age of 50 years in service, the University of Calgary is ranked 23rd in the world, according to Times Higher Education.

Reputation

The University of Calgary has been ranked as one of the top universities in Canada, and ranked 149th worldwide.

Grounds

Main Campus

The university grounds lie about 
The architecture is defined by a combination of Gothic Revival, Brutalist and Postmodern buildings spread across campus, most of them dated between 1905 and 1980.
A light rail transit link is provided to the university by the C-Train at the LRT station.
A large park is built in the center of the main campus, and is home to the infamous "Prairie Chicken" sculpture. In addition, a pond surrounded by benches and an open field is available for students to relax at. The park contains old oak trees which were specially transplanted to the location when the university was opened. Together, they form a considerable amount of tree canopies which add a more natural feeling to the campus.

West Campus

In 1995, the Province of Alberta gave the University of Calgary a large tract of land west of the Main Campus with the understanding it would be used in the future to advance the University's mission, vision, values and priorities. About a third of the size of downtown Calgary, the land overlooks the Bow River valley and covers  east of Shaganappi Trail between 16th Avenue (TransCanada Highway) and 32 Avenue N.W. The western campus lies on mostly hilly terrain, near the Bow River. It is adjacent to the main campus of the university, and is home to the Alberta Children's Hospital and Child Development Centre. With the recent boost in annual funding, the university has begun a development plan in order to make better use of the remaining space.
Five years ago, part of the West Campus was leased for the new Alberta Children's Hospital and a new Ronald McDonald House. So far, the campus is only halfway developed and is considered building room for the future. From this location, it is possible to see the entire university and also Downtown Calgary.

Health Sciences Campus

The University of Calgary Board of Governors chose to launch a new medical school in the late 1960s, with the first tangible building to house this endeavor being the Health Sciences Building, which opened in 1972.  The Health Sciences Building shared a site with the Foothills Medical Centre some distance south of the Main Campus.  This site became known as the Health Sciences Campus, with subsequent additions being the Heritage Medical Building (opened 1987), the Health Research Innovation Centre and the Teaching, Research and Wellness building.

Downtown Campus

On September 13, 2010, the University of Calgary opened its new downtown campus located at 8th Avenue and 8th Street SW. The first phase is currently open, as well as a second phase containing a bookstore, library, retail space and additional learning spaces. The building houses classes including Continuing Education, and energy & environment, as well as classes offered by the Haskayne School of Business and the new University of Calgary School of Public Policy.

=School of Public Policy=

The School of Public Policy is an institute at the University of Calgary and was founded in 2008. The school is devoted to public policy research and education, and is led by economist Dr. Jack Mintz. It is home to over 60 faculty and fellows (either full-time or part-time). The school is organized into three policy areas: Economic and Social Policy, Energy and Environmental Policy, and International Policy. Since 2012 the school has offered a graduate degree program, the Master of Public Policy. The degree is structured as a 12-month program involving two semesters of classroom-based learning and one semester of project work. Other degree programs offered include a joint Master of Business Administration/Master of Public Policy and a joint Juris Doctor/Master of Public Policy.
A study about the Temporary Foreign Worker Program (TFWP) titled All the workers we need: debunking Canada's labour shortage fallacy published at the University of Calgary School of Public Policy in May 2013 has gained headlines in Canadian media.huffingtonpost.html



Qatar Campus

In 2007, the University of Calgary established a campus in Doha, Qatar, the University of Calgary — Qatar (UCQ), which currently focuses upon nursing education. The University of Calgary — Qatar offers a flexible, innovative, Bachelor of Nursing (BN) degree to prepare students for the opportunities and challenges of a rewarding nursing career. Throughout the program, students are provided with a theoretical base and supervised clinical experience in a variety of nursing practice settings.
The University of Calgary — Qatar offers two routes towards a Bachelor of Nursing (BN) degree:
The University of Calgary — Qatar also offers a Diploma of Nursing program that launched in September 2012.ucalgary.qa/about/news/mar2012/diploma-launch
In addition, several graduate programs are expected to be phased in. Currently the University of Calgary — Qatar campus offers one Master of Nursing program which is sponsored by the Hamad Medical Corporation.ucalgary.qa/prospective/programs/master-nursing

Facilities

The university is home to MacEwan Hall Ballroom, a concert venue holding 1000 people. The Ballroom is also used for conferences, dinners, and political debates, including the 2006 Alberta PC leadership debate.
The university also has the Rozsa Centre, a theatre and concert hall on the south west side of campus, off 24th Ave NW. The Rozsa Centre has a Bach organ built by Jürgen and Hendrik Ahrend. The Rozsa Centre hosts wind ensembles, choirs, and other fine arts. Musical competitions are held at every year and can host 384 people. The University Theatre, beside the Rozsa Centre, is designed for drama and dance with seating for 505.
The campus is home to the Black Lounge. Throughout most of the 1990s, the room was a music venue. Its capacity for live music entertainment is 350.
The Olympic Oval ice arena was site of the 1988 Winter Olympic Games, the fastest ice in the world. It has a 400 m track oval as well as a short track and two ice hockey rinks. The University campus also covers the McMahon Stadium, which is home to the Dinos Football Team and the Calgary Stampeders.
Many other sport facilities are also located at the university of calgary. These include among others:

Athletics

The Calgary Dinos are the athletic teams that represent the University of Calgary in the Canada West, a division of Canadian Interuniversity Sport, and in the Alberta Colleges Athletic Conference. They were known as the "Dinosaurs" but usually referred to as the "Dinos" until 1999, when the name was officially shortened. Some of its venues are the Jack Simpson Gymnasium (basketball, volleyball), McMahon Stadium (football, soccer), Olympic Oval (speed skating), Hawkings Field (field hockey), University of Calgary Aquatic Centre (swimming, often shortened to Aquatic Centre) and a 200m Running Track (cross-country and track & field practice).
The Dinos compete in 12 varsity sports: basketball, cross-country, field hockey, football, golf, hockey, soccer, swimming, tennis, track and field, volleyball, and wrestling. The Dinos also have 2 club teams: Men's Baseball and Men's Rugby.
The men's hockey team plays at Father David Bauer Olympic Arena, while the women's hockey team's schedule is split between the Olympic Oval and Father David Bauer Olympic Arena. In the rare case of scheduling conflicts, both men's and women's hockey have used the Max Bell Centre for games.
The University of Calgary has been associated with the Olympics since 1976, when the 10-year-old athletic department sent three athletes to Montreal. Since then, 42 Dinos athletes have competed at both the summer and winter Games, bringing home 11 medals, and UC hosted the athletes' village and speed skating events at the XV Olympic Winter Games in 1988.
The football team plays home matches at McMahon Stadium, home of CFL's Calgary Stampeders. It has won the Vanier Cup on four occasions, 1983, 1985, 1988 and 1995.
Adopt-a-Dino is a university initiative to provide athletes with monetary assistance by allowing participating members to "adopt" an athlete. All Adopt-A-Dino donors will be recognized in the following season's ROAR Magazine, in addition to receiving: Two all-sport season passes valid for all Dinos regular season home games, a plaque-mounted photo of your chosen athlete or team, an invitation to a free event to meet an interact with your chosen team, and a tax receipt for $890.

Media

Newspaper

The University has two main newspapers, UToday, and The Gauntlet. UToday is the online source for news about the University of Calgary, published by the department of University Relations in collaboration with our 14 faculties. Created in September 2008, UToday reports on research discoveries at the university, major events and milestones, campus happenings and personalities, and opportunities to get involved in learning or activities. It is published every weekday throughout the year. UToday's readers include students, faculty, staff, alumni, news media, donors, community leaders and partners, and residents at large.
The Gauntlet is the University of Calgary's weekly student newspaper, covering the campus and the Calgary community. First published in 1960, it is primarily focused towards undergraduates. It currently publishes every Thursday throughout the year.
The University also prints Libin Life, which is published by the Libin Cardiovascular Institute of Alberta.

Radio

CJSW is the university's campus radio station, broadcasting at 90.9 MHz FM. CJSW is a member of the National Campus and Community Radio Association
In addition to the FM broadcast, the station can be heard at 106.9 MHz cable FM, and via Ogg Vorbis stream from its web site. Select shows are also available for podcast download.

Television

NUTV is one of the oldest university-based television production societies in Canada. Established in 1983 and incorporated in 1991, NUTV is a campus-based non-profit organization. NUTV offers the opportunity to University of Calgary students and community members to explore the medium of television by learning the various stages of production. NUTV is part of the University of Calgary Tri-Media Alliance, comprising print The Gauntlet, radio CJSW 90.9, and television (NUTV). The University of Calgary is unique in that it is the only Canadian university that houses three media operations on-campus.

Book publishing

The University of Calgary Press was founded in 1981 and to date has published over 280 titles.

Residence

The University of Calgary offers a wide range of residences on campus as a significant proportion of undergraduate students reside on the campus.
The residence buildings on campus house 2200
A new building, Dr. Fok Ying Tung International House houses 200 international students, instructors and conference attendees. In addition, a new residence for first year undergraduate students is due to be completed in 2011. Construction of the new residence at the University of Calgary broke ground Friday, May 15, 2009. Scheduled to open in spring 2011, the 596-bed residence is part of the university's ongoing commitment to students' academic success and personal growth. Through innovative building design and construction, the residence will meet current expectations for student housing and will help support institutional recruitment and retention objectives. This is part of the university's $1.5 billion capital program. With the completion of this new building the number of beds on campus will increase to 3000.
Efforts are being made to preserve green space wherever possible, which includes retaining the green belt fronting 24 Avenue N.W. and transplanting five mature oak trees to the front of the Dr. Fok Ying Tung International House this fall. A new site landscape plan is also being prepared, which involves planting replacement trees and creating additional recreational green space on the grounds of the new residence.University of Calgary Residence Services New 600 Bed Residence

Student life

The Den and Black Lounge

The Den and Black Lounge is the campus bar located in MacEwan Hall, the student centre in the middle of campus. Occupying two floors, with the Den located on the lower floor and the Black Lounge on the upper floor, in the warmer months of the year the second floor features a large outdoor patio. Once run by the University of Calgary, the Den was taken over by the Students' Union in 2000.

The LDL

The Last Defence Lounge (LDL) is run by the University of Calgary Graduate Students' Association. It is a members-only club that is open to undergraduate and graduate students, as well as faculty, staff and members of the public.

Traditions

Greek life

The Omega Chi Chapter, was formally initiated into the Alpha Kappa Psi Professional Business Fraternity on March 12, 2005, becoming the 302nd active branchChapters of Alpha Kappa Psi and the 14th in the Northwest Region. In October 2005, the Omega Chi Chapter was officially recognized as a Haskayne School of Business Student Club and now hold an office in the Scurfield Hall Haskayne Clubs Area.
The Fraternity of Phi Gamma Delta, also known as Fiji, is the one of the two other fraternities present at the university. It was the first fraternity at the university which is still running, being on campus since 1982. The other current fraternity is Kappa Sigma, also known as K Sig.
Alpha Gamma Delta and Alpha Omicron Pi are the two existing sororities at the U of C, being established in 1983 and 1985 respectively. Toegther, they form the Panhellenic Association of Calgary. The Panhellenic Association oversees all women's chapters and continually encourages the women to go above and beyond individual and shared expectations.

Leadership on campus

In 2009, the University of Calgary's Office of the Student Experience (now the Student Success Centre) launched their own co-curricular record, the first of its kind in western Canadian universities. The co-curricular record is an official university document to be coupled with a student's academic transcript, that recognizes out-of-classroom experiences that are still connected to the university. The Student Success Centre (SSC). The SSC offers programs and services to support students in creating: (1) Academic Success, (2) Personal Success, and (3) Career Success. The SSC offers Orientation Programs, Personalized Career Planning Sessions, Career and Life Workshops, Leadership Programs, the First-Year Experience Program, the Senior-Year Experience Program, Arts & Science Program Advising, Learning Support Services, and Writing Support Services.
In April 2011, the University of Calgary launched the Scholars Academy Program: a program for bright, dynamic students that excel beyond just mere academics. Students in the Scholars Academy Program are leaders in the community, show enthusiasm toward learning, compassion and integrity toward others, and inspire those around them. In addition to the formation of a community of high-achieving peers and success student perks, a dedicated academic development specialist provides one-on-one support with scholarship and post-degree applications, as well as with each student's overall academic plan. This support enables students to compete and win prestigious awards and scholarships, and leads to even greater opportunities.
The University of Calgary also offers the President's Award for Excellence in Student Leadership to five graduating students (undergraduate or graduate) that represent the best in academic achievement in addition to outstanding extracurricular contributions to the university and community.

Scholarships and Awards

The University of Calgary offers many scholarships, awards, and bursaries to students. For detailed information, visit the Office of Student Awards and Financial Aid.
A notable high school level scholarship is the Alexander Rutherford Scholarship which was introduced by the Government of Alberta in 1980. The Alexander Rutherford scholarship is to recognize and reward exceptional academic achievement at the senior high school level and to encourage students to continue their studies. To be considered for these scholarships, students must be a Canadian citizen or permanent resident who plan to enroll or are enrolled in a full-time post-secondary program of at least one semester in length.
The University joined Project Hero, a scholarship program cofounded by General (Ret'd) Rick Hillier, for the families of fallen Canadian Forces members. Dependents of Canadian Forces personnel killed while serving in active military missions will have the support of the University of Calgary to complete undergraduate degrees.
The office of the Chancellor and Senate offers many scholarships, awards, and bursaries to University of Calgary students who demonstrate outstanding academic achievement and exceptional service to the internal and external community.
Top students in the Schulich School of Engineering are recognized as Schulich Scholars and are awarded prestigious Schulich Entrance Scholarships.
Students enrolled in the Bachelor of Health Sciences Program are eligible for the O'Brien Centre Continuing Scholarship, which supports full-time students dedicated to extra-curricular involvement and the community on top of their academics.
The University also offers student awards for academic and leadership excellence. The two biggest awards a student can receive are the Arch Future Alumni Award.

Aboriginal

The University of Calgary recognizes Aboriginal students, and has instituted an Aboriginal Admissions Policy A.13 and Aboriginal Student Access Program (ASAP) A.14, as dictated in the Undergraduate Admissions section of the annual calendar.
Any student with Aboriginal ancestry (First Nations, Inuit, Metis) and legal status may apply and be considered under the policy. More information can be obtained online at the University of Calgary's website.ucalgary.ca/admissions/aboriginal_policy

Order of the University of Calgary

The Order of the University of Calgary, developed in 1994 resulting from a suggestion brought forward from the University's Senate, honours worthy recipients who have a record of exemplary and distinguished service to the University. Individuals who have been admitted into the Order have included faculty, staff, students, alumni and volunteers. Young aboriginal leaders such as Spencer Saurette have caused an increased awareness in aboriginal heritage and traditions on campus. It is available to any member of the University community, those currently or formerly attached to the University and to those representing the University in the community. Candidates nominated for membership in the Order may include, but are not limited to, current or former faculty, staff, students (graduate or undergraduate), alumni and volunteers.
The Order of the University of Calgary includes numerous personalities of note including the likes of Dr. Eldon R. Smith. As of November 2009, a total of 114 individuals had been admitted into the Order.

Notable alumni

Notable alumni of the university include:

Histories of the university








