[[Long-distance running]]

CATEGORIES: Long-distance running, Running, Events in athletics (track and field)

Long-distance running, or endurance running, is a form of continuous running over distances of at least five kilometres (3.1 miles). Physiologically, it is largely aerobic in nature and requires stamina. et al  (October 2006). The First Humans - Origin and Early Evolution of the Genus Homo. Stonybrook University. Retrieved on 2013-04-11.
Among mammals, humans are well adapted for running significant distances, and particularly so among primates. The endurance running hypothesis suggests that running endurance in the Homo genus arose because travelling over large areas improved scavenging opportunities and allowed persistence hunting. Phys. Retrieved on 2013-04-11. The capacity for endurance running is also found in migratory ungulates and a limited number of terrestrial carnivores, such as dogs, wolves and hyenas. Science Week (2004/2005). Retrieved on 2013-04-11.
In modern human society, long-distance running has multiple purposes: people may engage in it for physical exercise, for recreation, as a means of travel, for economic reasons, or for cultural reasons. Long distance running can also be used as a means to improve cardiovascular health.runnersgoal. Professional running is most commonly found in the field of sports, although in pre-industrial times foot messengers would run to deliver information to distant locations. Long-distance running as a form of tradition or ceremony is known among the Hopi and Tarahumara people, among others. Hopi Cultural Preservation Office/Northern Arizona University. Retrieved on 2013-04-11. E. The ecology of servitude in Tarahumara ritual tesgüinada. International Society for Gesture Studies. Retrieved on 2013-04-11.
In the sport of athletics, long-distance events are defined as races covering three kilometres (1.86 miles) and above. The three most common types are track running, road running and cross country running, all of which are defined by their terrain – all-weather tracks, roads and natural terrain, respectively. Typical long-distance track races range from 3000 metres to 10,000 metres (6.21 miles), cross country races usually cover 5 to 12 km (3.1 to 7.45 miles), while road races can be significantly longer, reaching 100 kilometres (62.14 miles) and beyond. In college cross country races, in the United States, males run an 8000 meter race whereas the women run a 6000 meter race. The Summer Olympics features three long-distance running events: the 5000 metres, 10,000 m and marathon (42.195 kilometres, or 26 miles and 385 yards).

History

Prehistoric running

=Hunting=

Anthropological observations of modern hunter-gatherer communities have provided accounts for long distance running as a method for hunting among the San of the Kalahari,Bjerre, Jens. Kalahari. Hill and Wang, 1960. American Indians,Bennett, Wendell Clark, and Robert Mowry Zingg. "The Tarahumara, an Indian tribe of northern Mexico." (1935). and the Australian Aboriginals. J. 1924. Ancient hunters and their modern representatives. New York: Macmillan In this method, the hunter would run at a slow and steady pace between one hour and a few days, in an area where the animal has no place to hide. The animal, running in spurts, has to stop to pant in order to cool itself, but as the chase goes on it would not have enough time before it has to start running again, and after a while would collapse from exhaustion and heat. Running through the Ages. McFarland, 2001. The body structure of a skeleton of a 12 years old Nariokatome boy is suggested to prove that early humans from 1.5 million years ago were eating more meat and less plants, and hunted by running down animals. and Leakey, R. (1993). Nariokotome Homo Erectus Skeleton.

Ancient History

With developments in agriculture and culture, long distance running took more and more purposes other than hunting: religious ceremonies, delivering messages for military and political purposes, and sport.

=Messengers=

The Old Testament has few mentions of messengers running to deliver messages. For example, in 2 Samuel 18, two runners, Ahimaaz son of Zadok and a Cushite run to deliver King David the message of the death of his son Absalom. In Jeremia 51:31-32, two running messengers meet each other halfway to deliver the message about the loss of Babylon:
Running messengers are reported from early Sumer, were named lasimuThe Assyrian Dictionary L (Chicago: The Oriental Institute), 104–108. 1973 as military men as well as the king's officials who disseminated documents throughout the kingdom by running. Journal of Sport History, Vol.22, No. 3 (Fall 1995).  Ancient Greece was famous for its running messengers, who were named hemerodromoi, meaning "day runners". Retrieved on Aug-13-2013 from  of the most famous running messengers is Philippides, who according to the legend ran from Marathon to Athens to announce the victory of the Greek over the Persians in the Battle of Marathon in 490 B.C. He collapsed and died as he delivered the message "we won". G. L. (1968). The Campaign and the Battle of Marathon. The Journal of Hellenic Studies, Vol. 88, pp. 13-57  While there are debates around the accuracy of this historical legend,Lovett, C. (1997). Olympic Marathon: A Centennial History of the Games' Most Storied Race. Retrieved from  Classical World, Vol. 68, No. 3 (Nov., 1974), pp. 161-169. the marathon running event of 26.2 miles / 42 km is based on this legend.

Physiology of long-distance running

Humans are considered among the best distance runners among all running animals: game animals are faster over short distances, but they have less endurance than humans. R., Kapoor, A. K., Kimura, T.,Nickels, M. K., Satwanti, Scott, E. C., So, J. K., & Trinkaus, E. (1984). Current Anthropology, Vol. 25, No. 4 (Aug. - Oct., 1984), pp. 483-495.  Unlike other primates whose bodies are designed to walk on four legs or climb trees, the human body has evolved into upright walking and running around 2-3 million years ago. O. (1988). Evolution of human walking. Scientific American (0036-8733), 259 (5), p. 82.  The human body can endure long distance running through the following attributes:
One distinction between upright walking and running is energy consumption during locomotion. While walking, humans consume about half the energy compared to running., Cerretelli, P., Aghemo, P., and Sassi, G. (1963). Energy cost of running. Journal of Applied Physiology. 18:367-370.  Evolutionary biologists believe that the human ability to run over long distances has helped meat-eating humans to compete with other carnivores. E., and Bramble, D. M. (2007). The evolution of marathon running: Capabilities in humans. Sports Medicine 37(4-5):288-290.

In sport

Many sports feature a significant level of running in prolonged periods of play, including ball sports like association football and rugby league. However, continuous endurance running is exclusively found in racing sports. Most of these are individual sports, although team and relay forms also exist.
The most prominent long-distance running sports are grouped within the sport of athletics, where running competitions are held on strictly defined courses and the fastest runner to complete the distance wins. The foremost types are long-distance track running, road running and cross-country running. Both track and road races are usually timed, while cross country races are not usually timed and only the placing is of importance. IAAF. Retrieved on 2013-04-13. Other less popular variants such as fell running, trail running, mountain running and tower running combine the challenge of distance with a significant incline or change of elevation as part of the course.60-Second Guide: Fell Running. Runner's World (2008-03-25). Retrieved on 2013-04-13. The only way is up. The Guardian. Retrieved on 2013-04-13.
Multisport races frequently include endurance running. Triathlon, as defined by the International Triathlon Union, may feature running sections ranging from five kilometres (3.1 mi) to the marathon distance (42.195 kilometres, or 26 miles and 385 yards), depending on the race type. International Triathlon Union (2012-12-28). Retrieved on 2013-04-13. The related sport of duathlon is a combination of cycling and distance running. USA Triathlon. Retrieved on 2013-04-13. Previous versions of the modern pentathlon incorporated a three or four kilometre (1.9–2.5 mi) run, but changes to the official rules in 2008 meant the running sections are now divided into three separate legs of one kilometre each (0.6 mi). Modern Pentathlon Gets a Little Less Penta. New York Times. Retrieved on 2013-04-13.
Depending on the rules and terrain, navigation sports such as foot orienteering and rogaining may contain periods of endurance running within the competition. Orienteering for Runners - an Overview. About. Retrieved on 2013-04-13.  Variants of adventure racing may also combine navigational skills and endurance running in this manner. Adventure Sports Online. Retrieved on 2013-04-13.

Running competitions

=Track running=

The history of long-distance track running events is tied into the track and field stadia where they are held. Oval circuits allow athletes to cover long distances in a confined area. Early tracks were usually on flattened earth or were simply marked areas of grass. The style of running tracks became refined during the 20th century: the oval running tracks were standardised to 400 metres in distance and cinder tracks were replaced by synthetic all-weather running track of asphalt and rubber from the mid-1960s onwards. It was not until the 1912 Stockholm Olympics that the standard long-distance track events of 5000 metres and 10,000 metres were introduced.
The world record for men:
For women:
The world record for men:
For women:
The one hour run is an endurance race that is rarely contested, except in pursuit of world records.  The 20,000 metres is also rarely contested, and all world records in the 20,000 metres have been set while in a one hour run race

=Road running=

Long-distance road running competitions are mainly conducted on courses of paved or tarmac roads, although major events often finish on the track of a main stadium. In addition to being a common recreational sport, the elite level of the sport – particularly marathon races – are one of the most popular aspects of athletics. Road racing events can be of virtually any distance, but the most common and well known are the marathon, half marathon and 10 km run.
The sport of road running finds its roots in the activities of footmen: male servants who ran alongside the carriages of aristocrats around the 18th century, and who also ran errands over distances for their masters. Foot racing competitions evolved from wagers between aristocrats, who pitted their footman against that of another aristocrat in order to determine a winner. The sport became professionalised as footmen were hired specifically on their athletic ability and began to devote their lives to training for the gambling events. The amateur sports movement in the late 19th century marginalised competitions based on the professional, gambling model. The 1896 Summer Olympics saw the birth of the modern marathon and the event led to the growth of road running competitions through annual public events such as the Boston Marathon (first held in 1897) and the Lake Biwa Marathon and Fukuoka Marathons, which were established in the 1940s. The 1970s running boom in the United States made road running a common pastime and also increased its popularity at the elite level. IAAF. Retrieved on 2010-05-27.
The marathon is the only road running event featured at the IAAF World Championships in Athletics and the Summer Olympics, although there is also the IAAF World Half Marathon Championships held every two years. The marathon is also the only road running event featured at the IPC Athletics World Championships and the Summer Paralympics. The World Marathon Majors series includes the six most prestigious marathon competitions at the elite level – the Berlin, Boston, Chicago, London, Tokyo, and New York City marathons. (See also: List of marathon races)
Ekiden contests – which originated in Japan and remain very popular there – are a relay race variation on the marathon, being in contrast to the typically individual sport of road running.

=Cross country running=

Cross country running is the most naturalistic form of long-distance running in athletics as competitions take place on open-air courses over surfaces such as grass, woodland trails, earth or mountains. In contrast to the relatively flat courses in track and road races, cross country usually incorporates obstacles such as muddy sections, logs and mounds of earth. As a result of these factors, weather can play an integral role in the racing conditions. Cross country is both an individual and team sport, as runners are judged on an individual basis and a points scoring method is used for teams. Competitions are typically races of  or more which are usually held in autumn and winter. Cross country's most successful athletes often compete in long-distance track and road events as well.
The history of the sport is linked with the game of paper chase, or hare and hounds, where a group of runners would cover long distances to chase a leading runner, who left a trail of paper to follow. The Crick Run in England in 1838 was the first recorded instance of an organised cross country competition. The sport gained popularity in British, then American schools in the 19th century and culminated in the creation of the first International Cross Country Championships in 1903. IAAF. Retrieved on 2010-05-27. The annual IAAF World Cross Country Championships was inaugurated in 1973 and this remains the highest level of competition for the sport. A number of continental cross country competitions are held, with championships taking place in Asia, Europe, North America and South America. The sport has retained its status at the scholastic level, particularly in the United Kingdom and United States. At the professional level, the foremost competitions come under the banner of the IAAF Cross Country Permit Meetings.
While cross country competitions are no longer held at the Olympics, having featured in the athletics programme from 1912–1924, it has been present as one of the events within the modern pentathlon competition since the 1912 Summer Olympics.
Fell running, trail running and mountain running can all be considered variations on traditional cross country which incorporate significant uphill and/or downhill sections as an additional challenge to the course.

Notable long-distance track athletes

Men

Women

Ultra-long distance: extended events and achievements

A number of events, records and achievements exist for long distance running, outside the context of track and field sports events. These include multiday races, ultramarathons, and long distance races in extreme conditions or measuring hundreds or thousands of miles.
Beyond these, records and stand-alone achievements, rather than regular events, exist for individuals who have achieved running goals of a unique nature, such as running across or around continents (see lists of runners: America, Australia) or running around the world.








