[[Interstate 68]]

CATEGORIES: Appalachian Development Highway System, Interstate Highway System, Interstate Highways in Maryland, Interstate Highways in West Virginia, Transportation in Monongalia County, West Virginia, Transportation in Preston County, West Virginia, Transportation in Cumberland, MD-WV-PA, Roads in Washington County, Maryland, U.S. Route 40

Interstate 68 (I-68) is a  parallels between Keysers Ridge and Hancock. The freeway mainly spans rural areas and crosses numerous mountain ridges along its route. A road cut at Sideling Hill exposed geological features of the mountain and has become a tourist attraction.
The construction of  provides a major transportation route in western Maryland and northern West Virginia and also provides an alternative to the Pennsylvania Turnpike for westbound traffic from Washington, D.C. and Baltimore.
U.S. Route 219 and U.S. Route 220 overlap with  in Garrett County, Maryland and Cumberland, Maryland, respectively, and U.S. Route 40 overlaps with the freeway from Keysers Ridge to the eastern end of the freeway at Hancock.

History

Predecessors

Prior to the construction of the freeway from Morgantown to Hancock, several different routes carried traffic across the region. West Virginia Route 73 extended from Bridgeport to Bruceton Mills, serving regions now served by Interstate 79 (Bridgeport to Morgantown) and Interstate 68 (Morgantown to Bruceton Mills). After the I-68 freeway, then known as US 48, was completed in West Virginia, the WV 73 designation was removed. Portions of the road still exist as County Routes 73, 73/73, and 857. Between I-68's exit 10 at Cheat Lake and exit 15 at Coopers Rock, I-68 was largely built directly over old WV 73's roadbed.
At Bruceton Mills, WV 73 ended at WV 26, which from there runs northeast into Pennsylvania, becoming Pennsylvania Route 281 at the state line and meeting US 40 north of the border. From there eastbound traffic would follow US 40 into Maryland. This road is now paralleled by I-68 through western Maryland.
US 40 followed the route of the National Road through Pennsylvania and Maryland. The National Road was the first federally funded road built in the United States, authorized by Congress in 1806. Construction lasted from 1811 to 1837, establishing a road that extended from Cumberland to Vandalia, Illinois. Upon the establishment of the U.S. Highway system in 1926, the route of the National Road became part of U.S. Route 40.

Cumberland Thruway

In the early 1960s, as the Interstate Highway System was being built throughout the United States, east-west travel through western Maryland was difficult, as US 40, the predecessor to .
Construction began on one of the first sections of what would become 

Corridor E

In 1965, the Appalachian Development Act was passed, authorizing the establishment of the Appalachian Development Highway System, which was meant to provide access to areas throughout the Appalachian Mountains that were not previously served by the Interstate Highway System. A set of corridors was defined, comprising 
The construction of Corridor E, which was also designated as 
Much of the work in building the freeway was completed during the 1970s, with US 48 being opened from Vocke Road in LaVale to  portion from the West Virginia state line to Keysers Ridge in Maryland opened, followed by the remainder of the freeway in Garrett County on August 13, 1976.
In the 1980s, the focus of construction shifted to the east of Cumberland, where a 

Designation as I-68

Though the National Freeway was designated as . This change took effect upon the completion of the last section of the National Freeway, on August 2, 1991.
With the completion of I-68 and the change in its route number, the 

Incidents

Numerous accidents and incidents have occurred on 
On May 23, 2003, poor visibility due to fog was a major contributing factor to an 85-vehicle pileup on 

Effect on surrounding region

One of the arguments in favor of the construction of 

Future work

In the 1990s, there was discussion about a future westward extension to 
The southernmost 

Route description



West Virginia


Entering Preston County, the route interchanges with County Route 73/12, which provides access to Coopers Rock State Forest. In contrast to the Morgantown area, the portion of Preston County that  meets County Route 5 (Hazleton Road) at its last exit before entering Garrett County, Maryland.
The region of West Virginia through which the freeway passes is rural and mountainous. There are several sections that have steep grades, especially near the Cheat River Canyon, where there is a truck escape ramp in case trucks lose their brakes descending the steep grade.
The peak traffic density on Interstate 68 in West Virginia is 32,900 average annual daily traffic at the interchange with I-79 in Morgantown. The traffic gradually decreases further eastward, reaching a low point at 14,600 cars per day at the Hazleton exit.

Maryland

After entering Garrett County,  crosses Negro Mountain, which was the highest point along the historic National Road that the freeway parallels east of Keysers Ridge. This is the source of the name of the freeway in Maryland: the National Freeway. Three miles (five kilometers) east of Grantsville, US 219 leaves the National Freeway to run northward towards Meyersdale, Pennsylvania, while I-68 continues eastward, crossing Savage Mountain before entering Allegany County.
The section of I-68 west of Dans Mountain in Allegany County is located in the Allegheny Mountains, characterized in Garrett County by a series of uphill and downhill stretches along the freeway, each corresponding to a ridge that the freeway crosses. In Allegany County, the freeway crosses the Allegheny Front, where, from Savage Mountain to LaVale, the highway drops in elevation by 
The traffic density on  in Hancock.
After entering Allegany County, 
East of Frostburg,  through Cumberland.
Until 2008, signs at exit 43A in downtown Cumberland labeled the exit as providing access to West Virginia Route 28 Alternate 
At exit 44 in east Cumberland, .

On the east side of Sideling Hill,  ends at I-70 and U.S. Route 522 in the town of Hancock.

Exit list








