[[Steve Mann]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, Canadian scientists, Canadian electrical engineers, Cyborgs, Human–computer interaction researchers, Massachusetts Institute of Technology alumni, McMaster University alumni, Transhumanists, University of Toronto faculty, People from Hamilton, Ontario

Steven Mann (born 1962) is a researcher and inventor best known for his work on computational photography, particularly wearable computing and high dynamic range imaging.

Early life and education

Mann holds degrees from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (PhD in Media Arts and Sciences '97) and McMaster University, where he was also inducted into the McMaster University Alumni Hall of Fame, Alumni Gallery, 2004, in recognition of his career as an inventor and teacher.
He is also General Chair of the IEEE International Symposium on Technology and Society, Associate Editor of IEEE Technology and Society, is a licensed Professional Engineer, and Senior Member of the IEEE.bepress.cgi?article=1374&context=kmichael

Career

Mann is a tenured professor at the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, with cross-appointments to the Faculty of Arts and Sciences, and Faculty of Forestry, at the University of Toronto, and is a Professional Engineer licensed through Professional Engineers Ontario.  He is also General Chair of the IEEE International Symposium on Technology and Society and Associate Editor of IEEE Technology and Society.

Ideas and inventions

Many of Mann's inventions pertain to the field of computational photography.
Mann also works in the fields of computer-mediated reality.
His CyborGLOGS ('glogs), such as the spontaneous reporting of news as everyday experience, were an early predecessor of 'blogs and the concept of blogging, and earlier than that, his pre-internet-era live streaming of personal documentary and cyborg communities defined cyborg-logging as a new form of social networking.

Anonequity project

Mann is presently collaborating with a number of researchers including Ian Kerr, Canada Research Chair in Ethics, Law & Technology, University of Ottawa, who teaches a course on "Cyborg Law" that uses Mann's book.

Media coverage

Mann has been described as the "father of wearable computing".
In 1961 Edward O. Thorp (with Claude Shannon) built a microprocessor timing circuit into a shoe, for covertly cheating at roulette, and referred to himself as inventor of the wearable computer.computer">
Mann has also been described as "the world's first cyborg" in Canadian popular press such as NOW, The Globe and Mail, National Post, and Toronto Life but has himself rejected the term "cyborg" as being too vague.

Publications

Mann is author of more than 200 publications, including a textbook on electric eyeglasses and a popular culture book on day-to-day cyborg living. Selected works:

McVeillance and the Mann-Wassel Law

On July 16, 2012, after numerous unsuccessful attempts to contact McDonalds, Mann published a first-person account of a July 1st 2012 incident from when he and his family were eating dinner at BFI Champs Elysées, a McDonald's restaurant in Paris, France, as follows (excerpt):

Within a day, this incident was posted on reddit under the title "Steve Mann, father of wearable computing, physically assaulted by McDonald's for wearing Digital Eye Glass," quickly becoming the top post on the site. The subsequent media coverage resulted in Mann being successful in contacting McDonald's Head of Customer Service, but only to receive a denial, not an apology.  Mann requested a review of the video surveillance recordings from the many surveillance cameras in this McDonald's establishment, but received no further replies from McDonald's. (alternate link)
Subsequently Mann sent a much shorter letter, in French, to McDonald's Head of Customer Service, but also received no reply. (alternate link)
As a result of this incident, rather than bringing legal action against McDonald's, Mann teamed up with the IEEE (world's largest technical society), the ACLU, and some industry leaders such as the Pete Wassell, CEO of Augmate Corporation, to propose the Mann-Wassell law for presentation to the New York legislature (alternate link), as well an IEEE conference on the topic of Veillance.  The goal of this work is to create a legal, policy, and social climate to counteract the actions of companies like McDonald's, that are likely to have a chilling effect on the research and use of Augmediated Reality technologies in everyday life.  In this context, Mann also formalized the concept of McVeillance as placing people under surveillance while simultaneously forbidding them from using their own cameras. More precisely, McVeillance was defined as the ratio (linearly) or difference (logarithmically) of surveillance to sousveillance. (alternate link)  McVeillance is one of the topics of the IEEE conference.

Additional news items associated with the 2012 July 1st French "McDoGate" incident

Additional news items soon appeared thereafter, e.g. "Broken glass: Father of wearable computing allegedly assaulted",Broken Glass: Father of wearable computing allegedly assaulted, Slashgear, Chris Davies, Jul 17th 2012 and "What may be the world's first cybernetic hate crime...",What may be the world's first cybernetic hate crime unfolds in French McDonald's etc.
Due to the employees alleged rough handling of the device, which he claimed was soundly attached to his head, the temporary storage buffer in the computer system could no longer be overwritten by new images, the damage to the system thus causing photos of these persons to remain stored in the glass memory.  These were published, with faces concealed, on Manns weblog.








