[[Fraggle Rock]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 American television series debuts, 1987 American television series endings, Fraggle Rock, 1980s American television series, 1980s Canadian television series, 1983 Canadian television series debuts, 1987 Canadian television series endings, 1980s British television series, 1983 British television programme debuts, 1987 British television programme endings, American children's television series, CBC network shows, HBO network shows, ITV children's television programmes, Canadian children's television series, Star Comics titles, Television programs featuring anthropomorphic characters, Television programs featuring puppetry, Television series by HIT Entertainment, Television series by The Jim Henson Company, Television series produced in Toronto, HBO Family, English-language television programming

Fraggle Rock (also known as Jim Henson's Fraggle Rock or Fraggle Rock with Jim Henson's Muppets) is a children's live action puppet television series created by Jim Henson with the central characters being a set of Muppet creatures called Fraggles.
Fraggle Rock was co-produced by British television company Television South (TVS), the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation, U.S. pay television service Home Box Office and Henson Associates. Unlike Sesame Street, which had been created for a single market and only later adapted for international markets, Fraggle Rock was intended from the start to be an international production and the whole show was constructed with this in mind.

History

Fraggle Rock debuted in 1983 as one of the first shows involving the collaboration of Henson International Television (HIT Entertainment from 1989), the international arm of Jim Henson Productions and of Deluxe Digital Studios. The co-production brought together British regional ITV franchise-holder Television South (TVS), CBC Television, United States pay-television service Home Box Office and Henson Associates (later Jim Henson Productions). Filming took place on a Toronto sound-stage (and later at Elstree Studios, London). The avant-garde poet bpNichol worked as one of the show's writers. In the early days of development, the script called the Fraggles "Woozles" pending the devising of a more suitable name.
Henson described the Fraggle Rock series as "a high-energy, raucous musical romp. It's a lot of silliness. It's wonderful."[ref]Random House, 1993. Jim Henson The Works: The Art, The Magic, The Imagination
[/ref] While the program proved accessible to audiences of all ages, it used the fantasy creatures as an allegory to deal with serious issues such as prejudice, spirituality, personal identity, the environment, and social conflict.[ref]
Down at Fraggle Rock documentary; 1987, HBO and Jim Henson Productions[/ref]
In 2009, as part of the Jim Henson Foundation's donation of puppets to the Center for Puppetry Arts, the Atlanta museum displayed many of the original puppet characters from Fraggle Rock in their exhibition Jim Henson: Wonders from his Workshop."Center for Puppetry Arts—Jim Henson: Wonders From His Workshop"

International co-productions

The producers made the series with the intention of it airing in various forms internationally. That concept grew out of Duncan Kenworthy's experience adapting Sesame Street to the requirements of foreign markets. The human "wraparound" segments were produced separately in several countries, with the intention that the child viewer would always be able to relate to the world of the program. The series has appeared now in over ten countries and languages. The head producer was Wesley James Tomlinson.

Setting

There are 3 main intelligent antropomorfic species in the Fraggle Rock environment: Fraggles, Doozers and Gorgs. The Fraggles and Doozers live in a system of natural caves called Fraggle Rock that are filled with all manner of creatures and features, and which seem to connect to at least two different worlds (the one of the Gorgs and the one of the "silly creatures" or humans). One of the main themes of the series is that, although the 3 species depend on the other for their survival they usually fail to communicate due to vast differences in their biology and culture. The series mainly follows the adventures of five Fraggles (Gobo, Mokey, Red, Wembley, and Boober) with distinct personalities.

Fraggles

Fraggles are small anthropomorphic creatures, about  tall, that come in a wide variety of colors and have tails that bear a tuft of fur on the end. Fraggles live a very carefree life, spending most of their time playing, exploring, and generally enjoying themselves. They live on a diet of vegetables (mainly radishes) and Doozer sticks. The doozer sticks are made of ground up radishes and are the material that the doozers use to build their constructions.

Doozers

Within Fraggle Rock lives a second species of small humanoid creatures, the pudgy green ant-like Doozers. Standing only  tall, Doozers are in a sense anti-Fraggles; their lives are dedicated to work and industry. Doozers spend much of their time busily constructing all manner of pointless scaffolding throughout Fraggle Rock, using miniature construction equipment and wearing hardhats and work boots. To ensure that they always have a steady stream of work to do, Doozers build their constructions out of an edible candy-like substance (manufactured from radishes) which is greatly enjoyed by Fraggles. This is essentially the only interaction between Doozers and Fraggles; Doozers spend most of their time building, and Fraggles spend much of their time eating tasty Doozer buildings. They thus form an odd sort of symbiosis.

Gorgs

Outside another exit from Fraggle Rock lives a small family of Gorgs, giant furry humanoids standing 22 feet (7 m.) tall. The husband and wife of the family consider themselves the King and Queen of the Universe, with their son Junior Gorg as its prince and heir, but to all appearances they are really simple farmers with a rustic house and garden patch.
Fraggles are considered a pest by the Gorgs, as they steal their radishes, that they need to make a potion in order not to vanish.

The Silly Creatures of Outer Space

In the North American version and in the German version of Fraggle Rock, the connection between Fraggle Rock and Outer Space is a small hole in the wall of the workshop of an eccentric inventor called Doc, and Gobo must go out into Doc's workshop to retrieve the postcards of his uncle Matt, who is exploring the human's world, from the wastebasket where Doc throws them. Doc is unaware of the Fraggles' existence.

Episodes

Broadcast

The HBO version of the series has been broadcast and dubbed in a number of countries around the world.

Syndication

After the show ended on HBO in 1987, the channel started to rerun the series. In the late 1980s, it ran on TNT. The show aired on The Disney Channel from October 1, 1992The Disney Channel Magazine, Vol. 10, no. 5, October/November 1992: pp. 31, 32, 34, 42-43. to 1996. 14, no. 3, June/July 1996: p. 26. 14, no. 4, August/September 1996: p. 28. From 1999 until 2001 the show moved to Odyssey Network, which had recently been purchased by Henson & Hallmark. However, after Hallmark took full control they discontinued the reruns.
In 2007, Fraggle Rock reruns aired on television in several countries. On July 23, 2007, Boomerang started repeating episodes of the North American co-production of Fraggle Rock in the UK. In January 2013 ITV broadcast 2 episodes of this version as part of their 'Old Skool' Weekend feature on the CITV channel. On October 24, 2007, The Australian Broadcasting Corporation begins repeating episodes on the digital-only ABC2 channel. On September 20, 2007, TVNZ 6 in New Zealand began airing episodes daily. The series has aired on Teletoon Retro in Canada daily since 2008. On October 10, 2010, Fraggle Rock reruns returned to U.S. airwaves on The Hub, the newly launched cable-network jointly owned by Hasbro and by Discovery Communications, but were discontinued in June 1, 2012. However, it was announced that a 3-hour marathon of the show is to air on April 21 in honor of Fraggle Rock's 30th anniversary. However, after the marathon, Fraggle Rock reruns returned to the Hub's schedule until June 28, 2013.  The television series is available for streaming through Amazon Instant Video and Hulu.

Home video

Australia

Magna Pacific published the American version of Fraggle Rock on Region 4 DVD in 2007. The DVD set  Fraggle Rock: The Complete Fourth Season actually includes seasons four and five. The DVDs have no special features.
A set of plush dolls of Gobo, Wembley, Boober, and Red were released by Sababa Toys, each accompanied by a DVD featuring two episodes of the show, and one episode of the animated series.

United Kingdom

Twelve UK episodes were released on VHS and DVD by HIT Entertainment in April 2004. TVS, the original broadcasters, has passed through several owners since 1992 and it was believe only these twelve episodes to have survived. Since then a lot more research has taken place which confirmed a lot episodes actually exist, but not the full 95 which were made.  HIT Entertainment has tried unsuccessfully to locate the missing episodes, including extensive enquiries with The Jim Henson Company both in the UK and the US.  When UK television channels wish to broadcast the show, they are forced to use US versions; such was the case with Boomerang in 2007.
In 2010, Lionsgate Home Entertainment UK began releasing complete season box sets. These releases are the same as the American box sets, except they have no bonus features.

United States

HBO video released a collection of single-episode VHS tapes during the 1980s.
In 1993, Jim Henson Video released five Fraggle Rock VHS tapes with two episodes each.
HIT Entertainment released a number of single-disc DVDs with three episodes each (two in the VHS counterparts) plus bonus episodes which could be unlocked by completing a trivia game before releasing the first three seasons of Fraggle Rock on DVD in Region 1 between September 2005 and September 2007. They also released a complete series box set on November 4, 2008 but did not release the final season in a separate release.  Season 4 had originally been scheduled to be released on the same day as the complete series set but at the last minute it was scrapped and was never released.  The season box sets have been re-released by Vivendi Visual Entertainment, but the 5 DVDs with 3 episodes are still sold in stores.
On August 10, 2009, Lionsgate Home Entertainment announced that they had reached a deal with The Jim Henson Company to acquire the rights to release Fraggle Rock on DVD.  They subsequently released the final season on DVD for the very first time on November 3, 2009.
On February 18, 2013, it was announced that Vivendi Visual Entertainment had acquired the rights to the series.'30th Anniversary Collection' Joined By 'Meet the Fraggles' and Season Re-Releases
Season 1 was be re-released on Mar. 12, 2013, followed by season 2 on April 16, 2013 and season 3 on May 14, 2013.  They've also released a complete series set on May 14 entitled Fraggle Rock - The 30th Anniversary Collection.  This 21-disc set features all 96 episodes of the series as well as bonus features. They also released a 6 episode DVD on the same title called Meet The Fraggles which was previously used on the 1993 VHS, but with different episodes.

Spin-offs

Animated series

An animated Fraggle Rock series aired for one season on NBC's Saturday morning lineup in 1987. The cartoon series introduced some Fraggles, Doozers, and other cave creatures exclusive to the series.

The Doozers

The Jim Henson Company and Decode Entertainment have announced a computer animated Fraggle Rock spin-off called The Doozers which will be targeted for children between 4 Years Old and 7 Years Old and focus on four young Doozers named Spike, Mollybolt, Flex and Daisy Wheel who live at Doozer Creek.

Feature film

In September 2005, The Jim Henson Company announced that it was working on a film adaptation of Fraggle Rock, known as Fraggle Rock: The Movie, with the aim of a release in 2009. The story allegedly involves the original Fraggle characters.[ref]
[/ref]
On October 20, 2006, Darkhorizons. Henson Co. co-topper Lisa Henson is producing, whilst Brian Henson will exec produce."
In May 2008 it was announced that The Weinstein Company would be distributing the Fraggle Rock movie. The film was written as a live-action musical by Cory Edwards, who would also direct. The film was to be produced by The Jim Henson Company; Ahmet Zappa was executive producing along with Brian Inerfeld. The film would involve all of the core characters from the series. The story would take the characters "outside of their home in Fraggle Rock, where they interact with humans, which they think are aliens."Weinsteins roll with 'Fraggle Rock' Karen Prell and Dave Goelz were slated to return for the film as Red Fraggle, Boober Fraggle, and Uncle Traveling Matt, respectively.
However in 2011, Weinstein's deal with Henson had expired leaving production of the film in doubt. It was also announced that the Scissor Sisters would write music for the film, making the film possible. In October 2011 New Regency acquired the rights to the movie to be produced by The Jim Henson Company and The Montecito Picture Company. New Regency (the company behind Alvin and the Chipmunks movies) and the producers are currently in discussion whether to use puppets or CGI as well as a mix of live action. Once this has been decided they will look to a writer for the movie. According to Cory Edwards' blog, Gerry Parkes will not reprise his role as Doc, the American human character, for the movie.
Due to the death of puppeteer Jerry Nelson after The Muppets (2011), Gobo Fraggle will likely be recast. In recent appearances, Gobo has been performed by John Tartaglia.

Music

Music played a central part in Fraggle Rock. Every episode featured two or three original songs co-written by Canadian poet Dennis Lee and Philip Balsam, as well as incidental music. Several episodes (usually involving Cantus and the Minstrels) focused primarily on music—such as Red Fraggle's attempt to find "her song" for the Fraggle Medley, or the effect of music on the breaking of winter or the presence of light in Fraggle Rock.
The "Fraggle Rock Theme" reached number 33 on the British music charts during the phenomenon. Writers included Jim Henson, Jerry Juhl, and Jocelyn Stevenson, with songs by Philip Balsam and Dennis Lee.

Album releases

KOCH Records released Fraggle Rockin': A Collection, a three-disc box set of Fraggle Rock music, on October 30, 2007. The collection  featured "restored and remastered" versions of three original Fraggle Rock LPs. The collection also included "special liner notes featuring rarely seen photos, contributions from the original composers and even sheet music for select songs."James, Greg. Fraggle Rockin' CD Details. The Muppet Newsflash. September 6, 2007 The main portion of these liner notes, called "Getting Down at Fraggle Rock," features an interview with Philip Balsam and Lawrence S. Mirkin and is written by Mike Petersen and Saul Pincus.

Song list

=Soundtrack musicians=

In other media

Books

Interactive books produced for Playskool's Talk 'n Play:

Listed as: title, author, illustrator, and date of publication.

Comics

The Star Comics imprint of Marvel Comics published two separate Fraggle Rock comic-book series in 1985 and 1988 respectively.  The first series lasted eight issues, the second series lasted six issues.
In early 2010, Archaia Studios Press published their first three-issue series of Fraggle Rock. A second three-issue series was followed in January 2011. Both series were collected into hardcover editions shortly after their respective publications. No further announcements were made regarding any future volumes.

Other televised appearances

Video game appearances

Live appearances

Internet appearances






