[[House of Lancaster]]

The House of Lancaster was a cadet branch of the royal House of Plantagenet. Henry III of England created the Earldom of Lancaster{–}from which the house was named{–}for his second son Edmund Crouchback in 1267. Edmund had already been created Earl of Leicester in 1265 and was granted the lands and privileges of Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, after de Montfort's death and attainder at the end of the Second Barons' War. This brought him{–}and Henry, his younger brother{–}into conflict with their cousin Edward II of England, leading to Thomas's execution. Henry inherited Thomas's titles and he and his son, who was also called Henry, gave loyal service to Edward's son{–}Edward III of England.
Edward III married all his sons to wealthy English heiresses rather than following his predecessors' practice of finding continental political marriages for royal princes. Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster, had no male heir so Edward married his son John to Henry's heiress daughter and John's third cousin Blanche of Lancaster. This gave John the vast wealth of the House of Lancaster. Their son Henry usurped the throne in 1399, creating one of the factions in the Wars of the Roses. There was an intermittent dynastic struggle between the descendants of Edward III. In these wars, the term Lancastrian became a reference to members of the family and their supporters. The family provided England with three kings: Henry IV, who ruled from 1399 to 1413, Henry V (1413–1422), and Henry VI (1422–1461 and 1470–1471).
The House became extinct in the male line upon the murder in the Tower of London of Henry VI, following the battlefield execution of his son Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales, by supporters of the House of York in 1471. Lancastrian cognatic descent{–}from John of Gaunt and Blanche of Lancaster's daughter Phillipa{–}continued in the royal houses of Spain and Portugal while the Lancastrian political cause was maintained by Henry Tudor{–}a relatively unknown scion of the Beauforts{–}eventually leading to the establishment of the House of Tudor. The Lancastrians left a legacy through the patronage of the arts{–} most notably in founding Eton College and King's College, Cambridge{–} but to historians' chagrin their propaganda, and that of their Tudor successors, means that it is Shakespeare's{–} dramatized, imperfect, part fictional{–}history plays rather medievalist scholarly research that has the greater influence on modern perceptions of the dynasty. 

Origin of the Earls of Lancaster

After the supporters of Henry III of England suppressed opposition from the English nobility in the Second Barons' War, Henry granted to his second son Edmund Crouchback the titles and possessions forfeited by attainder of the barons' leader, Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester, including the Earldom of Leicester, on 26 October 1265. Later grants included the first Earldom of Lancaster on 30 June 1267 and that of Earl Ferrers in 1301. Edmund was also Count of Champagne and Brie from 1276 by right of his wife.
Edmund's second marriage to Blanche of Artois, the widow of the King of Navarre, placed him at the centre of the European aristocracy. Blanche's daughter Joan I of Navarre was queen regnant of Navarre and through her marriage to Philip IV of France was queen consort of France. Edmund's son Thomas became the most powerful nobleman in England, gaining the Earldoms of Lincoln and Salisbury through marriage to the heiress of Henry de Lacy, 3rd Earl of Lincoln. His income was £11,000 per annum{–}double that of the next wealthiest earl.
Thomas and his younger brother Henry served in the coronation of their cousin King Edward II of England on 25 February 1308; Thomas carried Curtana, the Sword of Mercy, and Henry carried the royal sceptre.
Henry joined the revolt of Edward's wife Isabella of France and her lover Mortimer in 1326, pursuing and capturing Edward at Neath in South Wales.

Duchy and Palatinate of Lancaster

Henry's son, also called Henry, was born at the castle of Grosmont in Monmouthshire between 1299 and 1314.
In 1345, Edward III launched a major, three-pronged attack on France. The Earl of Northampton attacked from Brittany, Edward from Flanders, and Henry from Aquitaine in the south. There were two other counties palatine; Durham was an ancient ecclesiastical palatinate and Chester was crown property.
In 1350, Henry was present at the naval victory at Winchelsea, where he saved the life of the Black Prince.
Edward III of England married John of Gaunt, his third surviving son, to Henry's heiress Blanche of Lancaster. On Henry's death, Edward conferred on Gaunt the second creation of the title of Duke of Lancaster, which made Gaunt, after Edward, the wealthiest landowner in England. Gaunt enjoyed great political influence during his lifetime, but upon his death in 1399 his lands were confiscated by Richard II.  Gaunt's exiled son and heir Henry of Bolingbroke returned home and gathered military support in clear contravention of Richard's treason act of 1397, which included a definition of treason  of "or to ... raiseth People and rideth against the King to make War within his Realm ...". Although he claimed his aim was restoration of his Lancaster inheritance, this Act and Henry's knowledge of Richard's character{–}suspicious and vindictive{–}probably meant Henry knew that only by removing Richard from power could he be secure.

Reign of Henry IV

There is much debate amongst historians about Henry's accession, in part because some see it as a cause of the Wars of the Roses. For many historians, the accession by force of the throne broke principles the Plantagenets had established successfully over two and a half centuries and allowed any magnate with sufficient power and Plantagenet blood to have ambitions to assume the throne. Richard had attempted to disinherit Henry and remove him from the succession. In response Henry's legal advisors, led by William Thirning, dissuaded Henry from claiming the throne by right of conquest and instead look for legal justification..
Henry IV was plagued with financial problems, the political need to reward his supporters, frequent rebellions and declining health{–}including leprosy and epilepsy.
Henry IV was succeeded by his son Henry V,

Henry V and the Hundred Years' War

Henry V of England was a successful and ruthless monarch.
Henry VI of England was less than a year old but his uncles{–}led by Henry V's brother John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford{–}continued the war.

Henry VI and the fall of the House of Lancaster

The Hundred Years' War caused political division between the Lancastrians and the other Plantagenets during the minority of Henry VI: Bedford wanted to maintain the majority of the Lancastrian's French possessions; Humphrey of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Gloucester wanted to hold only Calais; and Cardinal Beaufort desired a negotiated peace.
England's ally Philip III, Duke of Burgundy defected to Charles, when the English ambassadors' refusal to renounce the claim to the French crown stalled negotiations, signing the Treaty of Arras (1435).
Henry VI proved to be a weak king and vulnerable to the over-mighty subjects who developed private armies of retainers. Rivalries often spilled over from the courtroom into armed confrontations, such as the Percy–Neville feud.
Henry's marriage to Margaret of Anjou prompted criticism from Richard Plantagenet, Duke of York, because it included the surrender of Maine and an extended truce with France. York was Henry's cousin through his descent from Edward III sons Lionel of Antwerp, 1st Duke of Clarence, and Edmund, Duke of York. This gave York political influence but he was removed from English and French politics through his appointment as Lord Lieutenant of Ireland.
According to historian Robin Storey, "If Henry's insanity was a tragedy; his recovery was a national disaster".
Margaret gained the support of the Scottish queen Mary of Guelders, and with a Scottish army she pillaged into southern England.

Legacy

Shakespeare's history plays

It is a source of irritation to historians that Shakespeare's influence on the perception of the later medieval period exceeds that of academic research. These plays are:
According to the historian Norman Davies, the plays were constrained by the political and religious requirements of Tudor England. While they are factually inaccurate, they demonstrate how the past and the House of Lancaster are remembered in terms of myth, legend, ideas and popular misconceptions. Shakespeare avoided contentious political and religious issues to dubiously illustrate Tudor England as having rejected medieval conflict and entered an era of harmony and prosperity. The famous patriotic "sceptr'd isle" speech is voiced by John of Gaunt; a man who spent the majority of his life in Aquitaine and is a piece of poetic license that illustrates English prejudices. The play of Henry V is one side with little sympathy for the French.

Succession

Lancastrian cognatic descent from John of Gaunt and Blanche's daughter Phillipa continued in the royal houses of Spain and Portugal.
With the House of Lancaster extinct, Henry claimed to be the Lancastrian heir through his mother Lady Margaret Beaufort. His father was Henry VI's maternal half-brother. In 1485, Henry Tudor united increasing opposition within England to the reign of Richard III with the Lancastrian cause to take the throne. To legitimise his questionable claim, Henry married Elizabeth of York{–}Edward IV of England's daughter{–}and promoted the House of Tudor as a dynasty of dual Lancastrian and Yorkist descent.

Religion, education and the arts

The Lancastrians were both pious and well read. Henry IV was the first English king known to have possessed a vernacular Bible, supported the canonization of John Twenge, gave a pension to the anchoress Margaret Pensax and maintained close relations with several Westminster recluses. His household accounts as king record conventional payments to large numbers of paupers (12,000 on Easter day 1406) and the intercession for him of twenty-four oratores domini regis at 2d each per day. However, his reliance on the church was both personal and political. Archbishop Arundel gave the Lancastrians vital support and carried other bishops with him. In return the church required support for religious orthodoxy against heresy. Lollards were suppressed and heresy was made a capital offence in England under the statute of De haeretico comburendo even though Henry could not afford to overly antagonize his supporters with Lollard sympathies, including those among his Lancastrian retainers.
According to the author of the Gesta Henrici quinti, Henry V aimed 'to promote the honour of God, the extension of the Church, the deliverance of his country and the peace and tranquillity of kingdoms'. He was deeply religious, engaged with ecclesiastical issues and saw that his role as king was to honour God, extend the church, fight heresy and defend the established social order. All his victories, especially Agincourt, were attributed to divine intervention. Henry V founded Syon Abbey in 1415, as penance for his father's execution of Archbishop Scrope, and three monasteries in London: for Carthusian, Bridgettine and Celestines orders.
The Lancastrian regime was founded and legitimised by formal lying that was both public and official. This has been described as "a series of unconstitutional actions" based "upon three major acts of perjury".

Earls and Dukes of Lancaster (first creation)

| Edmund Crouchback, 1st Earl of Lancaster and Leicester  || 100px|Edmund Crouchback || 16 January 1245 London son of Henry III of England and Eleanor of Provence|| Aveline de Forz 1269 0 children  Blanche of Artois 21 September 1371 4 children  Thomas, 2nd Earl of Lancaster, Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster, John Lord of Beaumont, Mary ||5 June 1296 Bayonne age 51
|-
| Thomas, Earl of Leicester and Lancaster|| 100px|Manuscript illustration of Thomas of Lancaster with Saint George. || (c) 1278  son of Edmund Crouchback and Blanche of Artois||Alice de Lacey 28 October 1294 divorced 1318 0 children  ||22 March 1322 Pontefract Executed by order of Edward II of England
|-
| Henry, 3rd Earl of Leicester and Lancaster|| 100px||1281 Grosmont Castle Monmouthshire son of Edmund Crouchback and Blanche of Artois||Matilda de Chaworth  7 children Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster
Blanche of Lancaster, Baroness Wake of Liddell
Maud of Lancaster, Countess of Ulster
Joan of Lancaster, Baroness Mowbray
Isabel of Lancaster, Prioress of Amesbury
Eleanor of Lancaster, Countess of Arundel Mary of Lancaster, Baroness Percy ||22 September 1345 Leicester 
|-
| Henry of Grosmont, 1st Duke of Lancaster, 4th Earl of Leicester and Lancaster|| 100px || between 1299 to 1314 Grosmont Castle Monmouthshire son of Henry, 3rd Earl of Lancaster||Isabella de Beaumont 1334 2 children Maud, Countess of Leicester Blanche, Duchess of Lancaster ||23 March 1361 Leicester 
|-
| Blanche, 6th Countess of Lancaster||100px ||25 March 1345 daughter of Henry of Grosmont|| John of Gaunt, 1st Duke of Lancaster 19 May 1359  7 children Philippa, Queen of Portugal John Elizabeth of Lancaster, Duchess of Exeter Edward John Henry IV Bolingbroke, King of England Isabella||12 September 1369  Bolingbroke Castle Lincolnshire  Black Death
|-
|}

Dukes of Lancaster (second creation)

| John of Gaunt Earl by right of his wife, the title Duke of Lancaster was vacant because there were no male heirs. Created Duke by his father Edward III of England || 100px|John of Gaunt || 6 March 1340 Ghent son of Edward III of England and Philippa of Hainault|| Blanche of Lancaster 1359 7 children See above Constance of Castile 21 September 1371 2 children Catherine, Queen of Castile John Katherine Swynford 13 January 1396 4 children House of Beaufort John Beaufort, 1st Earl of Somerset  Cardinal Henry Beaufort Thomas Beaufort, Duke of Exeter Joan Beaufort, Countess of Westmorland ||3 February 1399 Leicester Castle age 58
|}

Lancastrian Kings of England

|-
|Henry IV of England ||100px|Henry IV|| 3 April 1366
Bolingbroke Castle
son of John of Gaunt and Blanche of Lancaster||(1) Mary de Bohun
Arundel Castle
20 July 1380
seven children Edward of Lancaster  Henry V of England Thomas of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Clarence John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford Humphrey, 1st Duke of Gloucester Blanche, Electress Palatine Philippa, Queen of Denmark, Norway and Sweden (2) Joanna of Navarre Winchester Cathedral 7 February 1403 no children ||20 March 1413 Westminster, London aged 46||Henry's claim was extremely tenuous. He claimed the throne through his mother's descent from Edmund on the basis that he was older than Edward I but had been set aside because of deformity. This was not widely accepted
|-
|Henry V of England||100px||Monmouth Castle son of Henry IV and Mary de Bohun||Catherine of Valois
Troyes Cathedral 2 June 1420 one son Henry VI of England||31 August 1422 Château de Vincennes aged 35||son of Henry IV (agnatic primogeniture)
|-
|Henry VI of England ||100px|Henry VI
||6 December 1421 Windsor Castle son of Henry V and Catherine of Valois||Margaret of Anjou Titchfield Abbey 22 April 1445 one son Edward of Westminster, Prince of Wales||21 May 1471
Tower of London
aged 49
(believed murdered) ||son of Henry V (agnatic primogeniture)
|}





Bibliography




