[[Bristol Parkway railway station]]

CATEGORIES: Railway stations in Bristol, Bath and South Gloucestershire, South Wales Main Line, Railway stations opened in 1972, Railway stations opened by British Rail, Railway stations served by CrossCountry, Railway stations served by First Great Western, DfT Category B stations

Bristol Parkway railway station, on the South Wales Main Line, is in the Stoke Gifford area of the Bristol conurbation. It is . There are three platforms, and a well-equipped waiting area. The station is managed by First Great Western, who provide most of the trains at the station, with CrossCountry providing the rest.
The line is not electrified, but will be by 2016 as part of the planned modernisation of the Great Western Main Line. A new platform will also be built, allowing increased services from London.

Description

Bristol Parkway is located in the unitary authority of South Gloucestershire, in the Stoke Gifford area of the Bristol conurbation. The immediate surrounding area is mostly residential, with farmland to the south east., however there is only train per day calling at both Bristol Parkway and Patchway.
The station is on an east/west alignment, with the main station building and car park to the north of the line. There is a goods yard adjacent to the station to the south, with two loops for trains to pass. The station has three platforms, numbered 2, 3 and 4. Platform 2 is to the south of the two main running lines, and serves westbound trains towards Wales and Bristol Temple Meads. Platforms 3 and 4 share an island to the north of the two main running lines, with a further two running lines between platform 4 and the car park. Platform 3 serves mainly inter-city trains towards London and . Platforms 3 and 4 are signalled for bidirectional running, while platform 2 is unidirectional. The footbridge can be accessed by both stairs and lifts.
The station building, a sweeping metal construction opened in 2001, contains a booking office, waiting rooms, payphones, cash machines, shops, toilets and a café overlooking the tracks.  There are waiting rooms on each platform, as well as vending machines and LED displays giving next train information. Ticket barriers are in use at the station. The pay-and-display car park, run by APCOA, has 1140 spaces, and is currently being expanded as it is at capacity on weekdays.
Bristol Parkway was the first of a new generation of park and ride railway stations, and a large number of passengers use it for that purpose. Over the decade 2002–2012, the number of passengers starting or ending a journey at Bristol Parkway grew by 1 million passengers per year to 2.25 million, with a further 740,000 passengers changing trains there, giving an annual footfall of just under 3 million passengers and making it the 216th busiest station in the country and the third busiest in the West of England (after Bristol Temple Meads and 
The line through Bristol Parkway has a linespeed of  It is not electrified, though it is planned that it will be electrified by 2016 as part of the 21st-century modernisation of the Great Western Main Line.

Services

The station is managed by First Great Western, who operate most rail services from the station. 
CrossCountry also operate trains from Bristol Parkway – as of the December 2013 timetable, the basic weekday service consists of one hourly train each way between Bristol Temple Meads and 
First Great Western services between London and Wales are formed of High Speed Train (HST) sets, while other FGW services use a mix of  Voyager diesel-electric multiple units, with some services between Scotland and the South West employing HST sets.
The standard journey time to London Paddington is 90 minutes, to Cardiff Central 40 minutes, to Birmingham New Street 75 minutes, and to Bristol Temple Meads 12 minutes.



Bristol Parkway is served by several bus routes linking it with the rest of Bristol and South Gloucestershire. These include
These routes are operated by First Bristol, First Avon and Somerset, Wessex Bus and Severnside Transport.

Irish Connections

From Bristol Parkway connections can be made via Cardiff Central to Fishguard Harbour for the Stena Line ferry to Rosslare Europort for onward Irish Rail trains to Wexford and Dublin Connolly.  There are also connecting trains from Cardiff Central and Swansea to Pembroke Dock for the Irish Ferries to Rosslare Europort onward Irish Rail services to Wexford and Dublin Connolly.

History

The line through Bristol Parkway was originally opened in 1903 as part of the Great Western Railway's "Badminton Line" from Wootton Bassett to 
The station, owned by British Rail, opened on 1 May 1972. Platform canopies were added in 1973, along with a cover for the footbridge. Further minor improvements were implemented over the next thirty years, including a new booking office and small extensions to the car park.
Following the privatisation of British Rail in 1997, services at Bristol Parkway were franchised to several different train operating companies. South Wales Main Line services were provided by Great Western Trains, which was later taken over and rebranded as First Great Western;
In the early 2000s, the Royal Mail began construction of the West of England Post Office Rail Depot just to the east of the station, taking over some of the station car park to provide a platform and warehouse for postal trains. The 
In 2000, work began on a complete redevelopment of the station building. It opened on 1 July 2001, and featured lifts and generally enhanced facilities. Local roads were enhanced to help speed passengers' journeys to and from the station, and a new multi-storey car park was built to replace the spaces lost to the Royal Mail facility. A dedicated bus interchange was opened in 2003. In 2006, construction started on a new platform face on the north side of platform 1, to ease congestion for trains toward Birmingham and London. The new platform, platform 4, was opened on 9 May 2007 by rail minister Tom Harris MP. As part of the reconstruction, the waiting room at the east end of platform 1 was demolished, and replaced with an extended waiting area and customer help desk. Platform 1 was subsequently redesignated platform 3. The work cost £3,000,000, and was funded by Network Rail, with First Great Western contributing £100,000 towards the new waiting room and help desk.
Despite the large car park, the increase in passenger numbers at Parkway in recent years has led to problems with on-street parking, leading to the commissioning of a new 200-space car park 
Improved cycle facilities, including a bike hire scheme, were provided in the late 2000s.

Future

First Great Western declined an option to continue the Greater Western passenger franchise beyond 2013, citing a desire for a longer-term contract due to the impending upgrade to the Great Western Main Line.
The car park is currently being expanded to around 1,500 spaces. Construction began in mid-2013, Work is due to be completed in March 2014.
The South Wales Main Line from London to Cardiff is due to be electrified by 2016, as is the line to Bristol Temple Meads. The area will also be resignalled.

Bristol Parkway is on the Weston-super-Mare/








