[[Interstate 26]]

CATEGORIES: Interstate Highway System, Interstate Highways in North Carolina, Interstate Highways in South Carolina, Interstate Highways in Tennessee, Interstate 26, Interstate 81

Interstate 26 (I-26) is a nominally east-west (but physically more northwest-southeast diagonal) main route of the Interstate Highway System in the Southeastern United States. I-26 runs from the junction of U.S. Route 11W and U.S. Route 23 in Kingsport, Tennessee, generally southeastward to U.S. Route 17 in Charleston, South Carolina.
Northwards from Kingsport, US-23 continues north to Portsmouth, Ohio, as the Corridor B of the Appalachian Development Highway System, and beyond to Columbus, as the Corridor C. In conjunction with the Columbus-Toledo, Ohio corridor formed by Interstate 75, U.S. 23, and State Route 15, I-26 forms part of a mostly high-speed four-or-more-lane highway from the Great Lakes to the Atlantic Coast at Charleston, South Carolina. There are no plans for further official Interstate 26 extensions farther north than Northern Tennessee.

Route description

|-
|TN
|31
|50
|-
|NC
|54
|86
|-
|SC
|221
|356
|-
|Total
|306
|492
|}
I-26 is a diagonal Interstate Highway, which runs northwest/southeast. (Most of the other highway routes in this area are odd-numbered and run northeast/southwest.) The extension past Asheville is mostly north-south. Where I-26 crosses the French Broad River in Asheville at the Jeffrey Bowen Bridge (previously known as the Smoky Park Bridge), the highway runs in opposite directions from its designations. (I-26 West actually goes east. I-26 is concurrent with I-240, so that I-240 East and I-26 West are the same route.) When the extension was made in 2003, the exit numbers in North Carolina were increased by 31 to reflect the new mileage. The part that it shares with I-240 has not had its numbers changed, although most of the road signs now indicate I-26 instead of I-240.
I-26 has signs with an extra FUTURE sign above (and in the same style as) the EAST and WEST signs from Asheville north to Mars Hill, North Carolina, because the older U.S. Route 23 freeway does not yet meet all of the Interstate Highway standards. The road shoulders remain substandard or nonexistent along short sections of the route, and also, a rebuilding is planned in Asheville to avoid some tight interchanges.

Tennessee

The exit numbers in Tennessee were formerly numbered "backwards"—increasing from "east" (physically south) to "west" (physically north)—because this highway was formerly signed north—south as U.S. Route 23 (and Interstate 181). Although this is consistent with the south-to-north numbering conventions, this exit numbering was changed on all 284 signs along I-26 to be consistent with the rest of the east-to-west-numbered highway in March 2007. The remaining I-181 signs north of I-81 were also replaced with I-26 signs at that time.
For its entire length in Tennessee, I-26 shares the route with U.S. Route 23.  The route is named the James H. Quillen Parkway, after Jimmy Quillen, a past member of the U.S. House of Representatives for Tennessee.
In Tennessee,  US-23 runs south from the Virginia state line for , I-26 crosses the South Fork Holston River before swinging around to a generally south-east path through Sullivan County, TN.  It reaches its major interchange with Interstate 81 at Exit 8a, on the south-west outskirts of Colonial Heights, TN.
Shortly after entering Washington county, it reaches the north-west part of Johnson City, TN, and also serves as a local transit route as it makes it way around the north and eastern parts of the city.  It begins to travel through more obviously mountainous terrain before turning to travel in a south direction.  Entering Carter County, TN briefly, it passes Exit 27 before entering the Cherokee National Forest and Unicoi County, TN.  From this point, it passes through part of the Blue Ridge Mountains, first the Unaka Range and later, as it passes Erwin, Tennessee between Exits 34 and 40, the Bald Mountains.  It meets the Nolichucky River just after mile marker 38 and travels along its south-east bank before crossing it immediately before Exit 40.
The remainder of I-26 in Tennessee passes through a sparsely populated area, and travelers enjoy scenic views of the mountains that are typical of the region. Most of the route is at elevations of .  Two runaway truck ramps are provided on both carriageways of the interstate.
Exit 50, at Upper Higgins Creek Road, near Flag Pond, begins the last section of I-26 in Tennessee, which reaches the North Carolina state line after another .

North Carolina

About  at the U.S. 74 interchange. The land flattens substantially after entering the French Broad River drainage basin from Flat Rock, N.C. to Hendersonville, N.C., Fletcher, N.C., and Arden, N.C..
I-26 has a major interchange with Interstate 40 in Asheville, N.C..  After ,  immediately part company. As I-240 continues to swing round to the north and east of Asheville, I-26 turns north towards Weaverville and Mars Hill, N.C.  It enters first the Blue Ridge and then the Walnut Mountains and Bald Mountains of the Appalachian range, passing through the Pisgah and Cherokee National Forests as it does so.
As I-26 crosses the Bald Mountains near the North Carolina/Tennessee state line, it travels through a relatively high-elevation rural area. At Buckner Gap, I-26 reaches 

South Carolina

Beginning in the city of Charleston, I-26 travels northwestwardly over flat plains with little urbanization past Summerville. After the junction with I-95 just inside of Orangeburg County, the terrain becomes somewhat hilly. Orangeburg is the first major stop outside Charleston with several exits bearing this name. Between Orangeburg and the junction with Interstate 77 just outside of Cayce the highway goes up and down a few very long hills averaging about  section of I-26 from Interstate 126 in Columbia to US 176 at Exit 97 was the first section of the highway to open up to traffic (on September 7, 1960).

History

Interstate 181

Interstate 181 (I-181) was established in December 1985 as an interstate designation of US-23, which was already built to interstate standards in the 1970s.  I-181 traversed from US-321/SR-67, in Johnson City, to US-11W/SR-1, in Kingsport, totaling 

Exit list

Auxiliary routes






