[[Calvert DeForest]]

CATEGORIES: American comedians, American male film actors, American male stage actors, American television personalities, Male actors from New York City, 1921 births, 2007 deaths, People from Brooklyn

Calvert Grant DeForest (July 23, 1921 – March 19, 2007), also known by his character Larry "Bud" Melman, was an American actor and comedian, best known for his appearances on Late Night with David Letterman and the Late Show with David Letterman.

Biography

Early life

Little has been published about his early life. He was born to Calvert Martin DeForest, M.D., a physician who died in 1949, and Mabelle (Taylor) DeForest., Calvert DeForest, 85, Larry (Bud) Melman on 'Letterman,' Dies, The New York Times, March 22, 2007 He was a cousin of actor DeForest Kelley of Star Trek fame, and Bebe Daniels, a silent film star who survived the introduction of sound. Radio pioneer Lee De Forest was Daniels's second cousin. The exact family connection of Lee De Forest to Calvert DeForest is unclear.
DeForest attended Poly Prep Country Day School in Brooklyn, New York. He was employed for many years as a file clerk at the large pharmaceutical company Parke Davis, which was later acquired by Pfizer. He had aspirations of acting but was discouraged by his mother, who was briefly an actress herself. After her death in 1969, DeForest did part-time backstage work, which eventually led to acting work, and is credited with appearing in four films from 1972 to 1982. He additionally worked part-time as a receptionist in a drug rehabilitation center until February 1984, when his supervisor learned of his employment with NBC and his resulting ineligibility for the position (as it was part of a program designed for those who made under $6,000 a year) and asked him to resign.

Work with David Letterman

In early 1982, DeForest was hired to appear on the new show Late Night With David Letterman.  The Associated Press noted: "DeForest's gnomish face was the first to greet viewers when Letterman's NBC show debuted on February 1, 1982, offering a parody of the prologue to the Boris Karloff film Frankenstein. 'It was the greatest thing that had happened in my life,' he once said of his first Letterman appearance."
On Late Night, DeForest played the role of Larry "Bud" Melman.  Melman had no fixed or defined role on the show; he was simply an older, short, portly man with thick black-framed glasses who was seen relatively frequently, especially in the early years.  Melman would sometimes be given odd chores to perform by Letterman, such as handing out hot towels to arrivals at the New York Port Authority bus terminal.  At other times, Melman would give (pre-scripted) answers to unlikely audience questions, interrupt programming to promote a bizarre new product (such as "Toast-on-a-stick: Bread's answer to the popsicle!"), or appear at unexpected moments to hector Letterman, or the audience.  Melman also appeared as "Kenny The Gardener", offering dubious gardening advice to home viewers. Occasionally, Melman would just simply wander onto the stage during Letterman's monologue as if lost, then leave without saying anything.
A hallmark of the character was his seemingly genuine lack of acting polish. Melman's scripted lines were usually delivered in a forceful shout, but when Letterman or others forced "Melman" into ad-libbing, the actor's naturally more soft-spoken and polite nature came to the forefront.  He was also noted for his remote interviews in which he would ask the interviewee a question, but pitch the microphone to the interviewee too quickly, resulting in the last part of the question being inaudible.  
When Letterman moved from NBC to CBS in 1993, the Melman name was retired, as NBC insisted that character of "Larry 'Bud' Melman" was their intellectual property.  However, starting from the very first edition of The Late Show with David Letterman, DeForest continued to play exactly the same character he had played on Late Night -- he now simply used his own name to do so.  DeForest often "drew laughs by his bizarre juxtaposition as a Late Show correspondent at events such as the 1994 Winter Olympics in Norway and the Woodstock anniversary concert that year." One of DeForest's more memorable skits came on Letterman's May 13, 1994, show. The host stated Johnny Carson would announce the evening's Top 10 list, at which point DeForest appeared as "Johnny Carson."  Shortly after DeForest's exit, the real Johnny Carson appeared in what would prove Carson's last television appearance.
DeForest continued to appear on Letterman's show until his 81st birthday in 2002 before retiring from acting. He had appeared in 15 outside films or TV shows since he began his association with Letterman in 1982.
Letterman noted after DeForest's death: "Everyone always wondered if Calvert was an actor playing a character, but in reality he was just himself: a genuine, modest and nice man. To our staff and to our viewers, he was a beloved and valued part of our show, and we will miss him."David Letterman Regular Larry 'Bud' Melman Dies. March 22, 2007. When asked how he'd like to be remembered, DeForest responded, "Just being able to make people laugh and knowing people enjoyed my humor. I also hope I haven't offended anyone through the years."FADE TO BLACK PRESENTS – Calvert Deforest, a.k.a. Larry Bud Melman.

Other appearances

He was co-host (in charge of the digital switcher) on the local SF Bay Area radio program, 10@10, on KFOG-FM with Dave Morey.
In 1985, he appeared in the music video for the Run-DMC song "King of Rock" as a security guard.
In 1989, he appeared in the Special Ed video for the song "Think About it" as the villainous Dr. Norecords.
In 1994, he wrote a humor book called Cheap Advice.
In the late 1990s, he often appeared in various television ads including ones for Tropicana Twister, 1-800-Collect and Little Caesars.
1999, he recorded the lounge compilation CD Calvert DeForest's Erotic Experience, a collection of cover songs, published October 12, 1999 by Mars Entertainment.
DeForest also appeared on the hit albums Americana and Ixnay on the Hombre by The Offspring, doing some of the voices that can be heard before and after certain tracks. In late March 2007, a 20-minute clip of DeForest recording the voices for their album was posted on The Offspring's website.
He appeared at Woodstock 1994 to announce Nine Inch Nails late night set by proclaiming, "Ladies and gentlemen, punch your balls off and please welcome Nine Inch Nails!"
He appeared on the first episode of the 1996 series The Dana Carvey Show on ABC.
He appeared as one of the clubhouse gang in an episode of Pee-wee's Playhouse.

Death

After years of poor health, DeForest died at Good Samaritan Hospital in West Islip, New York, on Long Island, on March 19, 2007. Per his request, no funeral services were held; he was cremated and his remains were interred at Pinelawn Cemetery, Farmingdale, New York. By all press accounts, he left no surviving relatives.

Filmography






