[[Ringo Lam]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, Living people, Hong Kong film directors, York University alumni, Hong Kong film producers, Asian film producers

Ringo Lam Ling-Tung (, Cantonese: Lam Ling-tung), is a Hong Kong film director, producer and scriptwriter. Born in Hong Kong in 1955, Lam initially went to an acting school. After finding he preferred making films to acting, he went to Canada to study film. In 1983, he returned and began filming comedy films. After the commercial success of his film Aces Go Places IV, he was allowed to develop his own film. Lam directed City on Fire in 1987 which led him to winning his first Hong Kong Film Award.
Lam followed up City on Fire with other similar films that shared a dark view of Hong Kong society. Many of these films starred Chow Yun Fat. In 1996, Lam made his first American film, Maximum Risk starring Jean-Claude Van Damme. Lam would continue working on film productions in both Hong Kong and two more American productions with Jean Claude Van Damme until 2003. Lam's final directorial effort was directing one third of the portmanteau film Triangle along with Tsui Hark and Johnnie To. In 2014, it was announced that Lam was working on a new feature film.

Biography

Ringo Lam was born in Hong Kong in 1955. Lam started his career by enrolling in the TVP Actors Training Program in 1973. At the program, he met Chow Yun Fat who he would later collaborate with on several films. After taking a few acting roles, Lam went to Canada and studied film at York University in Toronto. Lam returned to Hong Kong in 1981.

Film career

1980s

Ringo Lam's first four films were not written by Lam. p. 64
Lam took over as director for Po-Chih Leong after he had finished about one-third of the film Esprit d'amour as The film's producer Karl Maka needed a cheap replacement and hired Ringo Lam. Lam explained that he had "no choice, I need food, so I do the best I can ..." Lam received sole directing credit for the film.
After Aces Go Places IV, Karl Maka allowed Ringo Lam to make whatever type of film he wanted. Lam's had two films released in 1987. which would first of his On Fire films, City on Fire. The film is a gangster film that began being made in Hong Kong after the release of A Better Tomorrow (1986) which re-invented the gangster film genre in Hong Kong. The film was released on February 13, 1987 and earned $19,723,505 in Hong Kong. Lam won the award for Best Director award at the 1987 Hong Kong Film Awards for City on Fire. Lam's next film that year was Prison on Fire which had a script that was written in nine days while the film was shot in 20 days. p. 71
In 1988, along with Karl Maka, Lam had a brief acting role in the film The Eighth Happiness. 124 Lam then continued his On Fire series with School on Fire which was released in Hong Kong on August 20, 1988.

1990s

Ringo Lam's first film in the 1990s was Undeclared War released in 1990.
In 1996, Lam made his American debut with the film Maximum Risk starring Jean-Claude Van Damme. The film was not a big draw at the box office. Lam returned to Hong Kong where he shot his next film Full Alert which was budgeted at $13 million. The film was shown at film festivals in 1997 including Rotterdam and Berlin.

21st Century

In 2001, Ringo Lam's second America-based production Replicant was released.
In 2007, Ringo Lam co-directed a section of portmanteau film Triangle with Tsui Hark and Johnnie To. Lam stated that his story in the film represented "a metaphor of my attitude towards filmmaking: It is always a love-hate process." The film was screened out of competition at the Cannes Film Festival.
In 2014, the Hong Kong newspaper Apple Daily reported that Ringo Lam will return to directing with a film with funded from Mei Ah Entertainment with a cast that includes Daniel Wu and Shawn Yue. The film is set to being production in June 2014. The film would mark Lam's first feature-length film in over a decade

Style

Ringo Lam's first four films were comedies not written by Lam. p. 64 When Lam began to shoot the films he wanted to make after the success of Aces Go Places IV, he began his On Fire series. Lam chose the English titles for these films stating that it gave them "a sense of energy, of action". The films City on Fire, Prison on Fire and School on Fire do not share any characters or situations, but all have a common bleak view on Hong Kong society. p. 64 In these films, Lam looks at controversial issues such as street violence and the abuse of street, prison and school systems.
Lam rarely uses Cantopop in his films. Lam's films often have Western music, such as City on Fire which features a blues oriented saxophone score and Full Contact uses American rock music. p. 170

Filmography



Notes

References

 | last= Charles
 | first= John
 | title= The Hong Kong Filmography , 1977-1997
