[[Prince Friso of Orange-Nassau]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, 2013 deaths, 20th-century Dutch people, 21st-century Dutch people, Counts of Orange-Nassau, Deaths in avalanches, Delft University of Technology alumni, Dutch nobility, Dutch people of German descent, Dutch princes, Erasmus University Rotterdam alumni, Goldman Sachs people, House of Amsberg, House of Orange-Nassau, INSEAD alumni, Neurological disease deaths in the Netherlands, People with severe brain damage, Princes of the Netherlands, Protestant Church Christians from the Netherlands, Skiing deaths, University of California, Berkeley alumni

Prince Friso of Orange-Nassau (Johan Friso Bernhard Christiaan David van Oranje-Nassau van Amsberg; 25 September 1968 – 12 August 2013) was a younger brother of King Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands. Prince Friso was a member of the Dutch Royal Family, but because of his marriage without an Act of Consent in 2004, he lost his membership of the Dutch Royal House and was no longer in the line of succession to the throne.
On 17 February 2012, Prince Friso was buried under an avalanche in Lech, Austria, while skiing off piste. He was taken to a hospital in Innsbruck where he was in critical but stable condition.

Early life and education

Johan Friso Bernhard Christiaan David was born on 25 September 1968 Jeugd, Royal House. Retrieved 19 February 2013. He had one elder brother, king Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands (1967) and one younger brother, prince Constantijn (1969).
His titles at birth were Prince of the Netherlands, Prince of Orange-Nassau, Jonkheer van Amsberg. Prince Friso was baptized on 28 December 1968 in the Dom Church in Utrecht. Prins Friso wordt gedoopt in Utrecht, NOS, 2011. Retrieved 18 February 2013. His godparents are prince Harald of Norway, Johan Christian Baron von Jenisch, Herman van Roijen, queen Juliana of the Netherlands and Christina von Amsberg.Oorkonde, ''Nederlands dagblad, 30 december 1968
In 1986, he graduated from the secondary school Eerste Vrijzinnig Christelijk Lyceum in The Hague. From 1986 until 1988, he studied mechanical engineering at the University of California, Berkeley, where he joined Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity.

Work

Prince Friso worked from 1995 until 1996 at the Amsterdam branch of the international management consultancy McKinsey. After completing an MBA-programme at INSEAD, Prince Friso worked as vice president from 1998 till 2003 for Goldman Sachs International in London. In 2004, he became part-time co-president of TNO Space in Delft.  From October 2006, Prince Friso was Managing Director in the London office of the private investment and advisory firm Wolfensohn & Company.
Prince Friso was a co-founder of the MRI Centre in Amsterdam and is also a founding shareholder of Wizzair, the largest low-cost airline in Eastern Europe. Prince Friso was honorary chairman of the Prince Claus Fund for Culture and Development (a position he held together with his younger brother Prince Constantijn).Board members Prince Claus Fund for Culture and Development
Prior to his accident, Prince Friso was working as a chief financial officer for URENCO, a uranium enrichment company.

Marriage and children

On 30 June 2003, it was announced that Prince Friso was to marry Mabel Wisse Smit. The Dutch cabinet, however, did not seek permission from parliament for this marriage, a constitutional requirement if Prince Friso was to remain a member of the Dutch Royal House and in line of succession for the throne; at the time, he was second in line after his older brother, Willem-Alexander.
The Prime Minister Jan Peter Balkenende explained that this was due to discussions with Mabel Wisse Smit in October 2003 where she had admitted that her previous statements about an alleged relationship with Klaas Bruinsma (1953–1991), a known Dutch drug lord, had not been complete and accurate. She had previously stated that she had contact for a few months with Bruinsma, but in a casual context, not intimate or relating to business and that she had broken the contact on learning of Bruinsma's occupation.
This "breach of trust" was the reason the government did not seek parliamentary permission, respecting the wishes of the couple."Revelations About Dutch Prince's Fiancée Rattle Royal Family" They nevertheless married in Delft on 24 April 2004, and Mabel Wisse Smit became a member of the Dutch Royal Family but not a member of the Dutch Royal House.
Considering that his elder brother King Willem-Alexander has three children, Prince Friso's exclusion from the succession was unlikely to have an effect on the monarchy in the Netherlands.
After their marriage, Prince Friso and his wife Princess Mabel set up home in London, in the suburb of Kew.
The couple had two daughters:

Avalanche accident and death

On 17 February 2012, Prince Friso was buried under an avalanche in Lech, Austria, and he was taken to a hospital in Innsbruck.In hospital MSNBC, 17 February 2012
The Dutch royal family issued a statement on 19 February saying "The Royal Family is very grateful and deeply touched by all expressions of support and sympathy after the ski accident of His Royal Highness Prince Friso. It was a great support for them during this difficult time."
A prognosis on his health situation was expected within a few days, but this was pushed back to 24 February, a week after his accident. The RVD's comment remained the same: stable, but critical. On 24 February, an Innsbruck medical team announced that the prince had been buried for 25 minutes, followed by a 50-minute CPR to treat his cardiac arrest. Wolfgang Koller stated that an MRI was performed a day earlier revealing little change, however other neurological tests indicated significant damage due to oxygen shortage. It remained unclear whether the prince would ever regain full consciousness. Koller said that the Prince's family may now look for a rehabilitation institution. On the same day the Dutch royal family issued a statement requesting that the privacy of the Prince's family be respected to enable them to come to terms with his condition.
On 1 March 2012, Prince Friso was transferred to the Wellington Hospital in London where he and his wife had lived for many years.
On 19 November 2012, it was announced that the prince had started to show some signs of consciousness but it was still not certain whether he would ever wake up, and if he did, in what  state.
On 9 July 2013, Prince Friso was moved back to Huis ten Bosch in the Netherlands. It was understood that his coma had then evolved into a minimally conscious state. As he was no longer in need of hospital-level medical care, he stayed with his family for the summer.
On 12 August 2013, it was announced that Prince Friso died in Huis ten Bosch due to complications from the accident.

Style, titles and names

Under the Act on the Membership of the Royal House (2002), Prince Friso lost the title 'Prince of the Netherlands' by entering into a marriage without an Act of Consent.
By Royal Decree of 19 March 2004, nr. 126 the Prince was granted the surname 'Van Oranje-Nassau van Amsberg' and the hereditary title 'Count of Orange-Nassau' to take effect upon his marriage.
By the same Royal Decree the Prince was allowed to continue his title 'Prince of Orange-Nassau' as a personal and non-hereditary title and the style of 'Royal Highness'. According to the notification of this Royal Decree, any children born to the couple were to receive the surname 'Van Oranje-Nassau van Amsberg' and become a 'Count (Countess) of Orange-Nassau' and also have the noble predicate 'Jonkheer (Jonkvrouw) van Amsberg'. Herewith, his children had the same titles and names as those of Prince Constantijn, and thereby to show that they altogether belong to the royal family with descendance from Queen Beatrix and Prince Claus. In social use they are named with their comital title. His wife acquired the feminine version of her husband's style and titles as a courtesy title, since it is customary for wives of members of the royal family to take the titles of their husbands.
Referred to from birth as Prince Johan-Friso, in 2004 the royal court announced that he had requested that his first name be simply "Friso" without the prefix "Johan".

Honours

See also List of honours of the Dutch Royal Family by country

Ancestry






