[[Protected areas of South Australia]]

CATEGORIES: Protected areas of South Australia, Lists of national parks in Australia, South Australia-related lists

Protected areas of South Australia consists of areas located within South Australia and its immediate onshore waters and which are managed by South Australian Government agencies.  As of February 2014, South Australia contains 350 separate protected areas declared under the National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972, the Crown Land Management Act 2009 and the Wilderness Protection Act 1992 which have a total land area of  

Jurisdiction

The jurisdiction for legislation of protected areas within South Australia and the immediate onshore waters known officially as 'the coastal waters and waters within the limits of South Australia' belongs to the South Australian government.  
Other state legislation that may create protected areas include the following: Forestry Act 1950, Wilderness Protection Act 1992, Historic Shipwrecks Act 1981, River Murray Act 2003, Adelaide Dolphin Sanctuary Act 2005, Fisheries Management Act 2007, Marine Parks Act 2007, Crown Land Management Act 2009 and Arkaroola Protection Act 2012.
While the Australian Government does not have the power under the Australian constitution to legislate for protected areas within South Australia, its treaty obligations and its constitutional responsibilities do permit it to develop policy for protected areas and to enter into agreements concerning protected areas.  Examples include nomination of sites under the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (Ramsar Convention) and establishment of agreements for Indigenous Protected Areas.

National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972

The National Parks and Wildlife Act 1972 (also known as the 'National Parks Act') is the principal legislation in South Australia in respect to the establishment and management of protected areas.  
The act which uses the term 'reserve' in lieu of the term 'protected area' is concerned with the establishment and management of reserves, establishment of sanctuaries, conservation of native plants and animals, declaration of protected animals, the management of protected animals in respect to taking, keeping, farming and harvesting, and the control of hunting.
The act is administered by the Department of Environment, Water and Natural Resources (DEWNR).
As of February 2014, reserves declared under this act totalled 320 with a total area of  or 19.6% of South Australia's area.
The following types of reserves are listed within the Act: national parks, conservation parks, game reserves, recreation parks and regional reserves.

National Parks

National parks are 'areas considered to be of national significance due to wildlife, natural features of the land, or Aboriginal or European heritage'.  As of February 2014, the  following national parks have been declared:

Conservation Parks

Conservation parks are 'areas protected for the purpose of conserving wildlife or the natural or historic features of the land'. As of February 2014, the following conservation parks have been declared:

Game Reserves

Game reserves are 'areas set aside for conservation of wildlife and the management of game for seasonal hunting.'  As of February 2014, the  following game reserves have been declared:

Recreation Parks

Recreation parks are 'areas managed for public recreation and enjoyment in a natural setting.' As of February 2014, the  following recreation parks have been declared:

Regional Reserves

Regional reserves are 'areas proclaimed for the purpose of conserving wildlife or natural or historical features while allowing responsible use of the area's natural resources.' As of February 2014, the  following regional reserves have been declared:

Other South Australian legislation

Conservation Reserves

Conservation reserves are a parcels of 'land set aside for conservation of natural and cultural features under the Crown Land Management Act 2009.' As of February 2014, the following conservation reserves have been declared:''
As of February 2014, reserves declared under the Crown Land Management Act 2009 totalled 16 with a total area of  or less than 0.1% of South Australia's area.

Native Forest Reserves

The Forestry Act 1950 which is administered by Forestry SA allows for the declaration of forest reserves for 'purposes relating to the conservation, development and management of land supporting native flora and fauna…'   
As of March 2014, the following forest reserves which are located in the Southern Flinders Ranges, the Mount Lofty Ranges and the Limestone Coast have been declared:

Wilderness Protection Areas

The Wilderness Protection Act 1992 was established in 1992 to provide for 'the protection of wilderness and the restoration of land to its condition before European colonisation'.
As of February 2014, reserves declared under the Wilderness Protection Act 1992 totalled 14 with a total area of  or 1.9% of South Australia's area.

Protected zones for Historic Shipwreck sites

The Historic Shipwrecks Act 1981 which is  administered by DEWNR allows for the creation of protected zones over land and water around historic shipwrecks. The following protected zones have been declared:

River Murray protection area

The River Murray Act 2003 which is administered by DEWNR has provision for 'the protection and enhancement of the River Murray and related areas and ecosystems'.
As of September 2010, the following protection areas have been designated:

Aquatic reserves

The following areas have been declared under the Fisheries Management Act 2007 (SA).

Adelaide Dolphin Sanctuary

Adelaide Dolphin Sanctuary (ADS) is a sanctuary area intended to protect the  bottlenose dolphin (Tursiops aduncus) population residing in the Port Adelaide River estuary and Barker Inlet as well as protecting and enhancing the Port Adelaide River estuary and Barker Inlet.  The sanctuary was declared under the Adelaide Dolphin Sanctuary Act 2005 and is managed by DEWNR.

Marine parks

Marine parks  are areas set aside under the Marine Parks Act 2007 (SA) 'to preserve the biological diversity of the state's coastal, estuarine and marine environments while allowing ecologically sustainable use of the area's natural resources.' As of December 2013, the following marine parks have been declared:

Arkaroola Protection Area

The Arkaroola Protection Act 2012 which commenced operation on 26 April 2012 was created to 'establish the Arkaroola Protection Area; to provide for the proper management and care of the area; and to prohibit mining activities in the area'.  The protection area which is located 

Australian government

Ramsar sites

As a contracting party to the Convention on Wetlands of International Importance (known as the Ramsar Convention), Australia is encouraged 'to nominate sites containing representative, rare or unique wetlands, or that are important for conserving biological diversity, to the List of Wetlands of International Importance'.
As of March 2014, the Australian Government has nominated the following Ramsar sites within South Australia:

Indigenous Protected Areas

An Indigenous Protected Area (IPA) is a voluntary agreement between owners of indigenous owned land (known as traditional owners) and the Australian government which is intended to 'promote biodiversity and cultural resource conservation on indigenous owned land'.  As of March 2014, there are six IPAs in existence within South Australia:








