[[Canoe]]

CATEGORIES: Canoes, Canoeing and kayaking equipment

A canoe is a lightweight narrow boat, typically pointed at both ends and open on top, propelled by one or more seated or kneeling paddlers facing the direction of travel using a single-bladed paddle.
Canoes are used for racing, whitewater canoeing, touring and camping, freestyle, and general recreation. The intended use of the canoe dictates its hull shape and construction material.
Historically, canoes were dugouts or made of bark on a wood frame, but construction materials evolved to canvas on a wood frame, then to aluminum. Most modern canoes are made of molded plastic or composites such as Fiberglass. Until the mid-1800s the canoe was an important means of transport for exploration and trade, but then transitioned to recreational or sporting use. Canoeing has been part of the Olympics since 1936.  In countries where the canoe played a key role in history, such as Canada and New Zealand, the canoe remains an important theme in popular culture.
Canoes can be adapted to many purposes, for example with the addition of sails, outboard motors, and outriggers.

History

The word canoe comes from the Carib kenu (dugout), via the Spanish canoa.
Constructed between 8200 and 7600 BC, and found in the Netherlands, the Pesse canoe may be the oldest known canoe. Excavations in Denmark reveal the use of dugouts and paddles during the Ertebølle period, (ca 5300 BC – 3950 BC).
Australian Aboriginal people made canoes using a variety of materials, including bark and hollowed out tree trunks. The indigenous people of the Amazon commonly used Hymenaea trees.
Many indigenous peoples of the Americas built bark canoes. They were usually skinned with birch bark over a light wooden frame, but other types could be used if birch was scarce. At a typical length of 
Native American groups of the north Pacific coast made dugout canoes in a number of styles for different purposes, from western red-cedar (Thuja plicata) or yellow-cedar (Chamaecyparis nootkatensis), depending on availability.
The first explorer to cross the North American continent, Alexander Mackenzie, used canoes extensively, as did David Thompson and the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
In the North American fur trade the Hudson's Bay Company's voyageurs used three types of canoe:
The birch bark canoe was used in a 
In 19th-century North America, the birch-on-frame construction technique evolved into the wood-and-canvas canoes made by fastening an external waterproofed canvas shell to planks and ribs at Old Town Canoe in Maine, at the Peterborough Canoe Company and at the Chestnut Canoe Company  in New Brunswick.
Although canoes were once primarily a means of transport, with industrialization they became popular as recreational or sporting watercraft. John MacGregor popularized canoeing through his books, and in 1866 founded the Royal Canoe Club in London and in 1880 the American Canoe Association. The Canadian Canoe Association was founded in 1900, and the British Canoe Union in 1936.
Flatwater canoeing was a demonstration sport at the 1924 Paris Olympics and became an Olympic discipline at the 1936 Berlin Olympics. The International Canoe Federation was formed in 1946 and is the umbrella organization of all national canoe organizations worldwide.

Hull design

Hull design must meet different, often conflicting, requirements for speed, carrying capacity, maneuverability, and stability The canoe's hull speed can be calculated using the principles of ship resistance and propulsion.

Materials and construction

Modern

Traditional

These materials and techniques are used by artisans and produce boats that some consider more attractive, but which are more fragile than those made with modern methods.
| publisher = Smithsonian Center for Folklife Programs and Cultural Studies
| people = Tom Vennum, Charles Weber, Earl Nyholm (Director)
| title = Earl's Canoe: A Traditional Ojibwe Craft
| accessdate = 2012-12-03
| date = 1999
| url = 
}}[/ref]

Symbolism

In Canada, the canoe has been a theme in history and folklore, and is a symbol of Canadian identity.  From 1935 to 1986 the Canadian silver dollar depicted a voyageur and an aboriginal paddling a canoe with the Northern Lights in the background.
The Chasse-galerie is a French-Canadian tale of voyageurs who, after a night of heavy drinking on New Year's Eve at a remote timber camp want to visit their sweethearts some 100 leagues away. Since they have to be back in time for work the next morning they make a pact with the devil. Their canoe will fly through the air, on condition that they not mention God's name or touch the cross of any church steeple as they fly by in the canoe.
In John Steinbeck's novella The Pearl set in Mexico, the main character's canoe is a means of making a living that has been passed down for generations and represents a link to cultural tradition.
The Māori, indigenous Polynesian people arrived in New Zealand in several waves of canoe voyage. Canoe traditions are important to the identity of Māori. Whakapapa (genealogical links) back to the crew of founding canoes served to establish the origins of tribes, and defined tribal boundaries and relationships.

Types

Modern canoe types are usually categorized by the intended use. Many modern canoe designs are hybrids (a combination of two or more designs, meant for multiple uses). The purpose of the canoe will also often determine the materials used. Most canoes are designed for either one person (solo) or two people (tandem), but some are designed for more than two people.

Sprint

Sprint canoe is also known as flatwater racing. The paddler kneels on one knee, and uses a single-blade paddle. ICF classes include C1 (solo), C2 (crew of two), and C4 (crew of four). Race distances at the 2012 Olympic Games were 200 and 1000 metres.

Slalom and wildwater

In ICF whitewater slalom paddlers negotiate their way down a 300m of  whitewater  rapids, through a series of up to 25 gates. The colour of the poles indicates the direction in which the paddlers must past through gates. Categories are C1 (solo) and C2 (tandem), the latter being open to men only.
In ICF wildwater canoeing athletes paddle a course of class III to IV whitewater (using the international scale of river difficulty), passing over waves, holes and rocks of a natural riverbed in events lasting either 20 – 30 minutes ("Classic" races) or 2 – 3 minutes ("Sprint" races). Categories are  C1 and C2, for both women and men. C1s must have a minimum weight and width of 12 kg and 0.7 m, and a maximum length of 4.3 m. C2s must have a minimum weight and width of 18 kg and 0.8 m, and a maximum length of 5 m. Rudders are prohibited. Canoes are decked boats which must be propelled by single bladed paddles and inside which the paddler kneels.

Marathon

Marathons are long-distance races which may include portages. Under ICF rules minimum canoe weight is 10 and 14 kg for C1 and C2 respectively. Other rules can vary by race, for example in the Classique Internationale de Canots de la Mauricie athletes race in C2s, with a maximum length of 

General recreation

A square-stern canoe is an asymmetrical canoe with a squared off stern for the mounting of an outboard motor. Meant for lake travel or fishing.

Touring and camping

In North America, a "touring canoe" is a good tracking boat, good for wind blown lakes etc. A "tripping canoe" is a touring canoe with larger capacity for wilderness travel and is often designed with more rocker for better maneuverability on whitewater rivers but requiring some skill on the part of the canoeist in open windy waters when lightly loaded. Touring canoes are often made of lighter materials and built for comfort and cargo space. Tripping canoes such as the Chestnut Prospector derivates, and the Old Town trippers, are typically made of heavier and tougher materials, and are usually a more traditional design. A Prospector canoe is a generic name for copies of the Chestnut model, a popular type of tripping canoe marked by a symmetrical hull and a relatively large amount of rocker, giving a nice balance for wilderness tripping. This model also has the ability to carry large amounts of gear while being maneuverable enough for rapids. This makes it a superb large capacity wilderness boat, but requires skill on windy, broad waters when lightly loaded. It is made in a variety of materials. For home construction, 4 mm plywood is commonly used, mainly marine ply, using the "stitch and glue" technique. Commercially built canoes are commonly built of fibreglass, HDPE, Kevlar, Carbon Fiber, and Royalex which is although relatively heavy, very durable.
A touring canoe is sometimes covered with a greatly extended deck, forming a "cockpit" for the paddlers. A cockpit has the advantage that the gunwale can be made lower and narrower so the paddler can reach the water more easily, and the rim of the boat can be higher keeping the boat dryer.

Freestyle

A canoe specialized for whitewater play and tricks. Most are identical to short, flat-bottomed kayak playboats except for internal outfitting. The paddler kneels and uses a single-blade canoe paddle. Playboating is a discipline of whitewater canoeing where the paddler performs various technical moves in one place (a playspot), as opposed to downriver where the objective is to travel the length of a section of river (although whitewater canoeists will often stop and play en-route). Specialised canoes known as playboats can be used.

Notable traditional canoeists

Image gallery

Image:PaulKane-HuntingFish-ROM.jpg|Spearing Salmon By Torchlight, an oil painting by Paul Kane
Image:Voyageur canoe.jpg|Canoe Manned by Voyageurs Passing a Waterfall (Ontario), oil painting by Frances Anne Hopkins
Image:Pf026012.jpg|Ojibwe women in canoe on Leech Lake
Image:Dugout canoe Rennell.jpg|A dugout canoe of pirogue type in the Solomon Islands
Image:ADK Museum - Antique Strip-built Canoes.jpg|Antique "all-wood", traditionally built cedar canoes at the Adirondack Museum
File:Canoe on Shenandoah River.jpg|Canoeing on the Shenandoah River, Winchester, Virginia
Image:Kerala backwater 20080218-11.jpg|Canoe in Kerala, India
Image:Women Rowing - My Tho - Vietnam.JPG|Canoe in Vietnam in the Mekong delta
Image:Canoes01.jpg|Canoes stored at Lake Harriet Minneapolis, Minnesota
Image:OjIBWE BIRCH BARK CANOE 1910 mINNESOTA.jpg|Birch-bark canoe
Image:Vaillancourt.jpg|A Malecite birchbark canoe built by Henri Vaillancourt, made famous by John McPhee in his book, Survival of the Bark Canoe
File:Gerrish-name-plate.jpg|Nameplate on a Gerrish — the earliest wood-and-canvas canoe
File:Canoe display.jpg|An exhibit at the Wisconsin Canoe Heritage Museum
File:Kevlar racing canoes, Adirondack Canoe Classic.jpg|Kevlar canoes, Saranac Lake, New York
Image:Voyageur.jpg|Reverse of 1935 Voyageur Dollar





Further reading




