[[Kanangra-Boyd National Park]]

CATEGORIES: National parks of New South Wales, Protected areas established in 1969, Parks and reserves of the Blue Mountains (New South Wales), 1969 establishments in Australia

Kanangra-Boyd  is a national park in New South Wales, Australia, that is located approximately .

Features and location

Two of the features most spoken of in the Kanangra-Boyd National park are the Kanangra Falls and Kanangra Walls. Kanangra Walls was used in the re-filming of the movie Jedda in 1954.
Kanangra-Boyd National Park is composed of two land units — the elevated, gently undulating Boyd Plateau and the area of creeks, rivers, gorges and ridges into which the plateau falls away. The plateau is traversed by the Kanangra Walls Road and can be accessed either from Oberon or Jenolan Caves. The road leads to Kanangra Walls. There are several well known landmarks in the park, such as Mount Cloudmaker, Kanangra Walls and the Thurat Spires. The word Kanangra is generally held to be a corruption of Gundangura and was called Thurat for some time.

Geology

The Kanangra-Boyd Wilderness is among the largest and most rugged wilderness areas in New South Wales. Situated to the south of 

Flora

The complex geology, climate, fire regime, and topography has enabled a wide variety of ecosystems to develop. Eucalypt forest with western plain species, such as Yellow Box and White Box, are found in areas of rainshadow. Forests of Mountain Ash are found on well drained soils and Blaxland Stringybark where soil is poor. Red Spotted Gum, Blakelys Red Gum, Red Stringybark and Forest Oak are also found. Kurrajong trees are found in abundance where limestone outcrops occur, and in sheltered gullies rainforest species (including Red Cedar) and Blue Gum are found. On the Boyd Plateau, the misty mountain forests of Brown Barrel, Messmate, Ribbon Gum, Black Sally, Snow gum and Mallee predominate. High altitude areas subject to strong winds generally support heath and closed scrub communities. In areas of impeded drainage, various swamps occur, dominated by sedges and scrubs such as Leptospermum and Baeckea species.
About 1,000 flowering plant species occur in the Blue Mountains, in some 40 plant communities. There are over 45 rare or endangered plant species in the wilderness. A unique form of tall open forest occurs in the Kedumba Valley, dominated by Camden White Gum, an endangered species limited to these populations.

Fauna

The Blue Mountains National Park contains 46 species of mammals, including 27 marsupials and two monotremes. Over 200 birds and 98 reptile species have been recorded. Several species listed on Schedules 1 and 2 of the  are found in the Wilderness Area including: The Powerful Owl (Ninox strenua), Squirrel Glider (Petaurus norfolcensis), Yellow-bellied Glider (Petaurus volans), Tiger Quoll (Dasyurus maculatus), and Brush-tailed Rock Wallaby (Petrogale penicillata). A species of Peripatus, or Velvet Worm has been found on the Boyd Plateau is considered rare.

Hiking

There are several walking tracks and other sites in the park, these include the:
Camping is available at Boyd River camping ground located on Kanangra Road.

Gallery

Image:Kalang_Falls_by_Neil_Paton.jpg|Kalang Falls
Image:Kanangra Walls 2002.jpg|Kanangra Walls seen from Echo Head
Image:kanangra view of valley 2002.jpg|Kanangra Grand Gorge
Image:Mt Cloudmaker NSW.JPG|Mount Cloudmaker
Image:Kanangra Boyd Nat Park.JPG|View from Kanangra Walls
Image:Kanangra-Boyd National Park near Boyd River.JPG |Forest near Boyd River
File:Kanangra winter wonderland.jpg|Boyd River campground in winter








