[[New Jersey Route 31]]

CATEGORIES: State highways in New Jersey, Transportation in Hunterdon County, New Jersey, Transportation in Mercer County, New Jersey, Transportation in Warren County, New Jersey

Route 31 is a state highway in New Jersey, United States. It runs  from U.S. Route 1 Business (US 1 Bus.)/US 206 in Trenton, Mercer County north to an intersection with US 46 in Buttzville in White Township, Warren County. Along the way, Route 31 heads through the communities of Flemington, Clinton and Washington. Most of the highway is state-maintained; however, the section within the city limits of Trenton is maintained by the city. Much of Route 31 is a two-lane highway that passes through farmland, woodland, and mountainous areas. Two portions of the route—from Trenton to Pennington and from Ringoes to Clinton—consist of more development.
The highway was constructed from 1926 to 1935. Route 31 has carried two different numbers in the past. It was known as Route 30 between 1927 and 1953, when it was renumbered to Route 69 to avoid conflicting with US 30 in southern New Jersey. It was renumbered to Route 31 in 1967 due to sign theft that resulted from the sexual meaning of the number 69. There were plans made in the late 1960s and early 1970s to build a freeway in the Route 31 corridor that would begin in the Trenton area and extend as far north as Interstate 84 (I-84) in Port Jervis, New York; however, it was canceled in the mid-1970s due to opposition from area residents and environmental and financial constraints. In recent years, the portion of Route 31 between Flemington and Clinton has been widened to four lanes. In addition, there was a failed project to build a bypass of Flemington that would have also eliminated the Flemington Circle.

Route description

Mercer County

Route 31 heads north from US 1 Bus. and US 206 at the Trenton Battle Monument in Trenton, Mercer County on city-maintained two-lane undivided Pennington Road. The route passes by residences and some businesses in the northern part of Trenton, crossing County Route 653 (CR 653, Calhoun Street). Route 31 enters Ewing Township and becomes state-mantainted at the point where it crosses CR 634 (Parkway Avenue).  The route continues north through suburban residential areas and passes to the west of The College of New Jersey campus. It crosses into Hopewell Township and briefly becomes a four-lane divided highway as it interchanges with I-95. Past this interchange, Route 31 continues north as an undivided road through a mix of residences with some businesses, meeting CR 546 and CR 640 at a traffic circle. It continues past the circle as a two-lane, undivided road and bypasses Pennington to the west. The route briefly skirts into Pennington twice, where it is a divided highway as it crosses over CSX's Trenton Subdivision. Route 31 enters Pennington again before heading back into Hopewell Township. Here, the road meets CR 640 (North Main Street) again, and heads north into farmland and woodland with some homes. It eventually turns to the northwest and crosses CR 518 (Lambertville-Hopewell Road).

Hunterdon County

Upon crossing CR 518, Route 31 enters East Amwell Township, Hunterdon County and continues through rural areas. The route eventually forms the border between East Amwell Township and West Amwell Township and intersects CR 579 (Harbourton Road). The two routes run concurrent to the northwest, becoming a three-lane road with a center left-turn lane that crosses entirely into East Amwell Township before resuming along the border of East and West Amwell Townships. The road becomes a divided highway and crosses entirely into East Amwell Township again before it comes to an interchange with US 202, where CR 579 continues north into Ringoes and Route 31 heads north along US 202, a four-lane, divided highway with intersections featuring jughandle ramps.
US 202 and Route 31 head to the north, coming to an intersection with Old York Road, which heads to the southwest as Route 179 and to the northeast as CR 514. Past this intersection, the road forms the border between East Amwell Township to the west and Raritan Township to the east before crossing entirely into Raritan Township.[ref]
[/ref] The road continues north through farms, reaching commercial development as it approaches the Flemington area. The road widens to six lanes and crosses into Flemington. The road comes to the Flemington Circle where US 202 continues to the northeast, Route 12 heads to the west, and Route 31 continues to the north on a five-lane, undivided road.
The route crosses back into Raritan Township, where it briefly becomes a four-lane divided highway before reentering Flemington. Not long afterward, it heads into Raritan Township again, where it crosses CR 523 (Walter E. Foran Boulevard) and passes by the former site of Flemington Speedway, now a commercial development called Raritan Town Square. Route 31 passes through suburban development before turning into a four-lane, divided highway with some intersections controlled by jughandles and crossing over the South Branch Raritan River into Readington Township. It continues north through a mix of farms and wooded areas with some residential areas, crossing into Clinton Township.
Route 31 comes to an interchange with I-78 and US 22, where it turns to the northwest into a more developed setting and interchanges with Route 173. The road runs through Clinton Town, where it crosses the South Branch Raritan River again. Back in Clinton Township, Route 31 intersects CR 513 (Halstead Street), forming a concurrency with that route and running along the eastern shore of Spruce Run Reservoir. CR 513 splits from Route 31 by heading north on West Main Street and Route 31 continues north, narrowing to a two-lane undivided road. The route crosses into Lebanon Township, where it heads northwest across the wooded Musconetcong Mountains. Route 31 passes through Glen Gardner, which it enters upon crossing Sprunce Run, before heading into Hampton, where it heads west through that community as a three-lane road with two southbound lanes and one northbound lane.

Warren County

Route 31 crosses the Musconetcong River into Washington Township, Warren County, where it heads north into the agricultural Musconetcong Valley. It heads into Washington Borough, where the road becomes four lanes and crosses Route 57 (Washington Avenue). Past the Route 57 intersection, Route 31 narrows to three lanes, and becomes a two-lane road again as it crosses back into Washington Township at the Essex Road intersection. It heads into farmland before turning northwest and heading across Oxford Mountain, entering Mansfield Township. While crossing Oxford Mountain, Route 31 skirts along the border between Mansfield Township and Washington Township. The route enters Oxford Township, where it heads through the community of Oxford as a four-lane road. Route 31 continues north through a mix of woods and agricultural areas past Oxford, crossing into White Township at the East Quarry Road intersection and coming to its terminus at US 46.

History

Old roads and construction

Before the state recevied ownership of Route 31, the portion of the highway from Clinton to Oxford was part of the Spruce Run Turnpike. The turnpike was chartered by the New Jersey State Assembly on February 6, 1813 and was maintained and tolled by the Spruce Run Turnpike Company.
The formation of current-day Route 31 began around 1916, when a portion of the highway, along the community of Hampton was taken over by the state and was repaired to state standards for $300 (1916 USD).
By 1929, the construction had reached Lawrence Township, where another long stretch of highway was built.

Designation

What is today Route 31 was defined in the 1927 New Jersey state highway renumbering as Route 30, a highway that began in Trenton and ended in Buttzville. 
A limited-access freeway was once planned to serve traffic along the Route 31 (then Route 69) corridor. Plans came forth in the 1960s for a highway to run along Route 69 from the in-construction US 1 freeway (then designated Route 174 
There were plans to extend the freeway further in both directions, including northward to I-80 in Hope Township and southward to I-195. Each of these two extensions were brought forth in the 1960s, and were later shelved due to lack of support. In the early 1970s, a 
Following the completion of I-287's New Jersey portion in 1993, more out-of-state tractor trailer drivers began to use the alignment of Route 31 as a toll-free alternative to the New Jersey Turnpike.

The South Branch Parkway

In 2005, the New Jersey Department of Transportation introduced a case study for Route 31 for their New Jersey: Future in Transportation project. Over time, the residents and business owners of Raritan Township and Flemington had growing concerns over the congestion along the highway and US 202. After trying to use vacant land to the east of the current alignment, the Department of Transportation put forth the Flemington Bypass, trying to relieve congestion on Route 31 along the commercial district and to provide access to the industrial land between the two highways and the South Branch River. The project was never completed and the proposed site remains undeveloped.
The parkway was to be built as a two-lane alternative to Route 31 defining the border of the suburban and rural portions of Flemington Borough and Raritan Township. Along with the new parkway, a brand-new local street network was proposed to help support the new alignment. These would minimize the pressure of traffic on Route 31 and include better roads for bicycles and pedestrians. More direct routes to different portions of the community would be provided to maintain the community's character. The proposed parkway was to also help upgrade the sensitive history along the South Branch River. According to the 2008 highway plans, the South Branch Parkway would cost the state more than $2.2 million (2008 USD) in funds to put together the survey of lands in the proposed alignment. Some of these funds for the survey were originally intended to go towards the removal of the Flemington Circle.

Major intersections








