[[Ulverston]]

CATEGORIES: Market towns in Cumbria, Furness, Civil parishes in Cumbria, Towns in Cumbria, Post towns in the LA postcode area

Ulverston is a market town and civil parish in the South Lakeland district of Cumbria in North West England. Historically in Lancashire, the town is located in the Furness area, close to the Lake District, and just north of Morecambe Bay and neighboured by Swarthmoor, Pennington and Rosside.
Ulverston's most visible landmark is Hoad Monument, a concrete structure built in 1850 to commemorate statesman and local resident Sir John Barrow.
Ulverston Canal, which is no longer navigable, is claimed to be the deepest, widest and shortest canal in the United Kingdom at 1¼ miles, however these stats were made up by local business owners and with some simple research are proved to be wrong.
The town is home to many shops and pubs, some of which are located on the stone sett (paving) main street, Market Street. At the head of the street is the war memorial to local soldiers who died in World War I.

Geography

Ulverston is a comparatively large civil parish. It is bounded in the east by the Leven estuary, Crake, Coniston Water, and Yewdale Beck. To the west the boundary follows a chain of hills, and beyond that lie the towns of Kirkby-in-Furness and Askam and Ireleth. To the south is relatively low land, but it rises quickly. In the north are hills such as Coniston Old Man. The settlements of the parish are mainly concentrated in the eastern part.

Earthquake

On 28 April 2009, Ulverston was near the epicentre of an earthquake measuring 3.7 on the Richter scale. Tremors were felt across south Cumbria and parts of north Lancashire at 11.22 BST, although virtually no damage was caused by them. A spokesman for the British Geological Survey said that earthquakes of around that magnitude occur roughly once a year in Britain.

History

The name Ulverston, first recorded in the Domesday Book (1086) as Ulurestun, is derived from two elements: the first is either the Old Norse personal name Úlfarr, or the Old English Wulfhere; the second element is the Old English tūn, meaning "farmstead" or "village". which explains the presence of a wolf on the town's coat of arms. The loss of the 'W' in Wulfhere can be attributed to the historic Scandinavian influence in the region. Locally, the town has traditionally been known as Oostan. (1997), The Cumbrian Dictionary of Dialect, Tradition and Folklore, Smith Settle Ltd, p115 Other variations of the name recorded throughout history include Oluestonam (1127), and Uluereston (1189).
The town's market charter was granted in 1280 by Edward I. The charter also allowed for all public houses to open from 10:30 am until 11:00 pm irrespective of any other statute on the books. During the summer months the Saturday market day is themed with craft stalls, charity stalls and locally produced wares on "Made in Cumbria" stalls.
Historically, the ancient parish included several other chapelries or townships which later became separate civil parishes: Blawith, Church Coniston, Egton with Newland, Lowick, Mansriggs, Osmotherley, Subberthwaite and Torver. From 1894 to 1974 the town constituted an urban district in the administrative county of Lancashire. It became a successor parish in the Cumbria district of South Lakeland under the Local Government Act 1972.
Over the years the town has been the birthplace of several famous people. Sir John Barrow, born at Dragley Beck, Ulverston, was the Admiralty's Second Secretary: a much more important position than First Secretary. A monument to him—a replica of the third Eddystone Lighthouse—stands on Hoad Hill overlooking the town. Famous Ulverstonians include Norman Birkett,
One of Ulverston's lesser known sons is the late Bryan Martin, senior BBC Radio 4 newsreader and presenter of the 70s and 80s, who announced on the "Today" programme the death of Elvis Presley in 1977 and broke the news of the Iranian Embassy siege in 1980. He appeared in The News Quiz, occasionally introduced The Goon Show, and read the spoof "news bulletin" which always featured in the middle of the comedy The Men From the Ministry.

Education

Ulverston Victoria High School (UVHS) is the town's secondary school with approximately 1200 pupils. The school has a sixth form which draws students from Ulverston as well as the surrounding areas; the numbers of students attending is roughly 200. Also, one disabled school in the vicinity (Sandside). The nearest access to private education is Chetwynde School in Barrow-in-Furness.

Transport

Ulverston railway station, which serves the town, is located on the Furness Line from Barrow-in-Furness to Lancaster, ultimately leading on to Manchester Airport. The railway station is a short walk from the town centre. The town is also served by several bus services. These include the X6, running to Kendal from Barrow in Furness, via Grange over Sands. The X 12 runs from Coniston and passes through the village of Spark Bridge. Other services include the X 31 to Tarn Hows and the 6A and 6 to Barrow in Furness, the largest town in the region.

Twin towns

Ulverston is twinned with the town of Albert in France. The two towns regularly meet to play football at Easter with the Cyril Barker Shield being contested every year. The match's location is alternated between Ulverston and Albert.

Festival town

Ulverston calls itself a 'Festival Town' in reference to the many and varied festivals which take place in Ulverston over the course of the year. The most renowned of these is the Lantern Festival, which involves hundreds of local residents creating lanterns out of willow and tissue paper and parading them throughout the town in winding rivers of light. The annual event culminates in a lively display of theatrical performance and fireworks in Ford Park, and was organised entirely by the community themselves for the first time in 2008.
Other popular festivals include:

Sport

Football

Ulverston's football team is GSK Ulverston Rangers FC. They play in the Barrow junior district league. They play their home games at Glaxo or Dragley Beck depending on age.
U10's and below only play friendlies while U11's upwards play league football. Their strip is white with a black/orange trim, black shorts and black/white socks
GSK Ulverston Rangers adults wear a full blue strip with a black trim

Rugby League

Ulverston ARLFC is The RL team in Ulverston. They play their home games at Dragley beck also known as Pain Lane. They wear a blue with white trim strip with blue shorts and blue socks. They play in the north west counties rugby league.
Ulverston ARLFC has produced many Professional Rugby players over the past years, including; Geoff Worrall, Derek Hadley, Jos Kenley, Dave Milby, Alan Moses, Oliver Wilkes, Andy Whittle, Stuart Wilkinson, Phil Atkinson, Neil Atkinson, Martin John, John Stephenson, Stuart Howarth, Nick Caunt, Chris Wilkes, Andy Rigby, Andy Whalley.
Ulverston ARLFC are the current holders of the Barton Townley cup.

Notable people

International links

Despite being titled The Royal Norwegian Honorary Consulate in Barrow-in-Furness, one of the numerous consulates of Norway is actually located on the outskirts of Ulverston.norway.uk/Embassy/consulates/

Gallery

Image:Market Street, Ulverston.jpg|Market Street, Ulverston
Image:Marketplace1860.jpg|The Market Place in 1860
Image:View over to Hoad Hill.jpg|View over to Hoad Hill
Image:Hoadback3.JPG
Image:Ulverston Church Side Door.jpg|Side door of Ulverston Church of England
Image:Town Clock 1845.jpg|Town Clock of Ulverston, 1845
Image:Welfare State International Home. Now for sale.
Image:UlverstonCanal.JPG|Ulverston Canal








