[[Sydney Mardi Gras]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 establishments in Australia, Festivals in Sydney, LGBT culture in Sydney, LGBT events in Australia, Parades in Australia, Pride parades, Recurring events established in 1979, Mardi Gras

The Sydney Mardi Gras is an annual LGBTQIA pride parade and festival in Sydney, Australia, attended by hundreds of thousands of people from around Australia and overseas. It is one of the largest such festivals in the world, and includes a variety of events such as the Sydney Mardi Gras Parade and Party, Bondi Beach Drag Races, Harbour Party, the academic discussion panel Queer Thinking, Mardi Gras Film Festival, as well as Fair Day, which attracts 70,000 people to Victoria Park, Sydney.
Sydney Mardi Gras is one of Australia's biggest tourist drawcards,30 million for the state.
The event grew from gay rights marches held annually since 1978, when numerous participants had been contentiously arrested by New South Wales State Police. The Mardi Gras Parade maintains a political flavour, with many marching groups and floats promoting LGBTQI rights issues or themes.  Reflecting changes since the first Sydney Mardi Gras, participants in the Mardi Gras Parade now include groups of uniformed Australian Defence Force personnel, Police officers from New South Wales State Police, as well as interstate/federal police officers, firefighters and other emergency services personnel from the Australian LGBTI community. Marriage equality was a dominant theme in the 2011 Sydney Mardi Gras Parade with at least 15 floats lobbying for same-sex marriage.

History

1970s

On 24 June 1978 at 10 pm as a night-time celebration following a morning protest march and commemoration of the Stonewall Riots
The first Mardi Gras Parade occurred in 1979 in recognition of the impact of the Stonewall Riots commemoration march of the previous year and was attended by 3,000 people. In that same year, the Labor Government of New South Wales, led by Neville Wran, repealed the  under which the arrests in 1978 were made. The second Mardi Gras had the theme of Power in the Darkness. While there was a large police presence, there were no arrests made.
|-
|
|}

1980 to 1999

In 1980, no parade was held, but following community consultation, decisions were made to move the parade to the summer. In 1981, the parade was shifted to February, with the name changed to the "Sydney Gay Mardi Gras". An increasingly large number of people not only participated in the now summertime event, but a crowd of 5,000 came to watch it.  For most of the decade many lesbian excluded themselves from the event. The first post-parade party was held in 1982, which 4,000 people attended. This would continue to become an integral part of the Sydney Gay & Lesbian Mardi Gras.  1983 saw 44 floats participate with 20,000 onlookers. Footage of the 1984 event appeared in the music video for the Cold Chisel song "Saturday Night". In 1987, an estimated 100,000 people came to watch the parade. The mid-1980s saw considerable pressure placed to the Mardi Gras Committee following media controversy regarding AIDS. Despite calls for the parade and the party to be banned, the 1985 parade went ahead with the theme Fighting for Our Lives. In 1988 the parade was renamed the "Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras" at an Extraodinary General Meeting.
1991 saw the eighth annual Sydney Gay and Lesbian Film festival, a Mardi Gras event, included in a national film festival for the first time. In this year the parade had become the largest ever held in Australia.  In 1992, the festival lasted for four weeks, making it the largest gay and lesbian festival in the world.  By 1993, the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras Parade had become the largest night time outdoor parade in the world.  Mardi Gras' Economic Impact Study found that the total Mardi Gras impact into the Australian economy was around A$38 million.
An Aboriginal man dressed as Captain Cook and Aboriginal float led the parade in 1988, 200 years after Cook's landing and claim on the land.

Recent history

The 2001 Parade was broadcast on Network Ten and had a theme of gay and lesbian parenting.  The 2002 event saw a loss of A$400,000.
In early 2011, members of the organisation unanimously voted to include intersex formally into the organisation at the Annual General Meeting and adopt the formal use of the LGBTQI acronym.  To allow for greater inclusion of the LGBTQI community it represents (including those identifying as bisexual, transexual, queer and intersex), on 17 November 2011 the festival and event organisers changed the event name to "Sydney Mardi Gras". On the same date the organisation reverted to its former name, "Sydney Gay & Lesbian Mardi Gras" (from "New Mardi Gras"), as more than 9,100 participants joined in the 2012 Parade, on 134 floats.
In 2013, the New South Wales Police were accused of police brutality after a video shot by a bystander showing a handcuffed man thrown to the ground by an officer.

Events

Mardi Gras Parade

The Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras festival culminates in the renowned Sydney Mardi Gras Parade, an LGBTQI rights protest and celebration of sexuality. The parade features more than 8,500 entrants in colourful costumes and elaborate floats, who represent a community group, topical theme or political message. Parade entrants include members of Parents, Families and Friends of Lesbians and Gays, the Australian Defence Force, Amnesty International Australia, Australian Marriage Equality, City of Sydney, Fire and Rescue NSW, Taronga Conservation Society and DNA (magazine) among many others.
Each parade starts with approximately 200 Dykes on Bikes riding up Oxford Street. It is often accompanied by fireworks displays, which are launched from the rooftops of buildings along the parade route. Approximately 300,000 spectators watch the Parade as it snakes 
The parade travels along Oxford Street before turning into Flinders Street and finally into the bus lane that runs parallel to Anzac Parade – to the parade end. These roads and others including some around Hyde Park, are closed to traffic for the duration of the parade and for a few hours after as clean-up operations proceed.
Each year, a Chief of Parade (Grand Marshal), is chosen by the organisation New Mardi Gras as someone who represents the values and spirit of Mardi Gras. This honourable title has previously been awarded to:
The Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras Parade is extensively covered by the media. In 2011, it was broadcast on radio by Joy 94.9 FM Melbourne and 2SER 107.3 FM Sydney. The Parade was also shown live on Foxtel's Arena in its entirety. The Arena broadcast was presented by hosts Louie Spence of Pineapple Dance Studios, Charlotte Dawson, Ruby Rose and Matthew Mitcham. The Parade was also broadcast on radio live by various community radio stations, via the CBAA's Community Radio Network satellite. In 2012, Optus, a corporate sponsor, broadcast a delayed and edited highlights of the parade via www.org.au. In 2014, SBS TV broadcast delayed and edited coverage of the parade highlights, hosted by Tom Ballard, Patrick Abboud and Heather Peace.
Despite its name, Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras is not held on Mardi Gras (Shrove Tuesday) or indeed, on a Tuesday at all. In recent years, the Mardi Gras Parade has been on the first Saturday of March, with a festival of events going for approximately three weeks preceding it.

Mardi Gras Party (post Parade)

The post parade party is one of the largest ongoing party events in the country. tickets; and ticket sales a little lower again in 2013.
The 2010 party was not held on the night of the parade and was later described by the organisers as human error during scheduling.
In the last 20 years, several well known local and international artists have performed at the Party and include:

Mardi Gras Festival

By 1987 the festival included 35 events. The 1998 festival was estimated to contribute $99 million to the Sydney economy.
For many years a fully themed magazine style guide with information on all events has been produced. Several multi-disc Mardi Gras compilation albums were released in 1995, 1997, 2002 and 2003.
The festival's live entertainment includes cabarets, comedy, music and theatre.  The Mardi Gras Film Festival showcases international and local gay and lesbian films.  There are many literature and arts events, forum and conferences to attend between the many social activities.  Individual and team sports have always been a big part of the festival.

Mardi Gras Fair Day

In 1979 an 'Alternative Lifestyle Fair' as part of a week of activities around International Gay Solidarity Day. During the early 1980s the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Business Association held an annual Fair Day, which was brought into the Sydney Gay Mardi Gras program in 1985. From 1985 to 1988 the Business Association continued to run the Fair, which was subsequently run by the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras from 1989. The event is the kick off event for the official Mardi Gras season in Victoria Park, Sydney for Sydney's wider LGBTQI community and their friends and family. Up to 70,000 people routinely turn out to sit on the grass, browse the stalls and catch up with old friends or make some new ones. Fair Day 2011 saw record numbers of attendees. Entertainment came from the Foxtel Main Stage and included a set from Zoe Badwi and Garçon Garçon, and one of the biggest ever "Mr and Mrs Fair Day" competitions. Approximately 250 volunteers assisted with 220 stalls made up of many LGBTQI community groups.

Mardi Gras Awards

The Mardi Gras Awards are presented to organisations and individuals who made an outstanding contribution to Mardi Gras and the gay and lesbian community.

Support

Political support has come from a number of local and federal politicians such as Senators Natasha Stott Despoja and Penny Wong, Members of the House of Representatives Anthony Albanese and Tanya Plibersek, Premier Barry O'Farrell
Hundreds of thousands of Australians and international guests come out in support of the Parade, with many lining up for a viewing spot from early in the afternoon. By the 7.45 pm Parade kick-off, crowds are usually ten-people deep. Though it has rained on several Mardi Gras parades (notably with heavy downpours prior to, and drizzle during, the parade in 1995, and heavy rainfall during the parade in 2004), this has never stopped the parade.
The Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras is regarded internationally Mardi Gras is featured in the programmes of tour operators which target the gay market.
In the 2000s the Mardi Gras organisation struck financial trouble, and collapsed.  This was attributed at the time by some  to poor financial management, while another explanation was given as Australia's ongoing public liability crisis, which has seen massive insurance premiums impose a significant burden on community and public events, if not preventing them. As a consequence of the impending collapse of the organisation, there was a groundswell of concern and support within Sydney's LGBTQI communities for the continuation of the work and events of Mardi Gras. A series of crisis meetings culminated in the creation of a reformed organisation "New Mardi Gras" being formed to continue the Parade, the Festival & the Party.
In 2008, it was announced that the Government of New South Wales would provide funding for Mardi Gras as it had become part of the state's Master Events Calendar. Limited funds have also been sourced from the Sleaze Ball party held in Sydney towards the end of the year. Mardi Gras still receives significant public support and the event now receives some limited government funding.
In 2013, a temporary rainbow crossing was created by City of Sydney Council as part of the 35th anniversary celebrations.

Criticism and opposition

Mardi Gras, at different times, has attracted criticism from its own members, the LGBTQI community, and  a variety of religious and political groups. Some argue Mardi Gras is inherently subversive to traditional Christian values. Each year the event is held, Fred Nile, a member of the New South Wales Legislative Council and a former minister of the Uniting Church in Australia, leads a prayer for rain on the event.
Criticism of the Sydney Mardi Gras was perhaps at its strongest during the early years of the AIDS crisis, and flared again when in 1994 the national broadcaster ABC telecast the parade for the first time.
In January 2008 Robert Forsyth, the Anglican bishop of South Sydney, condemned Corpus Christi for opening the Mardi Gras because it depicted Judas seducing a gay Jesus as well as Jesus' administration of gay marriage between two apostles. Director Leigh Rowney accepted that it would generate discussion on Homosexuality and Christianity and stated: "I wanted this play in the hands of a Christian person like myself to give it dignity but still open it up to answering questions about Christianity as a faith system." Playwright Terrence McNally, a gay man, received death threats when it was played in the United States.
In 2011 Mardi Gras came under fire from the LGBTQI community for removing the words "Gay and Lesbian" from the festival's name.
During the rebranding in 2011, Chairman of Mardi Gras Peter Urmson stated: "I think that whilst we are first and foremost a GLBTQI community organisation, we also are very open to all of our friends that do not necessarily identify within that alphabet soup." 
In the 2012 Mardi Gras organisers faced the issue of having a Australian polygamists' float in the parade, whilst also promoting marriage equality for couples.   Particularly, as the 2012 Mardi Gras theme was "universal and infinite love" polygamists felt discriminated against.








