[[Winnipeg]]

CATEGORIES: Museums in Winnipeg, Festivals in Manitoba, Winnipeg, District of Keewatin, Hudson's Bay Company trading posts, Populated places established in 1738

Winnipeg  is the capital and largest city of Manitoba, Canada. It is located near the longitudinal centre of North America, at the confluence of the Red and Assiniboine Rivers. The Winnipeg area was a trading centre for Aboriginal peoples prior to the arrival of Europeans. The first fort was built there in 1738 by French traders. A settlement was later founded by the Selkirk settlers in 1812, the nucleus of which was incorporated as the City of Winnipeg in 1873. Winnipeg is the seventh-largest municipality in Canada, and is the primary municipality of the Winnipeg Capital Region.
The economy of Winnipeg is primarily based on the finance, manufacturing, food and beverage production, culture, retail and tourism sectors. Winnipeg is a transportation hub, served by Richardson International Airport.  The city has railway connections to the United States and Eastern and Western Canada. Winnipeg's professional sports teams are the Winnipeg Blue Bombers (football), the Winnipeg Jets (hockey), and the Winnipeg Goldeyes (baseball). Its post-secondary institutions are Red River College, the University of Manitoba, the University of Winnipeg, Canadian Mennonite University, Booth University College,  and University of St. Boniface (formerly known as St. Boniface College). Some of the city's popular festivals include the Festival du Voyageur, the Winnipeg Folk Festival, the Winnipeg Jazz Festival, the Winnipeg Fringe Theatre Festival, and Folklorama.

History

Winnipeg lies at the confluence of the Assiniboine and the Red River of the North, a location currently known as "The Forks". This point was at the crossroads of canoe routes travelled by Aboriginal peoples prior to European contact.

Settlement

Sieur de La Vérendrye built the first fur trading post on the site, called Fort Rouge, in 1738.
In 1869–70, Winnipeg was the site of the Red River Rebellion, a conflict between the local provisional government of Métis, led by Louis Riel, and newcomers from eastern Canada. General Garnet Wolseley was sent to put down the Métis rebellion. As a consequence of this rebellion, the Manitoba Act of 1870 paved the way for Manitoba's entry into the Canadian Confederation as Canada's fifth province.
Winnipeg developed rapidly after the coming of the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1881.

1919 Strike to present

More than 30,000 workers walked off their jobs in May 1919 in what came to be known as the Winnipeg General Strike of 1919.
The Manitoba Legislative Building, constructed mainly of Tyndall stone, opened in 1920; its dome supports a bronze statue finished in gold leaf, titled "Eternal Youth and the Spirit of Enterprise" (commonly known as the "Golden Boy").
When the war ended, pent-up demand generated a boom in housing development, although building activity was checked by the 1950 Red River Flood, the largest flood to hit Winnipeg since 1861.
Prior to 1972, Winnipeg was the largest of thirteen cities and towns in a metropolitan area around the Red and Assiniboine rivers. A consolidated metropolitan "Unicity" government was established on 27 July 1971, taking effect in 1972.
As of 2012, there are 26 National Historic Sites of Canada in Winnipeg.  See also: St. Boniface.

Geography

Winnipeg lies at the bottom of the Red River Valley, a flood plain with an extremely flat topography..
Winnipeg has four major rivers: the Red River, the Assiniboine River, the La Salle River, and the Seine River.

Climate

Winnipeg's location in the Canadian Prairies gives it a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfb.

Cityscape

There are officially 236 neighbourhoods in Winnipeg. More than 72,000 people work downtown, and over 40,000 students attend classes at its universities and colleges. The past few decades have seen downtown undergo major revitalization efforts; since 1999, over C$1.2 billion has been invested.
Downtown Winnipeg's Exchange District is named after the area's original grain exchange from 1880 to 1913.  The 30-block district received National Historic Site of Canada status in 1997; it includes North America's most extensive collection of early 20th-century terracotta and cut stone architecture, 62 of downtown Winnipeg's 86 heritage structures, Stephen Juba Park, and Old Market Square. Other major downtown areas are The Forks, Central Park, Broadway-Assiniboine and Chinatown. Many of Downtown Winnipeg's major buildings are linked with the Winnipeg Walkway System skywalk.
Various residential neighbourhoods surround downtown in all directions; expansion is greatest to the south and west, although several areas remain underdeveloped.

Demographics

As of the Canada 2011 Census there were 663,617 people living in Winnipeg proper,
As of the 2006 census, 48.3 percent of residents were male and 51.7 percent were female. 24.3 percent were 19 years old or younger, 27.4 percent were between 20 and 30 years old, and 34.0 percent were between 40 and 64 years old. The average age of a Winnipegger in May 2006 was 38.7, compared to an average of 39.5 for Canada as a whole. Between the censuses of 2006 and 2011, Winnipeg's population increased by 4.8 percent, compared to 5.2 percent for Manitoba as a whole. The population density of the city of Winnipeg averaged 1,430 people per km2, compared with 2.2 for Manitoba.
Winnipeg has a significant Aboriginal population, with both the highest percentage of Aboriginals (11.7%) for any major Canadian city, and the highest total number of Aboriginals (76,055) for any single non-reserve municipality. Winnipeg also has the highest Metis population in both percentage (6.3%) and numbers (41,005). The city has the greatest percentage of Filipino residents (8.7%) of any major Canadian city, although Toronto has more Filipinos by total population. In 2006, Winnipeg ranked seventh of the Canadian cities for percentage residents of a visible minority. Compared to similar profiles generated for other major cities. More than a hundred languages are spoken in Winnipeg, of which the most common is English: 99 percent of Winnipeggers are fluent English speakers. In terms of Canada's official languages, 88 percent of Winnipeggers speak only English, and 0.1 percent speak only French. 10 percent speak both English and French, while 1.3 percent speak neither. Other languages spoken as a mother tongue in Winnipeg include Tagalog (5.0%), German (2.5%), and Punjabi and Ukrainian (both 1.4%). Several Aboriginal languages are also spoken, such as Ojibway (0.3%) and Cree (0.2%).
The 2011 National Household Survey reported the religious make-up of Winnipeg as:

Economy

Winnipeg is an economic base and regional centre. It has a diversified economy, covering finance, manufacturing, transportation, food and beverage production, industry, culture, government, retail, and tourism. In 2013, The CIBC Metropolitan Economic Activity Index rated Winnipeg's economy as fourth place in a national survey of 25 city economies, behind Toronto, Calgary, and Regina.

In 2012, Winnipeg was ranked by KPMG as the least expensive locations to do business in western Canada.

Culture

Winnipeg was named the Cultural Capital of Canada in 2010.
Winnipeg the Bear, which would later become the inspiration for part of the name, Winnie-the-Pooh, was purchased in Ontario, by Lieutenant Harry Colebourn of the Fort Garry Horse. He named the bear after the regiment's home town of Winnipeg.
The city has developed many of its own distinct dishes and cooking styles, notably in the areas of confectionary and hot-smoked fish. Both the First Nations and more recent Eastern Canadian, European, and Asian immigrants have helped shape Winnipeg's dining scene, giving birth to dishes like schmoo torte and wafer pie.
Winnipeg's three largest performing arts venues, the Centennial Concert Hall, Manitoba Theatre Centre (MTC) and the Pantages Playhouse, are located downtown. MTC is Canada's oldest English language regional theatre, with over 250 performances yearly.
Winnipeg has hosted a number of Hollywood productions: Shall We Dance? (2004), the Oscar-nominated film Capote (2005), The Assassination of Jesse James by the Coward Robert Ford (2007), and Goon (2011) among others had parts filmed in the city.
The Winnipeg Symphony Orchestra (WSO) is the largest and oldest professional musical ensemble in Winnipeg.
The Royal Winnipeg Ballet (RWB) is Canada's oldest ballet company and the longest continuously operating ballet company in North America. It was the first organization to be granted a royal title under the reign of Queen Elizabeth II,  and has included notable dancers such as Evelyn Hart and Mikhail Baryshnikov. The RWB also runs a full-time classical dance school.
The Manitoba Museum is the largest museum in the city, and depicts the history of the city and province. The full-size replica of the ship Nonsuch is the museum's showcase piece.
The Western Canada Aviation Museum, located in a hangar at Winnipeg's James Richardson International Airport, features military jets, commercial aircraft, Canada's first helicopter, the 'flying saucer' Avrocar, flight simulators, and a Black Brant (rocket) built in Manitoba by Bristol Aerospace.
Festival du Voyageur, western Canada's largest winter festival, celebrates the early French explorers of the Red River Valley.

Sports

Winnipeg has been home to several professional hockey teams. The Winnipeg Jets of the National Hockey League (NHL) have called the city home since 2011.
The Winnipeg Blue Bombers play in the Canadian Football League. The Blue Bombers are ten-time Grey Cup champions, their last championship coming in 1990.
The University of Manitoba Bisons and the University of Winnipeg Wesmen represent the city in interuniversity sport.
Winnipeg has been home to a number of professional baseball teams, most recently the Winnipeg Goldeyes, since 1994. The Goldeyes play at Shaw Park, which was completed in 1999. The team led the Northern League for ten straight years in average attendance as of 2010, with 300,000+ annual fan visits, until the league collapsed and merged into the American Association of Independent Professional Baseball.
Winnipeg was the first Canadian city to ever host the Pan American Games, and the second city to host the event twice, in 1967 and again in 1999.

Local media

Winnipeg has three daily newspapers: the Winnipeg Free Press, the Winnipeg Sun, and the Metro Winnipeg.
Television broadcasting in Winnipeg started in 1954. The federal government refused to license any private broadcaster until the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation had created a national network. In May 1954, CBWT went on the air with four hours of broadcasting.  There are presently five English-language stations and one French-language station based in Winnipeg. Additionally, some American network affiliates are available over-the-air.

Law and government

Since 1992, the city of Winnipeg has been represented by 15 city councillors and a mayor elected every four years. At Council meetings, the mayor has one of 16 votes. The City Council is a unicameral legislative body, representing geographical wards throughout the city.
In provincial politics after the 2011 election, Winnipeg is represented by 31 of the 57 provincial Members of the Legislative Assembly (MLAs). 25 Winnipeg districts are represented by members of the New Democratic Party (NDP), 4 by members of the Progressive Conservative Party, one by the Liberal Party, and one by an Independent. All three leaders of the provincial parties represent Winnipeg districts in the legislature.
In federal politics, Winnipeg is represented by eight Members of Parliament: six Conservatives, one New Democrat and one Liberal.

Crime

From 2007 to 2011, Winnipeg was the "murder capital" of Canada, with the highest per-capita rate of homicides; it fell to second place in 2012, behind Thunder Bay. but was the site of 86.4% of the city's shootings, 66.5% of the robberies, 63.3% of the homicides and 59.5% of the sexual assaults in 2012.
From the early 1990s to the mid-2000s, Winnipeg had a significant auto-theft problem, with the rate peaking at 2,165.0 per 100,000 residents in 2006
Winnipeg is protected by the Winnipeg Police Service, which in 2012 had 1,442 police officers. In November 2013, the national police union reviewed the Winnipeg Police Force and found high average response times for several categories of calls.

Education

There are seven school divisions in Winnipeg: Winnipeg School Division, St. James-Assiniboia School Division, Pembina Trails School Division, Seven Oaks School Division, Division Scolaire Franco-Manitobaine, River East Transcona School Division, and Louis Riel School Division.
The University of Manitoba is the largest university in Manitoba.
Winnipeg also has two independent colleges: Red River College and Booth University College. Red River College offers diploma, certificate, and apprenticeship programs and, starting in 2009, began offering some degree programs.

Infrastructure

Transportation

Winnipeg has had public transit since 1882, starting with horse-drawn streetcars.
Winnipeg is a railway hub and is served by Via Rail, Canadian National Railway (CNR), Canadian Pacific Railway (CPR), Burlington Northern Santa Fe Manitoba, and the Central Manitoba Railway (CEMR). It is the only city between Vancouver and Thunder Bay with direct U.S. connections by rail.
Winnipeg is the largest and best connected city within Manitoba, and has highways leading in all directions from the city. To the south, Winnipeg is connected to the United States via Provincial Trunk Highway 75 (PTH 75) (a continuation of I-29 and US 75, known as Pembina Highway or Route 42 within Winnipeg). The highway runs 
The Winnipeg James Armstrong Richardson International Airport completed a $585-million redevelopment in October 2011.  The development includes a new terminal, a four-level parking facility, and other infrastructure improvements.
Winnipeg is served by several taxi companies, the three largest being Unicity, Duffy's Taxi and Spring Taxi. Fifty percent of Winnipeg residents use a taxi at least once during the year.

Medical centres and hospitals

Winnipeg's major hospitals include Health Sciences Centre, Concordia Hospital, Deer Lodge Centre, Grace Hospital, Misericordia Health Centre, Riverview Health Centre, Saint Boniface General Hospital, Seven Oaks General Hospital, Victoria General Hospital, and The Children's Hospital of Winnipeg.
The National Microbiology Laboratory in Winnipeg is one of only a handful of biosafety level 4 microbiology laboratories in the world.

Utilities

Water and sewage services are provided by the city.
Electricity and natural gas are provided by Manitoba Hydro, a provincial crown corporation headquartered in the city; it uses primarily hydroelectric power. although a number of other corporations offer telephone, cellular, television and internet services in the city.
Winnipeg contracts out several services, including garbage and recycling collection and street plowing and snow removal, to private companies. This practice represents a significant budget expenditure and is more expansive than in other comparable communities. The services have also faced numerous complaints from residents in 2013–14 about missed service.

Military

Canadian Forces Base Winnipeg, co-located at the airport, is home to many flight operations support divisions and several training schools. It is also the headquarters of 1 Canadian Air Division and the Canadian North American Aerospace Defense Command (NORAD) Region. The Wing supports 113 units, stretching from Thunder Bay to the Saskatchewan/Alberta border, and from the 49th parallel to the high Arctic. 17 Wing also acts as a deployed operating base for CF-18 Hornet fighter-bombers assigned to the Canadian NORAD Region.
There are two squadrons based in the city. The 402 "City of Winnipeg" Squadron flies the Canadian-designed and produced de Havilland CT-142 Dash 8 navigation trainer. In addition, 435 Squadron is the only Royal Canadian Air Force squadron equipped and trained to conduct tactical air-to-air refueling of fighter aircraft.
For many years, Winnipeg was the home of the Second Battalion of Princess Patricia's Canadian Light Infantry (2 PPCLI). Initially, the battalion was based at the Fort Osborne Barracks, the location of which now houses the Rady Jewish Community Centre.



Further reading



}}

