[[Dexter's Laboratory]]

CATEGORIES: Dexter's Laboratory, 1990s American animated television series, 1996 American television series debuts, 2000s American animated television series, 2003 American television series endings, American children's comedy series, American science fiction television series, Animated sitcoms, Cartoon Network programs, Comic science fiction, DC Comics titles, English-language television programming, Hanna-Barbera series and characters, Cartoon Network Studios series and characters, Television shows set in California, Television spin-offs, Television series created by Genndy Tartakovsky

Dexter's Laboratory (commonly abbreviated as Dexter's Lab) is an American comic science fiction animated children's television series created by Genndy Tartakovsky for Cartoon Network. The series follows Dexter, a boy-genius with a secret laboratory filled with his inventions. He constantly battles his sister Dee Dee, who always gains access despite his best efforts to keep her out, as well as his arch-rival and neighbor, Mandark. The series' first two seasons contain additional segments: Dial M for Monkey, which focuses on Dexter's pet lab-monkey-turned-superhero, and The Justice Friends, about a trio of superheroes who share an apartment.
Tartakovsky first pitched the series to Hanna-Barbera's animated shorts showcase World Premiere Toons, basing it on student films he produced while attending the California Institute of the Arts. A pilot aired on Cartoon Network in February 1995, and in August viewer approval ratings convinced the network to order a half-hour series, which premiered on April 27, 1996. By 1999, 52 episodes and a television movie had been produced, and Tartakovsky then left the series to begin work on his other projects, Samurai Jack and Star Wars: Clone Wars. In 2001, the network revived the series under a different production team at Cartoon Network Studios, and after 26 more episodes, the series ended on November 20, 2003.
Dexter's Laboratory received high ratings and became one of Cartoon Network's most popular and successful original series. During its run, the series was nominated for 4 Primetime Emmy Awards, 4 Golden Reel Awards, and 9 Annie Awards, winning 3 additional Annie Awards. The series is notable for helping launch the careers of several cartoonists, such as Craig McCracken (The Powerpuff Girls, Foster's Home for Imaginary Friends and Wander Over Yonder), Seth MacFarlane (Family Guy, American Dad! and The Cleveland Show), Butch Hartman (The Fairly OddParents, Danny Phantom and T.U.F.F. Puppy), and Rob Renzetti (My Life as a Teenage Robot). Spin-off media include comic books, DVD and VHS releases, music albums, collectible toys, and video games.

Series overview

The series revolves around Dexter (voiced by Christine Cavanaugh in Seasons 1 & 2, and later Candi Milo in Seasons 3 & 4), a boy-genius with a secret laboratory filled with highly advanced equipment hidden behind a bookcase in his bedroom. Access to the laboratory is achieved by speaking various passwords or by activating hidden switches on his bookshelf (e.g. pulling out a specific book). Though highly intelligent, Dexter often fails at what he has set out to do when he becomes overexcited and makes careless choices. He manages to keep the lab a secret from his clueless, cheerful parents (voiced by Jeff Bennett and Kath Soucie), who never notice any evidence of the laboratory. Although he comes from a typical all-American family, Dexter speaks with a thick accent of indeterminate origin. Cavanaugh described it as "an affectation, some kind of accent, we're not quite sure. A small Peter Lorre, but not. Perhaps he's Latino, perhaps he's French. He's a scientist; he knows he needs some kind of accent."
Dexter is frequently in conflict with his hyperactive older sister, Dee Dee (voiced by Allison Moore in Seasons 1 & 3, and later by Kathryn Cressida in Seasons 2 & 4), as well as a rival boy-genius from his school named Susan "Mandark" Astronomonov (voiced by Eddie Deezen). In spite of Dexter's advanced technology, Dee Dee eludes all manner of security and, once inside, delights in playing in his laboratory, often wreaking havoc with his inventions. Though usually destructive, Dee Dee occasionally outsmarts her brother and even gives him helpful advice. For his part, Dexter, though annoyed by his intrusive sibling, feels a reluctant affection for her and will come to her defense if she is imperiled. Mandark, Dexter's nemesis, also has his own laboratory, but his schemes are generally evil and designed to gain power while downplaying or destroying Dexter's accomplishments. As the series progresses, Mandark becomes significantly more evil, with his laboratory darker-looking, industrial, and angular in contrast to his original brightly lit lab with rounded features. Because Dexter's inventions are often better than his, Mandark tries to make up for this by stealing Dexter's plans. Mandark's weakness is his love for Dee Dee, though she ignores him and never returns his affections.

Recurring segments

Most episodes of Dexter's Laboratory are divided into three different stories or segments, each one being approximately 8 minutes in length. Occasionally, the middle segment centered around characters from the Dexter's Laboratory universe other than Dexter and his family. Two of these segments were shown, primarily during the first season: Dial M for Monkey and The Justice Friends. Dial M for Monkey was the middle segment for the first six episodes of season one, and The Justice Friends took its place for the rest of the season.
The Dial M for Monkey shorts feature Dexter's pet laboratory monkey, Monkey (vocal effects by Frank Welker), whom Dexter believes is an ordinary monkey and nothing more. In contrast, Monkey secretly has superpowers and fights evil as the superhero Monkey. Monkey is joined by his partner Agent Honeydew (voiced by Kath Soucie), the Commander General (voiced by originally by Robert Ridgely and later Earl Boen), and a team of assembled superheroes. Dial M for Monkey was created by Genndy Tartakovsky, Craig McCracken, and Paul Rudish.
The Justice Friends consists of Major Glory (voiced by Rob Paulsen), Valhallen (voiced by Tom Kenny), and the Infraggable Krunk (voiced by Frank Welker), a team of superheroes who are all roommates living in an apartment complex called Muscular Arms. Most of the adventures of the trio deal less with their lives as superheroes and more with their inability to get along as roommates; it is presented as a sitcom, including a laugh track. Genndy Tartakovsky's inspiration for The Justice Friends came from reading Marvel Comics when he was learning how to speak English. Tartakovsky stated in an interview with IGN that he was somewhat disappointed with how The Justice Friends turned out, saying, "it could have been funnier and the characters could have been fleshed out more."
Between the three main segments in seasons one and two are brief mini-segments, many of which feature only Dexter and Dee Dee. Other characters from the series may star in them also, such as "The Puppet Pals", two live-action puppets named Puppet Pal Mitch (voiced by Rob Paulsen) and Puppet Pal Clem (voiced by Tom Kenny).

History

Influences and design

Dexter's Laboratory was inspired by one of Genndy Tartakovsky's drawings of a ballerina. The series was animated in a stylized way, which Tartakovsky says was influenced by the Merrie Melodies cartoon The Dover Boys at Pimento University. 287. Dexter's Laboratory, however, was staged in a cinematic way, rather than flat and close to the screen, to leave space and depth for the action and gags. Tartakovsky was also influenced by other Warner Bros. cartoons, Hanna-Barbera, Japanese mecha anime, and the UPA shorts. Tartakovsky has said the character Dexter was designed "as an icon"—his body is short and squat and his design is simple, with a black outline and relatively little detail. Since he knew that he was designing the show for television, he purposely limited the design to a certain degree, designing the nose and mouth, for instance, in a Hanna-Barbera style to animate easily. 286–287.

Production

Dexter's Laboratory, along with Cow and Chicken, Johnny Bravo, The Powerpuff Girls, and Courage the Cowardly Dog, became responsible for pushing Cartoon Network in a new direction focusing on original programming and "character-driven" cartoons. 283. After enrolling at the California Institute of the Arts in 1990 to study animation, Tartakovsky wrote, directed, animated, and produced two short films that would become the basis for the series.
A second season premiered on Cartoon Network on July 16, 1997. Allison Moore, the voice of Dee Dee and a college friend of Genndy Tartakovsky, left the show after the first season because she was no longer interested in voice acting. The role was subsequently recast with Kathryn Cressida.net/onvoxshow/?p=190 Dexter's Laboratory ended its initial run in 1998 after two seasons, with the second season lasting 39 episodes, a notable record for a single TV production season on Cartoon Network.
On February 21, 2001, Cartoon Network announced the series had been picked up for a 13-episode third season. This second line of episodes featured noticeably different visual designs, minor inconsistencies with the original episodes both in storyline and in visuals, and different sound effects. Christine Cavanaugh retired from voice acting in 2001 for personal reasons and was replaced by Candi Milo as the voice of Dexter for the majority of these new episodes, though Cavanaugh still voiced Dexter for the first few episodes of the third season. In addition, Allison Moore briefly returned as Dee Dee's voice before Cressida once again assumed the role.
Directors and writers on the series included Genndy Tartakovsky,

Episodes

Dexter's Laboratory broadcast 78 half-hour episodes over 4 seasons during its 7-year run. Two pilot shorts were produced for World Premiere Toons that aired in 1995 and 1996 and were subsequently fused into the series' first season. Fifty-two episodes were produced over the original run from 1996 to 1998, which was followed by the TV movie Ego Trip in 1999. An additional 26 episodes were produced and broadcast from 2001 to 2003. The short "Chicken Scratch" debuted theatrically with The Powerpuff Girls Movie in 2002 and was later broadcast as a segment in the series' fourth and final season.

Broadcast history

On November 16, 2001, Cartoon Network aired the 12-hour "Dexter Goes Global" marathon in 96 countries and 12 languages.

Controversial episodes

="Dial M for Monkey: Barbequor"=

The segment "Dial M for Monkey: Barbequor" aired as part of the fourth episode of the first season, but was removed from rotation after a few years of being broadcast in the United States. The short features a character named the Silver Spooner (a spoof of the Silver Surfer), which was perceived by Cartoon Network as a stereotype of gay men.

="Rude Removal"=

During the initial run of Dexter's Lab, a segment titled "Rude Removal" was produced. The short involves Dexter creating a "rude removal system" to diminish Dee Dee's rudeness; however, it instead creates highly rude clones of both siblings. The episode was only shown during certain animation festivals and was never aired on Cartoon Network due to the characters swearing, even though the swear words were censored.
In October 2012, Genndy Tartakovsky was asked about the episode during an AMA on Reddit, and he replied "Next time I do a public appearance I'll bring it with me!". although it was removed after a few days.

Reception

Since its debut, Dexter's Laboratory has been one of Cartoon Network's most successful original series, being the network's highest-rated original series in both 1996 and 1997.
One of Cartoon Network president Betty Cohen's favorite animated shows was Dexter's Laboratory. Rapper Coolio has also said that he is a fan of the show and was happy to do a song for the show's soundtrack at Cartoon Network's request, stating, "I watch a lot of cartoons because I have kids. I actually watch more cartoons than movies."

Awards and nominations

Merchandise

Comics

Characters from Dexter's Laboratory appeared in a 150,000-print magazine called Cartoon Network, published by Burghley Publishing and released in the United Kingdom on August 27, 1998.

Home media releases

Dexter's Laboratory first appeared in home media on three VHS tapes made widely available in the early 2000s. Episodes had not been officially released prior to this, with the exception of a complete series DVD collection given as a contest prize. Warner Brothers stated in a 2006 interview that they were "...

Music releases

The series has spawned two music albums, Dexter's Laboratory: The Musical Time Machine and Dexter's Laboratory: The Hip-Hop Experiment, three hip hop music videos, and a fourth music video by the band They Might Be Giants for their song "Dee Dee and Dexter", which features Japanese-style animation.

Toys and promotions

In November 1997, Wendy's promoted Dexter's Laboratory with six collectible toys in their kids' meals.

Video games

Six video games based on the series have been released: Dexter's Laboratory: Robot Rampage for the Nintendo Game Boy Color, Punch Time Explosion featured different voice talent for Dexter (Tara Strong instead of Christine Cavanaugh or Candi Milo) and Monkey (Fred Tatasciore instead of Frank Welker).





Bibliography




