[[Wario]]

CATEGORIES: Characters designed by Hiroji Kiyotake, Explorer characters in video games, Fictional businesspeople, Fictional characters with superhuman strength, Male characters in video games, Mario characters, Super Smash Bros. fighters, Nintendo antagonists, Nintendo protagonists, Wario, Video game characters introduced in 1992, Video game bosses

 is a fictional character in Nintendo's Mario series who was designed as an antagonist to Mario. He first appeared in the 1992 Game Boy title Super Mario Land 2: 6 Golden Coins as the main antagonist and final boss. He was portrayed as an exaggerated version of Mario and his name is a variant of "Mario".  Wario was first designed by Hiroji Kiyotake, and is voiced by Charles Martinet, who also voices many other characters in the series.
Since his debut, Wario has become the protagonist and antihero of the Wario Land and WarioWare series, spanning handheld and console markets. In addition to appearances in spin-offs in the Mario series, he appears in cameos for Densetsu no Stafy 3 and Pilotwings 64. He has also been featured in other media such as the Super Mario Adventures graphic novel. The character has received a largely positive critical reception and has emerged as a well-established mascot for Nintendo. 

Concept and creation

A rival to Mario, Wario first appeared in the 1985 game Wrecking Crew in the character of Spike, a construction foreman. Wario's design arose from Super Mario Land's design team's distaste of making a game based around someone else's character. The creation of Wario allowed them a character of their own to "symbolize their situation".
Wario is portrayed as an exaggerated version of Mario; he has huge, muscular arms, a large moustache, and a bellicose cackle. Starting with Wario Land: Super Mario Land 3, Wario experiences rejuvenating effects from garlic in a similar manner as Mario is powered up by mushrooms. Wario often uses bombs, as in Wario Land: Super Mario Land 3 and Wario Blast. The WarioWare series prominently uses bombs as a visual motif to represent the time limit.
In video games in which Wario makes a cameo appearance, he is often portrayed as a villain. However, the development team for Wario Land: Shake It! stated that he was not really a villain, and they did not consider him one during development. They focused on his behavior, which alternates between good and evil.

Appearances

Wario Land series

Wario made his first appearance as a villain in the 1992 Game Boy video game Super Mario Land 2: 6 Golden Coins, in which he captured Mario's castle. He also served as a villain in the 1993 Japan-only puzzle game Mario & Wario, in which he drops a bucket on the head of Mario, Princess Peach, or Yoshi. The series' most recent release, Wario Land: Shake It!, was released for the Wii in 2008 and reintroduced Captain Syrup. The game uses a hand-drawn animation style, and Wario's design required more than 2,000 frames of animation.

WarioWare series

In 2003, the Wario franchise introduced a new series of games, the first of which was WarioWare, Inc.: Mega Microgames! for the Game Boy Advance. The game's premise involved Wario's decision to open a game development company to make money, creating short "microgames" instead of full-fledged games. The title's gameplay focused on playing a collection of microgames in quick succession. Mega Microgames! was later remade as WarioWare, Inc.: Mega Party Games! for the GameCube; it featured the same microgames but lacked a story mode and focused more on multi-player. In 2004, two sequels were released for the game. The first was the Game Boy Advance title WarioWare: Twisted!, which used the cartridge's a tilt sensor to allows microgames to be controlled by tilting the handheld left and right.
Game & Wario for the Nintendo Wii U was released on June 23, 2013.


Other appearances

In 1994's Wario's Woods, Wario appears as the main antagonist who wants to take over the forest and is defeated by Toad. That same year, Wario was also in the video game Wario Blast: Featuring Bomberman!, a remake of a Bomberman title for the Game Boy which incorporated Wario as a playable character. Starting with Mario Kart 64, Wario has appeared in 28 Mario sports games, including the Mario Tennis, Mario Golf, Mario Baseball, Mario Strikers, and Mario & Sonic series.
The Super Mario Adventures graphic novel, which is a collection of comics originally serialized in the video gaming magazine Nintendo Power, features Wario in two of the stories. One of the stories focuses on Wario's past, explaining his rivalry with Mario. Super Show!, with his counter part Waluigi. In the episode where Mario and Luigi go back to plumber school, Wario and Waluigi are also present, but have no speaking parts. 

Promotion and reception

Since his appearance in Wario Land: Super Mario Land 3, Wario has become a well-established mascot for Nintendo,






