[[Royal charter]]

CATEGORIES: British monarchy, Monarchy in Canada, Monarchy in Australia, Monarchy in New Zealand, Political charters, Medieval charters and cartularies

A royal charter is a formal document issued by a monarch as letters patent, granting a right or power to an individual or a body corporate. They were, and are still, used to establish significant organisations such as cities (with municipal charters) or universities. Charters should be distinguished from warrants and letters of appointment, as they have perpetual effect. Typically, a Royal Charter is produced as a high-quality work of calligraphy on vellum. The British monarchy has issued over 980 royal charters. Privycouncil.gov.uk. Retrieved 2 May 2012. Of these about 750 remain in existence. The earliest was to the town of Tain in 1066, making it the oldest Royal Burgh in Scotland, followed by the University of Cambridge in 1231. Charters continue to be issued by the British Crown, a recent example being the Chartered Institute for the Management of Sport and Physical Activity which received its charter on 7 April 2011.
Charters have been used in Europe since medieval times to create cities (that is, localities with recognised legal rights and privileges). The date that such a charter is granted is considered to be when a city is 'founded', regardless of when the locality originally began to be settled (which is often impossible to determine).
At one time, a royal charter was the sole means by which an incorporated body could be formed, but other means (such as the registration process for limited companies) are generally used nowadays instead.
Among the past and present groups formed by royal charter are the British East India Company (1600), the Hudson's Bay Company, the Peninsular and Oriental Steam Navigation Company (P&O), the British South Africa Company, and some of the former British colonies on the North American mainland, City livery companies, the Bank of England and the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC).

Australia

Universities and colleges

Companies and societies

Professional organisations

Belgium

The royal decree is the equivalent in Belgium of a Royal Charter. In the period before 1958, 32 higher education institutes had been created by royal charter: these were typically engineering or technical institutions rather than universities.Non-University Higher Technical Education in Belgium Gilbert Van Vaek and Henk Van Daele
However, several non-technical higher education institutions have been founded, or refounded, under royal decree:
Since the Belgian state reform of 1988–1989, competency over education was transferred to the federated entities of Belgium. Royal decrees can therefore no longer grant higher education institution status or university status.hogeronderwijsregister.be/faq/117/56 When is an institution considered a recognised higher education institution or a university?

Canada

A Royal Charter is granted by Order in Council, either creating an incorporated body, or giving an existent one special status. Such organisations include charities, businesses, colleges, universities, and cities. Today, it is mostly charities and professional institutions who receive Royal Charters.
Application for a charter is a petition to the Queen-in-Council. To receive a Royal Charter, the organisation must have corporate members who have at least first degree level in a relevant field, consist of 5,000 members or more, be financially sound, and it must be in the public interest to regulate the institution under a charter. However, meeting these benchmarks does not guarantee the issuance of a Royal Charter.Privy Council: Royal Charter

Companies and societies

Companies, corporations, and societies in Canada founded under or augmented by a Royal Charter include:

Territories and communities

Cities under Royal Charter are not subject to municipal Acts of Parliament applied generally to other municipalities, and instead are governed by legislation applicable to each city individually. The Royal Charter codifies the laws applied to the particular city, and lays out the powers and responsibilities not given to other municipalities in the province concerned.

Universities and colleges

A number of Canadian universities and colleges were founded under Royal Charter.
 | title = About the History of the University of Ottawa
 | publisher = University of Ottawa Archives
 | url = 
 | accessdate =30 April 2008
}}
[/ref]

Hong Kong

thumb|The emblem of the Royal Observatory, Hong KongBetween 1842 and 1997, a number of organisations had received Royal Charter:

India

The Institution of Engineers was incorporated by royal charter in 1935. Retrieved 8 July 2011.

Ireland

A number of Irish institutions retain the "Royal" prefix, even though Republic of Ireland severed all remaining connections between the state and the British monarch in 1949.
A more detailed list of current Irish institutions with Royal patronage is available here
A list of former Royal institutions with ties to Ireland, but they were mostly British institutions created in Ireland during British rule:

Italy

The British Institute of Florence was granted a Royal Charter in 1923.

South Africa

The University of South Africa received a Royal Charter in 1877.
The Natal Carbineers regiment received a Royal Charter in 1935, becoming known as the Royal Natal Carbineers until South Africa became a republic in 1961. The Royal Natal National Park's name remained unchanged, as did that of the Royal Society of South Africa, which received its Royal Charter in 1908.Royal Society of South Africa Brief History

Sri Lanka

United Kingdom

Among the 750 or so organisations with Royal Charters are cities; the Bank of England; the BBC; theatres such as the Royal Opera House and the Theatre Royal, Drury Lane; Livery Companies; universities (mostly those founded before 1993); professional institutions, such as the Institution of Royal Engineers and charities. Privycouncil.gov.uk. Retrieved 2 May 2012.
A Royal Charter is the mechanism by which a British town is raised to the status of city. Most recently Chelmsford in Essex was granted a Royal Charter in celebration of Queen Elizabeth II's Diamond Jubilee in 2012. Inverness, Brighton & Hove and Wolverhampton were given their charters to celebrate the Millennium, and Preston, Stirling, Newport, Lisburn and Newry to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Elizabeth II in 2002.
Most British universities operate under Royal Charters, giving them the authority to award degrees. The most recent generation of UK universities were granted the power to award degrees by the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 instead of by Royal Charter, while some other universities operate under Acts of Parliament. The University of Buckingham, The College of Law and Malvern College are the only private education institutions to have received a Royal Charter.
Almost without exception, the longstanding learned societies, such as the Royal Society, Royal Society of Literature, etc have Royal Charters.
Most Royal Charters are now granted to professional institutions such as the Chartered Institute of Linguists, and to charities such as the Royal Photographic Society. For example, the six accountancy institutes which make up the Consultative Committee of Accountancy Bodies each have a Royal Charter which allows their members to style themselves Chartered Accountants. A Charter is not necessary for them to operate, but one is often sought as recognition of "pre-eminence, stability and permanence".
The BBC operates under a Royal Charter which lasts for a limited period of ten years, after which it is renewed.
A Royal Charter changes a body from a collection of individuals into a single legal entity. Once incorporated by Royal Charter, amendments to the Charter and by-laws require government approval.
In January 2007, the UK Trade Marks Registry refused to grant protection to the American Chartered Financial Analyst trademark, as the word 'chartered' in the UK is associated with royal charters.patent.uk/tm/t-decisionmaking/t-challenge/t-challenge-decision-results/o31506.pdf
A list of UK chartered associations can be found here

United States

Although several American universities which predate the American Revolution purport to hold royal charters, in a number of cases they were in fact created by a grant from a local council such as a colonial legislature.
Colleges created by royal charter from King William III and Queen Mary II of England:
Colleges created by King George II of Great Britain:
American colleges popularly believed to have been established by Royal Charter, but actually by some other type of grant:








