[[Bhavani]]

CATEGORIES: Hindu goddesses, Forms of Parvati, Shakti temples, Hindu temples in Maharashtra, Hindu pilgrimage sites

Bhavani is a ferocious aspect of the Hindu goddess Parvati. Bhavani means "giver of life", the power of nature or the source of creative energy. In addition to her ferocious aspect, she is also known as Karunaswaroopini,  "filled with mercy".
Bhavani was the tutelary deity of the Maratha leader Shivaji,in whose veneration, he dedicated his sword, Bhavani Talwar. A temple to Bhavani at Tuljapur in Maharashtra, dates back to the 12th century. The temple contains a metre-high granite icon of the goddess, with eight arms holding weapons. She also holds the head of the demon Mahishasura, whom she slew in the region which is the present day Mysore.

Temples of Bhavani

The Tulja Bhavani and another temple in Tuljapur in Osmanabad district of Maharashtra is considered as one of the 51 Shakti Pithas. This temple was built in c. 12th century CE. A Tulja Bhavani temple was built between 1537-1540 CE in Chittorgarh.

History

Worship of the primeval energy, Shakti, in the form of the mother Goddess is seen in the four Shakti Peethas of Maharashtra -  Bhavani with her seat at Tuljapur, Mahalakshmi at Kolhapur, Mahamaya Renuka at Mahur and Jagadamba at Saptashrungi, and also in Tamil Nadu (Periyapalayam)Sri Bhavani Amman.  Other Shakti temples in the state are those at Ambejogai and Aundh. (also see Daksha Yagna).
Bhavani was the tutelary deity of Shivaji Maharaj, the valiant Maratha ruler and is held in great reverence throughout the state of Maharashtra. Bhavani is considered to be an embodiment of Ugra or ferocity, as well as a Karunaswaroopini - filled with mercy. A number of castes, sub-castes and families from Maharashtra consider her their family deity or Kuldevta.
The Bhavani temple in Tuljapur is located on a hill known as Yamunachala, on the slopes of the Sahayadri range in Maharashtra near Sholapur. The temple entrance is at an elevation and visitors need to ascend a flight of steps to reach the shrine. Historic records speak of the existence of this temple from as early as the 12th century CE.
Bhavani is worshipped in the form of a  granite image, with eight arms holding weapons, bearing the head of the slain demon Mahishasura. Bhavani is also known as Tulaja, Turaja, Tvarita and Amba.
Legend has it that a demon by name Matanga wreaked havoc upon the devas and the humans who approached Bhrahma for help and upon his advice turned to the Mother Goddess Shakti, who took up the form of the destroyer, and powered by the other (Sapta) Maataas Varaahi, Bhrahmi, Vaishnavi, Kaumaari, Indraani and Saambhavi and vanquished him for peace to reign again.
Legend also has it that Bhavani vanquished another demon who had taken the form of a wild buffalo (Mahishasura), and took abode on the Yamunachala hill, which is now home to the temple.
Four worship services are offered each day here. The festivals of significance here are Gudi Padva in the month of Chaitra, Shriral Sashti, Lalita Panchami, Makara Sankranti and Rathasaptami.  The deity is taken out in procession on Tuesdays. Navaratri is also celebrated with great fanfare, and it culminates in Vijaya Dasami.
Sri Bhavani Devi is Adhi Parashakti herself, The name Bhavani denotes so many meanings
Bhavani- Bhava(Shiva)ni- Internal Power of Lord Shiva
Bhavani- Parvathi
According to Lalitha Sahasranamam Bhavani means, Detiy who always helps devotees, who gives Mukthi
Great Sage and Guru Aadhi Shankara says, A Person who recitates the name Bhavani with true devotion thrice every day
will not acquire Sorrow, Sin, Illness & Unexpected Death, People confuse Bhavani devi with Renuka devi
Bhavani devi story is different from Renuka devi
One of the Great Purana Devi Bhaghavatam says Bhavani Devi is the original form of Aadhi Parashakti and Sister
Of Shri Krishna, Since Maha Vishnu did Penance to get Devi's help for his Krishna Avatar, Devi is born to Yashodha
As Maha Maaya devi (in Tamil Magamaaye), That is why Bhavani amman holds Sanghu (Conch)& Chakram (Wheel) which resembles
Vishnu, Her Appearance actually denotes She is the Sister of Vishnu

=Idol of Tuljabhavani=

The idol of Tuljabhavani is made up of black nonperishable stone.
The face  of goddess is beautiful and smiling.
The goddess has no clothes carved on her upper body.
The goddess is asta-bhuja(with 8 hands) Mahishasur mardini Durga.
As she is Parvati, she has a swayambhu (self manifested) shiv-lingam in her crown.
She has an arrow holder on her back. Her long hair is coming out of the crown.
The sun and the moon are present as witnesses of her victory over Mahishasur.
Her lion stands near her. The idol is self manifested and movable. It is moved three times a year from its place to the bedroom of Maa Bhavani. Below the lion, sage Markandeya is chanting the durga-saptashati shlokas.
The lady sage Anubhuti is on the left side of the goddess. She is in a hanging position and is meditating on the goddess.
It is chala idol. It is moved thrice a year during the long sleeping periods of maa Bhavani.
The face of Sati had fallen in Tuljapur because of which the goddess is decorated in such a way that only her face is visible after covering her with sarees and ornaments.
Bhavani came here to save Anubhuti from the demon kukur.
In a battle with the goddess, kukur took the form of a buffalo. Bhavani cut his head,then he sharted coming in his original form,at that time she penetrated her trident in his chest.



Notes

Further reading




