[[Millipede]]

CATEGORIES: Millipedes, Detritivores

Millipedes (class Diplopoda) are myriapodous arthropods that have two pairs of legs on most body segments. Each double-legged segment is a result of two single segments fused together as one (the name "Diplopoda" comes from the Greek words διπλοῦς (diplous), "double" and ποδός (podos), "foot"). Most millipedes have very elongated cylindrical or flattened bodies with more than 20 segments, while pill millipedes are shorter and can roll into a ball, like a pillbug.
The name "millipede" is a compound word formed from the Latin roots  The longest species is the giant African millipede (Archispirostreptus gigas).
Most millipedes are slow-moving detritivores, eating decaying leaves and other dead plant matter. However, they can also be minor garden pests, especially in greenhouses where they can cause severe damage to emergent seedlings.
Millipedes can be easily distinguished from the somewhat similar and related centipedes (Class Chilopoda) which move rapidly, are carnivorous, and have a single pair of legs for each body segment. The scientific study of millipedes is known as diplopodology, and a scientist who studies them is called a diplopodologist.

Evolution

This class of arthropod is thought to be among the first animals to have colonised land during the Silurian geologic period. These early forms probably ate mosses and primitive vascular plants. The oldest known land creature, Pneumodesmus newmani, was a 

Characteristics

Millipedes range from  and can have as few as eleven to over one hundred segments. They are generally black or brown in colour, although there are a few brightly coloured species.
The millipede's most obvious feature is its large number of legs. Having many short legs makes millipedes rather slow, but the many legs pushing in unison provides powerful strength for burrowing.

Head

The head of a millipede is typically rounded above and flattened below and bears a pair of large mandibles in front of a plate-like structure called a gnathochilarium ("jaw lip").
The head contains a single pair of antennae with seven or eight segments and a group of sensory cones at the tip. Many orders also possess a pair of sensory organs known as the Tömösváry organs, shaped as small oval rings posterior and lateral to the base of the antennae. Their true function is unknown, but they also occur in some centipedes, and are possibly used to measure humidity or light levels in the surrounding environment.
Millipede eyes consist of a number of simple flat-lensed ocelli arranged in a group on the side of the head. Many species of millipedes, including the entire order Polydesmida and cave-dwelling millipedes such as Causeyella and Trichopetalum, have secondarily lost their eyes and are completely blind.

Body

The body is flattened or cylindrical, composed of numerous metemeric segments, each with an exoskeleton consisting of a single chitinous plate above, one at each side, and two or three on the underside. In many millipedes, these plates are fused to varying degrees, sometimes forming a single cylindrical ring. The plates are typically hard, being impregnated with calcium salts.
The first segment behind the head is legless and known as a collum. The second to fourth body rings bear a single pair of legs each and are known as "haplosegments" (from the Greek haplo: single). The remaining segments, from the fifth to the posterior, are properly known as diplosegments, or double segments. Each diplosegment bears two pairs of legs, rather than just one as in centipedes. This is because each diplosgment is formed by the fusion of two embryonic segments. In some millipedes the last few segments may be legless. The terms "segment" or "body ring" are often used interchangeably to refer to both haplo- and diplosegments. The final segment bears a telson, which consists of a legless preanal ring, pair of anal valves (closeable plates around the anus), and a subanal scale.
Millipedes in several orders have keel-like extensions of the body-wall known as paranota, which can vary widely in shape and size. They may allow millipedes to wedge more securely into crevices, protect the legs, or make the millipede more difficult for predators to swallow.

Internal organs

Millipedes breathe through two pairs of spiracles located ventrally on each segment. Each opens into an internal pouch, and connects to a system of tracheae. The heart runs the entire length of the body, with an aorta stretching into the head. The excretory organs are two pairs of malpighian tubules, located near the mid-part of the gut. The digestive tract is a simple tube with two pairs of salivary glands to help digest the food.

Reproduction and growth

Millipedes show a diversity of mating styles and structures. In the basal order Polyxenida, males deposit spermatophores that are subsequently picked up by females. In all other millipede groups, males possess one or two pairs of modified legs called gonopods which are used to transfer sperm to the female during copulation. The location of the gonopods differs between groups: in males of the Pentazonia they are located at the rear of the body and known as telopods, while in Helminthomorpha – the vast majority of species – they are located on the 7th body segment.

Gonopod morphology is the predominant means of determining species among millipedes: the complex structures differ much between species but very little within a species.
The genital openings are located on the third segment, and are accompanied in the male by one or two penes which deposit the sperm packets onto the gonopods. In the female, the genital pores open into paired small sacs called cyphopods or vulvae, which are covered by a small hood-like cover, and are used to store the sperm after copulation. Millipede sperm is aflagellate (lacks a flagellum), a unique trait among myriapods.
Females lay between ten and three hundred eggs at a time, depending on species, fertilising them with the stored sperm as they do so. Many species simply deposit the eggs on moist soil or organic detritus, but some construct nests lined with dried faeces, and may protect the eggs within silk cocoons. In most species the female abandon the eggs after laying but some species in the orders Platydesmida and Stemmiulida provide parental care for eggs and young.
The young hatch after a few weeks, and typically have only three pairs of legs, followed by up to four legless segments. As they grow, they continually moult, adding further segments and legs as they do so. Some species moult within specially prepared chambers of soil or silk, which they may also use to wait out dry weather, and most species eat the shed exoskeleton after moulting. Millipedes live from one to ten years, depending on species.

Ecology

Habitat

In temperate zones, millipedes are most abundant in moist deciduous forests, but they also occur in coniferous forests, deserts, caves, and alpine ecosystems. Some species can survive freshwater floods and live submerged underwater for up to 11 months.

Diet

Most millipedes are detritivores and feed on decomposing vegetation, faeces, or organic matter mixed with soil. Millipedes in the order Polyxenida graze algae from bark, and Platydesmida feed on fungi. A few species are omnivorous or occasionally carnivorous, feeding on insects, centipedes, earthworms, or snails Some species have piercing mouth parts that allow them to feed on plant juices.

Predators and parasites

Millipedes are preyed upon by a wide range of animals, including various reptiles, amphibians, birds, mammals, and insects. Mammalian predators such as coatis and meerkats roll captured millipedes on the ground to deplete defensive secretions and rub them off the body before consuming,
Parasites of millipedes include nematodes, phaeomyiid flies, and acanthocephalans.

Defence mechanisms

Due to their lack of speed and their inability to bite or sting, millipedes' primary defence mechanism is to curl into a tight coil – protecting their delicate legs inside an armoured body exterior. Many species also emit various foul-smelling liquid secretions through microscopic ozopores (also called odoriferous or repugantorial glands), along the sides of their bodies as a secondary defence. These secretions may include alkaloids, benzoquinones, phenols, terpenoids, and/or hydrogen cyanide, among many others.

Millipedes in relation to people

Millipedes do not bite, and their defensive secretions are mostly harmless to humans – usually causing only minor discoloration on the skin – but the secretions of some tropical species may cause pain, itching, local erythema, edema, blisters, eczema, and occasionally cracked skin. First aid consists of flushing the area thoroughly with water; further treatment is aimed at relieving the local effects.
Some millipedes are considered household pests, including Xenobolus carnifex which infests thatched roofs in India.
Some of the larger millipedes in the orders Spirobolida, Spirostreptida, Sphaerotheriida are popular as pets.
Millipedes also appear in folklore and traditional medicine around the world. Many cultures ascribe millipede activity with coming rains.

Classification

Approximately 12,000 species of millipede have been described, but the true number of species on earth has been estimated at up to 80,000. Millipedes are considered a mega-diverse yet understudied group, with inconsistent taxonomic effort over time. thumb|right|Polyxenus lagurus, a species of the order Polyxenidathumb|right|Glomeris marginata, a pill millipede of the order Glomerida
The living members of the Diplopoda are divided into sixteen orders in two subclasses. The basal subclass Penicillata contains small species whose exoskeleton is not calcified, and which are covered in setae or bristles. All other millipedes belong to the subclass Chilognatha, consisting of two infraclasses: the infraclass Pentazonia containing the short-bodied pill millipedes, and the infraclass Helminthomorpha (worm-like millipedes) containing the great majority of the species.
The higher-level classification of millipedes is presented below, based on Shear, 2011, and Shear & Edgecombe, 2010 (extinct groups). Recent cladistic and molecular studies have challenged traditional classification schemes, and in particular the position of the orders Siphoniulida and Polyzoniida is not yet well established. The placement and positions of extinct groups (†) known only from fossils is tentative and not fully resolved.
Class Diplopoda de Blainville in Gervais, 1844








