[[Max Weinberg]]

CATEGORIES: 1951 births, Adelphi University alumni, American drummers, American session musicians, American television personalities, Southside Johnny & The Asbury Jukes members, The Tonight Show Band members, The E Street Band members, Jersey Shore musicians, Jewish American musicians, Late Night with Conan O'Brien, Living people, The Max Weinberg 7 members, People from Middletown Township, New Jersey, People from Newark, New Jersey, People from South Orange, New Jersey, Seton Hall University alumni

Max Weinberg (born April 13, 1951) is an American drummer and television personality, most widely known as the longtime drummer for Bruce Springsteen's E Street Band and as the bandleader for Conan O'Brien on Late Night with Conan O'Brien and The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien.
Weinberg grew up in suburban New Jersey and began drumming at an early age. He attended college planning to be a lawyer but got his big break in music in 1974 when he won an audition to become the drummer for Springsteen. His powerful but controlled playing on albums such as Born to Run and Born in the U.S.A. stabilized the E Street Band sound and Weinberg became a mainstay of Springsteen's long concert performances.  Springsteen dissolved the band in 1989 and Weinberg spent several years considering a law career and trying the business end of the music industry before deciding he wanted to continue with drumming.
In 1993, Weinberg was given the role as bandleader of The Max Weinberg 7 for Late Night with Conan O'Brien. Weinberg's drums-driven jump blues sound and his role as a comic foil prospered along with the show, giving him a second career. In 1999, Springsteen reformed the E Street Band for a series of tours and albums; Weinberg worked out an arrangement that allowed him to play with both O'Brien and Springsteen. In 2009, Weinberg moved to the short-lived Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien as leader of Max Weinberg and The Tonight Show Band. After that ended, he formed and toured with a new ensemble, the Max Weinberg Big Band, and in 2010 chose not to follow O'Brien to the new Conan show.
In 2014, Weinberg was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of the E Street Band.

Early life

Weinberg was born to a Jewish family in Newark, New Jersey a high school physical education teacher.  He has three sisters, Patty, Nancy and Abby. He grew up in Newark as well as in the neighboring suburban towns of South Orange and Maplewood.
The young Max was exposed to music early on, attending Broadway shows weekly from the age of two and liking the big sound put forth by the pit orchestras.  He then liked the rhythms of country and western music.  He knew he wanted to be a drummer from the age of five, when he saw Elvis Presley and his drummer, D. J. Fontana, appear on The Milton Berle Show in April 1956. Decades later, Weinberg said, "I think anybody who wanted to develop a life in rock 'n' roll music had a moment. That was my moment," and Fontana became a major influence on him. 237.
Weinberg started actually playing at the age of six.    His first public appearance came at the age of seven when he sat in on a bar mitzvah band playing "When the Saints Go Marching In". The bandleader, Herbie Zane, was the leading act for bar mitzvahs and weddings in the area; he became enamored of Weinberg and brought him along on other engagements as a kind of novelty act. and saw drummer Ed Shaughnessy of Doc Severinsen's band on The Tonight Show Starring Johnny Carson as having an ideal job as well as admiring the level of playing and serious sartorial style of the Tonight Show musicians.  Weinberg stayed with Zane until junior high school and learned rhythms such as cha-chas, merenges, polkas, and the hora and playing everything from Dixieland jazz to Acker Bilk's "Stranger on the Shore".
Weinberg attended Temple Sharey Tefilo-Israel, a Reform Judaism congregation in South Orange, where he was inspired by a local rabbi and had what he later described as "a wonderful Jewish background." He would later say that the Jewish concept of seder, meaning order, became key to his vision of how a good drummer serves his band's music. Witnessing his father lose two summer camps in The Poconos impressed upon him the fragility of economic success and led to a strong work ethic.
When the British Invasion hit in 1964, the Beatles and their drummer, Ringo Starr, became a huge influence on Weinberg. 238.  He began playing in local New Jersey rock bands, playing the music of The Rolling Stones, Mitch Ryder and the Detroit Wheels, and The Young Rascals. While a member of The Epsilons, he played at the 1964 New York World's Fair.  He attended Columbia High School in Maplewood; there he knew Leigh Howard Stevens, who would become a famous percussionist in his own right.  Another band he was in, Blackstone, recorded an eponymous album for Epic Records in 1970.
Weinberg first attended Adelphi University, and later Seton Hall University, majoring in film studies. p. 117–118. His general goal was to become a lawyer, but he was still most viscerally interested in a music career and kept his drum set in his car in case any chances to play arose. He performed at weddings, bar mitzvahs, and bars, then landed a job in the pit band for the Broadway musical Godspell.

Success with the E Street Band

Weinberg was still living at home when he met Bruce Springsteen on April 7, 1974 when his band, The Jim Marino Band, were Springsteen's support at Seton Hall. Springsteen had parted ways with his drummer, Vini "Mad Dog" Lopez, earlier that year, and the replacement, Ernest "Boom" Carter, lasted only six months before leaving with pianist David Sancious to form Tone.  Weinberg answered a Springsteen Village Voice newspaper ad that famously requested, "no junior Ginger Bakers,"
Weinberg rose to success as the drummer for Springsteen's E Street Band, as his powerful yet controlled beat solved the E Street Band's drumming instabilities.  On 1975's Born to Run, Weinberg's drumming evoked  two of his idols, Ringo Starr and Levon Helm, and he covered his snare drum with heavy paper towels to capture some of the Memphis soul sound. 68.  While travelling on tour, Weinberg became known for his exact requests, such as specifying the particular brand of paper towels to use for his drums or the standards for his hotel rooms.
Tempos slowed to an oft dirge-like pace on the 1978 Darkness on the Edge of Town;Hilburn, Springsteen, p. 117.  Rehearsals and recording of the album stretched out over a long period, with Springsteen and bandmate and co-producer Steven Van Zandt experiencing a prolonged frustration over their inability to capture a more resonant drum sound.  Weinberg soon regretted not playing faster on "Badlands",Hilburn, Springsteen, p. 74–75. and tempos did speed up on that number and some others during the accompanying Darkness Tour.  The River Tour Springsteen and E Street Band shows that opened New Jersey's Meadowlands Arena in 1981 became one of the top highlights of Weinberg's career.
Weinberg suffered an acknowledged "drumming slump" around 1980, and his time-keeping skills were criticized by Springsteen. 194.  What could pass unnoticed in concert became apparent on record, and Weinberg practiced drumming components for months in order to regain a fine sense of timing. 114.  Weinberg also suffered from repetitive stress injury and tendinitis, eventually requiring seven operations on his hands and wrists.  He studied for a while with noted jazz drummer Joe Morello; Weinberg credited Morello for helping him to learn how to play with the tendinitis.
In 1981, Weinberg married Rebecca Schick, a Methodist who had grown up in Tinton Falls, New Jersey and whom he had met through a mutual friend.
He made a full recovery from his injuries in time for 1984's Born in the U.S.A., which featured an aerobics-timed beat on some tracksHilburn, Springsteen, p. 182. that also owed something to the popular Phil Collins drum sound.  Weinberg's own experimentation since the Darkness days had also led to a more reverberant sound.  Overall, Weinberg's more fluid drumming combined with Roy Bittan's use of synthesizers and better overall production to give Springsteen a more modern sound, resulting in the album becoming Springsteen's best-selling one ever and spawning a record-tying seven Top 10 hit singles. 195–196.  Springsteen later said of the album, "Max was the best thing on the record."  Weinberg's most well-known drum part came on "Born in the U.S.A.", where his snare drum paired against Bittan's signature synthesizer riff on the opening and throughout the main part of the song. 116–118.  The recording then descends into improvised chaos; Springsteen had told Weinberg, "When I stop, keep the drums going."  Upon the restart, intentional drum breakdowns matched bass swoops and guitar feedback; Springsteen subsequently said of the performance overall, "You can hear Max – to me, he was right up there with the best of them on that song."  Weinberg said it was one of his most intense musical experiences. 66.
On the subsequent Born in the U.S.A. Tour, Springsteen generally interspersed hard-rocking song sequences after every three or four numbers in order to give Weinberg's hands a chance to recover. 314.  Weinberg's wife Becky unintentionally triggered one of the tour's most celebrated episodes. 254–257, 260, 263.  She was a fan of the This Week with David Brinkley television program and invited panelist George Will to the Washington-area Capital Centre show.  After seeing the band perform, Will became convinced that they were exemplars of hard-working patriotism and traditional American values; he wrote, "... consider Max Weinberg's bandaged fingers.  The rigors of drumming have led to five tendonitis operations. He soaks his hands in hot water before a concert, in ice afterward, and sleeps with tight gloves on."  Will further decided that Springsteen might endorse Ronald Reagan in the 1984 presidential campaign and talked to the campaign, which later led to Reagan's famous extolling of Springsteen at a stop in Hammonton, New Jersey and Springsteen's subsequent negative response.
For his efforts, Weinberg was named Best Drummer in the Playboy 1985 Pop and Jazz Music Poll and Best Drummer again in Rolling Stones 1986 Critics Poll.  The adulation got to him a bit as he aligned with the Mighty Max persona and went to fashionable parties.
Weinberg had a reduced role on Springsteen's 1987 Tunnel of Love album, replacing Springsteen's drum machine parts on a few tracks,Santelli, Greetings from E Street, p. 76. but the full band was in place for the 1988 Tunnel of Love Express and Human Rights Now! tours.  Weinberg called the latter tour's visiting of many third-world spots around the globe one of the most rewarding things the band had done. 79–80.
In 1984, Weinberg published The Big Beat: Conversations with Rock's Greatest Drummers, a series of interviews conducted over two years with drummers from various eras, including Starr, Helm, D. J. Fontana, Charlie Watts, Dino Danelli, Hal Blaine, and others. 61–62.  The book captured drummers revealing more about their musical approaches than they normally did to the press and was thus considered an important addition to the rock literature.  In 1986, Weinberg began taking a one-man show "Growing Up On E Street" to college campuses around the country.  It contained some short films that Weinberg produced as well as a question-and-answer session.
Weinberg also played as a session musician, enjoying particular success in connection with songwriter and producer Jim Steinman.  He drummed on the very popular 1977 Meat Loaf album, Bat out of Hell, playing on the Steinman-penned tracks "Bat Out of Hell", "You Took the Words Right Out of My Mouth", and "Paradise by the Dashboard Light".  At a point in 1983, Weinberg was featured on the number one and number two songs on the Billboard Hot 100, Bonnie Tyler's "Total Eclipse of the Heart" and Air Supply's "Making Love Out of Nothing at All", both Steinman creations.  Weinberg also recorded with Southside Johnny and the Asbury Jukes, Gary U.S. Bonds, Ian Hunter, and Carole King.
On October 18, 1989, Springsteen unexpectedly called Weinberg to say he was dissolving the E Street Band.  As Weinberg later said, "That's why they call him the Boss."

Breakup and career choices

The news left him "a zombie for about six months."  Even before the breakup, he had returned to school at Seton Hall University in early 1989.  The band breakup occurred during his second semester at Seton Hall, on his way to completing the remaining 21 credits needed to obtain his bachelor's degree in communications. 78. He graduated from there later in 1989. He then briefly attended Yeshiva University's Cardozo School of Law, but withdrew after six weeks.  Weinberg asked Ringo Starr for advice on how to go on when the band that had made your life had broken up.  Weinberg and Springsteen remained on friendly terms during this period.
In 1990, Weinberg began offering motivational seminars oriented towards corporations to augment his one-person college show business.  He received the HERO Award from Big Brothers Big Sisters of America in October 1990 for his work for that organization.  The Big Beat was republished in 1991.
Weinberg thought his career as a musician was over and considered himself retired as a drummer.  He went into the music business instead, joining a distribution company as a business partner. He worked as an executive for the Music Master label.  He formed his own record company, Hard Ticket Entertainment, in 1990.
He looked through the Yellow Pages for jobs and played at bar mitzvahs for $125; he later said "I was glad to do it." Weinberg became the live drummer for 10,000 Maniacs in 1992 after their drummer Jerry Augustyniak was injured five days before a five-week tour.  He went after that assignment once he heard it was open and later said, "I lived on a bus and had a roommate. Not exactly like the E Street Band, but I loved it. It reminded me that I am a drummer and I'm good. I was put here to play the drums. To turn my back on that ability was wrong."  He played at the January 1993 inauguration of Bill Clinton.  Weinberg auditioned in 1993 to be the principal drummer on the Broadway show The Who's Tommy, but was selected instead as the second substitute.  Despite the very low pay, Weinberg was nevertheless happy: "I'd buried drumming so far into my psyche. I felt I'd resurrected it."  Of Springsteen's work, Weinberg felt "that I would never get to play these songs again."

Late Night with Conan O'Brien

In July 1993, Weinberg had a chance sidewalk meeting outside Carnegie Deli with newly selected Late Night host Conan O'Brien, where Weinberg spoke about his ideas for music on the show. O'Brien promised Weinberg an audition. Within a few short days Weinberg put together The Max Weinberg 7, recruiting musicians he had worked with during his career including on the Killer Joe project, starting with guitarist and arranger Jimmy Vivino.  Weinberg decided a muscular, drums-driven jump blues vibe, partly derived from the Killer Joe sound, is what he would use as a starting point for the group's sound. At the early August audition the outfit impressed O'Brien with their ability to play not just rock but also rhythm and blues, soul, jazz, pop, and big band swing; Weinberg was so anxious to land the job that he threw up afterward. After a final meeting with executive producer Lorne Michaels they were hired as the house band. The band performed on the show every night since its premiere on September 13, 1993.  O'Brien later said of the Weinberg choice, "The energy and enthusiasm of his music coincided with the show I wanted to do. Plus, his tan offset my ghostly complexion."  Weinberg held the title of music director on the show, while Vivino did most of the arranging.  Of his career rebound, Weinberg said simply: "I grabbed the brass ring twice."
In the early phases of the show, Weinberg was involved in occasional comedy bits, but mostly focused on his musical responsibilities, including the selection of walk-on music for guests.  O'Brien often received poor notices during the early years of Late Night, and Jon Pareles of The New York Times pronounced the Max Weinberg 7 as the "saving grace" of the show.  Weinberg established an image by dressing in high-quality suits and a tie; he said, "I like us to look sharp and play sharp," and "I don't want to look like the audience, I want to look different." Weinberg became a television celebrity, and his visibility and stature grew from Late Night and established an image for him beyond Springsteen.  Indeed, much of the show's young fan base, and some of the staff on the show itself, were unaware of Weinberg's past role in the E Street Band.
In 1994, Rhino Records released Max Weinberg Presents: Let There Be Drums, a three-volume set of CDs that highlighted drumming that Weinberg admired on songs from the 1950s through the 1970s. 239.  Recaps in 1998 of the first five years of Late Night concluded that the band had been an important element in the show surviving, with Weinberg's personality providing a foil to O'Brien's  Their sound also fit into the swing revival going on during the late 1990s.
In 2000, Conan sidekick Andy Richter left the show, and Weinberg became the "second banana".
Weinberg returned to the E Street Band briefly when Springsteen re-grouped the band in early 1995 to record a few new songs for the Greatest Hits release. 82.  The regrouping was only temporary and the band returned to inactivity.  Also in 1995, Weinberg drummed on two of Johnnie Johnson's songs: "I'm Mad" and "She Called Me Out of My Name," on Johnnie's 1995 album Johnnie Be Back.  Weinberg spent two years building an  house in Middletown Township, New Jersey that they moved into in 1999; he picked up many of the furnishings for it from locations around the world during subsequent tours. "MUSIC; For Springsteen, Bar Mitzvahs and Conan, This Drummer Sets the Beat", The New York Times, January 28, 2001. Retrieved May 10, 2007. "I actually played at bar mitzvahs after the band broke up and was glad to do it, Mr. Weinberg said in a recent interview in his home in a tony section of Middletown Township."
The Max Weinberg 7 released a self-titled album in 2000 on Hip-O Records; Weinberg said he waited until then because "I wanted to change my style of playing and hone my style before I committed to a record."  He was especially proud that the band had successfully backed Tony Bennett during a late 1990s appearance on Late Night: "Two years ago if you'd asked me if I could play with Tony Bennett, I would have said absolutely not. I'm not in his league. But we played with him the other night, and it was wonderful. We swung."

Reformation of the E Street Band

Springsteen reunited the E Street Band in 1999 on a more lasting basis, for the Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band Reunion Tour.  This posed a dilemma for Weinberg, whose greater loyalty was to O'Brien and NBC.
While Weinberg did not forget the breakup and long separation, he viewed it as "at the same time the most horrifying experience I've ever been through and the most liberating."  In any case, he immediately felt comfortable playing with Springsteen once more: "Right from the first downbeat of the first rehearsal, it was there again."  His drumming for the E Street Band was more relaxed and mature than before, showing more confidence and finesse, and his hands and fingers were in better shape for having done the daily Late Night work.  His daughter Ali joined the band on keyboards several times during the tour.
Weinberg's steady drumming helped power Springsteen's 2002 comeback album, and the first E Street Band studio recording in 18 years, The Rising.  Weinberg took more time off from the Conan show to participate in the long and successful 2002–2003 Rising Tour.  In the early 2000s, Weinberg was at the center of annual holiday benefit shows at Asbury Park Convention Hall, billed as Bruce Springsteen, the Max Weinberg 7 and Friends.
Weinberg was a member of the board of trustees of the Monmouth Conservation Foundation
Springsteen himself also made appearances on Late Night in 1999, 2002, and 2006. Weinberg participated in the 2004 Vote for Change tour then drummed on Springsteen's 2007 album Magic.  There he was part of a core rhythm section comprising himself, Springsteen, bassist Garry Tallent, and pianist Roy Bittan, who did the tracks first; other members' contributions were added later.  Weinberg then took more time off from the Conan show to do the 2007–2008 Magic Tour.  Weinberg repeated his role in the core section in recording Springsteen's Working on a Dream album.  Weinberg also fulfilled a long-time dream by going to Super Bowl XLIII in February 2009 with Springsteen and the E Street Band's half-time performance, where he was joined by some of the other members of the Max Weinberg 7.

Move to The Tonight Show

The ending of the Conan Late Night and beginning of The Tonight Show coincided with the start of Springsteen and the E Street Band's 2009 Working on a Dream Tour.  O'Brien told a Variety reporter at the time of the announcement that he hoped that Weinberg would follow him to Los Angeles and that he also hoped an arrangement could be worked out to let Weinberg go on the road with Springsteen as had been done for past tours.
Whether Weinberg would stay with O'Brien and move or not became a subject of conflicting news reports.
Nevertheless, O'Brien confirmed on February 18, 2009, that Weinberg and the band were indeed coming with him.  Weinberg had not missed an E Street Band show since joining the outfit in 1974, and E Streeter Van Zandt said that no amount of rehearsal by another drummer could replace Weinberg's intuitive understanding of Springsteen's performance gambits.
The conflict was resolved when son Jay became a substitute drummer for his father during parts of the Working on a Dream Tour that Max could not make due to commitments to the O'Brien show.
The Tonight Show with Conan O'Brien premiered on June 1, 2009, with The Max Weinberg 7 now expanded to eight and referred to as Max Weinberg and the Tonight Show Band.  Andy Richter was back as an announcer, making Weinberg's role as a foil a little uncertain.  Gradually Weinberg and the band's roles in the comic aspects of the show began to assert themselves. Weinberg was left to concentrate on his bandleader role.
Even though Weinberg was living in Los Angeles for The Tonight Show, he retained his home in New Jersey and considered that his permanent residence: "I'm not really moving. I'm living out here, but it's more like an extended road trip."  Regarding his decision to stay in music rather than pursue the legal profession, he has had no regrets: "The world needs more drummers and fewer lawyers."
However, Weinberg's stint as Tonight Show bandleader was not to last long.  The 2010 Tonight Show host and timeslot conflict erupted, and after an intense period of public turmoil, the last Conan show took place on January 22, 2010,

Departure from O'Brien and start of Big Band

In February 2010, Weinberg underwent a twelve-hour open heart valve repair surgery to correct a condition he had known about and had been monitoring since the mid-1980s.  His recovery took place over three to five months, and Weinberg kept news about the operation private until an interview eight months later.
In April 2010, O'Brien began his The Legally Prohibited from Being Funny on Television Tour. While the rest of the group was part of the tour under the moniker The Legally Prohibited Band, Weinberg was not
Instead, he assembled and staged appearances by the Max Weinberg Big Band, a fifteen-piece ensemble with twelve horns that mostly plays the music of Frank Sinatra, Buddy Rich, Count Basie, and Maynard Ferguson.  Weinberg's interest in the genre dated back to his childhood and the artists he had seen on televised variety shows.
It was initially unknown whether Weinberg would be part of O'Brien's new late night show on TBS cable that began in November 2010,  In June 2010, the Max Weinberg Big Band Tour began with a show in Red Bank, New Jersey's Count Basie Theater.  Weinberg said that he was booking appearances by his big band through 2011 and that with regard to O'Brien, "I literally have not thought about it. There have been no discussions. It's kind of an open question."
In September 2010, it was announced Weinberg would not be part of the show, now named Conan; Jimmy Vivino took over leadership of that band, with Wormworth replacing Weinberg full-time on drums.  The split was stated as being mutual, with O'Brien saying, "Max has been a huge part of my life for the past 17 years and he is an incredible bandleader and musician," and Weinberg thanking his band and saying, "17 years — a lifetime on TV ... my association with Conan, his staff, and crew has been a deeply rewarding experience for me."  Weinberg subsequently acknowledged that "We both wanted to go in different directions," but both looked forward to Weinberg occasionally stopping by to sit in on the new show.  Weinberg said his health was better than ever but that the "life-changing experience emotionally and spiritually" of the surgery, a desire to remain in New Jersey with his family, and an interest in exploring new musical directions had all played a role in his departure from O'Brien.
Weinberg played on only a couple of tracks on Springsteen's March 2012 album Wrecking Ball, but resumed his normal role with the E Street Band on the subsequent 2012–2013 Wrecking Ball Tour, this time augmented by percussionist Everett Bradley.  In 2013, Weinberg again found himself in a real estate dispute, threatening legal action against Monmouth County in connection with its attempt to repair damage to the Henry Hudson Trail in Atlantic Highlands following damage caused by Superstorm Sandy.  Weinberg claimed that the work done in creating that portion of the trail, augmented by Sandy, had caused significant damage to two properties he and his wife owned there.






