[[Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 births, Dutch people of German descent, Dutch monarchs, Dutch princes, Dutch royalty, House of Amsberg, House of Orange-Nassau, International Olympic Committee members, Leiden University alumni, Living people, Members of the Council of State of the Netherlands, People educated at Atlantic College, People from Wassenaar, Protestant Church Christians from the Netherlands, Protestant monarchs, Presidents of the Council of State of the Netherlands, Princes of Orange, Bands of the Order of the Aztec Eagle, Grand Croix of the Ordre national du Mérite, Grand Crosses of the Order of Adolphe of Nassau, Grand Crosses of the Order of Merit (Chile), Grand Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, Grand Cordons of the Order of the Chrysanthemum, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Crown (Belgium), Grand Crosses of the Order of the House of Orange, Grand Cordons of the Order of the Liberator, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Southern Cross, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Oak Crown, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Chula Chom Klao, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Isabella the Catholic, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Netherlands Lion, Knights of the Elephant, Knights of the Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau, Knights of the Royal Order of the Seraphim, Special Classes of the Order of the Renaissance of Oman, Dato Laila Utamas of the Royal Family Order of Brunei, Recipients of Bintang Mahaputera Adipurna

Willem-Alexander (; Willem-Alexander Claus George Ferdinand; born 27 April 1967) is the  King of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, consisting of the countries of the Netherlands (including the Caribbean Netherlands), Curaçao, Aruba, and Sint Maarten. He is head of the Dutch royal house and the House of Amsberg.
Willem-Alexander was born in Utrecht and is the eldest child of Princess Beatrix and German diplomat Claus von Amsberg. He became Prince of Orange and heir apparent to the throne of the Netherlands on 30 April 1980, when his mother became queen regnant, and he ascended the throne on 30 April 2013 when his mother abdicated.
He went to public primary and secondary schools, served in the Royal Netherlands Navy, and studied history at Leiden University. He married Máxima Zorreguieta Cerruti in 2002 and they have three daughters: Catharina-Amalia, Princess of Orange (born 2003), Princess Alexia (born 2005), and Princess Ariane (born 2007).
Willem-Alexander is interested in sports and international water management issues. Until his accession to the throne, he was a member of the International Olympic Committee (1998–2013),Willem-Alexander neemt afscheid als 'waterprins', Trouw, 2013. Retrieved 19 April 2013. As of his ascension in 2013, at the age of forty-six, he is currently the youngest monarch in Europe.

Early life and education

Willem-Alexander Claus George Ferdinand was born on 27 April 1967 in the University Medical Center in Utrecht, Netherlands. He was the first child of Princess Beatrix and Prince Claus,The Prince of Orange. Dutch Royal House. Retrieved 19 July 2009. and the first grandchild of Queen Juliana and Prince Bernhard. He was the first male Dutch royal baby since the birth of Prince Alexander in 1851, and the first immediate male heir since Alexander's death in 1884.
From birth, Willem-Alexander has held the titles Prince of the Netherlands (), Prince of Orange-Nassau (Dutch: Prins van Oranje-Nassau), and Jonkheer of Amsberg (Dutch: Jonkheer van Amsberg). He was baptised as a member of the Dutch Reformed ChurchDoop Willem-Alexander. Nederlandse Omroep Stichting. Retrieved 13 December 2009. on 2 September 196740 meest gestelde vragen. Dutch Royal House. Retrieved 13 December 2009. in Saint Jacob's Church in The Hague. Radio Netherlands Worldwide. Retrieved 13 December 2009. His godparents are Prince Bernhard of Lippe-Biesterfeld, Prince Ferdinand von Bismarck, former Prime Minister Jelle Zijlstra, and Queen Margrethe II of Denmark.
He has two younger brothers: Prince Friso of Orange-Nassau, (1968-2013), and Prince Constantijn of the Netherlands, born in 1969. He lived with his family at the castle Drakensteyn in the hamlet Lage Vuursche near Baarn from his birth until 1981, when they moved to the larger palace Huis ten Bosch in The Hague. His mother Beatrix became Queen of the Netherlands in 1980, after his grandmother Juliana abdicated. He then received the title of Prince of Orange as heir apparent to the throne of the Kingdom of the Netherlands.
Willem-Alexander attended Nieuwe Baarnse Elementary School in Baarn from 1973 to 1979. He went to three different high schools: the Baarns Lyceum in Baarn from 1979 to 1981, the Eerste Vrijzinnig Christelijk Lyceum in The Hague from 1981 to 1983, and the United World College of the Atlantic in Wales near Llantwit Major (1983 to 1985), where the prince had friends, and from which he received his International Baccalaureate.Z.M. koning Willem-Alexander , koning der Nederlanden, prins van Oranje-Nassau, Parlement. Retrieved 5 April 2013.
After his military service from 1985 to 1987, Willem-Alexander studied history at Leiden University from 1987 onwards and received his MA degree (doctorandus) in 1993.anp-archief.mastersinleiden.
Willem-Alexander speaks English, Spanish and German in addition to his native Dutch.

Military training and career

Between high school and his academic studies, Willem-Alexander performed military service in the Royal Netherlands Navy from August 1985 until January 1987. He received his training at the Royal Netherlands Naval College and the frigates HNLMS Tromp and HNLMS Abraham Crijnssen, where he was an ensign. In 1988 he received additional training at the ship HNLMS Van Kinsbergen and became a lieutenant (junior grade) (wachtofficier). Dutch Royal House. Retrieved 17 December 2009.
As a reservist for the Royal Netherlands Navy, Willem-Alexander was promoted to Lieutenant Commander in 1995, Commander in 1997, Captain at Sea in 2001, and Commodore in 2005. As a reservist for the Royal Netherlands Army, he was made a Major (Grenadiers' and Rifles Guard Regiment) in 1995, and was promoted to Lieutenant Colonel in 1997, Colonel in 2001, and Brigadier General in 2005. As a reservist for the Royal Netherlands Air Force, he was made Squadron Leader in 1995 and promoted to Air Commodore in 2005. As a reservist for the Royal Marechaussee, he was made Brigadier General in 2005.
Before his investiture as king, Willem-Alexander was honorably discharged from the armed forces. The government declared that the head of state cannot be a serving member of the armed forces, since the government itself holds supreme command over the armed forces. As king, Willem-Alexander may choose to wear a military uniform with royal insignia, but not with his former rank insignia. Retrieved 3 March 2013

Royal duties and social interests

Since 1985, when he became 18 years old, Willem-Alexander has been a member of the Council of State of the Netherlands. This is the highest council of the Dutch government and is chaired by the head of state (then Queen Beatrix). Retrieved 24 July 2013. He attended its weekly meetings as often as possible. Retrieved 24 July 2013.
King Willem-Alexander is interested in water management and sports issues. He was an honorary member of the World Commission on Water for the 21st century and patron of the Global Water Partnership, a body established by the World Bank, the UN, and the Swedish Ministry of Development. He was appointed as the Chairperson of the United Nations Secretary General's Advisory Board on Water and Sanitation on 12 December 2006.
On 10 October 2010, Willem-Alexander and Máxima went to the Netherlands Antilles' capital, Willemstad, to attend and represent his mother, the Queen, at the Antillean Dissolution ceremony.
He was a patron of the Dutch Olympic Games Committee until 1998 when he was made a member of the International Olympic Committee (IOC). After becoming King, he relinquished his membership and received the Gold Olympic Order at the 125th IOC Session.[ref]
[/ref] To celebrate the 100th anniversary of the 1928 Summer Olympics held in Amsterdam, he has expressed support to bid for the 2028 Summer Olympics.Netherlands May Bid For 2028 Games, Gamesbids
He was a member of the supervisory board of De Nederlandsche Bank (the Dutch central bank), a member of the Advisory Council of ECP (the information society forum for government, business and civil society), patron of Veterans' Day and held several other patronages and posts. Retrieved 24 July 2013.

Reign

On 28 January 2013, Queen Beatrix announced that she planned to abdicate in favour of Willem-Alexander. The official programme for the abdication and investiture took place on 30 April 2013. The Queen signed the Instrument of Abdication at the Royal Palace, Amsterdam. Troonswisseling in Nederland (2013), Dutch Wikipedia, 2 May 2013
As king, Willem-Alexander has weekly meetings with the prime minister and speaks regularly with ministers and state secretaries. He also signs all new Acts of Parliament and royal decrees. He represents the kingdom at home and abroad. At the State Opening of Parliament, he delivers the Speech for the Throne, which announces the plans of the government for the parliamentary year. The Constitution requires that the king appoint, dismiss and swear in all government ministers and state secretaries. Willem-Alexander is also the president of the Council of State, which is a historical role. The monarch seldom chairs meetings of the Council of State. Retrieved on 2013-7-24.
Since his accession at age 46, he is Europe's youngest monarch. He is also the first male monarch of the Netherlands since the death of his great-great-grandfather King William III in 1890. Willem-Alexander is one of the world's four new monarchs to take the throne in 2013 along with Pope Francis of the Vatican, Emir Tamim bin Hamad of Qatar, and King Philippe of Belgium.

Leisure activities

He is an aircraft pilot and sportsman. In 1989, Willem-Alexander flew as a volunteer for the African Medical Research and Education Foundation (AMREF) in Kenya, and in 1991 he spent a month flying for the Kenya Wildlife Service. To make sure he flies enough hours each year to retain his license, he occasionally flies KLM Cityhopper's Fokker 70s or the Dutch royal airplane.
Using the name "W. A. van Buren", one of the least-known titles of the House of Orange-Nassau, he participated in the 1986 Frisian Elfstedentocht, a 

Marriage and children

On 2 February 2002, he married Máxima Zorreguieta Cerruti at the Nieuwe Kerk in Amsterdam. Máxima is an Argentine woman of Basque, Portuguese and Italian ancestry, who prior to their marriage worked as an investment banker in New York City. The marriage triggered significant controversy due to the role the bride's father, Jorge Zorreguieta, had in the Argentinian military dictatorship. The couple has three daughters:

Privacy and the press

In an attempt to strike a balance between privacy for the royal family and availability to the press, the Netherlands Government Information Service (RVD) instituted a media code on 21 June 2005 which essentially states that:
During a ski vacation in Argentina, several photographs were taken of the prince and his family during the private part of their holiday, including one by Associated Press staff photographer Natacha Pisarenko, in spite of the media code, and after a photo opportunity had been provided earlier.

Properties

The royal family currently lives in Villa Eikenhorst on the De Horsten estate in Wassenaar. After the move of Princess Beatrix to castle Drakensteyn and a renovation, Willem-Alexander and his family will move to palace Huis ten Bosch in The Hague.(Dutch) Verhuizing Prinses Beatrix, Koninklijk Huis. Retrieved 24 July 2013.
On 10 July 2008, the then Prince of Orange and Princess Maxima announced that they had invested in a development project on the Mozambican peninsula of Machangulo. After public and parliamentary controversy the royal couple announced that they decided to sell the property in Machangulo once their house was completed."Crown prince bows to public pressure over Mozambique villa". NRC. November 23, 2009. Retrieved 11 June 2010. In January 2012, it was confirmed that the villa had been sold.(Dutch) "Prins verkoopt villa in Mozambique". Nederlandse Omroep Stichting. 18 January 2012. Retrieved 2 May 2013.
The Dutch King has a villa in Kranidi, Greece. His neighbour is good friend and actor Sean Connery, with whom he shares a helicopter platform.

Titles, styles, honours and arms

Titles and styles

Willem-Alexander's full style from birth until his mother's accession was: "His Royal Highness Prince Willem-Alexander of the Netherlands, Prince of Orange-Nassau, Jonkheer van Amsberg". On his mother's accession, it became: "His Royal Highness the Prince of Orange, Prince of the Netherlands, Prince of Orange-Nassau, Jonkheer van Amsberg".
Following his accession, Willem-Alexander's official title, as appearing in preambles, is: "Willem-Alexander, by the Grace of God, King of the Netherlands, Prince of Orange-Nassau, etc. etc. etc."
He was the first male heir apparent to the Dutch throne since Prince Alexander, son of King William III, who died in 1884. Prince Willem-Alexander had earlier indicated that when he would become king, he would take the name William IV,Interview with Paul Witteman, September 1997, Racchvs but it was announced on 28 January 2013 that his regnal name would be Willem-Alexander.Prince of Orange to become King Willem-Alexander

Military ranks

Honours

See also List of honours of the Dutch Royal Family by country

=Dutch orders and decorations=

In his capacity as the Sovereign, Willem-Alexander is Grand Master of the Military Order of William (Militaire Willemsorde) and the other Dutch orders of merit.

=Foreign orders=

Honorary appointment

Arms

Ancestry

Through his father, a member of the House of Amsberg, he is descended from families of the lower German nobility, and through his mother, from several royal German/Dutch families such as the House of Lippe, Mecklenburg-Schwerin, the House of Orange-Nassau, Waldeck and Pyrmont, and the House of Hohenzollern. He is descended from the first King of the Netherlands, William I of the Netherlands, who was also a ruler in Luxembourg and several German states, and all subsequent Dutch monarchs. By his mother, Willem-Alexander also descended from Paul I of Russia and thus from German princess Catherine the Great. Through his father, he is also descended from several Dutch/Flemish families who left the Low Countries during Spanish rule, such as the Berenbergs. His paternal great-great-grandfather Gabriel von Amsberg (1822–1895), a Major-General of Mecklenburg, was recognized as noble as late as 1891, the family having adopted the "von" in 1795. 9, 66–72, p. 112, Heraldry SocietyF. J. J. Tebbe, W. D. E. Aerts, Arnout van Cruyningen, Jean Klare (eds.), Encyclopedie van het Koninklijk Huis, p. 17, Winkler Prins, 2005
King Willem-Alexander is a multiple descendant of Anne, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange, eldest daughter of British King George II. However, under the British Act of Settlement, King Willem-Alexander forfeited his (distant) succession rights to the throne of the United Kingdom, because he married a Roman Catholic.





|-


