[[Prince Claus of the Netherlands]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, 2002 deaths, Dutch diplomats, Dutch nobility, German diplomats, German untitled nobility, Princes of the Netherlands, Dutch royal consorts, Dutch people of German descent, German military personnel of World War II, House of Amsberg, Members of the Council of State of the Netherlands, People in international development, Dutch members of the Dutch Reformed Church, Dutch corporate directors, People from Hitzacker, People from the Province of Hanover, Cancer survivors, Deaths from Parkinson's disease, Deaths from pneumonia, Neurological disease deaths in the Netherlands, Infectious disease deaths in the Netherlands, Burials in the Royal Crypt at Nieuwe Kerk, Delft, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav, Grand Crosses of the Order of Christ (Portugal), Grand Crosses of the Order of Charles III, Grand Crosses of the Order of Good Hope, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Falcon, Recipients of the Grand Star of the Decoration for Services to the Republic of Austria, House of Orange-Nassau

Claus George Willem Otto Frederik Geert van Amsberg (né Klaus-Georg Wilhelm Otto Friedrich Gerd von Amsberg; 6 September 1926 – 6 October 2002), later Prince Claus of the Netherlands, was the husband of Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands, and as such was Prince consort of the Netherlands from Beatrix's ascension in 1980 until his death in 2002.

Biography

Prince Claus was born Klaus-Georg Wilhelm Otto Friedrich Gerd von Amsberg, on his family's estate, Haus Dötzingen, near Hitzacker, Germany on 6 September 1926. His parents were Claus Felix von Amsberg and Baroness Gösta von dem Bussche-Haddenhausen. His father, a member of the untitled German nobility, operated a large farm in Tanganyika (formerly German East Africa) from 1928 until World War II. From 1938 Claus and his six sisters grew up on their maternal grandparents' manor in Lower Saxony; he attended the Friderico-Francisceum-Gymnasium  in  Bad Doberan from 1933 to 1936 and a boarding school in Tanganyika from 1936 to 1938.
The future prince was a member of such Nazi youth organisations as Deutsches Jungvolk and the Hitler Youth (membership in the latter was mandatory for all fit members of his generation). The History Place. Retrieved on 23 April 2014. From 1938 until 1942, he attended the Baltenschule Misdroy.
In 1944, he was conscripted into the German Wehrmacht, becoming a soldier in the German 90th Panzergrenadier Division in Italy in March 1945, but taken as a prisoner of war by the American forces at Meran before taking part in any fighting. After his repatriation, he finished school in Lüneburg and studied law in Hamburg. He then joined the German diplomatic corps and worked in Santo Domingo and Côte d'Ivoire. In the 1960s, he was transferred to Bonn.
Claus met Crown Princess Beatrix for the first time on New Year's Eve 1962 in Bad Driburg at a dinner hosted by the count von Oeynhausen-Sierstorpff who was a distant relative of both of them. They met again at the wedding-eve party of Princess Tatjana of Sayn-Wittgenstein-Berleburg and Moritz, Landgrave of Hesse, in the summer of 1964. Sections of the Dutch population were unhappy that Beatrix's fiancé was a German and former member of the Hitler Youth, only twenty years after the end of the war, and there were protests during the wedding celebrations, most notably by the anarchist-artist group Provo.  Nonetheless, her engagement was approved by the States-General—a necessary step for Beatrix to remain heiress to the throne—in 1965.  He was granted Dutch citizenship later that year and changed the spellings of his names to Dutch.
The pair were married on 10 March 1966.  Their wedding day saw violent protests, including such memorable slogans as "Claus, 'raus!" (Claus, get out!) and "Mijn fiets terug" (Give me back my bike), a reference to the memory of occupying German soldiers confiscating Dutch bicycles. A smoke bomb was thrown at the wedding carriage by a group of Provos.  However, over time, Claus became accepted by the public, so much so that during the last part of his life he was generally considered the most popular member of the Royal Family..
The public also sympathised with Claus for his efforts to give meaning to his life beyond the restrictions that Dutch law imposed on the Royal Family's freedom of speech and action (lest they get involved in political controversy) Claus was even appointed as senior staff member at the Department of Developing Aid, albeit in an advisory role.
One example of his attitude toward protocol was the "Declaration of the Tie". In 1998, after presenting the annual Prince Claus Awards to three African fashion designers, Claus told "workers of all nations to unite and cast away the new shackles they have voluntarily cast upon themselves", meaning the necktie, that "snake around my neck," and encouraged the audience to "venture into open-collar paradise".  He then removed his tie and threw it on the floor. Claus' speech in which he removes his tie, among other video fragments
In 2001, when on Dutch television he announced the marriage of his son Willem-Alexander, Prince of Orange, and Máxima Zorreguieta, an Argentine woman of Spanish and Italian descent, Prince Claus referred to himself as more a citizen of the world than anything else.

Titles, styles, honours, and arms

Titles and styles

Honours and awards

See also List of honours of the Dutch Royal Family by country

=Dutch orders and decorations=

=Foreign honours=

=Academic awards=

Prince Claus was also appointed Honorary Fellow of the International Institute of Social Studies (ISS) in 1988. Prince Claus was held in very high esteem in the international development cooperation community, partly because of his considerable insight and understanding of the problems involved, and partly because of his exceptional gift for expressing the hopes and anxieties felt by all.

Ancestry

Issue

Health and death

Claus suffered various health problems, such as depression, cancer and Parkinson's disease. He died in Amsterdam on 6 October 2002 after a long illness, aged 76. He died less than 4 months after the birth of his first grandchild.
He was interred in the Royal Family's tomb in Delft on 15 October. It was the first full state funeral since Queen Wilhelmina's in 1962.





|-


