[[Benito Juárez International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Mexico, WAAS reference stations, Transportation in Mexico City

Benito Juárez International Airport ( is a commercial airport that serves Mexico City, the capital of Mexico. It is Mexico's busiest airport by both passenger traffic and aircraft movements and is Latin America's second busiest airport by passenger traffic after Guarulhos Airport in São Paulo, Brazil, and the busiest airport by aircraft movements. Although Juárez was not its official name for several decades, it was formally named after the 19th century president Benito Juárez in 2006, and is Mexico's main domestic gateway. The airport is owned by Grupo Aeroportuario de la Ciudad de México and operated by Aeropuertos y Servicios Auxiliares, the government-owned corporation, which also operates 21 other airports throughout Mexico. In recent years Toluca Airport has become an alternate airport.
This hot and high airport is served by 30 domestic and international airlines. On a typical day, more than 85,000 passengers pass through Benito Juárez airport to and from more than 100 destinations around the world. It provides non-stop services from Mexico City to North America, Central America and the Caribbean, South America, Asia and Europe. In 2013, the airport served 31,534,638 passengers, a 6.9% increase compared to 2012. For the 12-month period ending March 31, 2014, the airport handled 32,177,327 passengers. In optimal conditions, and with recent renovations and expansion projects completed, the Benito Juárez airport will be able to handle up to 32 million passengers per year. As the main hub for Mexico's largest airline Aeroméxico and a secondary hub for its subsidiary Aeroméxico Connect, the airport has become a SkyTeam hub. It is also a hub for Aeromar, Interjet, Volaris and a focus city for VivaAerobus.

Location

Located at the neighborhood of Peñón de los Baños within Venustiano Carranza, one of the sixteen boroughs into which Mexico's Federal District is divided, the airport is  east from Downtown Mexico City and is surrounded by the built-up areas of Gustavo A. Madero to the north and Venustiano Carranza to the west, south and east. As the airport is located on the east side of Mexico City and its runways run southwest-northeast, an airliner's landing approach is usually directly over Mexico City.

History

The airport first opened as Balbuena Military Airport with five runways. The first landing was on November 5, 1928 and regular service started a year later, but was officially inaugurated on May 15, 1931. On July 8, 1943, the Official Gazette of the Federation published a decree that acknowledged Mexico City's Central Airport as an International Airport, capable of managing international arrivals and departures of passengers and aircraft. Its first international route was to Los Angeles International Airport operated by Mexicana. Construction of Runway 05D-23I started six years later, as well as new facilities such as a platform, a terminal building, a control tower and offices for the authorities. The runway started its operations in 1951. On November 19, 1952,  President Miguel Alemán opened the terminal, thus becoming a commercial airport.
On December 2, 1963, Walter C. Buchanan, former director of the Transport and Communications Department (SCT), changed the airport's name "Aeropuerto Central" (Central Airport) to "Aeropuerto Internacional de la Ciudad de México" (Mexico City International Airport). Four decades later, on November 24, 2006, the Official Gazette of the Federation published a decree to rename Mexico's City International Airport "Benito Juárez".
In the 1970s, president Luis Echeverría closed three runways and gave that land to poor people in order to build their homes, leaving just two parallel runways. In 1980, the terminal was expanded to double its capacity, using a single large terminal rather than multiple terminals as in other airports. Ten years later in 1990, the mixed domestic/international gates were separated to increase the terminal's functionality, along with the separation of domestic and international check-in halls.
On November 24, 1978, the "Mexico" Control Tower began its operations; it has been in service since then.
The AICM has continually improved its infrastructure. On August 15, 1979, and after about a year of remodeling works, the terminal building reopened to the public; the airport continued its operations during the renovation, which improved passenger transit with better space distribution in walkways and rooms.
Due to constant growth in demand of both passengers and operations, on January 13, 1994, the Official Gazette of the Federation, published a presidential agreement that prohibited general aviation operations in the AICM, which were moved to Toluca International Airport in order to clear air traffic in the capital's airport.
Renovations to the AICM continued and on April 11, 1994, a new International Terminal building was ready and operational. It was built by a private contractor according to a co-investment agreement with Airports and Auxiliary Services.
In 2001, in order to improve service to passengers, construction for Module XI started. This Module permitted eight new contact positions in the Airport Terminal, capable of receiving eight regular airplanes, two wide-body, or four narrow-body aircraft.
Because of the increasing traffic, president Vicente Fox announced the construction of a new, larger airport on  in the municipalities of Texcoco and San Salvador Atenco, but when local violent protests aroused, the new airport was cancelled. Instead, to respond to the growing demand and aiming to position the AICM as one of the greatest in terms of quality, services, security, and operational functionality, on May 30, 2003 the Federal Government announced an update: an extension to the air terminal in order to widen its service capacity from 20 million to 32 million passengers a year. This program was part of the Metropolitan Airport System, promoted by the Federal Administration.
On November 15, 2007, Terminal 2 was opened, significantly increasing the airport's capacity. All SkyTeam members moved their operations to the new terminal, except Air France and KLM. It was officially inaugurated in March 2008, once the new road accesses and taxiways were finished. Terminal 2 increased the airport's contact positions by 40% and the operational capacity by 15%.

Lack of capacity and slot restriction

The airport has suffered from a lack of capacity due to restrictions on expansion, since it is located in a densely populated area. Some analysts have reported that if the airport had grown at the same speed as demand, it would now serve over 40 million passengers annually. The main issue with the airport is the limitation that its two runways provide, since they are used at 97.3% of their maximum capacity, leaving a very short room for new operations into the airport. Only government, military, commercial, and specially authorized aircraft are allowed to land at the airport. Private aircraft must use alternate airports, such as Lic. Adolfo López Mateos International Airport in Toluca, General Mariano Matamoros Airport in Cuernavaca, or Hermanos Serdán International Airport in Puebla. Even with the inauguration of the new Terminal 2 in 2007, the airport would be ideally designed to serve around 18 million passengers per year, according to international standards for runway and terminal usage. Instead, the airport will keep increasing the number of passengers from around 26 million passengers in 2008 at a rate of 16% per year.
To relieve the demand on Benito Juarez Airport, the Mexican Government laid the groundwork for a new airport to be built on the outskirts of Mexico City. After decades of planning a $2.3 billion airport, peasant farmers who owned the property where the airport was proposed, took several hostages into their hands, refusing to give up their land at any cost.

Terminals and facilities

Terminals

Mexico City International Airport has two passenger terminals. Terminal 1 is separated from Terminal 2 by the runways.

=Terminal 1=

Terminal 1 is currently the largest airport terminal in the Americas and the fourth largest in the world.

=Terminal 2=

Terminal 2 is now housing all Aeroméxico flights out of the airport, becoming the airline's main distribution center. Although the terminal was intended to be served by all-SkyTeam member airlines, Air France and KLM decided to remain at Terminal 1.

Other facilities

Aeropuertos y Servicios Auxiliares, a government-owned corporation that operates airports in Mexico, has its headquarters on the airport property."Home." Aeropuertos y Servicios Auxiliares. "Av.602 No.161 Col.P.15620, México D.F." The Aeromar headquarters are located in Hangar 7 in Zone D of the General Aviation Terminal of the airport."Directory: World Airlines." Flight International. March 16–22, 2004. 50. "Hangar 7, Zona "D", Terminal de Aviacion General, Col Federal, Mexico DF, 15620, Mexico""DIRECTORIO DE OFICINAS DE VENTAS." Aeromar. August 16, 2007. 3/7. "CORPORATIVO MEXICO Hangar No. 1 Zona "D" Col. Federal 15620 México, D. F." Aviacsa had its headquarters in Hangar 1 in Zone C."Directorio." Aviacsa. "DIRECCIÓN COMERCIAL Hangar 1, Zona "C", Col. Aviación Gral. ... Aeropuerto Int. de la Cd. de México. C.P. 15520"

Airlines and destinations

The airport connects 51 domestic and 50 international destinations in Latin America, North America, Europe and Asia. Its most prominent foreign airlines are United Airlines, combined with ExpressJet Airlines traffic, American Airlines, Delta Air Lines and Avianca Holdings. Other airlines with a presence on a lesser scale include Copa Airlines, Iberia, Lufthansa, Air France and US Airways. 
In terms of international passengers MEX is the third-busiest airport in Latin America (behind only São Paulo-Guarulhos International Airport & Cancún International Airport).
Aeroméxico/Aeroméxico Connect operates the most departures from the airport followed by Interjet, Volaris, and Aeromar. Aeroméxico also operates to the most destinations followed by Interjet. In peak season, Iberia and Air France operate the most trans-Atlantic flights (28 flights per week) with nonstop service to Madrid and Paris. As a foreign airline, Lufthansa operates the most destinations in Europe (2). Aeroméxico operates 2 trans-Pacific flights to destinations in China and Japan. As American carrier, United Airlines serves the most destinations in the USA (7). Air Canada serves the most destinations in Canada (2), while AeroMéxico serves the most destinations to Central and South America (12).
This table lists passengers flights served with a nonstop or direct flight with no change of aircraft carrying passengers originating in Mexico City according to the airlines' published schedules, unless otherwise noted.

 

Other services.
In addition to the scheduled airlines above, Mexico City airport is used by some further airlines for chartered flights including:

Cargo airlines

As of April 2014, Mexico City airport is served by 16 cargo airlines flying directly to Europe, Central, North and South America, Middle East and East Asia. Over 376,000 metric tonnes pass through the airport in 2013, making it the third busiest by cargo traffic in Latin America, after El Dorado International Airport in Bogotá and Guarulhos International Airport in São Paulo. Most passenger airlines, such as AeroMéxico and KLM use the airport to carry hold cargo on passenger flights, though most cargo is transported by all-cargo airlines. The following airlines operate the following scheduled destinations.

Airlines providing on-demand cargo services

Traffic statistics

Operations

In 2012, Benito Juárez was the busiest airport in Latin America by aircraft movements with 19.27% more operations than El Dorado International Airport in Bogotá and 37.92% more than Guarulhos Airport in São Paulo. For the 12-month period ending March 31, 2014, the airport had 400,241 aircraft operations, an average of 1,097 operations per day. 

Inter-terminal transportation

Terminal 1 is connected to Terminal 2 by the Aerotrén monorail system in which only connecting passengers with hand baggage are allowed to use with their boarding pass. Technical and cabin crew can also use it. Normal operation hours are from 5:00 am to 11:00 pm, every day of the year, and the first run always begins from T2 to T1; the last run of the day is to T2. The distance between the terminals is . The Airtrain journey, once the doors are fully closed therefore takes approximately 4 minutes and 40 seconds between stations in both directions. Also, if you arrive as a train is leaving the maximum waiting period for the next train is 11 minutes. Also there is a land service between terminals called "inter-terminal transportation". These buses are located at entrance no. 6 of Terminal 1 and entrance no. 4 of Terminal 2.

Airport lounges

Ground transportation

Metro 20px and bus services

Terminal 1 is served by the Terminal Aérea Metro station, which belongs to Line 5 of the subway, running from  Pantitlán station to Politécnico station. It is located just outside the national terminal. Also, trolley bus line G runs from the bus stop next to the Metro to  Boulevard Puerto Aéreo station  walk from Pantitlán served by Metro lines 1, 5, 9, A and numerous local buses.
Terminals 1 and 2 have two land terminals operating 24 hours a day, 365 days a year. Different bus lines operate from here  and provide continuous transportation services to the main cities located around Mexico City, such as Córdoba, Cuernavaca, Pachuca, Puebla, Querétaro, Tlaxcala and Toluca. The Terminal 1 land terminal is located in front of the international area vehicular ramp and its facilities include various services for the comfort of the passengers. Among others, it offers VIP lounges, internet, resting, reading and meeting halls. The Terminal 2 land terminal is located at gate D, between entrance 4 and the national arrival passenger exit, and its facilities include resting halls and a fast food area.

Metrobús 30px

In late 2010, Head of Government of the Federal District Marcelo Ebrard announced a plan to build a new Metrobús Line 4 that would run from near Buenavista Station in the west of the city towards Mexico City airport. Construction on Line 4 started on July 4, 2011. The plans for Line 4 include a two step construction process with the first  operational segment to be built between Buenavista and Metro San Lázaro. An extension provides travel between San Lázaro and the airport. The line opened on April 1, 2012.
 
 

Authorized taxis

Taxis are in operation in Terminals 1 and 2 and there are two models of service: Ordinary service in a sedan type vehicle for 4 passengers. Executive service in 8 passengers vans. At present there are 5 taxi groups in operation. These are the only taxis authorized by the Ministry of Communications and Transport (SCT) of the Federal Government. The Terminal 1 taxi boarding areas are located at entrances 1 and 10; and in Terminal 2, boarding areas are located at entrances 3 and 4. Taxi rates are registered under the SCT and include passenger insurance, civil liability and medical expenses for all occupants. To receive the taxi service you must purchase the corresponding ticket previously at the authorized sale points located within the airport. These taxis tend to be more expensive than others.

Parking

T1 National parking lot is located on Av. Capitán Carlos León in front of entrances 1 and 2 of the terminal building, in the national arrivals zone. It has the capacity of 1,971 vehicles which are permanently monitored by a modern security and surveillance system, by way of closed circuit TV cameras. T1 International parking lot is located on Av. Capitán Carlos León in front of the international area of the terminal building, on one side of the long-distance bus terminal. It has a capacity of 2,106 vehicles. An additional parking option for Terminal 1 airport users is Parking Lot 06, located on Sonora street in front of the taxi rank. Because of its location, it is a useful alternative for those visiting the airport customs, loading area, customs agencies and some airline offices. The new AICM Terminal 2 parking lot is located on one side of the Terminal's great central patio. It has the capacity of 2,437 vehicles.

Accidents and incidents

Gallery

File:B737 Aviacsa MEX. The airline ceased operations in 2009. date
File:Mexicana A320-231 StarAlliance at MMMX. 2003
File:Aeromexico Boeing. 2005
File:Mexicana A320 standing in mexico airport. 2006
File:AM Embraer ERJ-190 MEX DIC 2007. 2007
File:B767 MXA. 2008
File:A320 MX MEX. 2008
File:Mexicana Airbus A318 AADPR. 2010








