[[Codex Vaticanus]]

CATEGORIES: Illuminated biblical manuscripts, Greek New Testament uncials, Manuscripts of the Vatican Library, 4th-century biblical manuscripts, Septuagint manuscripts, Great uncial codices

The Codex Vaticanus (The Vatican, Bibl. Vat., Vat. gr. 1209; no. B or 03 Gregory-Aland, δ 1 von Soden), is one of the oldest extant manuscripts of the Greek Bible (Old and New Testament), one of the four great uncial codices. The Codex is named after its place of conservation in the Vatican Library, where it has been kept since at least the 15th century.
The manuscript became known to Western scholars as a result of correspondence between Erasmus and the prefects of the Vatican Library. Portions of the codex were collated by several scholars, but numerous errors were made during this process. The Codex's relationship to the Latin Vulgate was unclear and scholars were initially unaware of the Codex's value. This changed in the 19th century when transcriptions of the full codex were completed. It was at that point that scholars realised the text differed significantly from the Vulgate and the Textus Receptus.
Current scholarship considers the Codex Vaticanus to be one of the best Greek texts of the New Testament, with the Codex Sinaiticus as its only competitor. Until the discovery by Tischendorf of the Sinaiticus text, the Codex was unrivaled. It was extensively used by Westcott and Hort in their edition of The New Testament in the Original Greek in 1881. The most widely sold editions of the Greek New Testament are largely based on the text of the Codex Vaticanus.

Contents

Codex Vaticanus originally contained a virtually complete copy of the Septuagint ("LXX"), lacking only 1-4 Maccabees and the Prayer of Manasseh. The original 20 leaves containing Genesis 1:1–46:28a (31 leaves) and Psalm 105:27–137:6b have been lost and were replaced by pages transcribed by a later hand in the 15th century.[ref]
</ref>
2 Kings 2:5–7, 10-13 are also lost because of a tear to one of the pages.[ref]
</ref>
The order of the Old Testament books in the Codex is as follows: Genesis to 2 Chronicles as normal; 1 Esdras; 2 Esdras (Ezra-Nehemiah); the Psalms; Proverbs; Ecclesiastes; Song of Songs; Job; Wisdom; Ecclesiasticus; Esther; Judith; Tobit; the minor prophets from Hosea to Malachi; Isaiah; Jeremiah; Baruch; Lamentations and the Epistle of Jeremiah; Ezekiel and Daniel. This order differs from that followed in Codex Alexandrinus.[ref]
</ref>
The extant New Testament of the Vaticanus contains the Gospels, Acts, the General Epistles, the Pauline Epistles, and the Epistle to the Hebrews (up to Hebrews 9:14, καθα[ριει); it is lacking 1 and 2 Timothy, Titus, Philemon, and Revelation. These missing leaves were supplemented by a 15th-century minuscule hand (folios 760–768) and are catalogued separately as the minuscule Codex 1957. Possibly some apocryphal books from the New Testament were included at the end (as in codices Sinaiticus and Alexandrinus), as it is also possible that Revelation was not included. 20

Verses not in Vaticanus but in later manuscripts

The text of the New Testament lacks several passages:

Additions

Description

The manuscript is in quarto volume, arranged in quires of five sheets or ten leaves each, similar to the Codex Marchalianus or Codex Rossanensis; but unlike the Codex Sinaiticus which has an arrangement of four or three sheets. The number of the quires is often found in the margin.[ref]
</ref>
Originally it must have been composed of 830 parchment leaves, but it appears that 71 leaves have been lost. Kenyon, "Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts" (4th ed.), London 1939. Currently, the Old Testament consists of 617 sheets and the New Testament of 142 sheets. The parchment is fine and thin. The actual size of the pages is ; although the original was bigger. The codex is written in three columns per page, with 40–44 lines per page, and 16–18 letters per line. In the poetical books of the Old Testament (OT) there are only two columns to a page. In Pentateuch, Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and 1 Kings 1:1–19:11 there are 44 lines in a column; in 2 Chronicles 10:16–26:13 there are 40 lines in a column; and in the New Testament always 42.[ref]
</ref>
The manuscript is one of the very few New Testament manuscripts to be written with three columns per page. The other two Greek codices written in that way are Uncial 048 and Uncial 053. Codex Vaticanus comprises a single quarto volume containing 759 thin and delicate vellum leaves.
The lettering in the Codex is small and neat, without ornamentation or capitals.[ref]
</ref>
The Greek is written continuously in small neat writing; all the letters are equidistant from each other; no word is separated from the other; each line appears to be one long word. 262–263. Punctuation is rare (accents and breathings have been added by a later hand) except for some blank spaces, diaeresis on initial iotas and upsilons, abbreviations of the nomina sacra and markings of OT citations. The OT citations were marked by an inverted comma (>), as was done in Alexandrinus. There are no enlarged initials; no stops or accents; no divisions into chapters or sections such as are found in later manuscripts.[ref]
</ref>
The text of the Gospels is not divided according to the Ammonian Sections with a references to the Eusebian Canons, but divided into peculiar numbered sections: Matthew has 170, Mark 61, Luke 152, and John 80. This system is found only in two other manuscripts, in Codex Zacynthius and in codex 579. Metzger, Manuscripts of the Greek Bible: An Introduction to Greek Palaeography, New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1991, p. 74. There are two system divisions in the Acts and the Catholic Epistles that differ from the Euthalian Apparatus. In the Acts these sections are 36 (the same system as Codex Sinaiticus, Codex Amiatinus, and Codex Fuldensis) and according to the other system 69 sections. 2 Peter has no numeration, leading to the conclusion that the system of divisions dates prior to the time the Epistle came to be commonly regarded as canonical. The chapters in the Pauline epistles are numbered continuously as the Epistles were regarded as comprising one book.

Text-type

In the Old Testament, the type of text varies, with a received text in Ezekiel and a rejected one in Book of Isaiah. In Judges, the text differs substantially from that of the majority of manuscripts, but agrees with the Old Latin and Sahidic version and Cyril of Alexandria. In Job, it has the additional 400 half-verses from Theodotion, which are not in the Old Latin and Sahidic versions. The text of the Old Testament was considered by critics, such as Hort and Cornill, to be substantially that which underlies Origen's Hexapla edition, completed by him at Caesarea and issued as an independent work (apart from the other versions with which Origen associated it) by Eusebius and Pamphilus. Kenyon, "Handbook to the Textual Criticism of the New Testament", London2, 1912, p. 83.

Notable readings

Provenance

The provenance and early history of the codex is uncertain; Rome (Hort), southern Italy, Alexandria (Kenyon,Frederic G. Kenyon, "Handbook to the Textual Criticism of the New Testament", London2, 1912, p. 88. BurkittF. C. Burkitt, "Texts and Studies", p. VIII-IX.), and Caesarea (T. C. Skeat) have been suggested as the origin. Hort's argument for Rome rests mainly on certain spellings of proper names, such as Ισακ and Ιστραηλ, which show a Western or Latin influence. A second argument is that the chapter division of Acts, similar to that of Sinaiticus and Vaticanus, is not found in any other Greek manuscript, but is present in several manuscripts of the Latin Vulgate. Westcott and Fenton J. A. Hort, Introduction to the New Testament in the Original Greek (New York: Harper & Bros., 1882; reprint, Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson, 1988), pp. 264–267. Robinson counters the argument by suggesting that this system of chapter divisions was introduced into the Vulgate by Jerome himself, as a result of his studies at Caesarea. 42, 101. According to Hort, it was copied from a manuscript whose line length was 12–14 letters per line, because where the Codex Vaticanus's scribe made large omissions, they were typically 12–14 letters long. Westcott and Fenton J. A. Hort, Introduction to the New Testament in the Original Greek (New York: Harper & Bros., 1882; reprint, Peabody, Mass.: Hendrickson, 1988), pp. 233–234.
Kenyon suggested that the manuscript originated in Alexandria: "It is noteworthy that the section numeration of the Pauline Epistles in B shows that it was copied from a manuscript in which the Epistle to the Hebrews was placed between Galatians and Ephesians — an arrangement which elsewhere occurs only in the Sahidic version." A connection with Egypt is also indicated, according to Kenyon, by the order of the Pauline epistles and by the fact that, as in the Codex Alexandrinus, the titles of some of the books contain letters of a distinctively Coptic character, particularly the Coptic mu, used not only in titles but frequently at the ends of lines where space has to be economized. Kenyon, Handbook to the Textual Criticism of the New Testament, London2, 1912, p. 84. According to Metzger, "the similarity of its text in significant portions of both Testaments with the Coptic versions and with Greek papyri, and the style of writing (notably the Coptic forms used in some of the titles) point rather to Egypt and Alexandria".
It has been postulated that at one time the manuscript was in the possession of Cardinal Bessarion because the minuscule supplement has a text similar to one of Bessarion's manuscripts. According to Paul Canart, the decorative initials added to the manuscript in the Middle Ages are reminiscent of Constantinopolitan decoration of the 10th century, but the poor execution gives the impression they were added in the 11th or 12th century, and likely not before the 12th century in light of the way they appear in connection with notes in a minuscule hand at the beginning of the book of Daniel. Andrist (ed.) Le manuscrit B de la Bible (Vaticanus graecus 1209), (Lausanne: Éditions du Zèbre, 2009), pp.26 & 32-38. T. C. Skeat, a paleographer at the British Museum, first argued that Codex Vaticanus was among the 50 Bibles that the Emperor Constantine I ordered Eusebius of Caesarea to produce.T. C. Skeat, "The Codex Sinaiticus, the Codex Vaticanus and Constantine", JTS 50 (1999), pp. 583–625. The similarity of the text with the papyri and Coptic version (including some letter formation), parallels with Athanasius' canon of 367 suggest an Egyptian or Alexandrian origin.
The manuscript is dated to the first half of the 4th century and is likely slightly older than Codex Sinaiticus, which was also transcribed in the 4th century. One argument to support this, is that Sinaiticus already has the, at that time, very new Eusebian Canon tables, but Vaticanus does not. Another is the slightly more archaic style of Vaticanus, and the complete absence of ornamentation.F. G. Kenyon, "Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts (4th ed.)", London 1939.

Scribes and correctors

According to Tischendorf the manuscript was written by three scribes (A, B, C), two of whom appear to have written the Old Testament and one the entire New Testament. C. R. Gregory (Lipsiae 1884), p. 360. Tischendorf's view was accepted by Frederic G. Kenyon, but contested by T. C. Skeat, who examined the codex more thoroughly. Skeat and other paleographers contested Tischendorf's theory of a third (C) scribe, instead asserting that two scribes worked on the Old Testament (A and B) and one of them (B) wrote the New Testament. Scribe A wrote:
Scribe B wrote:
Two correctors worked on the manuscript, one (B2) contemporary with the scribes, the other (B3) in about the 10th or 11th century, although the theory of a first corrector, B1, proposed by Tischendorf was rejected by later scholars. According to Tischendorf, one of the scribes is identical to (and may have been) one of the scribes of the Codex Sinaiticus (scribe D),Constantin von Tischendorf, Editio octava critica maior, ed. C. R. Gregory (Lipsiae 1884), pp. 346, 360. Post Angeli Maii Aloirumque Imperfectos Labores ex ipso Codice (Lipsiae 1867), pp. XXI-XXIII. 73 but there is insufficient evidence for his assertion. Kenyon, Our Bible and the Ancient Manuscripts (London 1939). Skeat agreed that the writing style is very similar to that of Sinaiticus, but there is not enough evidence to accept identity of scribes; "the identity of the scribal tradition stands beyond dispute".
The original writing was retraced by a later scribe (usually dated to the 10th or 11th century), and the beauty of the original script was spoiled. Accents and breathing marks, as well as punctuation, have been added by a later hand. There are no enlarged initials, no divisions into chapters or sections such as are found in later manuscripts, but a different system of division peculiar to this manuscript. There are plenty of the itacistic faults, especially the exchange of ει for ι and αι for ε. The exchange of ει and ο for ω is less frequent.C. R. Gregory, "Canon and Text of the New Testament" (1907), pp. 343–344.
The manuscript contains unusual small horizontally aligned double dots (so called "distigmai," formerly called "umlauts") in the margin of the columns and are scattered throughout the New Testament. The date of these markings are disputed among scholars and are discussed in a link below. Two such distigmai can be seen in the left margin of the first column (top image). Tischendorf reflected upon their meaning, but without any resolution. XXI. He pointed on several places where these distigmai were used: at the ending of the Gospel of Mark, 1 Thess 2:14; 5:28; Heb 4:16; 8:1. The meaning of these distigmai was recognized in 1995 by Philip Payne. Payne discovered the first distigme while studying the section 1 Cor 14.34–35 of the codex. Payne and Paul Canart, The Text-Critical Function of the Umlauts in Vaticanus, with Special Attention to 1 Corinthians 14.34–35: A Response to J. Edward Miller, JSNT 27 (2004), pp. 105–112. He suggested that distigmai indicate lines where another textual variant was known to the person who wrote the umlauts. Therefore, the distigmai mark places of textual uncertainty. Payne and Paul Canart, The Originality of Text-Critical Symbols in Codex Vaticanus, Novum Testamentum 42 (2000), pp. 105–113.G. S. Dykes, Using the „Umlauts" of Codex Vaticanus to Dig Deeper, 2006. See: Codex Vaticanus Graece. The Umlauts.
The same distigmai were observed in Codex Fuldensis, especially in the section containing 1 Cor 14:34–35. The distigme of two codices indicate a variant of the Western manuscripts, which placed 1 Cor 14:34–35 after 1 Cor 14:40 (manuscripts: Claromontanus, Augiensis, Boernerianus, 88, itd, g, and some manuscripts of Vulgate). Payne, Fuldensis, Sigla for Variants in Vaticanus and 1 Cor 14.34-5, NTS 41 (1995) 251–262..., NTS 43 (1997), pp. 242–255.
On page 1512, next to Hebrews 1:3, the text contains an interesting marginal note, "Fool and knave, leave the old reading and do not change it!" – "ἀμαθέστατε καὶ κακέ, ἄφες τὸν παλαιόν, μὴ μεταποίει" which may suggest that inaccurate copying, either intentional or unintentional, was a recognized problem in scriptoriums.Codex Vaticanus Graece 1209, B/03, 

In the Vatican Library

The manuscript is believed to have been housed in Caesarea in the 6th century, together with the Codex Sinaiticus, as they have the same unique divisions of chapters in the Acts. It came to Italy – probably from Constantinople – after the Council of Florence (1438–1445).T. C. Skeat, The Codex Vaticanus in the 15th Century, JTS 35 (1984), ss. 454–465); T. C. Skeat, The Codex Vaticanus in the 15th Century, in: T. C. Skeat i J. K. Elliott, The collected biblical writings of T. C. Skeat, Brill 2004, p. 131.
The manuscript has been housed in the Vatican Library (founded by Pope Nicholas V in 1448) for as long as it has been known, appearing in the library's earliest catalog of 1475 (with shelf number 1209), and in the 1481 catalog. In a catalog from 1481 it was described as a "Biblia in tribus columnis ex memb" (three-column vellum Bible).

Collations

In the 16th century Western scholars became aware of the manuscript as a consequence of the correspondence between Erasmus and the prefects of the Vatican Library, successively Paulus Bombasius, and Juan Ginés de Sepúlveda. In 1521, Bombasius was consulted by Erasmus as to whether the Codex Vaticanus contained the Comma Johanneum, and Bombasius supplied a transcript of 1 John 4:1–3 and 1 John 5:7–11 to show that it did not. Sepúlveda in 1533 cross-checked all places where Erasmus's New Testament (the Textus Receptus) differed from the Vulgate, and supplied Erasmus with 365 readings where the Codex Vaticanus supported the latter, although the list of these 365 readings has been lost. Erasmus in his Adnotationes on Acts 27:16 wrote that according to the Codex from the Library Pontifici, the name of the island is καυδα (Cauda), not κλαυδα (Clauda) as in his Novum Testamentum (Tamet si quidam admonent in codice Graeco pontificiae bibliothecae scriptum haberi, καυδα, id est, cauda). See: Erasmus Desiderius, Erasmus' Annotations on the New Testament: Acts – Romans – I and II Corinthians, ed. A. Reeve and M. A. Sceech, (Brill: Leiden 1990), p. 931. Andrew Birch was the first, who identified this note with 365 readings of Sepulveda. Consequently, the Codex Vaticanus acquired the reputation of being an old Greek manuscript that agreed with the Vulgate rather than with the Textus Receptus. Not until much later would scholars realise it conformed to a text that differed from both the Vulgate and the Textus Receptus – a text that could also be found in other known early Greek manuscripts, such as the Codex Regius (L), housed in the French Royal Library (now Bibliothèque nationale de France).S. P. Tregelles, An Introduction to the Critical study and Knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, London 1856, p. 108.
In 1669 a collation was made by Giulio Bartolocci, librarian of the Vatican, which was not published, and never used until Scholz in 1819 found a copy of it in the Royal Library at Paris. This collation was imperfect and revised in 1862. Kenyon, "Handbook to the Textual Criticism of the New Testament", London2, 1912, p. 78. Another collation was made in 1720 for Bentley by Mico, revised by Rulotta, although not published until 1799. Bentley was stirred by Mill's claim of 30,000 variants in the New Testament and he wanted to reconstruct the text of the New Testament in its early form. He felt that among the manuscripts of the New Testament, Codex Alexandrinus was "the oldest and best in the world".R.C. Jebb, Richard Bentley (New York 1966), p. 487. Bentley understood the necessity to use manuscripts if he were to reconstruct an older form than that apparent in Codex Alexandrinus. He assumed, that by supplementing this manuscript with readings from other Greek manuscripts, and from the Latin Vulgate, he could triangulate back to the single recension which he presumed existed at the time of the First Council of Nicaea. Therefore he required a collation from Vaticanus. Unfortunately, the text of the collation was irreconcilable with Codex Alexandrinus and he abandoned the project. Petersen, What Text can New Yestament Textual Criticism Ultimately Reach, in: B. Aland & J. Delobel (eds.) New Testament Textual Criticism, Exegesis and Church History (Pharos: Kampen, 1994), p. 137.
A further collation was made by Andrew Birch, who in 1798 in Copenhagen edited some textual variants of the Acts of the Apostles and the Epistles,Andreas Birch, Variae Lectiones ad Textum Actorum Apostolorum, Epistolarum Catholicarum et Pauli (Copenhagen 1798). in 1800 for the Book of Revelation,Andreas Birch, Variae lectiones ad Apocalypsin (Copenhagen 1800). in 1801 for the Gospels. They were incomplete and included together with the textual variants from the other manuscripts. Many of them were false. Andrew Birch reproached Mill and Wettstein, that they falso citatur Vaticanus (cite Vaticanus incorrectly), and gave as an example Luke 2:38 – Ισραηλ instead of Ιερουσαλημ. XXVII. The reading Ισραηλ could be found in the codex 130, housed at the Vatican Library, under shelf number Vat. gr. 359. 210.
Before the 19th century, no scholar was allowed to study or edit the Codex Vaticanus, and scholars did not ascribe any value to it; in fact it was suspected to have been interpolated by the Latin textual tradition. Inst. Pr. 1980), p. 287. John Mill wrote in his Prolegomena (1707): "in Occidentalium gratiam a Latino scriba exaratum" (written by a Latin scribe for the western world). He did not believe there was value to having a collation for the manuscript. Wettstein would have liked to know the readings of the codex, but not because he thought that they could have been of any help to him for difficult textual decisions. According to him, this codex had no authority whatsoever (sed ut vel hoc constaret, Codicem nullus esse auctoris). 24. In 1751 Wettstein produced the first list of the New Testament manuscripts, Codex Vaticanus received symbol B (because of its age) and took second position on this list (Alexandrinus received A, Ephraemi – C, Bezae – D, etc.)Johann Jakob Wettstein, Novum Testamentum Graecum, Tomus I (Amstelodami, 1751), p. 22. until the discovery of Codex Sinaiticus (designated by ℵ). 345.
Griesbach produced a list of nine manuscripts which were to be assigned to the Alexandrian text: C, L, K, 1, 13, 33, 69, 106, and 118.J. J. Griesbach, Novum Testamentum Graecum, vol. I (Halle, 1777), prolegomena. Codex Vaticanus was not in this list. In the second (1796) edition of his Greek NT, Griesbach added Codex Vaticanus as a witness to the Alexandrian text in Mark, Luke, and John. He still believed the first half of Matthew represented the Western text-type.J. J. Griesbach, Novum Testamentum Graecum, 2 editio (Halae, 1796), prolegomena, p. LXXXI. See Edition from 1809 (London)

Editions of text of the codex

In 1809 Napoleon brought the manuscript as a victory trophy to Paris, but in 1815 it was returned to the Vatican Library. During that time, in Paris, German scholar Johann Leonhard Hug (1765–1846) saw it. Hug examined it, together with other worthy treasures of the Vatican, but he did not perceive the need of a new and full collation. 165.
Cardinal Angelo Mai prepared the first typographical facsimile edition between 1828 and 1838, which did not appear until 1857, three years after his death, and which was considered unsatisfactory. 60. It was issued in 5 volumes (1–4 volumes for the Old Testament, 5 volume for the New Testament). All lacunae of the Codex were supplemented. Lacunae in the Acts and Pauline epistles were supplemented from the codex Vaticanus 1761, the whole text of Revelation from Vaticanus 2066, text of Mark 16:8–20 from Vaticanus Palatinus 220. Verses not included by codex as Matthew 12:47; Mark 15:28; Luke 22:43–44; 23:17.34; John 5:3.4; 7:53–8:11; 1 Peter 5:3; 1 John 5:7 were supplemented from popular Greek printed editions. III, p. 364. The number of errors was extraordinarily high, and also no attention was paid to distinguish readings of the first hand versus correctors. There was no detailed examination of the manuscript's characteristics. As a consequence, this edition was deemed inadequate for critical purposes.J. K. Elliott, A Bibliography of Greek New Testament Manuscripts (Cambridge University Press, 1989), p. 34. An improved edition was published in 1859, which became the source of Bultmann's 1860 NT.
In 1843 Tischendorf was permitted to make a facsimile of a few verses,Besides the twenty-five readings Tischendorf observed himself, Cardinal Mai supplied him with thirty-four more his NT of 1849. His seventh edition of the text of New Testament (1859) was enriched by 230 other readings furnished by Albert Dressel in 1855. (F. H. A. Scrivener, A Plain Introduction to the Criticism of the New Testament (London 1894), vol. 1, p. 111). in 1844 Eduard de Muralt saw it,E. de Muralt, Novum Testamentum Graecum ad fidem codicis principis vaticani, Hamburg 1848, p. XXXV. and in 1845 S. P. Tregelles was allowed to observe several points which Muralt had overlooked. He often saw the Codex, but "it was under such restrictions that it was impossible to do more than examine particular readings."S. P. Tregelles, An Introduction to the Textual Criticism of the New Testament, London 1856, p. 162).
 
 "They would not let me open it without searching my pockets, and depriving me of pen, ink, and paper; and at the same time two prelati kept me in constant conversation in Latin, and if I looked at a passage too long, they would snatch the book out of my hand".S. P. Tregelles, "A Lecture on the Historic Evidence of the Authorship and Transmission of the Books of the New Testament", London 1852, pp. 83–85.

Tregelles left Rome after five months without accomplishing his object. During a large part of the 19th century, the authorities of the Vatican Library obstructed scholars who wished to study the codex in detail. Henry Alford in 1849 wrote: "It has never been published in facsimile (!) nor even thoroughly collated (!!)."H. Alford, The Greek Testament. The Four Gospels, London 1849, p. 76. Scrivener in 1861 commented:
 
 "Codex Vaticanus 1209 is probably the oldest large vellum manuscript in existence, and is the glory of the great Vatican Library in Rome. To these legitimate sources of deep interest must be added the almost romantic curiosity which has been excited by the jealous watchfulness of its official guardians, with whom an honest zeal for its safe preservation seems to have now degenerated into a species of capricious wilfulness, and who have shewn a strange incapacity for making themselves the proper use of a treasure they scarcely permit others more than to gaze upon".[ref]
</ref> It (...) "is so jealously guarded by the Papal authorities that ordinary visitors see nothing of it but the red morocco binding".<ref name = Scrivener/>

Thomas Law Montefiore (1862):
 
 "The history of the Codex Vaticanus B, No. 1209, is the history in miniature of Romish jealousy and exclusiveness." T.L. Montefiore, Catechesis Evangelica; bring Questions and Answers based on the "Textus Receptus", (London, 1862), p. 272.

Burgon was permitted to examine the codex for an hour and a half in 1860, consulting 16 different passages.[ref]
