[[Jervis Bay Territory]]

CATEGORIES: Jervis Bay Territory, Bays of Australia, Exclaves, City of Shoalhaven, South Coast (New South Wales), States and territories of Australia, States and territories established in 1989

The Jervis Bay Territory (
It was administered by the Department of the Interior (and later by the Department of the Capital Territory) as if it were part of the Australian Capital Territory (ACT), although it has always been a separate Commonwealth territory. The perception that it is part of the ACT stems from the fact that under the terms of the Jervis Bay Territory Acceptance Act, the laws of the ACT apply to the Jervis Bay Territory.
In 1989, when the ACT achieved self-government, the Department of The Arts, Sport, The Environment, Tourism and Territories took over responsibility for the JBT's administration, and it has since been administered by various Commonwealth Departments responsible to the Minister for Territories.

History

The bay was sighted by Lieutenant James Cook aboard 
In August 1791 the bay was entered and named by Lieutenant Richard Bowen aboard the convict transport ship Atlantic of the Third Fleet in honour of Admiral John Jervis, under whom he had served.  In November 1791 Master Matthew Weatherhead aboard the Matilda entered the bay to undertake repairs.
Survivors of the Sydney Cove shipwreck in 1797 reached the area by foot, heading to Port Jackson.
Explorer George Bass entered the bay on 10 December 1797. He named Bowen Island.
John Oxley, an English explorer and surveyor, in 1819.

Administration

Jervis Bay Territory is administered by the Department of Regional Australia, Regional Development and Local Government. However, it is counted as part of the ACT for the purpose of the ACT's representation in the Senate; and it forms part of the Division of Fraser for House of Representatives purposes. The Department of Regional Australia has proposed returning Jervis Bay Territory to New South Wales.
At the 2011 census, an estimated 377 people lived in the territory, the majority working and living at the Royal Australian Navy base, . Over 90% of the territory is now legally recognised as Aboriginal land. There is an Aboriginal community at Wreck Bay in the Booderee National Park.
For most purposes, the territory is governed under the laws of the Australian Capital Territory (ACT), by the Jervis Bay Administration, which handles matters normally concerned with local or state government, and provides primary school teachers and Australian Federal Police staffing. Residents have access to the courts of the ACT, but are not separately represented in the ACT Legislative Assembly. The Jervis Bay Territory is in the Commonwealth Electoral Division of Fraser (ACT). Jervis Bay Territory residents are not represented at the local or State government level but have access to the decision-making process through community organisations.
The Defence Force Discipline Act (DFDA) Section 61 makes all Australian Defence Force members and "Defence Civilians" subject to the criminal laws of the Jervis Bay Territory regardless of where the offence occurred.   This is a legal device which makes Defence personnel subject to the Crimes Act 1914 (Cth), the Criminal Code Act 1995 (Cth) and offences against the criminal law of the ACT, as military law, even if the offence is committed outside Australia.
Vincentia is the nearest town, roughly 3 km north of the border, population 2,750.

Geography

Having  on the Shoalhaven River to the north. The majority of Jervis Bay embayment is part of Jervis Bay Marine Park (NSW State) but the waters within JB Territory are part of Booderee National Park (Commonwealth). National Park was formerly known as Jervis Bay National Park (Commonwealth).
A wide variety of flora and fauna are native to the Booderee (aboriginal: bay of plenty) National Park with approximately 206 species of birds, 27 species of mammals, 15 species of amphibians, 23 species of reptiles and 180 species of fish native to the area. The park itself encompasses approximately 90% of the territory of Jervis Bay and covers the overlap between Australia's northern and southern climatic zones.
Ancient sand dunes overlay the sedimentary bedrock formations formed from upheaval of the surrounding marine environment 280–225 million years ago.  The park was designated sacred Aboriginal land in 1995. A significant portion of the bay's northern coast and headland forming Beecroft Peninsula and ending at Point Perpendicular and surrounding area is a gun bombardment range for the Royal Australian Navy (RAN).
There are three small lakes within the territory: Lake Windermere, the largest, with an area of .
Bowen Island, at the entrance to the bay  in area. It has rookeries for the Little Penguin Eudyptula minor at the northern extent of its range.

Towns and villages in the Territory

There are three small towns or villages in the Jervis Bay Territory. They are all covered by postcode 2540. Listed from north to south, they are:
There are four private leasehold holiday properties in Jervis Bay Territory, within but not part of Booderee National Park.environment.au/parks/publications/booderee/pubs/walks.Bay of Plenty Lodges|Jervis Bay, Sussex Inlet, & Hyams Beach holiday accommodation

HMAS Creswell

Within the Booderee National Park is 

Nuclear reactor site

Of historical interest is the site of the proposed Jervis Bay Nuclear Power Plant. The site is near Murray's Beach, at the southeast corner of the Bay. The project was cancelled in 1971 after site works (excavation and levelling) were done and a road was constructed to the territory border. The levelled site is now the car park for Murrays Beach and its adjacent boat ramp.






