[[Jorge Chávez International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in Lima, Buildings and structures in Callao Region, Airports in Peru

Jorge Chávez International Airport  Now it serves as a hub for many aviation companies.
The airport was named after Peruvian aviator Jorge Chávez.

Airport development programme

History
The first airport of Lima was the Limatambo Airport, located in San Isidro, which ceased operations in 1960 due to lack of space and capacity to handle the increasing flights. In that same year, the Lima-Callao International Airport began to operate in Callao. In June 1965, the airport was renamed as "Aeropuerto Internacional Jorge Chávez" after Peruvian aviator Jorge Chávez Dartnell and in December 1965, the current terminal building was inaugurated.5 In 2001, in order to improve and expand its infrastructure, the airport was concessioned by the Peruvian government to Lima Airport Partners (LAP), now composed of Fraport and two other minor partners, retaining the air traffic control managed by the Peruvian Corporation of Airports and Commercial Aviation (CORPAC).6 The key legal advisors in the transaction were Jaime Malagón, Jerome Jakubik, Paul Slocomb, and Víctor M. Marroquín of Baker & McKenzie, the international law firm retained by the Peruvian Government to advise on all privatization processes. 

Expansion

In February 2005, the first phase of a new renovation and expansion project was completed, including the Peru Plaza Shopping Center and the new concourse. In June 2007 a four-star hotel opened in front of the terminal, 'Ramada Costa del Sol'. In January 2009, the second phase of the terminal expansion was inaugurated. Currently the terminal has 28 gates, 19 of them with boarding bridges. In August 2009, Jorge Chávez International Airport announced that they should receive a new ILS CAT III in 2010 to help with fog landings in Lima. Tourism and commercial passenger traffic has increased in Peru dramatically, and it is predicted to double in 2011; this growth will be higher than anywhere else in Latin America.andina.pe/ingles/Noticia.

Awards

=Best airport in South America=

The expansion and renovation of the airport has had a significant positive impact on the quality of services provided to passengers. In April 2010 it was presented the "Best Airport in South America 2010" award,Lima Airport: Best Airport in South America 2010Jorge Chávez International Airport is the best in South America (In Spanish) by United Kingdom-based commercial aviation consultancy Skytrax.8 million airline passengers worldwide.World Travel Awards 2012
"Aeropuerto Jorge Chávez fue elegido el mejor de Sudamérica por cuarta vez"

=Best airport lounge in the world=

In addition to the award presented by Skytrax, Priority Pass,Priority Pass official website the world's largest independent airport access program, announced in March 2010 that Sumaq VIP LoungeSumaq VIP Lounge website had been voted by its members "Lounge of the Year 2010"Priority Pass - Sumaq VIP Lounge in Lima Airport is Lounge of the Year 2010 for second consecutive year among 600 VIP lounges in the world.Travelers vote VIP lounge at Jorge Chávez International Airport best in the worldVideo about Sumaq VIP Lounge - Jorge Chavez International Airport

Commercial infrastructure

Hotel - Along with the airport expansion Lima Airport Partners added a four star hotel, 'Ramada Costa del Sol', right in front of the control tower and the arrivals exit. The Hotel is built with noise canceling panels as well as a Restaurant, a pool, business center, spa, beauty salon, gymnasium and a bar.
"Peru Plaza" Shopping Center - Located near the passenger terminal in the Grand Concourse, the expansion included a new shopping center with stores, restaurants and souvenir shops.
Food Court - Located on the second floor, the food court has outlets of: McDonald's, Papa John's, Starbucks and others, there is also a Dunkin' Donuts next to the main entrance of the terminal.

Passenger services

VIP lounges -
Jorge Chavez Airport has various VIP Salons in the departures terminal, such as "VIP Peru", a luxury waiting room with bars, tables, and other amenities. For passengers in First class, there is an  exclusive salon near the gates,"VIP Club". And renovated
the "Sumaq VIP Lounge", a lounge exclusively for first and business class passengers nominated as the best VIP lounge of the year by the survey of the "Priority Pass" VIP Network.com.pe
Transportation -
Transportation between the airport and city is provided by taxis, tour buses and vans. For security reasons, visitors are recommended to take only those taxis offered by registered companies at the airport arrivals area.

Statistics

Airlines and destinations

Cargo airlines

Cargo operations

Jorge Chávez International Airport is home to Lima Cargo City, a hub for cargo airlines. The 35 million dollar project was completed and began operations on 12 May 2009. This cargo terminal is among the largerst cargo centers in Latin America.

Accidents and incidents








