[[Germantown, Maryland]]

CATEGORIES: Census-designated places in Maryland, Germantown, Maryland, Planned cities in the United States, Census-designated places in Montgomery County, Maryland

Germantown is an urbanized census-designated place in Montgomery County, Maryland. With a population of 86,395 as of the 2010 United States Census, Germantown is the third most populous place in Maryland, after the city of Baltimore, and the census-designated place of Columbia, Maryland. If Germantown were to incorporate as a city, it would become the second largest incorporated city in Maryland, after Baltimore. outside of the U.S. capital of Washington, D.C., and is an important part of the Washington, D.C. metropolitan area.
The original plan for Germantown divided the area into a downtown and six town villages: The Churchill Town Sector at the corner of Maryland Route 118 and Middlebrook Road most closely resembles the downtown, or center, of Germantown, due to the location of the Upcounty Regional Services Center, the Germantown Public Library, the Black Rock Arts Center, the Regal Germantown Stadium 14, and a pedestrian shopping that features an array of restaurants. Three exits to Interstate 270 are less than one mile away, the Maryland Area Regional Commuter train is within walking distance, and the Germantown Transit Center that provides Ride On shuttle service to the Shady Grove station of the Washington Metro's Red Line.
Germantown has the assigned ZIP codes of 20874 and 20876 for delivery and 20875 for post office boxes. It is the most populous Germantown in Maryland and is the only "Germantown, Maryland" recognized by the United States Postal Service, although there are others: one in Anne Arundel County, one in Baltimore County, and one in Worcester County.

Etymology

In the 1830s and 1840s, the central business area was focused around the intersection of Liberty Mill Road and Clopper Road. Several German immigrants set up shop at the intersection and the town became known as "German Town", even though most residents of the town were of English or Scottish descent.

History

19th century

=Early education=

Germantown did not have a public school until after the end of the American Civil War. During that time, education was handled at homes. In 1868, a one-room schoolhouse was built on Maryland Route 118, near Black Rock Road, which hosted children from both Germantown and neighboring Darnestown. In 1883, a larger one-room schoolhouse was built closer to Clopper Road. Another, newer school was constructed in 1910, on what is now the site of Germantown Elementary School. This school had four rooms, with two downstairs and two upstairs, with each room housing two grade levels. After the eighth grade, the students would head via train to nearby Rockville, for further education.

=American Civil War=

Although it avoided much of the physical destruction that ravaged other cities in the region, the American Civil War was still a cause of resentment and division among residents of Germantown. Many Germantown residents, particularly those of German ancestry, were against slavery and had sons fighting for the Union Army. In contrast, other residents of Germantown, particularly those of English ancestry, owned slaves, and even those who weren't slave-owners had sons fighting for the Confederate Army. As a result, many people in Germantown, who were once on friendly terms with each other, made an effort not to interact with each other, such as switching churches, or frequenting a store or mill miles away from the ones they'd normally do business with.
Late in the summer and fall of 1861, there were more than twenty thousand Union Army soldiers camped to the west of Germantown, in neighboring Darnestown and Poolesville. Occasionally, these soldiers would come to Germantown and frequent the stores there. In September 1862, and in June of 1863, several regiments of Union Army soldiers marched north on Maryland Route 355, on their way to the Battle of Antietam, and the Battle of Gettysburg, respectively. In July 1864, General Jubal Early led his army of Confederate soldiers down Maryland Route 355 to attack the Union capital of Washington, D.C. Throughout the course of the war, Confederate raiders would often come through the Germantown area. Local farmers in the Germantown area lost horses and other livestock to both Union and Confederate armies.

==Assassination of Abraham Lincoln==

On April 20, 1865, George Atzerodt, a co-conspirator in the Abraham Lincoln assassination, was captured in Germantown. He was assigned by John Wilkes Booth to assassinate Vice President Andrew Johnson, but lost his nerve and fled Washington, D.C., on the night of the Lincoln assassination. He was captured at his cousin Hartman Richter's farm in Germantown. Atzerodt was hanged on July 7, 1865 along with Mary Surratt, Lewis Powell, and David Herold in Washington, D.C.

1910s

=The Liberty Mill=

The wooden structure of the Bowman Brothers Mill fell victim to a fire in 1914, but four years later, the owners were back in business again, selling the mill to the Liberty Milling Company, a brand new corporation. Augustus Selby was the first owner and manager of the new Liberty Mill, which opened in 1918. Electricity was brought into Liberty Mill and also served the homes and businesses nearby, making Germantown the first area in the northern portion of Montgomery County to receive electricity.

1930s

In 1935, professional baseball player Walter Perry Johnson, who played as a pitcher for the Washington Senators (now the Minnesota Twins), purchased a farm on what is now the site of Seneca Valley High School. Used as a dairy farm, Johnson lived there with his five children and his mother, as his wife died, until his death in 1946.

1940s

"Feed the Liberty Way" was used as a slogan for Liberty Mill which, with eight silos, became the second largest mill in all of Maryland, supplying flour to the United States Army during World War II. Cornmeal and animal feed were also manufactured at Liberty Mill, and a store at the mill sold specialty mixes, such as pancake and muffin mix.

1950s

=U.S. Atomic Energy Commission=

In January 1958, the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission was relocated from its location in downtown Washington, D.C. to Germantown, which was considered far enough from the city to withstand a Soviet nuclear attack. The facility now operates as an administration complex for the U.S. Department of Energy and headquarters for its Office of Biological and Environmental Research.

1960s

=Early development and Master Plan=

Marshall Davis owned a farm located where Interstate 270 and Germantown Road intersect today. After Interstate 270 divided his farm in two, Davis decided to sell the last of his land to the International Development Corporation for about $1,300 per acre in 1955. Fairchild-Hiller Corporation bought the land for about $4,000 per acre in 1964, and it built an industrial park on the land four years later. Harry Unglesee and his family sold their farm near Hoyles Mill Road for less than $1,000 per acre in 1959. Other farmers soon sold their land to developers and speculators as well.
The Germantown Master Plan was adopted in 1967. In 1974, the Montgomery County Council approved an amended plan written by the Montgomery County Planning Board. The amended plan included a downtown area and six separate villages, each comprising smaller neighborhoods with schools, shopping areas, and public facilities. The amended plan also included the construction of a third campus for Montgomery College near the downtown area.

1970s

During the 1970s, Wernher von Braun, a German rocket scientist during World War II, worked for the aerospace company Fairchild Industries, which had offices in Germantown, as its Vice President for Engineering and Development. Von Braun worked at Fairchild Industries from July 1, 1972 until his death.
Following the end of World War II, the Liberty Mill went into disrepair, and was finally destroyed by an arsonist in 1971.

=Montgomery College=

The Germantown Campus of Montgomery College opened on October 21, 1978. At the time, it consisted of two buildings, 24 employees, and 1,200 students. Enrollment had increased to five thousand students by 2003, with eighty employees across four buildings. A steel water tower modeled after the Earth can be seen from orbiting satellites in outer space. As of 2008, a forty-acre bio-technology laboratory was nearing completion.

1980s

=Economic growth=

Since the early 1980s, Germantown has experienced rapid economic and population growth, both in townhouses and single-family dwellings, and an urbanized town center has been built. Germantown was the fastest growing zip code in the Washington, D.C. Metropolitan Area and Maryland in 1986.

2000s

In 2000, the Upcounty Regional Services Center (now the Sidney Kramer Upcounty Regional Services Center)
In March 2001, Germantown's only movie theater, the Sony 6, located at the Germantown Commons Shopping Center, closed down as part of a closure of 112 movie theaters across the United States by Loews Cineplex, leaving Germantown without a movie theater of its own. As a result, local residents frequented a movie theater in Kentlands or  one at The Rio in Gaithersburg. Over a year later, on May 3, 2002, the Hoyts Cinema 14, now the Regal Germantown Stadium 14, opened, and Germantown now had its own movie theater once again. A DSW footwear retail store now sits on the site of the former Sony 6 theater.
In June 2002, it was announced that a Staples and Best Buy store would open at Germantown's Milestone Shopping Center later that fall. The Best Buy store replaced a Homeplace store that had closed down in 2001 following that company's disbandment.
In 2007, at a cost of 19 million dollars, the Germantown Public Library moved from the Upcounty Regional Services Center to its current location, at a separate 44,193 square foot facility at the nearby Germantown Town Center.

2010s

In 2000, Germantown had a population of 55,419, according to the 2000 United States Census. Ten years later, at the time of the 2010 United States Census, Germantown had experienced a 55.9% growth in population, growing from 55,419 to 86,395.
On August 14, 2011, a 7-Eleven convenience store in downtown Germantown fell victim to a flash mob robbery, in which nearly forty people walked into the store, grabbed merchandise, and subsequently fled with the stolen goods, all without paying. The incident garnered widespread attention in the United States and internationally.
On September 29, 2013, the Upcounty Regional Services Center in Germantown was renamed as the Sidney Kramer Upcounty Regional Services Center, after Sidney Kramer, the Montgomery County executive from 1986 to 1990.
On January 17, 2014, officers from the Montgomery County Police Department (MCPD) arrived at a Germantown address and found a one-year-old boy and a two-year-old girl stabbed to death, as well as a five-year-old child and eight-year-old child injured. The mother of the children, as well as another woman, were arrested and charged with murder in their deaths. According to the MCPD, the women killed the children during an attempted exorcism.

Government

The U.S. Department of Energy has its headquarters for the Office of Biological and Environmental Research in Germantown. The U.S. Atomic Energy Commission was moved from its location in downtown Washington, D.C. to the present-day U.S. Department of Energy building in Germantown, due to fears of a Soviet nuclear attack on the U.S. capital. At the time, Germantown was believed to be far enough from Washington, D.C. to avoid the worst effects of a nuclear strike on the city. The facility now operates as an administration complex for the U.S. Department of Energy.

Economy

Library Systems & Services, Qiagen North America, Earth Network Systems Inc., Digital Receiver Technology Inc.,DRT, Inc and Hughes Network Systems have their headquarters in Germantown."Contact Us." Library Systems & Services. "US Corporate Headquarters Library Systems & Services, LLC 12850 Middlebrook Road Suite 400 Germantown, MD 20874-5244."
Wabtec, General Electric Aviation, and Proxy Aviation SystemsProxy Aviation Systems all have offices in Germantown.

Geography

Germantown is located at .
According to the United States Census Bureau, the community has a total area of 10.9 sq mi (28.0 km²), of which, all but  (0.46%) of which is land.

Climate

Demographics

As of the census of 2010, there were 86,395 people, and 30,531 households residing in the area. The population density was 8,019 people per square mile (3,096.6/km²).  The racial makeup of the area was 36.3% White, 21.8% African American, 0.2% Native American, 19.7% Asian, 0.03% Pacific Islander, 0.3% from other races, and 3.3% from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 18.4% of the population.
There were 20,893 households out of which 41.2% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 49.8% were married couples living together, 13.7% had a female householder with no husband present, and 32.4% were non-families. 23.5% of all households were made up of individuals and 1.8% had someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older.  The average household size was 2.80 and the average family size was 3.19.
In the area, the population was spread out with 28.9% under the age of 18, 7.7% from 18 to 24, 43.0% from 25 to 44, 17.3% from 45 to 64, and 3.1% who were 65 years of age or older.  The median age was 31 years. For every 100 females there were 94.9 males.  For every 100 females age 18 and over, there were 90.6 males.
The median income for a household in Germantown was $76,061 as of a 2010 estimate by the website, City-Data. 6.5% of the population and 3.5% of families were below the poverty line. Out of the total people living in poverty, 5.9% are under the age of 18 and 9.9% are 65 or older.

Education

Public schools in Germantown are part of the Montgomery County Public Schools system.
Montgomery College, the largest higher education institution in Montgomery County, has a campus in Germantown.

Transportation

Germantown is bisected by Interstate 270 and has a station on the MARC train commuter service's Brunswick Line, which operates over CSX's Metropolitan Subdivision. The station building itself, at the corner of Liberty Mill Road and Mateny Hill Road, is a copy of the original 1891 structure designed by E. Francis Baldwin for the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad.  The current building was rebuilt after it was burned down by arson in 1978.
The Montgomery County public transit bus system, Ride On, serves Germantown with approximately 20 bus routes and operates a major transit hub in Germantown, known as the Germantown Transit Center. Also, a light rail system (the Corridor Cities Transitway) is under evaluation which would, when completed, connect the terminal of the Washington Metro Red Line at Shady Grove Station near Gaithersburg to Germantown and continue on northward to Clarksburg.

Culture

Music

The BlackRock Center for the Arts is located in the downtown Germantown, at the Germantown Town Center. The BlackRock Center for the Arts also sponsors the Germantown Oktoberfest, an annual festival held every year in the fall, which includes various genres of music, including traditional German folk, rock and pop.

Sports

The Maryland SoccerPlex sports complex is located in Germantown. The arena now hosts the Washington Spirit of the National Women's Soccer League as well as amateur, collegiate, and regional soccer tournaments.

In popular culture

Notable people






