[[Wageningen]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Gelderland, Wageningen

Wageningen () is a municipality and a historic town in the central Netherlands, in the province of Gelderland. It is famous for Wageningen University, which specializes in life sciences. The city has 37,414 inhabitants (as of 1 January 2010), of which many thousands are students from over 150 countries.

Geography

Wageningen is situated on the north bank of the Nederrijn (the Dutch portion of the Lower Rhine) and at the border between the Gelderse valley and the Veluwe,
Topographic map of the municipality of Wageningen, July 2013 (click to enlarge)

History

The oldest known settlements in the Wageningen area were located north of today's town center.  They were mentioned as early as 828. During the early Middle Ages a small church was built on the hill east of the town. Several wood farms have been found near the top of the hill. In the twelfth century people settled at what is currently the Bergstraat. Close to Hotel de Wereld a stone floor has been found dating back to this period. After the construction of a dike to protect the city from the acidic water from the moors that then occupied the Gelderse Vallei (the current Hoogstraat), the oldest part of the present city was built to the south. The parts of the city north of the Hoogstraat were built later. Wageningen received city rights in 1263. The city was protected by a city wall and a moat, and in 1526 a castle was built. The castle was dismantled during the 18th century, but the foundations of three of the towers and part of the wall remain visible today.
The people, city, and institutions of Wageningen suffered greatly during World War II. Yet, the town is famous for its role at the end of the war. The central part of Wageningen was destroyed by artillery fire soon after the German invasion of the country in May 1940. Wageningen was the site of the surrender of German General Johannes Blaskowitz to Canadian General Charles Foulkes on May 5, 1945, officially ending the war in the Netherlands. The generals negotiated the terms of surrender in the Hotel de Wereld, near the center of the city. Now, each year on the 5th of May, Liberation Day in the Netherlands, Wageningen hosts a large festival to celebrate the liberation. On this occasion, veteran soldiers parade through the city and are honored for their service, and around 120,000 people

Education & research

In 1918 the town acquired its first institution of higher education, the Landbouwhogeschool Nederland (Netherlands Agricultural College), which was based on the previous agricultural college founded in 1876, and which later became Wageningen University.  This initiated the development from a small historical town into a modern technological community, a process which still continues today.
Wageningen University and Research Centre (WUR), including associated institutes, now employs about 7400 people.
Today, Wageningen is also the central city in Food Valley, the Dutch food & nutrition cluster concentrated around WUR and comprising many institutes, companies and state-of-the-art facilities in the food & nutrition field. Food Valley is regarded as the largest food & nutrition Research & Development cluster in the world. One such firm, Keygene, a biotechnology company in Wageningen developed AFLP in the early 1990s and collaborated with Beijing Genomics Institute to sequence the entire genome of Brassica napus.

Sports teams

The city had its own professional football (soccer) club, FC Wageningen, which won the KNVB-beker twice., The club went bankrupt in 1992 and played its last match in May 1992 against NAC Breda.

Traffic & transport

Wageningen is situated on the N225 provincial road, between Driebergen and Arnhem. The N781 provincial road connects Wageningen to the A12 national highway, to the north of the city. A small ferry (for cars, bikes, and pedestrians) crosses the Nederrijn to the south of the city, at Lexkesveer; from there, drivers can connect to the A15 national highway, via the N836 provincial road.
Several firms provide public bus service in and to Wageningen. From the Wageningen central bus terminal, lines connect to Rhenen, Tiel, Veenendaal, Utrecht, Oosterbeek, and Arnhem, and the Ede-Wageningen railway station. Further connections via bus, including to the Hoge Veluwe National Park and the Kröller-Müller Museum, also may be made at the Ede-Wageningen station. Bus service includes the following:
For detailed planning of travel via public transit to Wageningen, see the NS.

Politics

Municipal council

Composition of the Wageningen municipal council since 1994:

Mayor

Wageningen's mayor, Geert van Rumund (PvdA), has served since 1 November 2013.College van B&W van Wageningen

Notable people

Notable people from Wageningen include:

Places of interest

(Including nearby)

Twin towns

Gallery

Image:Grote Kerk Wageningen.jpg|Main church of Wageningen
Image:Hotel de wereld wageningen.JPG|Hotel de wereld
Image:Stadsmuur Wageningen1.jpg|Old city ruins of the castle and city walls
Image:Schip van Blaauw.jpg|Schip van Blauw
Image:'t Venster 1.jpg|'t Venster
Image:Joodse Begraafplaats Wageningen.jpg|Jewish graveyard
Image:Campagne autour de Wageningen.jpg|Panorama of the North side Wageningen
Image:Le Rhin à Wageningen.jpg|Panorama of the Rhine river in Wageningen





Note: some of this article is sourced from the corresponding article in the Dutch Wikipedia.




