[[Fitzgerald River National Park]]

CATEGORIES: National parks of Western Australia, Biosphere reserves of Australia, Great Southern (Western Australia), Protected areas established in 1973, South coast of Western Australia, Important Bird Areas of Western Australia

Fitzgerald River National Park is a national park in Western Australia (Australia),  southeast of Perth, in the Shire of Ravensthorpe and the Shire of Jerramungup.
The park includes the Barren Mountains and Eyre Range and the Fitzgerald River as well as incorporating the Fitzgerald Biosphere. There are 62 plant species which are unique to the  park and a further 48 are rarely found elsewhere.
Recording almost 40,000 visitors in 2008, the park received $20 million in funding from the federal government's economic stimulus plan with the state government contributing an additional $20 million. The investment is to be used to redevelop and seal 
Point Ann is one of the two places (the other is Head of the Bight) along Australia's coast where Southern Right Whales come to calve during their winter migration.
Within the National Park is the Quaalup Homestead Wilderness Retreat (now run as a hotel) that was built in 1858 by the Wellstead Family. In 1890, the Hassell family took over the pastoral lease and the homestead.
The park can be accessed from the western side via Bremer Bay, or from the eastern side via Hopetoun. The central area of the park is only accessible with a four wheel drive vehicle or on foot.
Many of the peaks in the park are off limits to climbers to prevent the spread of dieback or root rot from Phytophthora cinnamomi.

Flora and fauna

The park forms the basis of the internationally recognised Biosphere Reserve recognised by the UNESCO Man and Biosphere Program. The site contains over 1800 species of plant with 250 of these being rare and 62 being known to be found only within the confines of the park.
Some species of interest include the royal hakea, qualup bell, scarlet banksia, showy banksia, bell-fruit mallee, pea flowers, feather flowers, many species of eucalypts and bottlebrushes
Three populations of the Crowned Mallee all exist within the park and have a total number of 140 trees.
An endangered species, Boronia clavata, has five populations totalling only 100 individuals all of which are located in the area.
The park is also home to 22 species of mammal, 200 bird species, 41 species of reptile and 12 species of frog. It is recognised as an Important Bird Area;
Some of the mammals found are the very rare Dibbler and the Heath Rat, both of which were thought to be extinct at one time or another. The Tammar Wallaby and Woylie, both of which are threatened species, are known to inhabit the mallee and heath areas of the park.
Migratory birds find refuge in the wetland and coastal regions and species that temporarily inhabit the area include the White-bellied Sea Eagle, Fork-tailed Swift and the Caspian Tern.

Image:Fitzgerald River National Park DSC04433.JPG|Barren Mountain Range
Image:Fitzgerald River National Park DSC04436.
Image:Fitzgerald River National Park Homstead DSC04438.JPG|Quaalup Homestead
Image:Fitzgerald River National Park Royal hakea DSC04449.JPG|Royal Hakea
File:Fitzgerald River National Park.jpg|Fitzgerald River National Park from Point Ann








