[[Mr. Moto]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional detectives, Fictional secret agents and spies, 1950s American radio programs

Mr. Moto is a fictional Japanese secret agent created by the American author John P. Marquand. He appeared in six novels by Marquand published between 1935 and 1957. Marquand initially created the character for the Saturday Evening Post, which was seeking stories with an Asian hero after the death of Charlie Chan's creator Earl Derr Biggers.
In various other media, Mr. Moto has been portrayed as an international law enforcement agent. These include eight motion pictures starring Peter Lorre between 1937 and 1939, 23 radio shows starring James Monks broadcast in 1951,Digitaldeliftp. The graphic novel Welcome Back, Mr. Moto by Rafael Nieves and Tim Hamilton published by Moonstone Books in 2008 (originally published in 2003 as a 3-issue comic book miniseries) portrays Mr. Moto as an American of Japanese descent helping Japanese-American citizens after World War II. Moto graphic novel at Moonstone Books

Character in the novels

In Marquand's novels, Moto calls himself I. A. Moto. Mr. Moto, though capable of ruthlessness and deadly violence, appears to be a harmless eccentric. The main characters in these novels are Westerners who encounter Mr. Moto in the course of their own adventures in exotic lands and gradually come to realize what a formidable character he is.
In the first five novels, set in the era of expansionist Imperial Japan, Mr. Moto is an agent of the empire. In the final novel, set in the 1950s inside Japan, he is a senior intelligence official in the pro-Western Japanese government. 

Physical description

He is physically described in Think Fast, Mr. Moto:
 
 Mr. Moto was a small man, delicate, almost fragile. … He was dressed formally in a morning coat and striped trousers.  His black hair was carefully brushed in the Prussian style.  He was smiling, showing a row of shiny gold-filled teeth, and as he smiled he drew in his breath with a polite, soft sibilant sound.

This basic description carries through most of the novels, with a slightly different description in Right You Are, Mr. Moto, set 20 years later than the other novels.  In this novel he is described as  "middle aged," and his hair as being "grayish and close-clipped." In two novels, Marquand describes Mr. Moto's build as "chunky".
He is often described as wearing formal evening clothes that are impeccably tailored.  On occasion his sartorial style is somewhat misguided such as in Mr. Moto Is So Sorry when he appears in black-and-white checked sports clothes with green and red golf stockings. When his outfits are commented upon, Mr. Moto makes childlike excuses. In Stopover: Tokyo, he is said to have the imposing dignity of his samurai forebears when dressed in traditional Japanese clothing.

Speech

In the prewar novels, Moto speaks a faintly comic English, with elaborate 'Oriental'-style politeness, misuse of 'the' and 'a'.

Personal life

Mr. Moto rarely discourses on his personal life but in Think Fast, Mr. Moto he talks about his many talents.
 
 Yes, I can do many, many things.  I can mix drinks and wait on table, and I am a very good valet.  I can navigate and manage small boats.  I have studied at two foreign universities.  I also know carpentry and surveying and five Chinese dialects.  So very many things come in useful.

In Mr. Moto Is So Sorry he states that one of the foreign universities was in America where he studied Anthropology.  It is noted in this novel that he has enough knowledge of America to distinguish regional accents.
The novels always involve a romance between the main characters (often a disenfranchised expatriate American) and a mysterious woman.  While Mr. Moto often despairs of the hero's attempts at saving the girl, he notes in Mr. Moto Is So Sorry that he himself is not immune to their charms.
 
 "So often," he said, "I have seen such gracious ladies disrupt political combinations."  He sighed and still stared at the ceiling seemingly lost in memory.  "Such a lovely girl in Washington – I was so much younger then.  She sold me the navy plans of a submarine.  The price was thirty thousand yen.  When the blueprints came, they were of a tugboat.  Such a lovely lady.  Such a lovely lady in Tokyo.  She took me to see the goldfish in her garden, and there were the assassins behind the little trees.  Not her fault, but theirs that I am still alive – they were such poor shots.  I do no understand lovely ladies, but I still trust them sometimes."

Politics

While he is a devoted servant of the Emperor, he is often at odds with the Japanese military.  He believes in the manifest destiny of the Japanese expansion into China, but unlike the military, wants to achieve this slowly and carefully.  Millicent Bell in her biography of John P. Marquand notes how this may have impacted the audience:
 
 There is political significance, too, in the calculated appeal to American readers of the ever resourceful Mr. Moto, the representative of Eastern subtlety combined with Western efficiency, who emerges as a gentleman of wit and charm.   Up to 1939 it must have seemed possible to some that Japan would be moderate and reasonable in its expansion in the Far East – that the Mr. Motos would defeat the Japanese military fanatics.  Pearl Harbor, of course, put an end to American neutralism as well as to hopes of Japanese moderation – but not before Marquand's Moto series had become one of the most popular fictions ever to be run in an American magazine.  Boston: Little, Brown and Company. 1979. Pg.221.

Novels

By THEODORE STRAUSS. New York Times (1923-Current file) York, N.Y 14 Dec 1941: X7. [/ref] by the author. This novel, set in the Caribbean, had already been written prior to Pearl Harbour and was published afterwards.[ref]Notes on Books and Authors
New York Times (1923-Current file) York, N.Y 09 Jan 1942: 19. [/ref]

Anthologies/"omnibus"

Character in the films

Between 1937 and 1939 eight motion pictures were produced by 20th Century Fox starring Peter Lorre as Mr. Kentaro Moto.
Unlike the novels, Moto is the central character, a detective with Interpol, wears glasses (and has no gold teeth), and is a devout Buddhist (and friendly with the Chinese monarchy).  He is impeccably dressed in Western suits.  The stories are action-oriented due to Moto's skill with judo (only hinted at in the novels) and due to his tendency to wear disguises.
In early 1938 there was some press talk that Moto would be turned into a Korean due to controversy over Japanese foreign policy but this did not happen.[ref]In Hollywood
With JIMMY FIDLER. The Washington Post (1923-1954) D.C 08 Jan 1938: X14. [/ref] By April there was talk the series would soon wind up.[ref]Warren William to Star for Universal: Payne Replaces Powell More Cinema Series Four Pictures to Start Film World Pageant
Schallert, Edwin. Los Angeles Times (1923-Current File) Angeles, Calif 05 Apr 1938: 10.[/ref]

Abilities

In the film Mr. Moto's Last Warning a list is shown which describes him as:
Throughout the films other abilities have been noted:

Occupation

The motion picture Mr. Moto's occupation is described as an agent for Interpol.
In the first film, Think Fast, Mr. Moto, he reveals that he is the managing director of the Dai Nippon Trading Company and had decided to investigate the smuggling activities that were harming his business.  He claims to be a detective "only as a hobby."Quote from Think Fast, Mr. Moto.  In the second film, Thank You, Mr. Moto, the definition of his occupation/hobby begins to get murky. He tells a woman that he is an importer whose hobby is detective work, but only after showing her his identification which indicates he is a Confidential Agent for the International Association of Importers. However, in a climactic chase sequence he flashes a badge at a guard and says that he is from the International Police (understood as Interpol).
In subsequent films Mr. Moto works for private organizations such as the Diamond Syndicate (Danger Island) as well as for world governments (Mr. Moto's Last Warning and Mr. Moto Takes a Chance)-- but only when it is in Japan's interests.
As a member of the International Police, he garners respect from local police around the world.  In London, Shanghai, and San Francisco he is given full cooperation for his investigations.  In Mr. Moto's Last Warning he works side-by-side with British Secret Service agents and in Mr. Moto Takes a Chance he is spying for an unknown government agency. He is  known for his close relationship to the Chinese Royal Family.

Personal life

Mr. Moto's personal life is rarely touched upon.  In Think Fast, Mr. Moto he tells Bob Hitchings that he went to Stanford University, graduating in 1921 as an honorary member.  There, he set a pole vaulting record and was a member of the fraternity Alpha Omega.
He travels a great deal and manages to have his cat, Chunkina, along for the journey.  Besides his cat, the women in his life include Lela Liu (played by Lotus Long in the film Think Fast, Mr. Moto), a hotel telephone operator whom he asks out on a date, and who proves to be an agent who helps him in his investigation.  In Mysterious Mr. Moto, an agent, Lotus Liu (also played by Lotus Long credited as Karen Sorrell), pretends to fall for his charms so they can be alone to compare notes in their investigation.  Like his literary counterpart, Kentaro Moto believes that a "Beautiful girl is only confusing to a man", but has been known to use a woman's emotions to aid his cause.  In Thank You, Mr. Moto, he tells the disillusioned Madame Tchernov, "I am so grateful for your suspicious nature.  It is not the first time a woman's jealousy has been fatal to the man she loved."Quote from Thank You, Mr. Moto
Mr. Moto is charming and polite (even to rude or obnoxious people).  He is respectful of other cultures, but sometimes makes wry comments.  For instance, in Think Fast, Mr. Moto, he derails the drunken American's party tricks with a little judo.  After putting the tipsy Bob Hitchings to bed, he sadly shakes his head and says, "Strange people these Americans."
Mr. Moto's religion is never stated; but in Thank You, Mr. Moto, when his friend Prince Chung (played by Phillip Ahn) dies, it becomes clear Mr. Moto is a devout Buddhist, as he chants expertly before the statue of the Buddha while holding the prince in his arms.
The family crest or mon on Mr. Moto's yukata, as seen in the films Thank You, Mr. Moto and Mr. Moto Takes a Vacation, is three bars in a circle.  This is similar to the Maruno uchini mitsuhikiryō (丸の内に三引両),Image of Sakuma family crest the mon of the Sakuma clan who served under Oda Nobunaga.

Other films

A film version of Stopover Tokyo, made in 1957, stars Robert Wagner as an American spy.  This film eliminated Moto's character altogether. It disregards the plot of Marquand's novel, and was not a commercial or critical success.
In 1965 Mr. Moto's character was revived in a low-budget Robert Lippert production filmed in England starring Henry Silva. In Mr. Moto Returns, a.k.a. The Return of Mr. Moto, Mr. I.A. Moto is a member of Interpol. The very tall Silva conveyed an almost James Bond-like playboy character; in the fight scenes it is clearly obvious that he is not proficient in martial arts. He speaks in a lazy 'Beatnik' manner. Nowhere in the film is it mentioned that Moto is Japanese. He is referred to as an "Oriental" and, oddly, in the trailer, Moto is referred to as a "swinging Chinese cat." It is only when disguised as a Japanese oil representative, Mr. Takura, that a stereotypical portrayal of a Japanese businessman is given.

Mr. Moto filmography

Character in the radio program

From May to October 1951, the NBC Broadcasting network produced and aired 23 half-hour episodes starring James Monk as Mr. I.A. Moto, International Secret Agent.  Mr. Moto is an American of Japanese descent born in San Francisco but retaining his international connections.Mr. Moto radio show at Internet Archive
The show focused on Mr. Moto's fight against Communism although occasionally he solved more mundane mysteries such as murder and blackmail.

Radio program episode list

Parodies and satires

Peter Lorre brought the character of Mr. Moto to many comedy radio programs.Stephen Youngkin: The Lost One
Porky's Movie Mystery (1939) Features Porky Pig as the detective "Mr. Motto."Big Cartoon Database entry for Porky's Movie Mystery





Further reading

 Has chapter, "Ordering the World: The Uncompromising Logic of Charlie Chan and Mr. Moto"




