[[Batman River]]

CATEGORIES: Tigris River, Rivers of Turkey, Geography of Batman Province

The Batman River is a major tributary of the Tigris, joining it near the source of Tigris called Dicle River in southeast Turkey. It originates in the Anti-Taurus Mountains (at the Sason and Genç mountains) and flows approximately from north to south, passing near the city of Batman and forming a natural border between the Batman Province and Diyarbakır Province. The historic Malabadi Bridge (built in 1146–1147) crosses the river near the town of Silvan. Coğrafya, kultur.tr, 21 February 2007 (in Turkish) The region along the Batman River is known for its oil fields. The Batman Dam (), together with the associated reservoir and hydroelectric power plant.Batman DamBatman Dam, General Directorate of State Hydraulic Works
The river is widest at about 100 m right after exiting the dam, but then narrows to about 50 metres and forms numerous splits along its way to the Tigris. Its riverbed is irregular in many places that promotes flooding. A tributary of Batman, the Iluh River, originates in the Raman Mountain on the south of the Batman city and flows north-west through the city into the Batman River. Despite being a small river, absent on most maps, Iluh plays an important role for the province because its spring floods affect the provincial capital. The floods of Iluh and Batman rivers occur between March and May and sometimes in October–November. Major floods occurred in 1969 (April, 60 buildings damaged), 1972 (April and May, 210 buildings damaged), 1991 (November, 500 buildings flooded), 1995 (March, nearly 1000 buildings submerged and 450 damaged) and 2006 (October, 11 people died and 20 injured). PhD Thesis. Graduate School of Natural and Applied sciences, Middle East Technical University 2009, pp. 147–149, 157
In Antiquity, the Batman River was known as Kalat. This name meant "bride" to the Syriac people who populated the area; it was thus translated into Greek as Nymphios (Νυμφίος, Latinized Nymphius) and Nymphaios (Νυμφαῖος, Latinized Nymphaeus).Nymphius (Batman) 
In international literature, the name Batman came into use since the 19th century, or refer to the unit of weight used in the Ottoman Empire.




