[[Atlas Air]]

CATEGORIES: Airlines of the United States, IATA members, Airlines established in 1992, Air Transport Association members, Cargo Airline Association, Cargo airlines, Companies based in Westchester County, New York, Companies listed on NASDAQ

Atlas Air, Inc., is an American cargo and passenger charter airline based in Purchase, Harrison, New York."Investor Information." Atlas Air. "AAWW Investor Relations  2000 Westchester Avenue  Purchase, NY 10577-2543" It operates scheduled freight flights on a wet lease basis for some of the world's leading airlines, flying to 101 cities in 46 countries. The parent company is Atlas Air Worldwide Holdings, Inc. (AAWW).

History

The airline was founded in April 1992 by the late Pakistani American aerospace enthusiast Michael Chowdry, to specialise in the long-term contract outsourcing of its Boeing 747 aircraft. It started operations in 1993 with one Boeing 747 and contracted by China Airlines. In 1995 Atlas began trading publicly on the NASDAQ, and in 1997 appeared on the New York Stock Exchange. An initial public offering of 4 million shares was made in August 1998. In 2001 the airline introduced a new program of leasing and services, based on the Aircraft, Crew, Maintenance and Insurance(ACMI) model. Under this new program, Atlas Air cargo planes would be available to other airlines for operations such as charter flights. In July 2004 Atlas Air completed its restructuring plan and emerged from Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. Recently, AAWWH announced that DHL has bought long term rights to carry some of its cargo on Polar's aircraft.
In March 2010 Atlas Air was awarded a nine-year contract for the operation of the Boeing 747 Large Cargo Freighter (LCF) 'Dreamlifter' for transporting aircraft parts to Boeing from suppliers around the world. It commenced operation in September 2010.
Atlas Air Worldwide Holdings, Inc. (
The airline was named after Atlas, a Titan in Greek mythology, who carried the heavens on his shoulders. Their symbol on the plane's tail is a golden man carrying a golden world.

Passenger service

In October 2009, Atlas Air was selected to operate an outsourced premium passenger private charter service for the U.S.-Africa Energy Association (USAEA). The Agreement to operate the charter was reached with SonAir—Serviço Aéreo, S.A. (SonAir), acting as agent for the USAEA.
This new service replaced World Airways in May 2010, and Atlas operates the charter service with two newly customized Boeing 747-400 aircraft provided by SonAir's parent company.  The aircraft are laid out to serve 189 passengers and consists of a 3 class configuration.
The charter service, which has become known as the "Houston Express", includes three dedicated weekly non-stop flights between Houston and Luanda, Angola. While it is not open to the public, it provides USAEA members with a premium non-stop transportation link to support complex long-term projects in the West African energy sector.
The airline also charters service with a pair of 747-400's configured with 474 seats and a trio of 767-300ER's with 255 seats as of June 2012.

Safety issues

During early 2010, an Atlas Air aircraft was involved in a safety and maintenance incident.  In February, the cover of part of the flap assembly on a Boeing 747 detached from the aircraft, which was in the process of landing in Miami, Florida.  On 17 May, a similar incident occurred; in this case, part of the inboard flaps on the right wing of a Boeing 747 separated from the aircraft.  Due to alleged improper maintenance practices, the US Federal Aviation Administration on 5 May proposed a roughly $500,000 fine against the airline.  The airline is fighting the allegations.

Destinations

Both Atlas Air and Polar Air Cargo carry freight worldwide, including destinations throughout Europe, Asia, Africa, Australia and the Pacific, as well as Latin America.  Specific destinations vary due to changing customer's needs and seasonal air cargo trends.

Fleet

The combined Atlas Air/Polar Air Cargo fleet consists of the following aircraft with an average age of 12.8 years (as of March 2014):






