[[Visual thinking]]

CATEGORIES: Visual thinking, Developmental dyslexia

Visual thinking, also called visual/spatial learning, picture thinking, or right brained learning, is the phenomenon of thinking through visual processing. 
Visual thinking has been described as seeing words as a series of pictures.
"Real picture thinkers", those persons who use visual thinking almost to the exclusion of other kinds of thinking, make up a smaller percentage of the population. Research by child development theorist Linda Kreger Silverman suggests that less than 30% of the population strongly uses visual/spatial thinking, another 45% uses both visual/spatial thinking and thinking in the form of words, and 25% thinks exclusively in words. According to Kreger Silverman, of the 30% of the general population who use visual/spatial thinking, only a small percentage would use this style over and above all other forms of thinking, and can be said to be 'true' "picture thinkers".

Research and theoretical background

The Dutch nonprofit organization the "Maria J. Krabbe Stichting Beelddenken" conducts research on "beelddenken".euronet. Krabbe Stichting" has developed a test, named the "Ojemann wereldspel", to identify children who rely primarily on visual-spatial thinking. In this test, children are asked to build a village with toy houses and then replicate it a few days later.
In the Netherlands there is a strong and growing interest in the phenomenon of 'true' "picture thinking", or "beelddenken". Several websites and foundations are dedicated to "beelddenken".Startpagina "beelddenken"Stichting belddenken 

Non-verbal thought

Thinking in mental images is one of a number of other recognized forms of non-verbal thought, such as kinesthetic, musical and mathematical thinking.

Linguistics

A common assumption is that people think in language, and that language and thought influence each other. Linguistics studies how language is used and acquired.
The strong version of the Sapir–Whorf hypothesis in linguistics states that language determines thought, and that linguistic categories alone limit and determine cognitive categories. Although Whorf himself framed linguistic relativity in terms of "habits of mind" rather than determinism, the revolutionary nature of his hypothesis was met with much misinterpretation and criticism. In 1969, Brent Berlin and Paul Kay rejected the strong hypothesis using a color terminology study.
Steven Pinker notes that we are not born with language, so that it is not likely that we are engineered to think in words alone.Steven Pinker, The Language Instinct

Multiple intelligences

Gardner's multiple intelligences theory recognises various forms of intelligence, namely spatial, linguistic, logical-mathematical, bodily-kinesthetic, musical, interpersonal, intrapersonal, naturalistic.

Split-brain research

According to Roger Sperry the left hemisphere and the right hemisphere perform different tasks. The left and right hemisphere may be simultaneously conscious in different, even mutually conflicting, mental experiences that run in parallel. The right non-verbal hemisphere perceives, thinks, remembers, reasons, wills and emotes, all at a characteristically human level.
Research which builds on Sperry's split brain research is reinforced by anecdotal evidence, which supports the premise that different architectures lend themselves to one of the channels, at the expense of the others.

Spatial-temporal reasoning and spatial visualization ability

Spatial-temporal reasoning is the ability to visualize special patterns and mentally manipulate them over a time-ordered sequence of spatial transformations.
Spatial-temporal reasoning is prominent among visual thinkers as well as among kinesthetic learners (those who learn through movement, physical patterning and doing) and logical thinkers (mathematical thinkers who think in patterns and systems) who may not be strong visual thinkers at all.

Photographic memory

Eidetic memory (photographic memory) may co-occur in visual thinkers as much as in any type of thinking style as it is a memory function associated with having vision rather than a thinking style.
Psychologist E.R Jaensch states that eidetic memory apart of visual thinking has to do with eidetic images fading between the line of the after image and the memory image.

Learning styles

The acknowledgement and application of different cognitive and learning styles, including visual, kinesthetic, musical, mathematical and verbal thinking styles, are a common part of many current teacher training courses.
Empirical research shows that there is no evidence that identifying a student's "learning style" produces better outcomes. There is significant evidence that the widespread "meshing hypothesis", the assumption that a student will learn best if taught in a method deemed appropriate for the student's learning style is invalid.

Concurrency with Dyslexia and Autism

Dyslexia

Research suggests that dyslexia is a symptom of a predominant visual/spatial learning. Hinselwood expanded on 'word blindness' to describe the reversing of letters and similar phenomenon in 1900s. Orton suggested that individuals have difficulty associating the visual with the verbal form of words, in 1925. Visual-spatial symptoms (dyslexia, Developmental coordination disorder, Auditory Processing Disorder (APD) and the like) arise in non-visual and non-spatial environments and situations; hence, visual/spatial learning is aggravated by an education system based upon information presented in written text instead of presented via multimedia and hands-on experience.

Autism

Visual thinking has been argued by Temple Grandin to be an origin for delayed speech in people with autism.

Art and design education

Concepts related to visual thinking have played an important role in art and design education over the past several decades, but this has not always been the case. On the other hand, visual images, paintings in particular, caused the reliances on "illusionary images"  However, in the Western world, children begin primary school with abstract thought and shapes, but as we grow older, according to Rudolph Arnheim, "arts are reduced to a desirable supplement" The general world trend in the late twentieth century caused an emphases towards scientific, mathematical, and quantitative approach to education, and art education is often refuted because it is based on perception. It is qualitative and subjective which makes it difficult to measure and evaluate.
However, fundamentals in visual thinking lay the ground work for many design disciplines such as art and architecture. Two of the most influential aspects of visual composition in these disciplines are patterns and color. Patterns are not only prevalent in many different aspects of every day life, but it is also telling about our interpretation of the world. In addition, there are now studied approaches to how color should be used in design where "the functional aesthetics of colour can be reduced to a small number of guidelines and lists the main properties needed to make design decisions leading to visual clarity".
At the same time, techniques in art and design can open up pathways to stimulate the thought process. Sketches offer an unrestrained way to get thoughts down on paper through the "abstract representations of ideas and idea structures".  It is also an effective means of communication, especially for architects, for translating ideas from designer to client. Despite all the advantages of integrating art and visuals into education, it is a difficult skill to master. Those who can are well versed in visual analysis. It takes a lot of practice to have sketches evolve from "meaningless scribbles" to a complex "thinking tool".





Sources

Further reading



Netherlands

