[[Charlotte Gainsbourg]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, Actresses from London, Actresses from Paris, Atlantic Records artists, English child actresses, English child singers, English female singers, English film actresses, César Award winners, English emigrants to France, English people of French descent, French child actresses, French child singers, French film actresses, French female singers, English people of Russian-Jewish descent, French people of Russian-Jewish descent, École Active Bilingue Jeannine Manuel alumni, Living people, Serge Gainsbourg, 20th-century French actresses, 21st-century French actresses, 20th-century English actresses, 21st-century English actresses, English people of Ukrainian descent, French people of Ukrainian-Jewish descent

Charlotte Lucy Gainsbourg (born 21 July 1971) is an Anglo-French actress and singer. She is the daughter of English actress Jane Birkin and French singer and songwriter Serge Gainsbourg. After making her musical debut with her father on the song "Lemon Incest" at the age of twelve she released an album with her father at the age of fifteen.  More than twenty years passed before she released three albums as an adult (5:55, IRM and Stage Whisper) to commercial and critical success. Gainsbourg has also appeared in many films, including several directed by Lars von Trier, and has received both a César Award and the Cannes Film Festival Best Actress Award.

Personal life

Gainsbourg was born in London, to Jane Birkin and Serge Gainsbourg,Source of real name and birth date: birth certificate provided by the French Ministère des affaires étrangères, according to this web site and was raised in Paris. Her maternal grandmother was actress Judy Campbell and her uncle is the screenwriter Andrew Birkin, who directed her in The Cement Garden. Her father was Jewish and her mother is from a Protestant background. Gainsbourg attended École Active Bilingue Jeannine Manuel in Paris and Collège Alpin International Beau Soleil in Switzerland.
On her mother's side she has two half sisters, fashion photographer Kate Barry (1967-2013) and singer Lou Doillon.
Gainsbourg's longtime partner is French-Israeli actor/director Yvan Attal,Mapes, Marty. (25 July 2002) Interview with Charlotte Gainsbourg and Yvan Attal. Movie Habit. Retrieved on 24 August 2011. and together they have three children: a son, Ben (b. 1997) and daughters Alice (b. 2002) and Joe (b. 2011).
On 5 September 2007, Gainsbourg was rushed to a Paris hospital where she underwent surgery for a cerebral hemorrhage. She had been experiencing headaches since a minor waterskiing accident in the United States several weeks earlier.

Career

Acting

Gainsbourg made her motion picture debut playing Catherine Deneuve's daughter in the film Paroles et musique (1984). In 1986, Gainsbourg won a César Award for "Most Promising Actress" for L'effrontée, and, in 2000, she won "Best Supporting Actress" for the film La Bûche.  In 1993, Gainsbourg made her English speaking debut in The Cement Garden, written and directed by her uncle, Andrew Birkin. She made her stage debut in 1994 in David Mamet's Oleanna at the Théâtre de la Gaîté-Montparnasse. In 1996, Gainsbourg starred as the title character in Jane Eyre, a film adaption of Charlotte Brontë's 1847 novel.
In 2006, Gainsbourg appeared alongside Gael García Bernal in Michel Gondry's The Science of Sleep. In 2007, she appeared as Claire in the Todd Haynes-directed Bob Dylan biopic I'm Not There, also contributing a cover of the Dylan song "Just Like a Woman" to the film soundtrack. In 2009, she won the award for Best Actress at the 2009 Cannes Film Festival for the film Antichrist. In May 2012 Confession of a Child of the Century premiered, where she starred alongside the British musician Pete Doherty. 9 December 2010
Gainsbourg collaborated with von Trier once again on his 2013 film Nymphomaniac, in which she plays the lead character. The four-hour film depicts the life of a sex addict from youth to middle age. When asked about the nature of the role, Gainsbourg responded, "The sex scenes weren't so hard. For me it was all the masochistic scenes. Those were embarrassing and, yes, a little humiliating."

Music

Gainsbourg made her musical debut with her father on the song "Lemon Incest" in 1984. Two years later, she released her debut album Charlotte for Ever, which was produced by her father. 
In 2000, Gainsbourg was featured on the Madonna album Music on the track "What It Feels Like For A Girl". There is a lengthy spoken intro by Gainsbourg, taken from the film The Cement Garden, which inspired the title of the song. The track was further remixed for the single version of this song in 2001, with Gainsbourg's The Cement Garden speech repeated during the song.
In 2004, she sang a duet with French pop star Étienne Daho on his single "If".
In 2006, Gainsbourg released her second album 5:55 to critical acclaim and commercial success, reaching the top spot on the French charts and achieving platinum status in the country. In the UK, the album was moderately successful, reaching #78 (The single "The Songs That We Sing" only made #129).
In late 2009, Gainsbourg released her third studio album, IRM,
Her song "Heaven Can Wait" was chosen as the Starbucks iTunes Pick of the Week on 2 March 2010. www.com (2 March 2010). Retrieved on 24 August 2011. Her song "Trick Pony" appeared at the beginning of the Grey's Anatomy episode "Perfect Little Accident" (Season 6, Episode 16/airdate: 25 February 2010), is featured on the FIFA 11 soundtrack6.16 Perfect Little Accident – Grey's Anatomy Thegreysanatomywiki. Retrieved on 24 August 2011. and was used in the 2012 Teleflora Super Bowl advertisement featuring supermodel Adriana Lima.  
In 2011, Gainsbourg released the double album Stage Whisper, a collection of unreleased songs from IRM and live tracks.

Filmography

Discography






