[[Emanuel Steward]]

CATEGORIES: American boxing trainers, American male boxers, Sportspeople from Detroit, Michigan, People from McDowell County, West Virginia, 1944 births, 2012 deaths

Emanuel Steward (July 7, 1944 – October 25, 2012) was an American boxer, trainer, and commentator for HBO Boxing. Steward trained 41 world champion fighters throughout his career, most notably Lennox Lewis, Wladimir Klitschko, Thomas Hearns, and Tony Tucker.

Life and career

Steward was born in Bottom Creek, West Virginia, but, by the age of 12, he had moved with his mother to Detroit, Michigan, after she divorced his father, who was a coal miner.A. Times obituaries.  Retrieved November 13, 2012.  After moving to Detroit, he worked briefly in the auto industry before eventually going to Brewster Recreation Center, where Joe Louis and Eddie Futch trained. Steward began an amateur boxing career there. He compiled a record of 94 wins and 3 losses as an amateur boxer, including winning the 1963 national Golden Gloves tournament in the bantamweight division. He was forced to abandon a professional career due to his family's economic situation, and began working as an electrical lineman.
In 1971, Steward took his half brother, James Steward, to the nearby Kronk Gym, a hot-bed for amateur boxers in the 1970s, and became a part-time coach there.  Steward trained many of the nation's top amateurs. He eventually translated his success with amateurs into a career training championship-level professional fighters.
On March 2, 1980, Hilmer Kenty became Steward's first world champion by knocking out world lightweight champ Ernesto España. Steward achieved his most notable early success with welterweight Thomas Hearns, whom he changed from a light hitting boxer into one of the most devastating punchers in boxing history.  Hearns became one of Steward's most successful and popular fighters, fighting Sugar Ray Leonard, knocking out Roberto Durán, and challenging undisputed Middleweight Champion Marvelous Marvin Hagler in a fight known as The War. In 2012, he was training heavyweight Wladimir Klitschko, until a serious but undisclosed illness forced him to take a leave of absence from training.

Death

Steward died at 14:46 EDT on October 25, 2012, in a Chicago-area hospital, where he had been for several weeks after undergoing surgery for diverticulitis. He was 68. Colon cancer was subsequently reported as a contributing factor to his death.freep.
Ken Hershman, president of HBO Sports, who Steward worked for as a commentator since 2001, released a statement, saying: "There are no adequate words to describe the enormous degree of sadness and loss we feel at HBO Sports with the tragic passing of Manny Steward. For more than a decade, Manny was a respected colleague who taught us so much not only about the sweet science but also about friendship and loyalty. His energy, enthusiasm and bright smile were a constant presence. Ten bells do not seem enough to mourn his passing. His contributions to the sport and to HBO will never be forgotten. Our thoughts and prayers are with his family." 
Wladimir Klitschko, who Steward was training until his hospitalization, released a statement saying: "It is not often that a person in any line of work gets a chance to work with a legend, well I was privileged enough to work with one for almost a decade. I will miss our time together. The long talks about boxing, the world, and life itself. Most of all I will miss our friendship." 

Awards

Kronk Gym

Kronk Gym became a property of Steward's, who was also famous for his collection of Rolls Royce cars and mansions. He opened a branch of the gym in Tucson, Arizona, and started an association with the Dodge Theater in Phoenix to present boxing undercards once a month. In 2012 Emanuel Steward's Kronk Boxing Promotions put on a Highly Successful Series of World Class Boxing Shows at Pechanga Resort & Casino in Temecula Ca.

Fighters trained

Among the world champions and top rated contenders who have trained or sought Steward's guidance at some point of their career are:






