[[Tinnitus]]

CATEGORIES: Auditory perception, Diseases of the ear and mastoid process

Tinnitus ; from the Latin word tinnītus meaning "ringing" is the perception of sound within the human ear (ringing of the ears) when no actual sound is present. Despite the origin of the name, "ringing" is only one of many sounds the person may perceive.
Tinnitus is not a disease, but a condition that can result from a wide range of underlying causes. The most common cause is noise-induced hearing loss. foreign objects in the ear, nasal allergies that prevent (or induce) fluid drain, wax build-up, and exposure to loud sounds. Withdrawal from benzodiazepines may cause tinnitus as well. Tinnitus may be an accompaniment of sensorineural hearing loss or congenital hearing loss, or it may be observed as a side effect of certain medications (ototoxic tinnitus).
Tinnitus is usually a subjective phenomenon, such that it cannot be objectively measured. The condition is often rated clinically on a simple scale from "slight" to "catastrophic" according to the difficulties it imposes, such as interference with sleep, quiet activities, and normal daily activities.
If there is an underlying cause, treating it may lead to improvements. Otherwise typically management involves talk therapy. This, however, has no effect on tinnitus volume level. As of 2013, there are no effective medications. It is common, affecting about 10-15% of people. For many it may be only a temporary condition and can be tolerated well. However, for those for whom it is a permanent condition it can be a significant problem - it is estimated that this applies to 1-2% of people. Nevertheless, psychological treatment (specifically, CBT) can assist with management of the tinnitus and help reduce associated distress.

Signs and symptoms

Tinnitus can be perceived in one or both ears or in the head. It is usually described as a ringing noise, but in some patients, it takes the form of a high-pitched whining, electric buzzing, hissing, humming, tinging or whistling sound, or as ticking, clicking, roaring, "crickets" or "tree frogs" or "locusts (cicadas)", tunes, songs, beeping, sizzling, sounds that slightly resemble human voices or even a pure steady tone like that heard during a hearing test, and in some cases, pressure changes from the interior ear.
Most people with tinnitus have some degree of hearing loss,
The sound perceived may range from a quiet background noise to one that can be heard even over loud external sounds. The specific type of tinnitus called pulsatile tinnitus is characterized by one hearing the sounds of one's own pulse or muscle contractions, which is typically a result of sounds that have been created from the movement of muscles near to one's ear, changes within the canal of one's ear or issues related to blood flow of the neck or face.

Course

There has been little research on the course of tinnitus, and most research has been retrospective. An Australian study of participants aged 49–97 years, found that 35% of participants reported that their tinnitus was present all the time and 4% rated their tinnitus as annoying. Findings from a retrospective National Study of Hearing found that for 25% of people, loudness of tinnitus increased over time, and for 75% of people, loudness of tinnitus did not change over time. The rate of annoyance decreased for 31% of people from onset of tinnitus to the middle time. A study of the natural history of tinnitus in older adults found that for women, tinnitus increased for 25%, decreased in 58%, leaving 17% unchanged.  The study found that for men, tinnitus increased in 8%, decreased in 39%, leaving 53% unchanged. Information about the course of tinnitus would benefit from prospective studies investigating change over time as these studies may potentially be more accurate.

Psychological

Persistent tinnitus may cause irritability, fatigue, and on occasions, clinical depression
Tinnitus annoyance is more strongly associated with psychological symptoms than acoustic characteristics.

Causes

Objective tinnitus

In some cases, others can perceive an actual sound (e.g., a bruit) coming from the person's ears. This is called objective tinnitus. Objective tinnitus can arise from muscle spasms that cause clicks or crackling around the middle ear.

Subjective tinnitus

Subjective tinnitus can have many possible causes, but most commonly results from otologic disorders – the same conditions that cause hearing loss. The most common cause is noise-induced hearing loss, resulting from exposure to excessive or loud noises. Tinnitus, along with sudden onset hearing loss, may have no obvious external cause. Ototoxic drugs can cause subjective tinnitus either secondary to hearing loss or without hearing loss and may increase the damage done by exposure to loud noise, even at doses that are not in themselves ototoxic.
Subjective tinnitus is also a side effect of some medications, such as aspirin, and may also result from an abnormally low level of serotonin activity. It is also a classical side effect of quinidine, a Class IA anti-arrhythmic. Over 260 medications have been reported to cause tinnitus as a side effect. In many cases, however, no underlying physical cause can be identified.
Tinnitus can also occur due to the discontinuation of therapeutic doses of benzodiazepines. It can sometimes be a protracted symptom of benzodiazepine withdrawal and may persist for many months.
Causes of subjective tinnitus include:

Pathophysiology

One of the possible mechanisms relies on otoacoustic emissions. The inner ear contains thousands of minute inner hair cells with stereocilia which vibrate in response to sound waves, and outer hair cells which convert neural signals into tension on the vibrating basement membrane. The sensing cells are connected with the vibratory cells through a neural feedback loop, whose gain is regulated by the brain. This loop is normally adjusted just below onset of self-oscillation, which gives the ear spectacular sensitivity and selectivity. If something changes, it is easy for the delicate adjustment to cross the barrier of oscillation, and tinnitus results. Exposure to excessive sound kills hair cells, and studies have shown as hair cells are lost, different neurons are activated, activating auditory parts of the brain and giving the perception of sound.
Another possible mechanism underlying tinnitus is damage to the receptor cells. Although receptor cells can be regenerated from the adjacent supporting Deiters cells after injury in birds, reptiles, and amphibians, in mammals it is believed they can be produced only during embryogenesis. Although mammalian Deiters cells reproduce and position themselves appropriately for regeneration, they have not been observed to transdifferentiate into receptor cells except in tissue culture experiments. Therefore, if these hairs become damaged, through prolonged exposure to excessive sound levels, for instance, then deafness to certain frequencies results. In tinnitus, they may relay information that an externally audible sound is present at a certain frequency when it is not.
The mechanisms of subjective tinnitus are often obscure. While it is not surprising that direct trauma to the inner ear can cause tinnitus, other apparent causes (e.g., temporomandibular joint dysfunction and dental disorders) are difficult to explain. Research has proposed there are two distinct categories of subjective tinnitus: otic tinnitus, caused by disorders of the inner ear or the acoustic nerve, and somatic tinnitus, caused by disorders outside the ear and nerve, but still within the head or neck. It is further hypothesized somatic tinnitus may be due to "central crosstalk" within the brain, as certain head and neck nerves enter the brain near regions known to be involved in hearing. Supplement Pharmazeutische Zeitung. 1997 July
It may be caused by increased neural activity in the auditory brainstem where the brain processes sounds, causing some auditory nerve cells to become overexcited. The basis of this theory is most people with tinnitus also have hearing loss, and the frequencies they cannot hear are similar to the subjective frequencies of their tinnitus. Models of hearing loss and the brain support the idea a homeostatic response of central dorsal cochlear nucleus neurons could result in them being hyperactive in a compensation process to the loss of hearing input.

Diagnosis

The basis of quantitatively measuring tinnitus relies on the brain's tendency to select out only the loudest sounds heard. Based on this tendency, the amplitude of a patient's tinnitus can be measured by playing sample sounds of known amplitude and asking the patient which they hear. The volume of the tinnitus will always be equal to or less than that of the sample noises heard by the patient. This method works very well to gauge objective tinnitus (see above). For example: if a patient has a pulsatile paraganglioma in their ear, they will not be able to hear the blood flow through the tumor when the sample noise is 5 decibels louder than the noise produced by the blood. As sound amplitude is gradually decreased, the tinnitus will become audible, and the level at which it does so provides an estimate of the amplitude of the objective tinnitus.
Objective tinnitus, however, is quite uncommon. Often patients with pulsatile tumors will report other coexistent sounds, distinct from the pulsatile noise, that will persist even after their tumor has been removed. This is generally subjective tinnitus, which, unlike the objective form, cannot be tested by comparative methods. However, pulsatile tinnitus can be a symptom of intracranial vascular abnormalities, and should be evaluated for bruits by a medical professional with auscultation over the neck, eyes, and ears. If the exam reveals a bruit, imaging studies such as transcranial doppler (TCD) or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) should be performed.
The accepted definition of 'chronic tinnitus' rather than normal ear noise experience, is five minutes of ear noise occurring at least twice a week.

Severity

Assessment of psychological processes related to tinnitus involves measurement of tinnitus severity and distress (i.e. nature and extent of tinnitus-related problems), measured subjectively by validated self-report tinnitus questionnaires. These questionnaires measure the degree of psychological distress and handicap associated with tinnitus, including effects on hearing, lifestyle, health and emotional functioning.

Auditory evoked response

Tinnitus is the description of a noise inside a person's head in the absence of auditory stimulation. The noise can be described in many different ways, but the most common description of the tinnitus is a pure tone sound. Tinnitus affects one third of adults at some time in their lives, whereas ten to fifteen percent are disturbed enough to seek medical evaluation.
Tinnitus can be classified as either subjective or objective. Objective tinnitus can be detected by other people and is usually caused by myoclonus or a vascular condition. Subjective tinnitus can only be heard by the affected person and is caused by otology, neurology, infection, or drugs.
Tinnitus can be evaluated with most auditory evoked potentials; however results may be inconsistent. Results must be compared to age and hearing matched control subjects to be reliable. This inconsistently reported may be due to many reasons: differences in the origin of the tinnitus, ABR recording methods, and selection criteria of control groups. Since research shows conflicting evidence, more research on the relationship between tinnitus and auditory evoked potentials should be carried out before these measurements are used clinically.

Differential diagnosis

Other potential sources of the sounds normally associated with tinnitus should be ruled out. For instance, two recognized sources of very-high-pitched sounds might be electromagnetic fields common in modern wiring and various sound signal transmissions. A common and often misdiagnosed condition that mimics tinnitus is radio frequency (RF) hearing, in which subjects have been tested and found to hear high-pitched transmission frequencies that sound similar to tinnitus.

Prevention

Prolonged exposure to sound or noise levels as low as 70 dB can result in damage to hearing (see noise health effects). This can lead to tinnitus. Ear plugs can help with prevention.
Avoidance of potentially ototoxicity medicines. Ototoxicity of multiple medicines can have a cumulative effect, and can increase the damage done by noise. If ototoxic medications must be administered, close attention by the physician to prescription details, such as dose and dosage interval, can reduce the damage done.

Treatment

Psychological

There is some evidence that Cognitive behavioral therapy(CBT), which can be delivered via the internet or in person., can decrease the amount of stress those with tinnitus feel. However, it has no effect on tinnitus volume and the beneficial effects may not persist once counselling has ended.
Henry and Wilson (2001) proposed a cognitive behavioural model for tinnitus distress which suggested that  negative and unhelpful cognitions about tinnitus lead to distress. This theory explains why  some  people can ignore tinnitus whereas others cannot. Henry and Wilson (2001) proposed that people who experience tinnitus distress will have cognitions such as, 'my tinnitus will drive me crazy, and I cannot tolerate this unbearable noise' in response to the tinnitus noise being loud.  A person with these cognitions will have developed a tinnitus schema and will be hypervigilant for the tinnitus stimuli. When the stimuli are present, the schema will be activated, further directing attention to the tinnitus and triggering beliefs such as, 'I must be in control of my body'. Also, schemas related to depression or anxiety may also be activated.  Non-tinnitus stressors can activate a relevant schema which may activate the tinnitus schema and may maintain tinnitus related distress, such as depression, anxiety or anger. These emotions and poor coping strategies such as avoidance of noisy or quiet places, cutting back, social withdrawal confirm negative cognitions about tinnitus and lead to more disturbance and physiological arousal, causing poor sleep, fatigue and difficulty concentrating. Henry and Wilson (2001) also developed a cognitive behavioural treatment manual for tinnitus which provides a comprehensive and detailed account of the congnitive–behavioural approach in a user-friendly way (Henry & Wilson, 2001). They provide an overview of an 8-session CBT program including psychoeducation, cognitive restructuring, attention control techniques, imagery training and relaxation training.
Further to their 2001 textbook, Henry and Wilson (2002) released a self-help book designed to teach people how to self-manage their tinnitus. Henry and Wilson (2002) based their book and its content on their cognitive behavioural model of tinnitus.

Medications

Recent research has indicated that Clonazepam may have a reductive effect on tinnitus loudness, though more research is required.jour=J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012 Aug;83(8):821-7. doi: 10.1136. There is not enough evidence to determine if antidepressants  Anticonvulsants have not been found to be useful.

Other

The use of sound therapy by either hearing aids or tinnitus maskers is usual practice but poorly supported by evidence.

Alternative medicine

Ginkgo biloba does not appear to be effective.

Objective tinnitus

Prognosis

Most people with tinnitus get used to it over time. For a minority it remains a significant problem.

Epidemiology

Tinnitus is present in 10-15% of people.

Research

As of 2013 many potential treatments are being investigated. Recent psychological research on tinnitus focuses on the Tinnitus Distress Reaction (TDR) to account for differences in tinnitus severity.

Children

Tinnitus is commonly thought of as a symptom of adulthood; this may be why tinnitus in children is generally overlooked. Children with hearing loss have a high incidence of tinnitus, even though they do not express that they have tinnitus and the effect it has on their lives.







Further reading

|archiveurl= |archivedate=2007 |accessdate=5 November 2012 |edition=1st |series=Progress in brain research |volume=166 |date=December 2007 |publisher=Elsevier |location=Amsterdam ; Boston |isbn=9780444531674 |oclc=648331153 |lccn=2012471552}}

