[[The Canon of Medicine]]

CATEGORIES: Medical works of medieval Islam, 1020s books, History of medicine, Iranian literature, Iranian books, 11th-century Arabic books, Unani medicine, World Digital Library related

The Canon of Medicine ( 
As part of the Arabic translation project Ibn-Sina drew on various sources in the writing of his Canon an important one being the extensive pathology text from Chinese medicine called the Zhubing Yuanhuo Lun written in about 610 by Chao Yuan-fang. Ibn-Sina also drew on the early Chinese pulse diagnosis classic text the Maijing by Wang Shu-hu which was written in circa 310.) Zhongguo Yixue Shi (History of Chinese Medicine) Publishing House of Shanghai College of Chinese Medicine 1989
Originally written in the Arabic language, the book was later translated into a number of other languages, including Persian, Latin, Chinese, Hebrew, German, French, and English with many commentaries.
The word Canon in the title derives from the cognate Arabic original Qanun (the English word "canon" comes from Latin canōn, from Ancient Greek κανών (kanón, "measuring rod, standard"), while the Arabic word "qanun" comes directly from the same Ancient Greek root). The Canon of Medicine remained a medical authority for centuries. It set the standards for medicine in Medieval Europe and the Islamic world, and is Avicenna's most renowned written work. Qanun was used at many medical schools; at University of Montpellier, France, it was used as late as 1650. It is used in Unani (Ionian) medicine, a form of traditional medicine practiced in India.
George Sarton wrote in the Introduction to the History of Science:

Influence in Europe

The Qanun was translated into Latin as Canon medicinae by Gerard of Cremona. (Confusingly there appear to have been two men called Gerard of Cremona, both translators of Arabic texts into Latin. Ostler states that it was the later of these, also known as Gerard de Sabloneta, who translated the Qanun (and other medical works) into Latin in the 13th century.) Its encyclopaedic content, its systematic arrangement and philosophical marrying of the medicine of Galen with the theory of science of Aristotle helped it become one of the pre-eminent works in the medical literature of Europe. The Canon's influence declined in the 16th century as a result of humanists' preference in medicine for ancient Greek and Roman authorities over Arabic authorities, although others defended Avicenna's innovations beyond the original classical texts. It fell out of favour in university syllabi, although it was still being taught as background as late as 1715 in Padua.
The first three books of the Latin Canon were printed in 1472, and a complete edition appeared in 1473. In the last 30 years of the 15th century it passed through 15 Latin editions. It was one of the most frequently printed medical books of the 15th and 16th centuries. In recent years, a partial translation into English was made.
Sir William Osler described the Canon as "the most famous medical textbook ever written", noting that it remained "a medical bible for a longer time than any other work."



The book explains the causes of health and disease. Ibn Sina believed that the human body cannot be restored to health unless the causes of both health and disease are determined. He defined medicine (tibb) as follows:

Avicenna regarded the causes of good health and diseases to be:
The Qanun distinguishes mediastinitis from pleurisy and recognises the contagious nature of phthisis (tuberculosis of the lung) and the spread of disease by water and soil. The Qanun considered important factors in health were air (including breathing but also "bad" air); food and drink; movement and rest; sleep; bowel and urinary health; and emotions. The Qanun 's Materia Medica lists 800 substances, and the Formulary lists recipes for 650 compound drugs from various sources, with Avicenna's comments on different recipes and his views on the effectiveness of particular drugs. He recommended the testing of a new drug on humans to determine its effectiveness, cautioning against testing on animals because of the risk it would affect animals differently from humans.
The earliest known copy of volume 5 of the Canon of Medicine dated 1052 is held in the collection of the Aga Khan and is to be housed in the Aga Khan Museum planned for Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Book 1 Part 1

Book 1 is made up of six theses which give a general description of medicine in general, the cosmic elements that make up the cosmos and the human body, the mutual interaction of elements (temperaments), fluids of the body (humours), human anatomy, and physiology.

Thesis I Definition and Scope of Medicine

Avicenna begins part one by dividing theoretical medicine and medical practice. He describes what he says are the "four causes" of illness, based on Aristotelian philosophy: The material cause, the efficient cause, the formal cause:

Thesis II The Elements or Cosmology

Avicenna's thesis on the elements of the cosmos is described by Gruner as "the foundation of the whole Canon". The "light" elements are fire and air, while the "heavy" are earth and water. Ibn Sina (Avicenna) goes on to describe each of the four elements in detail.

Thesis III The Temperaments

The Canon of Medicine divides the thesis on temperaments into three subsections; a general overview, one based on members of the body, and temperaments based on age.

=I The Temperaments (General description)=

The temperaments are reported to be the interaction between the four different element's qualities, such as the conflict between dryness, wetness, cold, and hot. Avicenna suggests that these qualities battle between each other until an equilibrium state is reached and this state is known as the temperaments.
The Canon also adopted the ancient theory of Four Temperaments and extended it to encompass "emotional aspects, mental capacity, moral attitudes, self-awareness, movements and dreams." It summarized Avicenna's own theory of four temperaments in a table presented as follows:
Canon describes humans as having eight different "varieties of equipoise", or differing temperaments.  The temperaments fall under two categories; In relation to beings other than men and in relation to the individual himself.
i. "the equability of the temperament seen in man as compared with other creatures"

ii. the temperament of other human beings

iii. external factors "such as race, climate, atmosphere"

iv. in relation to extreme climates
v. "as compared to another person"

vi. comparison of the individual himself

vii. comparing one member of the body with another member of the body

viii. comparison of a member to itself
The Canon continues to explain the sun's position in relation to ideal temperament and the role that climate and human skin play. Organs are nowhere near ideal in temperament, but skin comes the closest. Avicenna says that the hand, especially the palm and the tip of the index finger, is the most sensitive of all and attuned to tactile contact. Medicine is described as "hot" or "cold", not based upon its actual temperature but with regard to how it relates to the temperament of the human body.
The Canon then describes when temperaments are unequal, in other words, illness.  Avicenna separates these into two categories, which are fairly self explainable within the context of what Ibn Sina has already defined as the temperaments.
i. Hot temperament (hotter than normal)
ii. Cold temperament (colder than normal)
iii. Dry temperament (drier than usual)
iv. Moist temperament (more moist than usual)

The compound intemperaments are where two things are wrong with the temperament, i.e. hotter and moister; hotter and drier; colder and moister; colder and drier. There are only four because something cannot be simultaneously hotter and colder or drier and moister. The four simple temperaments and four compound intemperaments can each be divided into "Those apart from any material substance" and "Those in which some material substance is concerned", for a total of sixteen intemperaments. Examples of the sixteen intemperaments are provided in the "third and fourth volumes."

=II The Temperament of the Several Members=

Each member of the body is described to be given each its individual temperament, each with its own degree of heat and moisture.  Avicenna lists members of the body in "order of degree of Heat", from hottest to coldest.
Then a list is given of coldest members to hottest.
Then a list is given in order of moisture.  Avicenna credits Galen with this particular list.
Finally, a list is given in order of dryness

=III The Temperaments Belonging to Age=

The Canon divides life into four "periods" and then subdivides the first period into five separate categories.
The following table is provided for the four periods of life:
Avicenna says that the third period shows signs of decline in vigor and some decline in intellectual power. In the fourth period, both vigor and intelligence decline.
Avicenna divides the beginning stage of life in the following table, according to Oskar Cameron Gruner's edition of the Canon of Medicine:
Avicenna generalizes youth as having a "hot" temperament, but comments that there is controversy over which periods of youth are hotter. The general notion that youth are "hot" in temperament is due to youth's supposed relationship to members of the body that are hot. For example, blood was considered "hot" as was mentioned earlier, therefore youth is assumed to be hot partially due to blood being more "plentiful" and "thicker", according to Avicenna. Evidence for youth having an excess of blood is suggested by Avicenna's observation that nose bleeds are more frequent within youth. Other contributing factors are the youth's association with sperm and the consistency of their bile. Further description of youth in regards to heat and moisture is given with respect to sex, geographical location, and occupation.  The Canon says, for example, that females are colder and more moist.

The Humours

The Canon of Medicine is based upon the Four Humours of Hippocratic medicine, but refined in various ways. In disease pathogenesis, for example, Avicenna "added his own view of different types of spirits (or vital life essences) and souls, whose disturbances might lead to bodily diseases because of a close association between them and such master organs as the brain and heart". An element of such belief is apparent in the chapter of al-Lawa", which relates "the manifestations to an interruption of vital life essence to the brain." He combined his own view with that of the Four Humours to establish a new doctrine to explain the mechanisms of various diseases in another work he wrote, Treatise on Pulse

=What a Body Fluid is and How Many Kinds There Are=

The Canon defines a humour as "that fluid, moist 'body' into which our aliment is transformed","Aliment: something that nourishes; food". Aliment and lists the four primary types of fluids as sanguineous, serous, bilious, and atribilious. The secondary fluids are separated into "non-excrementitious" and "excrementitious".

=The Four Body Fluids or Humours Proper=

==The sanguineous humour==

Avicenna calls this humour "the most excellent of all"

==The serous humour==

The serous humour is described as a sweet fluid that is cold and moist in relation to blood and bilious humours. Serous humour resembles blood and is necessary for body tissues for two reasons: to provide the tissue with nutrients as an auxiliary and to keep the bones and tissues moist.

==The bilious humour==

==The atribilious humour==

Anatomy or "The Members"

In his thesis on "The Members", Avicenna explains that the humours help to make up the members of the body, gives a general description and how to repair them.

Some are "simple members" or "elementary tissue" such as bone, cartilage and tendons. Some are "compound members" such as the heart, the liver, and the brain. He also categorizes these into vital organs and auxiliary organs.

Avicenna continues to classify the organs by different systems.  "According to actions" organizes members by what they do.  "According to their origin" classifies members by assuming that each member originates from the blood or from male or "female sperm".

General Physiology

In the thesis on General Physiology or "The Faculties of the Body", Avicenna separates life into three different categories: Vegetable, Animal, and Human. He contrasts Galen's view that the brain is the "chief seat of sentient life" with Aristotle's view that the heart is the source of all the body's faculties, saying that if physicians considered the matter carefully they would agree with Aristotle that the heart was the ultimate source of all the faculties, even if (for example) the brain is where the rational faculty manifests itself.

Book 1 Part 2

Writings on anatomy in the Canon are scattered throughout the text in sections regarding to illnesses related to certain body parts. The Canon included numerous discussions on anatomy and diagrams on certain body parts, including diagrams of the cranial sutures.

Dissection

The Canon was one of the Muslim medical encyclopedias of the period which distinguished anatomy "from other aspects of medicine by its need for a different methodology".

Simple and compound drugs

Book 2 (the Materia Medica) of the Canon lists about 800 "simple" substances alphabetically that were used by doctors of the time. The substances are simple in the sense of not compounded with other substances. Plants, animal substances and minerals are included. Book 5 (the Formulary) lists 650 compound drugs, attributing them to various Arabic, Indian and Greek sources. Avicenna added his own comments, highlighting differences between recipes from different sources, and sometimes giving his own recipe. He also gave his opinion of the effectiveness (or ineffectiveness) of some remedies, and gave details of where particular ingredients came from and how they were prepared. He favoured proven remedies which had been tested through experience, cautioning that compounds could have unexpected or much stronger effects than might be expected from the effects of the individual components.
The Canon contained seven rules for experimenting with new drugs, taken partly from Galen.

Book 3 Special Pathology

Book 3 is arranged from head to toe covering the function and diseases of each organ.

Book 4 Special Diseases Involving More Than One Member

Book 4 covers diseases that affect the whole body like fevers.

Book 5 Formulary

Book 5 covers compound drugs.



Notes and references




