[[Battle of the Planets]]

CATEGORIES: Gatchaman, 1978 American television series debuts, 1985 American television series endings, 1970s American animated television series, 1980s American animated television series, American science fiction television series, English-language television programming, First-run syndicated television programs in the United States, Science fiction anime and manga, Space adventure television series, Superhero television programs, Tatsunoko Production, TBS (TV channel) network shows, Jetix

Battle of the Planets (1978) is an American adaptation of the Japanese anime series Science Ninja Team Gatchaman (1972).
As of June 2013, Sentai Filmworks have licensed the Gatchaman franchise.  An oft-delayed CGI film based on the franchise, Gatchaman, last slated for a 2011 release from Warner Bros., was officially cancelled in June 2011.

Summary

Battle of the Planets cast five young people as G-Force, consisting of Mark, Jason, Princess, Keyop, and Tiny.  G-Force protects Earth from planet Spectra and other attacks from beyond space. The most prominent field commander of the Spectra forces was a villainous, masked individual known as Zoltar. Zoltar would receive his orders directly from a being he would refer to as "Luminous One". The Luminous One would appear as a ghost-like, disembodied, floating head. Who, or what this being actually was, is never explained in any detail throughout the series. 
The main ship of the G-Force team was called the Phoenix, which could carry, transport and deploy four smaller vehicles, each operated by one team member. The four vehicles included a futuristic race car with various hidden weapons driven by Jason; this vehicle was concealed within the Phoenix's nosecone.  The "galacti-cycle", a futuristic motor cycle the Princess rode, was stored within the left wing capsule of the Phoenix.  Keyop's "Space Bubble", an all-terrain, tank-like vehicle capable of VTOL as well as being a submersible craft, was held in the right storage capsule of the Phoenix.  And lastly, a futuristic jet fighter Mark pilots was stored in the top rear section of the Phoenix command island structure, and which used its tail fin to make up the center tail fin of the Phoenix.  The fifth crew member, Tiny, was assigned to pilot the Phoenix rather than one of the detachable craft.
A regularly featured plot device was the transformation of the Phoenix into a flaming bird-shaped craft able to handle virtually any exceptional situation by functioning as a sort of giant, super blowtorch called the Fiery Phoenix. The Phoenix's primary weapon was a supply of rockets called "TBX missiles" in the series. It also occasionally flaunted a powerful solar-powered energy blaster, although the team had the misfortune of choosing very cloudy days to use it.
The G-Force team themselves would use a combination of martial arts skill, ninja-like weapons, and their "cerebonic" powers to dispatch hordes of enemy soldiers and overcome other obstacles. Their bird-like costumes include wing-like capes that could fan out and function nearly identically to parachutes and/or wing suits, enabling the G-Force members to drift or glide down to safety from heights which would otherwise prove fatal.
The G-Force members stay in contact through a wrist-band communicator device which also serves as a way for them to change instantly into their G-Force uniforms or back into their civilian clothes. Other weapons seen displayed by various team members include: Mark's sonic boomerang, a bird-shaped boomerang with razor sharp wings; Jason's and Tiny's multi-purpose gadget guns, which can be outfitted with grappling hook and line, drill bits, etc.; and Keyop's and Princess's yo-yo bombs, which could be used as bolas, darts, and explosive devices. Other weapons include feathers with a sharpened steel quill that could be used as deadly throwing darts, and mini-grenades shaped like ball bearings with spike studs.

Subsequent versions

In 1986, Gatchaman was re-worked in the US as G-Force: Guardians of Space by Turner, with a good deal of the original content edited out of Battle of the Planets put back into the show. It followed the plot of the original Gatchaman much more faithfully than Battle of the Planets because of this. Missing was Hoyt Curtin's original score and new voice acting. This version, however, was criticized by fans of both Gatchaman and Battle of the Planets, and never achieved the same level of popularity.
Two soundtrack albums and several DVDs have been released.
The two Japanese follow-up series (Gatchaman II and Gatchaman Fighter) were combined into 65 episodes and released as the Saban-produced show Eagle Riders. All 65 episodes aired in Australia, but in the United States only 13 episodes were aired.

Key changes in the adaptation

The Battle of the Planets adaptation differs significantly from Gatchaman.
One of the most notable changes in the BotP adaptation involves the character Keyop (Jinpei in Gatchaman), who picked up a bizarre verbal tic of stuttering, chirping, and burbling every time he started to speak. There was a longstanding fan rumor that this was done because the original character spoke using much profanity and that Keyop's excess mouth motion would cover up deleting the words.  This was not true, as demonstrated by the existence of an unedited Gatchaman version released by ADV Films in the USA, in which Keyop rarely if ever used profanity.  The in-story explanation for Keyop's unique manner of speech is that he is an artificial life form with a speech impediment because of slightly defective genetic engineering.
The main villain, known as Zoltar in BotP, had an unusual background due to the hermaphroditic nature of the original Berg Katse character. In an episode where Katse's female half was featured (BotP title: "The Galaxy Girls"), she was introduced as a separate character, Zoltar's sister, for BotP. (A hint of her actual nature was retained in the name she used when masquerading as a human, Mala Latroz—"Latroz" is an anagram of "Zoltar.")
To compensate for the other differences, a robot named 7-Zark-7 performed explanatory voiceovers and light comic relief, which not only padded the time lost from editing but also filled in the gaps in the story line. This device bears the influence of contemporary Star Wars film, with 7-Zark-7 having a visual appearance not dissimilar from R2-D2, and a somewhat campy personality in the style of C3PO. Notionally, 7-Zark-7 ran the undersea monitoring station Center Neptune, from where he received information regarding incoming threats to Earth and relayed that information to G-Force. Zark and other added characters, such as 1-Rover-1, Zark's robotic dog (who could hover from one side of the control room to the other by spinning his tail like a propeller, Muttley-style) and Susan (the early-warning computer whose sultry feminine voice often sent Zark into paroxysms) added to the cartoon's youth appeal. Some additional footage was also animated showing G-Force members (using their Gatchaman model sheets) interacting with Zark, helping his addition blend more smoothly into the existing Gatchaman footage (although there is a clear difference in quality between the Zark and the Gatchaman animation).

Production staff

 
 Owned and distributed by: Sandy Frank Entertainment (1978–2007)
Produced by: Sandy Frank Film Syndication, Gallerie International Films Ltd.
Executive Producers: Jameson Brewer, Sandy Frank
Associate Producer: Warner E. Leighton
Producer-Directors: David E. Hanson, Alan Dinehart
Writers: Jameson Brewer, Peter B. Germano, William Bloom, Jack Paritz, Harry Winkler, Helen Sosin, Muriel Germano, Dick Shaw, Kevin Coates, Howard Post, Sid Morse
Supervising Film Editor: Franklin Cofod
Assistant Editor: Pam Bentkowski
Voice Director: Alan Dinehart
Assistant Voice Director: Alan Dinehart Jr
Creative Consultant: David Levy
Standards and Practices: Winifred Treimer
Program Consultants: Leonard Reeg, George Serban, M.D.
Production Executives: Irving Klein, Tom Swafford
Production Assistant: Bob Robinson
Production Manager: Emil Carle
Animation Supervisor: Harold Johns
Design Consultant: Alex Toth
Music Composers: Hoyt S. Curtin, Dennis Dreith, Richard Greene
Music Supervisors: Paul DeKorte, Igo Kantor
ADR Recording: TV-R Hollywood
Camera: Take One
Ink and Paint: C&D Productions, Hollywood
Titles: Thomas Wogatzke

Voice cast

 
 Mark: Casey Kasem
Jason: Unknown ("Attack of The Space Terrapin"), Ronnie Schell (all other episodes)
Princess/Susan/Mala: Janet Waldo
Keyop/7-Zark-7: Alan Young
Tiny: Ronnie Schell ("Attack Of The Space Terrapin"), Alan Dinehart Jr (all other episodes)
Chief Anderson/President Kane: Alan Dinehart Jr
Zoltar/The Great Spirit/Colonel Cronus: Keye Luke
Announcer: William Woodson
Misc.: Alan Oppenheimer, David Joliffe, Wendy Young, Takayo Fischer

Episodes

Movie

A TV Movie called "Battle Of The Planets: The Movie" was made by Gallerie International Films and Sandy Frank Film Syndication. David Bret Egen was the voice of 7-Zark-7. The movie was combined from several episodes to form a new story line which contained violence as well as deaths.

Comic books

Battle of the Planets was also released in comic book form, originally by Gold Key Comics, but later revamped by Top Cow Productions. A Battle of the Planets comic strip ran in the British TV Comic. The TV Comic issues which feature the Battle of the Planets strip run from #1530 (17 April 1981) to #1671 (30 December 1983). TV Comic also reprinted some of the Gold Key stories for two Battle of the Planets holiday specials and one TV Comic holiday special. There was also a Battle of the Planets annual which reprinted some of the Gold Key stories.

Soundtrack

 
 

Characters

The renaming of the various characters and terms in Battle of the Planets are highlighted as follows (in correspondence to their Gatchaman equivalents, among others):

Character variations across different versions

Other notable changes

| Bird, Go!
|-
! Planet/Civilization
| Selectol (planet) Gyarakutā (civilization)
| Spectra
| Galactor
| Vorak
| Galactor
| Selectol (planet) Galactor (civilization)
|}
‡The original Japanese language version of Gatchaman contains a small amount of English.

Reception

The show was voted #42 on Channel 4's 100 Greatest Kids' TV shows in 2001.
The show was voted #62 on "100 Greatest Cartoons" in 2004.
According to Wizard magazine, Battle of the Planets is considered to be one of the 100 greatest animated shows.
In 2009, IGN ranked BOTP as the 44th greatest animated show of all time in their Top 100 list.






