[[North Walsham & Dilham Canal]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Norfolk, Canals in England, Transport in Norfolk

The North Walsham and Dilham Canal is a waterway in the English county of Norfolk. It is accepted officially that this waterway is the only canal in Norfolk although it is the canalization of the upper reaches of the River Ant. This navigation was constructed with locks a little wider than most canals in the UK to accommodate the use of the Norfolk wherries.  It is  long and runs from Swafield Bridge to a junction with the River Ant at Smallburgh.

History

The River Ant was navigable to Dilham prior to 1810, when consideration was given to extending navigation northwards along the course of the river. Plans were drawn up by William Youard and John Millington in 1811 and it was Millington's plan that formed the basis of a bill presented to Parliament in early 1812. It was opposed by the inhabitants of Worstead and Dilham, who feared that their businesses would collapse if boats could reach North Walsham, but the navigation was nevertheless authorised by an Act of Parliament dated 5 May 1812, with some of the delays caused by a claim for damages made by Issac Harris Lewis, who owned his own staithe at Dilham and felt that the new canal would damage his trade. His case was heard in April 1825 and he was awarded £1,500 in compensation. Work began in the same month, employing 100 men from Bedfordshire. 
The canal was designed by John Millington, who acted as engineer for the project, although the actual construction was carried out by Thomas Hughes, who had previously worked on the construction of the Caledonian Canal, the Dingwall Canal and the Union Canal, all in Scotland. Millington came from Hammersmith in London. The North Walsham and Dilham Canal was his only canal-building venture. Later in his career he went to the United States of America and wrote Elements of Civil Engineering which includes much information on canal building.
The design of the canal included six locks to raise the level by 

Operation

The main use of the canal was to carry offal to the two Antingham Bone Mills, although other cargoes were carried such as manure, flour, grain, coal and farm produce. A profitable trade in coal did not develop, as the tolls were too high and it was cheaper for coal to be brought down the coast from the north east and landed on the beach near Bacton or Mundesley, from where it would reach North Walsham by cart. Later, the railways handled most of the coal traffic. Most of the vessels using the canal were wherries, which had a draught of 

Decline

The canal was not a financial success, and in 1866 the company obtained an act of Parliament that would allow them to sell the canal providing three-quarters of the shareholders agreed. In 1885, they decided to use this power, as Edward Press, the owner of Bacton Wood mill, and a trader with a fleet of wherries, wished to purchase it. The sale was completed on 16 March 1886, on the understanding that the £600 price would be distributed to the shareholders. Holders of 446 of the original 586 shares were traced, but after paying money on 55 shares, James Turner, the London solicitor handling the sale, absconded with the rest of the fund. The proprietors felt morally bound to refund the money themselves, but did not do so immediately, as none of the shareholders made a claim. Eventually in 1896, five of them, including Press who had bought the canal, contributed £110 17s 7d (£110.88) to a fund which was distributed as a dividend to those who had not been paid. 
In 1887, Walter Rye was appointed as the clerk and noticed a number of irregularities in the way the company ran. Edward Press was the general manager, although he was disqualified from the post as he profited from the canal, and there was no treasurer, despite the fact that the enabling act required one to be appointed. There was also no way to wind up the company. Rye's concerns were ignored, as nothing changed, and Press continued to run the canal. In 1893, the upper  from Swafield lock to Antingham were abandoned, but traffic figures for 1898 show that 6,386 tons arrived at wharves on the canal, 5,000 tons were loaded for shipping, and 400 tons were carried within the confines of the canal. Trade declined steadily and Press died on 2 July 1906. A director of the General Estates Company bought the canal at an auction held on 11 September 1907, for £2,550.
Heavy flooding in August 1912 washed away several staithes, and resulted in a breach of the canal bank above Bacton Wood Lock. The canal was bought by G Cubitt and G Walker in 1921, who immediately formed the North Walsham Canal Co Ltd, which bought the canal for the £1,500 they had paid. Some attempts were made to dredge the channel below Swafield locks in the 1920s, but the section above Swafield Bridge was abandoned in 1927 and has reverted to farmland. The wherry "Ella" made the final trading journey on the canal from Bacton Staithe in 1934.

The canal today

The canal was never nationalized and continued to belong to the North Walsham Canal Company. 
The canal is only navigable for the first  
Some  of the route, consisting of the pound above Bacton Wood lock, the lock itself, the pound below it and Ebridge Lock, were sold to the Old Canal Company in 2009, who intend to re-water this section. Work has concentrated on the lock at Bacton Mill, where reinstated water levels will enable the mill (which has been restored by its owner) to operate once more.Waterways, The journal of the Inland Waterways Association, Issue 227, Spring 2010
The residents of North Walsham made ten mosaics for the Millennium celebrations, one of which shows a Norfolk wherry.

Locks and Watermills



Bibliography

  |title=The Canals of Eastern England
  |year=1977
  |first=John |last=Boyes
  |first2=Ronald |last2=Russell
  |publisher=David and Charles
  |isbn=0-7153-7415-X
  |ref=harv}}
  |title=Inland Waterways of Great Britain (8th Ed.)
  |year=2009
  |first=Jane |last=Cumberlidge
  |publisher=Imray Laurie Norie and Wilson
  |isbn=978-1-84623-010-3
  |ref=harv}}
  |url=
  |title=Historical Account of the Navigable Rivers, Canals, and Railways, of Great Britain
  |first=Joseph |last=Priestley
  |year=1831
  |ref=harv}}

References




