[[Frank Morgan]]

CATEGORIES: 1890 births, 1949 deaths, American male film actors, American male stage actors, American male silent film actors, American male radio actors, Burials at Green-Wood Cemetery, Cornell University alumni, Deaths from myocardial infarction, California Republicans, Male actors from New York City, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer contract players, American people of German descent, American people of English descent, 20th-century American male actors, Hispanic and Latino American actors

Frank Morgan (born Frank Phillip Wuppermann; June 1, 1890 – September 18, 1949) was an American actor. He is best known for his multiple roles, including the title character, in The Wizard of Oz (1939).

Early life

Morgan was born Francis Phillip Wuppermann in New York City, the youngest of eleven children (six boys and five girls) born to Josephine Wright (née Hancox) and George Diogracia Wuppermann. His father was born in Venezuela, of German and Spanish descent, and was raised in Hamburg, Germany.us/morgan.S. of English descent. The family earned its wealth distributing Angostura bitters, permitting Wuppermann to attend Cornell University where he joined Phi Kappa Psi Fraternity.377: Bernard C. Harris Publishing Company, 1985. He then followed his older brother Ralph Morgan into show business, first on the Broadway stage and then into motion pictures.

Career and The Wizard of Oz

His first film was The Suspect in 1916. In 1917 he provided support to his friend John Barrymore in Raffles, the Amateur Cracksman, an independent film produced in and about New York City. Morgan's career expanded when talkies began, his most stereotypical role being that of a befuddled but good hearted middle-aged man.
By the mid-1930s, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer had been so impressed by Frank Morgan that they signed him to a lifetime contract. Morgan's best remembered performance, playing five roles,  is in The Wizard of Oz (1939), in which he played the carnival huckster "Professor Marvel", the Gatekeeper at the Emerald City, the coachman of the carriage drawn by "The Horse of a Different Color", the Guard who blubbers loudly upon seeing Dorothy cry at not being admitted to see the Wizard, and the Wizard himself. Morgan was cast for the role on September 22, 1938. W. C. Fields was originally chosen for the role of the Wizard, but the studio ran out of patience after protracted haggling over his fee.
In the 1940s Morgan costarred with Fanny Brice in one version (of several different series) of the radio program Maxwell House Coffee Time, aka The Frank Morgan-Fanny Brice Show. During the first half of the show Morgan would tell increasingly outlandish tall tales about his life adventures, much to the dismay of fellow cast members. After the Morgan segment there was a song, followed by Brice as 'Baby Snooks' for the last half of the show. In 1947, Morgan starred as the title character in the radio series, The Fabulous Dr. Tweedy. He also recorded a number of children's records, including the popular Gossamer Wump, released in 1949 by Capitol Records.
Like most character actors of the studio era, Frank Morgan was sought out for numerous motion picture roles. One of his last roles was as Barney Wile in The Stratton Story (1949), a true story about a ballplayer (played by James Stewart) who makes a comeback after having his leg amputated due to a hunting accident.
His last film Key to the City (1950) was released posthumously. In it Morgan played Fire Chief Duggan. He was the third lead, after Clark Gable and Loretta Young. He was nominated twice for an Academy Award: as Best Actor for his role as the cuckolded Duke of Florence in The Affairs of Cellini (1934), and as Best Supporting Actor for Tortilla Flat (1942), in which he played a simple Hispanic man.

Personal life and death

Morgan married Alma Muller (1895-1970) in 1914; they had one son. Their marriage ended with his death in 1949. He was widely known to have had a drinking problem, according to several  who worked with him, including actress Margaret Hamilton (the Wicked Witch of the West in The Wizard of Oz, 1939) and "Oz" historian Aljean Harmetz. Morgan sometimes carried a black briefcase to work fully equipped with a small mini bar.
Frank Morgan's niece, Claudia Morgan (née Wuppermann) was a stage and film actress, most notable for playing the role of Vera Claythorne in the first Broadway production of Agatha Christie's And Then There Were None.
Morgan was also a brother of playwright Carlos Wupperman, who was killed in the Rhineland in 1919 while on duty there with the Army of Occupation.  Wupperman had only one play produced on Broadway. The Triumph of X opened at the Comedy Theater in New York City on August 24, 1921,Theater Review by Alexander Woollcot New York Times, August 25, 1921. but ran only 30 performances.
The production, besides starring Frank Morgan, the play's female lead was Helen Menken (who would marry Humphrey Bogart in 1926), and in his first Broadway outing, character actor Robert Keith, father of actor Brian Keith and one-time husband of Theater Guild actress Peg Entwistle, who committed suicide by jumping from the Hollywood Sign in 1932.
Morgan died of a heart attack on September 18, 1949, while filming Annie Get Your Gun (replaced by Louis Calhern). He was the one major player from The Wizard of Oz who did not live to see the film become both a television fixture and an American institution. He is buried in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn. His tombstone carries his real name, Wuppermann, as well as his stage name, Frank Morgan. He has 2 stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for motion pictures at 1708 Vine Street and for radio at 6700 Hollywood Boulevard in Hollywood, California.

Filmography






