[[Mall of America]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in Bloomington, Minnesota, Hiawatha Line stations, Minneapolis–Saint Paul, Shopping malls established in 1992, Shopping malls in Hennepin County, Minnesota, Visitor attractions in Hennepin County, Minnesota

The Mall of America (MoA) is a shopping mall owned by the Triple Five Group. It is located in Bloomington, Minnesota (a suburb of the Twin Cities), southeast of the junction of Interstate 494 and Minnesota State Highway 77, north of the Minnesota River and across the interstate from the Minneapolis–St. Paul International Airport. Opened in 1992, the mall receives over 40 million visitors annually, the most of any mall in the world. 80 percent of the visitors are from Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa, the Dakotas, Illinois, Ohio, and Canada. The Triple Five Group, owned by Canada's Ghermezian family, owns and manages the Mall of America, as well as the West Edmonton Mall.

History

The Mall's concept was designed by Triple Five Group, owned by the Ghermezian brothers, who also own the largest shopping mall in North America, the West Edmonton Mall. Mall of America is located on the site of the former Metropolitan Stadium, where the Minnesota Vikings and Minnesota Twins played until the Hubert H. Humphrey Metrodome opened in 1982. A plaque in the amusement park commemorates the former location of home plate, and one seat from Met Stadium was placed in Mall of America at the exact location (including elevation) it occupied in the stadium, commemorating a  home run hit by hall-of-famer Harmon Killebrew on June 3, 1967.
In 1986, The Bloomington Port Authority signed an agreement with the Ghermezian organization. Groundbreaking for the Mall took place on June 14, 1989. Organizations involved include Melvin Simon and Associates, Teachers Insurance and Annuity (a.k.a. TIAA), the Triple Five Group, and the office of architect Jon Jerde.
In 1987 the Ghermezian brothers also met with Niagara Falls New York officials in regards to building a similar "mega mall" in that city. Discussions lasted for several months but a suitable economic package could not be put together by New York officials.
Mall of America opened its doors to the public August 11, 1992. Even before opening, the Mall had earned several nicknames, including "The Megamall" (or "The Megamess" during construction), "Sprawl of America", "Hugedale" (in reference to the four major "Dale" shopping malls within the Twin Cities, Rosedale, Southdale, Ridgedale, and (defunct as of 2010) Brookdale), and, simply, "The Mall".
Mall of America became the second-largest shopping mall in total area and largest in total store vendors in the United States when it opened. Its 42 million annual visitors equal roughly eight times the population of the state of Minnesota. The Mall employs over 12,000 workers.
During its run as an all-encompassing entertainment and retail venue, certain aspects - most notably bars - have come under scrutiny. A Mardi Gras-themed bar, Fat Tuesday, shut its doors in early-2000 due to indecent exposure and alcohol-related offenses.gov/oah/multimedia/pdf/210112816.rt.pdf
In 2003, after a protracted six-year legal battle between Simon Property Group, the managing general partner of the property, and the Ghermezian brothers/Triple Five Group, over majority ownership of the site, a federal appeals court ruled in favor of the Ghermezians, effectively transferring control and planning authority of the Mall back to the creator of the original concept., September 12, 2003. The dispute stemmed from a 1999 purchase of Teacher's Insurance's 27.5% equity stake by Simon Properties, giving them majority ownership. The Ghermezians claimed they were never told of the deal and sued Simon, citing fiduciary responsibility.
On November 3, 2006, the Ghermezians gained full control of Mall of America, spending US$1 billion to do so. Paul Business Journal, November 3, 2006.
The Mall of America is planned to be expanded with the construction of Phase II. It will develop a large empty parcel of land (the site of the former Met Center indoor arena) north of the mall, and integrate an IKEA store built on a portion of the property in 2004. The project will also include a dinner theatre, ice rink, three hotels, and a waterpark, similar in design to the West Edmonton Mall. The cost of expansion is $2.1 billion, and will double the Mall's size with a  extension. Paul Business Journal, July 26, 2007.
Mall of America has signed contracts to bring in Great Wolf Resorts as the waterpark operator, as well as Bass Pro Shops and a Kimpton Hotel. The expansion section will connect to the mall on all four levels, and the adjacent IKEA store via a second level bridge. There will be an NHL-size ice rink for public and private skating. A new parking structure will be included, adding 8,000 spaces to the complex. There will also be fine art exhibits  Mall of America Web site listing planned additions in Phase II expansion project. Retrieved 2012-01-22. and two upscale department stores.
On May 18, 2008, the Minnesota State Legislature passed a bill granting the City of Bloomington the right to use $34 million in tax-increment-financing to pay for public infrastructure to support the MoA expansion. In early 2011, construction began on an expansion of the south side of the mall near Killebrew Drive, where the 506-room Radisson Blu hotel opened in March, 2013.
On 29 November 2011 Google announced indoor maps for Mall of America along with several other places like airports, parks and public spaces.A new frontier for Google Maps 
On March 24, 2012, The Triple Five Group officially announced the start of a $200,000,000 expansion that would build into the north parking lot of the mall. Rather than the long planned Phase II expansion, this would be a step in building this expansion. The initial plans call for an additional hotel and an additional 200,000 square feet of retail space. In March, 2014, ground was broken on the Mall's north side for the $104 million, 14 storey JW Marriott hotel, owned and financed by the Shakopee Mdewakanton Sioux Community.  Retrieved 2014-03-21.
In winter 2012-2013, Mall of America hosted a 40 feet tall ice castle made of icicles formed from 4 million gallons of water and then fused together. The castle joined 50 large ice towers together to create a series of shimmering archways, tunnels, walls and caverns.

Architecture

The Mall of America has a gross area of  available as retail space. More than 530 stores are arranged along three levels of pedestrian walkways on the sides of the rectangle, with a fourth level on the east side. Four anchor department stores are located at the corners. The Mall is organized into four different zones, each with its own decorative style.
Despite Minnesota's cold winters, only the Mall's entrances and some below ground areas are heated. Heat is allowed in through skylights above Nickelodeon Universe. The majority of the heat is produced by lighting fixtures, other electric devices, and people in the mall.
Two nearly identical seven story parking ramps on the east and west sides of the Mall provide 12,287 parking spaces. Overflow parking north of the building provides an additional 1,200-1,500 spaces in addition to parking provided by IKEA (1,407 spaces) that is part of the currently under construction Phase II expansion of the Mall.

Mall contents

Level One is the location of Nickelodeon Universe, Sea Life Minnesota (underground), The Theme Park Food Court, LEGO, American Girl Doll store, the Apple Store and Microsoft store (directly across from each other near the Lego Store), and first level of general retail.
Skydeck Sports Grille and Lanes, formerly Jillian's, was initially closed due to low foot traffic and issue running a family friendly restaurant in a space occupied by several bars. The Mall was in negotiations with Dave and Buster's for several years, which failed to re-open the location. In 2011, new owners were brought back in and relaunched the restaurant and lanes under the new name. In order to keep the fourth floor from failing as it did in the early 2000s, the Mall has strategically leased to several different corporations, rather than leasing several spaced to one corporation. The bankruptcy of Jillian's in 2004 led to the lowest vacancy rate of the 4th floor, at 41%. The original Level Four had a comedy club, Hooters, bowling alley, arcade, and Planet Hollywood. Due to the structure of the building, Level Four only exists on the East and South side of the mall.
Currently, the mall has 23 empty stores. Mall of America is 4% vacant while nearby Southdale Center is 18% vacant.

Attractions

Nickelodeon Universe is an indoor theme park in the center of the mall. The park features roller coasters, among numerous other rides and attractions, and is the largest indoor theme park in the United States. Unlike many indoor amusement parks, Nickelodeon Universe has a great deal of natural foliage in and about the park, and its floor has a wide variance in height - the highest ground level in the park is  above the lowest. The park features two new roller coasters, SpongeBob SquarePants Rock Bottom Plunge and Avatar Airbender, and a new thrill ride called BrainSurge. The latter roller coaster bills itself as a "rather peculiar" ride.  It also has a miniature golfing section called Moose Mountain. This miniature golf course features eighteen holes and a relatively fast astroturf surface.
At the SEA LIFE Minnesota Aquarium, guests travel through a 
MOA has partnered with EMS Entertainment to open a permanent exhibits space on the third floor of the old Bloomingdale's space on the southeast corner of the mall that will host exhibitions of different kinds. There is space for three exhibits at a time with one larger exhibit space and two smaller ones. The first exhibit to open is Barbie: The Dreamhouse Experience, which opened to the public on February 14, 2014 is now open. Visitors have the opportunity to solve one of three different crimes by visiting the crime scenes, examining the evidence in a variety of labs and putting together their report for Gil Grissom. Visitors are guided by videos featuring cast members from the show and real forensic specialists. The third exhibit will be based on the Star Trek television franchise.bizjournals.html

Nostalgic artifacts or memorials

Twin Cities public events:

Transit and Mall of America Transit Station

The Mall of America Transit Station is the busiest transit hub/station in Minnesota, with bus and light rail service linking the mall to many destinations in the Minneapolis - St. Paul metro. Public transit service is provided by Metro Transit and Minnesota Valley Transit Authority.  Many area hotels and Mystic Lake Casino offer free shuttles to their establishments. The transit station for local bus/rail service is in the lower level of the eastern parking ramp. From there, the METRO Blue Line light rail connects the mall to the Minneapolis–Saint Paul International Airport and downtown Minneapolis (another shopping destination) and terminates at Target Field home of the Minnesota Twins (MLB baseball team). The mall is not a park and ride facility, and overnight parking is banned to prevent passengers taking the train to the airport. Commuters are encouraged to use the nearby 28th Avenue Station's parking ramp. The mall is the nineteenth and final stop on the Blue Line and is the northern terminus of the Red Line. The Mall of America Transit Station is undergoing a study to increase efficiencies and capacities, and to provide a better experience for its users; estimates for the upgrade are approximately $20 million.

Mall security

The mall's private security personnel were featured in 2010 TLC series Mall Cops: Mall of America.
In 2011, NPR's All Things Considered and Morning Edition, PBS's Newshour both aired programs documenting security abuses by the Mall's security personnel.
At the mall people have been questioned or detained for operating video cameras, using notebooks, or other perceived suspicious behavior.  Michael Rozin, the former manager of the mall's behavior detection unit instructs its members that "suspicious behavior" constitutes "photographing such things as air-conditioning ducts or signs that a shopper might have something to hide".

Slogans

Amusement park and other Mall features

Image:MOA1.
Image:Metstadium-homeplate.
Image:MOA Killebrew chair1.
Image:MOA Carousel 040531b.
Image:MOA Carousel 040531a.
Image:BubbaGumpMOA4. restaurant.
Image:MOA2.
Image:MOA3. The Kite-Eating Tree ride is shown in this picture.
Image:MOA kite tree swing-along 080920.
Image:MOA Rotunda Flag 080704.
Image:MOA Hours 080704.
Image:MOA lake wobegon 080920.
Image:MOA Al's Farm Toys 080920.
Image:MOA sports stores 080920.
Image:Minnesota Picnic Seurat takeoff 020402.
Image:Lego at MoA.
File:Lego at MOA 2010.








