[[Aranjuez]]

CATEGORIES: Aranjuez, Municipalities in the Community of Madrid, Populated places in Madrid

Aranjuez () is a town and municipality lying 42 km south of Madrid in the southern part of the Madrid Region or Community of Madrid. It is located at the confluence of the Tagus and Jarama rivers, 44 km from Toledo. As of 2009, it had a population of 54,055.
It is one of the Royal Estates of the Crown of Spain since the times of Philip II of Spain in 1560.

History

There are several theories about the origin of the name. The most widely accepted one states that it comes from the Basque language, deriving from arantza ("hawthorn" in English). Other theories say that it comes from Latin Ara Jovis or Ara Iovia, which means Jupiter's altar, but currently the pre-Roman name is preferred.
In 1178, the area was acquired by the Order of Santiago. Ferdinand and Isabella, the "Catholic monarchs", converted Aranjuez into a royal site. It was the spring residence of the kings of Spain from the late 19th century.
During the reign of Philip II of Spain, in the second half of the 16th century, the royal palace was constructed, designed by Juan Bautista de Toledo and Juan de Herrera. About 200 years later the city of Aranjuez itself came into being during the reign of Ferdinand VI; previously, only relatives of the monarch had been allowed to live in Aranjuez. In 1808 after the city revolted, Charles IV of Spain was forced to abdicate in favour of his son Ferdinand VII of Spain.
Aranjuez was reached by a railway line to Madrid in 1851, the so-called Strawberry Train. This was the second railway line in Spain, after that of Barcelona-Mataró (1848).
In 1939, Joaquín Rodrigo composed the Concierto de Aranjuez, which would make Aranjuez famous all over the world.

Main sites

The city was declared Conjunto Histórico-Artístico ("Historic Artistic Junction") in 1983. In 2001 UNESCO listed the Aranjuez Cultural landscape as a World Heritage Site.

Mariblanca

This was the first extension beyond the Royal Palace, along the south bank of the river Tagus (Local spelling Tajo). The royal Church of San Antonio which was built by Philip IV of Spain for both public and ceremonial royal use, stands at the southern end of Plaza San Antonio popularly known as Mariblanca, (possibly because it is a 'sea' of white sand or mar de arena blanca or else an allusion to the female statue of the fountain at the far end, which is the Venus of sculptor Juan Reyna in 1762).
This is now an occasional festival ground which is lined on the west by the quarters of the officers (Casa de Oficios) and knights (Casa de Caballeros now Juzgardos or law courts facility) and on the west by the Casa de las Infantas (built by Charles II of Spain for his sons Gabriel and Antonio, which now houses the tourist office).
To the north is the cobbled Santiago Rusiñol roundabout which links the Madrid road (M305/A4) with Calle de la Reina and the two grand boulevards av. de las Infantas as well as the roads along the side of Plaza San Antonio/Mariblanca, the south-bound calle Florida and northbound Antigua Carretera de Andalucía.

Plaza de Toros

One of the earliest in Spain the original was built in 1760 by order of King Charles IV, the refurbished structure was opened by his wife, Maria Luisa of Parma, on 14 May 1797. It had a capacity of 9000 spectators at a time when the population, according to the then prime minister, was only 4226! There are twelve public entrances which lead to three circular galleries, each with 10 stone seating benches. Royalty and their guests enjoyed a private entrance with stairs leading directly to the royal box.
Following a fire in 1809 King Ferdinand VII had it rebuilt, and donated it to the town, who installed a small museum (usually only open to the public Saturday, Sunday and Monday mornings at 11.15)

Buildings

Sights in the city include many buildings in addition to the 17th century Royal Palace and church mentioned above:

Parks and Gardens

Numerous parks and gardens are open to the public (detailed in )

Government and administration

The city of Aranjuez is governed by a single municipal authority, which, for convenience divides into the several administrative districts which in turn may contain residential estates (''urbanizaciones):

Economy

The main pillars of the local economy are hotels and tourism. Aranjuez has always been an attractive city for tourists with its Royal Palace, the gardens, the Tagus river and the landscapes. In 2001 this city was designated as a World Heritage Cultural landscape by UNESCO, and since then, tourism has kept on increasing until hit by the 2008 recession. Prior to 2008 much money was spent in order to beautify Aranjuez and many pubs and restaurants were opened (from 2001 to 2004 their number increased 22%).

La Montaña

This was a 'pharonic' proyecto de Actuación Urbanística (PAU) of some 5000 mixed 'open market homes (Viviendas precio libre or VPL) of which, by 2012, something around one fifth were actually sold. The remainder are now owned by the 'bad bank' SAREB
In 2005 a major events and gambling installation Gran Casino was opened in the (northern) barrio Montaña near the existing conference centers of La Finca and Hotel Barcelo (which includes an 18-hole golf course). Nearby, the ambitious Plaza commercial center, built but not fitted, has never opened, and the smaller enterprise center, although open, contains a local supermarket, two cafés and less than a dozen other small businesses. Finally, in March 2008 the University Hospital Tajo was opened. In 2013 this hospital, together with several others medical facilities in the Community of Madrid was threatened with privatisation, provoking considerable public protest known as the Marea Blanca (the white (coat) wave or tide).

Agriculture

Aranjuez is located on the fertile plain in the deep, high sided valley (cuenca) of the river Tagus (the comarca Vega del Tajo), whose rich soil is suitable for growing wheat and other cereals. There are also horticultural plantations, notably of asparagus and strawberries but also (centered around Villaconejos) vineyards and extensive production of melons. Typical of the neighbouring region of Castilla-La Mancha Aranjuez and the Vega del Tajo also produce a wide variety of products such as sorghum, sunflowers, potatoes, tomatoes, artichokes, beets and Jalapeño peppers.
The Real Cortijo de San Isidro is a settlement about 6 km north of Aranjuez where King Charles III of Spain established a royal farm in 1766, exploiting existing agricultural land. There is a village with a royal chapel (Hermitage) and a wine cellar (Bodegas del Real Cortijo de San Isidro)

Industry

The proximity to Madrid and the good communications by road and rail made Aranjuez a suitable location for industry: detergents, Mechanical engineering, computer and electrical material, photographic materials, pharmaceutical products, paints and varnishes, sugar refineries, and oil mills.
The majority of the industries are located to the west of the railway station or in the "Gonzalo Chacón" industrial park, in the south. The main existing industries are:
Previous industrial activities now reduced, mothballed or closed included

Transportation

Road

Aranjuez is served by the Autovía A-4 (Madrid Cordoba). The exit at Km 37 connects to the to M-305 (regular road which leads via La Montaña district and automotive sales zone (3 km north of city) and then directly to the royal palace. The A4 exit at Km 52 serves the south of the town, as does the toll road Radial R-4.
Six main line bus routes serve the locality via the town bus station e Las Infantas. Taxi's and local bus services (of which there are 4 routes) link this to the railway station.
The municipality provides a public pedal bicycle scheme which is free, although there is a modest registration fee.
There is also a tourist Chiquitren road train which tours the town and the extensive jardin del principe royal garden.

Rail

Aranjuez railway station building is richly ornamented in the neomudéjar style. It was built by the then operator Compañía de los Ferrocarriles de Madrid a Zaragoza y Alicante between 1922 and 1927. It is a recently renovated by RENFE, who operate an hourly shuttle service to Madrid and medium distance services to other destinations. The Strawberry train is a special Steam locomotive Heritage railway service provided for summer visitors and tourists.

River

The river is obstructed and so used only by a local tourist boat and canoeists. There is an annual fun rafting competition run by the pirates of the tajo
An ancient irrigation system for the royal kitchen-gardens and orchards (now farmland) includes channels and a noria waterwheel, recently restored in a leisure area known as Talud Sur (south bank of) de La Montaña de Aranjuez. The old, tree-lined avenues around are maintained provide shady level walkways.

Local media

Print media

Radio stations

Sports facilities

Notable people

Culture

Traditions

=Festivals=

=Gastronomy=

Twin cities








