[[River Thurne]]

CATEGORIES: Norfolk Broads, Rivers of Norfolk

The River Thurne is a river in Norfolk, England in The Broads. OS Explorer Map OL40 - The Broads. ISBN 0-319-23769-9. Just six miles (10 km) long it rises two miles (3 km) from the coast near Martham Broad and is navigable from West Somerton. It flows southwest and is linked by Candle Dyke and Heigham Sound to both Horsey Mere and Hickling Broad. It continues southwest and flows through Potter Heigham (passing under its medieval bridge) and enters the River Bure just south of Thurne dyke, near St. Benet's Abbey.

Navigation

Much of the River Thurne system is navigable, but there are a number of restrictions to the size of boats that can use it. The most famous is the medieval bridge at Potter Heigham. Most road traffic now uses the A149 Bypass, slightly to the north, but the narrow central arch restricts passage to boats needing headroom of less than 
Above Potter Heigham, the river is joined by Candle Dyke, which connects to Heigham Sound, from which White Slea Mere leads on to Hickling Broad, where there are moorings. Both Heigham Sound and Hickling Broad are quite shallow, and the navigation channels are clearly marked. Hickling Broad is also a National Nature Reserve. From Heigham Sound, Meadow Dyke leads northwards to Horsey Mere, most of which is a National Trust nature reserve. The National Trust also own Horsey Drainage Mill. Beyond Horsey Mere lies Waxham New Cut, along which boats up to  away by boat.
The main river is navigable almost to its source. The channel passes between the parts of Martham Broad, which is a nature reserve owned by the Norfolk Wildlife Trust, to reach West Somerton staithes. The staithes are at the end of a dyke cut from Martham Broad to the village.
Below Potter Heigham, Womack Water is navigable to Ludham, about  to the village of Thurne.

Structures

Potter Heigham bridge is one of the most well-known structures on the Broads. It consists of three arches, two triangular ones built in the fourteenth century, and a central circular arch built when the bridge was altered in the fifteenth century. The brick parapets date from the late eighteenth century. The bridge is a grade II listed structure, and is also a scheduled ancient monument.
The only other place at which vehicles can cross the navigable channel is at Martham Ferry, where a nineteenth-century bridge was replaced in the early 1920s by a floating swing bridge. The deck rests on two semi-circular steel buoyancy tanks, and there are concrete abutments on both sides of the river. The bridge pivots on a post at the south side of the river, and is connected by a chain to a winch on the north bank. The structure is grade II listed,
There are nine drainage mills situated along the banks of the river. Brograve Mill on the Waxham New Cut is an early nineteenth century, three-storey brick mill, which is derelict but retained parts of its sails and most of its internal machinery in 2003. The next mill downstream is the derelict Repp's Drainage Mill below Potter Heigham.
Thurne Dyke windpump was built in 1820 as a two-storey mill, but a third storey was added in the middle of the nineteenth century. Its cap was blown off during a gale in 1919, and a steam turbine was installed in 1926. It ceased to operate in 1936, and gradually became derelict until it was bought by Bob Morse in 1949, after he moved to Norfolk. He started to restore it with help from Albert England, a descendant of the original builders. Further work was done by the millwrights Thomas Smithdale and Sons of Acle in 1962, and Morse was assisted by the Norfolk Mills Trust from 1975, who funded the fitting of some of the shutters to the sails in 2002, enabling the mill to turn under wind power again. It still contains its internal machinery, which drove an external turbine, housed in an iron casing, and it is grade II* listed. Morse went on to form Morse's Wind Engine Park, a museum devoted to wind pumps from around the world, before he died in 2007.

Points of interest

Bibliography

  |title=Inland Waterways of Great Britain (8th Ed)
  |first=Jane |last=Cumberlidge
  |year=2009
  |publisher=Imray Laurie Norie and Wilson
  |isbn=978-1-84623-010-3
  |ref=harv}}

References




