[[Ocarina]]

CATEGORIES: Chinese musical instruments, Clay toys, Early musical instruments, Internal fipple flutes, Italian musical instruments, Traditional toys, Vessel flutes

The ocarina  Variations exist, but a typical ocarina is an enclosed space with four to twelve finger holes and a mouthpiece that projects from the body. It is traditionally made from clay or ceramic, but other materials are also used—such as plastic, wood, glass, metal, or bone. An example of an ocarina made of an animal horn is the medieval German gemshorn.

History

The ocarina belongs to a very old family of instruments, believed to date back over 12,000 years. In Japan, the traditional ocarina is known as the tsuchibue (kanji: 土笛; literally "earthen flute"). Different expeditions to Mesoamerica, including the one conducted by Cortés, resulted in the introduction of the ocarina to the courts of Europe. Both the Mayans and Aztecs produced versions of the ocarina, but it was the Aztecs who brought Europe the song and dance that accompanied the ocarina. The ocarina went on to become popular in European communities as a toy instrument.
Its earliest use in Europe dates back to the 19th century in Budrio, a town near Bologna, Italy, where Giuseppe Donati transformed the ocarina from a toy, which only played a few notes, into a more comprehensive instrument (known as the  first "classical" ocarinas). The word ocarina in the Bolognese dialect of the Italian language means "little goose." The earlier form was known in Europe as a gemshorn, which was made from animal horns of the chamois ().
In 1998, the ocarina featured in the Nintendo 64 video game The Legend of Zelda: Ocarina of Time, It also featured later in other games in the The Legend of Zelda series.

Musical performance

Tone production/acoustics

How an ocarina works:
The airstream is directed on the labium by a fipple or internal duct, which is a narrowing rectangular slot in the mouthpiece, rather than relying on the player's lips as in a transverse flute. Like other flutes, the airstream alternates quickly between the inner and outer face of the labium as the pressure in the ocarina chamber oscillates. At first the sound is a broad-spectrum "noise" (i.e. "chiff"), but those frequencies that are identical with the fundamental frequency of the resonating chamber, (which depends on the fingering), as well as its overtones to a lesser extent, are selectively amplified. The ocarina, unlike other vessel flutes, has the unusual quality of not relying on the pipe length to produce a particular tone. Instead the tone is dependent on the ratio of the total surface area of opened holes to the total cubic volume enclosed by the instrument. This means that, unlike a flute or recorder, sound is created by resonance of the entire cavity and the placement of the holes on an ocarina is largely irrelevant – their size is the most important factor. Instruments that have toneholes close to the voicing/embouchure should be avoided, however; as an ocarina is a Helmholtz resonator, this weakens tonal production.
The resonator in the ocarina can create overtones, but because of the common "egg" shape, these overtones are many octaves above the keynote scale. Arthur H. Benade pp.473–476 In similar Helmholtz resonator instruments with a narrow cone shape, like the Gemshorn or Tonette, some partial overtones are available. The technique of overblowing to get a range of higher pitched notes is possible with the ocarina but not widely used because the resulting note is not "clean" enough, so the range of pitches available is limited to a 12th. Some Ocarina makers increase the range by designing double- or triple-chambered ocarinas (sometimes simply referred to as double or triple ocarinas) tuned an octave or a tenth apart although some double ocarinas are not made to increase the range, but to play in harmony with the other chambers.
These double and triple ocarinas can also play chords.  Different notes are produced by covering the holes, and by opening and closing more or less of the total hole area. The tone is then produced through the sound hole/embouchure. The tone can also be varied by changing blowing strength to bend pitch.

Musical notation/tabulature

Ocarina music is written in three main ways. The most apparent is the use of sheet music. There are archives of sheet music either specifically written for ocarinas, or adapted from piano sheet music. Since some ocarinas are fully chromatic and can be played in professional musical situations, including classical and folk, sheet music is an ideal notation for ocarinas.
Second is the use of numerical tablature, which expresses the musical notes as numbers. Some makers have developed their own system of numerical tablature for their ocarinas, while others follow a more universal system where numbers correspond to different notes on the scale. This method is typically used by beginners who have not learned to read sheet music.
A third method uses a pictorial tablature similar to the ocarina's finger hole pattern, with blackened holes that represent holes to cover. The tablature represents the holes on the top of the ocarina, and, where necessary, the holes on the underside. This enables easy playing, particularly for beginners. The two most popular tabulature systems are:
Depending on the artist, some may write a number or figure over the picture to depict how many beats to hold the note.

Types

There are many different styles of ocarinas varying in shape and the number of holes.

Similar instruments

Other vessel flutes include the Chinese xun and African globe flutes.  The xun (simplified Chinese: 埙; traditional: 塤; pinyin: xūn) is a Chinese vessel flute made of clay or ceramic. It is one of the oldest Chinese instruments. Shaped like an egg, it differs from the ocarina in being side-blown, like the Western concert flute, rather than having a recorder-like mouthpiece (a fipple or beak). Similar instruments exist in Korea (the hun) and Japan (the tsuchibue).seocarinas.html
A related family of instruments is the closed-pipe family, which includes the panpipes and other instruments that produce their tone by vibrating a column of air within a stopped cylinder.
The old fashioned jugband jug also has similar properties.
The traditional German instrument Gemshorn works nearly the same way as an ocarina. The only difference is the material it is made from: the horn of the chamois, goat, or other suitable animal.seocarinas.html
The borrindo is a simple hollow clay ball with three to four holes, one somewhat larger and the others smaller and of the same size. The holes are arranged in an isosceles triangular form. The borrindo is made out of soft alluvial clay available in plenty everywhere in the central Indus Valley. Being of the simplest design, it is made even by children. Some adults make fine borrindos of larger size, put pottery designs on them, and bake them. These baked borrindos, with pottery designs, are the later evolved forms of this musical instrument, which appears to have previously been used in its simple unbaked form for a long time.absoluteastronomy. Finger tips are placed on smaller holes to regulate the notes. Its ease of play makes it popular among children and the youth.

Gallery

File:STL Triple Bass.
File:focalinkDoubleAC. The two blow holes in the mouthpiece are clearly visible, which makes it possible for the player to play an extended range of notes (17 in total, in this case from A4 to C6).
File:Blueandwhitepatternocarinaanonymous1923.
File:Ocarina SopranoF AltoC. The double holes on front indicate a fingering system developed in 20th Century Japan.
File:Pendant4ocarina.
File:Paolo collection.
File:STL Teacarina ocarina.
File:Ocarina.
File:Borrindo. The borrindo is made out of soft alluvial clay plentiful in the central Indus Valley.





Further reading




