[[Hamlet (1990 film)]]

CATEGORIES: Films based on Hamlet, 1990 films, 1990s romantic drama films, American films, American romantic drama films, British romantic drama films, French drama films, English-language films, Films directed by Franco Zeffirelli, Incest in film, Icon Productions films, Carolco Pictures films, Warner Bros. films, Film scores by Ennio Morricone

Hamlet is a 1990 drama film based on the Shakespearean tragedy of the same name directed by Franco Zeffirelli and starring Mel Gibson as the eponymous character.  The film also features Glenn Close, Alan Bates, Paul Scofield, Ian Holm, Helena Bonham Carter, Stephen Dillane, and Nathaniel Parker.  It is notable for being the first film from Icon Productions, a company co-founded by Gibson.

Cast

The cast includes three actors - Paul Scofield, Alan Bates, and Ian Holm - who had themselves played Hamlet on stage or in film. It also features two actors - Stephen Dillane and Michael Maloney - who went on to play Hamlet onstage.

Production

Dunnottar Castle, Stonehaven, Blackness Castle, and Dover Castle were used as locations in the film. Dover Castle provided the main location for Elsinore Castle, the home of Hamlet and his family.


Adaptation and interpretation

Film scholar Deborah Cartmell has suggested that Zeffirelli's Shakespeare films are appealing because they are "sensual rather than cerebral", an approach by which he aims to make Shakespeare "even more popular".^ Cartmell, Deborah Franco Zeffirelli and Shakespeare in Jackson, Russell (ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Screen (Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2007) p.216, quoting a Zeffirelli interview given to The South Bank Show in December 1997 To this end, he cast Gibson — then famous for the Mad Max and Lethal Weapon films — in the title role. Cartmell also notes that the text is drastically cut, but with the effect of enhancing the roles of the women.
J. Lawrence Guntner has suggested that Zeffirelli's cinematography borrows heavily from the action film genre that made Gibson famous, noting that its average shot length is less than six seconds. Lawrence: Hamlet, Macbeth and King Lear on film in Jackson, Russell (ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Film (Cambridge University Press, second edition, 2007) p. 124 In casting Gibson, the director has been said to have made the star's reputation part of the performance, encouraging the audience "to see the Gibson that they have come to expect from his other films".38-9, cited by Harry Keyishian, Shakespeare and Movie Genre: The Case of Hamlet in Jackson, Russell (ed.) The Cambridge Companion to Shakespeare on Film (second edition, Cambridge University Press, 2007) p.77ref>  Indeed, Gibson was cast after Zeffirelli watched his character, Martin Riggs, contemplate suicide in Lethal Weapon.72-81 The fight between Hamlet and Laertes is an example of using Gibson's experience in action movies; Gibson handily depicts Hamlet as an experienced fencer.

Reception

Critical response

Hamlet was well received by most critics and currently holds a 76% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes with the consensus, "It may lack some of the depth and complexity of the play, but Mel Gibson and Franco Zeffirelli make a surprisingly successful team."
Noted critic Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times awarded the film three-and-a-half out of four stars, calling Mel Gibson's portrayal of the Danish Prince "a strong, intelligent performance."
Despite a mostly positive response, some critics such as Peter Travers of Rolling Stone gave the film a negative review, calling Gibson's performance "an earnest but pedestrian reading."

Accolades

The movie received two Academy Awards nominations, for Best Art Direction and Best Costume Design (Dante Ferretti, Francesca Lo Schiavo).






