[[University of Twente]]

CATEGORIES: University of Twente, Universities in the Netherlands, Technical universities and colleges, Educational institutions established in 1961, 1961 establishments in the Netherlands, Buildings and structures in Overijssel



University of Twente (Dutch: Universiteit Twente; ) is a university located in Enschede, Netherlands. It offers research and degree programmes in the social and behavioral sciences and in engineering. In keeping with its entrepreneurial spirit, the University is committed to making economic and social contribution to the region of the Netherlands where it is based. The UT collaborates with Delft University of Technology and Eindhoven University of Technology under the umbrella of the 3TU.

History

The University was founded in 1961 as the Technische Hogeschool Twente, the Netherlands' third higher vocational institute of technology later to become a university (the other two being Delft and Eindhoven). Accordingly, in 1986, it changed its name to Universiteit Twente (University of Twente). The Dutch government's decision to locate the new institute in Enschede, the main city of Twente, had much to do with the north-eastern province's rich industrial history. Another important consideration was the fact that the local economy needed a boost to compensate for the dwindling textile industry.

Campus

The University of Twente was built on the former country estate of Drienerlo, situated between Hengelo and Enschede. On this beautifully landscaped 140 hectare estate, comprising woodland, meadows and water, architects Van Tijen and Van Embden designed the Netherlands' first - and so far only - campus university along American lines. Students and staff live, work and pursue their leisure activities on campus. Through the years, several other important architects and artists have made their own contributions to the design of the campus.
Students and staff at the University of Twente continue to form an active academic community. The beautiful campus of the University has excellent sports and cultural facilities that have stimulated the development of a rich mix of student societies, student social events, and a constant flow of new initiatives. The Student Union, which is run entirely by students, promotes the interests of all student societies and also manages several premises, including the student social centre in the heart of Enschede.

Organization

Administration

The current rector of the university is Prof.dr. H. Brinksma, who took the post in 2009 and was reappointed in 2012. The other two members of the executive board are Mr. V. van der Chijs (President Executive Board) and Ir. K.J. van Ast (Vice-President) 

Faculties

There are Six Faculties at the University of Twente:
Each Faculty is in turn organized into several departments.

Academics

Research

=Institutes=

=Knowledge and research centres=

Education

The degree programmes at the University of Twente range from business administration, psychology to applied physics, engineering and biomedical technology. The curriculum is broad, flexible and relevant to the labour market. Most students combine coursework in their major subject with a coherent set of minors in another discipline. A growing number of foreign students are finding their way to the UT. Almost all postgraduate programmes (and several undergraduate programmes) are taught in English. Half of all PhD students at the UT now come from outside the Netherlands.
The University of Twente has a world class research programme. In the applied sciences, the emphasis is on nanotechnology, process technology, engineering, information & communication technology, and the biomedical sciences. The University also has a strong track record in management and behavioural sciences.
The University of Twente sets great importance on the useful application of knowledge in the society. Patents, lifelong learning programmes, and spin-off companies testify to this commitment, as does UT's intensive involvement in research programmes that enhance knowledge infrastructure in the Netherlands. So far, the UT has produced over 700 spin-off companies; more than any other Dutch university.
From the outset, the University of Twente has sought to put the applied sciences in a wider social context. Students and researchers are always challenged to look beyond the boundaries of their own subject area and to establish links between different disciplines. The University of Twente believes that a multidisciplinary approach will stimulate innovation in science and society alike.

Rankings

In 2013 QS World University Rankings
In 2013-14 Times Higher Education World University Rankings
In 2013 Academic Ranking of World Universities
The Leiden Ranking (2013) ranked the University of Twente 111 overall in the world.
University of Twente also holds the title of the most entrepreneurial university in Netherlands and was voted the best Dutch university in the area of valorization.utwente.doc/

Timeline of rectors

Notes and references




