[[PLUNA]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct airlines of Uruguay, 1936 establishments in Uruguay, Airlines established in 1936, Airlines disestablished in 2012, Government-owned airlines, Government-owned companies of Uruguay, IATA members, Latin American and Caribbean Air Transport Association

PLUNA Líneas Aéreas Uruguayas S.A. from its hub at Carrasco International Airport.
On  The carrier was wholly owned by the government at the time of its closure.

History

Foundation

The airline was established in September 1936 and started operations the following month, on  The two planes were christened Churrinche and San Alberto, the latter in honor of the brothers' father. PLUNA flew 2,600 passengers in their first fiscal year, a huge success for that era. It also flew 20,000 pieces of mail and 70,000 newspapers.
The carrier saw the incorporation of both the Potez 62 and the Douglas DC-2 into its fleet in the early 1940s, the latter acquired from the U.S. government. Following the outbreak of World War II, PLUNA was forced to suspend operations between 1942 and 1944 due to the lack of spare parts. The delicate position PLUNA was in at this time led the Uruguayan Government to aid the company by boosting its stake to 85% on 

Nationalisation

The airline became a wholly government-owned company on . After World War II, PLUNA's fleet included two Douglas DC-2s which were operated on the Montevideo–Paysandú–Salto route until they were retired by 1951. In the same year, a Douglas DC-3 and four de Havilland Herons were added to the fleet. The Herons only stayed in PLUNA's fleet for a short time and by 1957 they had been sold. The DC-3s remained in service much longer, and in 1971 the last four of them were sold to the Fuerza Aérea Uruguaya.
São Paulo was added to the route network in January 1954. On  the carrier entered the turbine era with the delivery of its first of three Vickers Viscounts four-engined turboprops purchased new from Vickers; it later acquired two Viscount 700s from Alitalia and three Viscount 800s from VASP.
PLUNA's growth slowed considerably for the next three decades, but it entered the jet age soon after jets were introduced to the world, and added John F. Kennedy International Airport (JFK) in New York, and Miami to its destinations, using Boeing 707 and Boeing 737 aircraft.
In the 1980s PLUNA began flying to Madrid, Asunción, Rio de Janeiro and Santiago de Chile, but services to JFK and Miami were suspended. In the meantime, as the city of Punta del Este flourished as a major tourist destination, PLUNA benefited from that. During this time, an office was also opened in Tel Aviv, Israel.

Privatisation

The 1990s saw financial trouble loom for PLUNA. In 1995, the company was transformed into a public–private partnership and the government sold 51% of the shares to a holding formed by an Argentine consortium named Tevycom and Uruguayan businessmen; the holding later sold half of its participation in PLUNA to Varig.
By late .
On 
In late 
In 
In September and October 2010 three additional new CRJ900s aircraft were delivered from the Bombardier factory. In April 2011 three options were taken up for delivery at the end of 2011 and these were delivered between September and November 2011. With these additions, PLUNA's fleet consisted of 13 airplanes, the highest number in its history.

Collapse

In early —following a strike that started two days earlier, after failing to find new investors for the company.
The government announced that both PLUNA's fleet and routes would be auctioned. There are no plans for the government to have any stake in PLUNA's successor. In 
Regionally, the void created by PLUNA's collapse benefits foreign airlines on some routes.

Destinations

, PLUNA linked Uruguay with two destinations in Argentina, one in Chile, one in Paraguay, and eight in Brazil.

Codeshare agreements

PLUNA had a codeshare agreement with Iberia, which actually operates the Montevideo–Madrid–Montevideo route. Under the same codeshare agreement passengers also connected from Madrid to many destinations within Spain and also to Frankfurt. PLUNA also announced a codeshare agreement with American Airlines, which would have placed PLUNA's code on American's Miami-Montevideo route, if it had government approval.

Fleet

Prior to its collapse, PLUNA's fleet consisted of 13 Bombardier CRJ900s regional jet aircraft, with an average age of 2.7 years, . Each aircraft was equipped with 90 seats in an all-economy class layout. The list below also includes equipment operated by the carrier throughout its history.

PLUNA had previously considered the Bombardier Q400 for the expansion into new markets. Nevertheless, on  the airline announced it had converted some of the outstanding options for 3 new CRJ900 aircraft into firm orders for delivery before the end of 2011.

Accidents and incidents

PLUNA had only one fatal accident with the loss of ten crew members, the Aviation Safety Network records 3 hull-loss accidents/incidents for the airline.








