[[Dedekind domain]]

CATEGORIES: Commutative algebra, Algebraic number theory

In abstract algebra, a Dedekind domain or Dedekind ring, named after Richard Dedekind, is an integral domain in which every nonzero proper ideal factors into a product of prime ideals.  It can be shown that such a factorization is then necessarily unique up to the order of the factors.  There are at least three other characterizations of Dedekind domains which are sometimes taken as the definition: see below.
A field is a commutative ring in which there are no nontrivial proper ideals, so that any field is a Dedekind domain, however in a rather vacuous way.  Some authors add the requirement that a Dedekind domain not be a field.  Many more authors state theorems for Dedekind domains with the implicit proviso that they may require trivial modifications for the case of fields. 
An immediate consequence of the definition is that every principal ideal domain (PID) is a Dedekind domain.  In fact a Dedekind domain is a unique factorization domain (UFD) if and only if it is a PID.

The prehistory of Dedekind domains

Alternative definitions

(DD1) Every nonzero proper ideal factors into primes.
Thus a Dedekind domain is a domain which satisfies any one, and hence all four, of (DD1) through (DD4).  Which of these conditions one takes as the definition is therefore merely a matter of taste.  In practice, it is often easiest to verify (DD4).
A Krull domain is a higher-dimensional analog of a Dedekind domain: a Dedekind domain that is not a field is a Krull domain of dimension 1. This notion can be used to study the various characterizations of a Dedekind domain. In fact, this is the definition of a Dedekind domain used in Bourbaki's "Commutative algebra".
A Dedekind domain can also be characterized in terms of homological algebra: an integral domain is a Dedekind domain if and only if it is a hereditary ring; i.e., every submodule of a projective module over it is projective. Similarly, an integral domain is a Dedekind domain if and only if every divisible module over it is injective.

Some examples of Dedekind domains

All principal ideal domains and therefore all discrete valuation rings are Dedekind domains.
The other class of Dedekind rings which is arguably of equal importance comes from geometry: let C be a nonsingular geometrically integral affine algebraic curve over a field k.  Then the coordinate ring kC of regular functions on C is a Dedekind domain.  Indeed, this is essentially an algebraic translation of these geometric terms: the coordinate ring of any affine variety is, by definition, a finitely generated k-algebra, so Noetherian; moreover curve means dimension one and nonsingular implies (and, in dimension one, is equivalent to) normal, which by definition means integrally closed.  
Both of these constructions can be viewed as special cases of the following basic result:
Theorem: Let R be a Dedekind domain with fraction field K.  Let L be a finite degree field extension of K and denote by S the integral closure of R in L.  Then S is itself a Dedekind domain.
Applying this theorem when R is itself a PID gives us a way of building Dedekind domains out of PIDs.  Taking R = Z this construction tells us precisely that rings of integers of number fields are Dedekind domains.  Taking R = kt gives us the above case of nonsingular affine curves.
Zariski and Samuel were sufficiently taken by this construction to pose as a question whether every Dedekind domain arises in such a fashion, i.e., by starting with a PID and taking the integral closure in a finite degree field extension. 284  A surprisingly simple negative answer was given by L. Claborn.Claborn 1965, Example 1-9

Fractional ideals and the class group

For any fractional ideal I, one may define the fractional ideal
For a general domain R, it is meaningful to take the quotient of the monoid Frac(R) of all fractional ideals by the submonoid Prin(R) of principal fractional ideals.  However this quotient itself is generally only a monoid.  In fact it is easy to see that the class of a fractional ideal I in Frac(R)/Prin(R) is invertible if and only if I itself is invertible.
Now we can appreciate (DD3): in a Dedekind domain—and only in a Dedekind domain! -- is every fractional ideal invertible.  Thus these are precisely the class of domains for which Frac(R)/Prin(R) forms a group, the ideal class group Cl(R) of R.  This group is trivial if and only if R is a PID, so can be viewed as quantifying the obstruction to a general Dedekind domain being a PID.
We note that for an arbitrary domain one may define the Picard group Pic(R) as the group of invertible fractional ideals Inv(R) modulo the subgroup of principal fractional ideals.  For a Dedekind domain this is of course the same as the ideal class group.  However, on a more general class of domains—including Noetherian domains and Krull domains -- the ideal class group is constructed in a different way, and there is a canonical homomorphism 
which is however generally neither injective nor surjective.  This is an affine analogue of the distinction between Cartier divisors and Weil divisors on a singular algebraic variety.
A remarkable theorem of L. Claborn (Claborn 1966) asserts that for any abelian group G whatsoever, there exists a Dedekind domain R whose ideal class group is isomorphic to G.  Later, C.R. Leedham-Green showed that such an R may constructed as the integral closure of a PID in a quadratic field extension (Leedham-Green 1972).  In 1976, M. Rosen showed how to realize any countable abelian group as the class group of a Dedekind domain which is a subring of the rational function field of an elliptic curve, and conjectured that such an "elliptic" construction should be possible for a general abelian group (Rosen 1976).  Rosen's conjecture was proven in 2008 by P.L. Clark (Clark 2009).
In contrast, one of the basic theorems in algebraic number theory asserts that the class group of the ring of integers of a number field is finite; its cardinality is called the class number and it is an important and rather mysterious invariant, notwithstanding the hard work of many leading mathematicians from Gauss to the present day.

Finitely generated modules over a Dedekind domain

In view of the well known and exceedingly useful structure theorem for finitely generated modules over a principal ideal domain (PID), it is natural to ask for a corresponding theory for finitely generated modules over a Dedekind domain.  
differ only in the order of the factors.
if and only if 
and
Rank one projective modules can be identified with fractional ideals, and the last condition can be rephrased as 
These results were established by Ernst Steinitz in 1912.

Locally Dedekind rings

Notes



Further reading




