[[That Thing You Do!]]

CATEGORIES: 1990s musical films, 1990s romantic comedy films, 20th Century Fox films, American films, American musical comedy films, American romantic comedy films, American rock music films, Directorial debut films, Films about music and musicians, Films directed by Tom Hanks, Films set in Pennsylvania, Films set in 1964, Film scores by Howard Shore

That Thing You Do! is a 1996 musical comedy film written and directed by Tom Hanks. Set in the summer of 1964, the movie tells the story of the quick rise and fall of a one-hit wonder pop band. The film also resulted in a musical hit with the song "That Thing You Do".

Plot

In 1964, Guy Patterson (Tom Everett Scott) is a drummer who works at his family's Erie, Pennsylvania struggling appliance store -- "Patterson's Appliances". Jimmy Mattingly (Johnathon Schaech) and Lenny Haise (Steve Zahn) ask Guy to sit in with their band at the annual Mercyhurst College talent show, because their regular drummer (Giovanni Ribisi) has broken his arm. The last member of the group is the unnamed bass player (Ethan Embry). In the film, the character is never addressed by name and is credited as "T.B. Player". The group rehearses a ballad titled "That Thing You Do". Afterwards, Guy asks if they only have to perform that one song for the talent show, and when told that's the case, he says "Wonderful!" Jimmy's girlfriend, Faye Dolan (Liv Tyler), is inspired by Guy's exclamation and suggests that the group call themselves "The Oneders" (pronounced "wonders," after Guy's use of the word "Wonderful"); with various people mispronouncing it later in the film as "oh-need-ers".
At the talent show, Guy launches into a faster tempo for "That Thing You Do" than in rehearsal and the audience goes wild for the song. The Oneders win the $100 top prize and obtain their first paying gig at a local pizza parlor. With the help of Guy's Uncle Bob (Chris Isaak), they begin selling a single of "That Thing You Do", which attracts the attention of local manager Phil Horace (Chris Ellis). At a Pittsburgh gig, record company A&R representative Mr. White (Hanks) offers the band a development contract with Play-Tone Records. The boys sign the contract, and White changes their band name to "The Wonders" to avoid further confusion.
The Wonders tour state fairs across the Midwest during the summer with other Play-Tone artists. "That Thing You Do" enters and climbs the Billboard Top 100. The Wonders go from being the opening act to the feature attraction, and throngs of teenage girls mob the band. The Wonders appear in a low-budget beach movie. The bass player leaves the band with a group of Marines and never returns. White brings in an experienced studio bassist to join The Wonders for a live performance on a prestigious national television variety show. During the broadcast, the caption "Careful girls, he's engaged!" is superimposed beneath Jimmy's close-up. Jimmy is upset by this, and after the show claims he has no intention of marrying her. Faye ends their relationship.
During a recording session, Jimmy resists White's plan to cover songs from the Play-Tone catalog instead of songs of Jimmy's. White explains that their Play-Tone contract specifies the content of the album: one original song per side, with the balance consisting of corporate-owned material, but the original songs must be "snappy", not ballads. Jimmy steps up to the microphone and in a sarcastic "snappy" tone, sings that he's quitting the band, then storms out of the studio. White tells Guy that although "The Wonders" are now technically in breach of contract with Play-Tone, this is not an uncommon occurrence with young, emerging bands and the record company will simply terminate their agreement and write them off as just another "one-hit wonder". White leaves, and a dejected Guy remains in the recording studio, playing an impromptu jazz drum solo, which is overheard by the recording staff, who are impressed with his skills and offer to record the session.
Guy is bolstered when his idol, jazz pianist Del Paxton (Bill Cobbs), who overheard Guy's impromptu drum solo, suggests that they record a duet. Guy later tells Faye that Del thinks he has potential as a studio musician. Faye tells Guy she plans on returning to Erie, and Guy finally takes the opportunity to declare his feelings for her.
An epilogue details the subsequent lives of the band members: Guy and Faye marry, raise four children and start The Puget Sound Conservatory of Music in Bainbridge Island, Washington,  where Guy teaches jazz composition. Jimmy records three gold albums with a new band (The Heardsmen) on the Play-Tone label and becomes a successful record producer in Los Angeles. Lenny ends up single and manages a casino in Laughlin, Nevada. The unnamed T.B. Player serves two tours in Vietnam and is awarded the Purple Heart for wounds sustained at Khe Sanh and becomes a building contractor in Orlando, Florida.

Cast

Production and music

The movie features original music by Tom Hanks, Adam Schlesinger, Rick Elias, Scott Rogness, Mike Piccirillo, Gary Goetzman and Howard Shore. In the movie, The Wonders rise to brief stardom on the strength of "That Thing You Do", a song written as a wistful ballad but which becomes an uptempo rocker during the band's first performance at a talent show. Written and composed for the film by Adam Schlesinger, bassist for Fountains of Wayne and Ivy, and released on the film's soundtrack, the song became a genuine hit for The Wonders in 1996 (the song peaked at #41 on the Billboard Hot 100, #22 on the Adult Contemporary charts, #18 on the Adult Top 40, and #24 on the Top 40 Mainstream charts).  The track was nominated for a 1996 Golden Globe Award as well as a 1996 Academy Award for Best Original Song.  Mike Viola of The Candy Butchers provided the distinctive lead vocals for the Wonders.
In the film, the title song is referenced with "All My Only Dreams" as the B-side. The actual 45 RPM single, released to record stores in North America, features "Dance With Me Tonight" as its B-side. The song has since been recorded by The Knack and Bubblegum Lemonade.
The song that plays during the film's opening credits, "Lovin' You Lots and Lots," is credited to the fictitious Norm Wooster Singers, but was actually written by Hanks. This song is a good-natured parody of Ray Conniff, Mitch Miller, and other practitioners of the "beautiful music" or proto-Muzak formats that were a staple of adult radio during the early '60s such as on KPOL (AM)1540 in Los Angeles. Hanks also composed Guy's jazzy signature drum solo, "I Am Spartacus."
The tour and TV appearance are done in the authentic style of rock bands of the mid-1960s, including Go-Go girls, elaborate sharing of microphones, and formal clothing in various matching colors.
The song "Voyage Around the Moon" by the fictional band Saturn 5 closely resembles "Pipeline" by The Chantays. The scene where The Wonders are miming the instrumental tune "Shrimp Shack" during the filming of a beach party film titled Weekend at Party Pier is an overt reference to the scene in Pajama Party wherein The Nooney Rickett 4 play the instrumental song Beach Ball.

The (real) Wonders

There were least two real bands named the Wonders that managed to make the record charts at various radio stations in the early 60s. One had a ballad called "With These Hands" (b/w "Please Don't Cry"; Bamboo 523) that was played by KCRG in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, in the fall of 1962.com/arsa/surveys_item.php?svid=3789
The other Wonders had a regional hit record called "Say There" (b/w "Marilyn"; Colpix 699), released by Colpix Records in August 1963.45cat. (Even more interestingly, there is a scene in the movie where a disc jockey at WCOL—with the station's call letters clearly visible on the wall behind him—is seen playing "That Thing You Do"!)Both records by the real Wonders can be found on YouTube.

Soundtrack

The soundtrack album (released under the Play-Tone name in conjunction with Epic Records) was also a hit, peaking at #21 on the Billboard 200 albums chart.  The CD artwork is a replica of the fictional Play-Tone label used in the movie, and the liner notes are done in a mockumentary style, as if the Wonders had been a real group and the events of the film had actually happened. Hanks later used the success of That Thing You Do! as a spring-board to launch the actual Playtone Records label, through which the soundtracks of all his subsequent films, and other films like Bring It On and television programs like The Sopranos were released as albums.

Reception

The film was well received by critics and currently holds a 93% fresh rating at Rotten Tomatoes. The movie debuted at No. 3. It was moderately successful at the box office, grossing $25,857,416 domestically and $8,728,000 abroad for a worldwide gross of  $34,585,416.

Home media

Initial release

That Thing You Do! was first released in mid-1997 on VHS. In 1998, the film became available in the DIVX format (as with all 20th Century Fox films), rather than DVD.

First DVD

After DIVX failed, the film was released onto DVD on June 5, 2001. It included the featurette "The Making of That Thing You Do!," and two music videos.

Extended Edition DVD

On May 8, 2007, Tom Hanks' Extended Edition was released on DVD. The film's theatrical cut and an extended cut with 39 additional minutes of deleted scenes are included.
Many of the deleted scenes are devoted to character development. A tastefully steamy look at Guy's "make-out" session with Tina at his apartment is included. The extended version also goes more in-depth with Guy's developing relationship with Faye (via mild flirting) and his deteriorating relationship with Tina, as well as Tina's budding relationship with her dentist, Dr. Collins. It also reveals that the Tom Hanks character "Mr. White" is not only gay but in a relationship with a man played by former NFL defensive lineman Howie Long.
More camera time is also devoted to the romance between the bass player and one of the singers of the Chantrellines.  In the theatrical cut, this romance was depicted mainly as an unrequited crush on the part of the bass player; in the extended cut it is clearly shown that his efforts were successful.
At the end of the Extended Edition, rather than becoming a studio drummer on the recommendation of Del Paxton, Guy becomes a disc jockey for the jazz station KJZZ and records a documentary series of interviews with legendary jazz musicians.

2007 DVD repackage re-release

That Thing You Do! was packaged with Bachelor Party and The Man with One Red Shoe in the Tom Hanks Triple Feature DVD anthology set. The actual DVD appears to be the original 2001 disc, with the featurette and music videos.

Blu-ray release

20th Century Fox Home Entertainment released the film on Blu-ray on April 2, 2013. The Blu-ray includes the Theatrical and Extended cuts as well as all of the bonus features found on the 2-Disc DVD.








