[[Roma, Queensland]]

CATEGORIES: Maranoa Region, Populated places established in 1867

Roma is a town in the western Darling Downs area of South West Queensland, Australia,  It is in the Maranoa electoral district. It also serves as a centre for the larger Maranoa Region. At the 2011 census, Roma had a population of 6,906.
Bore water for the town is obtained from the Artesian Basin.
Hotels, pubs, and churches feature prominently near the centre of town. The ten hotels are within easy walking distance with most adjacent to another hotel. Paul's Church of England in Roma is a copy of a 13th Century English Church in the shape of crucifix.

History

Roma was named after Lady Diamantina Bowen (Contessa Diamantina di Roma), wife of the first Governor of Queensland, George Bowen in 1867. In 1863 Samuel Symons Bassett brought Queensland's vine cuttings to Roma and established the Romaville Winery and a century later, Roma was the site of Australia's first oil and gas discoveries.(2010). Roma Tourism Guide and Travel Deals. Roma Tourism. Kalhaven Group. Retrieved on 27 April 2012.
Captain Starlight, a cattle rustler, was tried and acquitted in the Roma Courthouse in February 1873. No successful conviction for cattle rustling has been made in Roma.

Heritage listings

Roma has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:

Climate

Roma has a humid subtropical climate, which gets enough precipitation to avoid the semi-arid climate. Its location on the far south of the Carnarvon Range at an elevation of 299 meters above sea level means that it is cooler and wetter than the plains to the south and west, while being warmer and drier than areas to the north and east. Temperatures in Roma range from 34 °C in summer to 20 °C in winter and winter minimums can drop below freezing; however, it seldom gets colder than -3 °C. Rainfall is mild and distributed fairly evenly throughout the year, with an annual average of 587.9 mm (23.15 in), however it peaks in summer due to frequent showers and thunderstorms. Roma is usually too far inland to experience the influence of tropical cyclones and associated rain depressions, however there are exceptions, and these systems have caused significant flooding in the town. Extremes have ranged from 45.8 °C (114.4 °F) to -5.8 °C (21.5 °F).January 2014 Daily Weather Observations

Flooding

The town is situated on Bungil Creek, a tributary of the Condamine River. In March 2010, Roma experienced its worst floods in over 100 years.  Flooding also occurred in April 2011, a year of record rainfall in Roma.
Having experienced three successive years of flooding, in May 2012, one insurer, Suncorp, announced it would not issue new policies to Roma residents, unless action was taken to mitigate the flood risk in Roma.

Industry and economy

Agriculture

The Maranoa's agriculture industry is worth approximately $620 million annually, 64.3% being generated from crops. 58.7% of businesses in the Maranoa are in the agriculture, forestry and fishing sector, which employs 32.7% of the region's workforce. Roma is home to Australia's largest cattle saleyards.(25 May 2005). Record year for Roma saleyards. ABC Rural. Australian Broadcasting Corporation. Retrieved on 27 April 2012.
Forestry plantations include Hardwood and Cypress Pines.  Roma and the Maranoa region is home to Australia's most active native Cypress Pine sawmilling.Future challenges 

Oil and Gas

In 1906 natural gas was used for lighting in Roma. The industry has expanded as more reserves were discovered.
Origin Energy's Spring Gully Coal Seam Gas Development is about  Roma-to-Brisbane gas pipeline hub there   Origin Energy is proposing Spring Gully Power Station as an $870 Million, 1,000 MW power station that will provide electricity to South-East Queensland.  With a base at the Spring Gully CSG site, the power station will have the benefit of being close to the source of gas and able to use the waste-water left over from the other CSG operations.

Employment

Roma has a relatively low unemployment rate of 2.9% in 2004.ABS employment figure

Media

Zinc ZR Roma is the local radio station. The Western Star is the local paper. APN News Media. Retrieved on 27 April 2012.

Tourist attractions

Local tourist attractions include the Big Rig and Oil and Gas Museum, Romavilla Winery and Roma Saleyards.  The winery is the oldest in Queensland.  To the north of the town is Carnarvon Gorge in Carnarvon National Park. Over the Easter period, Roma holds an Easter in the Country event. The Roma Show is also held around Easter.

Public facilities

Roma has a range of facilities open to the general public. These include a public library, swimming pool, golf course, bowling green, Bassett Park showground, visitor information centre and a number of sporting clubs and civic facilities.

Education

There are two schools in Roma, one is a state government school called Roma State College, the other one is non-government religious school called St. John's School.

Roma State College

Roma State College is located in Roma, the major provisional centre for the Maranoa District, South West Queensland for government and industry business. It is on the western fringe of the Surat Basin energy / resources "boom". Roma State College is a co-educational Prep to Year 12 College operating from three separate campuses: Junior Campus; Middle Campus and the Senior Campus. A Special Education Program embracing the full range of disabilities operates across all campuses.

St. John's School

St John's School, a Year P to 12 co-educational Catholic School, was established by the Sisters of Mercy in 1881.

Sport

'Cities' is a rugby team that has been in Roma. Darren Lockyer was captain of this team, and it was in this team that he was then scouted for the Brisbane Broncos. The 'Roma Tomatoes' mixed-gender Touch Rugby team was founded in 2009. 

Notable people








