[[Kalbarri National Park]]

CATEGORIES: National parks of Western Australia, Mid West (Western Australia), Protected areas established in 1963, 1963 establishments in Australia, Kalbarri, Western Australia

Kalbarri National Park is located  on the lower reaches of the Murchison River. Spectacular coastal cliffs are located on the coast near the mouth of the Murchison River and the town of Kalbarri.

Geography

Kalbarri National Park preserves the inland desert regions of red and white striped Tumblagooda sandstone east of the town of Kalbarri, particularly the lower reaches of the Murchison River and its gorge, as well as the mouth of the river by Meanarra Hill. The park also protects the coastline south of the town which features cliffs more than 

Climate

The park is open all year round though temperatures can be extremely high from December through April. The park lies in the northernmost limits of the transition zone between a Mediterranean and a semi-arid climate. Winters are warm with moderate precipitation. Summers are hot and dry with temperatures that frequently exceed 

Flora

The Kalbarri area is known for its diversity and extent of wildflowers. More than 800 species of wildflowers bloom from late winter through early summer with peak times in August and September. Twenty-one plant species are found only in the coastal cliff tops and gorge country predominantly in the National Park. One of the best known local plants is the Kalbarri catspaw, a small yellow or red plant that is usually seen on recently burnt country from August to September. Several orchids can only be seen in and near the park, including the Kalbarri spider orchid and the Murchison hammer orchid.
The small-petalled Beyeria or short-petalled Beyeria, once thought to be extinct, was re-discovered in the park in 1994. The population in the park is one of only three known populations.

Fauna

The park area has observation records for about 200 different animal species in the interior of the park along the Murchison River. More than 400 species have been recorded near the coast and around the town of Kalbarri. The threatened tammar wallaby was observed previously in the area but not lately. 
Approximately 150 bird species have been observed including the emu (Dromaius novaehollandiae), osprey (Pandion haliaetus), wedge-tailed eagle (Aquila audax) and Australian pelican (Pelecanus conspicillatus). Some of the recorded mammal species in the interior include the western grey kangaroo (Macropus fuliginosus), short-beaked echidna (Tachyglossus aculeatus) and spinifex hopping mouse (Notomys alexis). The only observed bat in the park is the Finlayson's cave bat (Vespadelus finlaysoni). The recorded reptile species include the thorny devil (Moloch horridus), western bearded dragon (Pogona minor) and central netted dragon (Ctenophorus nuchalis). The only observed amphibian is Günther's toadlet (Pseudophryne guentheri). About 30 different arthropods have been recorded including a dragonfly called the Pilbara tiger (Ictinogomphus dobsoni) and the savanna black tree ant (Tetraponera punctulata).

Activities

The most popular activities are sightseeing, boating, fishing, picnicking and bushwalking. Other activities include abseiling in the gorge and horseback riding, as well as scuba diving, snorkelling, surfing and swimming in the Indian Ocean at Red Bluff Beach and the small beach at Pot Alley. From Kalbarri there are scenic cruises along the Murchison River.

Facilities

There are no campsites or other accommodations and no water available within the park boundaries. All overnight visitors must use the facilities in the town unless they are on a multi-day bushwalk or boat tour.

Features

Coastal part, starting from the town of Kalbarri and moving south:
Inland part, along the Murchison River Gorge:

Gallery

File:Kalbarri Natures Window.jpg|Nature's Window - a natural arch
File:Murchison river gorge 1.jpg|Murchison River gorge
File:Kalbarri Natural Bridge.jpg|Natural Bridge on the coast
File:Kalbarri Park (2005).jpg|Murchison River gorge








