[[Tocumen International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in Panama, Airports in Panama, Panama City

Tocumen International Airport ( is an international airport located 24 km (15 miles) from Panama City, Panama. In 2006, it underwent a major expansion and renovation program in order to modernize and improve its facilities. It is currently the only airport in Central America with two runways for use and is also the largest and busiest airport in the country and Central America by passenger traffic.

History

During World War II, Panamanian airports were leased exclusively by the U.S. military. The nearest airport to Tocumen was the Paitilla Point Airfield. Several airports were built to protect the Panama Canal from foreign aggression. The 37th Pursuit Group at Albrook Field replaced the P-40 Warhawks of the 28th Pursuit Squadron at the Paitilla Point airbase from 9 December 1941 though 26 March 1942 in the immediate aftermath of the Pearl Harbor attack.
The first Tocumen International Airport was inaugurated on June 1, 1947 by President Enrique A. Jiménez, and airport operations began before the construction works were completed.
The administrative building/passenger terminal was inaugurated seven years later, during the administration of Colonel Jose Antonio Remon Cantera. The old airport, which currently is being used as a cargo terminal, was built on an area of  above sea level. As time passed, and due to Panama's role as a country of transit, that terminal became too small to attend to the growing demand for air operations. This compelled the aeronautical authorities at the time to consider expanding the airport. Work on the new installations began in 1971.
In order to build the structure that currently houses the current passenger terminal, a lot of land had to be moved and the bed of the Tocumen river had to be diverted from its original site. The current passenger terminal was inaugurated on August 15, 1978 and operations began on September 5 of the same year. The Tocumen International Airport is one of the few airports in the region that has two landing runways able to serve the largest commercial aircraft operating today.
The name of the airport was changed in 1981 by the military government for Omar Torrijos International Airport, in honor to the Panamanian leader who died in July 31, 1981, at the age of 52 in a plane crash in Cerro Marta, Coclesito in very bad conditions. After nine years, the original name was reestablished after the fall of the dictatorship of Panama by the U.S. invasion of 1989.
The runway of the old airport (03L/21R) is mainly used for cargo and private flights, but also as a supplement to the runway during peak traffic periods. The main runway (03R/21L) is 

Expansion 1

The 2006 expansion and modernization project consisted of three stages:

Passenger terminal expansion

The main passenger terminal was expanded  at a cost of approximately US$ 21 million. New boarding gates were built to allow more flights to and from Panama, and to facilitate the growth of commercial and internal circulation areas.
Tocumen airport administration acquired 22 new boarding bridges and replaced the oldest 14. This included the addition of 6 remote positions, hence allowing Tocumen Airport to have a total of 28 boarding gates. The new installations were opened in 2006.
The airport also has a VIP lounge, Copa Club, operated by the partnership between United Airlines and Copa Airlines that caters to Copa's partner airlines and Star Alliance members. It also had an Admirals Club for American Airlines, which closed on June 30, 2012.aa.jsp

Equipment

The next step of the modernization project was the purchasing of new equipment to provide service and support to the common areas of the airport.
New equipment included: modern boarding gates and elevators, luggage conveyor belts, flight information system, and revamping the air conditioning system.

Renovation in the cargo terminal

The renovation of the old Tocumen international airport (originally built in 1947) to be used solely as a cargo terminal, was the last step of the modernization project of Tocumen international airport. It included the redesign of the central building, the construction of new buildings for cargo companies among other improvements.


Expansion 2

Muelle Norte

The second expansion phase of Tocumen International airport is known as Terminal Muelle Norte. At a cost of USD 60 million, a completely new terminal with 12 additional aircraft docking positions (gates) was built. With these 12 new gates plus the existing 22 gates and the six remote aircraft docks, there will be a total of 40 gates.
The new facilities include platforms, taxiways and a new road which connect both the cargo terminal and the airport's administration building. The Muelle Norte is linked to the main passenger terminal and have 10 moving walkways for passengers and  commercial areas. The luggage sorting system was expanded to accommodate increased demand. Also, one gate designed to accommodate the Airbus A380 and the Boeing 747 was built. The tender for the design of the second phase was given to Ecuador-based Planman Cia Ltda. Colombia-based Aerotocumen won the tender of the construction of the Muelle Norte. The project started in mid-October 2009 and it was completed and inaugurated on January 20, 2012 by President Martinelli. It was fully opened for the tourists and passengers on April 2012. 
Expansion 3== 

Terminal Sur

Terminal Sur was tendered in the first half of 2012 and the competition was won by the company Odebrecht. It is an investment of US$ 780 million, which includes 20 additional gates. It includes the construction of a third runway, a new terminal, hundreds of parking spots, Tocumen river diversion, and four new direct-access lanes to the airport. It will open in 2016.

Airlines and destinations

Main terminal

Notes:

Cargo

Traffic figures

Tocumen International Airport is a regional hub for commercial flights heading to and from The Caribbean, South America, North America and Central America. Also, the European cities of Frankfurt, Madrid, Amsterdam, and Paris are served.
Common airliners at the airport include Boeing 737s, Embraer 190s and Airbus A320s. The largest passenger aircraft flying to/from the airport are the Airbus A310, the Airbus A340, the Boeing 767, and the Boeing 777,
Tocumen International Airport is also the home airport of Copa Airlines.
Reference






