[[Akureyri]]

CATEGORIES: Akureyri, Populated places in Iceland, Municipalities of Iceland, Populated places on Iceland's Route 1

 
Akureyri  is a town in northern Iceland.  It is Iceland's second largest urban area (after the Greater Reykjavík area) and fourth largest municipality (after Reykjavík, Hafnarfjörður, and Kópavogur).   
Nicknamed the Capital of North Iceland, Akureyri is an important port and fishing centre, with a population of 17,754. 
The area where Akureyri is located was settled in the 9th century but did not receive a municipal charter until 1786.  The town was the site of Allied units during World War II.  Further growth occurred after the war as the Icelandic population increasingly moved to urban areas.
The area has a relatively warm climate due to geographical factors, and the town's ice-free harbour has played a significant role in its history.

History

The Norse Viking Helgi magri (the slim) Eyvindarson originally settled the area in the 9th century. The first mention of Akureyri is in court records from 1562 when a woman was sentenced there for adultery. In the 17th century, Danish merchants based their camps at the current site of Akureyri, which was one of the numerous spits of land in Pollurinn. The main reasons for choosing this spot for trading operations were the outstanding natural harbour and the fertility of the area. The merchants did not live at Akureyri year-round but returned home in the winter.
Permanent settlement at Akureyri started in 1778, and eight years later, the town was granted its municipal charter by the king of Denmark (and at the time Iceland also) along with five other towns in Iceland. The king hoped to improve the living conditions of Icelanders by this action because at the time, Iceland had never had urban areas. As far as the king was concerned Akureyri was unsuccessful, because it did not grow from its population of 12. It lost its municipal status in 1836 but regained it in 1862. From then on Akureyri started to grow because of the excellent port conditions and perhaps more because of the productive agricultural region around it.  Agricultural products became an important sector of the economy.
During World War II, Akureyri was one of three air bases used by the Norwegian-British No. 330 Squadron RNoAF. "Norwegian Northrop". In After the Battle, No. 31, pages 43–50. The squadron, which was formed on 25 April 1941, flew Northrop N-3PB bombers: 'A' flight was based at Reykjavík, 'B' flight at Akureyri and 'C' flight at Budareyri. On 1 December 1940, 'A' and 'B' flights ceased operating from Norwegian bases, but 'C' flight continued to fly Northrop N-3PBs from Akureyri until 5 April 1943. No. 330 Squadron RNoAF also operated Catalina flying boats from Akureyri, which protected convoys from the United States to the United Kingdom and Murmansk from attack by German submarines.G., MBE, BA, RAF (Retd). RAF Squadrons, a Comprehensive Record of the Movement and Equipment of all RAF Squadrons and their Antecedents since 1912. Shrewsbury: Airlife Publishing, 2001. ISBN 1-84037-141-2.
In the 20th century, Iceland experienced an exodus from the countryside to the towns.
In the early 21st century, fishing industries have become more important in Akureyri as two of the major fishing companies of Iceland have become a more important source of revenue and are expected to grow further in coming years. The University of Akureyri was founded in 1987 and is growing rapidly.
Since 2004, the former municipality of Hrísey, an island   The town is located on the southern part of the island.  The northern part consists of privately owned land that requires passes to enter.

Geography

Akureyri is located at  and positioned on the west side of the inland end of the fjord Eyjafjörður.
It is surrounded by mountains, the highest being Kista (1447 metres) and another peak of 1538 metres at the head of Glerádalur. There is a narrow coastal strip of flat land; inland is a steep but low hill. In earlier times a few spits of land (Icelandic: eyri, thus Akur-eyri) jutted from the narrow coast, but a lot of land has since been reclaimed from the sea so that today the coastline is more even except for the largest, Oddeyri, which was formed by the river Glerá which runs through the town. It is thought that the name of the town is derived possibly from the name of a field which may have been situated near some of the sheltered locations by the river.
The body of sea between Oddeyri and the end of the fjord is known as Pollurinn ("the Pool") and is known for calm winds and a good natural harbour. Akureyri today is centered on Ráðhústorg (Town Hall Square) near the northwest corner of Pollurinn. The districts of Akureyri are: Innbær, the oldest part of town on the strip of land between the hill and Pollurinn south of the central area; Brekkan, on top of the hill; Oddeyri on the peninsula with the same name; and Glerárhverfi on the north bank of the Glerá (also referred to colloquially as Þorpið, 'the Village'). Because of the town's position at the end of a long fjord surrounded by high mountains, the climate is actually more inland than coastal, meaning greater variations in temperature (warmer summers, colder winters) than in many other inhabited parts of Iceland. However, the mountains shield the town from strong winds.  The relatively warm climate (for its latitude) allows the Botanical Gardens to flourish without need of a greenhouse.

Climate

Akureyri has a subpolar oceanic climate (Koppen: Cfc) with cold though not severe winters and mild summers. The snow cover starts forming in late October and melts in April, yet snow on the mountain peaks around Akureyri can stay for the whole year. Akureyri is a very cloudy town, averaging only 1047 sunshine hours annually, with barely any sunshine between November and February, but precipitation is much lower than in southern Iceland because the prevailing winds are from the south - it is as little as a fifth as much as in Vík í Mýrdal.

Demographics

Akureyri has a population of 17,304 based on the 1 April 2008 census.  The population in 1910 was 2,239, increasing to 7,711 in 1950 and 16,756 in 2005.

Crime

Crime statistics have been published by the Iceland national police for 2000.  Akureyri had a reported 726 non-traffic offenses per 10,000 population compared with a national average of 892, while 2,891 traffic offenses per 10,000 population were recorded compared with a national average of 2,397. However, Akureyri, and Iceland in general, has one of the lowest crime rates in the world.

Economy

The fishing industry has historically been a large and important part of the local economy.  In recent years, other industry and business services have also begun.  Higher education is also a growing sector in the local economy. Twenty percent of the work force is in the service industry.
Two of the five largest fishing companies in Iceland are headquartered in Akureyri.  The ice-free port is a contributing factor.  Other large companies in Akureyri include Samherji, Norðurmjólk, Brim hf, and Vífilfell, the largest brewery in Iceland. Sjúkrahús Akureyrar (FSA/Akureyri Hospital) is a major employer in the area and is one of two major hospitals in Iceland.
Corporations pay a tax rate of 18% to the national government, which is one of the lowest in the world.  There are no additional local corporate taxes.  Property tax, at 1.99%, accounts for most of the tax base.  A local government deficit of ISK 1 billion (US$ 9 million) was anticipated in 2009 prompting a cut in salaries of the mayor, town councilors, and committee members by 10% and increases in local taxes and property taxes.

Culture

Akureyri has a robust cultural scene, with several bars and reputable restaurants (such as "Greifinn", "Bautinn", "RUB 23 Steak/Sushi", "Kung Fu sushi bar" and "Götubarinn"). The Icelandic folk dance ensemble "Vefarinn" comes from Akureyri. Folk culture in general is more prevalent in Akureyri than in Reykjavík. During the summer there are several festivals in Akureyri and its surroundings. One example is the medieval festival held every summer at Gásir.  The Akureyri International Music Festival, a concert series by bands, was held for the fourth time in 2009.

Media

The Vikudagur newspaper is published in Akureyri.

Townscape

Sites that have been cited as areas of interest include various museums, churches, and the Botanical Gardens.
Local museums  Sundlaug Akureyrar is a swimming pool in Akureyri.
New residential and commercial growth has required an extension of electricity and water distribution as well as new water drilling.

Administration

Law and government

Akureyri is governed by a town council, directly elected by those over 18 with registered domicile in the town. The council has 11 members who are elected for four-year terms. The mayor is appointed by the council: usually one of the council members is chosen, but they may also appoint a mayor who is not a member of the council.
The last elections to the town council were held on May 29, 2010. The People's List received the most votes and also a majority of the seats in the council, 6 out of 11. It was the first time since the current election system was introduced in 1930 that one party list had won an outright majority on the council. The Independence Party (Sjálfstæðisflokkurinn) lost three representatives on the council and lost its position as the largest party; the other three parties also lost votes and most of them lost seats. Social Democratic Alliance (Samfylkingin) lost two seats and Left-Green Movement (Vinstri hreyfingin grænt framboð) lost one while the Progressive Party kept its one seat and the new list formed by Sigurður Guðmundsson, The Town List, won one seat. Following the elections the People's List advertised for a new mayor. 53 put their names forward. The current mayor is Eiríkur Björn Björgvinsson.

Timeline of mayors

Twin cities

The following cities or towns have been designated twin cities with Akureyri:
In 2007, a friendship and fisheries agreement was signed with Grimsby, United Kingdom which, according to Ice News, might lead to a twin cities designation in the future.

Education

There are two high schools (gymnasiums) in Akureyri,  The Menntaskólinn á Akureyri is a junior college in Akureyri and so is the Verkmenntaskólinn á Akureyri (Akureyri Vocational College).
Háskólinn á Akureyri (University of Akureyri) is a university located in Akureyri that was founded in 1987.  There are 3 faculties or colleges, the Faculty of Business and Science, Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences and Faculty of Health Sciences.
The RES - The School for Renewable Energy Science, established in 2006, is also located in the town.  This school offers graduate degrees in cooperation with two Icelandic universities.

Transport

Airport

Akureyri Airport, one of four international airports in Iceland and the only international airport in the north of the country,
In 2007, Akureyri Airport had a passenger traffic level of 221,200 and 19,778 aircraft movements.

Marine port

The port of Akureyri is vital to the town, which largely bases its livelihood on fisheries. It is the site of large fish processing plants and has docking facilities for trawlers.

Bus

SBA-Norðurleið (Icelandic Bus Company - northern route) is an Akureyri-based company that provides a bus service to the town.

Roads

Route 1 or the Ring Road (Þjóðvegur 1 or Hringvegur) connects the town with the other parts of the country, including Reykjavík, which is  There are no paved roads from Akureyri to the unpopulated interior of the island.  However, the F821 mountain road is open in summer: it climbs southwards from Akureyri and connects with the F26 mountain road across the interior to the SW of the country.
Parking in the central area requires use of a parking disc indicating the time that parking has commenced.  Parking is free but is limited in certain areas to a maximum period ranging from 15 minutes to 2 hours.

In popular culture

Akureyri was a main setting in the tenth volume of The Adventures of Tintin, The Shooting Star

Utilities

Akureyri has been heated geothermally since the late 1970s. Starting in 1928, there were unsuccessful attempts to develop geothermal energy. During this period, electricity and oil were used for heating. Construction of a geothermal distribution system was begun in 1976 after the discovery of a commercially viable source in 1975.  Distribution was widespread by 1979.
The Laugaland field near Akureyri was the first geothermal source commercially developed.  The Ytri-Tjarnir field followed. To obtain sufficient water flow, additional fields were developed at Botn in 1980, Glerárdalur , higher than the Icelandic national average of 11, but slightly less than the cost of imported heating oil. There is diminishing excess capacity but there are known and untapped resources near the town. Furthermore, there have been proposals to reinject water to extend the life of the sources.

Notes






