[[Marmalade]]

CATEGORIES: Orange production, Citrus, Spreads (food), Marmalade

Marmalade is a fruit preserve made from the juice and peel of citrus fruits boiled with sugar and water.  It can be produced from kumquats, lemons, limes, grapefruits, mandarins, sweet oranges, bergamots and other citrus fruits, or any combination thereof. 
The benchmark citrus fruit for marmalade production in Britain is the Spanish Seville orange, Citrus aurantium var. aurantium, prized for its high pectin content, which gives a good set. The peel has a distinctive bitter taste which it imparts to the marmalade.
Marmalade is generally distinguished from jam by its fruit peel. It may also be distinguished from jam by the fruits used.

Origins

The Romans learned from the Greeks that quinces slowly cooked with honey would "set" when cool (though they did not know about fruit pectin). Greek μελίμηλον (melimēlon, "honey fruit") transformed into Galician-Portuguese "marmelo"—for in Greek μῆλον (mēlon, "apple") stood for all globular fruits, and most quinces are too astringent to be used without honey. A Roman cookbook attributed to Apicius gives a recipe for preserving whole quinces, stems and leaves attached, in a bath of honey diluted with defrutum—Roman marmalade. Preserves of quince and lemon appear—along with rose, apple, plum and pear—in the Book of ceremonies of the Byzantine Emperor Constantine VII Porphyrogennetos, "a book that is not only a treatise on the etiquette of imperial banquetting in the ninth century, but a catalogue of the foods available and dishes made from them."Maguelonne -Samat, (Anthea Bell, tr.) A History of Food 2nd ed. 2009, p. 507
Medieval quince preserves, which went by the French name cotignac, produced in a clear version and a fruit pulp version, began to lose their medieval seasoning of spices in the 16th century. In the 17th century, La Varenne provided recipes for both thick and clear cotignac.C. Anne Wilson, The Book of Marmalade: its Antecedents, Its History, and Its Role in the World Today, revised ed., 1999, p.32 & others
In 1524, Henry VIII received a "box of marmalade" from Mr Hull of Exeter. VI (1870) p.339, noted by Wilson 1999, p. 31f, and by other writers. As it was in a box, this was likely to have been marmelada, a quince paste from Portugal, still made and sold in southern Europe. Its Portuguese origins can be detected in the remarks in letters to Lord Lisle, from William Grett, 12 May 1534, "I have sent to your lordship a box of marmaladoo, and another unto my good lady your wife" and from Richard Lee, 14 December 1536, "He most heartily thanketh her Ladyship for her marmalado".

Etymology

According to the Oxford English Dictionary, "marmalade" appeared in the English language in 1480, borrowed from French marmelade which, in turn, came from the Galician-Portuguese marmelada. According to José Pedro Machado's Dicionário Etimológico da Língua Portuguesa,"Etymological Dictionary of the Portuguese Language" the oldest known document where this Portuguese word is to be found is Gil Vicente's play Comédia de Rubena, written in 1521:
The extension of "marmalade" in the English language to refer to citrus fruits was made in the 17th century, when citrus first began to be plentiful enough in England for the usage to become common.
In Portuguese, according to the root of the word, which is marmelo, "quince", marmelada is a preserve made from quinces, quince cheese. Marmelo in turn derives from Latin melimelum, "honey apple",Klein's Comprehensive Etymological Dictionary of the English Language which in turn comes from the earlier Greek μελίμηλον (melímēlon),Melimelon, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library from "μέλι" (meli), "honey"[ref]μέλι,
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library[/ref] + "μήλον" (mēlon), "apple".μήλον, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus Digital Library

International usage of the term

In languages other than English, "marmalade" can mean preserves made with fruit other than citrus. The name originates in Portuguese, where marmelada applies exclusively to quince jam (from "marmelo", the Portuguese for quince). Anne. The Book of Marmalade: Its Antecedents, Its History and Its Role in the World Today (Together with a Collection of Recipes for Marmalades and Marmalade Cookery), University of Pennsylvania Press, Philadelphia. Revised Edition 1999. ISBN 0-8122-1727-6"Marmalade" in Online Etymology Dictionary, © 2001 Douglas Harper apud Dictionary. In Italian too, marmellata means every jam and marmalade. 
In some continental Europe languages, Polish for instance, a word sharing a root with "marmalade" refers to all gelled fruit conserves, and those derived from citrus fruits merit no special word of their own. Due to British influence, however, only citrus products may be sold as "marmalade" in the European Union (with certain exceptions
In some German speaking areas Marmelade is the traditional designation for any kind of jam and marmalade (especially smooth jam without visible pieces of fruit) regardless of fruit base, and remains so in everyday language in spite of EU regulation which limit the term Marmelade to citrus-based preserves to minimise international confusion. Because of the persisting traditional usage and given that the alternative term Konfitüre (originally used specifically for jam with visible pieces of fruit) is foreign to Austrian German, a special exception has been granted for Austria where non-citrus-based preserves may continue to be marketed regionally as Marmelade.

Dundee Marmalade

The Scottish city of Dundee has a long association with marmalade. In 1797 they opened a factory to produce "Dundee Marmalade",James Keiller & Son Dundee Marmalade a preserve distinguished by thick chunks of bitter Seville orange rind.  The business prospered, and remains a signature marmalade producer today.W.M. Matthew, The Keiller Dynasty 1800-1879 narrates the history of Keillers; BBC News "Legacies: Keiller's: Sticky Success": offers an abbreviated version.

As told by some Scots

Orange Marmalade in Britain happened by accident. Supposedly a ship full of oranges broke down in the port of Dundee and the ingenious Scots made marmalade out of them. 1985  London: Constable ISBN 0-09-465670-3. Dundee Marmalade

In children's books

Paddington Bear, a fictional character in children's books, is renowned for his particular liking for marmalade. Paddington, My Book-on Marmalade,Michael-Bond





Further reading




