[[Rez]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 video games, Cyberpunk video games, Dreamcast games, Microsoft games, Music video games, PlayStation 2 games, Q Entertainment games, Rail shooters, Sega video games, Sony Computer Entertainment games, Virtual reality in fiction, Xbox 360 Live Arcade games

Rez is a rail shooter music video game released by Sega in Japan in 2001 for the Dreamcast and PlayStation 2, with a European Dreamcast release and United States PlayStation 2 release in 2002. The game was developed by Sega's United Game Artists division, which contained several former members of the disbanded Team Andromeda,
The game is notable for replacing the typical sound effects found in most rail shooter games with electronic music, with sounds and melodies created by the player as they target and destroy foes in the game, leading to a form of synesthesia, enhanced by an optional Trance Vibrator peripheral.
A prequel, Child of Eden, has been released for Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3, published by Ubisoft. It is compatible with the Xbox 360 Kinect and the PlayStation Move motion controller.

Story

The game is set in futuristic computer "supernetwork" called the K-project where much of the data flow is controlled by an AI named Eden.  Eden has become overwhelmed with the amount of knowledge gathered on the network, causing her to doubt her existence and enter a shutdown sequence, which would create catastrophic problems everywhere should she be able to complete this.  The player plays the protagonist hacker, logging into the K-project system to reboot Eden while destroying any viruses or firewalls that happen to inhibit progress, and analyzing other sub-areas of the network to gain access to Eden's location.  The K-Project name and much of the game's visual and synesthesia inspiration comes from the Russian painter Wassily Kandinsky,  whose name is mentioned at the very end of the game credits, whereas the Rez name was inspired by the Underworld track of the same name.

Gameplay

Rez is a rail shooter in which the player takes control of an onscreen avatar traveling along a predetermined path through the computer network.  The player does not control the overall path, only the avatar's position on the screen.  The player targets foes by holding a "lock-on" button while moving an aiming reticule over up to 8 enemies.  Once the "lock-on" button is released, the avatar fires shots that home in on each target.  Failure to hit an enemy or projectile in time may cause a collision, which reduces the player's current evolution level by one and changes the avatar's form.  The game is over if the avatar is hit while at its lowest possible level.  At higher evolution levels, the avatar appears as a humanoid figure, while it appears as a pulsating sphere at the lowest level.
thumb|left|300px|Rez in-game screenshotSome enemies drop power-up items when destroyed.  Two different items enhance the player's avatar by increasing his/her "evolution bar" by one or three points, respectively.  Another item enables the player to trigger an "Overdrive", which releases a continuous shower of shots at all enemies on the screen for a short period of time.  In some game modes, score bonus items also appear periodically.
The game consists of five main areas.  The first four are divided into ten sub-sections and conclude with a boss battle.  The final area contains a larger number of sections and a boss rush, in which the player must fight variations of the bosses from the first four areas.  The player then goes on to the network's core to restart Eden in a final boss battle.
The boss for each area features a variable difficulty scale, depending on the player's performance leading up to that point.  According to Sega, this system was employed to make the game more accessible to casual players, while also making it more challenging for experienced players, thus potentially increasing its replay value.  In addition, completing all five levels unlocks alternate gameplay modes, color schemes and secret areas.
Unlike most games, Rez contains almost no sound effects or spoken dialogue.  Instead, the game is set to electronic music, which plays in the background and gradually evolves as the player moves among sections.  The music is enhanced by musical effects (such as trills and drums) generated by the player's actions, enemies and surroundings.  Player actions are usually locked to the rhythm of the music, such that shots and hits against enemies occur exactly on each beat (as opposed to occurring in real time).  Graphical elements such as the polygons that make up the player's avatar, as well as background elements, also "beat" in time with the music.  In reference to these coordinated effects, Sega focused its marketing of Rez primarily on the game's qualities of "synesthesia", the association of different senses and stimuli with one another.

Development

Rez was developed under the codenames K-Project, Project Eden, and Vibes,

Trance Vibrator

A "Special Package" version of the PlayStation 2 release of the game was sold in Japan only, including a USB device called a 'Trance Vibrator', which pulses in time with the music.  The intended use of the device would be to hold it, put it in a pocket, or sit on it while playing (a pouch was provided to protect the device); similar to the DualShock, it would vibrate in time with the music, but stronger than the DualShock's own feedback, helping to extend the synesthesia to the player's feeling of touch.  In 2007, ScrewAttack ranked the Trance Vibrator the #1 best gaming peripheral in its "Best Gaming Peripherals" for this reason (though the reason given in the video was far more sexual for comedic purposes). The trance vibrator is also compatible with Space Channel 5: Part 2 and the Japanese version of Disaster Report.
Reverse-engineering efforts to allow the Trance Vibrator to attach to and be controlled by a PC have been successfully executed in Japan, resulting in a device driver for Microsoft Windows XP and Windows 2000. Sam Hocevar also wrote a driver which is part of the Linux kernel.
The Xbox 360 version, Rez HD, uses up to three additional controllers for the trance vibration functionality in the game.

Music

A soundtrack entitled Rez / Gamer's Guide to… was released with the following track list:
 There are two versions of Fear: "Fear" and "Mind Killer." The latter is a more up beat version of the former, which is featured on Adam Freeland's album Now & Them.

Reception

The game received an award from The Agency for Cultural Affairs Media Art Festival in Japan.

Rez HD

Rez HD was announced for release on Xbox Live Arcade by Microsoft during their pre-Tokyo Game Show press conference held in September 2007.  Mizuguchi noted during the Show that "I always dreamed of a high-def wide screen and very good sound.  Now the future has come", and described the game as "100 percent the same game" as the original Dreamcast version. The title was ported to Xbox Live Arcade by Japanese game developer HexaDrive.Rez HD project page, HexaDrive
The game was released on January 30, 2008 to positive responses from reviewers. Rez HD is also included on the Qubed compilation for Xbox 360 along with Lumines Live! and Every Extend Extra Extreme.
Regarding releases on other systems, Mizuguchi has noted that there is "no reason" not to provide Rez HD on platforms other than the Xbox 360.
Rez HD was rated the 13th best Xbox Live Arcade of all time by IGN in a September 2010 listing.
Edge ranked the game #49 on its list of "The 100 Best Games To Play Today", calling it "Astonishing to watch and uniquely absorbing to play".








