[[Wave function]]

CATEGORIES: Quantum mechanics, Concepts in physics

A wave function or wavefunction (also named a state function) in quantum mechanics describes the quantum state of a system of one or more particles, and contains all the information about the system. Quantities associated with measurements, like the average momentum of a particle, are derived from the wavefunction. Thus it is a central quantity in quantum mechanics. The most common symbols for a wave function are the Greek letters  (lower-case and capital psi). The Schrödinger equation determines how the wave function evolves over time, that is, the wavefunction is the solution of the Schrödinger equation. The wave function behaves qualitatively like other waves, like water waves or waves on a string, because the Schrödinger equation is mathematically a type of wave equation. This explains the name "wave function", and gives rise to wave–particle duality.
The wave function for a given system does not have a unique representation. Most commonly, it is taken to be a function of all the position coordinates of the particles and time, that is, the wavefunction is in "position space". However, we could also consider a wave function in "momentum space"; a function of all the momenta of the particles and time instead. In general, the wave function of a system is a function of continuous and discrete variables characterizing the system's degrees of freedom, and there is one wavefunction for the entire system, not a separate wavefunction for each particle in the system. Elementary particles, like electrons, have spin, and the wavefunction must include this fundamental property as an intrinsic degree of freedom. The wave function is spinorial for fermions, namely particles with half-integer spin (1/2, 3/2, 5/2, ...), or tensorial for bosons, particles with integer spin (0, 1, 2, 3, ...).
In most treatments of quantum mechanics, the wavefunction is complex-valued. In one important interpretation of quantum mechanics called the Copenhagen interpretation, the modulus squared of the wavefunction,  and find the eigenvalues which correspond to sets of possible results of measurement. 
However, complex numbers are not necessarily used in all treatments. Louis de Broglie in his later years proposed a real-valued wave function connected to the complex wave function by a proportionality constant and developed the de Broglie–Bohm theory.
The unit of measurement for 

Historical background

In the 1920s and 1930s, quantum mechanics was developed using calculus and linear algebra. Those who used the techniques of calculus included Louis de Broglie, Erwin Schrödinger, and others, developing "wave mechanics". Those who applied the methods of linear algebra included Werner Heisenberg, Max Born, and others, developing "matrix mechanics". Schrödinger subsequently showed that the two approaches were equivalent. In each case, the wave function was at the centre of attention in two forms, giving quantum mechanics its unity.
In 1905 Planck postulated the proportionality between the frequency of a photon and its energy, in the Planck–Einstein equation, , now called the De Broglie relation. These equations represent wave–particle duality. In 1926, Schrödinger published the famous wave equation now named after him, indeed the Schrödinger equation, based on classical energy conservation using quantum operators and the de Broglie relations such that the solutions of the equation are the wave functions for the quantum system. Later Pauli invented the Pauli equation that adds a description of electron's spin and magnetic dipole. However, no one, even Schrödinger or De Broglie, were clear on how to interpret it. A. Tipler, G. Mosca, Freeman, 2008, ISBN 0-7167-8964-7
Around 1924–27, Max Born, Heisenberg, Bohr and others provided the perspective of probability amplitude. & Addison-Wesley Inc., 2008, ISBN 978-0-321-50130-1 This is the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics. There are many other interpretations of quantum mechanics, but this relates calculations of quantum mechanics directly to probabilistic experimental observations.
In 1927, Hartree and Fock made the first step in an attempt to solve the N-body wave function, and developed the self-consistency cycle: an iterative algorithm to approximate the solution. Now it is also known as the Hartree–Fock method.W. Atkins, Oxford University Press, 1974, ISBN 0-19-855493-1 The Slater determinant and permanent (of a matrix) was part of the method, provided by John C. Slater.
Schrödinger did encounter an equation for the wave function that satisfied relativistic energy conservation before he published the non-relativistic one, but discarded it as it predicted negative probabilities and negative energies. In 1927, Klein, Gordon and Fock also found it, but incorporated the electromagnetic interaction and proved that it was Lorentz invariant. De Broglie also arrived at the same equation in 1928. This relativistic wave equation is now most commonly known as the Klein–Gordon equation.R. Martin, G. Shaw, Manchester Physics Series, John Wiley & Sons, 2008, ISBN 978-0-470-03294-7
In 1927, Pauli phenomenologically found a non-relativistic equation to describe spin-1/2 particles in electromagnetic fields, now called the Pauli equation. Pauli found the wave function was not described by a single complex function of space and time, but needed two complex numbers, which respectively correspond to the spin +1/2 and −1/2 states of the fermion. Soon after in 1928, Dirac found an equation from the first successful unification of special relativity and quantum mechanics applied to the electron, now called the Dirac equation. In this, the wave function is a spinor represented by four complex-valued components. Spin was an automatic consequence of this wave function. Later, other wave equations were developed: see relativistic wave equations for further information.

Wave functions and function spaces

Functional analysis is commonly used to formulate the wave function with a necessary mathematical precision; usually they are quadratically integrable functions (at least locally) because it is compatible with the Hilbert space formalism mentioned below. The set on which their function space is defined is the configuration space of the system. In many situations it is a Euclidean space, that implies that wave functions are functions of several real variables. Superficially, this formalism is simple to understand for the following reasons.
For concreteness and simplicity, in this article, when coordinates are needed we use Cartesian coordinates so that , although spherical polar coordinates and other orthogonal coordinates are often useful to solve the Schrödinger equation for potentials with certain geometric symmetries, in which case the position and wave function is expressed in these coordinates.
One does not have to define wave functions necessarily on real spaces: appropriate function spaces can be defined wherever a measure can provide integration. Operator theory and linear algebra, as shown below, can deal with situations where the real analysis is not applicable.

Requirements

The following constraints on the wave function are formulated for the calculations and physical interpretation to make sense:Quantum Physics of Atoms, Molecules, Solids, Nuclei and Particles (2nd Edition), R. Resnick, R. Eisberg, John Wiley & Sons, 1985, ISBN 978-0-471-87373-0
A requirement less restrictive is that the wave function must belong to the Sobolev space W1,2. It means that it is differentiable in the sense of distributions, and its gradient is square-integrable. This relaxation is necessary for potentials that are not functions but are distributions, such as the Dirac delta function.
If these requirements are not met, it is not possible to interpret the wave function as a probability amplitude.

Definition (one spinless particle in 1d)

 

For now, consider the simple case of a single particle, without spin, in one spatial dimension. (More general cases are discussed below).

Position-space wave function

The state of such a particle is completely described by its wave function:
where .
If interpreted as a probability amplitude, the square modulus of the wave function is the positive real number
interpreted as the probability density that the particle is at  is the integral of the density over this interval:
where  is the time at which the particle was measured. This leads to the normalization condition:
because if the particle is measured, there is 100% probability that it will be somewhere.
Since the Schrödinger equation is linear, if any number of wave functions . Taking scalar multiplication and addition together is known as a linear combination:
This is the superposition principle. Multiplying a wave function . All that happens is that any normalization constants will be rescaled.
Since linear combinations of wave functions obtain more wave functions, the set of all wave functions :
In this way,  need to change to compensate.

Momentum-space wave function

The particle also has a wave function in momentum space:
where  is time. 
All the previous remarks on superposition, normalization, etc. apply similarly. In particular, if the particle's momentum is measured, the result is not deterministic, but is described by a probability distribution:
and the normalization condition is:

Relation between wave functions

The position-space and momentum-space wave functions are Fourier transforms of each other, therefore both contain the same information, and either one alone is sufficient to calculate any property of the particle. As elements of abstract physical Hilbert space, whose elements are the possible states of the system under consideration, they represent the same object, but they are not equal when viewed as square-integrable functions. (A function and its Fourier transform are not equal.) For one dimension:
Sometimes the wave-vector , since they are related by the de Broglie relation
and the equivalent space is referred to as  enter symmetrically, so there it doesn't matter which description one uses.

Definitions (other cases)

Following are the general forms of the wave function for systems in higher dimensions and more particles, as well as including other degrees of freedom than position coordinates or momentum components.
The position-space wave function of a single particle in three spatial dimensions is similar to the case of one spatial dimension above:
where  is a complex number, for this case a complex-valued function of four real variables.
If there are many particles, in general there is only one wave function, not a separate wave function for each particle. The fact that one wave function describes many particles is what makes quantum entanglement and the EPR paradox possible. The position-space wave function for  particles is written:
where  real variables.
For a particle with spin, the wave function can be written in "position–spin space" as:
where 
For spinless wave functions,  does matter – see matrix multiplication).
Since the position and spin degrees of freedom of the particle are separate from one another, the wave function is a product of a purely position space wave function 
The wave function for N particles each with spin is:
and the wave function is a product of a position space wave function 
Concerning the general case of  is interpreted as a probability amplitude, the probability density is:
and the probability that particle 1 is in region  is the integral of the probability density over these regions and spins:
The multidimensional Fourier transforms of the position or position–spin space wave functions yields momentum or momentum–spin space wave functions. The inner products of these momentum space wave functions are similar to the position cases above, with the corresponding normalization conditions.

Inner product

Position-space inner products

The inner product of two wave functions ):
More generally, the formulae for the inner products are integrals over all coordinates or momenta and sums over all spin quantum numbers. That is, for one spinless particle in 3d the inner product of two wave functions can be defined as the complex number:
while for many spinless particles in 3d:
(altogether, this is "). For one particle with spin in 3d:
and for the general case of  particles with spin in 3d:
(altogether,  sums over the spins).
In the Copenhagen interpretation, the modulus squared of the inner product (a complex number) gives a real number
which is interpreted as the probability of the wave function  being an eigenvector of the resulting eigenvalue.
Although the inner product of two wave functions is a complex number, the inner product of a wave function  with itself, 
is always a positive real number. The number . 
A wave function is normalized if:
If .
Two wave functions  are orthogonal if their inner product is zero:
A set of wave functions  are orthonormal if they are each normalized and are all orthogonal to each other:
where ).
Returning to the superposition above:
if the basis wave functions  are orthonormal, then the coefficients have a particularly simple form:
If the basis wave functions were not orthonormal, then the coefficients would be more complicated.

Momentum-space inner products

Analogous to the position case, the inner product of two wave functions  can be defined as:
and similarly for more particles in higher dimensions. 
One particular solution to the time-independent Schrödinger equation is
a plane wave, which can be used in the description of a particle with momentum exactly , since it is an eigenfunction of the momentum operator. These functions are not normalizable to unity (they aren't square-integrable), so they are not really elements of physical Hilbert space. The set
forms what is called the momentum basis. This "basis" is not a basis in the usual mathematical sense. For one thing, since the functions aren't normalizable, they are instead normalized to a delta function,
For another thing, though they are linearly independent, there are too many of them (they form an uncountable set) for a basis for physical Hilbert space. They can still be used to express all functions in it using Fourier transforms as described above.

Distinguishable and identical particles

In quantum mechanics there is a fundamental distinction between identical particles and distinguishable particles. For example, any two electrons are identical and fundamentally indistinguishable from each other; the laws of physics make it impossible to "stamp an identification number" on a certain electron to keep track of it. 179 of the first edition This translates to a requirement on the wave function for a system of 
where the  identical particles there is no such thing as "mixed symmetry": the wave function cannot be symmetric for some of the particles and antisymmetric for others. Notice the physical interchange of particles corresponds to mathematically switching arguments in the wave function.
The antisymmetry feature of fermionic wave functions leads to the Pauli principle. Generally, bosonic and fermionic symmetry requirements are the manifestation of particle statistics and are present in other quantum state formalisms.
For  distinguishable particles (no two being identical), there is no requirement for the wave function to be either symmetric or antisymmetric.

Units of the wave function

Even though wave functions are complex numbers, both the real and imaginary parts each have the same units (the imaginary unit , which has units of length−Nn.
In momentum space, length is replaced by momentum, and the units are momentum−Nn/2.
These results are true for particles with or without spin, since for particles with spin, the summations are over dimensionless spin quantum numbers.

Wave functions as elements of an abstract vector space

The set of all possible wave functions (at any given time) forms an abstract mathematical vector space. This vector space is infinite-dimensional, because there is no finite set of functions which can be added together in various combinations to create every possible function. Specifically, the entire wave function is treated as a single abstract vector:
where  is a "ket" (a vector) written in bra–ket notation. As always, the state vector for the system is solved from the Schrödinger equation (or other dynamical pictures of quantum mechanics):
The statement that "wave functions form an abstract vector space" means that it is possible multiply wave functions by complex numbers and add together different wave functions in a coherent superposition. If  are two complex numbers, then the linear combination
(subject to normalization) is also in the same vector space. The dual vectors are denoted as "bras", , but instead the dual space:
where * denotes complex conjugate.
The inner product of two wave functions  can be defined by
For these reasons, wave functions are elements of a Hilbert space. See the quantum state article for more explanation of the Hilbert space formalism and its consequences to quantum physics.
There are several advantages to understanding wave functions as elements of an abstract vector space:
Following is a summary of the bra–ket formalism applied to wave functions, with general discrete or continuous bases.

Discrete and continuous bases

  

A Hilbert space with a discrete basis  is orthonormal if the inner product of all pairs of basis kets are given by the Kronecker delta:
Orthonormal bases are convenient to work with because the inner product of two vectors have simple expressions. A wave function  expressed in this discrete basis of the Hilbert space, and the corresponding bra in the dual space, are respectively given by:
where the complex numbers
are the components of the vector. The column vector is a useful representation in terms of matrices. The entire vector  is independent of the basis, but the components depend on the basis. If a change of basis is made, the components of the vector must also change to compensate.
A Hilbert space with a continuous basis } is orthonormal if the inner product of all pairs of basis kets are given by the Dirac delta function:
As with the discrete bases, a symbol .
While discrete basis vectors are summed over a discrete index, continuous basis vectors are integrated over a continuous index (a variable of a function). In what follows, all integrals are with respect to the real-valued basis variable 
where the components are the complex-valued functions
of a real variable .

Completeness conditions

The completeness conditions (also called closure relations) are
for the discrete and continuous orthonormal bases, respectively. An orthonormal set of kets form bases if and only if they satisfy these relations. In each case, the equality to unity means this is an identity operator; its action on any state leaves it unchanged. Multiplying any state on the right of these gives the representation of the state  on the right of the relevant completeness condition.

Inner product

Physically, the nature of the inner product is dependent on the basis in use, because the basis is chosen to reflect the quantum state of the system.
If , the inner product is the complex number:
If , the inner product is the complex number:
where the integrals are taken over all .
The square of the norm (magnitude) of the state vector  with itself, a real number:
for the discrete and continuous bases, respectively. Each say the projection of a complex probability amplitude onto itself is real. If  is normalized, these expressions would be unity. If the state is not normalized, then dividing by its magnitude normalizes the state to:

Normalized components and probabilities

For the discrete basis, projecting the normalized state , gives the complex number;
so the modulus squared of this gives a real number;
In the Copenhagen interpretation, this is the probability of state  occurring.
In the continuous basis, the projection of the normalized state onto some particular basis  is a complex-valued function;
so the squared modulus is a real-valued function
In the Copenhagen interpretation, this function is the probability density function of measuring the observable  gives:
the probability of finding the system with .

Wave function collapse

The physical meaning of the components of , irreversibly and instantaneously.

Time dependence

In the Schrödinger picture, the states evolve in time, so the time dependence is placed in 
for discrete bases, or
for continuous bases. However, in the Heisenberg picture the states .

Position representations

State space for one spin-0 particle in 1d

For a spinless particle in one spatial dimension (the x-axis or real line), the state . The completeness condition for this basis is
and the orthogonality relation is
The state  is expressed by:
in which the "wave function" described as a function is a component of the complex state vector.
The inner product as stated at the beginning of this article is:
If the particle is confined to a region .

State space (other cases)

The previous example can be extended to more particles in higher dimensions, and include spin.
For one spinless particle in 3d, the basis states are :
with components:
For  in this space is
with components:
For one particle with spin in 3d, the basis states are  in this space is:
with components:
For , which exists in a new space from the spin space and position space alone. Any state in this space is:
with components:
If the particles are restricted to regions of position space, then the integrals in the completeness relations are taken over those regions, rather than the entire coordinate space. For the general case of many particles with spin in 3d, if particle 1 is in region , and so on, the state in this position–spin representation is:
The orthogonality relation for this basis is:
and the inner product of  is:
Momentum space wave functions are similar, using the momentum vectors of the particles as continuous bases, namely , etc.

Ontology

Whether the wave function really exists, and what it represents, are major questions in the interpretation of quantum mechanics. Many famous physicists of a previous generation puzzled over this problem, such as Schrödinger, Einstein and Bohr. Some advocate formulations or variants of the Copenhagen interpretation (e.g. Bohr, Wigner and von Neumann) while others, such as Wheeler or Jaynes, take the more classical approachE. T. Jaynes. Probability Theory: The Logic of Science, Cambridge University Press (2003), and regard the wave function as representing information in the mind of the observer, i.e. a measure of our knowledge of reality.  Some, including Schrödinger, Einstein, Bohm and Everett and others, argued that the wave function must have an objective, physical existence. The latter argument is consistent with the fact that whenever two observers both think that a system is in a pure quantum state, they will always agree on exactly what state it is in (but this may not be true if one or both of them thinks the system is in a mixed state). For more on this topic, see Interpretations of quantum mechanics.

Examples

Free particle

A free particle in 3d with wave vector  has a wave function

Particle in a box

A particle is restricted to a 1D region between ; its wave function is:
To normalize the wave function we need to find the value of the arbitrary constant ; solved from
From , so the integral becomes;
Solving this equation gives , so the normalized wave function in the box is;

One-dimensional quantum tunnelling

Note that these wave functions are not normalized; see scattering theory for discussion.
The standard interpretation of this is as a stream of particles being fired at the step from the left (the direction of negative  since no particles are coming from the right. By applying the continuity of wave functions and their derivatives at the boundaries, it is hence possible to determine the constants above.

Other

Some examples of wave functions for specific applications include:





2.D. Landau and E.M. Lifshitz, ISBN 0-08-020940-8

Further reading

  | pages =1 (55 pages)
  | publisher =
  | location =Maryland
  | date =September 2, 2000
  | url =
  | accessdate =2010-08-17}}




