[[Nigel Lawson]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, Living people, Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford, British Jews, British people of Latvian descent, British Secretaries of State, Chancellors of the Exchequer of the United Kingdom, Conservative Party (UK) life peers, Conservative Party (UK) MPs, English magazine editors, Environmental skepticism, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, Non-fiction environmental writers, People educated at Westminster School, London, UK MPs 1974, UK MPs 1974–79, UK MPs 1979–83, UK MPs 1983–87, UK MPs 1987–92

Nigel Lawson, Baron Lawson of Blaby, PC (born 11 March 1932) is a British Conservative politician and journalist.  He was a Member of Parliament (MP) representing the constituency of Blaby from 1974 to 1992, and served in the Thatcher Cabinet from 1981 to 1989. Prior to entering the Cabinet, he served as the Financial Secretary to the Treasury from May 1979 until his promotion to Secretary of State for Energy. He was appointed as Chancellor of the Exchequer in June 1983, and served until his resignation in October 1989. In both Cabinet posts he was a key proponent of Thatcher's policy of privatisation of several key industries and deregulation and oversaw the Big Bang launched in London on October 27, 1986.
Lawson was a backbencher from 1989 until he retired in 1992, and now sits in the House of Lords. He is the father of Nigella Lawson, a food writer and celebrity cook, and of Dominic Lawson, a journalist.

Early life

Lawson was born in 1932 to a wealthy Jewish familyGlasgow Herald living at Hampstead.  His father, Ralph Lawson (1904–1982), was the owner of a commodity-trading firm in the City of London, while his mother, Joan Elisa Davis, was also from a prosperous family of stockbrokers.11, (London 1992), by Nigel Lawson, page 3  His paternal grandfather, Gustav Leibson, a merchant from Mitau (now Jelgava in Latvia), changed his name from Leibson to Lawson in 1925,
Lawson was educated at Westminster School (following in his father's footsteps)Nick Clegg: the third man Times Online, 18 April 2010 and Christ Church, Oxford,Nigel Lawson: Thatcher's Chancellor takes on the planet alone Telegraph, 21 November 2009 where he gained a first-class honours degree in Philosophy, Politics and Economics. 11. Memoirs of a Tory Radical (Bantam, 1992), p. 4
Lawson carried out his National Service as a Royal Navy officer, during which time he commanded a fast patrol boat, HMS Gay Charger.
Lawson began his career as a journalist at the Financial Times in 1956, writing the Lexicon column. He progressed to the positions of City editor of The Sunday Telegraph in 1961 and editor of The Spectator (1966–1970).

Early political career

Lawson stood unsuccessfully at the 1970 General Election for the Eton and Slough seatLord Lawson of Blaby UK Parliament before becoming Member of Parliament for Blaby in Leicestershire in February 1974, which seat he held until retiring at the 1992 General Election.
While in Opposition, Lawson co-ordinated tactics with rebellious Government backbenchers Jeff Rooker and Audrey Wise to secure legislation providing for the automatic indexation of tax thresholds to prevent the tax burden being increased by inflation (typically in excess of 10% per annum during that Parliament).

In government

Financial Secretary to the Treasury

On the election of Margaret Thatcher's government, Lawson was appointed to the post of Financial Secretary to the Treasury.  Although this is the fourth-ranking political position in the UK Treasury, Lawson's energy in office was reflected in such measures as the ending of unofficial state controls on mortgage lending, the abolition of exchange controls in October 1979 and the publication of the Medium Term Financial Strategy. This document set the course for both the monetary and fiscal sides of the new government's economic policy, though the extent to which the subsequent trajectory of policy and outcome matched that projected is still a matter for debate.

Secretary of State for Energy

In the Cabinet reshuffle of September 1981, Lawson was promoted to the position of Secretary of State for Energy. In this role his most significant action was to prepare for what he saw as an inevitable full-scale strike in the coal industry (then state-owned since nationalisation by the post-war government of Clement Attlee) over the closure of pits whose uneconomic operation accounted for the coal industry's business losses and consequent requirement for state subsidy.1983: Macgregor named as coal boss BBC News, 28 March 1983 He was a key proponent of the Thatcher Government's privatisation policy. During his tenure at the Department of Energy he set the course for the later privatisations of the gas and electricity industries and on his return to the Treasury he worked closely with the Department of Trade and Industry in privatising British Airways, British Telecom, and British Gas.

Chancellor of the Exchequer

After the Government's re-election in 1983, Lawson was appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer in succession to Geoffrey Howe. The early years of Lawson's chancellorship were associated with tax reform. The 1984 Budget reformed corporate taxes by a combination of reduced rates and reduced allowances. The 1985 Budget continued the trend of shifting from direct to indirect taxes by reducing National Insurance contributions for the lower-paid while extending the base of value added tax.
During these two years Lawson's public image remained low-key, but from the 1986 Budget (in which he resumed the reduction of the standard rate of personal Income Tax from the 30% rate to which it had been lowered in Howe's 1979 Budget), his stock rose as unemployment began to fall from the middle of 1986 (employment growth having resumed over three years earlier). Lawson also changed the budget deficit from £10.5 billion (3.7% of GDP) in 1983 to a budget surplus of £3.9 billion in 1988 and £4.1 billion in 1989, the year of his resignation. During his tenure the rate of taxation also came down. The basic rate was reduced from 30% in 1983 to 25% by 1988. The top rate of tax also came down from 60% to 40% in 1988 and the four other higher rates were removed, leaving a system of personal taxation in which there was no rate anywhere in excess of 40 per cent.
The trajectory taken by the UK economy from this point on is typically described as "The Lawson Boom" by analogy with the phrase "The Barber Boom" which describes an earlier period of rapid expansion under the tenure as Chancellor of Anthony Barber in the Conservative Government of Prime Minister Heath (1970 to 1974). Critics of Lawson assert that a combination of the abandonment of monetarism, the adoption of a de facto exchange-rate target of 3 Deutsche marks to the pound (ruling out interest-rate rises), and excessive fiscal laxity (in particular the 1988 Budget) unleashed an inflationary spiral.
Lawson, in his own defence, attributes the boom largely to the effects of various measures of financial deregulation. Insofar as Lawson acknowledges policy errors, he attributes them to a failure to raise interest rates during 1986 and considers that had Margaret Thatcher not vetoed the UK joining the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in November 1985 it might have been possible to adjust to these beneficial changes in the arena of microeconomics with less macroeconomic turbulence. Lawson also ascribes the difficulty of conducting monetary policy to Goodhart's Law.
His tax cuts, beginning in 1986, resulted in the "Lawson Boom" of the British economy, which had halved unemployment from more than 3,000,000 by the end of 1989.20 years ago the dole queue hit 3 million – today it is the workforce that's a record The Guardian, 16 August 2006 However, this led to a rise in inflation from 3% to more than 8% during 1988, which resulted in interest rates doubling to 15% in the space of 18 months, and remaining high in spite of the 1990–1992 recession which saw unemployment rise nearly as high as the level seen before the boom began.Lawson boom, Brown boom, they all bust in the end Times Online, 27 October 2008
Lawson opposed the introduction of the Community Charge (nicknamed the poll tax) as a replacement for the previous rating system for the local financing element of local government revenue. His dissent was confined to deliberations within the Cabinet, where he found few allies and where he was overruled by the Prime Minister and by the ministerial team of the department responsible (Department of the Environment).
The issue of exchange-rate mechanism membership continued to fester between Lawson and Thatcher and was exacerbated by the re-employment by Thatcher of Sir Alan Walters as personal economic adviser. As orthodox monetarists, Lawson and Thatcher agreed to a steady rise in interest rates to restrain demand, but this had the effect of inflating the headline inflation figure.

Resignation

After a further year in office in these circumstances Lawson felt that public articulation of differences between an exchange-rate monetarist, as he had become, and the views of Walters (who continued to favour a floating exchange rate) were making his job impossible and he resigned.1989: Thatcher beats off leadership rival BBC News, 5 January 1989 He was succeeded in the office of Chancellor by John Major.John Major Prime Minister's Office
Lawson's tenure as Chancellor of the Exchequer was longer than that of any of his predecessors since David Lloyd George, who served from 1908 to 1915. Brown would ultimately spend 10 years in the position until he became Prime Minister in June 2007.

Retirement

After retiring from front-bench politics, Lawson decided, on his doctor's advice, to tackle his weight problem. He is 5 feet 10 inches (178 cm) tall; he lost five stone (70 pounds, 30 kg) from 238 pounds (108 kg) to 168 pounds (76 kilograms) – (BMI 34 to 24) in a matter of a few months, dramatically changing his appearance, and went on to publish the best-selling "The Nigel Lawson Diet Book".Fighting inflation with the BBC BBC News, 8 June 1998
On 1 July 1992 he was given a life peerage as Baron Lawson of Blaby, of Newnham in the County of Northamptonshire.
In 1996, Lawson appeared on the BBC satirical and topical quiz show Have I Got News For YouPoliticians HIGNFY and, as a former Chancellor (regarded as one of the "big four" Government positions, q.v.. Great Offices of State) became something of a coup as the guest who had previously held the highest political office.  He occasionally appears as a guest on his daughter Nigella's cookery shows.
Lord Lawson serves on the advisory board of the Conservative magazine Standpoint.About Us Standpoint

Corporate roles

|url=
|title= CET's Practice Leaders
|publisher=CET
|accessdate=2008-10-03}}
[/ref]

[/ref]

Position on global warming

Lawson is very sceptical about climate change and believes that man-made global warming is exaggerated.
In 2004, along with six others, Lawson wrote a letter to The Times criticising the Kyoto Protocol and claiming that there were substantial scientific uncertainties surrounding climate change.[ref]
 
At about the same time of the release of the House of Lords report, the UK Government launched the Stern Review, an inquiry undertaken by the HM Treasury and headed by Lord Stern. According to the Stern Review, published in 2006, the potential costs of climate change far exceed the costs of a programme to stabilise the climate. Lawson's lecture to the Centre for Policy Studies think-tank, published 1 November 2006 criticises the Stern Review and proposed what is described as a rational approach, advocating adaptation to changes in global climate, rather than attempting mitigation, i.e., reducing greenhouse gas emissions. Lawson also contributed to the 2007 documentary film The Great Global Warming Swindle.
In 2008, Lawson published a book expanding on his 2006 lecture to the Centre for Policy Studies, An Appeal to Reason: A Cool Look at Global Warming.
In July 2008 controversy was again incited when the Conservative magazine Standpoint published a transcript of a double interview with Lawson and Tory Policy Chief Oliver Letwin, in which Lawson described Letwin's views on global warming as "pie in the sky" and called on him and the Tory frontbench to "get real".
On 23 November 2009 Lord Lawson became chairman of a new think tank, the Global Warming Policy Foundation,
In 2011, Bob Ward claimed the GWPF was "spreading errors" and "the 'facts'" Lawson "repeats are demonstrably inaccurate" Ward referred to Lawson's "many times" repeated statement that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change worst case scenario predicted the rise in Third World living standards in 100 years would be limited to just nine times current levels. In fact, said Ward, the IPCC Fourth Assessment Report estimates living standard will rise by a factor of 66 but crucially makes no assessment of how it will be affected by climate change.  Ward also criticised Lawson for repeating in a 2010 BBC radio debate that Antarctic ice volumes were unchanged even after his error was highlighted by his opponent, Professor Kevin Anderson. According to Ward, Lawson provided no evidence to back his claim which is  contrary to satellite measurements and he similarly incorrectly implied that the correlation between CO2 and sea levels was uncertain as sea levels were rising more slowly since 1950 than before it. The current sea level rise is accelerating.
Given the Charity Commission requires that statements by campaigning charities "must be factually accurate and have a legitimate evidence base"  Ward suggested that they review the GWPF.
Lawson's son Dominic Lawson is also a climate change sceptic, taking a similar viewpoint as his father in his columns in the Independent on Sunday.

Economy

Lawson has been a critic of David Cameron's coalition government economic policy, describing spending cuts consultation plans as a "PR ploy".

In the media

Lawson was interviewed about the rise of Thatcherism for the 2006 BBC TV documentary series Tory! Tory! Tory!.Tory, Tory, Tory and the television truth New Statesman, 13 November 2006
In 2010, he appeared on the Analysis programme to discuss banking reform.  Lawson explained that the 2007–2012 global financial crisis was an unintended consequence of the 1986 Big Bang after investment banks merged with high street banks putting depositors' savings at risk.
Lawson has also appeared on the Business News Network in Canada to discuss global warming.
In a debate with other former cabinent ministers and prominent journalists, Lawson has argued that political life is more in need of ideas and direction than grand political visions.TV, 09 December 2013
Lawson is known for having coined several notable quotations, including "to govern is to choose. To appear to be unable to choose is to appear to be unable to govern."

Personal and family life

Lord Lawson has been married twice.
Lord Lawson is a member of the Garrick, Beefsteak and Pratt's Clubs.

Bibliography





|-
|-
|-
|-
|-


