[[Gaeltacht]]

CATEGORIES: Irish language, Gaeltacht places, Irish words and phrases

) is the Irish language word meaning an Irish-speaking region.
In Ireland, the Gaeltacht, or an Ghaeltacht, refers individually to any, or collectively to all, of the districts where the government recognises that the Irish language is the predominant language, that is, the vernacular spoken at home.

Boundaries

The boundaries of the Gaeltacht have always included a high percentage of English speakers.
This was so even in 1926, when the official Gaeltacht came into being after the report of the first Gaeltacht Commission Coimisiún na Gaeltachta. The exact boundaries were not defined. The quota at the time was 25%+ Irish-speaking, though in many cases status was given to areas that were linguistically weaker than this. The Irish Free State recognised that there were Irish-speaking or semi-Irish-speaking districts in 15 of its 26 counties.
In the 1950s another Gaeltacht Commission concluded that the Gaeltacht boundaries were ill-defined. It recommended that the Gaeltacht status admittance of an area be based solely on the strength of the language there. The Gaeltacht districts were initially defined precisely in the 1950s, excluding many areas which had witnessed a decline in the language. This left Gaeltacht areas in seven of the state's 26 counties (nominally Donegal, Galway, Mayo, Kerry, Cork, and Waterford). The Gaeltacht boundaries have not officially been altered since then, apart from minor changes:

Linguistic crisis in the Gaeltacht

In 2002 the third Coimisiún na Gaeltachta stated in its report that the erosion of Irish was now such that it was only a matter of time before the Gaeltacht disappeared.  In some areas Irish had already ceased to be a community language. Even in the strongest Gaeltacht areas, current patterns of bilingualism were leading to the dominance of English. Policies implemented by the State and voluntary groups were having no effect. A new language reinforcement strategy was required, one that had the conﬁdence of the community itself. The Commission recommended, among many other things, that the boundaries of the official Gaeltacht should be redrawn. It also recommended a comprehensive linguistic study to assess the vitality of the Irish language in the remaining Gaeltacht districts.
The study was undertaken by Acadamh na hOllscolaíochta Gaeilge (part of the National University of Ireland, Galway), and on 1 November 2007 Staidéar Cuimsitheach Teangeolaíoch ar Úsáid na Gaeilge sa Ghaeltacht ("A Comprehensive Linguistic Study of the Usage of Irish in the Gaeltacht") appeared.ie Concerning Gaeltacht boundaries, it suggested creating three linguistic zones within the Gaeltacht region:
The report suggested that Category A districts should be the State's priority in providing services through Irish and development schemes, and that Category C areas showing a further decline in the use of Irish should lose their Gaeltacht status.
Analysis of data from the 2006 Census shows that of the 95,000 people living within the official Gaeltacht, approximately 17,000 belonged to Category A areas, 10,000 to Category B and 17,000 to Category C, leaving about 50,000 in Gaeltacht areas which did not meet the minimum criteria.
The annual report in 2012 by the Language Commissioner for Irish reinforced these criticisms by emphasising the failure of the State to provide Irish-language services to Irish speakers in the Gaeltacht and elsewhere. The report said that Irish in the Gaeltacht was now at its most fragile and that the State could not expect that Irish would survive as a community language if the State itself kept forcing English on Gaeltacht communities.
An earlier study in 2005 by An Chomhairle um Oideachas Gaeltachta agus Gaelscolaíochta (the educational council for Gaeltacht and Irish-medium schools which was established in 2002 under the Education Act 1998) said that Gaeltacht schools were facing a crisis and that without support few of them would be teaching through Irish in 20 years' time. This would threaten the future of the Gaeltacht.  Parents felt that the educational system cancelled their efforts to pass on Irish as a living language to their children. The study added that a significant number of Gaeltacht schools had switched to teaching through English, and others were wavering.

Northern Ireland

There were areas of Northern Ireland that would have qualified as Gaeltacht districts (in 4 out of its 6 counties) at the time of partition, but the Government of Northern Ireland passed no legislation to ensure this.  The language was proscribed in state schools within a decade of partition, and public signs in Irish were effectively banned under laws by the Parliament of Northern Ireland, which stated that only English could be used.
In 2001, however, the British government ratified the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages. Irish (in respect only of Northern Ireland) was specified under Part III of the Charter, giving it a status comparable to that of the Welsh language or Scottish Gaelic. This included undertakings in relation to education, translation of statutes, interaction with public authorities, the use of placenames, media access, support for cultural activities and other matters. Compliance with the state's obligations is assessed periodically by a Committee of Experts of the Council of Europe.Council of Europe Charter monitoring report, 2010

Gaeltachtaí in the Republic of Ireland

Demographics

At the time of the 2006 census of the Republic of Ireland, the population of the Gaeltacht was 91,862,Census 2006 Principal Demographic Results; Table 33 approximately 2.1% of the state's 4,239,848 people, with major concentrations of Irish speakers located in the western counties of Donegal, Mayo, Galway, Kerry, and Cork. The Meath Gaeltacht, Ráth Cairn, came about when the government provided a house and 
The Gaeltacht districts have historically suffered from mass migration. Being at the edge of the island they always had fewer railways and roads, and poorer land to farm. Other influences have been the arrival of non-Irish speaking families, the marginal role of the Irish language in the education system and general pressure from the English-speaking community.udaras. There is no evidence that periods of relative prosperity have materially improved the situation of the language.
The following table lists the Gaeltacht areas in which at least 40% of the population speaks Irish on a daily basis. Some areas may contain several villages, e.g. the area Aran Islands consists of the three islands of Inishmore (with Kilronan), Inishmaan and Inisheer.

Cork Gaeltacht

The Cork Gaeltacht (. This represents 6% of the total Gaeltacht area. The largest Múscraí settlements are the villages of Baile Mhic Íre (Ballymakeera), Baile Bhuirne (Ballyvourney) and Béal Átha an Ghaorthaidh (Ballingeary).

Donegal Gaeltacht

The Donegal (or Tyrconnell) Gaeltacht (. This represents 26% of total Gaeltacht land area. The three parishes of Na Rosa, Gaoth Dobhair and Cloch Cheannfhaola constitute the main centre of population of the Donegal Gaeltacht. There are over 17,132 Irish speakers, 14,500 in areas where it is spoken by 30–100% of the population and 2,500 in areas where it is spoken by less than 30%.  In 2006 there were 2 436 people employed in a full-time capacity in Údarás na Gaeltachta client companies in the Donegal Gaeltacht. This region is particularly popular with students of the Ulster dialect; each year thousands of students visit the area from Northern Ireland. Donegal is unique in the Gaeltacht regions, as its accent and dialect is unmistakably northern in character. The language has many similarities with Scottish Gaelic, which are not evident in other Irish dialects.
Gaoth Dobhair in County Donegal is the largest Gaeltacht parish in Ireland, which is home to regional studios of RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta. It has produced well-known traditional musicians, including the bands Altan and Clannad, as well as the artist Enya.

Galway Gaeltacht

The Galway County ( There are 30,978 Irish speakers in the Gaeltacht, 11,000 Irish speakers in the Gaeltacht Cois Fharraige and Conamara Theas area including the Aran Islands stretching from Na Forbacha to Carna and another 5,000–7,000 in North Connemara (including the border area with County Mayo) and approximately 4,000 Irish speakers living in areas where the language is spoken by less than 30% of the population. There is also a third-level constituent college of NUIG called Acadamh na hOllscolaíochta Gaeilge in An Cheathrú Rua and Carna. The national Irish-language radio station Raidió na Gaeltachta is located in Casla, Foinse newspaper in An Cheathrú Rua, and national TV station TG4 in Baile na hAbhann. Galway city is home to the Irish language theatre Taibhdhearc na Gaillimhe.

Kerry Gaeltacht

The Kerry Gaeltacht (. This represents 9% of the total Gaeltacht area.ie

Mayo Gaeltacht

The Mayo Gaeltacht ( There are 6,667 Irish speakers, with 4,000 living in areas where the language is spoken by 30–100% of the population and 2,500 living in areas where it is spoken by less than 30%.

Meath Gaeltacht

The Meath Gaeltacht (. This represents 1% of the total Gaeltacht land area.
The Gaeltacht in Meath has a history quite different from that of the country's other Irish speaking regions. The two Gaeltachtaí of Baile Ghib and Ráth Cairn are resettled communities. The Ráth Cairn Gaeltacht was founded in 1935 when 41 families from Connemara were in West Galway settled on land previously acquired by the Irish Land Commission. Each was given 

Waterford Gaeltacht

The Waterford Gaeltacht (

Administration

The Department of Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs, under the leadership of the Minister for Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs, is responsible for the overall Irish Government policy with respect to the Gaeltacht, and supervises the work of the Údarás na Gaeltachta and other bodies. RTÉ Raidió na Gaeltachta is the Raidió Teilifís Éireann (RTÉ) radio station serving the Gaeltacht and Irish speakers generally. TG4 is the television station which is focused on promoting the Irish language and is based in the County Galway Gaeltacht.
In March 2005, Minister for Community, Rural and Gaeltacht Affairs Éamon Ó Cuív announced that the government of Ireland would begin listing only the Irish language versions of place names in the Gaeltachtaí as the official names, stripping the official Ordnance Survey of their English equivalents, to bring them up to date with roadsigns in the Gaeltacht, which have been in Irish only since 1970. This was done under a Placenames Order made under the Official Languages Act.irishstatutebook.html Irish Statute Book

Gaeltachtaí in Northern Ireland

Belfast

There is an area in Belfast, known as the Gaeltacht Quarter (An Cheathrú Ghaeltachta), where the Irish language is actively promoted. This is mainly situated along the Falls Road. It has Gaelscoileanna (primary schools), Gaelcholáistí (secondary schools), Naíonraí (crèches), an Irish language restaurant and agencies as well as the Cultúrlann, a cultural centre which also houses Raidió Fáilte (Northern Ireland's only full-time Irish-language radio station). This has grown from the Shaw's Road urban Gaeltacht in the southwest of Belfast. St. Mary's University College Belfast, also situated on the Falls Road is the only teaching college with a dedicated Irish Medium Unit. It is also home to An t-Aisionad (resource center) which translates literature into Irish and publishes it for use in schools and other organisations in Ireland.

County Londonderry

An area in southern County Londonderry centred on Slaghtneill (Sleacht Néill) and Carntogher (Carn Tóchair), which had gone from being 50% Irish-speaking in 1901 to having only a few speakers by the end of the century, has seen a language revival since the setting up of a naíscoil in 1993 and a gaelscoil in 1994. In 2008 two local organisations launched a "strategy for the rebirth of the Gaeltacht", based on Irish-medium primary and secondary education. Speaking at the launch, Éamon Ó Cuív, the Republic's Minister for the Gaeltacht, said that the area was "an example to other areas all over Ireland which are working to reestablish Irish as a community language". Accessed 5 April 2011

Neo-Gaeltachtaí

Clare Island

An attempt is being made to re-introduce the Irish language as the daily speech of Clare Island (

Dublin

Dublin and its suburbs are reported to be the site of the largest number of daily Irish speakers, with 14,229 persons representing 18 per cent of all daily speakers. In a survey of a small sample of adults who had grown up in Dublin and had completed full-time education, 54.2% of respondents reported some fluency in Irish, ranging from being able to make small talk to complete fluency. Only 19% of speakers spoke Irish three or more times per week, with a plurality (42.9%) speaking Irish less than once a fortnight.
It was reported by Nuacht TG4 on 13 January 2009 that a group in the Dublin suburb of Ballymun, in conjunction with the local branch of Glór na Gael had received planning permission to build 38 homes for people who wanted to live in an Irish-speaking community in the city. This project was based on significant local support for the language, since there are 4 Gaelscoileanna and Naíonraí (crèches) in the area, as well as a shop where Irish is spoken. There have been no reports of further progress with this project, which was described as an "urban Gaeltacht".

West Clare

In West Clare a group called Coiste Forbartha Gaeltachta Chontae an Chláir (The Clare Gaeltacht Development Committee) aims to have the area recognised once more as a Gaeltacht. It is claimed that native speakers who received grants under the Scéim Labhairt na Gaeilge, a scheme first established by the State in 1933 with the aim of supporting Gaeltacht families and language promotion in Gaeltacht regions, still live in the county and speak the language daily. It is said that there are up to 170 people who are daily speakers of Irish in County Clare.
Parts of the county were recognised Gaeltacht areas following recommendations made by Coimisiún na Gaeltachta 1926.   This was enacted by law under the Gaeltacht (Housing) Acts 1929-2001.   Irish speakers living west of Ennis in Kilmihil, Kilrush, Doonbeg, Doolin,  Ennistimon, Carrigaholt , Lisdoonvarna and Ballyvaughan consisted of traditional speakers who lived in rural areas unknown to each other. Irish is still spoken daily by some people in Clare Profile 9 What We Know An Phríomhoifig Staidrimh / CSO. Books record the type of traditional Irish spoken in West Clare such as The Dialects of County Clare Part 1 and Part 2, Caint an Chláir, Cuid 1 and Cuid 2 , A Comharsain Éistigí agus Amhráin eile as Contae an Chláir and Leabhar Stiofáin Uí Ealaoire. (ISBN 0 906426 07 5). "In Ard an Tráthnóna Siar" 2012-2014 is the Kilmihil-based Irish language journal on language planning in West Clare devoted to the restoration of traditional Irish in Gaeltacht Chontae an Chláir Clare Gaeltacht.    The committee aims to develop local networks amongst Irish speakers in County Clare and elsewhere until such time as recognition is obtained.

North America

A number of Irish speakers have purchased land in an area near Erinsville, Ontario in Canada and created a Gaeltacht called The Permanent North American Gaeltacht. It was officially opened in 2007 with the Irish Ambassador in attendance.

Irish colleges

Irish colleges are residential Irish language summer courses that give students the opportunity to be totally immersed in the language, usually for periods of three weeks over the summer months. During these courses students attend classes and participate in a variety of different activities games, music, art and sport.
As with the conventional schools, the Department of Education sets out requirements for class sizes and qualifications required by teachers. Some courses are college based and others provide for residence with host families in Gaeltacht areas such as Ros Muc in Galway and Ráth Cairn in County Meath,  Coláiste Cill Chartha in County Donegal receiving instruction from a bean an tí, or Irish-speaking landlady.








