[[George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham]]

CATEGORIES: 1592 births, 1628 deaths, 1628 crimes, People from Melton (district), British and English royal favourites, Lord High Admirals, Lord High Constables, Chancellors of the University of Cambridge, Diplomatic peers, Dukes of Buckingham, Knights of the Garter, Lord-Lieutenants of Buckinghamshire, Lord-Lieutenants of Kent, Lord-Lieutenants of Middlesex, Lords Warden of the Cinque Ports, Villiers family, People murdered in England, English murder victims, Assassinated nobility, Burials at Westminster Abbey, Deaths by stabbing in the United Kingdom, 17th-century English people, Ambassadors of England to the Netherlands, English people of the Thirty Years' War, Crime in Hampshire, Assassinated English politicians

George Villiers, 1st Duke of Buckingham .  Despite a very patchy political and military record, he remained at the height of royal favour for the first three years of the reign of Charles I, until he was assassinated.

Early life

George Villiers was born in Brooksby, Leicestershire, in August 1592, the son of the minor gentleman Sir George Villiers (1550–1604). His mother, Mary (1570–1632), daughter of Anthony Beaumont of Glenfield, Leicestershire, who was left a widow early, educated him for a courtier's life, sending him to France with Sir John Eliot.
Villiers took very well to the training set by his mother; he could dance well, fence well, and speak a little French and was overall an excellent student. Bishop Godfrey Goodman declared Villiers to be "the handsomest-bodied man in all of England; his limbs so well compacted, and his conversation so pleasing, and of so sweet a disposition."Godfrey Goodman, Bishop of Gloucester, quoted in 

Ascent at court

In August 1614 at age twenty-one, Villiers caught the eye of James I at a hunt in Apethorpe. 264 Opponents of the king's favourite Robert Carr saw an opportunity to usurp the Earl of Somerset and began promoting Villiers. Money was raised to purchase the young man a new wardrobe and intense lobbying led to his appointment as royal Cupbearer, a position that allowed Villiers to make conversation with the king. 268
Under the king's patronage Villers advanced rapidly through the ranks of the nobility. In 1615 he was knighted as a Gentleman of the Bedchamber and in 1616 elevated to the peerage as Baron Waddon, Viscount Villiers. 279 Villiers was created Marquess of Buckingham in 1618 and finally Duke of Buckingham in 1623. 221 Reductions in the peerage had taken place during the Tudor period, and Buckingham was left as the highest-ranking subject outside the royal family.

Relationship with James I

The personal relationships of James are much debated, with Villiers the last in a succession of handsome young favourites lavished with affection and patronage. Contemporaneous evidence suggests that Villiers was James' lover. In 1617, John Oglander wrote that he "never yet saw any fond husband make so much or so great dalliance over his beautiful spouse as I have seen King James over his favourites, especially the Duke of Buckingham."Bergeron, 2002. p. 348 Edward Peyton wrote, "the king sold his affections to Sir George Villiers, whom he would tumble and kiss as a mistress."Ruigh p. 77 
James's nickname for Buckingham was "Steenie," after St. Stephen who was said to have had "the face of an angel."Stewart p. 280 Speaking to the Privy Council in 1617, James declared:
 I, James, am neither a god nor an angel, but a man like any other. Therefore I act like a man and confess to loving those dear to me more than other men. You may be sure that I love the Earl of Buckingham more than anyone else, and more than you who are here assembled. I wish to speak in my own behalf and not to have it thought to be a defect, for Jesus Christ did the same, and therefore I cannot be blamed. Christ had John, and I have George. 281  
In a letter to Buckingham in 1623, the King ends with, "God bless you, my sweet child and wife, and grant that ye may ever be a comfort to your dear dad and husband."Bergeron, 1999. p. 175 Buckingham reciprocated the King's affections, writing back to James:  "I naturally so love your person, and adore all your other parts, which are more than ever one man had," "I desire only to live in the world for your sake" and "I will live and die a lover of you."  Restoration of Apethorpe Hall in 2004–8 revealed a previously unknown passage linking his bedchamber with that of James.
Until James I died in 1625, Buckingham was the king's constant companion and closest advisor, enjoying control of all royal patronage. Buckingham used his influence to prodigiously enrich his relatives and advance their social positions, which soured public opinion towards him. 314

Influence under James I

Francis Bacon

In his rise to power, Buckingham became connected with the philosopher and jurist Francis Bacon.  Bacon wrote letters of advice to the young favourite and drafted the patent of nobility when Buckingham ascended to the peerage. 20-21 With Buckingham's support, Bacon was appointed Lord Chancellor in 1618. 21 In gratitude, Bacon complied with repeated requests from Buckingham for favours from the court for friends and allies. This would prove ruinous to Bacon, who was convicted of corruption and forced into retirement following an investigation by Parliament into royal grants of monopoly, financial peculation and corrupt officials. 22   
Neither Buckingham nor the King attempted to intervene on Bacon's behalf. Buckingham had been liberally spending public funds and accepting gifts and bribes, and many of his contemporaries believed he had sacrificed Bacon to save himself from Parliamentary scrutiny. 309 In 1622 a destitute and ostracised Bacon reluctantly sold Buckingham York House, a handsome residence located on the Strand. 23  Apart from a period during the English Civil War, the property remained in the family until Buckingham's son sold it to developers for £30,000 in 1672.  The 2nd Duke of Buckingham made it a condition of the sale that his name and title be commemorated by George Street, Villiers Street, Duke Street, Of Alley and Buckingham Street, some of which have survived into the 21st century.

Ireland

From 1616, Buckingham established a dominant influence in Irish affairs, beginning with the appointment of his client, Sir Oliver St John, as Lord Deputy, 1616–22. Thence, he acquired control of the Irish customs farm (1618), dominated Irish patronage at court, particularly with the sale of Irish titles and honours, and (from 1618) began to build substantial Irish estates for himself, his family and clients—with the aid of a plantation lobby, composed of official clients in Dublin. To the same end, he secured the creation of an Irish Court of Wards in 1622. Buckingham's influence thus crucially sustained a forward Irish plantation policy into the 1620s.

Relations with Parliament, 1621–1624

When Parliament began its investigation into monopolies and other abuses in England and later Ireland in 1621, Buckingham made a show of support to avoid action being taken against him. However, the king's decision in the summer of 1621 to send a commission of inquiry, including parliamentary firebrands, to Ireland threatened to expose Buckingham's growing, often clandestine interests there. Knowing that, in the summer, the king had assured the Spanish ambassador that the Parliament would not be allowed to imperil a Spanish matrimonial alliance, he therefore surreptitiously instigated a conflict between the Parliament and the king over the Spanish Match, which resulted in a premature dissolution of the Parliament in December 1621 and a hobbling of the Irish commission in 1622.  Irish reforms nevertheless introduced by Lionel Cranfield, Earl of Middlesex, in 1623–24 were largely nullified by the impeachment and disgrace of the pacific Lord Treasurer in the violently anti-Spanish 1624 parliament—spurred on by Buckingham and Prince Charles.

Charles I and foreign affairs

In 1623, Buckingham accompanied Charles I, then Prince of Wales, to Spain for marriage negotiations regarding the Infanta Maria. The negotiations had long been stuck, but it is believed that Buckingham's crassness was key to the total collapse of agreement; the Spanish ambassador asked Parliament to have Buckingham executed for his behaviour in Madrid; but Buckingham gained popularity by calling for war with Spain on his return. He headed further marriage negotiations, but when, in 1624, the betrothal to Henrietta Maria of France was announced, the choice of a Catholic was widely condemned. Buckingham's popularity suffered further when he was blamed for the failure of the military expedition under the command of Ernst von Mansfeld, a famous German mercenary general, sent to the continent to recover the Electorate of the Palatinate (1625), which had belonged to Frederick V, Elector Palatine, son-in-law of King James I of England. However, when the Duke of York became King Charles I, Buckingham was the only man to maintain his position from the court of James.
Buckingham led an expedition to repeat the actions of Sir Francis Drake by seizing the main Spanish port at Cádiz and burning the fleet in its harbour. Though his plan was tactically sound, landing further up the coast and marching the militia army on the city, the troops were ill-equipped, ill-disciplined and ill-trained. Coming upon a warehouse filled with wine, they simply got drunk, and the attack was called off. The English army briefly occupied a small port further down the coast before re-boarding its ships.
This was followed by Buckingham leading the Army and the Navy to sea to intercept an anticipated Spanish silver fleet from its American territories. However, the Spanish were forewarned by their intelligence and easily avoided the planned ambush. With supplies running out and men sick and dying from starvation and disease, the fleet limped home in embarrassment.
Buckingham then negotiated with the French Prime Minister to the King, Cardinal Richelieu, for English ships to aid Richelieu in his fight against the French Protestants (Huguenots), in return for French aid against the Spanish occupying the Palatinate. Seven English warships participated in operations against La Rochelle and in the Siege of Saint-Martin-de-Ré (1625),An apprenticeship in arms by Roger Burrow Manning p.115 but Parliament was disgusted and horrified at the thought of English Protestants fighting French Protestants. The plan only fuelled their fears of crypto-Catholicism at court. Buckingham himself, believing that the failure of his enterprise was the result of treachery by Richelieu, formulated an alliance among the churchman's many enemies, a policy that included support for the very Huguenots whom he had recently attacked.
In 1627, Buckingham led another failure: an attempt to aid his new Huguenot allies besieged at La Rochelle in France, by leading the Siege of Saint-Martin-de-Ré (1627), during which he lost more than 4,000 of a force of 7,000 men.

Assassination

During the course of his incompetent leadership, Parliament had twice attempted to impeach the Duke. The king had rescued him by dissolving it both times, but public feeling was so inflamed as a result that he was widely blamed as a public enemy. Eventually his physician, Dr Lambe, popularly supposed to assert a diabolic influence over him, was mobbed in the streets and died as a result. Among the pamphlets issued afterwards was one that prophesied
The Duke was stabbed to death, on 23 August 1628, at the Greyhound Pub in Portsmouth, where he had gone to organise yet another campaign. He lived just long enough to jump up, shouting "Villain!" and made to chase after his assailant, but then fell down dead. The assassin was John Felton, an army officer who had been wounded in the earlier military adventure and believed he had been passed over for promotion by Buckingham.''Tudor and Stuart Britain 1471–1714, by Roger Lockyer, 2nd edition, London 1985, Longman.
Felton was hanged on 29 November of that year. Buckingham was buried in Westminster Abbey. His lavish tomb bears a Latin inscription that may be translated as "The Enigma of the World".

Descendants

Buckingham had married the daughter of the 6th Earl of Rutland, Lady Katherine Manners, later suo jure Baroness de Ros, on 16 May 1620, against her father's objections. The children of this marriage were:

Literary references

The Duke has been mentioned as one of the candidates to whom the nursery rhyme "Georgie Porgie" refers, although there is no mention of its existence before the 19th century.
In the few years of popular feeling against the royal favourite at the start of Charles I's reign, and especially after his assassination, a large amount of satirical verse was circulated on the subject. Most of this reflected on how pride goes before a fall and the damage he had done the kingdom, while several pieces commended John Felton's action.Frederick William Fairholt, 1850
A fictionalised Buckingham is one of the characters in Alexandre Dumas, père's The Three Musketeers (1844), which paints him as a lover of Anne of Austria and deals with the siege of La Rochelle and his assassination by Felton. The Duke also figures in historical romances like Evelyn Anthony's Charles, The King (1963) and Bertrice Small's Darling Jasmine (2007), although the main focus there is on other protagonists. In Philippa Gregory's Earthly Joys (1998), which has as its subject the famous gardener John Tradescant the elder, the bewitching Duke appears half way through the novel as the object of Tradescant's love.Jessica Mann, "The popular murderer", a review in the Daily Telegraph, 26 September 2004
Buckingham also appears in the Doctor Who audio drama The Church and the Crown (2002), dealing with the political intrigue of the time. And as George Villiers, he is a major character in Howard Brenton's 2010 play Anne Boleyn as King James I's mate in sexual horseplay.

Endmatter

Notes



Bibliography

 | title= King James and Letters of Homoerotic Desire
 | last=Bergeron
 | first = David M.
 | location = Iowa City
 | publisher = University of Iowa Press
 | year=1999
 | page=175
 | url= 
 | last = Bergeron
 | first = David M.
 | editor-last = Fischlin
 | editor-first = Fortier
 | contribution = Writing King James's Sexuality
 | encyclopedia = Royal Subjects: Essays on the Writings of James VI and I
 | publisher = Wayne State University Press
 | location = Detroit
 | date = 2002}}
  | title = The Parliament of 1624: Politics and Foreign Policy
  | last = Ruigh
  | first = Robert E.
  | location = Cambridge
  | publisher = Harvard University Press
  | year = 1971}}
  | title = The Cradle King: A Life of James VI & I
  | last = Stewart
  | first = Alan
  | location = London
  | publisher = Macmillan
  | year = 2003}}
  | title = The Routledge Companion to the Stuart Age, 1603–1714
  | last = Wroughton
  | first = John
  | location = London
  | publisher = Routledge Companions
  | year = 2013}}
  | title = Francis Bacon
  | last = Zagorin
  | first = Perez
  | location = Princeton
  | publisher = Princeton University Press
  | year = 1999}}



|-
|-
|-


