[[Hal Moore]]

CATEGORIES: 1922 births, American military personnel of the Korean War, American military personnel of the Vietnam War, American military writers, Battle of Ia Drang, George Washington University alumni, Harvard University alumni, Living people, People from Nelson County, Kentucky, Recipients of the Bronze Star Medal, Recipients of the Distinguished Service Cross (United States), Recipients of the Legion of Merit, Recipients of the Vietnamese Cross of Gallantry, United States Army generals, United States Military Academy alumni, Recipients of the Air Medal, Recipients of the Distinguished Service Medal (United States), Recipients of the Order of Saint Maurice

Harold Gregory "Hal" Moore, Jr. (born February 13, 1922) is a retired United States Army lieutenant general and author. He is a recipient of the Distinguished Service Cross, which is the second highest military decoration of the United States Army, and was the first of his West Point class (1945) to be promoted to brigadier general, major general, and lieutenant general.
Moore is best known as the lieutenant colonel in command of the 1st Battalion, 7th Cavalry Regiment, at the Battle of Ia Drang, in 1965 during the Vietnam War; today, he is the "honorary colonel" of the Regiment.
In 2007, Moore's volunteer driver authored a book on Moore's personal religious journey titled A General's Spiritual Journey.

Early life and education

Moore was born on February 13, 1922, in Bardstown, Kentucky, the eldest of four children born to Harold, Sr. and Mary (Crume) Moore.Guardia, p 14 Because he was interested in obtaining an appointment the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, New York and felt his chances were better if he was located in a larger city, he left Kentucky at the age of seventeen before finishing high school and got a job in Washington, D.C. working in the U.S. Senate book warehouse. Moore finished high school at night while working days and graduated from St. Joseph Preparatory School in Bardstown with the class of 1940."Harold G. Moore, Jr.", 2003 Distinguished Graduate Award, West Point Association of Graduates After President Franklin D. Roosevelt signed legislation authorizing each senator and representative additional appointments to the military and naval academies, Moore was offered an appointment to the United States Naval Academy by Representative Ed Creal (4th District, Kentucky) but Moore had no desire to go to the Naval Academy. Moore asked Creal if he could find another congressman that would trade his Military Academy appointment for Creal's Naval Academy appointment would he be agreeable to that arrangement. Creal agreed, and Moore soon found Representative Eugene Cox of Georgia's 2nd Congressional District, with an open appointment to West Point. Cox was impressed with Moore's tenacity and he left Cox's office with the West Point appointment.Guardia, pp 18–20Moore and Galloway (2008), pp 159–160
Moore received his appointment to the U.S. Military Academy shortly after the United States entered into World War II. He reported to West Point for "Reception Day" on July 15, 1942, and the summer training referred to as "Beast Barracks" held before the formal academic school term took up in the fall.Guardia, p 23 Although Moore did well in most of his classes, he was academically deficient in the required math subjects and he had to redouble his efforts to absorb the engineering, physics and chemistry, often studying two or three hours past lights out to memorize the material. Moore made it through the plebe year, but just barely, or as he put it, "an academic trip from hell" This observation caused Moore to lead a student life at West Point devoted to studying and very few extracurricular activities. The summer ended with maneuvers held again at Pine Camp. Wednesdays were spent watching the latest Staff Combat Film Report which reported the most recent fighting from the Pacific and European war fronts. Summer military training after his second year consisted of touring U.S. Army basic training centers to study tactics and techniques. The final academic year was spent studying military history and tactics as the war was winding down in Europe. Just before graduation each cadet selected his branch of assignment dependent on their academic standing in the class and the quota of openings in each branch. Moore stood in the bottom fifteen percent and he wanted an infantry assignment. When his name was finally called to declare, there were still infantry openings available. Moore graduated from West Point on June 5, 1945 and he was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the infantry branch.Guardia, pp 28–30

Military service

Post-World War II and Korean War service

Moore's first assignment after graduation was the Infantry Officer Basic Course at Fort Benning, Georgia which was a six week course. During the basic course he applied for the airborne jump school at Fort Benning, however, he was not selected and was instead assigned to the  three week jump school held at the 11th Airborne Division in Tokyo, Japan.Guardia, p 36 After a seven month stint as company commander, he was assigned as Camp Crawford's construction officer and responsible for all of the construction improvements being made at the camp. He volunteered to join the Airborne Test Section, a special unit testing experimental parachutes, and he made the first of some 150 jumps with the section over the next two years on November 17, 1948.Gathering of Eagles biography He was ordered to Fort Benning in 1951 to attend the Infantry Officer's Advanced Course, which would prepare him to command a company or to serve on a battalion staff.Guardia, pp 58–59
In June 1952 Moore was assigned to the 17th Infantry Regiment of the 7th Infantry Division during the Korean War. As a captain, he commanded a heavy mortar company in combat. He next served as regimental Assistant Chief-of-Staff, Operations and Plans. Moore's promotion to major was put on hold by a policy of the 7th Division commanding general that stated that no promotion to major would be possible without command of an infantry company in combat. The division commander personally assigned Moore to an infantry company so that Moore could be promoted to major and thus later become divisional assistant chief-of staff for operations.Guardia, pp 77–78

Stateside service

In 1954, Moore returned to West Point and served for three years as an instructor in infantry tactics. While serving as an instructor, Moore taught then-cadet Norman Schwarzkopf, who called Moore one of his "heroes," and cites Moore as the reason he chose the infantry branch upon graduation.S. Army and led the U.N. coalition forces in the Persian Gulf War against Iraq. During this assignment, he took a personal interest in the battles between the French Army forces and the Việt Minh at Điện Biên Phủ in Vietnam.Guardia, pp 86–87
Moore was assigned to attend the year-long student course at the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas in 1954. The course prepared majors for the duties of staff officers at the division and corps level. Following graduation from the Armed Forces Staff College at Norfolk, Virginia in 1960 Moore served a three-year tour as NATO Plans Officer with Headquarters, Allied Forces Northern Europe in Oslo, Norway.Guardia, p 92
In 1964, now a lieutenant colonel, Moore completed the course of study at the Naval War College, On July 28, 1965 President Lyndon Johnson announced that he was sending "the Airmoble Division to Vietnam". Moore's battalion was re-designated as 1st Battalion, 7th Cavalry Regiment, 1st Cavalry Division, the same regiment that was under the command of Lieutenant Colonel George Custer when the Irish song Garry Owen was adopted as a marching tune. The "Garry Owen" Brigade left Fort Benning August 14, 1965 and went to South Vietnam by way of the Panama Canal aboard USNS General Maurice Rose arriving at the Division's An Khê Base Camp a month later.Guardia, pp 105–106

Vietnam War and the Battle of Ia Drang

Beginning on November 14, 1965, Moore led his battalion in the week long Battle of Ia Drang. Encircled by enemy soldiers with no clear landing zone that would allow them to leave, Moore managed to persevere despite overwhelming odds that led to a sister battalion only two-and-a-half miles away being massacred the next day. Moore's dictum that "there is always one more thing you can do to increase your odds of success" and the courage of his entire command are credited with this outcome.  Moore was known as "Yellow Hair" to his troops at the battle at Ia Drang, for his blond hair, and as a tongue-in-cheek homage referencing George Armstrong Custer, commander of the same unit (7th Cavalry) at the Battle of the Little Bighorn just under a century before. Moore was awarded the Distinguished Service Cross for his actions at Ia Drang. After the Battle of the Ia Drang Valley, Moore was promoted to colonel and took over the command of the Garry Owen (3rd) Brigade.Guardia, p 141

Post-Vietnam War service

After his service in the Vietnam War, Moore served at the Pentagon as the military liaison to the Assistant Secretary for International affairs in the Office of Under Secretary of Defense.Guardia, pp 160–161 Having completed his work at Harvard, Moore reported back to the Pentagon to work with the Deputy Chief-of-Staff for Operations. He then helped draft the Army plan for the withdrawal of two brigades of the 9th Infantry Division to the United States as a part of the Vietnamization of the war effort. On August 31, 1968 Moore was promoted to the rank of brigadier general.Guardia, pp 162–163 Shortly after becoming Commanding General of the 7th Infantry Division Moore was promoted to major general in 1970 and he and his family moved to Camp Casey, South Korea. He was charged by General John H. Michaelis, Commander, United States Forces Korea with cleaning up the drug abuse problem and racial strife that was prevalent at the time in the 7th Division. His plan established Officer's Leadership Schools for company grade officers and a NCO Leadership School for staff sergeants and below as well as issuing an "Equal Opportunity Policy". He backed up the policy with the promise to punish those leaders who discriminated based on race, ethnicity or creed. As a part of the reformation of division morale he established several different athletic programs, including football, basketball, and boxing.Moore and Tuten, pp 52–59Guardia, pp 170–175  In August 1973, Moore was assigned as Commanding General of the Military Personnel Records Center, and in 1974 he was appointed Deputy Chief of Staff for Personnel, Department of the Army; his last assignment before leaving the Army. He dealt with Army recruiting issues after the termination of the draft as well as the orderly drawdown of forces after the close of the Vietnam War.S. Army Japan but he elected to retire instead. Moore retired from the Army August 1, 1977 after completing thirty two years of active service.Guardia, p 181

Personal life

While assigned to Fort Bragg, Moore met Julia B. Compton, the daughter of Colonel and Mrs. Louis J. Compton. Julie was a student enrolled at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, North Carolina and happened to be visiting her parents at Fort Bragg.Guardia, p 54 
After his retirement in 1977, Moore served as the Executive President of the Crested Butte Ski Area, Colorado. In June 2009, the 87-year-old Moore attended the formal opening of the National Infantry Museum in Columbus, Georgia. One of the featured exhibits of the museum is a life-size diorama of L.Z. X-Ray from the Battle of Ia Drang.
Moore and his late wife, Julia Compton Moore, as well as twelve grandchildren. Two of their sons are career U.S. Army officers: one a retired colonel and another a retired lieutenant colonel.Moore and Galloway (2008), pp 220–221

Bibliography

Awards and decorations



Notes

Further reading




