[[John Pilger]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 births, Living people, Australian documentary filmmakers, Australian expatriates in the United Kingdom, Australian freelance journalists, Australian investigative journalists, Australian people of English descent, Australian people of German descent, Australian people of Irish descent, Australian socialists, Australian war correspondents, International Organization for a Participatory Society, People educated at Sydney Boys High School, People from Sydney

John Richard Pilger (born 9 October 1939)Anthony Hayward, Breaking the Silence: The Television Reporting of John Pilger, London, Network, 2008, p. 3 (no ISBN, book contained within Heroes DVD, Region 2 boxset)Trisha Sertori "John Pilger: The Messenger", The Jakarta Post, 11 October 2012 is an Australian-BritishThe Parliamentary Debates (Hansard).: House of Lords official report, Volume 513, Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords, H.M. Stationery Office, 1989 journalist based in London. Markovits and Jeff Weintraub, "Obama and the Progressives: A Curious Paradox", The Huffington Post, 28 May 2008 Pilger has lived in the United Kingdom since 1962."Aboriginal squalor among Australia's 'dirtiest secrets' says expat", by Candace Sutton, The Australian, 1 March 2013"Pilger, John (1939–)" by Glen Jones, British Film Institute
Since his early years as a war correspondent in Vietnam, Pilger has been a strong critic of the American and British foreign policy, which he considers to be driven by an imperialist agenda. The practices of the mainstream media have also been a theme in his work.
His career as a documentary film maker began with The Quiet Mutiny (1970), made during one of his visits to Vietnam, and has continued with over fifty documentaries since then. Other works in this form include Year Zero (1979), about the aftermath of the Pol Pot regime in Cambodia, and Death of a Nation: The Timor Conspiracy (1993). Pilger has also criticised his native country's treatment of indigenous Australians and has made many programmes on this subject beginning with The Secret Country (1985). In the British print media, he has had a long association with the Daily Mirror, and since 1991 has written a fortnightly column for the New Statesman magazine.

Early life and career

Pilger was born and raised in Bondi, a suburb of Sydney."John Pilger", ABC (Australia) His father's father was German, and his mother's ancestors were Irish, English and German. xiv; 148 Two of his maternal great-great-grandparents were Irish convicts transported to Australia."Interview with John Pilger", Desert Island Discs, BBC Radio 4, 18 February 1990John Pilger Heroes, p. 10 His mother was a teacher of French. He attended Sydney Boys High School, where he started a student newspaper, The Messenger. He later joined a four-year journalist trainee scheme with the Australian Consolidated Press.
Beginning his career in 1958 as a copy boy with the Sydney Sun, Pilger later moved to the city's Daily Telegraph, where he was a reporter, sports writer and sub-editor. He also freelanced and worked for the Sydney Sunday Telegraph, the daily paper's sister title. After moving to Europe, he was for a year a freelance correspondent in Italy.4

Move to Britain

Settling in London in 1962, working as a sub-editor, Pilger joined British United Press and then Reuters on its Middle-East desk. In 1963 he was recruited by the English Daily Mirror, again as a sub-editor. Later, he advanced to become a reporter, a feature writer, and Chief Foreign Correspondent for the title. While living and working in the United States for the Daily Mirror, on 5 June 1968 he witnessed the assassination of Robert F. Kennedy in Los Angeles during his presidential campaign.John Pilger & Michael Albert "The View From The Ground", Znet, 16 February 2013
During the next twenty years, Pilger became the Daily Mirror's star reporter, particularly on social issues. He was a war correspondent in Vietnam, Cambodia, Egypt, India, Bangladesh, and Biafra. In the UK, Pilger reported from pit villages during the miners' strike 1984–5. Pilger won the Journalist of the Year award twice, for 1967 and 1979."Press Awards winners 1962-1969", British Press Aawards"1970-79 Winners", British Press Awaerds
Nearly eighteen months after Robert Maxwell bought the Mirror (on 12 July 1984), Pilger was sacked by Richard Stott, the newspaper's editor, on 31 December 1985. 401

Early television work

Pilger's career on television began on World in Action (Granada Television) in 1969, for whom he made two documentaries broadcast in 1970 and 1971, the earliest of more than fifty in his career. The Quiet Mutiny (1970) was filmed at Camp Snuffy, presenting a character study of the common US soldier during the Vietnam War. It revealed the shifting morale and open rebellion of American troops. Pilger later described the film as "something of a scoop" – it was the first documentary to show the problems with morale among the drafted ranks of the US military.
 "When I flew to New York and showed it to Mike Wallace, the star reporter of CBS' 60 Minutes, he agreed. "Real shame we can't show it here"", Pilger said in an interview with the New Statesman.John Pilger, "The revolution will not be televised", New Statesman, 11 September 2006 
He made additional documentaries about the United States involvement in Vietnam, including Vietnam: Still America's War (1974), Do You Remember Vietnam? (1978), and Vietnam: The Last Battle (1995).
During his work with BBC's Midweek television series during 1972–73,Hayward (2008), p.5 Pilger completed five documentary reports, but only two were broadcast.
Pilger was successful in gaining a regular television outlet at ATV. The Pilger half-hour documentary series was commissioned by Charles Denton, then a producer with ATV, for screening on the British ITV network. The series ran for five seasons from 1974 until 1977, at first running in the UK on Sunday afternoons after Weekend World. Later it was scheduled in a weekday peak-time evening slot. The last series included "A Faraway Country" (September 1977) about dissidents in Czechoslovakia, then still part of the Communist Soviet bloc. Pilger and his team interviewed members of Charter 77 and other groups, clandestinely using domestic film equipment. In the documentary Pilger praises the dissidents' courage and commitment to freedom, and describes the communist totalitarianism as "fascism disguised as socialism".A Faraway Country, JohnPilger.com, Retrieved 23 January 2012
Pilger was given an hour's slot, placed in the 9pm slot before News at Ten, which gave him a high profile in Britain. Since ATV lost its franchise in 1981, he has continued to make documentaries for screening on ITV, initially for Central, later via Carlton Television and other companies.

Documentaries and career: 1978–2000

Cambodia

In 1979, Pilger and two colleagues with whom he collaborated for many years, documentary film-maker David Munro and photographer Eric Piper, entered Cambodia in the wake of the overthrow of the Pol Pot regime. They made photographs and reports that were world exclusives. The first was published as a special issue of the Daily Mirror, which sold out. They also produced an ITV documentary, Year Zero: the Silent Death of Cambodia,Year Zero: the Silent Death of Cambodia, video of programme on John Pilger's website. which brought to people's living rooms the suffering of the Khmer people.
Following the showing of Year Zero, some $45 million was raised, unsolicited, in mostly small donations, including almost £4 million raised by schoolchildren in the UK. This funded the first substantial relief to Cambodia, including the shipment of life-saving drugs such as penicillin, and clothing to replace the black uniforms people had been forced to wear. According to Brian Walker, director of Oxfam, "a solidarity and compassion surged across our nation" from the broadcast of Year Zero.410 Pilger and Munro made four later films about Cambodia. During the filming of Cambodia Year One, they were warned that Pilger was on a Khmer Rouge 'death list.' In one incident, they narrowly escaped an ambush. The British Film Institute (BFI) has described Year Zero as one of the ten most influential documentary films of the 20th century.
Pilger in 2006 described the British reaction to Year Zero:
 
 The documentary as a television "event" can send ripples far and wide... Year Zero not only revealed the horror of the Pol Pot years, it showed how Richard Nixon's and Henry Kissinger's 'secret' bombing of that country had provided a critical catalyst for the rise of the Khmer Rouge. It also exposed how the West, led by the United States and Britain, was imposing an embargo, like a medieval siege, on the most stricken country on earth. This was a reaction to the fact that Cambodia's liberator was Vietnam – a country that had come from the wrong side of the Cold War and that had recently defeated the US. Cambodia's suffering was a wilful revenge. Britain and the US even backed Pol Pot's demand that his man continue to occupy Cambodia's seat at the UN, while Margaret Thatcher stopped children's milk going to the survivors of his nightmare regime. Little of this was reported. Had Year Zero simply described the monster that Pol Pot was, it would have been quickly forgotten. By reporting the collusion of "our" governments, it told a wider truth about how the world was run... Within two days of Year Zero going to air, 40 sacks of post arrived at ATV ... in Birmingham – 26,000 first-class letters in the first post alone. The station quickly amassed £1m, almost all of it in small amounts. "This is for Cambodia," wrote a Bristol bus driver, enclosing his week's wage. Entire pensions were sent, along with entire savings. Petitions arrived at Downing Street, one after the other, for weeks. MPs received hundreds of thousands of letters, demanding that British policy change (which it did, eventually). And none of it was asked for. For me, the public response to Year Zero gave the lie to clichés about "compassion fatigue", an excuse that some broadcasters and television executives use to justify the current descent into the cynicism and passivity of Big Brotherland. Above all, I learned that a documentary could reclaim shared historical and political memories, and present their hidden truths. The reward then was a compassionate and an informed public; and it still is."John Pilger "The revolution will not be televised", New Statesman, 11 September 2006
In a 2007 speech, "Freedom Next Time: Resisting the Empire", Pilger described his experience with executives of the American Public Broadcasting Service (PBS). They refused to screen Year Zero, which, according to Pilger, has never been broadcast in the USA.
Pilger's documentary Cambodia – The Betrayal (1990), prompted a libel case against him, which was settled at the High Court  with an award against Pilger and Central Television n favour of the plaintiffs. The Times of 6 July 1991 reported:
 Two men who claimed that a television documentary accused them of being SAS members who trained Pol Pot's Khmer Rouge to lay mines, accepted "very substantial" libel damages in the High Court yesterday. Christopher Geidt and Anthony De Normann settled their action against the journalist John Pilger and Central Television on the third day of the hearing. Desmond Browne, QC, for Mr Pilger and Central Television, said his clients had not intended to allege the two men trained the Khmer Rouge to lay mines, but they accepted that was how the program had been understood."The lie is breathtaking indeed, Mr. Pilger, but who told it?", The Australian, 27 February 2009, accessed 7/24/11  Damages and costs awarded against the defendants were thought to be £500,000 in total.20
Cambodia – The Betrayal won the Richard Dimbleby Award for factual reporting at the BAFTA Awards in March 1991. It was a decision which received objections from both Sir Robin Day and David Dimbleby at the time.21

Australia's indigenous peoples

Pilger has long criticized aspects of Australian government policy, particularly what he regards as its inherent racism resulting in the poor treatment of its indigenous peoples. He has made several documentaries on this subject, such as The Secret Country – The First Australians Fight Back (1985), and has written a book on the subject, A Secret Country (1989).
Pilger wrote in 2000 that the 1998 legislation that removed the common-law rights of indigenous Australians
 "is just one of the disgraces that has given Australia the distinction of being the only developed country whose government has been condemned as racist by the United Nations Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination."John Pilger "Australia is the only developed country whose government has been condemned as racist by the United Nations", New Statesman, 16 October 2000 
Pilger returned to this subject with Utopia, released in 2013 (see below).

East Timor

In 1993 Pilger clandestinely entered East Timor and shot Death of a Nation: The Timor Conspiracy. The film helped alert the British public to the "brutality" of the Indonesian occupation of East Timor, which began in 1975. Death of a Nation contributed to an international outcry which ultimately led to Indonesian withdrawal from East Timor and eventual independence in 2000. When Death of a Nation was screened in Britain it was the highest rating documentary in 15 years and 5,000 telephone calls per minute were made to the programme's action line.timeout.""Pilger turns up heat on East Timor", The Australian, 3 June 1994

Documentaries and career since 2000

Later newspaper career

Pilger was a founder of the News on Sunday tabloid in 1984, and was hired as Editor-in-Chief in chief in 1986.572-73 During the period of hiring staff, Pilger was away for several months filming The Secret Country in Australia. Prior to this, he had given editor Keith Sutton a list of people who he thought might be recruited for the paper, but found on his return to Britain that none of them had been hired.Lefties: 3: A Lot of Balls, BBC Four, 11 October 2007
Pilger resigned before the first issue and had come into conflict with those around him. He disagreed with the founders decision to base the paper in Manchester and then clashed with the governing committees; the paper was intended to be a workers' co-operative.494-95"Gone and (largely) forgotten", British Journalism Review, 17:2, 2006, pp.50-52 Sutton's appointment as editor was Pilger's suggestion, but he fell out with Sutton over his plan to produce a left wing Sun newspaper. The two men ended up producing their own dummies, but the founders and the various committees backed Sutton. Pilger, appointed with "overall editoral control", resigned at this point,Maurice Smith "A Newspaper In Pursuit Of Lost Ideals", Glasgow Herald, 13 February 1987, p.13 The first issue appeared on 27 April 1987. and The News on Sunday soon closed.
Since 1991, while Steve Platt was editor of the New Statesman, Pilger has written a fortnightly column for the magazine.
In 2001, while Piers Morgan was editor of the Mirror, Pilger returned to his old paper in 2001, after the 9/11 attacks in the United States.10

Palestine Is Still the Issue

The broadcast of Pilger's documentary Palestine Is Still the Issue (2002), whose historical adviser was Ilan Pappé,John Pilger "Why my film is under fire", The Guardian, 23 September 2002 resulted in complaints by the Israeli embassy, the Board of Deputies of British Jews, and the Conservative Friends of Israel that it was inaccurate and biased.Jason Deans "TV boss 'irresponsible' says Pilger", mediaguardian, 20 September 2002
The UK television regulator, the Independent Television Commission (ITC), ordered an investigation. Based on its investigation, the ITC rejected the complaints about the film, stating in its report:
 The ITC raised with Carlton all the significant areas of inaccuracy critics of the programme alleged and the broadcaster answered them by reference to a range of historical texts. The ITC is not a tribunal of fact and is particularly aware of the difficulties of verifying 'historical fact' but the comprehensiveness and authority of Carlton's sources were persuasive, not least because many appeared to be of Israeli origin."Programme Complaints and Findings Bulletin No. 6", ITC, 13 January 2003, pp. 4-5 (now on OFCOM website) 
The ITC concluded that in Pilger's documentary "adequate opportunity was given to a pro-Israeli government perspective" and that the programme "was not in breach of the ITC Programme Code".Louise Jury "Pilger cleared of bias in TV documentary on Palestinians", The Independent, 13 January 2003, accessed on 3 July 2011

Diego Garcia

Pilger's 2004 documentary film Stealing a Nation told the story of the late 20th-century trials of the people of the Chagos Islands in the Indian Ocean. In the 1960s and 70s, British governments expelled the entire population of the Chagos Archipelago, settling them in Mauritius, with only enough money to live in the slums. It gave access to Diego Garcia, the principal island of this Crown Colony, to the United States (US) for its construction of a major military base for the region. In the 21st century, the US used the base for planes bombing targets in Iraq and Afghanistan in its response to the 9/11 attacks.
In a 2000 ruling on the events, the International Criminal Court described the wholesale removal of the indigenous peoples from the Chagos as "a crime against humanity." Pilger strongly criticised Tony Blair for failing to respond in a substantive way to the 2000 High Court ruling that the British expulsion of the island's natives to Mauritius had been illegal.
In March 2005, Stealing a Nation received the Royal Television Society Award, Britain's most prestigious documentary prize.
In May 2006, the UK High Court ruled in favour of the Chagossians in their battle to prove they were illegally removed by the UK government during the depopulation of Diego Garcia. This will pave the way for a return to their homeland. The leader of the Chagos Refugee Group, Olivier Bancoult, described it as a "special day, a day to remember". In May 2007, when the UK Government's appeal against the 2006 High Court ruling was dismissed, they took the matter to the House of Lords. In October 2008, the House of Lords ruled in favour of the Government, overturning the original High Court ruling.

Latin America

Pilger's documentary The War on Democracy (2007) was the first to be released for cinema screenings. The film explores the historic and current relationship of the United States with such Latin American countries as Chile, Venezuela, and Bolivia. The film explores the role of US interventions since the 1950s, overt and covert, in toppling a series of governments in the region. It discusses reports of the US role in the overthrow in 1973 of the democratically elected Salvador Allende in Chile, who was replaced by the military dictatorship of General Augusto Pinochet. Pilger interviews several ex-CIA agents who purportedly took part in secret campaigns against democratic governments in South America.
He explores the US Army School of the Americas in the US state of Georgia. Generations of South American military were trained there, with a curriculum including counter-insurgency techniques. Attendees reportedly included members of Pinochet's security services, along with men from Haiti, El Salvador, Argentina, Brazil and Argentina who have been implicated in human rights abuses.
The film also explores the attempted overthrow of Venezuela's President Hugo Chávez in 2002. The people of Caracas rose up to force his return to power. It looks at the wider rise of populist governments across South America, led by figures calling for loosening ties with the United States and making a more equitable redistribution of the continent's natural wealth.
 "film" says Pilger, "is about the struggle of people to free themselves from a modern form of slavery". These people, he says, "describe a world not as American presidents like to see it as useful or expendable, they describe the power of courage and humanity among people with next to nothing. They reclaim noble words like democracy, freedom, liberation, justice, and in doing so they are defending the most basic human rights of all of us in a war being waged against all of us."John Pilger, The War on Democracy 
It was named Best Documentary at the 2008 One World Media Awards.Will Hurrell "War on Democracy scoops One World award", Broadcast, 13 June 2008

Critic of Bush, Blair and Obama

In 2003 and 2004, Pilger strongly criticised the policies of United States President George W. Bush, saying that he had exploited the 9/11 terrorist attacks in his 2003 invasion of Iraq and later occupation. Pilger in 2004 criticized then British Prime Minister Tony Blair as equally responsible for the invasion and the bungled occupation of Iraq.John Pilger "Iraq: the unthinkable becomes normal", New Statesman, 15 November 2004 In 2004, as the Iraq insurgency increased, Pilger said in an interview that the anti-war movement should support "Iraq's anti-occupation resistance":
 "We cannot afford to be choosy. While we abhor and condemn the continuing loss of innocent life in Iraq, we have no choice now but to support the resistance, for if the resistance fails, the "Bush gang" will attack another country."Pip Hinman & John Pilger "Pilger interview: Truth and lies in the 'war on terror'", Green Left (Australia), 28 January 2004 His support for the Iraqi insurgency was criticised at the time by some, including Andrew Bolt. He described Pilger as an "apologist for terrorists". According to Cohen, citing Pilger's 2004 comments, he "was not arguing for peace. He was taking sides ... in a war."Nick Cohen "Is the Internet a Tool of Tyranny?", Standpoint, December 2009
On 25 July 2005, Pilger ascribed blame for the 2005 London bombings that month to Blair. He wrote that Blair's decision to follow Bush helped to generate the rage that Pilger said precipitated the bombings.John Pilger "Blair's bombs", New Statesman, 25 July 2005
In his column a year later, Pilger described Blair as a war criminal for supporting Israel's actions during the 2006 Israel–Lebanon conflict. "He endangers and betrays us in his vassal's affair with the religious fanatic in Washington and the Biblo-ethnic cleansers in Israel. Unlike him, the Israelis at least are honest."
"Before Obama had won more than a handful of primaries", wrote Jonathan Freedland in The Guardian, Pilger criticised Barack Obama in January 2008 during his first presidential campaign, saying that the candidate was "a glossy Uncle Tom who would bomb Pakistan."Jonathan Freedland "By all means hold Obama's feet to the fire, but it's a bit early to cry betrayal", The Guardian, 10 December 2008 John Pilger, "The danse macabre of US-style democracy", New Statesman, 24 January 2008
After Obama was elected and took office in 2009, Pilger wrote, "In his first 100 days, Obama has excused torture, opposed habeas corpus and demanded more secret government".""Pilger loath to hear roar of dissent", The Sydney Morning Herald, 10 November 2009

Julian Assange

With others,"Julian Assange's backers lose £200,000 bail money", Daily Telegraph (UK), 4 September 2012 Pilger supported Julian Assange, founder of Wikileaks, by pledging bail in December 2010. Pilger said at the time: "There's no doubt that he is not going to abscond"."Julian Assange in conversation with John Pilger", johnpilger.Owen Jones "There should be no immunity for Julian Assange from these allegations", The Independent, 17 August 2012
Pilger's bail money was lost in June 2012 when a judge ordered it to be forfeited. Assange had sought to escape the jurisdiction of the English courts by entering the embassy of Ecuador. Pilger visited Assange in the embassy and continues to support him.John Pilger "The pursuit of Julian Assange is an assault on freedom and a mockery of journalism", New Statesman, 22 August 2012

Utopia (2013)

With Utopia Pilger returns to the experiences of indigenous Australians and what he terms "the denigrating of their humanity".Donald Clarke "John Pilger on breaking the Great Silence of Australia's past", Irish Times, 15 November 2013 Since the first of his seven films on the subject of the Aboriginal people, A Secret Country: The First Australians (1985), Pilger says that "in essence, very little" has changed."Alex Ivett "Interview: John Pilger exposes Australia's shocking secret in Utopia", Australian Times, 15 November 2013

Criticism of the mainstream media

Pilger has criticised many journalists of the mainstream media. During the administration of President Bill Clinton in the US, Pilger attacked the British-American Project as an example of "Atlanticist freemasonry." He asserted in November 1998 that "many members are journalists, the essential foot soldiers in any network devoted to power and propaganda."John Pilger "Having a fun time in New Orleans: the latest recruits (sorry, "alumni") of latter-day Reaganism", New Statesman, 13 November 1998 In 2002 he said that "many journalists now are no more than channelers and echoers of what Orwell called the official truth."David Barsamian "Interview with John Pliger", The Progressive, November 2002
In 2003, he was scornful of pro-Iraq War commentators on the liberal left, whom he called 'liberal interventionists', such as David Aaronovitch. In Pilger's view, Aaronovitch is a "right-wing provocateur" who "exemplifies the mask-wearers" by pretending to be a liberal.) in 2003 as one of his "typical pieces about the corruption of most journalists (ie people like me Aaronovitch) versus the bravery of a few (ie people like him)."David Aaronovitch "Lies and the Left", The Observer, 27 April 2003
In an address at Columbia University on 14 April 2006, he said:
 
 During the Cold War, a group of Russian journalists toured the United States. On the final day of their visit, they were asked by their hosts for their impressions. 'I have to tell you,' said their spokesman, 'that we were astonished to find after reading all the newspapers and watching TV, that all the opinions on all the vital issues were by and large, the same. To get that result in our country, we imprison people, we tear out their fingernails. Here, you don't have that. What's the secret? How do you do it?'John Pilger "War by Media", Information Clearing House, 14 April 2006
On another occasion, while speaking to journalism students at the University of Lincoln, Pilger said that mainstream journalism means corporate journalism. As such, he believes it represents vested corporate interests more than those of the public.

Affiliations

Pilger is a member of the interim consultative committee of the International Organization for a Participatory Society, founded in 2012. The American Noam Chomsky is also a member.International Organization for a Participatory Society – Interim Committee Retrieved 2012-05-20

Honours and awards

Praise and criticism

Praise

Criticism

 
 Next up is the egregious John Pilger, who thinks the Arab revolts show that the West in general and the United States in particular are "fascist." ... Maybe he hasn't noticed, but what most of the Arab protesters say they want are the very freedoms that they know full well, even if Pilger doesn't, to be available in the West. No doubt he believes they are labouring under some massive mind-control delusion engineered by the CIA. Accessed on 15 March 2011. The author was commenting on the Pilger article "Behind the Arab revolt lurks a word we dare not speak", New Statesman, 24 February 2011

Bibliography

Books
Plays

Selected documentaries






