[[Milliken v. Bradley]]

CATEGORIES: United States equal protection case law, African-American history, African-American history in Detroit, Michigan, United States school desegregation case law, United States Supreme Court cases, 1974 in United States case law, 1974 in Michigan, Education in Detroit, Michigan

Milliken v. Bradley, 418 U.S. 717 (1974), was a significant United States Supreme Court case dealing with the planned desegregation busing of public school students across district lines among 53 school districts in metropolitan Detroit. It concerned the plans to integrate public schools in the United States in the aftermath of the Brown v. Board of Education, 347 U.S. 483 (1954) decision. 
The ruling clarified the distinction between de jure and de facto segregation, confirming that segregation was allowed if it was not considered an explicit policy of the school district. In particular, the Court held that the school systems were not responsible for desegregation across district lines unless it could be shown that they had deliberately engaged in a policy of segregation. The case did not expand on Swann v. Charlotte-Mecklenburg Board of Education, 402 U.S. 1 (1971), the first major Supreme Court case concerning school busing.

Background

Educational segregation in the United States

Brown v. Board was a landmark ruling, but challenging to implement. The case also did not take into account many of the sources of segregation in the US, including an ongoing migration of blacks into the cities. By the 1970s, many urban school districts had super-majorities of black students. Educational segregation was therefore widespread, despite rules against explicit racial barriers (i.e. "whites only").

Detroit

Detroit is one of the most segregated cities in the United States.
By the mid-70s, more than two-thirds of students in the Detroit school system were black.

Lawsuit

On August 18, 1970, the NAACP filed suit against Michigan state officials, including Governor William Milliken. The original trial began on April 6, 1971, and lasted for 41 days. The NAACP argued that although schools were not officially segregated (white only), the city of Detroit and its surrounding counties had enacted policies to increase racial segregation in schools. The NAACP also suggested a direct relationship between unfair housing practices (such as redlining) and educational segregation. 
District Judge Steven J. Roth held all levels of government accountable for the segregation. The Sixth Circuit Court affirmed some of the decision, withholding judgment on the relationship of housing inequality with education. The Court specified that it was the state's responsibility to integrate across the segregated metropolitan area. 
The accused officials appealed to the Supreme Court, which took up the case on February 27, 1974.

Decision of the Court

The Supreme Court overturned the lower courts in a 5-to-4 decision, holding that school districts were not obligated to desegregate unless it could be proven that the lines were drawn with racist intent. Thus, officially arbitrary lines which produced segregated districts could not be challenged. 
The Court held that "with no showing of significant violation by the 53 outlying school districts and no evidence of any interdistrict violation or effect," the district court's remedy was "wholly impermissible" and not justified by Brown v. Board of Education.  The Court noted that desegregation, "in the sense of dismantling a dual school system," did not require "any particular racial balance in each 'school, grade or classroom.'" The Court agreed that the Constitutional rights of blacks were being violated; however, because these violations occurred within the city of Detroit, outside suburbs could not be held responsible. 
The Court also emphasized the importance of local control over the operation of schools.

Dissent

Justice Douglas' dissenting opinion held that:

Impact of the case

The Supreme Court's decision removed pressure on Detroit to desegregate. According to Wayne State professor John Mogk, the decision also enabled the white flight that re-entrenched the city's segregation. The Detroit Public Schools became even more disproportionately black over the next two decades (with 90% black students in 1987). 
This result reaffirmed the national pattern of city schools attended mostly by blacks, with surrounding suburban schools mostly attended by whites. 








