[[OO gauge]]

CATEGORIES: 4 mm scale, Model railroad scales

OO gauge or OO scale (also spelled 00 gauge and 00 scale) model railways are the most popular standard-gauge model railway tracks in the United Kingdom. This track gauge is one of several 4 mm-scale standards (4 mm to 1 foot or 1:76.2) used, but it is the only one to be served by the major manufacturers. Despite this, the OO track gauge of  is inaccurate for 4 mm scale, and other gauges of the same scale have arisen to better serve the desires of some modellers for greater scale accuracy.

Origin

Double-0 scale model railways were launched by Bing in 1921 as 'The Table Railway', running on  track and scaled at 4 mm to the foot. In 1922, the first models of British prototypes appeared. Initially all locomotives were powered by clockwork, but the first electric power appeared in autumn 1923.
OO describes models with a scale of 4 mm = 1 foot (1:76) running on HO scale 1:87 (3.5 mm = 1 foot) track (16.5 mm/0.650"). This combination came about as early clockwork mechanisms and electric motors were difficult to fit within H0 scale models of British prototypes which are smaller than equivalent European and US locomotives. A quick and cheap solution was to enlarge the scale of the model to 4 mm to the foot but keep the 3.5 mm to the foot gauge track. This also allowed more space to model the external valve gear. The resulting HO track gauge of 16.5mm represents 4 feet 1.5 inches at 4mm to the foot scale, this is 7 inches under scale or is approximately 2.33 mm too narrow.
In 1932 the Bing company collapsed, but the Table Railway continued to be manufactured by the new Trix company. Trix decided to use the new HO standard, being approximately half of European 0 gauge (1:43 scale).
In 1938, the Meccano Company launched a new range of OO models under the trade name of Hornby Dublo, OO gauge has remained the UK's most popular scale/gauge ever since.
In the United States, Lionel Corporation introduced a range of OO models in 1938. Soon other companies followed but it did not prove popular and remained on the market only until 1942. OO gauge was quickly eclipsed by HO scale. The Lionel range of OO used 19 mm/¾" track gauge, a scale 57", a track width that was more to scale. There is a small following of American OO scale/gauge today.

OO today

OO remains the most popular scale for railway modelling in the Great Britain due to a ready availability of ready-to-run stock and starter sets. Ready-to-run in the UK is dominated by Hornby Railways and Bachmann Branchline. Other sources of ready-to-run rolling stock or locomotives include Dapol, Heljan, Peco, ViTrains and previously Lima. Other scales, with the possible exception of N gauge, lack the variety and affordability of UK ready-to-run products. The quality of OO models has improved over time.

Scaling and accuracy

. This different is particularly noticeable when looking along the track. Curves are often sharper than the prototype, and often not transitioned, particularly when using "set-track" systems (radius 1 = 371mm, 2 = 438mm, 3 = 505mm, 4 = 571.5mm). Overhang from long vehicles means that track centres are overscale to prevent collisions on curves between stock on adjacent lines, at up to 65mm (for set-track (reduced down to 50mm for Peco Streamline)). As the market for proprietary track is mostly for HO scale, sleeper size and spacing are designed for HO and are therefore underscale. Overscale wheel width and deep wheel flanges are used on typical models (but particularly older models), and these require overscale rail profile and much larger clearances on pointwork than is prototypical. Pointwork is often compressed in length to save space.
Though they run on the same track, OO gauge and HO gauge models of the same prototype do not sit well together since the OO models are larger than the HO equivalent.
OO is also used to represent the  too narrow.
These differences have led to the development of the finescale standards of EM gauge and P4 standards. Nevertheless, it is possible to model using OO to standards that fall just short of finescale.

4 mm finescale standards

Many experienced modellers find the OO standard produces a "narrow gauge" appearance when the model is viewed from head on. Greater accuracy is possible using either EM gauge or the closer to exact scale P4 gauge track.
Whilst flextrack is available for both EM and P4 gauges (from manufacturers such as C&L Finescale, SMP and The P4 Track Company), ready-to-run (RTR) point and crossing (P&C) work is not available, so this trackwork must be constructed by the modeller. Kits for doing this are also available from the aforementioned sources amongst others. Several of these kits are also available for the OO modeller who aims for more realistic track, since most RTR track is actually scaled to HO and does not represent any British prototype and the sleeper spacing is too close together for scale. EM gauge has slightly overscale flanges and flangeways on point and crossing work; P4 is closer to scale but the smaller flanges and flangeways on P&C work expose poor track construction.



Other model railway scales

Related scales

Manufacturers




