[[Æthelweard (historian)]]

CATEGORIES: Anglo-Saxon royalty, Anglo-Saxon writers, English historians, 10th-century historians, 10th-century Latin writers, Medieval Latin-language writers, Latin texts of Anglo-Saxon England, Anglo-Saxon ealdormen, Year of birth unknown, 990s deaths, House of Wessex

Æthelweard (also spelled Ethelward), (died c. 998) Anglo-Saxon historian, was descended from King Æthelred I (the elder brother of Alfred the Great), and was ealdorman or earl of the western provinces.

Biography

Career

Æthelweard first witnesses charters as a minister after the accession of Eadwig in 955, and this is likely to be connected with the king's marriage to Ælfgifu. This Ælfgifu is identified with the noblewoman of this name who in her will leaves bequests to a brother of this name, and another brother, Ælfweard, who also begins witnessing at this time. Anglo-Saxon Wills, 1930, No 8 
Æthelweard signs as dux or ealdorman in 973, and was accorded primacy among the ealdormen after 993. He continues to witness until 998, about which time his death must have taken place. Æthelweard's ealdormanry was the Western Provinces, probably the south-west peninsula. His brother Ælfweard,  a royal discthegn, or household official, continues to sign as minister until 986. The Diplomas of King Æthelred the Unready 978-1016, 1980 
In the year 991 Æthelweard was associated with archbishop Sigeric in the conclusion of a peace with the victorious Danes from Maldon, and in 994 he was sent with Bishop Ælfheah of Winchester to make peace with Olaf Tryggvason at Andover.Anglo-Saxon Chronicle
Æthelweard was the friend and patron of Ælfric of Eynsham, who in the preface to his Old English Lives of saints, addressed Æthelweard and his son Æthelmær.

Family

In 957 King Eadwig, the great-grandson of King Æthelred I's brother, Alfred the Great, was obliged to divorce Æthelweard's sister Ælfgifu on the grounds of consanguinity, and in the introduction to his Latin Chronicle Æthelweard claims to be the "grandson's grandson" of King Æthelred. 
It has been postulated that Æthelweard and his siblings Ælfweard, Ælfgifu and Ælfwaru were the children of Eadric, ealdorman of Hampshire. This identification rests on Aelfgifu's possession of the estate of Risborough, which had belonged to Eadric's mother, Æthelgyth, the wife of ealdorman Æthelfrith of Mercia. 
One possible construction is that his putative grandfather Æthelfrith was the grandson of King Æthelred I through his son Æthelhelm. "The Antecedents of Earl Godwine of Wessex" in New England Historical and Genealogical Register, 1957 This royal connection would go some way to explaining the enormous prestige enjoyed by Æthelfrith's sons. 
Assuming that the identification of Æthelweard as the brother of  Ælfgifu is correct, his mother was the Æthelgifu whose company Eadwig enjoyed along with her daughter whilst escaping his coronation. Ælfgifu leaves a bequest to an Æthelflaed, who is either Æthelweard's wife or his sister-in-law.
Æthelweard was father of Æthelmær the Stout, who was ealdorman of the Western provinces towards the end of Æthelred II's reign. Æthelmær was the father of Æthelnoth, who became Archbishop of Canterbury in 1020, and was later regarded as a saint.;Mason, Emma "Æthelnoth (d. 1038)" Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Oxford University Press, 2004 Online Edition accessed November 7, 2007 and of the Æthelweard executed by King Cnut in 1017. Æthelmær has also been tentatively identified as the father Wulfnoth Cild, who was the father of Godwin, Earl of Wessex, and grandfather of King Harold II. 7

Works

After 975 and probably before 983, Æthelweard wrote the Chronicon, a Latin translation of a lost version of the Anglo Saxon Chronicle, including material not found in surviving Old English versions. Michael Lapidge, 2001
Æthelweard wrote his work at the request of his relative Mathilde, abbess of the Essen Abbey and granddaughter of emperor Otto I and Eadgyth of Wessex, to help her in the duty of keeping the remembrance of their dead relatives. The text only survives in a single copy now in the British Library,Chronicon de Rebus Anglicis, BL Cotton MS, Otho A.x which was badly damaged in the Cotton Library fire in 1731, so that later portions are lost.  Mathilde probably rewarded him with a copy of Vegetius' work De Re Militari which was written in Essen and has long been in England. 
The Chronicon was composed in the hermeneutic style almost universally adopted by English scholars writing in Latin in the tenth century. Michael Lapidge defines it as "a style whose most striking feature is the ostentatious parade of unusual, often very arcane and apparently learned vocabulary."Lapidge, pp. 105, 135-136, 139 The twelfth century historian William of Malmesbury, writing at a time when the style had come to be seen as barbarous, described him as "... a noble and illustrious character, who attempted to arrange these chronicles in Latin, and whose intention I could applaud, if his language did not disgust me it would be better to be silent..."





Primary sources

Secondary sources




