[[Sam Phillips (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, American female singers, American pop singers, American rock musicians, American rock singers, American singer-songwriters, Female rock singers, Musicians from California, Living people

Sam Phillips (born Leslie Ann Phillips January 28, 1962) is an American singer-songwriter and composer. She began her career in the contemporary Christian music industry but, uncomfortable with that image and industry, she re-branded herself as "Sam"—transitioning into the mainstream market after meeting producer T-Bone Burnett. She has released eight albums including the critically acclaimed Martinis and Bikinis in 1994. She has also composed scores for the television shows Gilmore Girls and Bunheads.

Early life

Phillips was born in Glendale, California.

Career

She began her musical career in the early 1980s, singing background vocals for Christian artists Mark Heard and Randy Stonehill. Phillips was signed to a solo contract with Myrrh Records - under her given name - and recorded four Christian pop albums, Beyond Saturday Night, Dancing with Danger, Black and White in a Grey World and, finally, The Turning, which teamed her with producer and future husband, T-Bone Burnett. Several became Top 10 singles on Christian radio
With The Indescribable Wow Philips moved into mainstream music. The album featured the orchestrations of Van Dyke Parks. Cruel Inventions was released in 1991, and included a guest performance by Elvis Costello. 1994's  Martinis and Bikinis was widely praised by music critics and was nominated for a Grammy Award; her second nomination (the first was as Leslie Phillips).
In 1995, Phillips made her film acting debut in the Bruce Willis blockbuster Die Hard with a Vengeance, in the role of a mute terrorist. In 1996, Phillips released Omnipop (It's Only a Flesh Wound Lambchop), which featured a song co-written by R.E.M.. Phillips made a cameo appearance in the 1997 Wim Wenders film The End of Violence, singing part of the song "Animals on Wheels" from Omnipop. After releasing a contractually obligated "best of" album in 1999, Virgin Records dropped Phillips from its roster.
In 2001, Phillips signed with Nonesuch Records and released a stripped-down acoustic album called Fan Dance, which featured some of her most critically acclaimed songwriting. Phillips also began writing music for and scoring the television series Gilmore Girls, and appeared in the final episode of season six, performing "Taking Pictures" from her Fan Dance album. In 2004, she released A Boot and a Shoe, another collection of acoustic cabaret songs.
After the release of A Boot and a Shoe, Phillips and husband/producer T-Bone Burnett divorced, although they continued to work together to finish her album. Her album, Don't Do Anything, was self produced and released in 2008.
In October 2009, Phillips launched The Long Play, a music subscription service offering digital releases without a record label. The first subscription only EP, Hypnotists in Paris, was recorded with the Section Quartet and a Christmas collection Cold Dark Night, Magic for Everyone, Old Tin Pan, and Days of the One Night Stands followed, with the full length album Cameras in the Sky being released in early 2010. In Spring of 2011 she issued Solid State, a public CD release comprising 13 of the best songs from her subscription service.
Phillips described her next album, Pretty Time Bomb (later renamed Push Any Button), as being "a nostalgic sort of dream of being a pop star in the 60s and early 70s. It's a sweet kind of album and I don't know where it came from. I don't know what compelled me to make it. It's probably a bad idea, but every time I listen to what I've done, it makes me really happy. So I figure, that must mean something and I should go ahead and put it out there."
In 2012, it was announced that she would be reunited with Gilmore Girls creator Amy Sherman-Palladino by scoring music for the American TV show Bunheads.
Phillips released Push Any Button on August 13, 2013.

Discography

Albums

=As Leslie Phillips=

=As Sam Phillips=

Digital EPs

Compilations

Compilation appearances

Appearances on other artist's albums

Singles

Composer of television music






