[[Good Samaritan law]]

CATEGORIES: Public law, First aid, Medical law

Good Samaritan laws offer legal protection to people who give reasonable assistance to those who are injured, ill, in peril, or otherwise incapacitated. In some cases, Good Samaritan laws encourage people to offer assistance (duty to rescue).
An example of the obligation to help a person is the Argentina law on "abandonment of persons", Articles 106-108 of the Argentine Penal Code, which include the provision in Article 106 "a person who endangers the life or health of another, either by putting a person in jeopardy or abandoning to their fate a person unable to cope alone who must be cared for ... will be imprisoned for between 2 and 6 years".
An example of legal protection without obligation to act: in common-law areas of Canada a good Samaritan doctrine is a legal principle that prevents a rescuer who has voluntarily helped a victim in distress from being successfully sued for 'wrongdoing'. Its purpose is to keep people from being reluctant to help a stranger in need for fear of legal repercussions should they make some mistake in treatment.
Good Samaritan laws vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, as do their interactions with various other legal principles, such as consent, parental rights and the right to refuse treatment.  Most such laws do not apply to medical professionals' or career emergency responders' on-the-job conduct, but some extend protection to professional rescuers when they are acting in a volunteer capacity.
The principles contained in good Samaritan laws more typically operate in countries in which the foundation of the legal system is English Common Law, such as Australia. In many countries that use civil law as the foundation for their legal systems, the same legal effect is more typically achieved using a principle of duty to rescue.
Good Samaritan laws take their name from a parable found in the Bible, attributed to Jesus, commonly referred to as the Parable of the Good Samaritan which is contained in Luke 10:25-37.  It recounts the aid given by a traveler from the area known as Samaria to another traveler of a conflicting religious and ethnic background who had been beaten and robbed by bandits. (n.d.). Merriam-Webster's Dictionary of Law. Retrieved January 09, 2010, from Dictionary.reference.com/browse/Good+Samaritan

Regions

Canada

In Canada, good samaritan acts are under provincial jurisdiction.  Each province has its own act, such as Ontario
An example of a typical Canadian law is provided here, from Ontario's Good Samaritan Act, 2001, section 2:
 
 Protection from liability
2. (1) Despite the rules of common law, a person described in subsection (2) who voluntarily and without reasonable expectation of compensation or reward provides the services described in that subsection is not liable for damages that result from the person's negligence in acting or failing to act while providing the services, unless it is established that the damages were caused by the gross negligence of the person. 2001, c. 2, s. 2 (1).

New Brunswick and Nunavut do not have Good Samaritan laws.

China

China is notorious for its poor treatment of good Samaritans. There have been incidents in China, such as the Peng Yu incident in 2006, where Good Samaritans who helped people injured in accidents were accused of having injured the victim themselves.
The Death of Wang Yue was caused when the toddler was run over by two vehicles. The entire incident was caught on a video, which shows eighteen people seeing the child but refusing to help. In a November 2011 survey, a majority, 71%, thought that the people who passed the child without helping were afraid of getting into trouble themselves.
According to China Daily, "At least 10 Party and government departments and organizations in Guangdong, including the province's commission on politics and law, the women's federation, the Academy of Social Sciences, and the Communist Youth League, have started discussions on punishing those who refuse to help people who clearly need it."

Europe

Laws in North America mainly shield from liability those who choose to help in a situation they did not cause; laws in much of Europe

=Germany=

In Germany, failure to provide first aid to a person in need is punishable under § 323c of the criminal penal code. However, any help one provides can and will not be prosecuted even if it made the situation worse or did not fulfill specific first aid criteria. People are thus encouraged to help in any way possible even if it does not lead to success.

=Finland=

The Finnish Rescue act explicitly stipulates a duty to rescue as a general duty to act and engage in rescue activities according to their abilities. The Finnish Rescue act thus includes a principle of proportionality which e.g. requires professionals to extend immediate aid further than lay persons. Failure to rescue is punishable by the Finnish penal code, section 21, 15 §.

=Ireland=

The Civil Law (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act of 2011 first introduced legislation specifically addressing the liability of citizen good samaritans or volunteers in the Republic of Ireland, without introducing a duty to intervene. This Act provides for exemption from liability for a person, or voluntary organisation, for anything done while providing "assistance, advice or care" to a person who is injured, in serious risk or danger of becoming injured or suffering from an illness (or apparently so). There are exclusions for cases of "bad faith" or "gross negligence" on behalf of the carer, and incidents relating to negligent use of motor vehicles. This Act only addresses situations where there is no duty of care owed by the good samaritan or the volunteer.

Israel

In Israel, the law requires anyone to assist a person in danger or at the very least call for help. People who help in good faith are not liable for damages. Helpers are eligible for compensation for damages caused to them during their assistance.

United States

The details of good Samaritan laws/acts in various jurisdictions vary, including who is protected from liability and in what circumstances.01-225. Not all jurisdictions provide protection to laypersons, in those cases only protecting trained personnel, such as doctors or nurses and perhaps also emergency services personnel such as trained police, fire and EMS workers.

Australia

Most Australian states and territories have some form of good Samaritan protection.  In general these offer protection if care is made in good faith, and the "good Samaritan" is not impaired by drugs or alcohol.  Variation exists between states, from not applying if the "good Samaritan" is the cause of the problem (NSW), to applying under all circumstances if the attempt is made in good faith (VIC).racgp.au/afp/200807/200807bird.pdf

Common features

In some jurisdictions, unless a caretaker relationship (such as a parent-child or doctor-patient relationship) exists prior to the illness or injury, or the "good Samaritan" is responsible for the existence of the illness or injury, no person is required to give aid of any sort to a victim. Good Samaritan statutes in the states of Minnesota and Vermont do require a person at the scene of an emergency to provide reasonable assistance to a person in need.  New York's law provides immunity for those who assist in an emergency.N.Y. Public Health L. §§ 3000-a, 3000-b, 3013 (McKinney 2000); see also NY State Assembly website database of law.  Accessed April 8, 2009; last accessed July 25, 2011.  The public policy behind the law is:
Good Samaritan provisions are not universal in application.  The legal principle of imminent peril may also apply. Torti, December 18, 2008, with a similar fact pattern and limitation of protection to medical personnel rendering medical aid.
Only first aid provided without intention of reward or financial compensation is covered. Medical professionals are typically not protected by good Samaritan laws when performing first aid in connection with their employment.  In Texas, a physician who voluntarily assisted in the delivery of an infant, and who proved that he had "no expectation of remuneration", had no liability for the infant's injuries due to allegedly ordinary negligence; there was "uncontroverted testimony that neither he nor any doctor in Travis County would have charged a fee to mother or any other person under the circumstances of this case."McIntyre v. Ramirez, 109 S.W.3d 741 (Tex. Sup. Ct. 2003), overturning 59 S.W.3d 821 (Tex. Ct. of Appeals) and citing Tex. Civ. Prac. & Rem. Code § 74.001 (effective in 1998, and since amended), found at Texas Courts website.  Accessed July 25, 2011.  It was significant that the doctor was not an employee of the attending physician, but was only visiting the hospital and had responded to a "Dr. Stork" page, and had not asked or expected to be paid.
If a responder begins rendering aid, he must not leave the scene until it is necessary to call for needed medical assistance, a rescuer of equal or higher ability takes over, or continuing to give aid is unsafe. A responder is never legally compelled to take risks to aid another person. The responder is not legally liable for any harm to the person assisted, as long as the responder acted rationally, in good faith and in accordance with their level of training.

Consent

The responder must obtain the consent  of the patient, or of the legal guardian of a patient who is a minor, unless this is not possible; failing to do so may attract a charge of assault or battery.

=Implied consent=

Consent may be implied if an unattended patient is unconscious, delusional, intoxicated or deemed mentally unfit to make decisions regarding his or her safety, or if the responder has a reasonable belief that this was so; courts tend to be very forgiving in adjudicating this, under the legal fiction that "peril invites rescue" (as in the rescue doctrine). The test in most jurisdictions is that of the 'average, reasonable person'.  To illustrate, would the average, reasonable person in any of the states described above consent to receiving assistance in these circumstances if able to make a decision?
Consent may also be implied if the legal parent or guardian is not immediately reachable and the patient is not considered an adult.

=Parental consent=

If the victim is a minor, consent must come from a parent or guardian. However, if the legal parent or guardian is absent, unconscious, delusional or intoxicated, consent is implied. A responder is not required to withhold life-saving treatment (e.g., CPR or the Heimlich maneuver) from a minor if the parent or guardian will not consent. 

=Laws for first responders only=

In some jurisdictions,

Comparison with duty to rescue

Good Samaritan laws may be confused with the duty to rescue, as described above. U.S. and Canadian approaches to this issue differ.  Under the common law, good Samaritan laws provide a defence against torts arising from the attempted rescue. Such laws do not constitute a duty to rescue, such as exists in some civil law countries, Similarly, in France anyone who fails to render assistance to a person in danger will be found liable before French Courts (civil and criminal liability). The penalty for this offence in criminal courts is imprisonment and a fine (under article 223–6 of the Criminal Code) while in civil courts judges will order payment of pecuniary compensation to the victims.Audrey Laur Liabilities of Doctors on Aircraft Med Leg J March 2013 81:31—35
To illustrate a variation in the concept of duty to rescue, in the Canadian province of Ontario, the Occupational Health and Safety Act provides all workers with the right to refuse to perform unsafe work.  There are, however, specific exceptions to this right.  When the "life, health or safety of another person is at risk," then specific groups, including "police officers, firefighters, or employees of a hospital, clinic or other type of medical worker (including EMS)" are specifically excluded from the right to refuse unsafe work.

In popular culture

A Good Samaritan law was featured in the May 1998 series finale of the popular NBC situation comedy Seinfeld, in which the show's four main characters were all prosecuted and sentenced to one year in jail for making fun of (rather than helping) a fat man (John Pinette) who was getting robbed at gunpoint.



References and notes




