[[Economy of Hong Kong]]

CATEGORIES: Economy of Hong Kong, World Trade Organization member economies, Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation

As one of the world's leading international financial centers, Hong Kong's service-oriented economy is characterised by low taxation, near free port trade and well established international financial market.hkma.hk/media/eng/publication-and-research/quarterly-bulletin/qb200309/fa1. legislation.hk (1997-06-30) and pegged to the US Dollar.hkma.hk/eng/exhibition/2.  (for more, see Exchange Bank Association) When destabilizing factors attempt to hit the financial market of this Special Administrative Region of People's Republic of China it will be supervised and inspected by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority. Electronic finance trading  (see page 134~136)
[/ref]
According to Index of Economic Freedom since the inception of the index in 1995, Hong Kong has remained as the world's freest economy,  The economy is governed under positive non-interventionism, and is highly dependent on international trade and finance.  In 2009 the real economic growth fell by 2.8% as a result of the global financial turmoil. Hong Kong's economic strengths include a sound banking system, virtually no public debt, a strong legal system, ample foreign exchange reserves, rigorous anti-corruption measures and close ties with the mainland China.  Despite the downturn, these strengths enable it to quickly respond to changing circumstances.S. Department of State] In terms of international comparison, with the most efficient and corruption-free application procedure, lowest income tax and lowest corporate tax as well as abundant and sustainable government finance that the government of Hong Kong consistently upheld the policy of encouraging (and supporting such as Cyberport and Hong Kong Disneyland (by Hong Kong International Theme Parks)) activities of private businesses.  This is having a sound impact on the overall economic performance by removing unnecessary barriers for the private enterprises in the Special Administrative Region. Hong Kong is a favorable destination especially for international firms and firms from Mainland China to be listed in the Hong Kong Stock Exchange due to Hong Kong's highly internationalized and modernized financial industry along with its capital market in Asia, its size, regulations and available financial tools, which are comparable to London and New York.ft.html#axzz2g6qsw9W6
Hong Kong's gross domestic product, between 1961 and 1997, has grown 180 times.  Also, the GDP rose by 87 times per capita.
By the late 20th century, Hong Kong was the seventh largest port in the world and second only to New York and Rotterdam in terms of container throughput. Hong Kong is a full Member of World Trade Organization. WTO. Retrieved on 2012-11-01. The Kwai Chung container complex was the largest in Asia; while Hong Kong shipping owners were second only to those of Greece in terms of total tonnage holdings in the world. The Hong Kong Stock Exchange is the 5th largest in the world, with a market capitalisation of about US$2.63 trillion.
Hong Kong has also had an abundant supply of labour from the region nearby. A skilled labour force coupled with the adoption of modern British/Western business methods and technology ensured that opportunities for external trade, investment, and recruitment were maximised. Prices and wages in Hong Kong are (relatively) flexible depending on the performance and stability of the economy of Hong Kong.hkma.hk/media/eng/publication-and-research/research/working-papers/HKMAWP09_20_full.pdf
Taxation in Hong Kong raises revenues from the sale and taxation of land and through attracting international business to provide capital for its public finance, due to its low tax policy. According to Healy Consultants, Hong Kong is East Asia's most attractive business environment, in terms of attracting foreign direct investment (FDI). From its revenues, the government has built roads, schools, hospitals, and other public infrastructure facilities and services. Low levels of spending relative to GDP (for example, no spending on armed forces, minimal outlays for foreign affairs and modest recurrent social welfare spending) have allowed the accumulation of very large fiscal reserves with minimal foreign debt.
Though not conventionally regarded as a tax haven, Hong Kong ranked fourth on the Tax Justice Network's 2011 Financial Secrecy Index.financialsecrecyindex.html

Stock exchange

The Hong Kong Stock Exchange is the 6th largest in the world, with a market capitalisation of about US$2.97 trillion. In 2006, the value of initial public offerings conducted in Hong Kong was second highest in the world after London. Retrieved 2007-1-20. In 2009, Hong Kong raised 22 percent of worldwide initial public offering (IPO) capital, becoming the largest centre of IPOs in the world. The rival stock exchange of the future is expected to be the Shanghai Stock Exchange.  As of 2006, Hong Kong Exchanges and Clearing (HKEX) has an average daily turnover of 33.4 billion dollars, which is 12 times that of Shanghai.

Economic predictions

Since the 1997 handover Hong Kong's economic future became far more exposed to the challenges of economic globalization and direct competition from mainland China.  Shanghai claimed in particular to have a geographical advantage, and a municipal government that dreamt of turning the city into China's main economic centre by as early as 2010. The target is to allow Shanghai to catch up to New York by 2040–2050.  Bae, Chang-Hee C.  2005 (2005) Globalization and Urban Development: Advances in Spatial Science.  ISBN 3-540-22362-2 Hong Kong, on the other hand, continues to have a more positive and realistic approach, and remains the principal international financial centre in China. Until then, Hong Kong is expected to have higher overall economic figures yearly.  Hong Kong's main trading partners are China, the United States, Japan, Taiwan, Germany, Singapore, and South Korea.

Positive non-interventionism

This policy has often been cited by economists such as Milton Friedman and the Cato Institute as an example of the benefits of laissez-faire capitalism. However others have argued that the economic strategy was inadequately characterised by the term laissez-faire.sbs.edu/faculty/mcooper/ps536readings/cheung_interventionism. The government has intervened to create economic institutions such as the Hong Kong Stock Market and has been involved in public works projects and social welfare spending. All land in Hong Kong is owned by the government and leased to private users.  By restricting the sale of land leases, the Hong Kong government keeps the price of land at what some would say are artificially high prices and this allows the government to support public spending with a low tax rate.  Doesn't Hong Kong show the potentials of "free market" capitalism?. Retrieved on 2008-03-06. (dead link)

Economic freedom

Hong Kong has ranked as the world's freest economy in the Index of Economic Freedom of Heritage Foundation for 20 consecutive years, since its inception in 1995. 

Economic indicators

GDPCensus and Statistics Department, www.gov.hk.

Population

LabourQuarterly Report on General Household Survey, July to September 2009, Census and Statistics Department

FY 2010–11 budget

Trade (2010)Search for Statistical Products | Census and Statistics Department. Censtatd.hk. Retrieved on 2012-11-01.








