[[Peter Stormare]]

CATEGORIES: 1953 births, Living people, People from Kumla Municipality, Swedish expatriates in the United States, Swedish Christians, Swedish male film actors, Swedish male stage actors, Swedish male television actors, 20th-century Swedish male actors, 21st-century Swedish male actors

Rolf Peter Ingvar Storm (born 27 August 1953), known professionally as Peter Stormare (), is a Swedish film, stage, voice and television actor, as well as a theatrical director, playwright and musician. Stormare is probably best known in the United States for playing Gaear Grimsrud in the Academy Award-winning film Fargo (1996).

Early life

Stormare was born in Kumla, Närke, Sweden,Peter Stormare Film Reference bio and grew up in Arbrå, Hälsingland. He changed his surname when he discovered he shared it with a senior student at the acting academy. Just like "storm" (a word which has the same meaning in Swedish and English), "stormare" is a Swedish word, meaning "stormer". Before settling on "Stormare" he briefly contemplated changing his name to "Mrots Retep" which is simply "Peter Storm" backwards.

Career

Stormare began his career with the Swedish Royal Dramatic Theatre, to which he belonged for eleven years. In 1990, he took a leading position (Associate Artistic Director) at the Tokyo Globe Theatre and made a name for himself through various Shakespeare performances including Hamlet. Three years later, he moved to New York City and mainly took part there in English language productions. He played Carl Hamilton, a fictional Swedish secret agent similar to James Bond. He was discovered by international audiences for his critically acclaimed role as one of the kidnappers (with Steve Buscemi) in Fargo (1996). He later played a sleazy, unlicensed "eye-doctor" named Solomon Eddie in Minority Report. He portrayed Dieter Stark in the 1997 film The Lost World: Jurassic Park.
In 1998, he appeared in "The Frogger", a Seinfeld episode where he played a "rogue electrician" known as "Slippery Pete". He portrayed Uli Kunkel in the 1998 film The Big Lebowski, as well as playing Lev Andropov, the Russian Cosmonaut in 1998's Armageddon. In 1999 he appeared opposite Nicolas Cage, in the role of a villainous producer & director of deviant hard-core porn named "Dino Velvet" in the film 8mm. He also portrayed Gunny in the movie Windtalkers in 2002 and Alexei in the 2003 film Bad Boys II. In 2003, Stormare played the role of Ernst Rohm in Hitler: The Rise of Evil. In the 2005 film Constantine, Stormare played Lucifer. He played an interrogator in the 2005 movie The Brothers Grimm. His first major character in television was on the show Prison Break in 2005, where he played mob boss John Abruzzi. Stormare was originally cast for the role of Fido, but upon being cast in Prison Break, he opted out of the film.
He voiced "Mattias Nilsson" in the video games Mercenaries: Playground of Destruction and Mercenaries 2: World in Flames, the voice of Isair in the computer game Icewind Dale 2, and the voice of Johann Strauss in Quake 4. In February 2006, he starred as Wolfgang in Volkswagen's VDub series of television commercials.
Stormare played the main character in the movie Svartvattnet, which was filmed in Sweden and Norway during 2007. Stormare was also offered a role in the ABC television series Lost for a period of one year,Stormare Offered Role in "Lost" which he later declined. In April 2007, he appeared in an episode of crime drama CSI: Crime Scene Investigation, "Ending Happy".
In December 2007, Stormare participated in the Swedish reality show "Stjärnorna på slottet" along with Britt Ekland, Arja Saijonmaa, Jan Malmsjö and Magnus Härenstam. He appears in Command & Conquer: Red Alert 3 as Dr. Zelinsky, a Russian scientist who builds a time machine. He runs his own record label, StormVox. He appeared in the music video of the song "Uprising" by the Swedish power metal band Sabaton. He appeared in "The Replacer" trailer for the video game Call of Duty: Black Ops II, which was made for the "Revolution" DLC pack. He has since reappeared in most recent trailers for the game.

Personal life

Stormare divides his time between the United States and Sweden.kurt-ulander.htm He is divorced from his first wife, actress Karen Sillas and is currently married to Toshimi, a native of Japan.
After Bono of U2 heard some of Stormare's music, he encouraged Stormare to make an album. In 2002, Stormare released his first album, Dallerpölsa och småfåglar. Stormare is the godfather of Gustaf Skarsgård, the son of equally-acclaimed Swedish actor Stellan Skarsgård, and plays in a band called Blonde From Fargo. While working on a Disney film in Prague, Stormare was introduced to Bob Dylan after the concert by bassist Tony Garnier.
Peter Stormare is a Christian, and claims he has had contact with God.expressen.1052099/jag-har-kontakt-med-gud When he was young, he participated in the Baptist meetings in Arbrå.se/sida/artikel.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Music video

Discography








