[[Virgin birth of Jesus]]

CATEGORIES: Christian belief and doctrine, Christian miracle narrative, Christianity and Islam, Glorious Mysteries, Islamic theology, Jesus, Human pregnancy

The virgin birth of Jesus is the belief that Jesus was conceived in the womb of his mother Mary by the Holy Spirit and born while Mary was yet a virgin.. The virgin birth is not mentioned in the Pauline epistles, nor is it mentioned in the Gospels of Mark or John.
The virgin birth was universally accepted in the Christian church by the 2nd century, was enshrined in the Apostles' Creed, and, except for several minor sects, was not seriously challenged until the 18th century, and remains a basic article of belief in the Roman Catholic, Orthodox, and most Protestant churches. Muslims also accept the virgin birth of Jesus.

Distinction from other doctrines

Mary's virginal conception of Jesus is sometimes confused
The virgin birth of Jesus is also distinct from the doctrine of the perpetual virginity of Mary, the belief that Mary remained a virgin for her entire life.

Cultural context

According to standard Jewish custom of the time of Jesus, girls were betrothed around the age of twelve or twelve and a half.

New Testament

The earliest Christian preaching about Jesus concerned his death and resurrection, and the early Church turned its attention to the chronology of the rest of the life of Jesus later. Brown, in The Birth of the Messiah, pages 26-28Robert J. Karris (editor), Collegeville Bible Commentary 1992, p. 939  Early Christians were hardly monolithic in their preachings, and the Nativity accounts of the gospels may have diverged as a result, but a comparison of the Nativity stories of Luke and Matthew show common elements in terms of the virgin birth, the birth at Bethlehem and the upbringing at Nazareth. Matthew by George Dunbar Kilpatrick 2007 ISBN 0-86516-667-6 page 54.

Pauline epistles

The Pauline epistles, the earliest surviving Christian writings, refer to Jesus' mother without stating that she was a virgin. Instead Paul focuses on contrasting the birth of Jesus with the fall of Adam, and presents Jesus as the "firstborn of all creation", and a second Adam, in Colossians 1:15-16. Bromiley 1988 ISBN 0-8028-3785-9 pageAn introductory dictionary of theology and religious studies'' by Orlando O. Espín, James B. Nickoloff 2007 ISBN 0-8146-5856-3 page 238
Some see the silence of Paul on virginity as implying that he knew of no account of the virgin birth of Jesus, while scholars such as Raymond Brown reject the "argument from silence" and state that Paul's letters were composed with a view to ecclesiastical problems with which he had to deal, not to give a narrative of the life of Jesus.
Raymond E. Brown states that given the multiple lines of reasoning, there are no convincing arguments to determine whether Paul knew of the virgin birth or not. Brown writes that it is difficult to decide whether Paul's silence on the question of the virginal conception of Jesus is significant in any case. 56-57 Brown states that, even if the silence of Paul is taken to indicate ignorance of the virgin birth, it does not disprove it, for a family tradition about it could have circulated among relatively few in the years 30-60, before becoming known to the communities for whom Matthew and Luke wrote. 61 Other authors have noted that the silence of Paul is no indication, given the Pauline Epistles were not intended as chronologies and include very few details of the life of Jesus in general, and that even the Last Supper was only mentioned by Paul in response to problems in Corinth.Virgin Birth of Christ by J Gresham Machen 1987 ISBN 0-227-67630-0 page 262
Specific passages in Paul's letters include ) includes the words: "concerning his Son, who was descended from David (or who came from the offspring of David) according to the flesh and was declared to be the Son of God in power according to the Spirit of holiness by his resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord". Some, pointing out that the Greek word translated as "descendant" in some Bibles is sperma, which literally means "seed", and interpreting this as indicating descent through the male line,Carlson, Paul (1995) "New Testament Contradictions"Kick, Russ (2007) Everything You Know About God Is WrongEverett Peter (2013) Jesus: The Man Behind the Veil; Page 36 take "descended from David according to the flesh" to mean that Joseph, a descendant of David, was the physical father of Jesus, thus denying the virgin birth of Jesus, others take it as indicating that Mary too was a descendant of David.[ref]
</ref><ref>
</ref><ref>
</ref><ref>

