[[Soju]]

CATEGORIES: Rice drinks, Korean distilled beverages, Distilled beverages

Soju  (Hangul 소주; Hanja 燒酒) is a distilled beverage native to Korea. Jinro and Lotte soju are the first and third top selling alcohol brands in the world.indiatimes.html It is usually consumed neat.
Most brands of soju are made in South Korea. It is traditionally made from rice, wheat, or barley, but modern producers of soju use supplements or even replace rice with other starches, such as potatoes, sweet potatoes, or tapioca.
Soju is clear and colorless. Its alcohol content varies from about 16.7%, to about 45% alcohol by volume (ABV) for traditional Andong soju, However, by using freeze distillation, ABV can be increased to desired percentage. There are two different ways to produce soju; the classic way of distilling soju that uses the single distillation method and the modern way of diluted soju that uses the chain distillation method.american.htm Distilled soju usually has a higher ABV of 30~35% than diluted soju with ABV of 21~30%. As distilled soju tends to have a higher ABV, it has stronger smell than diluted soju. It is widely consumed in part because of its relatively low price in Korea. A typical 375mL bottle of soju costs the consumer 1,000 to 3,000 South Korean won in South Korea (roughly $1 to $3 Canadian dollars). In Canada, it costs substantially more – $5.50 ~ $9.25 (depends on brand) 
Now soju is exported to 80 countries and is in the top market share of diluted alcohol market. 
Statistically, soju ranked #1 in world sale records of the diluted alcohol market in 2002.

Etymology

Soju  燒酒, literally means "burned liquor". In 2008 the word soju entered the Merriam-Webster Dictionary,merriam-webster.

Etiquette

Soju is Korea's most well known alcoholic beverage.chosun.html 
Korea has a very strict culture of respect and etiquette. When receiving a glass from an elder, one must hold the glass with two hands (left palm on the bottom & hold the glass with right hand) and bow the head slightly. When it is your turn to drink, turn away from the elder and cover your mouth and glass with hands. If you are pouring a glass for others, hold the bottle with your right hand and support your right arm with your left hand by touching its elbow.
There are a few rules unique to Soju: never pour your own, and don't refill your glass until it's empty.

Korea

Soju was first distilled around the 13th century, during the Mongol invasions of Korea. The Mongols had acquired the technique of distilling Arak from the Muslim World
From 1965 until 1999, in order to alleviate rice shortages, the Korean government prohibited the traditional distillation of soju from rice. Instead, highly distilled ethanol from sweet potatoes and tapioca was mixed with water, flavoring, and sweetener to create soju. Although the prohibition has been lifted, cheap soju continues to be made this way. The Korean government regulates the alcohol content of diluted soju to less than 35%, The lower alcohol concentration also makes the drink milder to consume, which may broaden its appeal.
Several regions have resumed distilling soju from grain. Soju from Andong, South Korea is a traditional hand-crafted soju that has about 45% ABV.

Canada

Liquors in Canada are controlled by government. In Ontario, the Liquor Control Board of Ontario sells soju but not all stores have it. Only big stores have foreign liquor like soju. They sell three different kinds of soju; Chamisul Fresh Soju by Jinro, Charm Soju by Kum Bok Ju Co, and Chum Churum Cool Soju by lotte.
In addition, not all LCBO establishments have soju, but almost all Korean LLBO restaurants have them. Recently, local Canadian soju distilleries who produce soju in the traditional method using local ingredients (such as barley grown in Canada) have sprung up and are starting to distribute throughout Canada. There could be Korean restaurants making their own diluted soju with their own recipe.
One of recent innovation of soju is soju wine.

United States

The liquor licensing laws in the states of California and New York specifically exempt the sale of soju from regulation relating to the sale of other distilled spirits, allowing businesses with a beer/wine license to sell it without requiring the more expensive license required for other distilled spirits. (Accessed February 2011) The only stipulation is that the soju must be clearly labeled as such and contain less than 25% alcohol.kusoju.html
This has led to the appearance in the United States of many soju-based equivalents of traditional Western mixed drinks normally based on vodka or similar spirits, such as the soju martini and the soju cosmopolitan. Another consequence is that the manufacturers of similar distilled spirits from other parts of Asia, such as Japanese shōchū, have begun to relabel their products as soju for sale in those regions.What is Sochu?

Brands

Jinro is the largest manufacturer of soju. (76 million cases sold in 2008).businessweek.html The most popular variety of soju is currently Chamisul (참 이슬 - literally meaning "real dew"),

Consumption

Although beer, whiskey, and wine have been gaining popularity in recent years, soju remains one of the most popular alcoholic beverages in Korea because of its ready availability and relatively low price. More than 3 billion bottles were consumed in South Korea in 2004.3.05 billion bottles were reported sold in 2004, up from previous years. 

Cocktails

While soju is traditionally consumed straight, a few cocktails and mixed drinks use soju as a base spirit. Beer and soju can be mixed to create somaek (소맥), a portmanteau of the words soju and maekju (맥주  beer). Flavored soju is also available. It is also popular to blend fruits with soju and to drink it in "slushy" form. Another very popular flavored soju is yogurt soju (요구르트 소주), which is a combination of soju, yogurt, and lemon lime soda.
A poktanju (폭탄주) ("bomb drink") consists of a shot glass of soju dropped into a pint of beer (similar to a boilermaker); it is drunk quickly. This is similar to the Japanese sake bomb.
Another cocktail is called kojinkamrae (고진감래).  It is the same as the poktanju above but includes a shot of cola (1 shot soju, 1 shot cola, 1 glass beer).
An Abominable Killer Snowmen is a popular cocktail containing soju. It consists of 1 oz. of soju, 1 oz. of Rose's lime juice, and 1 oz. of sour mix combined together in a highball glass. The glass is then garnished with a cucumber.



Soju is sometimes mistakenly referred to as cheongju (청주), a Korean rice wine. Mass-produced soju is also mistaken for Chinese baijiu, a grain liquor, and shōchū, a Japanese beverage.






