[[Joe Biden]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, Living people, American legal scholars, American people of English descent, American people of French descent, American people of Irish descent, American Roman Catholics, County council members and commissioners in Delaware, Delaware Democrats, Delaware Fightin' Blue Hens football players, Delaware lawyers, Democratic Party (United States) vice presidential nominees, Democratic Party United States Senators, Democratic Party Vice Presidents of the United States, Joe Biden, Obama Administration cabinet members, People from New Castle County, Delaware, People from Scranton, Pennsylvania, Recipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class, Recipients of the Order of the Three Stars, 2nd Class, Syracuse University College of Law alumni, United States presidential candidates, 1988, United States presidential candidates, 2008, United States Senators from Delaware, United States vice-presidential candidates, 2008, United States vice-presidential candidates, 2012, University of Delaware alumni, Vice Presidents of the United States, Widener University faculty, 21st-century American writers


Joseph Robinette "Joe" Biden, Jr.  (; born November 20, 1942) is the 47th and current Vice President of the United States, jointly elected with President Barack Obama. He is a member of the Democratic Party and was a United States Senator from Delaware from January 3, 1973, until his resignation on January 15, 2009, following his election to the Vice Presidency. In 2012, Biden was elected to a second term alongside Obama.
Biden was born in Scranton, Pennsylvania, and lived there for ten years before moving to Delaware.  He became an attorney in 1969, and was elected to the New Castle County council in 1970.  Biden was first elected to the Senate in 1972 and became the sixth-youngest senator in U.S. history.  He was re-elected to the Senate six times, and was the fourth most senior senator at the time of his resignation.  Biden was a long-time member and former chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.  His strong advocacy helped bring about U.S. military assistance and intervention during the Bosnian War. He opposed the Gulf War in 1991.  He voted in favor of the Iraq War Resolution in 2002, but later proposed resolutions to alter U.S. strategy there.  He has also served as chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, dealing with issues related to drug policy, crime prevention, and civil liberties, and led creation of the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement Act and Violence Against Women Act. He chaired the Judiciary Committee during the contentious U.S. Supreme Court nominations of Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas.
Biden unsuccessfully sought the Democratic presidential nomination in 1988 and 2008, both times dropping out early in the race.  Barack Obama selected Biden to be the Democratic Party nominee for Vice President in the 2008 U.S. presidential election. Biden is the first Roman Catholic and the first Delawarean to become Vice President of the United States.  As Vice President, Biden has been heavily involved in Obama's decision-making process and held the oversight role for infrastructure spending from the Obama stimulus package aimed at counteracting the late-2000s recession.  His ability to negotiate with Congressional Republicans played a key role in bringing about the bipartisan deals that resulted in the Tax Relief, Unemployment Insurance Reauthorization, and Job Creation Act of 2010 that resolved a taxation deadlock, the Budget Control Act of 2011 that resolved that year's debt ceiling crisis, and the American Taxpayer Relief Act of 2012 that addressed the impending "fiscal cliff".

Early life and education

Biden was born on November 20, 1942, at St. Mary's Hospital in Scranton, Pennsylvania,Witcover, Joe Biden, p. 5. the son of Joseph Robinette Biden, Sr. (1915–2002)
Biden's father had been very well-off earlier in his life, but had suffered several business reverses by the time Biden was born,  In 1953, the Biden family moved to an apartment in Claymont, Delaware, where they lived for a few years before moving to a house in Wilmington, Delaware.  Joe Biden Sr. then did better as a used car salesman, and the family's circumstances were middle class. 364.
Biden attended the Archmere Academy in Claymont,Witcover, Joe Biden, pp. 27, 32. where he was a standout halfback/wide receiver on the high school football team; he helped lead a perennially losing team to an undefeated season in his senior year.  He played on the baseball team as well.  During these years, he participated in an anti-segregation sit-in at a Wilmington theatre.  Academically, Biden received mostly 'B' grades, but he was a natural leader among the students, and was elected class president during his junior and senior years. He graduated in 1961. 40–41.
Biden attended the University of Delaware in Newark, where he was more interested in sports and socializing than in studying, although his classmates were impressed by his cramming abilities. 43.  He played halfback with the Blue Hens freshman football team. In 1964, while on spring break in the Bahamas, he met and began dating Neilia Hunter, who was from an affluent background in Skaneateles, New York, and who attended Syracuse University. He told her that he aimed to become a Senator by the age of 30 and then President.  He dropped a junior year plan to play for the varsity football team as a defensive back, enabling him to spend more time visiting out of state with her. 27, 32–33.  He double majored in history and political science and graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in 1965, ranking 506th of 688 in his class. 98.
He then entered Syracuse University College of Law (where he would be near her), receiving a half scholarship based on financial need with some additional assistance based in part upon academics.
Biden received five student draft deferments during this period, with the first coming in late 1963 and the last in early 1968, at the peak of the Vietnam War.  Biden was generally supportive of the war during much of this time and never became part of the anti-Vietnam War movement; he would later say that at the time he was preoccupied with marriage and law school, and that he "wore sports coats ... not tie-dyed". 96.
Negative impressions of drinking alcohol in the Biden and Finnegan families and in the neighborhood led to Joe Biden becoming a teetotaler. he overcame it by spending many hours reciting poetry in front of a mirror. 99.

Family and early political career

On August 27, 1966, Biden, while still a law student, married Hunter. article will appear in search results They overcame her parents' initial reluctance for her to wed a Roman Catholic, and the ceremony was held in a Catholic church in Skaneateles. 32, 36–37. They had three children, Joseph R. "Beau" Biden III (born 1969), Robert Hunter (born 1970), and Naomi Christina (born 1971).
During 1968, Biden clerked for six months at a Wilmington law firm headed by prominent local Republican William Prickett and, as he later said, "thought of myself as a Republican". He disliked the conservative racial politics of incumbent Democratic Governor of Delaware Charles L. Terry and supported a more liberal Republican, Russell W. Peterson, who defeated Terry in 1968. The local Republicans tried to recruit Biden, but he resisted due to his distaste for Republican presidential candidate Richard M. Nixon, and registered as an Independent instead.
In 1969, Biden resumed practicing law in Wilmington, first as a public defender and then at a firm headed by Sid Balick, a locally active Democrat.  Balick named Biden to the Democratic Forum, a group trying to reform and revitalize the state party,Witcover, Joe Biden, p. 86. and Biden switched his registration to Democratic. Biden also started his own firm, Biden and Walsh.  Corporate law, however, did not appeal to him and criminal law did not pay well. He supplemented his income by managing properties.
Later in 1969, Biden ran as a Democrat for the New Castle County Council on a liberal platform that included support for public housing in the suburban area. He won by a solid, two-thousand vote margin in the usually Republican district and in a bad year for Democrats in the state. 59. Even before taking his seat, he was already talking about running for the U.S. Senate in a couple of years. Biden served on the County Council from 1970 to 1972 while continuing his private law practice. Among issues he addressed on the council was his opposition to large highway projects that might disrupt Wilmington neighborhoods, including those related to Interstate 95. 62.

United States Senator

Election and tragedy; recovery and new family

Biden's entry into the 1972 U.S. Senate election in Delaware presented a unique circumstance. Longtime Delaware political figure and Republican incumbent Senator J. Caleb Boggs was considering retirement, which would likely have left U.S. Representative Pete du Pont and Wilmington Mayor Harry G. Haskell, Jr. in a divisive primary fight. To avoid that, U.S. President Richard M. Nixon helped convince Boggs to run again with full party support.  No other Democrat wanted to run against Boggs.  Biden's campaign had virtually no money and was given no chance of winning.  It was managed by his sister Valerie Biden Owens (who would go on to manage his future campaigns as well) and staffed by other members of his family, and relied upon handed-out newsprint position papers and meeting voters face-to-face; the small size of the state and lack of a major media market made the approach feasible.  Biden did receive some assistance from the AFL-CIO and Democratic pollster Patrick Caddell.  Biden's campaign issues focused on withdrawal from Vietnam, the environment, civil rights, mass transit, more equitable taxation, health care, the public's dissatisfaction with politics-as-usual, and "change".  During the summer, Biden trailed by almost 30 percentage points, but his energy level, his attractive young family, and his ability to connect with voters' emotions gave the surging Biden an advantage over the ready-to-retire Boggs.  Biden won the November 7, 1972, election in an upset by a margin of 3,162 votes.
On December 18, 1972, a few weeks after the election, Biden's wife and one-year-old daughter were killed in an automobile accident while Christmas shopping in Hockessin, Delaware. Neilia Biden's station wagon was hit by a tractor-trailer as she pulled out from an intersection; the truck driver was cleared of any wrongdoing.[ref]
