[[Military slang]]

CATEGORIES: Military slang and jargon, Military humor

Military slang is an array of colloquial terminology used commonly by US military personnel, including slang which is unique to or originates with the armed forces. It often takes the form of abbreviations/acronyms or derivations of the NATO Phonetic Alphabet, or otherwise incorporates aspects of formal military concepts and terms. Military slang is often used to reinforce or reflect (usually friendly and humorous) interservice rivalries.

Acronym slang

A number of military slang terms are acronyms. Rick Atkinson ascribes the origin of SNAFU, FUBAR, and a bevy of other terms to cynical GIs ridiculing the Army's penchant for acronyms.

SNAFU

SNAFU stands for the sarcastic expression situation normal: all fucked up. It is a well-known example of military acronym slang. It is sometimes bowdlerized to all fouled up or similar.
The acronym is believed to have originated in the United States Marine Corps during World War II. Attribution to the American military is not universally accepted: it has also been attributed to the British.
In modern usage, snafu is sometimes used as an interjection, though it is mostly now used as a noun. Snafu also sometimes refers to a bad situation, mistake, or cause of trouble. It is more commonly used in modern vernacular to describe running into an error or problem that is large and unexpected. For example, in 2005, The New York Times published an article titled "Hospital Staff Cutback Blamed for Test Result Snafu".
SUSFU (situation unchanged: still fucked up) is a variant of SNAFU. SNAFU and SUSFU were first recorded in American Notes and Queries in their September 1941 issue.

FUBAR

FUBAR stands for fucked up beyond all recognition/repair/reason. Like SNAFU and SUSFU, it dates from World War II. The Oxford English Dictionary lists Yank, the Army Weekly magazine (1944, 7 Jan. p. 8) as its earliest citation: "The FUBAR squadron. ‥ FUBAR? It means 'Fucked Up Beyond All Recognition."

FUBAR BUNDY

FUBAR BUNDY is an ambulance term meaning fucked up beyond all recognition but unfortunately not dead yet.

TARFU

TARFU stands for totally and royally fucked up or things are really fucked up. The 1944 U.S. Army animated shorts Three Brothers and Private Snafu Presents Seaman Tarfu In The Navy (both directed by Friz Freleng), feature the characters Private Snafu, Private Fubar, and Seaman Tarfu.

BOHICA

BOHICA stands for bend over, here it comes again. It is an item of acronym slang which grew to regular use amongst the United States armed forces during the Vietnam War. It is used colloquially to indicate that an adverse situation is about to repeat itself, and that acquiescence is the wisest course of action. It is commonly understood as a reference to being sodomized. An alternative etymology relates the expression to the days of sail and avoiding being struck by the boom, which would swing around the mast due to shifts in wind or the vessel's course. Although it originated in the United States military forces, and is still commonly used by United States Air Force fighter crew chiefs and armament crews, its usage has spread to civilian environments, used to describe unavoidable, unpleasant situations that have inconvenienced someone before and are about to yet again.

FIGMO

FIGMO describes a person, especially one who has a short remaining time on station, who has a lax attitude toward their work.  The acronym stands for 'Fuck it, I've got my orders'.  The set of orders implied are transfer or release orders, and once you have those it doesn't matter much what your current commanding officer thinks of you any longer.

FUBB

FUBB, according to Gordon L. Rottman's FUBAR: Soldier Slang of World War II, was a term used by American soldiers and Marines during the second world war. It may either stand for 'fucked up beyond belief' or 'fouled up beyond belief.'

Other

Military brat, (branch) brat or Pad Brat (meaning son or daughter of a serving Officer/Soldier), such as Army brat, Navy brat. Originally from the British Army.  When a member of the British Army was assigned abroad and could take his family, the soldier was listed as BRAT status, which stood for: British Regiment Attached Traveler. Eventually it came to refer only to the children of the military member, as the wives of the British Army soldiers objected to it referring to them.  The term has been adopted worldwide and is commonly heard in reference to U.S. children.  Mewes, Allison (2011) Intro To Army Life: A Handbook For Spouses And Significant Others Entering The Army.   Refers to the child of someone in that branch of the service.Military Brats Are a Special Breed
ROAD Retired on active duty refers to active duty military personnel who either have earned a 20 year retirement or has received retirement orders and performs the minimum amount of work they are able to accomplish without getting disciplined.





Further reading




