[[Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation]]

CATEGORIES: NBBJ buildings, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, Bill Gates, Foundations based in the United States, Biomedical research foundations, Rockefeller Foundation, Organizations established in 2000, Medical and health foundations, Recipients of the Indira Gandhi Peace Prize, International development, Non-profit organizations based in Seattle, Washington, Research institutes in Seattle, Washington

Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (B&MGF or the Gates Foundation) is one of the largest private foundations in the world, founded by Bill and Melinda Gates. It is "driven by the interests and passions of the Gates family."Guiding Principles The primary aims of the foundation are, globally, to enhance healthcare and reduce extreme poverty, and in America, to expand educational opportunities and access to information technology.
The foundation, based in Seattle, Washington, is controlled by its three trustees: Bill Gates, Melinda Gates and Warren Buffett. Other principal officers include Co-Chair William H. Gates, Sr. and Chief Executive Officer Jeff Raikes.
It had an endowment of US$38.3 billion 

History

In 1997, the foundation was formed as the William H. Gates Foundation with an initial stock gift of US$94 million. The foundation was renamed the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation after a merger with the Gates Learning Foundation in 2000 when the Gates gave an additional US$126 million. On June 15, 2006, Gates announced his plans to transition out of a day-to-day role with Microsoft, effective July 31, 2008, to allow him to devote more time to working with the foundation.
Bill and Melinda Gates, along with the musician Bono, were named by Time as Persons of the Year 2005 for their charitable work. In the case of Bill and Melinda Gates, the work referenced was that of this foundation.
In April 2010, Gates was invited to visit and speak at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology where he asked the students to take on the hard problems of the world in their futures. He also explained the nature and philosophy of his philanthropic endeavors.[ref]Guo, Jeff; McQueen, Rob,
"Gates asks students to tackle world's problems : Disease and education among biggest challenges", The Tech, Volume 130, Issue 21, Friday, April 23, 2010[/ref]Guo, Jeff, "In interview, Gates describes philanthropic journey", The Tech, Volume 130, Issue 21, April 23, 2010. (video & transcript). "After he spoke at Kresge Auditorium, Bill Gates sat down with The Tech to talk more about his college tour, his philanthropy, and the philosophy behind it."
In 2010, The Foundation's founders started The Commission on Education of Health Professionals for the 21st Century, entitled "Transforming education to strengthen health systems in an interdependent world."Public Health Blog | PHGN Blog - Public Health Global Network

Warren Buffett donation

On June 25, 2006, Warren Buffett (then the world's richest person, estimated worth of US$62 billion as of April 16, 2008) pledged to give the foundation approximately 10 million Berkshire Hathaway Class B shares spread over multiple years through annual contributions, with the first year's donation of 500,000 shares being worth approximately US$1.5 billion.com/donate/bmgfltr.Warren Buffett Makes Huge Charity Stock Donation To Gates Foundation, Other Charities. Huffingtonpost. Retrieved on 2013-07-18.

Activities

To maintain its status as a charitable foundation, the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation must donate funds equal to at least 5 percent of its assets each year.
The Foundation maintains an online database of grants on its website and, as of April 6, 2014, the The National Alliance to End Homelessness, Inc. was the latest grantee, with an amount of US$100,000 donated under the US Program.

Financials

The Foundation explains on its website that its trustees divided the organization into two entities: the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (foundation) and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Trust (trust). The foundation section, based in Seattle, US, "focuses on improving health and alleviating extreme poverty," and its trustees are Bill and Melinda Gates and Warren Buffett. The trust section manages "the investment assets and transfer proceeds to the foundation as necessary to achieve the foundation's charitable goals"—it holds the assets of Bill and Melinda Gates, who are the sole trustees, and receives contributions from Buffett.
The Foundation posts its audited financial statements and 990-PF forms on the "Financials" section of its website as they become available. At the end of 2012, the Foundation registered a cash sum of US$4,998,000, down from US$10,810,000 at the end of 2011. Unrestricted net assets at the end of 2012 were worth US$31,950,613,000, while total assets were worth US$37,176,777.

Global Development Division

Christopher Elias leads the Foundation's efforts to combat extreme poverty through grants as president of the Global Development Program.
In March 2006, the Foundation announced a US$5 million grant for the International Justice Mission (IJM), a human rights organization based in Washington, D.C., US to work in the area of sex trafficking. The official announcement explained that the grant would allow the IJM to "create a replicable model for combating sex trafficking and slavery" that would involve the opening of an office in a region with high rates of sex trafficking, following research. The office was opened for three years for the following purposes: "conducting undercover investigations, training law enforcement, rescuing victims, ensuring appropriate aftercare, and seeking perpetrator accountability."
The IJM used the grant money to found "Project Lantern" and established an office in the Philippines city of Cebu. In 2010 the results of the project were published, in which the IJM stated that Project Lantern had led to "an increase in law enforcement activity in sex trafficking cases, an increase in commitment to resolving sex trafficking cases among law enforcement officers trained through the project, and an increase in services – like shelter, counseling and career training – provided to trafficking survivors." At the time that the results were released, the IJM was exploring opportunities to replicate the model in other regions.

Financial services for the poor

Agricultural development

Global Special Initiatives

The Foundation's Special Initiatives include responses to catastrophes as well as learning grants that are used to experiment with new areas of giving. Currently, the Foundation is exploring water, hygiene, and sanitation as a new focus within Global Development.
Open defecation poses significant health and environmental risks, and creates vulnerability, particularly for non adult males, who are exposed to a loss of dignity, abuse, or harassment while defecating in the open. Globally, poor sanitation contributes to 1.5 million child deaths each year from diarrheal disease; in India alone, diarrhea kills one child per minute (UNICEF/WHO, 2009). Diarrhea is also a major cause of death for children and chronic diarrhea affects a child's development by impeding their health and nutrition, and hindering vaccine absorption. Poverty, ill health, and an overall poor quality of life are concurrent factors for such people.
The Foundation has called on grantees to design a standalone toilet unit—without piped-in water, a sewer connection, or outside electricity— with a facility cost target of less than five cents per person, per day. The RTTC is also working to improve waste handling from collection and treatment. Funded by the Foundation, scientists at University of Colorado have developed a composting toilet that uses solar heat to treat the fecal matter and produce char.

Global Health Division

Since 2011, the President of the Global Health Program is Trevor Mundel.
The Global Health Program's significant grants include:

United States Division

Under President Allan Golston, the United States Program has made grants such as the following:

Libraries

In 1997, the charity introduced a U.S. Libraries initiative with a goal of "ensuring that if you can get to a public library, you can reach the internet." Only 35% of the world's population has access to the Internet. (2014). "What We Do: Global Libraries Strategy Overview." The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Retrieved from  The foundation has given grants, installed computers and Microsoft brand software, and provided training and technical support in partnership with public libraries nationwide in an effort to increase access and knowledge. (2014). "What We Do: Global Libraries Strategy Overview." The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Retrieved from  Helping provide access and training for these resources, this foundation, led by Deborah Jacobs, help move public libraries into the digital age Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. (2014). "What We Do: Global Libraries Strategy Overview." The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. Retrieved from 
Most recently, the foundation gave a US$12.2 million grant to the Southeastern Library Network (SOLINET) to assist libraries in Louisiana and Mississippi on the Gulf Coast, many of which were damaged or destroyed by Hurricanes Katrina and Rita.

Education

Pacific Northwest

Global Policy & Advocacy Division

Lifespan

In October 2006 the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation was split into two entities: the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Trust, which manages the endowment assets and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, which "... conducts all operations and grantmaking work, and it is the entity from which all grants are made."Gates Foundation Announces That It Doesn't Plan to Operate ForeverAbout the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Trust Also announced was the decision to "... spend all of Trust's resources within 20Interview with Bill Gates September 21, 2013 (Video 33:52) years after Bill's and Melinda's deaths."Announcements - Bill & Melinda Gates FoundationThe Chronicle, 11/29/2006: Gates Foundation Announces That It Doesn't Plan to Operate ForeverGates foundation to spend all assets within 50 years of trustees' deathsGates Foundation Sets Its Lifespan This would close the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation Trust and effectively end the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. In the same announcement it was reiterated that Warren Buffett "... has stipulated that the proceeds from the Berkshire Hathaway shares he still owns at death are to be used for philanthropic purposes within 10 years after his estate has been settled."
The plan to close the Foundation Trust is in contrast to most large charitable foundations that have no set closure date. This is intended to lower administrative costs over the years of the Foundation Trust's life and ensure that the Foundation Trust not fall into a situation where the vast majority of its expenditures are on administrative costs, including salaries, with only token amounts contributed to charitable causes.

Criticism

Investments

The foundation trust invests undistributed assets, with the exclusive goal of maximizing the return on investment. As a result, its investments include companies that have been criticized for worsening poverty in the same developing countries where the Foundation is attempting to relieve poverty.Dark cloud over good works of Gates Foundation, Los Angeles Times, January 7, 2007
In response to press criticism, the foundation announced in 2007 a review of its investments to assess social responsibility.Foundation to maintain its investment plan, The Austin Statesman, January 14, 2007

Diversion of health care resources

The Foundation has donated millions of dollars to help sufferers of AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria. However, investigations in 2007 from Foreign AffairsThe Challenge of Global Health Foreign Affairs, January/February 2007 and Los Angeles Times claimed there were three major problems with the foundation's allocation of aid. First, "by pouring most contributions into the fight against such high-profile killers as AIDS, Gates guarantees have increased the demand for specially trained, higher-paid clinicians, diverting staff from basic care." This form of "brain drain", pulls away trained staff from children and those suffering from other common killers.  Second, "the focus on a few diseases has shortchanged basic needs such as nutrition and transportation…." Finally, "Gates-funded vaccination programs have instructed caregivers to ignore – even discourage patients from discussing – ailments that the vaccinations cannot prevent."

Education reform

The public school reform program of the Gates Foundation has come under criticism by education professionals, parents, and researchers for promoting reforms that they see as undermining public education. The reforms include closing neighborhood schools in favor of privately run charter schools; using standardized test scores extensively to evaluate students, teachers, and schools; and merit pay for teachers based on test scores. Critics also believe that the Gates Foundation exerts too much influence over public education policy without being accountable to voters or tax payers.
Diane Ravitch. The Death and Life of the Great American School System: Basic Books, 2010. Kovacs. The Gates Foundation and the Future of U.S. "Public" Schools. Routledge, 2011.

Grantee communication

A 2011 survey of grantees found that many believed the foundation did not make its goals and strategies clear and sometimes did not understand those of the grantees; that the foundation's decision- and grantmaking procedures were too opaque; and that its communications could be more consistent and responsive. The foundation's response was to improve the clarity of its explanations, make "orientation calls" to grantees upon awarding grants, tell grantees who their foundation contact is, give timely feedback when they receive a grantee report, and establish a way for grantees to provide anonymous or attributed feedback to the foundation. Gatesfoundation. Retrieved on 2013-07-18.  The foundation also launched a podcast series. Soundcloud. Retrieved on 2013-07-18.

Awards



Notes and references




