[[Transport in Haiti]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in Haiti

All of the major transportation systems in Haiti are located near or run through the capital, Port-au-Prince.

Roads

Haiti's network of roads consists of National Roads, Department Roads, and county roads.  The hub of the road network is located at the old airport (at the intersection of Boulevard Jean-Jacques Dessalines and Autoroute de Delmas).   From this intersection, Route Nationale #1 and Route Nationale #2 commence.
Maintenance for RN1 and RN2 lapsed after the 1991 coup, prompting the World Bank to loan US$50 million designated for road repairs. The project was canceled in January 1999. The World Bank, who view the cancellation of those projects will ruin Haiti road Infrastructure Concise into creating, FER (Fond d'Etretient Routiers) in 2003, this was a way to cut down corruption, get local company involved, and not stopping those works because of political Contestation. President Rene Preval on his campaign for his second terms vow on his Maillages Routiers to rebuild the majority of those roads that was disintegrate rapidly and build new one that will enable the country to move forward; when he could not get fund from the world Bank went Literally and beg Foreign donor for assistant which was heavily criticize by many politicians in the media, but was greatly embrace by a population desperate to see road pave come in to their town. Therefore EU had pledge to help Build RN6 than RN3. In the mean time the World Bank loan Haiti US$200 Million to rebuild RN2, From River Froide which was where the starting point of RN2 all the way to Aquin and Repair on RN1 from Titanyen to Cap-Haitian. The hurricane of 2008 was a major setback since many bridges in multiple areas was either Collapse or suffers extensive damage; was in immediate need of repair. Most of those works on RN1 and RN2 who were already stopped suffer a Major setback during the earthquake of January 12, 2010. For the Construction of RN7 Canada Pledge US$75 and IDB US$31 Million for the construction of the road which started in 2009; it did suffer major setback because of the earthquake also.

Statistics

Public transportation

The public transportation is mostly privately owned in Haiti, previously it was an individual business, with the new generation of entrepreneurs, it is mainly association. The most common form of public transportation in Haiti is the use of brightly painted pickup trucks as taxis called "tap-taps". They are named this because when a passenger needs to be let off they use their coin money to tap the side of the vehicle and the driver usually stops. Most tap-taps are fairly priced at around 10-15 gourdes per ride within a city. The catch to the price is that the driver will often fill a truck to maximum capacity, which is nearly 20-30 people. The Government in an effort to structure the public transportation has attempted several time to bring BUS, in around 1979, It was the BUS called CONATRA a contract between the government and association of driver which quickly fail because of sabotage from different factor and poor maintenance. In 1998 another attempt was made with the Service Plus and Dignite for student and teacher. Sabotage, poor  maintenance and the overthrown of Aristide in 2004 had severely undermine the effort, in 2006 at the return of Preval in power another effort was made to recover the majority of the bus left, and a Gift of 300 new bus from Taiwan an effort to bring back Service Plus in association of the drivers. Mini-Van are frequently use to cover town Close to PAP, such as Pétionville, Jacmel, Leogane and others. Today throughout the island, motorcycle is widely use as a form of taxi.

Water transport

The port at Port-au-Prince, Port international de Port-au-Prince,  has more registered shipping than any of the over dozen ports in the country. The port's facilities include cranes, large berths, and warehouses, but these facilities are in universally poor shape. The port is underused, possibly due to the substantially high port fees compared to ports in the Dominican Republic.
The port of Saint-Marc is currently the preferred port of entry for consumer goods coming into Haiti. Reasons for this may include its location away from volatile and congested Port-au-Prince, as well as its central location relative to a large group of Haitian cities including Cap-Haïtien, Carrefour, Delmas, Desarmes, Fond-Parisien, Fort-Liberté, Gonaïves, Hinche, l'Artibonite, Limbe, Pétionville, Port-de-Paix, and Verrettes. These cities, together with their surrounding areas, contain about six million of Haiti's eight million people.
The Island of Ile-a-vache, La  Tortue, Petit and Grand Caillimite, gros-caille and la Gonave are reachable only by ferry or small sailing boat, except for La Gonave, which has an air strip that is rarely used. The majority of towns near the coast of Haiti are also accessible by the small sailing boat, which is preferable and cheaper to many passengers.  In some area sailing boats are more available for the commute than public transportation, which usually is on the back of a Truck load with merchandise and passengers that rarely come to those areas except when it's the Public market day.

Statistics

NEGL; less than 100 km navigable
none (1999 est.)

Ports and harbors

History

Haiti has one of the oldest maritime histories in the Americas.
The Panama Canal Railway Company ran a shipping line with three ocean liners that traveled between New York City (USA) - Port-au-Prince (Haiti) - Cristobal (Panama). The company had facilities in Port-au-Prince and their ocean liners stopped there. It has not had any known railroad operations in Haiti.
The three ocean liners were:

Aviation

 'International flights:'  Toussaint Louverture International Airport (formerly known as Port-au-Prince International Airport), which opened in 1965 (as François Duvalier International Airport), is located 10 km North/North East of Port-au-Prince. It is Haiti's only jetway, and as such, handles the vast majority of the country's international flights. Air Haïti, Tropical Airways and a handful of major airlines from Europe, the Caribbean, and the Americas serve the airport. 
 'Domestic flights:'  are available through Sunrise Airways which is Haiti's largest airline for the general public offering scheduled, as well as, charter flights. Another domestic company is, Mission Aviation Fellowship catering to non-Catholic registered Christians.

Statistics

14 (2007 est.)

Railroads

Railroad ran in Haiti Between 1876 to 1991. Haiti is known to be the first in the Caribbean with a Railway system in the Urban of Port-au-Prince and later a Project that was supposed to run by The Company Mc Donald from Port-au-Prince to Cap-Haitian, and From Port-au-Prince to Les Cayes it did not completed. Most of the disoperation of the railroad in Haiti is due to Bankruptcy, and closure of the company who supported the construction of the railroad.




