[[University of New South Wales]]

CATEGORIES: University of New South Wales, Schools of the University of New South Wales, Universities in Sydney, Educational institutions established in 1949, 1949 establishments in Australia

The University of New South Wales (UNSW) is an Australian public university. Established in 1949, it is ranked among the top 60 universities in the world according to the QS World University Rankings. It has more than 50,000 students from over 120 countries.
The main UNSW campus is located on a 38 hectare site at Kensington, seven kilometres from the centre of Sydney. Other campuses are the College of Fine Arts in Paddington, UNSW@ADFA, the University College at the Australian Defence Force Academy in Canberra, and sub-campuses at Randwick and Coogee in Sydney, as well as research stations around NSW.
UNSW is a founding member of the Group of Eight, a coalition of Australian research-intensive universities, and of the international network Universitas 21.
UNSW graduates hold more chief executive positions of ASX 200 listed companies than those of any other university in Australia.leadingcompany.au/managing-me/what-our-corporate-leaders-studied-at-university/201210152769?displaypage=start

History

The idea of founding the University originated from the crisis demands of World War II, during which the nation's attention was drawn to the critical role that science and technology played in transforming an agricultural society into a modern and industrial one.O'Farrell, UNSW, a portrait: the University of New South Wales, 1949-1999, UNSW Press, 1999 at p15 ISBN 0-86840-417-9 The post-war Labor government of New South Wales recognised the increasing need to have a university specialised in training high quality engineers and technology-related professionals in numbers beyond that of the capacity and characteristics of the existing University of Sydney. This led to the proposal to establish the Institute of Technology, submitted by the then New South Wales Minister for Education Bob Heffron, accepted on 9 July 1946.
The University, originally named the "New South Wales University of Technology", gained its statutory status through the enactment of New South Wales University of Technology Act 1949 (NSW) by Parliament of New South Wales in Sydney in 1949. In March 1948 classes commenced with a first intake of 46 students pursuing programs including Civil Engineering, Mechanical Engineering, Mining Engineering and Electrical Engineering. At that time the thesis programmes were innovative. Each course embodied a specified and substantial period of practical training in the relevant industry. It was also unprecedented for tertiary institutions at that time to include compulsory instruction in humanities.O'Farrell, UNSW, a portrait: the University of New South Wales, 1949-1999, UNSW Press, 1999 at p33 ISBN 0-86840-417-9
Initially the University operated from the inner Sydney Technical College city campus at Ultimo. However, in 1951, the Parliament of New South Wales passed the New South Wales University of Technology (Construction) Act 1951 (NSW) to provide funding and allow buildings to be erected at the Kensington site where the university is now located.
In 1958 the University name was changed to the 'University of New South Wales' to reflect its transformation from a technology-based institution to a generalist university. In 1960 it established Faculties of Arts and Medicine, and shortly after decided to add a Faculty of Law, which came into being in 1971.
The university's first director was Arthur Denning (1949–1952), who made important contributions to founding the university. In 1953 he was replaced by Professor Philip Baxter, who continued as vice-chancellor when this position's title was changed in 1955.  The new Vice-Chancellor, Professor Rupert Myers (1969–1981), brought consolidation and an urbane management style to a period of expanding student numbers, demand for change in University style, and challenges of student unrest.
The stabilising techniques of the 1980s managed by Vice-Chancellor Professor Michael Birt (1981–1992) provided a firm base for the energetic corporatism and campus enhancements pursued by the subsequent Vice-Chancellor, Professor John Niland (1992–2002). The 1990s saw the addition of Fine Arts to the University. The University established Colleges in Newcastle (1951) and Wollongong (1961), which eventually became the University of Newcastle and the University of Wollongong in 1965 and 1975 respectively.
At present, private sources contribute 45% of its annual funding.
The University is home to the Lowy Cancer Research Centre, one of Australia's largest cancer research facilities. The centre, costing $127 million, is Australia's first facility to bring together researchers in childhood and adult cancer."New cancer research centre for Sydney", Sydney Morning Herald. Retrieved on 2007-09-23.
In 2003 the University was invited by Singapore's Economic Development Board to consider opening a campus there. Following a 2004 decision to proceed, the first phase of a planned $200m campus opened in 2007. Students and staff were sent home and the campus closed after one semester following substantial financial losses.

Symbols

The Grant of Arms was made by the College of Arms on 3 March 1952. The grant reads:
The lion and the four stars of the Southern Cross on the St George's Cross have reference to the State of New South Wales which established the University; the open book with "SCIENTIA" (knowledge) across its pages is a reminder of its purpose. The placement of "Scientia" on the book was inspired by its appearance on the arms of the Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, formed in 1907. Beneath the shield is the motto "Manu et Mente" (with hand and mind), which was the motto of the Sydney Technical College, from which the University developed.
An update of the design and colours of the Arms was undertaken in 1970, which provided a more contemporary design, yet retained all the Arms' heraldic associations. In 1994 the University title was added to the UNSW arms, as was the abbreviation "UNSW", to create the UNSW Symbol, which is used for everyday and marketing purposes.
There is also a university flag, which consists of the coat of arms centred on a mid blue field. The blue field of the flag is lined with a yellow band on the top, right hand and bottom sides only. There is a further band of black on the top, right hand and bottom sides which is equal in width to the yellow band.

Academics

Selection and entry

The Australian Tertiary Admission Rank (ATAR) is the primary criterion for entry into most undergraduate-entry university programs. ATAR is a percentile awarded to students based upon the student's performance in their Higher School Certificate (HSC). The number functions as a rank of all students entering the tertiary education system, based on the number of students in year 12. The maximum rank attainable is 99.95.
In 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013, UNSW admitted more of the top 500 NSW HSC performers than any other university. Accordingly, UNSW and Sydney are arguably the most selective universities in Australia for undergraduate admission.
The table below summarises the ATAR scores needed to secure entry into the course. UMAT is the Undergraduate Medicine and Health Sciences Admission Test. A (V) indicates that vacancies were available at the conclusion of the main round of offers to students.uac.au/documents/atar/2013-main-cutoffs.pdf
The university offers a bonus points scheme, "HSC Plus",
The UNSW Co-op Program is offered across many Programs in the Faculties of the Built Environment, Engineering, Science, and the Australian School of Business. The Co-op program offers industry funded scholarships to students and includes internships with the sponsoring companies. Students usually enter the program after an application and interview while in their final year of high school.

University rankings

The QS World University Rankings 2012–2013 placed UNSW 52nd in the world and 5th in Australia.
The Times Higher Education World University Rankings 2012–2013 placed UNSW 85th in the world and 5th in Australia.  UNSW is ranked in the 81-90th bracket and 5th in Australia in the 2013 Times Higher Education Reputation Rankings.timeshighereducation.co.uk/world-university-rankings/2013/reputation-ranking/range/81-90
The Shanghai Jiaotong University's Academic Ranking of World Universities 2013 rankings placed UNSW in the 101–150 bracket globally and equal 6th in Australia.shanghairanking.html
The Good Universities Guide 2014 scored UNSW 5-star ratings across 10 categories, more than any other Australian university. Monash University ranked second with seven 5-stars, followed by ANU, Melbourne University and the University of Western Australia with six each.hobsonscoursefinder.au/ratings/compare/UNSW?studyType=UG&institutionName=unsw&actionSearch=Search#.UqpW878SgTs
UNSW has produced more millionaires than any other Australian university and ranked 33rd in the world according to the Spear's Wealth Management Survey 
UNSW graduates hold more chief executive positions of ASX 200 listed companies than those of any other university in Australia,
Engineers Australia ranked UNSW as having the highest number of graduates in "Australia's Top 100 Influential Engineers 2013" list at 23%, followed by Monash University at 8%, the University of Western Australia, Sydney University and The University of Queensland at 7%.realviewtechnologies.com/#folio=1
UNSW reported the highest median ATAR for the incoming 2012 and 2013 cohort and the 2nd highest average ATAR cutoff, as well as the highest number of Top 500 HSC Students.fin.edu.pdf
Australian Government survey data of university graduates have indicated in the past that students who enter the Group of Eight come from higher income families, and that graduates largely have higher paid occupations or positions of influence.Department of Education Training and Youth Affairs (1998), The Characteristics and Performance of Higher Education Institutions, Canberra: Higher Education Division, Department of Education, Employment and Youth Affairs

Study Abroad

UNSW has maintained an extensive partnership with universities abroad. UNSW sends approximately 400 students to partner institutions each semester. Some of the universities that UNSW students are able to attend are:
Princeton University, University of Pennsylvania (inc. Wharton), Duke University, Johns Hopkins University, Brown University, Columbia University (summer law students only), University of California Berkeley, UCLA, University of Michigan (inc. Ross), New York University (inc. Stern), Cornell University, University of Texas at Austin (inc. McCombs), University College London (law students only), Imperial College London, London School of Economics and ETH Zurich.

Governance

The University is governed by Council of 15 members including parliamentary and ex-officio members, members elected by staff, students and graduates of the University, and members appointed by the Minister for Education or by Council itself. It is responsible for acting on the University's behalf to promote its objectives and interests. The governance of universities has come under increasing scrutiny nationally in recent years example?, and UNSW and its Council are committed to meeting this scrutiny by demonstrating the highest standards evidence?.
The principal academic body is the Academic Board which receives advice on academic matters from the Faculties, College (Australian Defence Force Academy), and the Boards of Studies. It is responsible for academic policy setting, academic strategy via its eight standing committees, approval and delivery of programs, and academic standards. The Board comprises 56 members, including the Vice-Chancellor, members of the Executive Team, Deans and Faculty Presiding Members, 24 members elected from the academic staff and four from the student body. Membership also includes 'such other persons' approved by Council. The Academic Board advises the Vice-Chancellor and Council on matters relating to teaching, scholarship and research and takes decisions on delegation from Council. Its purpose is to make academic policy; approve courses and programs; further and co-ordinate the work of the Faculties and other academic units; and support teaching, scholarship and research.
The chief executive officer of the University is the Vice-Chancellor and President. The Deputy Vice-Chancellors and Pro-Vice-Chancellors are responsible for academic operations, research policy, research management, quality assurance and external relations including sponsorship. The Chancellor is usually an eminent member of society. (See UNSW Chancellors and UNSW Vice-Chancellors).
The Faculties and boards are responsible for the teaching and examining of subjects within their scope and the Academic Board co-ordinates and furthers their work.

Faculties

The University has nine faculties:
 
 
The School of Education=== 
The School of Education, located in the John Goodsell Building, was established in 1960. It specialises in research and teacher education at the pre-service and in-service levels, with a particular focus on secondary and higher education contexts. It features both Undergraduate Programs and Postgraduate Programs. The School of Education is home to several distinctive research teams composed of staff and local and international students. Students carry out their own research programs and publish in leading academic journals.

Other

The University has an association with the National Institute of Dramatic Art.

Campus

The main UNSW campus is situated in Kensington, Sydney. Two of the University's faculties are situated elsewhere. The College of Fine Arts, is located in the inner suburb of Paddington. UNSW Canberra at ADFA is situated in Canberra.
The University also has additional campuses and field stations at Randwick, Coogee, Botany, Dee Why, Cowan, Manly Vale, Fowlers Gap and Bankstown Airport.
The main UNSW campus is divided geographically into two areas: upper campus and lower campus. The site of the lower campus was vested in the university in two lots in December 1952 and June 1954, while the upper campus was vested in the university in November 1959. These two are separated mainly by an elevation rise between the quadrangle and the Scientia building. It takes roughly fifteen minutes to walk from one extreme to the other.

Accommodation

The University has a number of residential colleges, including: Philip Baxter College, Basser College, Goldstein College, Fig Tree Hall, Colombo House, UNSW Hall, New College, Warrane College, International House, Shalom College and Creston College.
In 2014, a staged re-development of UNSW's on-campus accommodation portfolio will conclude. The re-development has included a complete rebuild of the three existing Kengsington Colleges; Basser, Philip Baxter and Goldstein, as well as the addition of the three brand new colleges; Fig Tree Hall, Colombo House and UNSW Hall. The development has also included a re-refurbishment of the historic Goldstein Dining Hall and the construction of the University Terraces, a new on-campus apartment complex which opened in 2013.

Venues

There are a number of theatre and music venues at the University, many of which are available for hire to the general public. 

Facilities

Student projects

Students of the University are involved in a number of projects, including:

File:RUNSWift Naos 2010.
File:Sunswift IVy.jpg|Sunswift IVy
File:Rb2011.jpg|Redback Racing RB11 at competition in Melbourne

Student organisations

In 2007, the three previous student organisations, the UNSW Student Guild, UNSW Union and COFA Students' Association were wound up and reformed as a new student organisation known as the Arc @ UNSW.recordkeeping.edu.pdf This new student organisation is a major service provider on campus, running a number of retail outlets, student media such as Tharunka and the entertainment venue, the Roundhouse. The Arc Student Representative Council represents students to the university and nationally and fights for their rights. Arc also provides support and funding to university clubs and societies and runs student volunteer programs such as Orientation Week.
In 2007, the University of New South Wales Sports Association It runs the UNSW Fitness and Aquatic Centre, provides health and fitness facilities and services and supports the thirty UNSW affiliated sporting clubs that compete both at home and abroad.

High school and primary school competitions and resources

UNSW engages with primary and secondary education, administering several national and international academic competitions for school age children. These include, among others:
International Competitions and Assessments for Schools (ICAS) is conducted by Educational Assessment Australia, UNSW Global Pty Limited. UNSW Global is a not-for-profit provider of education, training and consulting services and a wholly owned enterprise of the University of New South Wales. It provides exams for students in Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Brunei, Malaysia1, South Africa, Indonesia, Hong Kong, India and the Pacific region. It caters to students from year 3 (Australia) through year 12, examining skills in English, mathematics, science, computers, writing and spelling.
International Competitions and Assessments for Schools (ICAS). From 2003-05, ICAS-Mathematics was called Australasian Schools Mathematics Assessment. Prior to 2003, it was known as the Primary Schools Mathematics Competition and was targeted at primary schools.
Since 1997, The School of Computer Science and Engineering (UNSW COMPUTING) as run the UNSW COMPUTING ProgComp. This competition has the overall aim of raising awareness amongst high school students of the craft of programming and to encourage students to develop and apply their computing knowledge and skills.
Established in 2011, the John Lions Award for Contribution to Open Software is open to high school and undergraduate university students enrolled in an Australian secondary or tertiary institution. Full-time and part-time students are eligible, as well as local and internationals students. The annual prize is valued at $1,000.
UNSW School of Computer Science and Engineering (UNSW COMPUTING) has developed specialised robotic workshops for school students. They focus on the use of the Lego NXT technology combined with the popular RoboCup Junior competition for schools. UNSW COMPUTING is also a National and NSW State sponsor of RoboCup Junior.

Notable people

Chancellors

Vice-Chancellors

Rectors

UNSW Canberra is a campus of the University of New South Wales and is located at the Australian Defence Force Academy. Since 1967 the university has been providing tertiary education to officers in the Australian Defence Force through the Royal Military College, Duntroon. In 1986 the Australian Defence Force Academy, a tri-service military training institution was established. The academy is run jointly between the Commandant, who represents the Australian Defence Force side, and the Rector, who represents the University of New South Wales.

=Past Deans=

=Past and present Rectors=

=Past and present Deputy Rectors=

Notable Previous Professors

Alumni

 
 



Further reading



 
 

