[[Kenya Airways]]

CATEGORIES: Kenya Airways, Airlines of Kenya, Companies listed on the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange, Companies listed on the Nairobi Stock Exchange, Companies listed on the Uganda Securities Exchange, Companies of Kenya, IATA members, African Airlines Association, Airlines established in 1977, SkyTeam

Kenya Airways Ltd., more commonly known as Kenya Airways, is the flag carrier of Kenya. The company was founded in 1977, after the dissolution of East African Airways. The carrier's head office is located in Embakasi, Nairobi, with its hub at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport.
The airline was wholly owned by the Government of Kenya until , and it was privatised in 1996, becoming the first African flag carrier to successfully do so. Kenya Airways is currently a public-private partnership. The largest shareholder is the Government of Kenya (29.8.%), followed by KLM, which has a 26.73% stake in the company. The rest of the shares are held by private owners; shares are traded on the Nairobi Stock Exchange, the Dar es Salaam Stock Exchange, and the Uganda Securities Exchange.
Kenya Airways is widely considered as one of the leading Sub-Saharan operators; , the company had 4,006 employees.

History

Kenya Airways was established by the Kenyan government on 
At 
In 1986, Sessional Paper Number 1 was published by the Government of Kenya, outlining the country's need for economic development and growth. The document stressed the government opinion that the airline would be better off if owned by private interests, thus resulting in the first attempt to privatise the airline. The government named Philip Ndegwa as Chairman of the Board in 1991, with specific orders to make the airline a privately owned company. In 1992, the Public Enterprise Reform paper was published, giving Kenya Airways priority among national companies in Kenya to be privatised. Ndegwa was succeeded by Isaac Omolo Okero. In  British Airways, KLM, Lufthansa and South African Airways were among the airlines that expressed interest in taking a stake in Kenya Airways.
KLM was eventually awarded the privatisation of the company, which restructured its debts and made a master corporation agreement with the Dutch airline that bought 26% of the shares, becoming the largest single shareholder since then. Shares were floated to the public in .
In 
In  Following the allocation of shares, KLM increased their stake in the company from 26% to 26.73%, while the Kenyan government boosted their participation into the company from 23% to 29.8%, becoming the new major shareholder of the carrier.

Corporate affairs

Subsidiaries and associates

The cargo handling company African Cargo Handling Limited is a wholly owned subsidiary of Kenya Airways; partly owned companies are Kenya Airfreight Handling Limited, dedicated to the cargo handling of perishable goods (51%-owned) and Tanzanian carrier Precision Air (41.23%-owned). A new low-cost subsidiary named Jambojet was created in 2013.

Key business trends

The key trends for Kenya Airways over recent years are shown below (as at year ending 31 March):

Destinations

Alliances

KLM sponsored the process of the company joining SkyTeam in mid-2005. In 
The alliance provides Kenya Airways' passengers with access to the member airlines' worldwide network and passenger facilities.

Codeshare agreements



Future plans

In 
In  route network by the end 2014.

Fleet

Recent developments and future plans

The first of five Embraer 190s ordered in 2010 was incorporated into the fleet in , the airline took possession of the 900th E-Jet manufactured by Embraer.
Kenya Airways has nine Boeing 787 Dreamliners on order, although the company considered cancelling the order after systematic delays with the delivery dates. The airline received some compensation, in cash and in kind, from Boeing for the delays. Afreximbank are financing the acquisition of the 20 aircraft the airline has on order.
The company announced in late .
The handover of the first Boeing 787 took place on  the same year. Nairobi–Paris is the first route that will be served using the Boeing 787.

Current fleet



Retired fleet

The company has previously operated the following equipment:

Livery

In 2005, Kenya Airways changed its livery. The four stripes running all through the length of the fuselage were replaced by the company slogan Pride of Africa, whereas the KA tail logo was replaced by a styled K encircled with a Q to evoke the airline's IATA airline code.

Services

Frequent flyer programmes

Former Kenya Airways' frequent flyer programme Msafiri was merged with KLM's Flying Dutchman in 1997, which was in turn merged with that of Air France and rebranded as Flying Blue in 2005, following the fusion of both companies. Gold Elite and Platinum Elite members of the Flying Blue programme are offered the JV Lounge. This service is provided to Kenya Airways passengers, and to passengers flying with its partner airlines as well. Simba Lounge is a service provided to Kenya Airways Business passengers only. Both lounges are located at Jomo Kenyatta International Airport.

In-flight entertainment

Different in-flight entertainment is available depending upon the aircraft and the class travelled. The airline's in-flight magazine is called Msafiri, and is distributed among the passengers in all aircraft, irrespective of the class.
Premier World entertainment is AVOD, while NVOD is offered in Economy class. Twelve audio channels are available in both classes.
Personal televisions are available in both classes, with 11 TV dual French/English stereo channels, plus 8 audio channels.
Overhead screens in both classes, plus 8 channels of audio offered.
Background music playing throughout the flight.
Individual in-seat touchscreens.

Accidents and incidents

According to Aviation Safety Network, 

Accidents involving fatalities

Non-fatal hull-losses



Notes



Bibliography




