[[University of Notre Dame]]

CATEGORIES: University of Notre Dame, Atlantic Coast Conference schools, Buildings and structures in St. Joseph County, Indiana, Education in St. Joseph County, Indiana, Holy Cross universities and colleges, Notre Dame, Indiana, Visitor attractions in St. Joseph County, Indiana, Universities and colleges in Indiana, Educational institutions established in 1842, 1842 establishments in the United States, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in Indiana, Association of Catholic Colleges and Universities, History of Catholicism in Indiana



The University of Notre Dame du Lac (or simply Notre Dame ) is a Catholic research university located near South Bend, Indiana, in the United States. In French, Notre Dame du Lac means "Our Lady of the Lake" and refers to the university's patron saint, the Virgin Mary.
The school was founded by Father Edward Sorin, CSC, who was also its first president. Today, many Holy Cross priests continue to work for the university, including as its president. It was established as an all-male institution on November 26, 1842, on land donated by the Bishop of Vincennes. The university first enrolled women undergraduates in 1972.  Notre Dame's Catholic character is reflected in its explicit commitment to the Catholic faith, numerous ministries funded by the school, and the architecture around campus.
The university today is organized into five colleges and one professional school, and its graduate program awards 32 master's and 25 doctoral degrees. Over 80% of the university's 8,000 undergraduates live on campus in one of 29 single-sex residence halls, each of which fields teams for more than a dozen intramural sports, and the university counts approximately 120,000 alumni.ND Alumni Association – Notre Dame Alumni Association
The university is known for its Notre Dame School of Architecture, a faculty that teaches (pre-modernist) traditional architecture and urban planning (e.g. following the principles of New Urbanism and New Classical Architecture)." It also awards the annual Driehaus Architecture Prize.
The university's athletic teams are members of the NCAA Division I and are known collectively as the Fighting Irish. The football team, an Independent, has accumulated eleven consensus national championships, seven Heisman Trophy winners, and 62 members in the College Football Hall of Fame. Other ND teams, chiefly in the Atlantic Coast Conference, have accumulated 16 national championships.

History

Foundations

In 1842, the Bishop of Vincennes, Célestine Guynemer de la Hailandière, offered land to Father Edward Sorin of the Congregation of the Holy Cross, on the condition that he build a college in two years."Founding Information". University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on 2007-10-31. Retrieved 2007-12-31. Sorin arrived on the site with eight Holy Cross brothers on November 26, 1842, and began the school using Father Stephen Badin's old log chapel. They immediately acquired two students and set about building additions to the campus.
Notre Dame began as a primary and secondary school, but soon received its official college charter from the Indiana General Assembly on January 15, 1844.a b Hope, C.S.C., Arthur J. (1979) 1948. "IV". Notre Dame: One Hundred Years (2 ed.). Notre Dame, IN: University Press. ISBN 0-89651-501-X. Under the charter the school is officially named the University of Notre Dame du Lac (University of Our Lady of the Lake). Cohen, Ed (Autumn 2004). "One lake or two?". The Notre Dame Magazine. Archived from the original on 2007-07-01. Retrieved 2007-12-07. Because the university was originally only for male students, the female-only Saint Mary's College was founded by the Sisters of the Holy Cross near Notre Dame in 1844."Saint Mary's at a Glance". Saint Mary's College. Retrieved 2007-12-31.

Early history

The first degrees from the college were awarded in 1849.S.C., Arthur J. (1979) 1948. "V". Notre Dame: One Hundred Years (2 ed.). Notre Dame, IN: University Press. ISBN 0-89651-501-X. The university was expanded with new buildings to accommodate more students and faculty. With each new president, new academic programs were offered and new buildings built to accommodate them. The original Main Building built by Sorin just after he arrived was replaced by a larger "Main Building" in 1865, which housed the university's administration, classrooms, and dormitories. Beginning in 1873, a library collection was started by Father Lemonnier. By 1879 it had grown to ten thousand volumes that were housed in the Main Building.
This Main Building, and the library collection, was destroyed by a fire in April 1879, and rebuilt before the next school year."The Story of Notre Dame: Main Building". University of Notre Dame Archives. Retrieved 2007-12-31. The library collection was also rebuilt and stayed housed in the new Main Building for years afterwards."The Story of Notre Dame: Lemmonier Library". University of Notre Dame Archives. Retrieved 2007-12-31. Around the time of the fire, a Music Hall was opened. Eventually becoming known as Washington Hall, it hosted plays and musical acts put on by the school."The Story of Notre Dame: Washington Hall". University of Notre Dame Archives. Retrieved 2007-12-31. thumb|390px|left|A view of the University's historic center, the Main Quadrangle, popularly termed the God Quad. By 1880, a science program was established at the university, and a Science Hall was built in 1883. The hall housed multiple classrooms and science labs needed for early research at the university."The Story of Notre Dame: Science Hall". University of Notre Dame Archives. Retrieved 2007-12-31. By 1890, individual residence halls were built to house the increasing number of students."The Story of Notre Dame: Sorin Hall". University of Notre Dame Archives. Retrieved 2007-12-31.
William J. Hoynes (1846–1919) was dean of the law school 1883-1919, and when its new building was opened shortly after his death it was renamed in his honor.a b Marvin R. O'Connell, Edward Sorin (2001)
John Zahm C.S.C. (1851–1921) became the Holy Cross Provincial for the United States (1896–1906), with overall supervision of the university. He tried to transform Notre Dame into a great university, erecting buildings and added to the campus art gallery and library, and amassing what became a famous Dante collection. His term was not renewed because of fears he had expanded Notre Dame too quickly and had run the Holy Cross order into serious debt.
In 1919 Father James Burns became president of Notre Dame, and in three years he produced an academic revolution that brought the school up to national standards by adopting the elective system and starting the abandonment of the traditional scholastic and classical emphasis. McAvoy, "Notre Dame 1919–1922: The Burns Revolution," Review of Politics (1963) 25#4 pp: 431-450 in JSTOR.  By contrast, the Jesuit colleges, bastions of academic conservatism, were reluctant to move to  a system of electives. Their graduates  were shut out of Harvard Law School for that reason. Mahoney, Catholic higher education in Protestant America: The Jesuits and Harvard in the age of the university (2003).

Hesburgh Era: 1952–1987

Theodore Hesburgh, C.S.C., (born 1917) served as president for 35 years (1952–87) of dramatic transformations. In that time the annual operating budget rose by a factor of 18 from $9.7 million to $176.6 million, and the endowment by a factor of 40 from $9 million to $350 million, and research funding by a factor of 20 from $735,000 to $15 million. Enrollment nearly doubled from 4,979 to 9,600, faculty more than doubled 389 to 950, and degrees awarded annually doubled from 1,212 to 2,500. Hesburgh, God, Country, Notre Dame: The Autobiography of Theodore M. Hesburgh (2000)
Hesburgh is also credited with transforming the face of Notre Dame by making it a coeducational institution. In the mid-1960s Notre Dame and Saint Mary's College developed a co-exchange program whereby several hundred students took classes not offered at their home institution, an arrangement that added undergraduate women to a campus that already had a few women in the graduate schools. Nearly a third of accepted Notre Dame students chose not to enroll because of its single-sex status, and a 1968 poll indicated that nearly three-fourths of all Notre Dame students considered transferring to a coeducational school. After extensive debate, merging with St. Mary's was rejected, primarily because of the differential in faculty qualifications and pay scales. "In American college education," explained Rev. Charles E. Sheedy, C.S.C., Notre Dame's Dean of Arts and Letters, "certain features formerly considered advantageous and enviable are now seen as anachronistic and out of place.... In this environment of diversity, the integration of the sexes is a normal and expected aspect, replacing separatism." Thomas Blantz, C.S.C., Notre Dame's Vice President of Student Affairs, added that coeducation "opened up a whole other pool of very bright students."Susan L. Poulson and Loretta P. Higgins, "Gender, Coeducation, and the Transformation of Catholic Identity in American Catholic Higher Education," Catholic Historical Review 2003 89(3): 489-510, for quotes. Two of the male residence halls were converted for the newly admitted female students that first year,"Badin Hall". University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on 2007-12-11. Retrieved 2008-01-01.^ "Walsh Hall". University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on 2007-11-17. Retrieved 2008-01-01. while two others were converted for the next school year."Breen-Phillips Hall". University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on 2007-11-17. Retrieved 2008-01-01."Farley Hall". University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on 2007-12-11. Retrieved 2008-01-01. The first female student, a transfer from St. Mary's College, graduated in 1972 with a bachelor's degree in marketing. "A hardcover thank-you card". Notre Dame Magazine. Retrieved 2008-01-01.

Malloy Era: 1987–2005

In 18 years under President Edward Malloy, C.S.C., (1987–2005), there was a rapid growth in the school's reputation, faculty, and resources. He increased the faculty by more than 500 professors; the academic quality of the student body has improved dramatically, the average SAT score rose from 1240 to 1360; the number of minority students more than doubled; the endowment grew from $350 million to more than $3 billion; the annual operating budget rose from $177 million to more than $650 million; and annual research funding improved from $15 million to more than $70 million. Notre Dame's most recent capital campaign raised $1.1 billion, far exceeding its goal of $767 million, and is the largest in the history of Catholic higher education.See Biography

Jenkins Era: 2005–present

Currently Notre Dame is led by John I. Jenkins, C.S.C., the 17th president of the university."About Notre Dame: Officer Group Bios: Rev. John I. Jenkins, C.S.C.". University of Notre Dame. Archived from the original on 2007-11-11. Retrieved 2008-01-01. Jenkins took over the position from Edward "Monk" Malloy, CSC, on July 1, 2005. "Monk moves on: Jenkins will succeed Malloy after June 2005". The Observer. Retrieved 2008-01-01. In his inaugural address, Jenkins described his goals of making the university a leader in research that recognizes ethics and building the connection between faith and studies."Fr. John I. Jenkins Inaugural Address". University of Notre Dame. September 23, 2005. Archived from the original on 2007-07-07. Retrieved 2007-12-14.

Campus

Notre Dame's campus is located in Notre Dame, Indiana, an unincorporated community in the Michiana area of Northern Indiana, just north of South Bend and four miles (6 km) from the Michigan state line. Development of the campus began in the spring of 1843, when Father Sorin and some of his congregation built the "Old College," a building used for dormitories, a bakery, and a classroom.
A year later, after an architect arrived, a small "Main Building" was built allowing for the launch of the college. thumb|left|upright|Historic Washington Hall on the Main Quadrangle, popularly termed the God Quad.
A number of the buildings that Father Sorin built still stand on the campus, while others have been replaced. The Old College building has become one of two seminaries on campus run by the Congregation of the Holy Cross.
In September 2011, Travel+Leisure listed Notre Dame as having one of the most beautiful college campuses in the United States."America's Most Beautiful College Campuses", Travel+Leisure (September, 2011)

Environmental sustainability

The University of Notre Dame has made being a sustainability leader an integral part of their mission, creating the Office of Sustainability in 2008 to achieve a number of goals in the areas of power generation, design and construction, waste reduction, procurement, food services, transportation, and water. Notre Dame's dining services sources 40% of its food locally and offers sustainably-caught seafood as well as many organic, fair-trade, and vegan options. thumb|upright|The Main Quad/God Quad in autumn[ref]
  The university also houses the Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies.  Father Gustavo Gutierrez, the founder of Liberation Theology is a current faculty member.

New buildings

The university continues to expand and add new buildings each year. Since 2004, many buildings have been built—the most prominent being the DeBartolo Performing Arts Center, Additionally the new hockey arena opened in the fall of 2011. The Stayer Center for Executive Education, which houses the Mendoza College of Business Executive Education Department opened in March 2013 just South of the Mendoza College of Business building.

LaFortune Student Center

The LaFortune Student Center, commonly known as "LaFortune" or "LaFun," is a 4-story building of 83,000 square feet LaFortune employs 35 part-time student staff, 29 full-time non-student staff, and has an annual budget of $1.2 million.
Many businesses, services, and Divisions of Student affairs are found within. The building also houses restaurants from national restaurant chains.
The building is named for Joseph LaFortune, an oil executive from Tulsa, Oklahoma. Joseph LaFortune was the father of Tulsa former mayor Robert J. LaFortune and the grandfather of former Tulsa mayor Bill LaFortune.

Legends of Notre Dame

Legends of Notre Dame (commonly referred to as Legends) is a music venue, public house, and restaurant located on the campus of the University of Notre Dame, just 100 yards south of Notre Dame Stadium. The former Alumni Senior Club after a $3.5 million renovation and transformed into the all-ages student hang-out that currently exists. Legends is made up of two parts: The Restaurant and Alehouse and the nightclub.

London Centre

The university has had a presence in London, England since 1968. Since 1998, its London Centre has been based in the former United University Club at 1, Suffolk Street in Trafalgar Square. The Center enables the Colleges of Arts & Letters, Business Administration, Science, Engineering and the Law School to develop their own programs in London, as well as hosting conferences and symposia.

Organization and administration

Since 1967 Notre Dame has been governed by a Board of Trustees, and not directly by the leadership of Holy Cross. The university is governed by two groups, the Board of Fellows and the Board of Trustees.

Academics

As of fall 2006, Notre Dame had 11,603 students and employed 1241 full-time faculty members and another 166 part-time members to give a student/faculty ratio of 13:1.

Colleges

The College of Arts and Letters was established as the university's first college in 1842 with the first degrees given in 1849.
The College of Science was established at the university in 1865 by president Father Patrick Dillon. Dillon's scientific courses were six years of work, including higher-level mathematics courses.
The School of Architecture was established in 1899,
The College of Engineering was established in 1920,
The Mendoza College of Business was established by Father John Francis O'Hara in 1921, although a foreign commerce program was launched in 1917. In the 2010 Bloomberg/Businessweek Undergraduate Business School Rankings, The Mendoza College of Business was ranked as the top overall school.
All of Notre Dame's undergraduate students are a part of one of the five undergraduate colleges at the school or are in the First Year of Studies program. The First Year of Studies program was established in 1962 to guide incoming freshmen in their first year at the school before they have declared a major. Each student is given an academic advisor from the program who helps them to choose classes that give them exposure to any major in which they are interested.

Graduate and professional schools

The university first offered graduate degrees, in the form of a Master of Arts (MA), in the 1854–1855 academic year. The program expanded to include Master of Laws (LL.M.) and Master of Civil Engineering in its early stages of growth, before a formal graduate school education was developed with a thesis not required to receive the degrees. This changed in 1924 with formal requirements developed for graduate degrees, including offering Doctorate (PhD) degrees.
In addition to the programs offered by each of the colleges, the Notre Dame Law School offers a professional program for students. Established in 1869, Notre Dame was the first Catholic university in the United States to have a law program.
The Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies at the University of Notre Dame is dedicated to research, education and outreach on the causes of violent conflict and the conditions for sustainable peace. It offers PhD, Master's, and undergraduate degrees in peace studies. It was founded in 1986 through the donations of Joan B. Kroc, the widow of McDonald's owner Ray Kroc. The institute was inspired by the vision of Rev. Theodore M. Hesburgh CSC, President Emeritus of the University of Notre Dame. The institute has contributed to international policy discussions about peace building practices. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies
Though Notre Dame does not have a medical school of its own, it hosts a regional campus of the Indiana University School of Medicine, where Indiana University medical students may spend the first two years of their medical education before transferring to the main medical campus at IUPUI.

Libraries

The library system of the university is divided between the main library and each of the colleges and schools. The main building is the 14-story Theodore M. Hesburgh Library, completed in 1963, which is the third building to house the main collection of books.
Another piece of artwork associated with the Library is the statue of Moses by Joseph Turkalj. This statue, popularly known as "First Down Moses" because of the manner in which his right arm is outstretched with his right index finger in the air, is at a side entrance to the building.
The library system also includes branch libraries for Architecture, Chemistry & Physics, Engineering, Law, and Mathematics as well as information centers in the Mendoza College of Business, the Kellogg Institute for International Studies, the Joan B. Kroc Institute for International Peace Studies, and a slide library in O'Shaughnessy Hall.

Rankings

In 2012–2013, Notre Dame ranked 17th overall among "national universities" in the United States in U.S. News & World Report's Best Colleges 2013. 
Additionally, the study abroad program ranks sixth in highest participation percentage in the nation, with 57.6% of students choosing to study abroad in 17 countries. According to payscale. The median starting salary of $55,300 ranked 41st in the same peer group."Do Elite Colleges Produce the Best-Paid Graduates?," New York Times, July 20, 2009
Named by Newsweek as one of the "25 New Ivies,"

Research

Zahm

Father Joseph Carrier, C.S.C. was Director of the Science Museum and the Library and Professor of Chemistry and Physics until 1874. Carrier taught that scientific research and its promise for progress were not antagonistic to the ideals of intellectual and moral culture endorsed by the Church. One of Carrier's students was Father John Augustine Zahm (1851–1921) who was made Professor and Co-Director of the Science Department at age 23 and by 1900 was a nationally prominent scientist and naturalist. Zahm was active in the Catholic Summer School movement, which introduced Catholic laity to contemporary intellectual issues. His book Evolution and Dogma (1896) defended certain aspects of evolutionary theory as true, and argued, moreover, that even the great Church teachers Thomas Aquinas and Augustine taught something like it. The intervention of Irish American Catholics in Rome prevented Zahm's censure by the Vatican. In 1913, Zahm and former President Theodore Roosevelt embarked on a major expedition through the Amazon.Ralph Edward Weber, Notre Dame's John Zahm: American Catholic Apologist and Educator (1961)

Other science

In 1882, Albert Zahm (John Zahm's brother) built an early wind tunnel used to compare lift to drag of aeronautical models. Around 1899, Professor Jerome Green became the first American to send a wireless message. In 1931, Father Julius Nieuwland performed early work on basic reactions that was used to create neoprene. and continues now partly through a partnership in the Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics.

Lobund Institute

The Lobund Institute grew out of pioneering research in germ-free-life which began in 1928. This area of research originated in a question posed by Pasteur as to whether animal life was possible without bacteria. Though others had taken up this idea, their research was short lived and inconclusive. Lobund was the first research organization to answer definitively, that such life is possible and that it can be prolonged through generations. But the objective was not merely to answer Pasteur's question but also to produce the germ free animal as a new tool for biological and medical research. This objective was reached and for years Lobund was a unique center for the study and production of germ free animals and for their use in biological and medical investigations. Today the work has spread to other universities. In the beginning it was under the Department of Biology and a program leading to the master's degree accompanied the research program. In the 1940s Lobund achieved independent status as a purely research organization and in 1950 was raised to the status of an Institute. In 1958 it was brought back into the Department of Biology as integral part of that department, but with its own program leading to the degree of PhD in Gnotobiotics. Moore, The Story of Notre Dame: Academic Development: University of Notre Dame online

English

Richard T. Sullivan taught English from 1936 to 1974 and published six novels, dozens of short stories, and various other efforts. He was known as a regional writer and a Catholic spokesman. Cadegan, "How Realistic Can a Catholic Writer Be? Richard Sullivan and American Catholic Literature," Religion & American Culture 1996 6(1): 35–61
Frank O'Malley was an English professor during the 1930s–1960s. Influenced by Jacques Maritain, John U. Nef, and others, O'Malley developed a concept of Christian philosophy that was a fundamental element in his thought. Through his course "Modern Catholic Writers" O'Malley introduced generations of undergraduates to Gabriel Marcel, Graham Greene, Evelyn Waugh, Sigrid Undset, Paul Claudel, and Gerard Manley Hopkins." U.S. Catholic Historian 1990 9(3): 305–320. 0735–8318

European émigrés

The rise of Hitler and other dictators in the 1930s forced numerous Catholic intellectuals to flee Europe; president John O'Hara brought many to Notre Dame. From Germany came Anton-Hermann Chroust (1907–1982) in classics and law,See bibliography and Waldemar Gurian a German Catholic intellectual of Jewish descent. Positivism dominated American intellectual life in the 1920s onward but in marked contrast, Gurian received a German Catholic education and wrote his doctoral dissertation under Max Scheler. 17, No. 1, The Gurian Memorial Issue (Jan., 1955), pp. 19–23 in JSTOR Ivan Meštrović (1883–1962), a renowned sculptor, brought Croatian culture to campus, 1955–62.See Yves R. Simon (1903–61)
The exiles developed a distinctive emphasis on the evils of totalitarianism. For example the political science courses of Gerhart Niemeyer (1907–97) discussed communist ideology and were particularly accessible to his students. He came to ND in 1955, and was a frequent contributor to the National Review and other conservative magazines. Miller, "Gerhart Niemeyer: His Principles of Conservatism," Modern Age 2007 49(3): 273–284 online at EBSCO

Political science

The Review of Politics was founded in 1939 by Gurian, modeled after German Catholic journals. It quickly emerged as part of an international Catholic intellectual revival, offering an alternative vision to positivist philosophy. For 44 years, the Review was edited by Gurian, Matthew Fitzsimons, Frederick Crosson, and Thomas Stritch. Intellectual leaders included Gurian, Jacques Maritain, Frank O'Malley, Leo Richard Ward, F. A. Hermens, and John U. Nef. It became a major forum for political ideas and modern political concerns, especially from a Catholic and scholastic tradition. in JSTOR

Research



Endowment

Notre Dame's financial endowment was started in the early 1920s by university president James Burns, and increased to US$7 million by 1952 when Hesburgh became president. By the 1980s it reached $150 million, and in 2000, it returned a record 57.9% investment. For the 2007 fiscal year, the endowment had grown to approximately $6.5 billion, putting the university in the top-15 largest endowments in the country. As of June 2012, Notre Dame's endowment is valued at $6.33 billion."U.S. and Canadian Institutions Listed by Fiscal Year 2012 Endowment Market Value and Percentage Change in Endowment Market Value from FY 2011 to FY 2012" (PDF). 2012 NACUBO-Commonfund Study of Endowments. National Association of College and University Business Officers.

Student life

In 2009 the Notre Dame student body consisted of 11,733 students, with 8,371 undergraduates and 3,362 graduate and professional students.
The strictly measured federal graduation rate for athletes was 86% for freshmen who entered between 2000 and 2002. This is one of the highest in the country.

Residence halls

About 80% of undergraduates and 20% of graduate students live on campus. The majority of the graduate students on campus live in one of four graduate housing complexes on campus, while all on-campus undergraduates live in one of the 29 residence halls. At the end of the intramural season, the championship game is played on the field in Notre Dame Stadium.

Religious life

The university is affiliated with the Congregation of the Holy Cross. More than 93% of students identify as Christian, with over 80% of the total being Catholic.
The University was founded by a group of Catholic missionary priests and brothers from France, members of the Congregation of the Holy Cross (in Latin, Congregatio a Sancta Cruce; more commonly referred to as "CSC," which is also the initials placed after all members' names). The land where they founded the school was donated to them by the Bishop of Vincennes, Indiana. They saw a large part of their early mission to be caring for and evangelizing the local Potawatomi tribes. Upon arrival on the lake shore in the cold of winter, they dedicated their new school and all their endeavors to the Virgin Mary under the name of Notre Dame du Lac, which is French for Our Lady of the Lake.
This Catholic mission of the Congregation, its schools at the site, and their successors has shaped the campus and the university. Fifty-seven chapels are located throughout the campus.
While religious affiliation is not a criterion for admission, approximately 80% of undergraduates enrolled self-identify as Catholic. There are many Catholic clubs, organizations, and ministries on campus. There is a large campus ministry program and many volunteer opportunities. There is no compulsory participation in any religious liturgies. Students and clubs of other religions and Christian denominations are welcomed and supported.
Nearly every residence hall has a priest in residence. Every residence hall (and many academic buildings) contains a chapel, where Sunday and daily masses are celebrated during the school year. One dorm is named after a saint (Saint Edward). Sunday and daily masses as well as daily confessions are held in the Basilica of the Sacred Heart in the center of campus.
Architecturally, the school has a Catholic character. Atop the Main Building's gold dome is a golden statue of the Virgin Mary. Immediately in front of the Main Building and facing it, is a copper statue of Christ with arms upraised with the legend "Venite Ad Me Omnes" ("Come to me, all you"; Matthew 11:28a). Next to the Main Building is the Basilica of the Sacred Heart. Immediately behind the basilica is the Grotto, a Marian place of prayer and reflection. It is a replica of the grotto at Lourdes, France where Mary is reputed to have appeared to St. Bernadette in 1858. At the end of the main drive (and in a direct line that connects through 3 statues and the Gold Dome), is a simple, modern stone statue of Mary. Behind her approximately  stone mosaic on its southern face of Christ surrounded by the Apostles and notable scholarly saints and doctors of the Church. This mosaic is entitled "The Word of Life," but is affectionately referred to as 'Touchdown Jesus' because of Christ's upraised arms and the visibility of the mosaic from the stadium through the uprights of the northern endzone. Next to the library is Ivan Meštrović's large bronze statue of Moses with finger upraised (affectionately known as 'Firstdown Moses').
The university is the major seat of the Congregation of the Holy Cross (albeit not its official headquarters, which are in Rome). Its main seminary, Moreau Seminary, is located on the campus across St. Joseph lake from the Main Building. Old College, the oldest building on campus and located near the shore of St. Mary lake, houses undergraduate seminarians. Retired priests and brothers reside in Fatima House (a former retreat center), Holy Cross House, as well as Columba Hall near the Grotto. Until the 1970s, many of the support staff were nuns and monks.
The university supports many Church-related organizations and ministries.
The university has a highly regarded theology program, both undergraduate and graduate, with many scholars, including Lawrence Cunningham, John Cavadini, and Gary Anderson. The chair of the department, John Cavadini, was appointed to the International Theological Commission by Pope Benedict XVI in 2010; Prof. Brian Daley, SJ, received the Ratzinger Prize in Theology in 2012.
University by-laws require that the President of the University be a priest of the United States Province of the Congregation of Holy Cross. Until 1967, when governance was transferred to a lay board of trustees, the university was entirely governed by the leadership of the Holy Cross order.
Although the faculty was well over 85% Catholic before 1970, search practices have broadened. In recent years about half the new faculty hires have been Catholics, and Catholics now comprise 52% of the faculty.S. about 6% of the faculty are Catholics. John T. Mcgreevy, "Catholic Enough? Religious Identity at Notre Dame," Commonweal, Vol. 134, September 28, 2007
However, in a policy statement the University declares that "the Catholic identity of the University depends upon ... the continuing presence of a predominant number of Catholic intellectuals" on the faculty. As the provost has explained, the aim is "to have a majority of faculty who are Catholic, who understand the nature of the religion, who can be living role models, who can talk with students about issues outside the classroom and can infuse values into what they do."William H. Dempsey, "How Catholic Is Notre Dame?" First Things: A Monthly Journal of Religion and Public Life, No. 183, May 2008.
In 2009 the University was criticized by many Catholic bishops for conferring an honorary degree on President Barack Obama. President Obama's promotion of abortion access and types of embryonic stem cell research that result in the destruction of human embryos conflicts with Catholic doctrine on the sanctity of life.

Student-run media

As at most other universities, Notre Dame's students run a number of news media outlets. The nine student-run outlets include three newspapers, both a radio and television station, and several magazines and journals. The newspapers have varying publication interests, with The Observer published daily and mainly reporting university and other news.
The television station, NDtv, grew from one show in 2002 to a full 24-hour channel with original programming by September 2006.

Community development

The first phase of Eddy Street Commons, a $215 million development located adjacent to the University of Notre Dame campus and funded by the university, broke ground on June 3, 2008. The developer, Kite Realty out of Indianapolis, has made agreements with major national chains rather than local businesses, a move that has led to criticism from alumni and students.The ObserverThe Observer

Athletics

Notre Dame teams are known as the Fighting Irish. They compete as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I, primarily competing in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) for all sports since the 2013–14 school year.
Notre Dame's conference affiliations for all of its sports except football and fencing changed in July 2013 as a result of major conference realignment, and its fencing affiliation will change in July 2014. The Irish left the Big East for the ACC during a prolonged period of instability in the Big East;
The Fighting Irish name was used in the early 1920s with respect to the football team and was popularized by alumnus Francis Wallace in his New York Daily News columns.
The university marching band plays at home games for most of the sports. The band, which began in 1846 and has a claim as the oldest university band in continuous existence in the United States, was honored by the National Music Council as a "Landmark of American Music" during the United States Bicentennial. According to College Fight Songs: An Annotated Anthology published in 1998, the "Notre Dame Victory March" ranks as the greatest fight song of all time.
According to some analysts without direct connection to the university or its athletic department, Notre Dame promotes Muscular Christianity through its athletic programs. Neither the university nor its athletic department has ever commented on this assertion.

Football

The Notre Dame football team has a long history, first beginning when the Michigan Wolverines football team brought football to Notre Dame in 1887 and played against a group of students.com, November 24, 2006, Accessed March 24, 2009.com, October 12, 2005, Accessed March 24, 2009.com, October 20, 2007, Accessed March 24, 2009.
George Gipp was the school's legendary football player during 1916–20. He played semiprofessional baseball and smoked, drank, and gambled when not playing sports. He was also humble, generous to the needy, and a man of integrity. Bacon, "The Gipper," Michigan History 2001 85(6): 48–55, It was in 1928 that famed coach Knute Rockne used his final conversation with the dying Gipp to inspire the Notre Dame team to beat the Army team and "win one for the Gipper." The 1940 film, Knute Rockne, All American, starred Pat O'Brien as Knute Rockne and Ronald Reagan as Gipp.
Today the team competes in Notre Dame Stadium, an 80,795-seat stadium on campus.

=Football gameday traditions=

During home games, activities occur all around campus and different dorms decorate their halls with a traditional item (e.g. Zahm House's two-story banner). Traditional activities begin at the stroke of midnight with the Drummers' Circle. This tradition involves the drum line of the Band of the Fighting Irish and ushers in the rest of the festivities that will continue the rest of the gameday Saturday. Later that day, the trumpet section will play the Notre Dame Victory March and the Notre Dame Alma Mater under the dome. The band entire will play a concert at the steps of Bond Hall, from where they will march into Notre Dame Stadium, leading fans and students alike across campus to the game.

File:Irish Guard with Band ND.jpg|The Irish Guard leading the Band of the Fighting Irish to the stadium
File:ND Stadium 2011.jpg|The Band of the Fighting Irish spells out ND through which the Notre Dame Fighting Irish Football Team runs onto the field
File:Notre Dame Stadium 2011.JPG|Notre Dame Stadium student section wearing "The Shirt" for the 2011 football season
File:Zahm Hall Gameday Sign.JPG|Multi-Story tall "HERE COME THE IRISH" gameday sign on Zahm Hall
File:NDBandBondHall.png|The Band of the Fighting Irish plays on the steps of Bond Hall before every home game
File:Notre Dame Game with Band.JPG|The Band of the Fighting Irish plays inside Notre Dame Stadium

Men's basketball

The men's basketball team has over 1,600 wins, one of only 12 schools who have reached that mark, and have appeared in 28 NCAA tournaments. Just in 2009 they were invited to the NIT, where they advanced to the semifinals but were beaten by Penn State who went on and beat Baylor in the championship. The 2010–11 team concluded its regular season ranked number seven in the country, with a record of 25–5, Brey's fifth straight 20-win season, and a second place finish in the Big East.

Other sports

Notre Dame has been successful in other sports besides football, with an additional 14 national championships in various sports. Three teams have won multiple national championships with the fencing team leading them with seven,
In the first ten years that Notre Dame competed in the Big East Conference its teams won a total of 64 championships.
In 2006–07, Notre Dame's hockey team finished the regular season ranked #1.

Music

The Band of the Fighting Irish is the oldest university band in continuous existence. The all-male Glee Club was formed in 1915.
The "Notre Dame Victory March" is the fight song for the University of Notre Dame. It was written by two brothers who were Notre Dame graduates. The Rev. Michael J. Shea, a 1904 graduate, wrote the music, and his brother, John F. Shea, who earned degrees in 1906 and 1908, wrote the original lyrics. The lyrics were revised in the 1920s; it first appeared under the copyright of the University of Notre Dame in 1928. The chorus is, "Cheer cheer for old Notre Dame, wake up the echos cheering her name. Send a volley cheer on high, shake down the thunder from the sky! What though the odds be great or small, old Notre Dame will win over all. While her loyal sons are marching, onward to victory!"
The chorus of the song is one of the most recognizable collegiate fight songs in the United States, and was ranked first among fight songs by Northern Illinois University Professor William Studwell, who remarked it was "more borrowed, more famous and, frankly, you just hear it more."
In the film Knute Rockne, All American, Knute Rockne (played by Pat O'Brien) delivers the famous "Win one for the Gipper" speech, at which point the background music swells with the Notre Dame Victory March. George Gipp was played by Ronald Reagan, whose nickname "The Gipper" was derived from this role. This scene was parodied in the movie Airplane! with the same background music, only this time honoring George Zipp, one of Ted Striker's former comrades. The song also was prominent in the movie Rudy, with Sean Astin as Daniel "Rudy" Ruettiger, who harbored dreams of playing football at the University of Notre Dame despite significant obstacles.

Alumni

Notre Dame alumni number near 120,000, and the performing arts center.
Notre Dame alumni work in various fields. Alumni working in political fields include state governors,



Further reading




