[[Pet Sounds]]

CATEGORIES: 1966 albums, The Beach Boys albums, Baroque pop albums, Capitol Records albums, Concept albums, English-language albums, Grammy Hall of Fame Award recipients, Psychedelic rock albums, United States National Recording Registry recordings, Albums produced by Brian Wilson, Albums conducted by Brian Wilson, Albums arranged by Brian Wilson

Pet Sounds is the eleventh studio album by the American rock band the Beach Boys, released May 16, 1966, on Capitol Records. It has since been recognized as one of the most influential records in the history of popular music and one of the best albums of the 1960s. It features songs such as "Wouldn't It Be Nice" and "God Only Knows". Pet Sounds was created several months after Brian Wilson had quit touring with the band in order to focus his attention on writing and recording. In it, he wove elaborate layers of vocal harmonies, coupled with sound effects and unconventional instruments such as bicycle bells, buzzing organs, harpsichords, flutes, Electro-Theremin, dog whistles, trains, Hawaiian-sounding string instruments, Coca-Cola cans and barking dogs, along with the more usual keyboards and guitars.173.
Although Pet Sounds was met with strong sales abroad, reaching number two in the UK, it charted lower in the US than the majority of the band's preceding albums, peaking at number ten on the Billboard 200.

Background

The track "Sloop John B" predated the rest of the LP by some months, but it proved to be a pivotal point in the album's development. It was a traditional Caribbean folk song that had been suggested to Wilson by group member Al Jardine. Al updated the chord progression by having the IV, D♭ major, move to its relative minor, B♭ minor before returning to the tonic, A♭. He expected to collaborate further with Wilson on the arrangement, but was pleasantly surprised by what Brian accomplished on his own. Wilson devoted the last three months of 1965 to polishing the vocals of "Sloop John B" and recording six new original compositions: "The Little Girl I Once Knew", "In My Childhood", "Don't Talk (Put Your Head On My Shoulder)",  "Run, James, Run", "Trombone Dixie", and "Three Blind Mice". What would become Pet Sounds could not be finished in time for Christmas 1965.

Halfway through the Pet Sounds sessions, Wilson reportedly became enthralled with the Beatles' album Rubber Soul, which was released that December. The British version of Rubber Soul was edited prior to its release in the US to emphasise a folk rock feel that critics attributed to Bob Dylan and the Byrds. Wilson found Rubber Soul to lack filler tracks, which was mostly unheard of at a time when 45 rpm singles were considered more noteworthy than full-length LPs. Many albums up until the late-1960s lacked a cohesive artistic goal and were largely used to sell singles at a higher price point. Wilson thought that Rubber Soul broke the mold with a consistent thread of high-quality music. Inspired, he rushed to his wife and proclaimed, "Marilyn, I'm gonna make the greatest album! The greatest rock album ever made!".

Composition

Lyrics

In early January 1966 Wilson contacted Tony Asher, a young lyricist and copywriter who had been working on advertising jingles, and whom Wilson had met in a Hollywood recording studio earlier. Within ten days they were writing together. Wilson played him some of the music he had been recording and gave him a cassette of the backing track for a piece with the working title "In My Childhood". It had lyrics, but Wilson refused to show them to Asher. The result of Asher's tryout was eventually retitled "You Still Believe in Me" and the artistic success of the piece convinced Wilson that Tony Asher was the wordsmith he had been looking for.
Most of the songs were written during December 1965 and January 1966. While most were composed with Tony Asher, "I Know There's an Answer" was co-written by another new associate, Terry Sachen. Mike Love is co-credited on the album's opening track, "Wouldn't It Be Nice", and on "I Know There's an Answer" but with the exception of his co-credit on "I'm Waiting for the Day", his songwriting contributions are thought to have been minimal. The exact degree of Love's contribution to "Wouldn't It Be Nice" was never fully determined, but under oath in a court of law, Tony Asher stated it consisted of the tag "Good night my baby/Sleep tight, my baby" and possible minor vocal arrangement. Love's influence on "I Know There's an Answer" is reputed to have stemmed from his opposition to the song's original title, "Hang On to Your Ego", and his belief that it be partially rewritten and retitled. The original lyrics created a stir within the group. "I was aware that Brian was beginning to experiment with LSD and other psychedelics," explained Love. "The prevailing drug jargon at the time had it that doses of LSD would shatter your ego, as if that were a positive thing... I wasn't interested in taking acid or getting rid of my ego." Jardine recalled that the decision to change the lyrics was ultimately Wilson's. "Brian was very concerned. He wanted to know what we thought about it. To be honest, I don't think we even knew what an ego was... Finally Brian decided, 'Forget it. I'm changing the lyrics. There's too much controversy.'"  Terry Sachen, who co-wrote the revised lyrics to this song, was the Beach Boys' road manager in 1966. Brian Wilson and The Beach Boys: The Complete Guide to Their Music. Omnibus Press, 2004, ISBN 1-84449-426-8 p. 50"John Lennon's secret" (David Stuart Ryan), ISBN 0-905116-08-9, p.139

Music

Professors John Covach and Graeme M. Boone of Ohio State University have written that "In terms of the structure of the songs themselves, there is comparatively little advance from what Brian had already accomplished or shown himself capable of accomplishing. Most of the songs use unusual harmonic progressions and unexpected disruptions of hypermeter, both features that were met in 'Warmth of the Sun' and 'Don't Back Down.'"
Pet Sounds is the first rock record to incorporate the Electro-Theremin, an easier-to-play version of the theremin. Its inventor Paul Tanner performs the instrument on the song "I Just Wasn't Made For These Times".

Concept

The concept album form received a resurgence of popularity in the late 1960s among pop artists, when many rock releases including Pet Sounds presented a set of thematically-linked songs. Other rock music artists, such as Frank Zappa and the Mothers of Invention, the Beatles and The Who subsequently released concept albums. Pet Sounds was a musical portrayal of Brian Wilson's private/public state of mind at the time. However, Wilson stated that making the record a concept album is how they had thought of it. Sonically, it was structured as an interpretation of Phil Spector's Wall of Sound.
On February 15, the group traveled to the San Diego Zoo to shoot the photographs for the cover, which had already received its title. George Jerman was credited for taking the cover photo. Mike Love also laid claim to the title. "We were standing in the hallway in one of the recording studios, either Western or Columbia, and we didn't have a title," he recounted. "We had taken pictures at the zoo and…there were animal sounds on the record, and we were thinking, well, it's our favorite music of that time, so I said, 'Why don't we call it Pet Sounds?'" At another time, Brian credited the album title to Carl.

Psychedelia

The album is psychedelic music. Brian was publicly effused with the drug LSD during the mid-1960s and was using it to further his creative process, an admitted example being the 1965 single "California Girls". Throughout the latter half of the decade, Wilson was repeatedly been shown to have become interested in Eastern philosophy and the psychedelic experience, often pointing to ego loss as the key to a better way of living. 1964. The Act of Creation, p38. Penguin Books, New York. During the spring of 1965, Wilson had what he considered to be "a very religious experience" after consuming a full dose of LSD. He stated, "I learned a lot of things, like patience, understanding. I can't teach you, or tell you what I learned from taking it." Elsewhere within Pet Sounds lyrical content, Brian turned inward and probed his deep-seated self-doubts and emotional longings; Pet Sounds did not address the problems in the world around them, unlike other psychedelic rock groups.J. DeRogatis, Turn On Your Mind: Four Decades of Great Psychedelic Rock, (Milwaukee, Michigan: Hal Leonard, 2003), ISBN 0-634-05548-8 Music professors Paul Hegarty and Martin Halliwell have written:


Recording

With writing well under way, Wilson recorded six backing tracks for the new material. surviving tapes of his recording sessions show that he was open to his musicians, often taking advice and suggestions from them and even incorporating apparent 'mistakes' if they provided a useful or interesting alternative. Wilson said of his recording process with the Wrecking Crew:
Wilson had developed his production methods over several years, reaching a peak with Pet Sounds during late 1965 and early 1966. Wilson's approach was in some respects a refined interpretation of the famous "Wall of Sound" technique created by his former mentor and now rival Phil Spector. Equipped with newest state-of-the-art Ampex 8-track recorders, Wilson produced tracks of great complexity using his regular team of 'first call' players, sometimes known collectively as "the Wrecking Crew". Like Spector, Wilson was a pioneer of the 'studio as instrument' concept, exploiting novel combinations of sounds that sprang from the use of multiple electric instruments and voices in an ensemble and combining them with echo and reverberation. He often doubled bass, guitar and keyboard parts, blending them with reverberation and adding other unusual instruments.
When the other Beach Boys returned from a three-week tour of Japan and Hawaii, they were presented with a substantial portion of a new album, with music that was in many ways a radical departure from their earlier attempts. Most of March and early April 1966 was devoted to recording the remaining backing tracks and to the crucial recording of vocals, a process which proved to be the most exacting work the group had hitherto undertaken, as Mike Love later recalled:
In spite of the availability of sophisticated multitrack recording, Wilson always mixed the final version of his recordings in mono, as did Phil Spector. He did this because he felt that mono mastering provided more sonic control over the final result, regardless of the vagaries of speaker placement and sound system quality. In that era radio and TV were broadcast in mono and most domestic and automotive radios and record players were monophonic. Another and more personal reason for Wilson's preference for mono was due to his almost total deafness in his right ear, rumored to be the result of childhood injury to his eardrum caused by a blow from his violent father Murry Wilson, although Wilson claimed that he was born deaf in one ear.
These backing tracks were then dubbed down onto one track of an 8-track recorder, The last track was usually reserved for additional vocals and/or instruments and other 'sweetening' elements. 

Outtakes

On October 15, 1965, Wilson went to the studio to record an instrumental piece entitled "Three Blind Mice", bearing no musical connection to the nursery rhyme of the same name. It's not known what the piece's purpose was to be, but it was inexplicably included as part of the Beach Boys' 2011 release of The Smile Sessions. By February 1966, Wilson was in the studio with his session band laying down the first takes for a new composition, "Good Vibrations". During that month, Wilson gave Capitol a provisional track listing for the new LP, which included both "Sloop John B" and "Good Vibrations." This contradicts the long held misconception that "Sloop John B" was a forced inclusion as the hit single at Capitol's insistence: in late February, the song was weeks away from release. Wilson worked through February and into March fine-tuning the backing tracks. To the group's surprise he also dropped "Good Vibrations" from the running order, telling them that he wanted to spend more time on it. Al Jardine remembered: "At the time, we all had assumed that "Good Vibrations" was going to be on the album, but Brian decided to hold it out. It was a judgment call on his part; we felt otherwise but left the ultimate decision up to him." A third instrumental, called "Trombone Dixie", had been fully recorded, but it remained in the vaults until its inclusion on the album's 1990 remastered CD release.
Wilson devoted some Pet Sounds sessions to avant-garde indulgences such as an extended a cappela run-through of the children's song "Row, Row, Row Your Boat" exploiting the song's use of rounds via tape delay and overdubbing. At least half an hour of tape reels exist which involve Brian and friends attempting to create a psychedelic comedy album, foreshadowing much of his work on Smile, which was set to have followed Pet Sounds. About a year later Brian had moved on to burning wood in the studio.

Legacy and influence

Initial sales

By mid-April 1966, Pet Sounds was finished. "Caroline, No" was released as a single; it was credited to Brian Wilson alone, leading to speculation that he was considering leaving the band. The single reached number 32 in the US.
"Sloop John B" was extremely successful, reaching number three in the US and number two in Great Britain. 
Its greatest success was in the UK, where it reached number two. Its success was aided by support from the British music industry, who embraced the record; Paul McCartney spoke often about the album's influence on the Beatles. Bruce Johnston stated that he flew to London in May 1966 and played the album for John Lennon and McCartney.111. Wilson intimated his feelings on Pet Sounds' release and reception by saying:

Critical reception

Pet Sounds is frequently cited by both critics and musicians as the greatest rock album of all time. Advocates include Mojo magazine and Paul McCartney, who acknowledges that it was the primary impetus for the Beatles' 1967 album Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band. Although not originally a big seller, Pet Sounds has been influential since it was released.

Other musicians


Artists and musicians have revered Pet Sounds as a remarkable milestone in the history of popular music. These have included Tom Petty,
According to Thom Yorke, portions of the album OK Computer were based on the atmosphere of Pet Sounds. Pizzicato Five's Pizzicatomania!, Coma Cinema's Blue Suicide and Yann Tomita's Doopee Time.
Pet Sounds inspired tribute albums such as Do It Again: A Tribute To Pet Sounds, The String Quartet Tribute to the Beach Boys' Pet Sounds and Mojo Presents: Pet Sounds Revisited. Many songs from Pet Sounds have also appeared on general-themed Beach Boy and Brian Wilson tribute albums like Making God Smile and Smiling Pets, which feature cover versions by various artists including Sixpence None the Richer, Seagull Screaming Kiss Her Kiss Her and Thurston Moore. Other notable artists include They Might Be Giants, David Bowie, Black Francis, Peter Thomas, Sonic Youth, Rivers Cuomo, Patrick Wolf, Tim Burgess, Saint Etienne and the Flaming Lips.
Pet Sounds tribute parodies include Punk Sounds by the Huntingtons.
In the mid-1990s, Robert Schneider of The Apples in Stereo and Jim McIntyre of Von Hemmling founded Pet Sounds Studio, which served as the venue for many Elephant 6 projects such as Neutral Milk Hotel's In the Aeroplane Over the Sea, and the Olivia Tremor Control's Dusk at Cubist Castle and Black Foliage.

Live performances

The entire Pet Sounds album has been played live by The Beach Boys and by Brian Wilson. Several of its songs have become live staples for the group, including "Wouldn't It Be Nice", "Sloop John B" and "God Only Knows".
Brian Wilson performed the entire album live on three occasions on his 2002 and 2006 Pet Sounds tours, which included fellow band member Al Jardine at several shows. He also performed it twice on his 2013 tour, which again included Al Jardine as well as original Beach Boys guitarist David Marks.
"Wouldn't It Be Nice", "Sloop John B" and "God Only Knows" have been performed at most Beach Boys shows since the album release. "Wouldn't It Be Nice" has had several lead vocalists over the years due to Brian Wilson's absence from touring, including Carl Wilson, Al Jardine and Jeff Foskett. "Sloop John B" has also been a live staple with Al Jardine, Bruce Johnston or Carl Wilson often covering Brian's part. "God Only Knows" was long considered Carl Wilson's signature song at live shows until his death in 1998. Following his death Bruce Johnston began to sing the lead at live shows. During the band's 50th Anniversary Tour all three songs were played including "God Only Knows" featuring Carl Wilson's pre-recorded vocals and a tribute video.
"I Just Wasn't Made For These Times" and "Pet Sounds" were both performed live by The Beach Boys for the first time on the band's 50th Anniversary Tour. "Here Today" has only been performed by the Mike Love-led Beach Boys with he and Bruce Johnston alternating on the lead.
"Caroline, No" and "You Still Believe in Me" have been played by the band at several times during their live history. "Caroline, No" was played infrequently throughout the 70's, 80's and 90's with Carl Wilson on lead vocals. "You Still Believe in Me" was also played infrequently during the early 70's and again in the early 90's with Al Jardine on Brian's original lead.
"That's Not Me, Let's Go Away For Awhile" and "I Know There's An Answer" have only ever been performed by Brian Wilson during his Pet Sounds tours, the Beach Boys have never performed the songs live.
"Don't Talk (Put Your Head On My Shoulder)" and "I'm Waiting For the Day" were both performed by Brian Wilson, but also by the Beach Boys in the 70's. With Brian absent from the group, "Don't Talk (Put Your Head On My Shoulder)" was performed with Carl Wilson on lead vocals. "I'm Waiting For The Day" was performed with backing member Billy Hinsche on lead.
Close Beach Boys friend Scott Mathews planned a "Pet Sounds Live" world tour project that he designed and began spearheading in 1983 with full participation from Brian Wilson. However the tour never took flight due to one band member having creative difficulties in adjusting to changing the tour formula, even for such a special event and the much needed credibility the band would gain. When an unacceptable offer from the 'swing voter' was finally proposed in 1991, Mathews officially passed on pursuing the Pet Sounds performance project as he preferred to protect his relationship with close friends Carl Wilson. Brian Wilson however would go on to tour the album as previously mentioned.

Accolades

In 1995, nearly thirty years after its release, a panel of top musicians, songwriters and producers assembled by MOJO magazine voted it "The Greatest Album Ever Made." It was number one in New Musical Express's list "The 100 Best Albums". In 1997, Pet Sounds was named the 33rd greatest album of all time in a poll conducted in the United Kingdom by HMV, Channel 4, The Guardian and Classic FM.
It placed number two on Rolling Stones list of the 500 greatest albums of all time behind only Sgt. Pepper's Lonely Hearts Club Band by the Beatles. In 2004, it was one of 50 recordings chosen by the Library of Congress to be added to the National Recording Registry. In 2006, the album was chosen by TIME as one of the 100 best albums of all time. Rolling Stone Magazine ranked it as the second greatest album of all time.500 Greatest Albums of All Time: The Beach Boys, 'Pet Sounds' | Rolling Stone Pet Sounds also helped cement The Beach Boys as the founders of California Rock.
 denotes an unordered list

Re-issues

In 1990, Pet Sounds was released in mono CD format with three bonus tracks: "Unreleased Backgrounds"
In 1997, The Pet Sounds Sessions box set was released. It included the original mono release, the first stereo release and three discs of outtakes and rehearsals. The stereo mix was released in 1999 on vinyl and on CD. The current CD release has the original mono version, followed by "Hang On to Your Ego" as a bonus track, and the album remixed in stereo.
Recordings from Brian Wilson's 2002 concert tour, in which he played the whole album live on stage, were released as Pet Sounds Live.
On August 29, 2006, Capitol released the 40th Anniversary edition. The new compilation contains a new 2006 remaster of the original mono mix, DVD mixes (stereo and Surround Sound), and a "making of" documentary. The discs were released in a regular jewel box and a deluxe edition was released in a green fuzzy box. A two disk colored gatefold vinyl set was released with green (stereo) and yellow (mono) disks.
On September 2, 2008, Capitol reissued a single LP version replicating the original artwork and the inner sleeve with the original mono mix on 180 gram vinyl.

Track listing

Pet Sounds has had many different re-issues since its release in 1966, including remastered mono and stereo versions. The first release of the album on CD came in 1990, when it was released with the addition of three bonus tracks. In 2001, Pet Sounds was re-released with "Hang on to Your Ego" as a bonus track.

Personnel

The majority of the groups, session musicians and engineers information has derived largely from musician union contracts, web sources and books stating information about the record. This means that some of the information isn't certain or accurate. Furthermore, while contracts contain the session date, song title and hours booked, none was required to be precisely accurate. The date on the contracts were often changed to comply with union requirements.
According to Russ Waspensky,"Sessionography". In Pet Sounds: 40th Anniversary Edition booklet. Los Angeles: Capitol Records Laura Tunbridge and Brad Elliott, except as noted.

 denotes uncertainty where or if the musician plays the instrument on the album.

Sales chart positions

Chart information courtesy of Allmusic and other music databases.



Notes



Further reading

|work=Rolling Stone
| title=Pet Sounds
| url=
| ref=
| accessdate=July 8, 2011
}}

