[[William Osler]]

CATEGORIES: 1849 births, 1919 deaths, Baronets in the Baronetage of the United Kingdom, Canadian baronets recommended by the British government, Book and manuscript collectors, Canadian expatriates in the United Kingdom, Canadian expatriate academics in the United States, Canadian Medical Hall of Fame, Canadian medical researchers, Canadian physicians, Fellows of Christ Church, Oxford, Johns Hopkins University faculty, Johns Hopkins Hospital physicians, McGill University alumni, Pre-Confederation Ontario people, Trinity College (Canada) alumni, University of Pennsylvania faculty, People from Dundas, Ontario, Persons of National Historic Significance (Canada), Statutory Professors of the University of Oxford, Fellows of the Royal Society

Sir William Osler, 1st Baronet ( Osler was a person of many interests, who in addition to being a physician, was a bibliophile, historian, author, and renowned practical joker.

Biography

Family

William's great-grandfather, Edward Osler, was variously described as either a merchant seaman or a pirate. when it was nearly destroyed by Atlantic storms and left adrift for weeks. Serving in the Navy, he was shipwrecked off Barbados. In 1837 Featherstone Osler retired from the Navy and emigrated to Canada, becoming a "saddle-bag minister" in rural Upper Canada. When Featherstone Osler and his bride, Ellen Free Picton, arrived in Canada, they were nearly shipwrecked again on Egg Island in the Gulf of Saint Lawrence. The Oslers had several children, including William, Britton Bath Osler, and Sir Edmund Boyd Osler.

Early life

William Osler was born in Bond Head, Canada West (now Ontario) on July 12, 1849, and raised after 1857 in Dundas, Ontario. (He was called William  after William of Orange, who won the Battle of the Boyne  on July 12, 1690.)
Educated at the original Trinity College School in Weston, Ontario, as a teenager Osler's aim was to follow his father into the Anglican ministry and to that end he entered Trinity College, Toronto (now part of the University of Toronto) in the autumn of 1867. However, his chief interest proved to be medicine and, forsaking his original intention, he enrolled in the Toronto School of Medicine. This was a privately owned institution, not part of the Medical Faculty of the University of Toronto. Osler left the Toronto School of Medicine after being accepted to the MDCM program at McGill University Faculty of Medicine in Montreal. He received his medical degree (MDCM) in 1872.

Career

Following post-graduate training in Europe, Osler returned to the McGill University Faculty of Medicine as a professor in 1874.  Here he created the first formal journal club.  In 1884, he was appointed Chair of Clinical Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania in Philadelphia and in 1885, was one of the seven founding members of the Association of American Physicians, a society dedicated to "the advancement of scientific and practical medicine." When he left Philadelphia in 1889, his farewell address. "Aequanimitas",Medicalarchives.edu was on the equanimity necessary for physicians.
In 1889, he accepted the position as the first Physician-in-Chief of the new Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore, Maryland. Shortly afterwards, in 1893, Osler was instrumental in the creation of the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine and became one of the school's first professors of medicine. Osler quickly increased his reputation as a clinician, humanitarian, and teacher. He presided over a rapidly expanding domain. In the hospital's first year of operation, when it had 220 beds, 788 patients were seen for a total of over 15,000 days of treatment. Sixteen years later, when Osler left for Oxford, over 4,200 patients were seen for a total of nearly 110,000 days of treatment.
In 1905, he was appointed to the Regius Chair of Medicine at Oxford, which he held until his death. He was also a Fellow of Christ Church, Oxford.
In 1911, he initiated the Postgraduate Medical Association, of which he was the first President.D. G. James. The portraiture of Sir William Osler. pmj.com
Osler was created a baronet in the Coronation Honours List of 1911 for his many contributions to the field of medicine.
A collection of his papers are held at the National Library of Medicine in Bethesda, Maryland. 

Assessment

Perhaps Osler's greatest contribution to medicine was to insist that students learn from seeing and talking to patients and the establishment of the medical residency. The latter idea spread across the English-speaking world and remains in place today in most teaching hospitals. Through this system, doctors in training make up much of a hospital's medical staff. The success of his residency system depended, in large part, on its pyramidal structure with many interns, fewer assistant residents and a single chief resident, who originally occupied that position for years. While at Hopkins, Osler established the full-time, sleep-in residency system whereby staff physicians lived in the administration building of the hospital. As established, the residency was open-ended, and long tenure was the rule. Doctors spent as long as seven or eight years as residents, during which time they led a restricted, almost monastic life.
He liked to say, "He who studies medicine without books sails an uncharted sea, but he who studies medicine without patients does not go to sea at all." His best-known saying was "Listen to your patient, he is telling you the diagnosis," which emphasises the importance of taking a good history.
The contribution to medical education of which he was proudest was his idea of clinical clerkship – having third- and fourth-year students work with patients on the wards. He pioneered the practice of bedside teaching, making rounds with a handful of students, demonstrating what one student referred to as his method of "incomparably thorough physical examination." Soon after arriving in Baltimore, Osler insisted that his medical students attend at bedside early in their training. By their third year they were taking patient histories, performing physicals and doing lab tests examining secretions, blood and excreta.
He reduced the role of didactic lectures and once said he hoped his tombstone would say only, "He brought medical students into the wards for bedside teaching." He also said, "I desire no other epitaph … than the statement that I taught medical students in the wards, as I regard this as by far the most useful and important work I have been called upon to do."  Osler fundamentally changed medical teaching in North America, and this influence, helped by a few such as the Dutch internist P.K. Pel, spread to medical schools across the globe.
Osler was a prolific author and a great collector of books and other material relevant to the history of medicine. He willed his library to the Faculty of Medicine of McGill University where it now forms the nucleus of McGill University's Osler Library of the History of Medicine, which opened in 1929. The printed and extensively annotated catalogue of this donation is entitled "Bibliotheca Osleriana: a catalogue of books illustrating the history of medicine and science, collected, arranged and annotated by Sir William Osler, Bt. and bequeathed to McGill University". He was instrumental in founding the Medical Library Association in North America and served as its second president from 1901–1904. In Britain he was the first (and only) president of the Medical Library Association of Great Britain and Ireland
Osler was a prolific author and public speaker and his public speaking and writing were both done in a clear, lucid style. His most famous work, The Principles and Practice of Medicine quickly became a key text to students and clinicians alike. It continued to be published in many editions until 2001 and was translated into many languages.(See Osler Library Studies in the History of Medicine vol. 8.)A History of William Osler's The Principles and Practice of Medicine by Richard Golden. ISBN 0-7717-0615-4. It is notable in part for supporting the use of bloodletting as recently as 1923. He noted that Avicenna's Canon of Medicine remained "a medical bible for a longer time than any other work".
Osler's essays were important guides to physicians. The title of his most famous essay, "Aequanimitas", espousing the importance of imperturbability, is the motto on the Osler family crest and is used on the Osler housestaff tie and scarf at Hopkins.

Controversy

Osler is well known in the field of gerontology for the speech he gave when leaving Hopkins to become the Regius Professor of Medicine at Oxford.  "The Fixed Period", given on February 22, 1905, included some controversial words about old age.  Osler, who had a well-developed humorous side to his character, was in his mid-fifties when he gave the speech and in it he mentioned Anthony Trollope's The Fixed Period (1882), which envisaged a college where men retired at 67 and after a contemplative period of a year were "peacefully extinguished" by chloroform. He claimed that, "the effective, moving, vitalizing work of the world is done between the ages of twenty-five and forty" and it was downhill from then on.  Osler's speech was covered by the popular press which headlined their reports with "Osler recommends chloroform at sixty".

Personal life and family

An inveterate prankster, he wrote several humorous pieces under the pseudonym "Egerton Yorrick Davis", even fooling the editors of the Philadelphia Medical News into publishing a report on the extremely rare phenomenon of penis captivus, on December 13, 1884. A collection of writings by the fictitious surgical character created by Osler, E.Y. Davis The letter was apparently a response to a report on the phenomenon of  vaginismus reported three weeks previously in the Philadelphia Medical News by Osler's colleague Theophilus Parvin."Egerton Y. Davis", Chris Nickson, Life in the Fastlane, November 16, 2008 Davis, a prolific writer of letters to medical societies, purported to be a retired U.S. Army surgeon living in Caughnawaga, Quebec (now Kahnawake), author of a controversial paper on the obstetrical habits of Native American tribes that was suppressed and unpublished. Osler would enhance Davis's myth by signing Davis's name to hotel registers and medical conference attendance lists; Davis was eventually reported drowned in the Lachine Rapids in 1884.
Throughout his life, Osler was a great admirer of the 17th century physician and philosopher Sir Thomas Browne.
He died at the age of 70, on December 29, 1919 in Oxford, during the Spanish influenza epidemic; his wife, Grace, lived another nine years but succumbed to a series of strokes. Sir William and Lady Osler's ashes now rest in a niche in the Osler Library at McGill University. They had two sons, one of whom died shortly after birth.  The other, Edward Revere Osler, was mortally wounded in combat in World War I at the age of 21, during the 3rd battle of Ypres (also known as the battle of Passchendaele). At the time of his death in August 1917, he was a second lieutenant in the (British) Royal Field Artillery; Lt. Osler's grave is in the Dozinghem Military Cemetery in West Flanders, Belgium. In 1876, she married Samuel W. Gross, chairman of surgery at Jefferson Medical College in Philadelphia. Gross died in 1889 and in 1892 she married William Osler who was then professor of medicine at Johns Hopkins University.
Osler was a founding donor of the American Anthropometric Society, a group of academics who pledged to donate their brains for scientific study. Osler's brain was taken to the Wistar Institute in Philadelphia to join the Wistar Brain Collection. In April 1987 it was taken to the Mütter Museum, on 22nd Street near Chestnut in Philadelphia where it was displayed during the annual meeting of the American Osler Society."They Put Their Brains To Work William Osler, Joseph Leidy, Edward Drinker Cope And William Pepper Were Among The Greatest Brains In Turn -of-the-century Philadelphia. And They Still Are" at articles.comOsler Library Newsletter  
In 1925, a biography of William Osler was written by Harvey Cushing,Cushing, Harvey (1925) who received the 1926 Pulitzer Prize for the work. A later biography by Michael Bliss was published in 1999. In 1994 Osler was inducted into the Canadian Medical Hall of Fame.

Eponyms

Osler lent his name to a number of diseases, signs and symptoms, as well as to a number of buildings that have been named for him.

Conditions

Buildings

Notes





|title=Sir William Osler
|author=Richard L. Golden,  Charles G. Roland
|year=1988
|publisher=Norman Publishing
|isbn=0-930405-00-5
|url=
}}


