[[Whitehall]]

CATEGORIES: Areas of London, Streets in the City of Westminster, Government buildings in the United Kingdom

Whitehall is a road in the City of Westminster, in central London, which forms the first part of the A3212 road from Trafalgar Square to Chelsea. It is the main thoroughfare running south from the site of the original Charing Cross at the southern end of Trafalgar Square towards Parliament Square. Recognised as the centre of Her Majesty's Government, the street is lined with government departments and ministries; the name "Whitehall" is thus also frequently used as a metonym for overall British governmental administration, as well as being a geographic name for the surrounding area.
The name is taken from the vast Palace of Whitehall that used to occupy the area but which was largely destroyed by fire in 1698. Whitehall was originally a wide road that led to the front of the palace. Trafalgar Square was built at its northern extremity in the early 19th century. The southernmost portion between Parliament Square and Downing Street is named Parliament Street. Combined, Parliament Street and Whitehall cover a distance of about 0.6 mile (1 km).
Whitehall is also widely known for a number of memorial statues and monuments, including Britain's primary war memorial, the Cenotaph.

History

Parliament Street was a small side-road alongside the Palace of Whitehall which led to the Palace of Westminster. When the Palace of Whitehall was demolished, Parliament Street was widened to match Whitehall's width. The present appearance of the street is largely the result of 19th-century redevelopment.
Banqueting House, built in 1622 by Inigo Jones, is the only surviving portion of the former palace. Charles I was executed on 30 January 1649 on a scaffold erected outside the building, stepping onto it from a first-floor window. Royalists commemorate the regicide annually on the anniversary of the execution.
The name "Whitehall" is often used as a metonym to refer that part of the civil service which is involved in the government of the United Kingdom, similar to the use of "the Kremlin" to refer to the Russian government or "the White House" for some elements of the executive branch of the United States government.
The central portion of the street is dominated by military buildings, including the Ministry of Defence, with the former headquarters of the British Army and Royal Navy, the Royal United Services Institute, the Horse Guards building and the Admiralty, on the opposite side.
Scotland Yard, the headquarters of London's Metropolitan Police Service, was originally located in Great Scotland Yard off the north-eastern end of Whitehall, but was relocated to New Scotland Yard on the Victoria Embankment in 1890. From 2015, the Metropolitan Police will be headquartered in a building between Whitehall and the Embankment.
Downing Street leads off the south-west end of Whitehall, just above Parliament Street. It is closed to the public at both ends by security gates erected in 1989. 42. St. Martin's Press, 1998. ISBN 0-312-17730-5 These have since been supplemented by a further gated barrier around 3 m outside the main gates.
Additional security measures have been put in place along Whitehall for the protection of the government buildings that line the street. This is partly due to a £25 million streetscape project undertaken by Westminster City Council and approved months before the 7 July 2005 London bombings.thisislondon.co.do The project has provided wider pavements, better lighting and hundreds of concrete and steel security barriers. 
On 28 October 2013 during the St Jude storm, Whitehall was temporarily closed to traffic after a crane collapsed on top of the Cabinet Office.bbc.co.uk/news/uk-england-london-24702806

Memorials

The Cenotaph, Britain's primary war memorial, is situated in the centre of Whitehall and is the site of the annual ceremonies on Remembrance Sunday.
In 2005 a national Monument to the Women of World War II was erected a short distance north of the Cenotaph in the middle of the Whitehall carriageway.
The road is also home to six other monuments:

File:Cenotaph London.jpg|The Cenotaph
File:Women of World War II memorial, Whitehall - DSC08095.JPG|Women of World War II
File:Prince George, Duke of Cambridge statue Whitehall.jpg|Prince George, Duke of Cambridge
File:Whitehall memorial to Spencer Compton.JPG|Spencer Cavendish, 8th Duke of Devonshire
File:Haig statue Whitehall.jpg|Earl Haig Memorial
File:Field Marshal The Viscount Slim.jpg|Viscount Slim
File:Viscount Alanbrooke statue, Whitehall SW1 - geograph.uk - 1318029.jpg|Viscount Alanbrooke
File:Statue of "Monty" Field Marshal Viscount Montgomery of Alamein, Whitehall, London - geograph.uk - 306882.jpg|Viscount "Monty" of Alamein

Government buildings

Government buildings on Whitehall, from north to south, include:



Gallery

File:Whitehall Street Traffic.jpg|Busy street traffic on Whitehall, pictured from Trafalgar Square
File:Whitehall, London.jpg|Looking south down Whitehall towards Victoria Tower of the Palace of Westminster
File:Taxi_and_Monuments_on_Whitehall.jpg|A taxi passing between two of Whitehall's famous memorials
File:Old war office.jpg|Old War Office
File:Government Offices Great George Street.jpg|Government Offices Great George Street, Parliament Street
File:TrafalgarStudiosLondon.png|Trafalgar Studios, formerly the Whitehall Theatre
File:Whitehall1799.jpg|In 1799 many of the sites now occupied by large government buildings were covered with terraced houses
File:Horse Guards from Whitehall Shotter Boys pub 1836 edited.jpg|Horse Guards from Whitehall, 1836
File:Former Cox & Co Bank, Whitehall, London. H. Christian, Ewan's cousin and a partner in his practice.  Ewan Christian designed the National Portrait Gallery in St Martin's Place

Bibliography



Notes


