[[Mike Shinoda]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, American heavy metal guitarists, American rock guitarists, American keyboardists, American male singers, American rappers, Rap rock musicians, American record producers, American singer-songwriters, American rappers of East Asian descent, American rappers of East European descent, American rappers of Hungarian descent, American rock musicians, American musicians of Japanese descent, American musicians of Hungarian descent, American people of Hungarian descent, American people of Japanese descent, American Christians, American Protestants, Linkin Park members, Alternative rock pianists, Living people, Musicians from California, American artists, Nu metal singers, People from the Greater Los Angeles Area, Alternative metal musicians, American baritones

Michael Kenji "Mike" Shinoda (born February 11, 1977) is an American musician, record producer, and artist. He is best known as the rapper, principal songwriter, keyboardist, rhythm guitarist and one of the two vocalists of the rock band Linkin Park. Shinoda is also a solo rapper in his side-project Fort Minor. He also provides artwork, production, and mixing for both projects. Shinoda was ranked #72 in the list of "Top 100 Heavy Metal Vocalists" by Hit Parader. Shinoda's voice is baritone.

Life and career

Early life

Shinoda was born and raised in the affluent Los Angeles suburb of Agoura Hills. His father is Japanese-American, descendant of the Kumaichiro Shinoda floral company family, and his mother is of Hungarian descent.
Following his mother's wishes, Shinoda began classical piano training lessons around the age of six. By thirteen, he expressed the desire to move toward playing jazz, blues, and even hip-hop. He added the guitar and rap-style vocals to his repertoire during his middle school and high school years, eventually.
Shinoda attended Agoura High School with Linkin Park bandmates Brad Delson and Rob Bourdon. The trio formed the band Xero, and began to make a more serious attempt to pursue a career in the music industry. After graduating high school, Shinoda enrolled in the Art Center College of Design to study graphic design and illustration. He attended classes with DJ and turntablist Joseph Hahn. While studying at the Art Center College of Design, he experienced a form of identity crisis. Years later, in an interview he said:

Shinoda graduated from college with a bachelor's degree in illustration a year in advance and secured himself a job as a graphic designer. With his background as a graphic artist, Shinoda has taken it upon himself in designing all of Linkin Park's artwork with Hahn, and has even designed the album cover for Styles of Beyond's debut album, 2000 Fold. In later years he displayed his art skills in his debut art showcase (Diamonds Spades Hearts & Clubs) at Gallery 1988 in Los Angeles in the time leading up to Linkin Park's album Minutes to Midnight.

Linkin Park

Shinoda's band brought in second vocalist Chester Bennington, replacing Mark Wakefield. From the onset, Shinoda was closely involved in the technical aspects of the band's recordings, and over the subsequent releases that role continued to expand. Shinoda, with guitarist Brad Delson, engineered and produced the band's Hybrid Theory EP, and performed similar roles in the recording of the Hybrid Theory album. Mike has contributed to the writing and performance of the guitar on most songs of every Linkin Park record since the beginning, i.e., from Hybrid Theory; Brad Delson and Mike have both contributed to most songs that have guitar. Mikeshinoda. Retrieved on 2013-08-25. Mike executively organized and oversaw the band's remix album Reanimation (2002), contributing his own production remixes that he made in his home studio for "Crawling" and "Pushing Me Away". In his spare time, he produced and performed on a song by The X-Ecutioners entitled "It's Goin' Down".
On the second Linkin Park Warner Bros. studio release Meteora (2003) Shinoda continued to expand upon his duties as a musician and studio technician/engineer. Additionally, for the backbone of the album artwork, Shinoda collaborated with graffiti artist DELTA, graphic designer Frank Maddocks, and band-mate Joe Hahn.
By the release of the Linkin Park and Jay-Z 'mash-up' album Collision Course in 2004, Shinoda's involvement in the creation of the albums continued to grow. He produced and mixed the album, which won a Grammy Award for "best rap / song collaboration" in 2006.
The band released their next album, Minutes To Midnight, on May 14, 2007. On this album, Shinoda shared a production credit with producer Rick Rubin, overseeing the musical evolution of the band's sound. This album was also the first time that Shinoda, best known for his rapping, sang a featured vocal. Mike sang in the songs "In Between" and the B-side song, "No Roads Left", as well as rapping and singing in the songs "Bleed It Out" and "Hands Held High". Despite the rarity of Shinoda-fronted singing tracks, music magazine Hit Parader ranked Mike at number 72 of the Top 100 Metal Vocalists of All Time. Mike and Rick Rubin again shared a production credit for Linkin Park's fourth album, A Thousand Suns, released on September 14, 2010.
Linkin Park then released Living Things on June 26, 2012. The band's latest album Recharged which is a remix of Living Things was released on October 29, 2013.

Fort Minor

Shinoda formed a side project named Fort Minor between 2003 and 2004 because he could not demonstrate as much of his hip-hop background in Linkin Park. He explained the name of his project in an interview:
The debut album from Fort Minor, titled The Rising Tied, was released on November 13, 2005, and includes guest appearances from Styles of Beyond, Lupe Fiasco, Common, Black Thought of The Roots, John Legend, Holly Brook, Jonah Matranga, Celph Titled, and features Jay-Z (Shawn Carter) as an executive producer.
A single was put out by the X-Ecutioners featuring him and bandmate Mr. Hahn, and it was called "It's Goin Down".
For the NBA 2006–2007 season, "Remember the Name", the second single from The Rising Tied, became the soundtrack for NBA Overtime on TNT.
He also scored a top 10 smash with the surprise hit single "Where'd You Go", which peaked at #4 on Hot 100 chart. According to Shinoda, the song was written about his wife, Anna Hillinger and how she and the rest of his family must feel when he is away on tour.The Making of The Rising Tied DVD
Shinoda provided several original score selections to the 2005 MTV VMAs. Lil Jon also provided original music, but not on any of the same tracks.
Fort Minor won an MTV VMA for "Best Ringtone" in 2006, and was featured in the following films and TV programs (2005–2006 and 2010): Entourage, Boston Legal, Gridiron Gang, Freedom Writers, Friday Night Lights (TV), The Karate Kid, and Numbers.
Shinoda has also continued his Fort Minor musical style in an executive producer role on the Styles of Beyond album, Reseda Beach. He contributed music and vocals to the album, which was slated for release sometime in 2009. However, Styles of Beyond went under hiatus, and the album was released in 2012.

Art and painting

Shinoda was the youngest of his graduating class from Art Center College of Design of Pasadena in 1998, with a Bachelor of Arts in Illustration. He has had a hand in most artistic facets of Linkin Park's imagery, including album artwork, band merchandise, web design, and on-stage production art.
During time off in 2003, he did a collaborative "remix" shoe for DC Shoes, remixing the "Clientele". He reworked the colors and materials for the shoe, and additionally designed all the packaging and print advertisements.com
In 2004, Shinoda created a series of ten paintings which became the basis of the Fort Minor debut album, The Rising Tied. That series became the backbone for the packaging of the album, and was featured in Shinoda's first public art show "Diamonds Spades Hearts & Clubs".com/base. Retrieved December 17, 2007.
In addition to the ten Fort Minor pieces, the show also featured thirteen more original works and five collaborative pieces. "Diamonds Spades Hearts & Clubs" opened at Gallery 1988 on Sunday, November 19, 2006.
Additionally in 2004, Shinoda started a college scholarship at Art Center College of Design to benefit future illustration and graphic design students. Named the Michael K. Shinoda Endowed Scholarship, it is awarded based on financial need and merit. The scholarship was awarded for the first time in 2006.
On July 11, Shinoda's second public art show "Glorious Excess (BORN)" premiered at the Japanese American National Museum in Los Angeles. The show included nine new pieces, with an exclusive signing on opening night. The show served as part one of the "Glorious Excess" two-part series, with the second installment "Glorious Excess (DIES)" due at JANM at August 22, 2009.
Concerning the inspiration behind the Glorious Excess series, Shinoda stated that it:
"Got to a point where the pervasiveness of 'celebrity news' concerned me. It seemed like it has jumped out of its niche into places where it doesn't belong. I would be watching the news, and thinking, 'of all the things going on in the world right now, why are they covering so-and-so's breakup?' It didn't make sense to me. Add to that the fact that I'm supposed to somehow 'belong' to that celebrity group—and I really don't feel like I do in a lot of ways—and you can see how the topic started to become really interesting to me. The Glorious Excess (BORN) show was my way of diving into those topics, trying to find answers. It follows a central 'celebrity' character, who is filthy rich, slightly violent, and famous without any particular skill or talent."
Also in 2008, Shinoda partnered up with DC Shoes again on a second DC Remix Series project. The project would feature a "great juxtaposition of Shinoda's unique influences: accomplished artist versus recording-breaking musician, American upbringing versus Japanese heritage." The MS/DC limited edition remix has two different versions – Xander and Pride. Roughly 2000 pairs of the limited edition shoes were made available for purchase when the sneaker was released on August 1, 2008.
In an interview with Sneaker Freaker Magazine, Shinoda had this to say about the latest DC Shoe project:
"This remix is a little slimmer than most of DC's skate shoes; the Xander feels almost like the skate shoes I grew up wearing in the late 80s. But the art brings it up to date—my work is laser-etched into the panels on the side of the shoe, and the sole is a clear gum sole with a koi fish pattern, and four-color artwork beneath. That way, when you're walking, and your foot lifts up, it's a little surprise under there. We also took the time to add extra padding and a satin inner lining to make it as comfortable as possible. They come with three pairs of lightly waxed laces instead of two, because I like to flip up the look sometimes. Each pair also comes with a booklet of my art."

Influences

Although Shinoda listens to current rap music, for his production, he looks up to earlier hip-hop artists for inspiration. "I think my production style is more in the spirit of old B.D.P., Public Enemy, N.W.A., and Juice Crew," he likened.

Production

Shinoda produced The Rising Tied, the debut album by his side-project Fort Minor. He has also produced tracks for albums by Lupe Fiasco and Styles of Beyond, as well as producing or co-producing all of Linkin Park's non-studio albums, including Reanimation, Hybrid Theory EP, the collaborative EP with Jay-Z, Collision Course, and for the first time producing a studio album in 2007, the group's third studio release Minutes to Midnight. In 2004 Shinoda, with drumming assistance by band mate Rob Bourdon, remixed "Enjoy the Silence" by Depeche Mode. Shinoda and Bourdon again teamed up in 2008 to create an instrumental piece entitled "Lockjaw" while previewing Digidesign's Pro Tools 8 software.

Other musical activities

Other activities

Shinoda started writing articles for The Big Issue in September 2012 and will act as publication's US election correspondent.

Personal life

Shinoda is a third generation Japanese American.
In 2009, Shinoda received an Honorary Doctorate of Humane Letters (L.H.D) from Art Center College Of Design. EWP honored Shinoda with a Visionary Award and dinner in 2010.
He has been married to author Anna Shinoda (née Hillinger),since 2003. Anna released her first novel Learning Not To Drown on first of April,2014. According to her blog and an interview with Mike

Discography






