[[Hypothermia]]

CATEGORIES: Diving medicine, Medical emergencies, Wilderness medical emergencies, Physiology, Causes of death, Cryobiology, Heat transfer, Effects of external causes, Cardiac dysrhythmia, Thermoregulation, Cold waves

Hypothermia (from Greek ὑποθερμία) is a condition in which the body's core temperature drops below that required for normal metabolism and body functions. This is generally considered to be  through biologic homeostasis or thermoregulation. If a person is exposed to cold, and their internal mechanisms cannot replenish the heat that is being lost, the body's core temperature falls, and characteristic symptoms occur such as shivering and mental confusion.
One of the lowest documented body temperatures from which anyone has recovered was  in a near-drowning incident involving a 7-year-old girl in Sweden in December 2010.

Classification

Normal human body temperature in adults is 
Other cold-related injuries that can be present either alone or in combination with hypothermia include:

Signs and symptoms

The signs and symptoms vary depending on the degree of hypothermia, and may be divided by the three stages of severity.  Infants with hypothermia may feel cold when touched, with bright red skin and unusual lack of energy.What Is Hypothermia?

Mild

Symptoms of mild hypothermia may be vague, with sympathetic nervous system excitation (shivering, hypertension, tachycardia, tachypnea, and vasoconstriction). These are all physiological responses to preserve heat. Sympathetic activation also releases glucose from the liver. In many cases, however, especially in alcoholic patients, hypoglycemia appears to be a more common presentation. Hypoglycemia is also found in many hypothermic patients, because hypothermia may be a result of hypoglycemia. Coauthors: James Li, MD; Mark A Silverberg, MD; Wyatt Decker, MD. Updated: Oct 29, 2009 

Moderate

Low body temperature results in shivering becoming more violent. Muscle mis-coordination becomes apparent. Movements are slow and labored, accompanied by a stumbling pace and mild confusion, although the person may appear alert. Surface blood vessels contract further as the body focuses its remaining resources on keeping the vital organs warm. The subject becomes pale. Lips, ears, fingers and toes may become blue.

Severe

As the temperature decreases, further physiological systems falter and heart rate, respiratory rate, and blood pressure all decrease. This results in an expected heart rate in the 30s at a temperature of .
Difficulty in speaking, sluggish thinking, and amnesia start to appear; inability to use hands and stumbling is also usually present. Cellular metabolic processes shut down. Below , the exposed skin becomes blue and puffy, muscle coordination becomes very poor, walking becomes almost impossible, and the person exhibits incoherent/irrational behavior including terminal burrowing (see below) or even a stupor. Pulse and respiration rates decrease significantly, but fast heart rates (ventricular tachycardia, atrial fibrillation) can occur. Major organs fail. Clinical death occurs.

Paradoxical undressing

Twenty to fifty percent of hypothermia deaths are associated with paradoxical undressing. This typically occurs during moderate to severe hypothermia, as the person becomes disoriented, confused, and combative. They may begin discarding their clothing, which, in turn, increases the rate of heat loss. 
Rescuers who are trained in mountain survival techniques are taught to expect this; however, some may assume incorrectly that urban victims of hypothermia have been subjected to a sexual assault.
One explanation for the effect is a cold-induced malfunction of the hypothalamus, the part of the brain that regulates body temperature. Another explanation is that the muscles contracting peripheral blood vessels become exhausted (known as a loss of vasomotor tone) and relax, leading to a sudden surge of blood (and heat) to the extremities, fooling the person into feeling overheated.Terminal burrowing behaviour"--a phenomenon of lethal hypothermia

Terminal burrowing

An apparent self-protective behaviour known as terminal burrowing, or hide-and-die syndrome, Researchers in Germany claim this is "obviously an autonomous process of the brain stem, which is triggered in the final state of hypothermia and produces a primitive and burrowing-like behavior of protection, as seen in hibernating animals."Get Naked and Dig: The Bizarre Effects of Hypothermia This happens mostly in cases where temperature drops slowly.

Causes

Hypothermia usually occurs from exposure to low temperatures, and is frequently complicated by alcohol. Any condition that decreases heat production, increases heat loss, or impairs thermoregulation, however, may contribute. Hypothermia also occurs frequently in major trauma. Hypothermia is also observed in severe cases of anorexia nervosa.

Alcohol

Alcohol consumption increases the risk of hypothermia by its action as a vasodilator. It increases blood flow to the body's skin and extremities, making a person feel warm, while increasing heat loss.

Poverty

In the UK 28,354 cases of hypothermia were treated in 2012/13 – an increase of 25% from the previous year. Rising fuel bills have increased the numbers who have difficulty paying for adequate heating in the UK. Some pensioners and disabled people are at risk because they do not work and cannot easily get out of their homes. Better heat insulation can help.Excess winter deathsThe scandal of fuel povertyFuel poverty

Water immersion

Hypothermia continues to be a major limitation to swimming or diving in cold water. The reduction in finger dexterity due to pain or numbness decreases general safety and work capacity, which consequently increases the risk of other injuries. Due to the use of gas mixtures containing helium at extreme depths, the use of argon inflation for dry suits, or hot water suits become a necessity for diving deep in colder waters.
Other factors predisposing to immersion hypothermia include dehydration, inadequate rewarming between repetitive dives, starting a dive while wearing cold, wet dry suit undergarments, sweating with work, inadequate thermal insulation (for example, thin dry suit undergarment), and poor physical conditioning.
Heat is lost much more quickly in water water died within 15–30 minutes.Sinking of the RMS Titanic#CITEREFButler1998
The actual cause of death in cold water is usually the bodily reactions to heat loss and to freezing water, rather than hypothermia (loss of core temperature). For example, plunged into freezing seas, around 20% of victims die within 2 minutes from cold shock (uncontrolled rapid breathing and gasping causing water inhalation, massive increase in blood pressure and cardiac strain leading to cardiac arrest, and panic); another 50% die within 15–30 minutes from cold incapacitation (inability to use or control limbs and hands for swimming or gripping, as the body "protectively" shuts down the peripheral muscles of the limbs to protect its core), "The Truth About Cold Water" - drowning expert Mario Vittone, pub. gCaptain 2013-04-12 and own website 2010-10-21: Something that almost no one in the maritime industry understands ... That includes mariners and even many (most) rescue professionals: 'It is impossible to get hypothermic in cold water unless you are wearing flotation, because without flotation you won't live long enough to become hypothermic.' in original, and details of causes in article and exhaustion and unconsciousness cause drowning, claiming the rest within a similar time.

Pathophysiology

Heat is primarily generated in muscle tissue, including the heart, and in the liver, while it is lost through the skin (90%) and lungs (10%). Heat production may be increased 2 to 4 fold through muscle contractions (i.e. exercise and shivering). The rate of heat loss is determined, as with any object, by convection, conduction, and radiation. The rates of these can be affected by body mass index, body surface area to volume ratios, clothing and other environmental conditions.
Many changes to physiology occur as body temperature decreases. These occur in the cardiovascular system leading to the Osborn J wave and other dysrhythmias, decreased CNS electrical activity, cold diuresis, and non-cardiogenic pulmonary edema.
Research has shown that glomerular filtration rate (GFR) decreases as a result of hypothermia.

Diagnosis

Accurate determination of core temperature often requires a special low temperature thermometer, as most clinical thermometers do not measure accurately below . Accidental hypothermia. Critical Care Clinincs 1999; 15:235.  The Osborn J may look very similar to those of an acute ST elevation myocardial infarction.  Thrombolysis as a reaction to the presence of Osborn J waves is not indicated, as it would only worsen the underlying coagulopathy caused by hypothermia.
As a hypothermic person's heart rate may be very slow, prolonged palpation could be required before detecting a pulse.  In 2005, the American Heart Association recommended at least 30–45 seconds to verify the absence of a pulse before initiating CPR.
Most physicians are recommended not to declare a patient dead until their body is warmed to a normal body temperature, since extreme hypothermia can suppress heart and brain function.

Prevention

Appropriate clothing helps to prevent hypothermia. Synthetic and wool fabrics are superior to cotton as they provide better insulation when wet and dry. Some synthetic fabrics, such as polypropylene and polyester, are used in clothing designed to wick perspiration away from the body, such as liner socks and moisture-wicking undergarments. Clothing should be loose fitting, as tight clothing reduces the circulation of warm blood. In planning outdoor activity, prepare appropriately for possible cold weather. Those who drink alcohol before or during outdoor activity should ensure at least one sober person is present responsible for safety. 
Covering the head is effective, but no more effective than covering any other part of the body. While common folklore says that people lose most of their heat through their heads, heat loss from the head is no more significant than that from other uncovered parts of the body.[ref]
</ref><ref></ref> However, heat loss from the head is significant in infants, whose head is larger relative to the rest of the body than in adults. Several studies have shown that for uncovered infants, lined hats significantly reduce heat loss and thermal stress.<ref>
 (full text)
[/ref][ref]
 Children have a larger surface area per unit mass, and other things being equal should have one more layer of clothing than adults in similar conditions, and the time they spend in cold environments should be limited. However children are often more active than adults, and may generate more heat. In both adults and children, overexertion causes sweating and thus increases heat loss.
Building a shelter can aid survival where there is danger of death from exposure.  Shelters can be of many different types, metal can conduct heat away from the occupants and is sometimes best avoided. The shelter should not be too big so body warmth stays near the occupants.  Good ventilation is essential especially if a fire will be lit in the shelter.  Fires should be put out before the occupants sleep to prevent carbon monoxide poisoning. People caught in very cold, snowy conditions can build an igloo or snow cave to shelter.Cold Weather Survival, Shelkters This has instructions about building different types of shelter
The United States Coast Guard promotes using life vests to protect against hypothermia through the 50/50/50 rule: If someone is in  A heat escape lessening position can be used to increase survival in cold water.
Babies should sleep at 16-20°C (61-68°F) and housebound people should be checked regularly to make sure the temperature of the home is sufficient.Preventing hypothermiahypothermia Prevention
Can hypothermia be prevented?

Management

Aggressiveness of treatment is matched to the degree of hypothermia. Treatment ranges from noninvasive, passive external warming to active external rewarming, to active core rewarming. In severe cases resuscitation begins with simultaneous removal from the cold environment and concurrent management of the airway, breathing, and circulation. Rapid rewarming is then commenced. Moving the person as little and as gently as possible is recommended as aggressive handling may increase risks of a dysrhythmia.
Hypoglycemia is a frequent complication of hypothermia, and needs to be tested for and treated. Intravenous thiamine and glucose is often recommended, as many causes of hypothermia are complicated by Wernicke's encephalopathy.
Detecting vital signs in those who are severely hypothermic may be difficult, so it should not be assumed that the person is dead but resuscitation should be continued until the body is warm.How is hypothermia treated?When should I call the doctor for hypothermia?

Rewarming

Rewarming can use a number of different methods including passive external rewarming, active external rewarming, and active internal rewarming. It is recommended for those with mild hypothermia. Wet clothing should be replaced with dry clothes including head covering. Person to person warming is also helpful. Emergency services should be called if the person does not improve within a few minutes or worsens.First Aid for Hypothermia
Active external rewarming involves applying warming devices externally, such as warmed forced air (a Bair Hugger is a commonly used device).  In austere environments, hypothermia can according to some sources be treated by placing a hot water bottle in both armpits and groin. It is recommended for moderate hypothermia. Other sources warn this can burn the skin.  Active core rewarming involves the use of intravenous warmed fluids, irrigation of body cavities with warmed fluids (the thorax, peritoneal, stomach, or bladder), use of warm humidified inhaled air, or use of extracorporeal rewarming such as via a heart lung machine. Extracorporeal rewarming is the fastest method for those with severe hypothermia.  The UK NHS advises against unqualified people attempting some of the above. They also recommend against putting a person in a hot bath, massaging their arms and legs or using heating pad.

Fluids

Warm sweetened liquids can be given provided the person is alert and can swallow. Many recommend that alcohol and drinks with lots of caffeine be avoided. is often recommended).

Rewarming collapse

Rewarming collapse (or rewarming shock) is a sudden drop in blood pressure in combination with a low cardiac output which may occur during active treatment of a severely hypothermic person.  There is theoretical concern that external rewarming rather than internal rewarming may increase the risk.  However, recent studies have not supported these concerns.

Dysrhythmias

For ventricular fibrillation or ventricular tachycardia, a single defibrillation should be attempted.

Prognosis

There is considerable evidence that children who suffer near-drowning accidents in water near  and 75%.  If there are obvious fatal injuries or the chest is too frozen, compression resuscitation is futile.

Epidemiology

In the past, hypothermia occurred most frequently in homeless people, but recreational exposure to cold environments is now the main cause of hypothermia.  Between 1995 and 2004 in the United States, an average of 1560 cold-related emergency department visits occurred per year and in the years 1999 to 2004, an average of 647 people died per year due to hypothermia.Baumgartner, Hypothermia and Other Cold-Related Morbidity Emergency Department Visits: United States, 1995–2004 Wilderness and Environmental Medicine, 19, 233 237 (2008)

History

Hypothermia has played a major role in the success or failure of many military campaigns from Hannibal's loss of nearly half his men in the Second Punic War (218 B.C.) to the near destruction of Napoleon's armies in Russia in 1812.  Men wandered round confused through hypothermia, some lost consciousness and died, others shivered, later developed torpor and tended to sleep.  Others too weak to walk fell on their knees, some stayed that way some time resisting death.  The pulse was of some was weak and hard to detect, others groaned, yet others had eyes open and wild with quiet delirium.  Loss of life to hypothermia in Russian regions continued through the first and second world wars, especially in the Battle of Stalingrad.
Civilian examples of deaths caused by hypothermia are found during the sinkings of the RMS Titanic and RMS Lusitania, and more recently of the MS Estonia.Findings: Titanic victims in 'cold shock' Times Higher Education 2010-03-23Remember the Lusitania Two new books reëxamine the disaster New Yorker Retrieved 2010-03-23
Antarctic explorers developed hypothermia, Ernest Shackleton and his team measured body temperatures "below 94.2° which spells death at home" though this probably referred to oral temperatures rather than core temperature and corresponded to mild hypothermia.  One of Scott's team, Atkinson became confused through hypothermia. History of accidental hypothermia
Nazi human experimentation during World War II amounting to medical torture included hypothermia experiments and many victims died.  There were 360 to 400 experiments and 280 to 300 victims indicating some victims suffered more than one experiment. Different methods of rewarming were attempted, "One assistant later testified that some victims were thrown into boiling water for rewarming" Nazi Science — The Dachau Hypothermia Experiments

Other animals

Many animals other than humans often induce hypothermia during hibernation or torpor.
Water bears (Tardigrade), microscopic multicellular organisms, can survive freezing at low temperatures by replacing most of their internal water with the sugar trehalose, preventing the crystallization that otherwise damages cell membranes.








