[[Osprey]]

CATEGORIES: Accipitriformes, Falconiformes, Bird families, Bird genera, Monotypic bird genera, Birds of prey, Provincial symbols of Nova Scotia, Birds of Africa, Birds of Canada, Birds of Europe, Birds of Asia, Birds of Southeast Asia, Birds of South Australia, Birds of Western Australia, Birds of Azerbaijan, Birds of India, Birds of Indonesia, Birds of Japan, Birds of Palestine, Birds of Panama, Birds of Puerto Rico, Birds of Turkey, Birds of Gibraltar, Birds of North America, Animals described in 1758, Cosmopolitan species, Birds of Cameroon, Birds of Bangladesh, Birds of Ukraine

The osprey (Pandion haliaetus), sometimes known as the sea hawk, fish eagle, river hawk or fish hawk, is a diurnal, fish-eating bird of prey. It is a large raptor, reaching more than  across the wings. It is brown on the upperparts and predominantly greyish on the head and underparts.
The osprey tolerates a wide variety of habitats, nesting in any location near a body of water providing an adequate food supply. It is found on all continents except Antarctica, although in South America it occurs only as a non-breeding migrant.
As its other common name suggests, the osprey's diet consists almost exclusively of fish. It possesses specialised physical characteristics and exhibits unique behaviour to assist in hunting and catching prey. As a result of these unique characteristics, it has been given its own taxonomic genus, Pandion and family, Pandionidae. Four subspecies are usually recognized, one of which has recently been given full species status (see below). Despite its propensity to nest near water, the osprey is not classed as a sea-eagle.

Taxonomy and systematics

The osprey was one of the many species described by Carolus Linnaeus in his 18th-century work, Systema Naturae, and named as Falco haliaeetus. The genus, Pandion, is the sole member of the family of Pandionidae, and used to contain only one species, the osprey (P. haliaetus). The genus Pandion was described by the French zoologist Marie Jules César Savigny in 1809, and is taken from a mythical Greek king, Pandion. "The Sons of Pandion." Greek Myths. London: Penguin. pp. 320–323. ISBN 0-14-001026-2.All about Ospreys, From desk of Thisbe Nissen
The osprey differs in several respects from other diurnal birds of prey. Its toes are of equal length, its tarsi are reticulate, and its talons are rounded, rather than grooved. The osprey and owls are the only raptors whose outer toe is reversible, allowing them to grasp their prey with two toes in front and two behind. This is particularly helpful when they grab slippery fish. It has always presented something of a riddle to taxonomists, but here it is treated as the sole living member of the family Pandionidae, and the family listed in its traditional place as part of the order Falconiformes. Other schemes place it alongside the hawks and eagles in the family Accipitridae—which itself can be regarded as making up the bulk of the order Accipitriformes or else be lumped with the Falconidae into Falconiformes. The Sibley-Ahlquist taxonomy has placed it together with the other diurnal raptors in a greatly enlarged Ciconiiformes, but this results in an unnatural paraphyletic classification.

Classification

The osprey is unusual in that it is a single living species that occurs nearly worldwide. Even the few subspecies are not unequivocally separable. There are four generally recognised subspecies, although differences are small, and ITIS only lists the first two.
| last =Barrow
| first =M. V.
| title =A passion for Birds: American ornithology after Audubon
| publisher =Princeton University Press
| year = 1998
| location =Princeton, NJ
| isbn =0-691-04402-3 }}[/ref]

[/ref]
Recently, P. h. cristatus has been given full species statusChristidis, L. and Boles, W.E. (2008) Systematics and Taxonomy of Australian Birds, Csiro Publishing, ISBN 0643065113. as eastern osprey.

Fossil record

To date there have been two extinct species named from the fossil record. Warter in 1976 from fossils of Middle Miocene, Barstovian age, found in marine deposits in the southern part of the U.S. state of California. The second named species Pandion lovensis, was described in 1985 by Jonathan J. Becker from fossils found in the U.S. state of Florida and dating to the latest Clarendonian and possibly representing a separate lineage from that of P. homalopteron and P. haliaetus. A number of claw fossils have been recovered from Pliocene and Pleistocene sediments in Florida and South Carolina, USA. The oldest recognized Pandionidae family fossils have been recovered from the Oligocene age Jebel Qatrani Formation, of Faiyum, Egypt. However they are not complete enough to assign to a specific genus.

Etymology

The genus name Pandion is after the mythical Greek king Pandion of Athens and grandfather of Theseus, who was transformed into an eagle.
The origins of osprey are obscure;

Description

The osprey is  A short tail and long, narrow wings with four long, finger-like feathers, and a shorter fifth, give it a very distinctive appearance.
The sexes appear fairly similar, but the adult male can be distinguished from the female by its slimmer body and narrower wings. The breast band of the male is also weaker than that of the female, or is non-existent, and the underwing coverts of the male are more uniformly pale. It is straightforward to determine the sex in a breeding pair, but harder with individual birds.
The juvenile osprey may be identified by buff fringes to the plumage of the upperparts, a buff tone to the underparts, and streaked feathers on the head. During spring, barring on the underwings and flight feathers is a better indicator of a young bird, due to wear on the upperparts.[ref]

</ref>
In flight, the osprey has arched wings and drooping "hands", giving it a gull-like appearance. The call is a series of sharp whistles, described as cheep, cheep or yewk, yewk. If disturbed by activity near the nest, the call is a frenzied cheereek![ref]
</ref> 

Distribution and habitat

The osprey is the second most widely distributed raptor species, after the peregrine falcon. It has a worldwide distribution and is found in temperate and tropical regions of all continents except Antarctica. In North America it breeds from Alaska and Newfoundland south to the Gulf Coast and Florida, wintering further south from the southern United States through to Argentina.

Behaviour and ecology

Ospreys have been known to exhibit great joint flexibility. Their limbs (wings and legs) have adapted to have greater flexibility over time. An example of this is when flying towards bright lights (e.g., sun)—they are able to bend the joint in their wing to shield their eyes from the light to aid safety while flying.

Diet

Fish make up 99% of the osprey's diet.. Virtually any type of fish in that size range are taken.
Ospreys have vision that is well adapted to detecting underwater objects from the air. Prey is first sighted when the osprey is  above the water, after which the bird hovers momentarily then plunges feet first into the water. F., R. O. Bierregaard, and M. S. Martell. (2002). Osprey (Pandion haliaetus). In The Birds of North America, No. 683 (A. Poole and F. Gill, eds.). The Birds of North America, Inc., Philadelphia, PA.
The osprey is particularly well adapted to this diet, with reversible outer toes, sharp spicules on the underside of the toes,Clark, W. S. and Wheeler, B. K. (1987). A field guide to Hawks of North America. Houghton Mifflin, Boston. ISBN 0-395-36001-3 closable nostrils to keep out water during dives, and backwards-facing scales on the talons which act as barbs to help hold its catch.
Occasionally, the osprey may prey on rodents, rabbits, hares, amphibians, other birds,

Reproduction

The osprey breeds near freshwater lakes and rivers, and sometimes on coastal brackish waters. Rocky outcrops just offshore are used in Rottnest Island off the coast of Western Australia, where there are 14 or so similar nesting sites of which five to seven are used in any one year. Many are renovated each season, and some have been used for 70 years. The nest is a large heap of sticks, driftwood and seaweed built in forks of trees, rocky outcrops, utility poles, artificial platforms or offshore islets. Generally, ospreys reach sexual maturity and begin breeding around the age of three to four, though in some regions with high osprey densities, such as Chesapeake Bay in the U.S., they may not start breeding until five to seven years old, and there may be a shortage of suitable tall structures. If there are no nesting sites available, young ospreys may be forced to delay breeding. To ease this problem, posts are sometimes erected to provide more sites suitable for nest building.
The platform design developed by one organization, Citizens United to Protect the Maurice River and Its Tributaries, Inc. has become the official design of the State of New Jersey, U.S.A. The platform plans and materials list, available online, have been utilized by people from a number of different geographical regions. Cumauriceriver. Retrieved on 2011-11-23. Osprey-watch.Project OspreyWatch. Osprey-watch.
Ospreys usually mate for life. Rarely, polyandry has been recorded. The breeding season varies according to latitude; spring (September–October) in southern Australia, April to July in northern Australia and winter (June–August) in southern Queensland. In spring the pair begins a five-month period of partnership to raise their young. The female lays two to four eggs within a month, and relies on the size of the nest to conserve heat. The eggs are whitish with bold splotches of reddish-brown and are about  The eggs are incubated for about 5 weeks to hatching.
The newly hatched chicks weigh only 

Migration

European breeders winter in Africa. (2001). Birds of Europe. Princeton University Press. pp. 74–5 ISBN 0-691-05054-6 American and Canadian breeders winter in South America, although some stay in the southernmost U.S. states such as Florida and California. mirror Australasian ospreys tend not to migrate.
Studies of Swedish ospreys showed that females tend to migrate to Africa earlier than the males. More stopovers are made during their autumn migration. The variation of timing and duration in autumn was more variable than in spring. Although migrating predominantly in the day, they sometimes fly in the dark hours particularly in crossings over water and cover on average 

Provincial bird

In 1994, the osprey was declared the provincial bird of Nova Scotia, Canada. gov.ns.ca

Status and conservation

The osprey has a large range, covering  in just Africa and the Americas, and has a large global population estimated at 460,000 individuals. Although global population trends have not been quantified, the species is not believed to approach the thresholds for the population decline criterion of the IUCN Red List (i.e., declining more than 30% in ten years or three generations), and for these reasons, the species is evaluated as Least Concern. There is evidence for regional decline in South Australia where former territories at locations in the Spencer Gulf and along the lower Murray River have been vacant for decades.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, the main threats to osprey populations were egg collectors and hunting of the adults along with other birds of prey, but osprey populations declined drastically in many areas in the 1950s and 1960s; this appeared to be in part due to the toxic effects of insecticides such as DDT on reproduction. The pesticide interfered with the bird's calcium metabolism which resulted in thin-shelled, easily broken or infertile eggs. Possibly because of the banning of DDT in many countries in the early 1970s, together with reduced persecution, the osprey, as well as other affected bird of prey species, have made significant recoveries. In South Australia, nesting sites on the Eyre Peninsula and Kangaroo Island are vulnerable to unmanaged coastal recreation and encroaching urban development.
The osprey is the provincial bird of both Nova Scotia, Canada and Södermanland, Sweden.

Cultural depictions

Nisos, a king of Megara in Greek mythology, became a sea eagle or osprey, to attack his daughter after she fell in love with Minos, king of Crete.90
The Roman writer Pliny the Elder reported that parent ospreys made their young fly up to the sun as a test, and dispatch any that failed.
Another odd legend regarding this fish-eating bird of prey, derived from the writings of Albertus Magnus and recorded in Holinshed's Chronicles, was that it had one webbed foot and one taloned foot.
There was a medieval belief that fish were so mesmerised by the osprey that they turned belly-up in surrender, and this is referenced by Shakespeare in Act 4 Scene 5 of Coriolanus:
 
 I think he'll be to Rome 
As is the osprey to the fish, who takes it 
By sovereignty of nature.

In Buddhism, the osprey is sometimes represented as the "King of Birds", especially in the  'The Jātaka: Or, Stories of the Buddha's Former Births' , no.486.
The Irish poet William Butler Yeats used a grey wandering osprey as a representation of sorrow in The Wanderings of Oisin and Other Poems (1889).
The osprey is depicted as a white eagle in heraldry, and more recently has become a symbol of positive responses to nature,
The osprey is used as a brand name for various products and sports teams. Examples include: the Ospreys (a Welsh, Rugby team, of the European country of Wales); the Geraldton skiing team (in Western Australia); the North Florida Ospreys (a NCAA Division II intercollegiate athletics team), the Missoula Osprey (a minor league baseball team); the Seattle Seahawks (an American football team of the National Conference); the Wagner Seahawks (a NCAA Division I intercollegiate athletics team); and the Cold Spring Harbor Seahawks (a High school football team in Cold Spring Harbor, New YorkCold Spring Harbor High School Seahawks).
Examples of the osprey used as a mascot include: Ozzie Osprey (of the University of North Florida); Talon the Osprey of Richard Stockton College; Sammy the Seahawk (of University of North Carolina Wilmington); the Wells International Seahawks (of Bangkok, Thailand); the Salve Regina Seahawks (of Newport, Rhode Island); and the LA Harbor College Seahawks (of South Bay).






