[[Bob Crane]]

CATEGORIES: 1928 births, 1978 deaths, 1978 murders in the United States, 20th-century American male actors, Male actors from Connecticut, American DJs, American male film actors, American murder victims, American radio personalities, American male stage actors, American male television actors, Burials at Westwood Village Memorial Park Cemetery, Deaths by beating in the United States, Murdered male actors, People from Waterbury, Connecticut, People murdered in Arizona, United States Army soldiers, Unsolved murders in the United States

Robert Edward "Bob" Crane (July 13, 1928 – June 29, 1978) was an American actor and disc jockey. 
Crane began his career as a disc jockey in New York and Connecticut before moving to Los Angeles where he hosted the number-one rated morning show. In the early 1960s, he moved into acting. Crane is best known for his performance as Colonel Robert E. Hogan in the CBS sitcom Hogan's Heroes. The series aired from 1965 to 1971, and Crane received two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for his work on the series.
After Hogan's Heroes ended, Crane's career declined. He became frustrated with the few roles he was being offered and began doing dinner theater. In 1975, he returned to television in the NBC series The Bob Crane Show. The series received poor ratings and was canceled after 13 weeks. Afterwards, Crane returned to performing in dinner theaters and also appeared in occasional guest spots on television.
While on tour for his play Beginner's Luck in June 1978, Crane was found bludgeoned to death in his Scottsdale apartment, a murder that remains officially unsolved. 

Early life

Bob Crane was born in Waterbury, Connecticut, but he spent his childhood and teenage years in Stamford, Connecticut. 1, "Glittering Stars to Appear on Telethon,"  33, 76-79.; Stamford High School; Stamford Historical Society, Stamford, CT. He graduated from Stamford High School in 1946. Music was important to Crane, and he started playing drums early in life. By junior high, he was organizing local drum and bugle parades with his neighborhood friends in Stamford. 1, "Glittering Stars to Appear on Telethon,"  33, 76-79; Stamford High School, Class of 1946 Alumni. Later, he became involved in his high school marching and jazz bands, as well as in the school's orchestra. 1, "Glittering Stars to Appear on Telethon,"  33, 76-79; TV Star Parade, January 1966, "The Unlikeliest Hero of Them All," pp. 8, 70-71; Stamford High School, Stamford, CT. He also played for the Connecticut Symphony and the Norwalk Symphony Orchestras as part of the youth orchestra program."TV Radio Mirror," October 1967, pp. 33, 76-79; Bridgeport Symphony Orchestra, formerly Connecticut Symphony Orchestra, Bridgeport, CT; Stamford High School, Class of 1946 Alumni. On June 21, 1948, Bob enlisted in the National Guard and was honorably discharged on May 1, 1950. 7; Stamford National Guard records, Stamford, CT.

Career

Early career

In 1950, Crane started his broadcasting career at WLEA in Hornell, New York. He soon moved to WBIS in Bristol, Connecticut, followed by WICC in Bridgeport, Connecticut. This was a 1,000-watt operation with a signal covering the northeastern portion of the New York metropolitan area where he remained until 1956. At that time CBS radio network executives plucked Crane out partly to help stop his huge popularity from affecting the suburban ratings of their New York flagship WCBS, and partly to re-energize their flagging West Coast flagship KNX in Los Angeles. Crane moved his family to California to host the morning show at KNX. He filled the broadcast with sly wit, drumming, and guests such as Marilyn Monroe, Frank Sinatra, and Bob Hope. It quickly became the number-one rated morning show with adult listeners in the Los Angeles area, with Crane known as "The King of the Los Angeles Airwaves."
Crane's acting ambitions led to his subbing for Johnny Carson on the daytime game show Who Do You Trust? and appearances on The Twilight Zone (uncredited), Channing, Alfred Hitchcock Presents, and General Electric Theater. When Carl Reiner appeared on his show, Crane persuaded him to book him for a guest shot on The Dick Van Dyke Show, where he was noticed by Donna Reed, who suggested him for the role of neighbor Dr. Dave Kelsey in her eponymous sitcom from 1963 through 1965.

Hogan's Heroes (1965–1971)

In 1965, Crane was offered the starring role in a television comedy pilot about a German P.O.W. camp. Hogan's Heroes became a hit and finished in the Top Ten in its first year on the air. The series lasted six seasons, and Crane was nominated for an Emmy Award twice, in 1966 and 1967. During its run, he met Patricia Olson, who played Hilda under the stage name Sigrid Valdis. He divorced his wife of twenty years and married Olson on the set of the show in 1970. They had a son, Scotty (Robert Scott), and adopted a daughter named Ana Marie.
In addition to playing the drums on the theme song, Crane's  musical talent can also be seen in the sixth season episode "Look at the Pretty Snowflakes," where he has an extended drum solo during the prisoners' performance of the jazz standard "Cherokee".
In 1968, during the run of Hogan's Heroes, Crane and series costars Werner Klemperer, Leon Askin, and John Banner appeared, with Elke Sommer, in a feature film called The Wicked Dreams of Paula Schultz. The setting was the divided city of Berlin inside East Germany. Paula Schultz was being tempted to defect to the West, with Crane encouraging her to do so. Klemperer and Banner were involved as East German officials trying to keep Paula in the East.

Post-Hogan's Heroes

Following the cancellation of Hogan's Heroes in 1971, Crane appeared in two Disney films, Superdad (1973) in the title role and Gus (1976) in a featured role.
In 1973, Crane purchased the rights to Beginner's Luck, a play that he starred in and directed. The production toured for five years, predominantly at dinner theaters around the country.trutv.html TruTV Crime Library, The Bob Crane Case. During breaks he guest starred in a number of TV shows, including Police Woman, Quincy, M.E., and The Love Boat. In 1975 Crane returned to TV with his own series; The Bob Crane Show was canceled by NBC after three months (13 episodes).
At the time of his death Crane had recently taped a travel documentary in Hawaii, and had recorded an appearance on the Canadian cooking-talk show Celebrity Cooks. Out of respect for his death, neither was ever aired. However, Crane's appearance on Celebrity Cooks was recreated in the biopic film Auto Focus.

Dinner theatre

Crane became a fixture on the dinner theatre scene and performed there for ten years. In 1969, he starred with Abby Dalton in Cactus Flower. He also performed in Send Me No Flowers, but his most popular performances were in Beginner's Luck, which he toured at The Showboat Dinner Theatre in St. Petersburg, Florida, the La Mirada Civic Theatre in California, and the Windmill Dinner Theatre in Scottsdale, Arizona. Crane was performing at the Windmill at the time of his death.

Personal life

Marriages and children

In 1949, Crane married his high school sweetheart Anne Terzian. They had three children — Robert David, Deborah Ann, and Karen Leslie. The couple divorced in 1970.
Later that year, Crane married his Hogan's Heroes co-star Sigrid Valdis on the set of the series.
They had a son, Scotty. Valdis and Crane separated in 1977, but reportedly reconciled shortly before his death.

Friendship with Carpenter

Crane frequently videotaped and photographed his own sexual escapades.

Death

In June 1978, Crane was living in the Winfield Place Apartments in Scottsdale, Arizona while appearing in Beginner's Luck at the Windmill Dinner Theatre. On the afternoon of June 29 Crane's co-star Victoria Ann Berry found his body in his apartment after he failed to show up for a lunch meeting.
Crane's funeral was held on July 5 at St. Paul the Apostle Catholic Church in Westwood. An estimated 200 family members and friends attended, including Patty Duke, John Astin, and Carroll O'Connor. Pallbearers included Hogan's Heroes producer Edward Feldman, co-stars Larry Hovis and Robert Clary, and Crane's eldest son, Robert. Crane was interred in Oakwood Memorial Park in Chatsworth, California.
More than 20 years after his death, Crane's widow, Sigrid Valdis, had his remains exhumed and transported approximately 25 miles southeast to Westwood Village Memorial Park in Westwood. After her death from lung cancer in 2007, Valdis was buried next to him.

Investigation

According to an episode of A&E's Cold Case Files, police officers at the crime scene noted that Carpenter called the apartment several times, and did not seem surprised that the police were there, which raised suspicions. Carpenter's rental car was impounded and searched; several blood smears were found that matched Crane's blood type. DNA testing was not available at that time. Due to insufficient evidence, Maricopa County Attorney Charles F. Hyder declined to file charges.

Murder case reopened

In 1990 the Maricopa County Attorney re-opened Crane's murder case; investigators reexamined and retested the evidence found in June 1978.

Trial

At Carpenter's 1994 trial Crane's eldest son Robert testified that in the weeks before his father's death, Crane had repeatedly expressed a desire to sever his friendship with Carpenter.  Carpenter had become "a hanger-on," he said, and "a nuisance to the point of being obnoxious".
Defense attorneys attacked the prosecution's case as circumstantial and inconclusive. They countered testimony that Carpenter and Crane were on bad terms, and they labeled the determination that a camera tripod was the murder weapon as sheer speculation, based on Carpenter's occupation. They disputed the claim that the newly discovered evidence photo showed brain tissue, noting that authorities did not have the tissue itself. They pointed out that Crane had been videotaped and photographed in compromising sexual positions with numerous women, implying that a jealous person or someone fearing blackmail might have been the killer.
Carpenter was found not guilty. He continued to maintain his innocence until his death in 1998. Crane's murder remains officially unsolved.

Auto Focus

Crane's life and murder were the subject of the 2002 film Auto Focus, directed by Paul Schrader and starring Greg Kinnear as Crane. The film, described as "brilliant" by critic Roger Ebert, portrays Crane as a happily married, church-going family man and popular Los Angeles disc jockey who succumbs to Hollywood's celebrity lifestyle after becoming a television star, meets Carpenter, learns the wonders of home video, and spirals into a life of strip clubs and sex addiction. (September 2, 2002). "Auto Focus" Captures Star's Downfall. RogerEbert. Retrieved November 15, 2013.
Scotty, Crane's son with Sigrid Valdis, challenged the film's accuracy in an October 2002 review.  "During the last 12 years of his life," he wrote, "Crane went to church three times: when I was baptized, when his father died, and when he was buried."  Crane was a sex addict long before he became a star, he said, and may have begun recording his sexual encounters as early as 1956.  There was no evidence, he claimed, that Crane engaged in BDSM; none was portrayed in any of his hundreds of home movies, and Schrader admitted that the film's BDSM scene was based on his own personal experience (while writing Hardcore).
In June 2001 Scotty Crane launched the web site bobcrane.  It included a paid section featuring photographs, outtakes from his father's sex films, and Crane's autopsy report, which, Scotty claimed, disproved the allegation that his father had a penile implant. The site has since been renamed "Bob Crane: The Official Web Site", and no longer includes a pay wall or controversial material.

Filmography

Film

Television

Award nominations

Notes

Citations

References

Further reading




