[[Susan Blackmore]]

CATEGORIES: Consciousness researchers and theorists, Parapsychologists, British atheists, British humanists, British psychologists, Alumni of St Hilda's College, Oxford, Alumni of the University of Surrey, 1951 births, Living people, Atheism activists, Memetics, English sceptics, English writers on paranormal topics, Fellows of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry

Susan Jane Blackmore (born 29 July 1951) is an English freelance writer, lecturer, sceptic, and broadcaster on psychology and the paranormal, and is best known for her book The Meme Machine. She has written or contributed to over 40 books and 60 scholarly articles and is a contributor to The Guardian newspaper.

Career

In 1973, Susan Blackmore graduated from St Hilda's College, Oxford, with a BA (Hons) degree in psychology and physiology. She received an MSc in environmental psychology in 1974 from the University of Surrey. In 1980, she earned a PhD in parapsychology from the same university, her doctoral thesis was "Extrasensory Perception as a Cognitive Process." Blackmore taught at the University of the West of England in Bristol until 2001. After some period of time spent in research on parapsychology and the paranormal,
 Within a few weeks I had not only learned a lot about the occult and the paranormal, but I had an experience that was to have a lasting effect on me—an out-of-body experience (OBE). It happened while I was wide awake, sitting talking to friends. It lasted about three hours and included everything from a typical "astral projection," complete with silver cord and duplicate body, to free-floating flying, and finally to a mystical experience.
 It was clear to me that the doctrine of astral projection, with its astral bodies floating about on astral planes, was intellectually unsatisfactory. But to dismiss the experience as "just imagination" would be impossible without being dishonest about how it had felt at the time. It had felt quite real. Everything looked clear and vivid, and I was able to think and speak quite clearly.
In a New Scientist article in 2000, she again wrote of this:
 It was just over thirty years ago that I had the dramatic out-of-body experience that convinced me of the reality of psychic phenomena and launched me on a crusade to show those closed-minded scientists that consciousness could reach beyond the body and that death was not the end. Just a few years of careful experiments changed all that. I found no psychic phenomena - only wishful thinking, self-deception, experimental error and, occasionally, fraud. I became a sceptic. 
In an article in The Observer on sleep paralysis Barbara Rowland wrote that Blackmore, "carried out a large study between 1996 and 1999 of 'paranormal' experiences, most of which clearly fell within the definition of sleep paralysis."
She is a Fellow of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry (formerly CSICOP)
Blackmore has done research on memes (which she wrote about in her popular book The Meme Machine) and evolutionary theory. Her book Consciousness:  An Introduction (2004), is a textbook that  broadly covers the field of consciousness studies.
She acted as one of the psychologists who was featured on the British version of the television show "Big Brother",
Blackmore debated Christian apologist Alister McGrath in 2007 on the existence of God.

Memetics

Susan Blackmore has made contributions to the field of memetics.
Blackmore's treatment of memetics insists that memes are true evolutionary replicators, a second replicator that like genetics is subject to the Darwinian algorithm and undergoes evolutionary change.
At the February 2008 TED conference Blackmore introduced a special category of memes called temes. Temes are memes which live in technological artifacts instead of the human mind.

Personal life

Blackmore is an active practitioner of Zen, although she identifies herself as "not a Buddhist".  All kinds of infectious memes thrive in religions, in spite of being false, such as the idea of a creator god, virgin births, the subservience of women, transubstantiation, and many more. In the major religions, they are backed up by admonitions to have faith not doubt, and by untestable but ferocious rewards and punishments." 
On 15 September 2010, Blackmore, along with 54 other public figures, signed an open letter published in The Guardian, stating their opposition to Pope Benedict XVI's state visit to the UK.
She is married to the writer Adam Hart-Davis.
Blackmore was diagnosed with chronic fatigue syndrome in 1995.

Publications

Books

Selected articles






