[[Freeview (UK)]]

CATEGORIES: Television in the United Kingdom, Freeview, Digital television

Freeview is the only free-to-air UK digital terrestrial television service. It is delivered by the company DTV Services Ltd, a joint venture between the BBC, ITV, Channel 4, BSkyB and transmitter operator Arqiva. It was launched in 2002. In April 2014 it had some 60 DVB-T TV channels, 26 digital radio channels, 10 HD channels, 6 text services, 11 streamed channels, and 1 interactive channel.publisher Ofcom, 16 July 2013: New HD channels on terrestrial TV Linked 2013-08-10 The new HD channels were launched in selected areas on 10 December 2013 with a further rollout expected during 2014.
DTV Services' delivery of standard-definition television and radio is labelled Freeview, while its delivery of HDTV is called Freeview HD. Reception of Freeview requires a Freeview tuner, either in a separate set-top box or built into the TV set. Since 2008 all new TV sets sold in the United Kingdom must have a built-in Freeview tuner. Freeview HD requires a special tuner, capable of handling HDTV signals. Digital video recorders (DVRs) with a built-in Freeview tuner are labelled Freeview+, in line with the British tradition of calling TV service dependent DVRs the service name plus a "+", established in 2002 by BSkyBs Sky+ DVRs. Depending on model, DVRs and HDTV sets with a Freeview tuner may offer regular Freeview or Freeview HD.
The technical specification for Freeview is published and maintained by the Digital TV Group, the industry association for digital TV in the UK who also provide the test and conformance regime for Freeview, Freeview + and Freeview HD products. DMOL (DTT Multiplex Operators Ltd.), a company owned by the operators of the six DTT multiplexes (BBC, ITV, C4, and Arqiva) is responsible for technical platform management and policy, including the electronic programme guide and channel numbering.dmol.co.uk
Since the completion of the digital switchover on 24 October 2012, there is no terrestrial analogue television being broadcast in the United Kingdom, and all terrestrial TV is delivered through Freeview.

History

Freeview officially launched on 30 October 2002 at 5 am when the BBC and Crown Castle (now Arqiva) officially took over the digital terrestrial television (DTT) licences to broadcast on the three multiplexes from the defunct ITV Digital (originally called ONdigital). The founding members of DTV Services, who trade as Freeview, were the BBC, Crown Castle UK (now part of Arqiva) and British Sky Broadcasting. On 11 October 2006, ITV plc and Channel 4 became equal shareholders. Since then, the Freeview model has been copied in Australia and New Zealand.
Although all pay channels had been closed down on ITV Digital, many free-to-air channels continued broadcasting, including the five analogue channels and digital channels such as ITV2, ITN News Channel, S4C2, TV Travel Shop and QVC.

2009 retune

The Freeview service underwent a major upgrade on 30 September 2009 which required 18 million households to retune their Freeview receiving equipment.
On 23 August 2010, Sky Sports News was removed from Freeview and replaced with Sky3 +1.

Channels

The Freeview service broadcasts free-to-air television channels, radio stations and interactive services from the existing public service broadcasters. Channels on the service include the BBC, ITV, Channel 4 and Channel 5 terrestrial channels, as well as their digital services. In addition, channels from other commercial operators, such as Sky and UKTV, are available, as well as radio services from a number of broadcasters.
The full range of channels broadcast via digital terrestrial television includes pay television services from operators such as VuTV and BT Sport. These channels, although available only to subscribers with appropriate equipment, are listed in the on-screen electronic programme guides displayed by many Freeview receivers but may not be viewed.

Reception equipment

Receivers

To receive Freeview, either a television with an integrated digital tuner, or an existing standard analogue TV plus a digital set-top box is required.

Aerial

An aerial is required for viewing any broadcast television transmissions. For all transmissions indoor, loft-mounted, and external aerials are available. In regions of strong signal an indoor aerial may be adequate; in marginal areas a high-gain external aerial mounted high above the ground with an electronic amplifier at its top may be needed.
Aerial requirements for analogue (the old standard) and digital reception in the UK are identical; there is no such thing as a special "digital aerial", although installers and suppliers often falsely say one is necessary... 5 told the mystery shopper they would need a "digital aerial", when in fact there is no such thing. As the signal degrades, the analogue picture degrades gradually, but the digital picture holds up well then suddenly becomes unwatchable; an aerial which gave poor analogue viewing may give unwatchable, rather than poor, digital viewing, and need replacing, at a cost of typically £80 to £180, most of which is fitting cost.

Service costs

Freeview channels can be received at no charge (other than the annual television licence required for television reception required for all viewers of broadcast television in the UK which must be purchased by anyone who has and uses the appropriate equipment to receive television signals).
A subscription-based DTT service, Top Up TV, launched in March 2004 using unused channel space on multiplexes that were owned by parties who, at the time, were not members of the Freeview consortium. The Top Up TV service is not connected with the Freeview service; it simply runs alongside it on the DTT platform. It was possible to receive Top Up TV on selected Freeview set-top boxes or televisions equipped with a card slot or CI slot, however, this was replaced in 2006 by "Top Up TV Anytime", a service which requires a proprietary set top box. ESPN can be received with televisions equipped with a card slot.
The Digital TV Group the industry association for digital television in the UK, is responsible for co-ordination between Freeview, Top Up TV, and other digital services.

Freeview+

Freeview+, originally entitled "Freeview Playback", is the marketing name for Freeview-capable digital video recorders.
All Freeview+ and Freeview+ HD recorders are required to include the following features:DTG Functional Specification for Digital TV Recorders v1.0 (Schedule 4)

Freeview HD

Channels

With two channels (BBC HD and ITV HD) Freeview HD completed a "technical launch" on 2 December 2009 from Winter Hill (as a full power service) and Crystal Palace (as a reduced power temporary service) and operates on multiplex BBC B (aka Multiplex B or PSB3) from that date in regions that switched-over on or after that date, with the service coming to all regions by the end of 2012.
Five HD was due to launch during 2010 but was unable to reach 'key criteria' to keep its slot.
Until 17 October 2011, the Commercial Public Service Broadcasters had the opportunity to apply to Ofcom to provide an additional HD service from between 28 November 2011 and 1 April 2012.
On 16 July 2013, Ofcom announced that up to 10 new HD channels would be launched by early 2014, due to new capacity made available by the digital switchover. This has allowed additional spectrum to become available in the 600Mhz band for an additional DVB-T2 multiplexes. These additional channels will be available up to 70% of the UK population. At the same time, the BBC announced that they would provide five new HD channels due to the newly available capacity: BBC Three HD, BBC Four HD, CBBC HD, CBeebies HD and BBC News HD.

Technical

The Digital TV Group publishes and maintains the UK technical specification for high-definition services on digital terrestrial television (Freeview) based on the new DVB-T2 standard. The specification is known as the D-book. Freeview HD is the first operational TV service in the world using the DVB-T2 standard. This standard is incompatible with DVB-T, and can only be received using compatible reception equipment. The Freeview HD trademark requirements state that any manufacturer applying for the Freeview HD logo should submit their product to the Digital TV Group's test centre (DTG Testing) for conformance testing.
On 2 February 2010, Vestel became the first manufacturer to gain Freeview HD certification, for the Vestel T8300 set top box.
It was announced on 10 February 2009 that the signal would be encoded with MPEG-4 AVC High Profile Level 4, which supports up to 1080i30/1080p30, so 1080p50 cannot be used. This was extended to all of the other Freeview HD channels in October 2011.
To ensure provision of audio description, broadcasters typically use the AAC codec. Thus equipment sold as Freeview HD before April 2011 may not deliver surround sound to audio equipment (some equipment may, but this is not mandatory); later equipment must be capable of surround sound compatible with most suitable audio equipment.
In early February 2011 it was announced that 1,000,000 Freeview HD set-top boxes had been sold.

=Copy protection=

In August 2009 the BBC wrote to Ofcom after third-party content owners asked the BBC to undertake measures to ensure that all Freeview HD boxes would include copy protection systems as required by the Digital TV Group's D-Book, which sets technical standards for digital terrestrial television in the UK. The BBC proposed to ensure compliance with copy-protection standards on the upgraded Freeview HD multiplex by compressing the service information (SI) data, which receivers need to understand the TV services in the data stream. To encourage boxes to adopt copy protection, the BBC made its own look-up tables and decompression algorithm, necessary for decoding the EPG data on high-definition channels, available without charge only to manufacturers who implement the copy-protection technology. This technology would control the way HD films and TV shows are copied onto, for example Blu-ray discs, and shared with others over the internet. No restrictions will be placed on standard-definition services. In a formal written response, Ofcom principal advisor Greg Bensberg said that wording of the licence would probably need to be changed to reflect the fact that this new arrangement is permitted. The BBC had suggested that as an alternative to the SI compression scheme, the Freeview HD multiplex may have to adopt encryption. Bensberg said that it would appear "inappropriate to encrypt public service broadcast content on DTT".
On 14 June 2010 Ofcom agreed to allow the BBC to limit the full availability of its own and other broadcasters' high definition (HD) Freeview services to receivers that control how HD content can be used. Ofcom concluded that the decision to accept the BBC's request will deliver net benefits to licence-holders by ensuring they have access to the widest possible range of HD television content on DTT.








