[[Sex toy]]

CATEGORIES: Sex toys

A sex toy is an object or device that is primarily used to facilitate human sexual pleasure, such as a dildo or vibrator.  Many popular sex toys are designed to resemble human genitals and may be vibrating or non-vibrating.  The term can also include BDSM apparatus and sex furniture such as slings,  however it is not applied to items such as birth control, pornography, or condoms. Alternative expressions include adult toy and marital aid, although "marital aid" has a broader sense and is applied to drugs and herbs marketed to supposedly enhance or prolong sex. Sex toys are most commonly sold at a sex shop.

Types of sex toys

Erotic electrostimulation

Another form of sex toy for both men and women are those for erotic electrostimulation.

Erotic furniture

Erotic furniture is furniture specially shaped for comfort, penetration levels, and stimulation.

General penetrative toys

=Anal toys=

Butt plugs should not be shared with other people, due to the risk of blood-borne diseases, including HIV that can arise from the transfer of body fluids from one person to another.  They should be used only for anal play and not inserted into any other orifice, to avoid the transfer of harmful bacteria to other parts of the body.  These bacteria may persist through cleaning.

=Glass sex toys=

Glass sex toys are commonly made from clear medical grade borosilicate glass ("hard glass"). This particular type of safety toughened glass is non-toxic and will withstand extreme temperatures, as well as physical shock without compromising its structural integrity.
The choice of this high-grade material provides safety in use and the option to heat or chill the toys. Borosilicate glass is also non-porous and can be sterilized to help prevent infection with reuse. The highest quality glass toys can even be put in the dishwasher making them easier to keep clean. As well as their practical qualities, a main selling point of glass sex toys is their visual appeal.
Some glass sex toys vibrate.  There are two main ways this can be achieved:
1. The toy may have a hole into which a small bullet vibrator can be inserted.
2. The core of the glass design can be modified to form a standard vibrator.
Option 2 usually has a plastic cap covering the battery compartment, which will also house any control buttons or switches.

=Vibrators=

Vibrators are vibrating devices intended to stimulate the body. Vibrators come in a range of shapes and sizes, for internal or external use.  Some vibrators intended for internal use are phallic in shape.  Small vibrators may have a stretchy loop attachment for use as a finger toy or cock ring. Penetrative vibrators usually measure twelve to eighteen cm (five to seven inches) in length and two to five cm (one to two inches) wide often to mimic the size of the average human penis.

Nipple toys

Penile toys

Materials used in sex toys

Health and safety concerns

Danish retailers report that they often lack information about the composition of sex toys that they sell. A recent (2006) study conducted by the Greenpeace Netherlands office found high level of phthalates in seven out of eight plastic sex toys tested.Bad vibrations? We expose an EU sex scandal Posted by bex (8 September 2006)Greenpeace UK
Studies on rodents have revealed that when exposed to very large doses, phthalates can cause damage to the liver, lungs, kidneys, testes and can cause hormonal disruption. The latest research indicates that exposure to these substances can upset the body's ability to regulate hormone production, damage reproduction, and can cause liver and kidney defects. They can also possibly cause cancer.How safe is your sex? toxic phthalates in your sex toy
Sex toys are currently classified as novelties, despite their sexual nature. This is because sex toy manufacturers find the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) to have extensive testing and financial requirements for sex toys to be classified as medical devices. Therefore, sex toy manufacturers more often choose the less complex production by labelling them a novelty. Due to the novelty classification, sex toys are permitted to contain known toxins in them such as phthalates (some of which have been banned in children's toys by the CPSC) and in some cases lead paint.
In 2000, the development toward safe and nontoxic sex toys in the United States began with sexual health pioneers such as Lisa S. Lawless, Ph.D. allowing consumers to become more aware of health concerns regarding sex toy safety. Lawless also began a movement toward safer sex toys through the National Association for the Advancement of Science & Art in Sexuality (NAASAS). This trade organization works with professionals in the field of sexuality and the adult industry to self regulate the safety of sex toys.

Legal issues

India

Sex toys are illegal in IndiaSingh, Jyotsna (20 June 2007). India rattled by vibrating condom. BBC News Selling sex toys is a punishable offense under section 292 of Indian penal code, with up to two years in prison. Sex toys recovered from shop in Rajkot. Times of India

South Africa

Section 18A of the Sexual Offences Act, 1957, inserted by the Immorality Amendment Act, 1969, prohibited the manufacture or sale of any item "intended to be used to perform an unnatural sexual act". The term "unnatural sexual act" referred to any sex other than vaginal heterosexual sex, and this prohibition was ostensibly aimed at preventing the use of dildos by lesbians. No longer enforced, the section was repealed by the Criminal Law (Sexual Offences and Related Matters) Amendment Act, 2007.

United States

Sex toys and lubricants have become increasingly available in major commercial outlets in the United States. On-shelf displays tend to be more discreet than the offerings on web sites. These items tend to be displayed in the "sexual health" sections of stores.Red-Light Specials Newsweek February 13, 2008
Until recently, many Southern and some Great Plains states banned the sale of sex toys completely, either directly or through laws regulating "obscene devices." In 1999, William H. Pryor, Jr., an assistant attorney general in Alabama commenting on a case involving sex toys and discussing to what end the devices are used, was quoted as saying there is no "fundamental right for a person to buy a device to produce orgasm". A federal appeals court upheld Alabama's law prohibiting the sale of sex toys on Valentine's Day, 2007. Court leaves Ala. sex toy ban intact, USA Today, Oct 1, 2007
In February 2008, a federal appeals court overturned a Texas statute banning the sales of sex toys, deeming such a statute as violating the Constitution's 14th Amendment on the right to privacy. The appeals court cited Lawrence v. Texas, where the U.S. Supreme Court in 2003 struck down bans on consensual sex between gay couples, as unconstitutionally aiming at "enforcing a public moral code by restricting private intimate conduct."  Similar statutes have been struck down in Kansas and Colorado.
Dr. Marty Klein, author of America's War on Sex and an advocate for the moral value of sex toys, has written of sex toy bans that this "extraordinary erosion of personal liberty, coupled with the massive disrespect of and fear of sexuality is no joke" and that the "Supreme Court the United States has declared our orgasms a battlefield, and sex toys another casualty."Holthouse, David. Alabama vs. Dildos Attorney General Troy King stands hard against stimulators, Dame Magazine

Industry

As of 2008, it was valued at US$ 15 billion worldwide, with a growth rate of 30%. and at parties. However, some items, such as "hand held massagers", are sold in mainstream retail outlets such as drugstores.

In popular culture





Further reading




