[[Steamship]]

CATEGORIES: Steamships, Steam engines, Steam engine technology

A steamship (often referred to as a steamer) is an ocean faring seaworthy vessel that is propelled by one or more steam engines that typically drive (turn) propellers or paddlewheels. The first steamships came into practical usage during the early 1800s, however there were isolated cases to the exception that came before. Steamships usually use the prefix designation SS, S.S. or S/S.

Development of the steamboat

Mechanical ship propulsion began with the steamship. The first ships of this type were invented in the late 18th century by William Symington, John Fitch and Robert Fulton.1-5 William Symington's ship the Charlotte Dundas, built to tow cargo along the Forth and Clyde Canal to Glasgow starting in 1803, is regarded as the world's "first practical steamboat".
Paddlewheels as the main motive source became standard on these early vessels (see Paddle steamer). It was an effective means of propulsion under ideal conditions but otherwise had serious drawbacks. The paddle-wheel performed best when it operated at a certain depth, however when the depth of the ship changed from added weight it further submerged the paddle wheel causing a substantial decrease in performance.23
Within a few decades of the development of the river and canal steamboat, the first steamships began to cross the Atlantic Ocean. The first sea-going steamboat was Richard Wright's first steamboat "Experiment", an ex-French lugger; she steamed from Leeds to Yarmouth on July 1813..
The Margery launched in Dunbarton in 1814 was the first steamboat to be seen on the River Thames in January 1815 much to the amazement of Londoners, and operated a London to Gravesend river service until 1816 when she was bought by the French and became the first steamboat to cross the Channel, reaching Paris and inaugurating a Seine steamboat service under her new name Elise.dover-kent.co.htm
The steamboat Rob Roy commenced regular mail and passenger service from Dover to Calais on 15 June 1821, and was so successful that it was soon followed by other steamboats 
The first iron steamship to go to sea was the 116 ton Aaron Manby, built in 1821 by Aaron Manby at the Horseley Ironworks, and became the first iron built vessel ever to put to sea when she crossed the Channel in 1822 arriving in Paris on 22 June.artistaswitness.htm

Screw-propeller steamers

The key innovation that made ocean-going steamers viable was the change from the paddle-wheel to the screw-propeller as the mechanism of propulsion. These steamships quickly became more popular, because the propeller's efficiency was consistent regardless of the depth at which it operated. Being smaller in size and mass and being completely submerged it was also far less prone to damage.
James Watt of Scotland is widely given credit for applying the first screw propeller to an engine at his Birmingham works, an early steam engine, beginning the use of an hydrodynamic screw for propulsion. The first successful steamshipThe emphasis here is on ship. There were a number of successful propeller-driven vessels prior to Archimedes, including Smith's own Francis Smith and Ericsson's Francis B. Ogden and Robert F. Stockton. However, these vessels were boats—designed for service on inland waterways—as opposed to ships, built for seagoing service. to be driven by a screw propeller was the , built in Britain in 1839 by British engineer Francis Pettit Smith.

First ocean-going steamships

The first steamship credited with crossing the Atlantic Ocean between North America and Europe was the American ship 
The British side-wheel paddle steamer 
Great Western was an iron-strapped, wooden, side-wheel paddle steamer, with four masts to hoist the auxiliary sails. The sails were not just to provide auxiliary propulsion, but also were used in rough seas to keep the ship on an even keel and ensure that both paddle wheels remained in the water, driving the ship in a straight line. The hull was built of oak by traditional methods. She was the largest steamship for one year, until the British and American's British Queen went into service. Built at the shipyard of Patterson & Mercer in Bristol, Great Western was launched on 19 July 1837 and then sailed to London, where she was fitted with two side-lever steam engines from the firm of Maudslay, Sons & Field, producing 750 indicated horsepower between them. The ship proved satisfactory in service and initiated the transatlantic route, acting as a model for all following Atlantic paddle-steamers.
The Cunard Line's 
In 1847, the revolutionary 
Brunel was given a chance to inspect John Laird's 
In the spring of 1840, Brunel also had the opportunity to inspect the s paddlewheels, and took an immediate interest in the new technology, and Smith, sensing a prestigious new customer for his own company, agreed to lend Archimedes to Brunel for extended tests. Over several months, Smith and Brunel tested a number of different propellers on Archimedes in order to find the most efficient design, a four-bladed model submitted by Smith. When launched in 1843, Great Britain was by far the largest vessel afloat.
Brunel's last major project, the 
The first regular steamship service from the East Coast to the West Coast of the United States began on February 28, 1849, with the arrival of the 

Era of the ocean liner

By 1870, a number of inventions, such as the screw propeller, the compound engine, The size of ocean liners increased from 1880 to meet the needs of immigration to the United States and Australia.
 were the last two Cunard liners of the period to be fitted with auxiliary sails. Both ships were built by John Elder & Co. of Glasgow, Scotland, in 1884. They were record breakers by the standards of the time, and were the largest liners then in service, plying the Liverpool to New York route.
, as an act of World War I.
Launched in 1938, , later Atlantic Star, reportedly sold to Turkish shipbreakers in 2013.
Most luxury yachts at the end of the 19th and early 20th centuries were steam driven (see luxury yacht; also Cox & King yachts). Thomas Assheton Smith was an English aristocrat who forwarded the design of the steam yacht in conjunction with the Scottish marine engineer Robert Napier.[ref]
Dawson, Journal, 2006, p.331ff[/ref]

Decline

After the demonstration by British engineer Charles Parsons of his steam turbine-driven yacht, Turbinia, in 1897, the use of steam turbines for propulsion quickly spread. The Cunard RMS Mauretania, built in 1906 was one of the first ocean liners to convert to the steam turbine and was soon followed by all subsequent liners.
Most capital ships of the major navies were propelled by steam turbines in both World Wars and nuclear marine propulsion systems aboard warships, submarines, and such vessels as the NS Savannah relied on turbines as well.





Bibliography

Further reading


