[[Washington Metro]]

CATEGORIES: Washington Metro, Passenger rail transportation in Maryland, Passenger rail transportation in Virginia, Passenger rail transportation in Washington, D.C., Rapid transit in Maryland, Rapid transit in Virginia, Rapid transit in Washington, D.C., 1976 introductions, Underground rapid transit in the United States, Northern Virginia, Harry Weese buildings

The Washington Metro, commonly called Metro, and branded Metrorail,
Metro is the second-busiest rapid transit system in the United States in number of passenger trips, after the New York City Subway. In June 2008, Metro set a new monthly ridership record with 19,729,641 trips, or 798,456 per weekday. Fares vary based on the distance traveled, the time of day, and the type of card used by the passenger. Riders enter and exit the system using a stored-value card in the form of a paper magnetic stripe farecard or a proximity card known as SmarTrip.

History

During the 1960s, there were plans for a massive freeway system in Washington, but opposition to this freeway system grew. Harland Bartholomew, who chaired the National Capital Planning Commission, thought that a rail transit system would never be self-sufficient because of low density land uses and general transit ridership decline. Finally, a mixed concept of a Capital Beltway system along with rail line radials was agreed upon. The Beltway received full funding; funding for the ambitious Inner Loop Freeway system was partially reallocated toward construction of the Metro system.
In 1960, the federal government created the National Capital Transportation Agency to develop a rapid rail system. In 1966, a bill creating WMATA was passed by the federal government, the District of Columbia, Virginia, and Maryland,
with planning power for the system being transferred to it from the NCTA.
WMATA approved plans for a   Underground stations were built with cathedral-like arches of concrete, highlighted by soft, indirect lighting.C.), Dec 3, 2012, p. 12.
The 
Metro construction required billions of federal dollars, originally provided by Congress under the authority of the National Capital Transportation Act of 1969 (Public Law 91-143). The cost was paid with 67% federal money and 33% local money. This act was amended on January 3, 1980 by Public Law 96-184, "The National Capital Transportation Amendment of 1979" (also known as the Stark-Harris Act), which authorized additional funding of $1.7 billion to permit the completion of 
The highest ridership for a single day was on the day of the inauguration of Barack Obama, January 20, 2009, with 1,120,000 riders. It broke the previous record, set the day before, of 866,681 riders.  June 2008 set several ridership records: it set the single-month ridership record of 19,729,641 total riders, the record for highest average weekday ridership with 1,044,400 weekday trips, had five of the ten highest ridership days, and had 12 weekdays in which ridership exceed 800,000 trips.
In February 2006, Metro officials chose Randi Miller, a car dealership employee from Woodbridge, Virginia, to record new "doors opening", "doors closing", and "please stand clear of the doors, thank you" announcements after winning an open contest to replace the messages recorded by Sandy Carroll in 1996.  The "Doors Closing" contest attracted 1,259 contestants from across the country.
On October 30, 2010, the crowd at the Rally to Restore Sanity and/or Fear broke a 19-year record in Saturday ridership, with 825,437 trips.  The previous record had been set on June 8, 1991 at 786,358 trips during the Desert Storm rally.

Architecture

Many Metro stations were designed by Chicago architect Harry Weese (1915-1998), and are examples of late-20th century modern architecture. With their heavy use of exposed concrete and repetitive design motifs, Metro stations display aspects of brutalist design.  The stations also reflect the influence of Washington's neoclassical architecture in their overarching coffered ceiling vaults. In 2007, the design of the Metro's vaulted-ceiling stations was voted number 106 on the American Institute of Architects' "America's Favorite Architecture" list. 
In January 2014, the  American Institute of Architects (AIA) announced that it would present its Twenty-Five Year Award to the Washington Metro system for "an architectural design of enduring significance" that "has stood the test of time by embodying architectural excellence for 25 to 35 years".  The announcement cited the key role of Weese, who conceived and implemented a "common design kit-of-parts" which continues to guide the construction of new Metro stations over a quarter-century later.

Metro network

Since opening in 1976, the Metro network has grown to include five lines, 86 stations, and 
There are 40 stations in the District of Columbia, 15 in Prince George's County, 11 in Montgomery County, 11 in Arlington County, six in Fairfax County, and three in the City of Alexandria. The Silver Line will add 11 new stations, eight in Fairfax County and three in Loudoun County, Virginia.
About .
At  below the surface, the Forest Glen station on the Red Line is the deepest in the system. There are no escalators; high-speed elevators take 20 seconds to travel from the street to the station platform.
The Wheaton station, next to Forest Glen station on the Red Line, has the longest continuous escalator in the USA and in the Western Hemisphere, at 
The Rosslyn station is the deepest station on the Orange/Blue Line, at 
The system is not centered on any single station, but Metro Center is at the intersection of the Red, Orange and Blue Lines, the three busiest lines. Gallery Place, transfer station for the Red, Green and Yellow Lines; L'Enfant Plaza, transfer station for the Orange, Blue, Green and Yellow Lines; Union Station, the busiest station by passenger boardings; Farragut North; and Farragut West.
In order to deal with the high number of passengers in transfer stations, Metro is studying the possibility of building pedestrian connections between nearby core transfer stations. For example, a 
Metro runs special service patterns on holidays and when events in Washington may require additional service. Independence Day activities require Metro to adjust service to provide extra capacity to and from the National Mall.
In an effort to gain revenues, WMATA has started to allow retail ventures in Metro stations. WMATA has authorized DVD-rental vending machines and ticket booths for the Old Town Trolley Tours and is seeking additional retail tenants.

Rush Plus

In 2012, WMATA announced enhanced rush period service that was implemented on June 18, 2012 under the name Rush+ (or Rush Plus).  Rush Plus service occurs only during portions of peak service: 6:30-9 AM and 3:30-7 PM, Monday through Friday.
The Rush Plus realignment is intended to free up space in the Rosslyn Portal (the tunnel between Rosslyn and Foggy Bottom), which operates at full capacity already. When Silver Line service begins, those trains will need to be routed through the tunnel, and so some of what were Blue Line trains to Largo Town Center are now diverted across the Fenwick Bridge to become Yellow Line Trains running all the way to Greenbelt. Select Yellow Line trains running south will divert along the Blue Line to Franconia-Springfield (as opposed to the normal Yellow line terminus at Huntington). Until the start of Silver Line Service, excess Rosslyn Tunnel capacity will be used by additional Orange Line trains. The additional Orange Line trains will travel along the Blue Line to Largo (as opposed to the normal Orange Line terminus at New Carrollton). Rush Plus has the additional effect of giving some further number of passengers transfer-free journeys, though severely increasing headways for the portion of the Blue Line running between Pentagon and Rosslyn.

Rolling stock

Metro's fleet consists of 1,126 rail cars, each 
Metro's rolling stock was acquired in six phases, and each version of car is identified with a separate series number. The original order of 300 rail cars (290 of which are in operation 
The 7000 series of cars, currently being built by Kawasaki Railcar Corp. of Kobe, Japan are being delivered for on-site testing during winter 2013, and are to go into service in early 2014. The new cars will be different from previous models in that while still operating as married pairs, the cab in one car would be removed, essentially turning it into a B car. The new design will allow for increased passenger capacity, elimination of redundant equipment, greater energy efficiency, and lower maintenance costs. Metro plans to eventually purchase up to 748 cars to increase system capacity and replace its older rolling stock.
In May 2013, Metro placed another order for 100 7000 cars series cars, which will replace all of the 4000 series cars.

Signaling and operation

During normal passenger operation on revenue tracks, trains are designed to be controlled by an integrated Automatic Train Operation (ATO) and Automatic Train Control (ATC) system that accelerates and brakes trains automatically without operator intervention.  All trains are still manned with train operators who open and close the doors, make station announcements, and supervise their trains. The system was designed so that an operator could manually operate a train when necessary.
Since June 2009, when two Red Line trains collided and killed nine people due in part to malfunctions in the ATC system, all Metro trains have been manually operated. The current state of manual operation has led to heavily degraded service, with new manual requirements such as absolute blocks, speed restrictions, and end-of-platform stopping leading to increased headways between trains, increased dwell time, and worse on-time performance. Automatic Operation and Operational Restrictions," Information Item IV-B, Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Board, March 11, 2010. As of August 2012, Metro has no plans or timetable to return to ATO or ATC.
The train doors were originally designed to be opened and closed automatically and the doors would re-open if an object blocked them, much as elevator doors do.  Almost immediately after the system opened in 1976 Metro realized these features were not conducive to safe or efficient operation and they were disabled.  At present the doors may be opened automatically or manually.  If a door tries to close and it meets an obstruction, the operator must re-open the door.

Hours and headways

Metrorail begins service at 5 am Monday through Friday and at 7 am Saturdays and Sundays; it ends service at midnight Sunday through Thursday nights and at 3 am on Friday and Saturday nights, although the last trains leave the end stations inbound about half an hour before these times. Trains run more frequently during rush hours on all lines, with scheduled peak hour headways of 3 minutes on the Red Line and 6 minutes on all other lines. Headways are much longer during midday and evening on weekdays and all weekend. The midday six-minute headways are based on a combination of two Metrorail lines (Orange/Blue and Yellow/Green) as each route can run every 12 minutes; in the case of the Red Line, every other train bound for Glenmont terminates at Silver Spring instead. Night and weekend service varies between 8 and 24 minutes, with trains generally scheduled only every 20 minutes. As of summer 2012, the WMATA board of directors was considering adopting a new policy that would codify maximum acceptable headways as 15 minutes during peak hours and 30 minutes during off-peak.
Other service truncations also occur in the system during rush hour service only. On the Red Line, every other train bound for Shady Grove terminates at Grosvenor-Strathmore, in addition to the alternating terminations at Silver Spring mentioned above. For the Yellow Line, all non-Rush+ trains (that is, all trains originating from Huntington, not Franconia-Springfield) bound for Fort Totten terminate at Mount Vernon Square. These are primarily instituted due to a limited supply of rail cars and the locations of pocket tracks throughout the system.
Until 1999, Metro ended service at midnight every night, and weekend service began at 8 am. That year, WMATA began late night service on Fridays and Saturdays until 1 am. By 2007, with encouragement from businesses, that closing time had been pushed back to 3 am. There were plans floated to end late night service due to costs in 2011, but they were met with resistance by riders.J. Freedom DuLac et al., "Metro's proposal to end late-night weekend trains rankles Washington's party crowd" Washington Post, February 13, 2011.

Passenger information

A Passenger Information Display System (PIDS) was installed in all Metrorail stations in 2000. Displays are located on all track platforms and at the mezzanine entrances of stations, and provide real-time information on next train arrivals, delayed trains, emergency announcements, and related information. "Metro offers enhancements for the passenger information display monitors." News release. WMATA also provides current train and related information to customers with conventional web browsers, as well as users of smartphones and other mobile devices. "Mobile Services." Accessed November 19, 2012. In 2010 Metro began sharing its PIDS data with outside software developers, for use in creating additional real-time applications for mobile devices. Free apps are available to the public on major mobile device software platforms (iPhone/iPad, Android, Windows Phone, Palm). "Metro invites software developers to discuss new transit data feed." News release. "Developer Resources." Accessed November 19, 2012. WMATA also began providing real-time train information by phone in 2010. "Real-time next train arrival information now available by phone." News release.

Fare structure

Riders enter and exit the system using a stored-value card in the form of a paper magnetic stripe farecard or a proximity card known as SmarTrip. The fare is deducted from the balance of the card; on paper farecards, the new balance is printed upon exiting the system. Farecards are purchased primarily at vending machines in each station. Paper farecards can hold up to $45 in value and are reused until the value of the card reaches zero. If the card contains the exact fare needed to exit, leaving the card at a zero balance, the card is not returned by the exit gate. SmarTrip cards can be purchased at station vending machines, online or at retail outlets, and can store up to $300 in value.
Metro fares vary based on the distance traveled and the time of day at entry. During regular hours (weekdays from opening until 9:30 a.m. and 3–7 p.m., and Friday and Saturday nights from midnight to closing), fares (effective July 1, 2012) range from $2.10 to $5.75, depending on distance traveled. At all other times, fares range from $1.70 to $3.50 based on distance traveled. Customers using a paper farecard must add an additional $1.00 fee for each ride. Discounted fares are available for school children, the disabled, and the elderly.
Passengers may purchase passes at most farecard vending machines. The passes are used the same way as farecards but grant riders unlimited travel within the system for a certain period of time. All the passes are gate-activated, with the period of validity starting with the first use of the pass, and for the paper versions, the expiration date of the pass is printed on the pass when exiting the system at the end of the first trip. Four types of passes are currently sold:
 | title	= Metro to launch unlimited 'short trip' Metrorail pass on SmarTrip cards
 | date		= May 16, 2013
