[[Bowling for Columbine]]

CATEGORIES: Works about the Columbine High School massacre, 2002 films, 2000s documentary films, American films, American documentary films, American independent films, English-language films, Films directed by Michael Moore, Documentary films about politics, Films about school violence, United Artists films, Best Documentary Feature Academy Award winners, Best Foreign Language Film César Award winners, Lessin and Deal productions

Bowling for Columbine is a 2002 American documentary film written, directed, and narrated by Michael Moore.  The film explores what Moore suggests are the causes for the Columbine High School massacre in 1999 and other acts of violence with guns.  Moore focuses on the background and environment in which the massacre took place and some common public opinions and assumptions about related issues.  The film also looks into the nature of violence in the United States.
The film brought Moore international attention as a rising filmmaker and won numerous awards, including the Academy Award for Best Documentary Feature, the Independent Spirit Award for Best Documentary Feature, a special 55th Anniversary Prize at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival, and the César Award for Best Foreign Film.Internet Movie Database entry

Film content

In Moore's discussions with various people—including South Park co-creator Matt Stone, the National Rifle Association's then-president Charlton Heston, and heavy metal musician Marilyn Manson—he seeks to explain why the Columbine massacre occurred and why the United States' violent crime rate (especially concerning crimes committed with firearms) is substantially higher than other nations'. 

Bowling

The film title originates from the story that Eric Harris and Dylan Klebold—the two students responsible for the Columbine High School massacre—attended a school bowling class early that morning, at 6:00 AM, before they committed the attacks at school starting at 11:17 AM. Later investigation showed that this was based on mistaken recollections, and Glenn Moore of the Golden Police Department concluded that they were absent from school on the day of the attack. The investigator's conclusion is on page 33 of the supplied document.
See also:pages 10101-10200 of a copy of the evidence recorded by the Boulder Daily Camera[/ref]
Moore incorporates the concept of bowling in other ways as well. For example, the Michigan Militia uses bowling pins for their target practice. When interviewing former classmates of the two boys, Moore notes that the students took a bowling class in place of physical education. Moore notes this might have very little educational value; the girls he interviews generally agree. They note how Harris and Klebold had a very introverted lifestyle and a very careless attitude towards the game, and that nobody thought twice about it. Moore asks if the school system is responding to the real needs of their students or if they are reinforcing fear. Moore also interviews two young residents of Oscoda, Michigan; Moore suggests a culture of fear created by the government and the media. He says that fear leads Americans to arm themselves, to gun-making companies' advantage. Moore suggests sarcastically that bowling could have been just as responsible for the attacks on the school as Marilyn Manson, or even President Bill Clinton, who launched bombing attacks on Serbia at the time.

Free gun for opening a bank account

An early scene depicts how Moore discovered a bank in Michigan that would give customers a free hunting rifle when they made a deposit of a certain size into a time deposit account. Banks use gifts to target depositors, Chicago Sun-Times. January 28, 2001. The film follows Moore as he goes to the bank, makes his deposit, fills out the forms, and awaits the result of a background check before walking out of the bank carrying a brand new Weatherby hunting rifle. Just before leaving the bank, Moore jokingly asks, "Do you think it's a little dangerous handing out guns at a bank?"Bowling for Columbine : Media Clips - Michael At The Bank

"Happiness is a Warm Gun" montage

About 20 minutes into the film, The Beatles song "Happiness Is a Warm Gun" plays during a montage in which the following footage is shown:

Weapons of mass destruction

Early in the film, Moore links the violent behavior of the Columbine shooters to the presence of a large defense establishment manufacturing rocket technology in Littleton. It is implied that the presence of this facility within the community, and the acceptance of institutionalized violence as a solution to conflict, contributed to the mindset that led to the massacre.
Moore conducts an interview with Evan McCollum, Director of Communications at a Lockheed Martin plant near Columbine, and asks him:
McCollum responds:

"What a Wonderful World" montage

The film then cuts to a montage of American foreign policy decisions, with the intent to contradict McCollum's statement by citing examples of how the United States has frequently been the aggressor nation. This montage is set to the song "What a Wonderful World" performed by Louis Armstrong.
The following is an exact transcript of the onscreen text in the Wonderful World segment:
The montage then ends with handheld-camera footage of the second WTC plane crash, the audio consisting solely of the hysterical reactions of the witnesses, recorded by the camera's microphone. On the website accompanying the film, Moore provides additional background information for this section.

Climate of fear

Moore attempts to contrast this with the attitude prevailing in Canada, where (he states) gun ownership is at similar levels to the U.S. He illustrates his thesis by visiting neighborhoods in Canada near the Canada–U.S. border, where he finds front doors unlocked and much less concern over crime and security.
In this section, a montage of possible causes for gun violence are stated by several social pundits. Many claim links with violence in television, cinema, and computer games; towards the end of the montage, however, the same people all change their claims to Marilyn Manson's responsibility. Following this is an interview between Moore and Marilyn Manson. Manson shares his views about the United States' climate with Moore, stating that he believes U.S. society is based on "fear and consumption", citing Colgate commercials that promise "if you have bad breath, people are not going to talk to you" and other commercials containing fear-based messages. Manson also mentions that the media, under heavy government influence, had deliberately asserted his influence on the acts of Klebold and Harris as being far greater than that of President Clinton, who ordered more bombings on Kosovo on April 20, 1999, than any other day during his Balkans campaign. When Moore asks Manson what he would say to the students at Columbine, Manson replies, "I wouldn't say a single word to them; I would listen to what they have to say, and that's what no one did."

Statistics

Moore follows up his climate of fear thesis by exploring the popular explanations as to why gun violence is so high in the United States. He examines Marilyn Manson as a cause, but states that German citizens listen to Marilyn Manson more per capita and that the country has a larger Goth population than does the United States, with less gun violence (Germany: 381 incidents per year). He examines violent movies, but notes that they have the same violent movies in other countries, showing The Matrix with French subtitles (France: 255 incidents per year). He also examines video games, but observes that many violent video games come from Japan (Japan: 39 incidents per year). He concludes his comparisons with the suggestion that the United States' violent history is the cause, yet negating that with the violent histories of Germany, France, and the United Kingdom (UK: 68 incidents per year). Moore ends his segment with gun-related-deaths-per-year statistics of a few major countries:

KMart refund

Moore takes two Columbine victims, Mark Taylor and Richard Castaldo (also Brooks Brown, who goes unidentified during the refund), to the American superstore KMart headquarters in Troy, Michigan, ostensibly to claim a refund on the bullets still lodged in their bodies. After a number of attempts to evade the issue, a KMart spokesperson says that the firm will change its policy and phase out the sale of handgun ammunition; this comes after Moore and the victims go to the nearest KMart store in nearby Sterling Heights, Michigan, purchase all of their ammunition, and return the next day with several members of the media. "We've won," says Moore, in disbelief. "That was more than we asked for.""I'm trying to connect the dots between the local violence and the global violence," says director Michael Moore of his new film, "Bowling for Columbine", The Sacramento Bee, October 25, 2002

Reception

Reviews for the film were overwhelmingly positive, with a 96% rating on Rotten Tomatoes,Bowling for Columbine Movie Reviews, Pictures - Rotten Tomatoes thus earning a "certified fresh" award. Another score aggregator, Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating in the 0–100 range based on reviews from top mainstream critics, calculated an average score of 72, based on 32 reviews, signifying 'generally favorable reviews. Michael Wilmington of the Chicago Tribune wrote, "It's unnerving, stimulating, likely to provoke anger and sorrow on both political sides—and, above all, it's extremely funny."Bowling for Columbine : Reviews & Acclaim : Articles & Press
Some reviews were not as unequivocally glowing. A.O. Scott of The New York Times wrote, "The slippery logic, tendentious grandstanding, and outright demagoguery on display in Bowling for Columbine should be enough to give pause to its most ardent partisans, while its disquieting insights into the culture of violence in America should occasion sober reflection from those who would prefer to stop their ears."

Criticisms

Free gun for opening a bank account

In Michael Wilson's documentary Michael Moore Hates America, bank employees from the branch at which Moore is handed a free hunting rifle assert that they were misled during the filming of this segment. They say that the bank's policy was to conduct background checks on rifle recipients and mail the rifles to a licensed gun dealer, but Moore's agents, under the pretext of "doing a story on unique businesses across America," are accused of convincing bank employees to have his rifle presented to him on camera the morning after filming his account opening. Further, they counter that contrary to the film's supposition that the bank kept hundreds of guns on their premises, the gun which was handed to Michael Moore in the film was shipped overnight from a vault in their Upper Peninsula branch "300 miles away." Moore emphatically denies that this sequence was staged but admits the timing was compressed for production reasons. He reminds his readers that North Country Bank is a licensed firearms dealer and, in addition to its ATF license number, he produces out-takes where bank employee Jan Jacobson confirms on camera that rifles are secured locally on bank premises.

Ignoring the role of municipal governance

The American Prospect published a piece by Garance Franke-Ruta criticizing the film for ignoring the role that municipal governance plays in crime in the United States, and ignoring African-American urban victims of violence while focusing on the unusual events of Columbine. "A decline in murders in New York City alone—from 1,927 in 1993 to 643 in 2001—had, for example, a considerable impact on the declining national rate. Not a lot of those killers or victims were the sort of sports-hunters or militiamen Moore goes out of his way to interview and make fun of."Garance Franke-Ruta, Moore's the Pity, The American Prospect, November 22, 2002

Weapons of mass destruction

After the release of the film, Lockheed Martin spokesperson Evan McCollum clarified that the plant no longer produces missiles (the plant manufactured parts for intercontinental ballistic missiles with a nuclear warhead in the mid-1980s), but rockets used for launching satellites:
 I provided specific information to Moore about the space launch vehicles we build to launch spacecraft for NASA, NOAA, the Dept. of Defense and commercial customers, including DirecTV and EchoStar.Möller, Erik. A defense of Michael Moore and "Bowling for Columbine" kuro5hin. 
Erik Möller argues that Moore's question was not limited to the Littleton-area Lockheed Martin facility:
 First, note the word "our" in Moore's question. Moore is not from Colorado -- his question is generic, not meant to refer specifically to the Lockheed Martin plant in question. ... Of course, critics Hardy, et al. have conveniently ignored the fact that Lockheed Martin does supply weapons of mass destruction to the US military, and that the company is the nation's largest military contractor. 


Matt Stone

Being from Littleton, Matt Stone agreed to talk with Moore about his hometown and the shooting. Although he did not feel that Moore mischaracterized him or his statements in the film, he harbors ill feelings about the cartoon "A Brief History of the United States of America". Both Stone and his fellow South Park producer Trey Parker feel that the cartoon was done in a style very similar to theirs. Also, its proximity to Stone's interview may have led some viewers to believe, incorrectly, that they created the cartoon.
As a humorous retort to this, Stone and Parker portrayed Moore as a gibbering, overweight, hot-dog-eating buffoon who ultimately commits a suicide bombing against the protagonists in their 2004 film, Team America: World Police.'Team America' takes on moviegoers msnbc.com, October 15, 2004

Charlton Heston interview

For the final scene of the film, Moore visited Charlton Heston in his home and asked him about American firearm violence. Heston's response included the suggestion that the United States had a "history of violence" and more "mixed ethnicity" than other countries.

MPAA rating

The film is rated R by the Motion Picture Association of America, which means that children under the age 17 were not admitted to see the film theatrically unless under supervision. Film critic Roger Ebert chastised the MPAA for this move as "banning teenagers from those films they most need to see."Ebert, Roger. Bowling For Columbine. October 18, 2002. Ebert has criticized the MPAA rating system on past occasions. The film was noted for "some violent images and language."

Awards and nominations

During the screening at the 2002 Cannes Film Festival the film received a 13-minute standing ovation.
Moore was both applauded and booed at the Academy Awards on March 23, 2003, when he used his acceptance speech as an opportunity to proclaim his opposition to the United States-led invasion of Iraq, which had begun just a few days prior.
The film was nominated for the prestigious Grand Prix of the Belgian Syndicate of Cinema Critics.
In 2005, Bowling for Columbine was voted the third most popular film in the British Channel 4 program The 50 Greatest Documentaries of all time.

Gross income

With a budget of $4 million, Bowling for Columbine grossed $58,008,423 worldwide, including $21,576,018 in the United States. The documentary also broke box office records internationally, becoming the highest-grossing documentary in the United Kingdom, Australia, and Austria. These records were later eclipsed by Moore's next documentary, Fahrenheit 9/11.Documentary Movies






