[[Network Rail]]

CATEGORIES: Network Rail, Post-privatisation British railway companies, Companies established in 2002, Railway infrastructure companies, Private companies limited by guarantee of the United Kingdom, 2002 establishments in England

Network Rail is the trade name used by Network Rail Ltd and its various subsidiary companies. The most prominent subsidiary is Network Rail Infrastructure Ltd (previously Railtrack plc) which is the owner and operator of most of the rail infrastructure in Great Britain (England, Scotland and Wales). Retrieved 25 May 2009. It is not responsible for railway infrastructure in Northern Ireland or for the majority of track used by London Underground.
Network Rail Ltd is a statutory corporation created as a "not for dividend" private company limited by guarantee; Network Rail Infrastructure Ltd was reported in the 2010 annual company report as 100%-owned by Network Rail Ltd. Network Rail Ltd. has no shareholders thus is not owned by anyone but it is subject to various official requirements and directions. Currently the company applies its income to its own purposes (including some donations to charities etc.). The lack of a legal owner makes it liable (as happened with the pre-privatisation Trustee Savings Bank) to any future statute taking it into government ownership and its status as a statutory corporation enables the government to make changes to the company despite not being the legal owner.
Network Rail's main customers are the separate and mostly private-sector train operating companies (TOCs), responsible for passenger transport, and freight operating companies (FOCs), who provide train services on the infrastructure that the company owns and maintains. Network Rail does not itself run passenger or freight services. Ultimately both Network Rail and the train operating companies have the shared responsibility of delivering train services to the travelling public.

History

Britain's railway system was built by private companies, but it was nationalised by the Transport Act 1947 and run by British Railways until re-privatisation in the 1990s. Infrastructure and passenger and freight services were separated at that time. Between 1994 and 2002 the infrastructure was owned and operated by Railtrack.
The Hatfield train crash on 17 October 2000 was a defining moment in the collapse of Railtrack.
Network Rail Ltd. took over control by buying Railtrack plc, which was in "railway administration", from Railtrack Group plc for £500 million; Railtrack plc was then renamed and reconstituted as Network Rail Infrastructure Ltd. The purchase was completed on 3 October 2002. The former company had thus never ceased to exist but continued under another name: for this reason Network Rail Infrastructure Ltd was the defendant in later prosecutions in respect of events which had occurred in the days of Railtrack.
Following an initial period in which Network Rail established itself and demonstrated its competence in addressing the principal challenges of improving asset condition, reducing unit costs and tackling delay, the Government's Rail Review in 2004 White Paper said that Network Rail should be given responsibility for whole-industry performance reporting, timetable development, specification of small and medium network enhancements, and the delivery of route-specific utilisation strategies (RUS).
The company moved its headquarters to Kings Place, 90 York Way, from 40 Melton Street, Euston, on 26 August 2008. On 3 October 2008, Sir Ian McAllister announced that he would not stand for re-election as chairman of Network Rail. He had held the position for six years. He noted that as Network Rail moved to a "new phase in its development" it was appropriate for a new chairman to lead it there.
Many track safety initiatives have been introduced in the time Network Rail has been responsible for this area. The latest, announced in December 2008, known as "All Orange", states that all track personnel must not only wear orange hi-vis waistcoats or jackets, but must also wear orange hi-vis trousers at all times when working on or near the track.
This new safety ruling came into force on 1 January 2009 for maintenance and property workers and on 1 April 2009 for infrastructure and investment sites.
In 2011 the company began the process of reorganising its operational structure into nine semi-autonomous regional entities, each with their own managing director; the first two units to be created were Scotland and Wessex regions.

Responsibilities

Network Rail owns the infrastructure, including the railway tracks, signals, overhead wires, tunnels, bridges, level crossings and most stations, but not the passenger or commercial freight rolling stock.
Although it owns over 2,500 railway stations, it manages only 17 of the biggest and busiest of them, all the other stations being managed by one or other of the various train operating companies (TOCs).
Network Rail should not be confused with 'National Rail'. National Rail is not an organisation, but merely a brand, used to explain and promote a Great-Britain-wide network of passenger railway services. The majority of Network Rail lines also carry freight traffic; some lines are freight only. A few lines that carry passenger traffic are not part of the National Rail network (for example High Speed 1, Heathrow Express, Tyne and Wear Metro (The Tyne and Wear Metro uses Network Rail track between Pelaw and Sunderland and is responsible for that) and the London Underground). Conversely, a few National Rail services operate over track that is not part of the Network Rail network (for example where they run on London Underground track). For example, Chiltern Railways services run on track owned by London Underground between Harrow-on-the-Hill and Amersham.
The current Chairman is Richard Parry-Jones, and Mark Carne is currently appointed as the Chief Executive.

Assets

Infrastructure

Network Rail covers 20,000 miles of track, and 40,000 bridges and tunnels.
In October 2003 Network Rail announced that it would take over all infrastructure maintenance work from private contractors, following concerns about the quality of work carried out by certain private firms, and spiralling costs.
February 2004 saw the opening of an operations centre at Waterloo station in London, operated jointly by Network Rail and the train operating company South West Trains. This was the first full collaboration of its kind since privatisation, and it is regarded as a model for other areas of the network, with a further six integrated Network Rail + TOC Control Centres having opened since then, at Blackfriars, Croydon (Leading Control for First Capital Connect), , Glasgow and, most recently, Liverpool Street and South Wales based in Cardiff Canton.
Track renewal, the ongoing modernisation of the railway network by replacing track and signalling, continues to be carried out by private engineering firms under contract. The biggest renewals project is the multi-billion-pound upgrade of the London – Glasgow West Coast Main Line, which was completed in 2008.
Network Rail initially sub-contracted much of the work and the site to private Infrastructure Maintenance Companies such as Carillion and First Engineering. Other sub-contractors are used on site for specialist work or additional labour. These include Prima Services Group, Sky Blue, Balfour Beatty, Laboursite, BCL, Atkins (Atkins Rail) and McGinleys.
Since 2003 Network Rail has been building up significant in-house engineering skills, including funding of apprenticeship and foundation degree schemes. Network Rail reports significant savings resulting from the initial transfers of work away from contracting companies. Additional contracts were taken back by Network Rail after the serious accident at Potters Bar and other accidents at Rotherham and King's Cross led Jarvis to pull out of the track repair business. Shortly after this, and due to other failures by maintenance companies, Network Rail took control of many more maintenance duties. 
Telecomms maintenance came full circle in April 2009 with the bringing in house of the staff of Thales Telecom Services Ltd (formerly British Rail Telecommunications (BRT)).
In 2006, Network Rail made public a high-tech plan to combat the effects of slippery rail. This plan involves the use of satellites for tracking trouble areas, water-jetting trains and crews using railhead scrubbers, sand sticks and a substance called Natrusolve, which dissolves leaf mulch.
All workers working on, near or trackside have to undergo a Personal Track Safety assessment (re-assessed every two years) Network Rail workers undergo an assessment every year as part of AITL (Assessment in the Line). The AITL requires each worker to go through questions on a computer based program on all the competencies held.
In September 2007 it was announced that the number of track renewal contractors will be reduced to four from the current six.
These are now Amey/SECO, Balfour Beatty, Babcock First Engineering and Jarvis PLC. Jarvis PLC has since gone into administration, with the bulk of its work commitments being picked up by Babcock.

Stations

Network Rail owns more than 2,500 railway stations, divided into six categories. Management and operation of most of them is carried out mostly by the principal train operating company serving that station; however, in a few cases the train operating company does not serve the station. For example,  The stations Network Rail operate are:
Glasgow Central, Liverpool Lime Street and London St Pancras stations are divided into high and low level stations – the high level stations are all termini used primarily by the main inter-city services to those stations. The low level stations are through routes on local commuter networks that are largely separate from other routes to the main station; these stations/platforms are not managed by Network Rail, but instead the rail operator that primarily uses them.
Network Rail operated  when the station redevelopment is complete in 2015 and Newcastle Central as part of the return of the East Coast Mainline to the private sector.

Training facilities

Network Rail has several training and development sites around Britain. These include sites in Newcastle, Peterborough, Derby, Leeds, Walsall and Larbert which provide refresher courses, and train staff in new equipment. Advanced Apprentice Scheme trainees are trained at HMS Sultan in Gosport within the whole the first year and over seven 2-week periods or five 3-week periods (throughout their second and third year) of their apprenticeship, using a combination of Royal Navy facilities and a specially installed training centre. All courses are taught by VT Flagship (part of Babcock International) in the first year but apprentices are trained by Network Rail staff in the second and third years. Network Rail bought a residential centre from Cable and Wireless in the Westwood Business Centre near Coventry for leadership development. The company and other industry partners such as VolkerRail and Balfour Beatty, also operate a Foundation Degree in conjunction with Sheffield Hallam University.
In 2008, Network Rail piloted its first qualification in "track engineering". It has been given permission to develop courses equivalent to GCSE and A-levels.

Telecoms assets

Network Rail operates various essential telecommunication circuits for signalling and electrification control systems, train radio systems, lineside communications, level crossing CCTV, station information and security systems as well as more general IT and business telephony needs. The fixed bearer network infrastructure comprises transmission systems and telephone exchanges linked by a fibre optic and copper cable network that is located mainly within trackside troughing routes on the former British Rail Telecommunications network. (It is the largest private telecoms network in the UK.)
Network Rail operates several analogue radio networks that support mobile communication applications for drivers and lineside workers which consist of base stations, antenna systems and control equipment. The National Radio Network (NRN) was developed specifically for the operational railway; it provides radio coverage for 98% of the rail network through 500 base stations and 21 radio exchanges. The Radio Electronic Token Block RETB system is based on similar technology as the NRN and ORN but provides data communication for signalling token exchange as well as voice communication.
Fixed communication at trackside is provided by telephone. These are primarily provided for signallers' to communicate with train-crew, via telephones mounted on signal-posts, and with the public through telephones located at level crossings.
GAI-Tronics provides many of the telephones sited on trackside and at level crossings. They also provide Public Access Help Points on platforms and stations to provide passengers with easy access to Information and Emergency control centres.
GSM-R radio systems are being introduced across Europe under EU legislation for interoperability. In the UK, as of March 2014, Network Rail is well underway in the UK implementation of GSM-R to replace its legacy National Radio Network (NRN) and Cab Secure Radio (CSR) systems currently in use (source: 

Rolling stock

Network Rail operates a large variety of DMUs, locomotives and rolling stock to perform safety checks and maintenance (this fleet is not be confused with the combined rolling stock assets of ATOC members who work in combination as National Rail). As well as the multiple units and locomotives detailed below, Network Rail own and operate a large stock of rolling stock for particular testing duties and track maintenance. Network Rail also hire freight locomotives from DB Schenker and Freightliner among others to operate engineers trains at weekends. DRS provide a number of locomotives to power test trains around the network when Network Rail locomotives are unavailable or busy elsewhere. Drivers of Network Rail rolling stock are hired from DB Schenker.

Development

The GRIP process

For investment projects, as opposed to routine maintenance, Network Rail has developed an eight-stage process designed to minimise and mitigate risks. This is known as the Governance for Railway Investment Projects (GRIP), previously known as "Guide to Rail Investment Projects". The stages are as follows:
Each stage delivers an agreed set of outputs to defined quality criteria.

Control periods

For financial and other planning purposes, Network Rail works within 5-year "Control Periods", each one beginning on 1 April and ending on 31 March to coincide with the financial reporting year. These periods were inherited from Railtrack, so that the earlier ones are retrospective, and not necessarily of 5 years duration. They are as follows:
The Secretary of State for Transport regularly issues a High-Level Output Specification (HLOS) indicating what work the Government wishes to be undertaken during a given Control Period.

Route plans

Network Rail regularly publishes a Strategic Business Plan detailing their policies, processes and plans, as well as financial expenditure and other data. The most recent complete business plan was published in January 2013. Within these plans the rail network is divided into 26 Strategic Routes, with a Route Plan for each being published annually. The Business Plan and the Route plans were updated in 2008 and the Route plans again in 2009.
Each Route or other Plan covers a number of railway lines usually defined by geographical area and each route is further subdivided into Strategic Monday Route Sections (SRS) and given an SRS number and name. The plans also detail the geography of routes, stations, major junctions, capacity constraints and other issues and provide data on freight gauge, electrification, linespeed, number of tracks, capacity and other information. The plans also detail the expected future demand and development of each route, their predicted expenditure and their maintenance and investment requirements.
The Route Plans and respective areas are organised as in the table below.

Electricity

Network Rail opened the world's largest solar-powered bridge at Blackfriars Bridge across the River Thames in January 2014. The roof of the bridge has been covered with 4,400 photovoltaic panels, providing up to half of the energy for London Blackfriars station.World's largest solar-powered bridge opens in London The Guardian 22 January 2014

Governance structure and accountability

Formal governance structure

The company is accountable to a body of members through its corporate constitution, to its commercial train operator customers through its contracts with them (the contracts are subject to regulatory oversight), and to the public interest through the statutory powers of the Office of Rail Regulation.Office of Rail Regulation
Since Network Rail does not have shareholders, its members hold the Board of Directors to account for their management of the business. Members are appointed by an independent panel and serve a three-year term. They have a number of statutory rights and duties which include attending annual general meetings, receiving the Annual Report and Accounts, and approving the appointment or re-appointment of Network Rail's directors. Members have a duty to act in the best interests of the company without personal bias. They receive no payments other than travel expenses.
Members have clearly defined and limited powers; they do not run the company. Setting the strategic direction and the day-to-day management of Network Rail is the responsibility of the company's Board of Directors. That direction must be consistent with the regulatory jurisdiction of the Office of Rail Regulation, and with the requirements of its contracts. The Office of Rail Regulation in turn operates within the overall transport policy set by the UK Department for Transport and the Scottish Government, including as to what the Government wants the railway industry to achieve and how much money the Government is prepared to put into the industry. This means that the degree of Government influence and control over the company is higher than it was before these enlargements of the powers and role of the Government were introduced by the Railways Act 2005.
At any one time there are around 100 members in total, drawn from a wide range of industry partners and members of the public. There are two general categories of membership, industry members comprising any organisation holding a licence to operate on the railway or preferred bidder for a railway franchise, and public members who are drawn from the wider stakeholder community.

Monitoring Network Rail's performance

The Office of Rail Regulation monitors Network Rail's performance on a continuous basis against targets established by the regulatory authority in the most recent access charges review (2003), against obligations in the company's network licence and against forecasts in its own business plan. If performance is poor, the company will face criticism and possible enforcement action from its commercial customers (under their contracts) and from the Office of Rail Regulation (enforcing the company's network licence). It may also be criticised by its members in general meeting.
In the end of year report 2005/06, the ORR reported on train performance that:
"Train Performance: Good progress has been made in improving punctuality.
The Public Performance Measure (PPM) of 86.4% in the year is up from
85.5% (refreshed) at the end of the third quarter (Q3) and up from 83.6% last
year."

Informal governance groups

=Railway Industry Planning Group (RIPG)=

The Railway Industry Planning Group (RIPG), chaired by Network Rail, has as its purpose railway industry input into the structure and development of the national railway strategic planning processes. Its members are drawn from railway funders, operators and users, and the group meets quarterly to consider:

Directors

Executive directors

Other directors

Previous directors

Controversies

Safety

The safety record of the company has been marred by the Grayrigg derailment, when a Virgin express was derailed at Grayrigg in Cumbria on 23 February 2007. Network Rail admitted responsibility for the incident. The RAIB investigation concluded in August 2009 that a faulty set of points had caused the derailment.
In December 2005 two young girls were killed by a train as they were crossing the railway line via a pedestrian level crossing at 

Private versus public-sector status

In 2001 the then Labour government denied that it had nationalised the rail network in order to prevent Railtrack's shareholders claiming, via the European Court of Human Rights, the four-year average price of Railtrack, about £10 per share. Instead, Railtrack's shareholders were given only £2.60.
Railtrack plc was placed into railway administration under the Railways Act 1993 on 7 October 2001, following an application to the High Court by the then Transport Secretary, Stephen Byers. The High Court accepted that the company was not insolvent, and the railway administration order was discharged on 2 October 2002.
There has been considerable controversy over whether Network Rail is a public-sector or a private-sector entity. Although officially a private sector organisation, the fact that its debts are underwritten by the government, and it is partially funded by the government, has led to its being described as being "nationalisation in all but name". would be counted as public expenditure liabilities.
The National Audit Office and the Statistics Commission both treat Network Rail Ltd as a state-owned company. The Office for National Statistics (ONS) has repeatedly clashed with the National Audit Office and the Statistics Commission over whether the successor to Railtrack should be considered a private company – as the ONS believes – or included on the Government's books, as the NAO argues. The NAO says that as the Government is bearing the risk that would normally be borne by equity capital, and as it can appoint, through the SRA, a director who cannot be removed by members, Network Rail is effectively a subsidiary of the Government-controlled SRA. The Statistics Commission, set up by the Government to ensure that statistics are trustworthy, is known to question the basis of the ONS judgment that Government guarantees given to Network Rail are unlikely to be called in.
Even though the ONS insists that it is correct to have classified Network Rail as in the private sector the company is occasionally described as being in the public sector:
In December 2013 the ONS Announced that from 2014 Network Rail will be classified as a "government body". This means that the company's debt will be counted as part of the national debt. This will increase Government debt by £30 billion, equivalent to 2% of GDP.

Allegations of misuse of public funds and discrimination

In 2009, allegations appeared in the media from the Transport Salaried Staffs' Association concerning treatment of Network Rail employees. Criticism included alleged bullying of staff and accusations that millions of pounds had been spent paying compensation and confidentiality payments to staff in cases of alleged sexual or racial discrimination.
An internal investigation held by Network Rail in 2010, vetted by its auditors PricewaterhouseCoopers, uncovered no evidence of wrongdoing. An independent enquiry headed by Anthony White QC in 2011 further examined the claims, but also exonerated Coucher.
The £1.6 million severance payment awarded to Coucher on his subsequent departure from the company in October 2010 was also the subject of criticism from the media, the Secretary of State for Transport Philip Hammond and trade union leaders.

Knighthood of John Armitt

Critical commentary appeared in the media concerning the knighthood awarded to John Armitt in the 2012 New Year Honours for services to engineering and construction. Armitt was Chief Executive of Network Rail at the time of the 2007 Grayrigg derailment and the family of a victim of the accident criticised the award, which coincidentally was conferred on the same day that Network Rail were prosecuted for the accident.

National Centre

The new national centre now known as 'The Quadrant:MK' is in Milton Keynes: it completed construction in June 2012. The complex is five minutes walk from . The four buildings which are connected to a central street, accommodates about 3,000 people.
, the following departments are moving to the Quadrant:MK:








