[[Boston Symphony Orchestra]]

CATEGORIES: 1881 establishments in Massachusetts, Culture of Boston, Massachusetts, American orchestras, Musical groups from Boston, Massachusetts, Musical groups established in 1881, Articles needing audio and or video, Symphony orchestra articles needing audio and or video

The Boston Symphony Orchestra (BSO) is an American orchestra based in Boston, Massachusetts.  It is one of the country's five major symphony orchestras commonly referred to as the "Big Five". Founded in 1881, the BSO plays most of its concerts at Boston's Symphony Hall and in the summer performs at the Tanglewood Music Center.
Andris Nelsons is scheduled to serve as the music director designate of the BSO in the 2013-2014 season, and to become music director with the 2014-2015 season.  Bernard Haitink currently holds the title of conductor emeritus of the BSO, and Seiji Ozawa has the title of BSO music director laureate.

History

Early years

The BSO was founded in 1881 by Henry Lee Higginson. Its first conductor was George Henschel, who was a noted baritone as well as conductor, and a close friend of Johannes Brahms. For the orchestra, Henschel devised innovative orchestral seating charts and sent them to Brahms, who replied approvingly and commented on the issues raised by horn and viola sections in a letter of mid-November 1881 .
The orchestra's four subsequent music directors were all trained in Austria, including the seminal and highly influential Hungarian-born conductor Arthur Nikisch, in accordance with the tastes of Higginson. Wilhelm Gericke served twice, from 1884 to 1889 and again from 1898, to 1906. According to Joseph Horowitz's review of correspondence, Higginson considered 25 candidates to replace Gericke after receiving notice in 1905. He decided not to offer the position to Gustav Mahler, Fritz Steinbach, and Willem Mengelberg but did not rule out the young Bruno Walter if nobody more senior were to accept. He offered the position to Hans Richter in February, 1905, who declined, to Felix Mottl in November, who was previously engaged, and then to previous director Nikisch, who declined; the post was finally offered to Karl Muck, who accepted and began his duties in October, 1906. He was conductor until 1908 and again from 1912-1918.
The music director 1908-12 was Max Fiedler.  He conducted the premiere of Ignacy Jan Paderewski's Symphony in B minor "Polonia" in 1909.
During World War I, Muck (born in Germany but a Swiss citizen since childhood), was arrested, shortly before a performance of the St. Matthew Passion in 1918, and interned in a prison camp without trial or charge until the end of the war, when he was deported. He vowed never to return, and conducted thereafter only in Europe. Its next two music directors were French: Henri Rabaud, who took over from Muck for a season, and then Pierre Monteux from 1919 to 1924. Monteux, because of a musician's strike, was able to replace 30 players, thus changing the orchestra's sound; the orchestra developed a reputation for a "French" sound which persists to some degree to this day.

Koussevitzky and Munch

The orchestra's reputation increased during the music directorship of Serge Koussevitzky. One million radio listeners tuned in when Koussevitzky and the orchestra were the first to perform a live concert for radio broadcast, which they did on NBC in 1926.
Under Koussevitzky, the orchestra gave regular radio broadcasts and established its summer home at Tanglewood, where Koussevitzky founded the Berkshire Music Center, which is now the Tanglewood Music Center. Those network radio broadcasts ran from 1926 through 1951, and again from 1954 through 1956. The orchestra continues to make regular live radio broadcasts to the present day. The Boston Symphony has been closely involved with Boston's WGBH Radio as an outlet for its concerts.
Koussevitzky also commissioned many new pieces from prominent composers, including the Symphony No. 4 of Sergei Prokofiev, George Gershwin's Second Rhapsody and the Symphony of Psalms by Igor Stravinsky. They also gave the premiere of Béla Bartók's Concerto for Orchestra, which had been commissioned by the Koussevitzky Music Foundation at the instigation of Fritz Reiner and Joseph Szigeti.
Koussevitzky started a tradition of commissions that the orchestra continued, including new works by Henri Dutilleux for its 75th anniversary, Roger Sessions, and Andrzej Panufnik, for the 100th, and lately for the 125th works by Leon Kirchner, Elliott Carter, and Peter Lieberson. Other BSO commissions have included John Corigliano's Symphony No. 2 for the 100th anniversary of Symphony Hall. Hans Werner Henze dedicated his Eighth Symphony to the orchestra.
Although Koussevitsky recommended his protégé Leonard Bernstein to be his successor after he retired in 1949,

Leinsdorf, Steinberg, and Ozawa

Erich Leinsdorf became music director in 1962 and held the post until 1969. William Steinberg was then music director from 1969 to 1972. Steinberg was "ill and ailing" according to composer/author Jan Swafford, and "for four years he was indisposed much of the time." instead he accepted the post of BSO principal guest conductor, which he held from 1972 to 1984. As the search continued, Leonard Bernstein met with four board members and recommended Michael Tilson Thomas, who had been Assistant Conductor and Associate conductor under Steinberg, for the directorship, but the young conductor "did not have sufficient support among the BSO players," according to journalist Jeremy Eichler. The committee eventually chose Seiji Ozawa, who became Music Director in 1973 and held the post until 2002, the longest tenure of any Boston Symphony conductor.  ( Bernard Haitink served as principal guest conductor from 1995 to 2004, and was named conductor emeritus in 2004.)
Ozawa's tenure involved significant dissension and controversy. One concern was his handling of the Tanglewood Music Center. Greg Sandow wrote in the Wall Street Journal in December, 1998 that Ozawa "had taken control of the school with what many people thought was surprising and abrupt brutality. Members of the faculty, themselves world-famous, had angrily resigned." )
A more basic concern involved perceived shortcomings in Ozawa's musical leadership; as Sandow wrote in the 1998 article, "what mattered far more was how badly the BSO plays."  He noted that a group of Boston Symphony musicians had privately published a newsletter, Counterpoint, expressing their concerns; in the summer of 1995 concertmaster Malcolm Lowe and principal cellist Jules Eskin wrote that in rehearsal Ozawa gave no "specific leadership in matters of tempo and rhythm," no "expression of care about sound quality," and no "distinctly-conveyed conception of the character of each piece the BSO plays."
The Boston Symphony's managing director Mark Volpe responded that some board members considered Sandow's article a "hatchet job," and some unnamed BSO "observers" were said in the Boston Globe to believe that Sandow "might be sharpening blades for BSO members with axes to grind". Sandow called the suggestion "nonsense," saying, "I found them criticizing Ozawa in his article, they didn't find me". André Previn wrote to the Wall Street Journal defending Ozawa,
Various current music critics describe a decline in the orchestra's playing during Ozawa's tenure. Jan Swafford writes, "Now and then he gave a standout performance, usually in the full-throated late-Romantic and 20th-century literature, but most of the time what came out was glittering surfaces with nothing substantial beneath: no discernable concept, no vision." In a 2013 survey of recordings of The Rite of Spring by Igor Stravinsky, a New Yorker music critic, the composer Russell Platt, writes of "Seiji Ozawa's downright depressing account, recorded in 1979: the Boston Symphony Orchestra's sonic shine, developed by Ozawa's predecessors Monteux and Charles Munch, is audibly dripping away, its dispirited musicians losing their sense of individual responsibility to the score. It is a record of a professional relationship that went on far too long."
On June 22, 1999, the symphony announced that Ozawa would leave to become music director of the Vienna State Opera - a decision the board had heard about only a day earlier (Volpe said he was "a little surprised at the timing"). He gave his last concert with the orchestra in July 2002.

Levine and Nelsons

In 2004, James Levine became the first American-born music director of the BSO.  Levine received critical praise for revitalizing the quality and repertoire since the beginning of his tenure, including championing contemporary composers.
Levine suffered from recurring injuries and health problems issues during his BSO tenure,

Related ensembles

The Boston Pops Orchestra, the Boston Symphony Orchestra minus its principal players, was founded in 1885, and plays lighter, more popular classics, and show tunes. Arthur Fiedler was the conductor who did the most to increase the fame of the Boston Pops, over his tenure from 1930 to 1979.  Film composer John Williams succeeded Fiedler as the conductor of the Pops from 1980 to 1993.  Since 1995, the conductor of the Boston Pops has been Keith Lockhart.
The Boston Symphony Chamber Players were launched in 1964. Today they are the only chamber ensemble composed of principal players from an American symphony orchestra.  In addition to regular performances in Boston and Tanglewood, they have performed throughout the United States and Europe.  They have also recorded for RCA Victor, DG, Philips, and Nonesuch.
Performing with the BSO and Boston Pops for major choral works is the Tanglewood Festival Chorus. Organized in 1970 by its founding director, John Oliver, the Chorus comprises 250 volunteer singers.  Before the creation of the Tanglewood Festival Chorus, and for some time after, the BSO frequently employed the New England Conservatory Chorus conducted by Lorna Cooke DeVaron, Chorus Pro Musica, Harvard Glee Club and Radcliffe Choral Society.

Recordings

The Boston Symphony made its first acoustical recordings in 1917 in Camden, New Jersey for the Victor Talking Machine Company with Karl Muck.  Among the first discs recorded was the finale to Tchaikovsky's fourth symphony.  Typical of acoustical recordings, the musicians had to crowd around a large horn that transferred the sounds to a recording machine.
It was under Serge Koussevitsky that the orchestra made its first electrical recordings, also for Victor, in the late 1920s.  Using a single microphone for a process Victor called "Orthophonic", the first recordings included Ravel's Boléro.  Recording sessions took place in Symphony Hall.  Koussevitsky's final recording with the Boston Symphony was a high fidelity version of Sibelius' second symphony, recorded in 1950 and released on LP.
In February 1954, RCA Victor began recording the orchestra in stereo, under the direction of Charles Munch.  RCA continued to record Munch and the orchestra through 1962, his final year as music director in Boston (see the Charles Munch discography for a complete list of commercial recordings with the BSO under Charles Munch). During Munch's tenure, Pierre Monteux made a series or records with the BSO for RCA Victor (see Pierre Monteux for a complete list of commercial recordings with the BSO).
Erich Leinsdorf, who had already made numerous recordings for RCA, continued his association with the company during his seven years in Boston.  These included a critically acclaimed performance of Brahms' German Requiem (see Erich Leinsdorf for a complete list).
Then, the orchestra switched to Deutsche Grammophon (DG) under William Steinberg.  RCA recorded several LPs with Steinberg and Berlioz's Symphonie Fantastique with Georges Prêtre during the transition to DG (see William Steinberg for a complete list of commercial recordings). Michael Tilson Thomas, who was assistant conductor and associate conductor under Steinberg, also made several recordings for DG; some of these have been reissued on CD. Due to Steinberg's illness, DG recorded the BSO with Rafael Kubelík in Beethoven's Symphony No. 5, Ma Vlast by Bedřich Smetana and in Béla Bartók's Concerto for Orchestra as well as with Eugen Jochum conducting Symphony No. 41 by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart and Franz Schubert's Symphony 8.
As a guest conductor in the 1960s, Ozawa made several recordings with the BSO for RCA Victor.  He continued the BSO relationship with DG while making several other releases for New World. Over the course of Ozawa's tenure, the BSO diversified its relationships, making recordings under Ozawa with CBS, EMI, Philips Records, RCA, and TELARC.
The BSO also recorded for Philips under Colin Davis.  Leonard Bernstein made records for both Columbia and DG with the BSO, including selections from his last concert ever as a conductor on 19 August 1990 at Tanglewood.  The BSO has also appeared on Decca with Vladimir Ashkenazy, with Charles Dutoit and André Previn for DG, and on Phillips and Sony Classical with Bernard Haitink.
The BSO has also done recording for film scores on occasion. Films such as Schindler's List and Saving Private Ryan (both composed and conducted by John Williams) were recorded by the Orchestra at Symphony Hall.
In the James Levine era, the BSO had no standing recording contract with a major label;

Music directors

Orchestra musicians

A list of the principal players of the Boston Symphony : 

In popular culture

In the 1974-1975 American television situation comedy Paul Sand in Friends and Lovers, several cast members played fictional personnel of the Boston Symphony Orchestra. The show



Notes



Further reading

List of publications that have drawn extensively from the Collection of the Boston Symphony Orchestra Archives.




