[[Toothbrush]]

CATEGORIES: English inventions, Dental equipment, Domestic implements, Oral hygiene

thumb|300px|ToothbrushesThe toothbrush is an oral hygiene instrument used to clean the teeth and gums that consists of a head of tightly clustered bristles mounted on a handle, which facilitates the cleansing of hard-to-reach areas of the mouth. Toothpaste, which often contains fluoride, is commonly used in conjunction with a toothbrush to increase the effectiveness of tooth brushing. Toothbrushes are available with different bristle textures, sizes and forms. Most dentists recommend using a toothbrush labelled "soft", since hard bristled toothbrushes can damage tooth enamel and irritate the gums."Oral Longevity," American Dental Association brochure (PDF), page 2 Retrieved June 12, 2008 The predecessor of the toothbrush, the chew stick, first appeared in Egypt and Babylonia, and the earliest bristle toothbrushes originate from China. Toothbrushes were introduced to Europe through merchants and travelers in East Asia by the 17th century. DuPont introduced the nylon toothbrush in the 1930s.

History

A variety of oral hygiene measures have been used since before recorded history prior to the toothbrush. In the Islamic world the use of chewing stick Miswak is considered a pious action, and has been prescribed to be used before every prayer five times a day.30. Miswak has been used by Muslims since 7th Century AD.
The first bristle toothbrush, resembling the modern toothbrush, was found in China during the Tang Dynasty (619–907) and used hog bristle. Europeans found the hog bristle toothbrushes exported from merchants in China too firm, and preferred softer bristle toothbrushes manufactured from horsehair. Mass-produced toothbrushes, made with horse or boar bristle, continued to be imported to England from China until the mid-20th century.
In Europe, William Addis of England is believed to have produced the first mass-produced toothbrush in 1780. To that end, he saved a small animal bone left over from the meal he had eaten the previous night, into which he drilled small holes. He then obtained some bristles from one of his guards, which he tied in tufts that he then passed through the holes in the bone, and which he finally sealed with glue. After his release, he started a business that would manufacture the toothbrushes he had built, and he soon became very rich. He died in 1808, and left the business to his eldest son, also called William; the company was continuing, as of the middle of October 2013, to do business under the name of Wisdom Toothbrushes. Pig bristle was used for cheaper toothbrushes, and badger hair for the more expensive ones.
The first patent for a toothbrush was granted to H. N. Wadsworth in 1857 (US Patent No. 18,653) in the United States, but mass production in the United States only started in 1885. The rather advanced design had a bone handle with holes bored into it for the Siberian boar hair bristles. Unfortunately, animal bristle was not an ideal material as it retains bacteria and does not dry well, and the bristles often fell out. In addition to bone, sometimes handles were made of wood or ivory. In the United States, brushing teeth did not become routine until after World War II, when American soldiers had to clean their teeth daily.
During the 1900s, celluloid handles gradually replaced bone handles in toothbrushes. Natural animal bristles were also replaced by synthetic fibers, usually nylon, by DuPont in 1938. The first nylon bristle toothbrush, made with nylon yarn, went on sale on February 24, 1938. The first electric toothbrush, the Broxodent, was invented in Switzerland in 1954. "Who invented the toothbrush and when was it invented?" The Library of Congress. 2007-04-04. As of the turn of the 21st century, nylon had come to be widely used for the bristles, and the handles were usually molded from thermoplastic materials.
Johnson & Johnson, a leading medical-supplies firm, introduced the "Reach" toothbrush in the middle 1980s. It differed from previous toothbrushes in three ways: First, it had an angled head, similar to dental instruments, to reach back teeth;
second, the bristles were concentrated more closely than usual to clean each tooth of potentially carigenic (cavity-causing) materials; and
third, the outer bristles were longer and softer than the inner bristles, to clean between teeth.
The Reach toothbrush was the first to have a specialized design intended to increase its effectiveness. Other models, from other manufacturers, soon followed; each of these had unique design features intended to be, and promoted as being, more effective than the basic toothbrush design that had been employed for years.
In January 2003 the toothbrush was selected as the number one invention Americans could not live without according to the Lemelson-MIT Invention Index.

Types of toothbrush

Electric toothbrush

An electric toothbrush performs oscillations or rotations of its bristles, driven by a motor. Most studies report a medical performance equal to the one of manual brushes,

Interdental brush

An interdental or interproximal ("proxy") brush is a small brush, typically disposable, either supplied with a reusable angled plastic handle or an integral handle, used for cleaning between teeth and between the wire of dental braces and the teeth.
There are evidences that, after tooth brushing with a conventional tooth brush, interdental brushes remove more plaque than dental floss.
Brushes are available in a range of widths ranked from 1 to 7, color-coded as per ISO 16409. Interdental brushes are classified according to ISO standard 16409:2006. The ISO brush size is determined by the PHD or Passage Hole Diameter in mm. This PHD is the minimum diameter of a hole that the interdental brush will pass through without deforming the brush wire stem.

Sulcabrush

A Sulcabrush is a type of toothbrush used specifically for cleaning along the gumline adjacent to the teeth. The bristles are usually shaped in a pointed arrow pattern to allow closer adaptation to the gums. A Sulcabrush is ideal for cleaning specific difficult-to-reach areas, such as between crowns, bridgework and crowded teeth.  End-tufted brushes may also be used around fixed orthodontic appliances, such as braces.

End-tuft brush

The small round brush head comprises seven tufts of tightly packed soft nylon bristles, trimmed so the bristles in the center can reach deeper into small spaces. The brush handle is ergonomically designed for a firm grip, giving the control and precision necessary to clean where most other cleaning aids cannot reach.gumbrand.html These arias include, the posterior of the wisdom teeth (third molars), orthodontic structures (braces) crowded teeth, and tooth surfaces that are next to missing teeth. It can also be used to clean areas around implants, bridges, dentures and other appliance.google.com/site/flossingandinterdentalaids/end-tuft-brush

Chewable toothbrush

A chewable toothbrush is a miniature plastic moulded toothbrush which can be placed inside the mouth. While not commonly used they are useful to travelers and are sometimes available from bathroom vending machines. They are available in different flavors such as mint or bubblegum and should be disposed of after use. Other types of disposable toothbrushes include those that contain a small breakable plastic ball of toothpaste on the bristles, which can be used without water.

Ecological toothbrushes

Traditionally, toothbrushes are made of plastic. Such brushes constitute a small source of pollution.

Adversity of toothbrushes

Teeth can be damaged by several factors including poor oral hygiene, but also by wrong oral hygiene. Especially for sensitive teeth dentin and gums damages can be prevented by several measures including a correct brushing technique.
It is beneficial not to scrub horizontally over the necks of teeth, pressing the brush not too hard against the teeth, not choosing a tooth paste that is too abrasive,Erosion—diagnosis and risk factors; A. Lussic, T. Jaeggi; (2008) Clin Oral Investig.; 12(Suppl 1): 5–13.;  PMCID: PMC2676420 : "It is concluded that keeping tooth unbrushed for at least 30 min after an erosive attack is necessary for protecting dentin"
Harder tooth brushes reduce plaque more efficiently but are more stressful to teeth and gum, using a medium to soft tooth brush for a longer cleaning time was rated to be the best compromise between cleaning result and gum and tooth health. Zimmer S, Öztürk M, Barthel CR, Bizhang M, Jordan RA. J Periodontol. 2011 Feb; 82(2):267-71. 

Hygiene and care








