[[October Manifesto]]

CATEGORIES: 1905 in Russia, Politics of the Russian Empire, Political manifestos, 1905 works, 1905 in politics, Nicholas II of Russia

The October Manifesto ( as a response to the Russian Revolution of 1905.

Prelude

While France, Great Britain, and the United States chose democracy in one form or another, the Russian Empire maintained its ancient autocratic government, headed by the Tsar. Russia also chose not to reform its economy, and enjoy the economic prosperity that industrialization had to offer. Instead of industrialization, Russia chose to continue its agricultural economy at the expense of the peasants who still remained 80 percent of the population and all but tied to the land, like the former serfs.  Russia, by remaining an agricultural based economy, created economic issues and conflict between the differing social classes, as well as the government of the Russian Autocracy. 
The conflict created by Russia's economic and political issues climaxed in the months prior to October 1905, also known as the Russian Revolution of 1905. With Russia's communication, transportation and public services crippled by the strikes, Nicholas II was forced to act before he lost power completely.

Nicholas II Opposition to Reform

Although Russia was at a standstill with violent revolts terrorizing the nation, Nicholas II still opposed any reforms that involved limiting the Autocracy. Nicholas felt that it was not his place to limit a system created by his ancestors and he is even quoted as saying "I cannot squander a legacy that is not mine to squander."

Provisions

The October Manifesto addressed the unrest application throughout the Russian Empire and pledged to grant basic civil liberties, including 
[/ref]
This document, although granting basic rights to the Russian people, did not guarantee that the Russian government would function in a democratic way. Instead the Manifesto  just stated that the people now had basic rights and a voice in legislation.

The Duma

One provision of the Manifesto was the creation of a legislative body in Russia, which was intended to limit the power of the Autocrat in favor of the Russian people. 
The legislative body known as the Duma was flawed from its inception. One major flaw of the Duma was that the Tsar maintained the power to veto any legislation that he wished. 
The Duma was also weakened by the influence of the Russian bureaucracy, as well as the fact that the body could be disbanded by Nicholas if he and the Duma could not reach an agreement.

Opposition

The October Manifesto divided opposition to the Emperor. The Kadets were appeased by the idea of having freedom of speech and a truly representative government, and the Union of October 17 (informally known as the Octobrists, this party took its name from the October Manifesto). The Marxists, however, maintained that Nicholas had only made small concessions, arguing that the Duma was only a shell of democracy as it could not pass laws without the approval of the monarch, and that freedom of speech was heavily regulated.

Successes of the Manifesto

Successes of the Manifesto were immediate and short-lived. Almost immediately the strikes and the violence came to a stop.

Failures of the Manifesto

The immediate success of the Manifesto was followed by long-term failure, and a return to the cycle of strikes and violence. Shortly after its introduction, strikes returned as the Autocracy began to affirm its power once again. Within months, executions began again, numbering over 1000. It appears that instead of being a reform, the manifesto was just a short term ploy by Nicholas to regain order in Russia.





Link


