[[NHK]]

CATEGORIES: Commercial-free television networks, Japanese radio, NHK, Japanese-language television stations, Publicly funded broadcasters, 1926 establishments in Japan, Organizations established in 1926

 is Japan's national public broadcasting organization. (1990). ''Tokyo Rising: The City Since the Great Earthquake,'' p. 67. is a publicly owned corporation funded by viewers' payments of a television license fee.
NHK operates two terrestrial television services (NHK General TV and NHK Educational TV), two satellite television services (NHK BS-1 and NHK BS Premium, both now high-definition television services), and three radio networks (NHK Radio 1, NHK Radio 2, and NHK FM).
NHK also provides an international broadcasting service, known as NHK World. NHK World is composed of NHK World TV, NHK World Premium, and the shortwave radio service NHK World Radio Japan. World Radio Japan also makes some of its programs available on the internet.

History

NHK's earliest forerunner was the  founded in 1924 under the leadership of Count Gotō Shinpei. Tokyo Broadcasting Station, along with separate organizations in Osaka and Nagoya, began radio broadcasts in 1925. The three stations merged under the first incarnation of NHK in August 1926.nhk.or.html NHK was modelled on the BBC of the United Kingdom, and the merger and reorganisation was carried out under the auspices of the pre-war Ministry of Communications.or.
NHK began shortwave broadcasting on an experimental basis in the 1930s, and began regular English and Japanese-language shortwave broadcasts in 1935 under the name Radio Japan, initially aimed at ethnic Japanese listeners in Hawaii and the west coast of North America. By the late 1930s NHK's overseas broadcasts were known as Radio Tokyo, which became an official name in 1941.
In November 1941, the Imperial Japanese Army nationalised all public news agencies and coordinated their efforts via the Information Liaison Confidential Committee.  All published and broadcast news reports became official announcements of the Imperial Army General Headquarters in Tokyo for the duration of World War II. The famous Tokyo Rose wartime programs were broadcasts by NHK. NHK also broadcast the Gyokuon-hōsō, the surrender speech made by Emperor Hirohito, in August 1945.
Following the war, in September 1945, the Allied occupation administration under General Douglas MacArthur banned all international broadcasting by NHK, and repurposed several NHK facilities and frequencies for use by the Far East Network (now American Forces Network). Japanese-American radio broadcaster Frank Shozo Baba joined NHK during this time and led an early postwar revamp of its programming. Radio Japan resumed overseas broadcasts in 1952.
A new Broadcasting Act ("Hōsō Hō") was enacted in 1950, which made NHK a listener-supported independent corporation and simultaneously opened the market for commercial broadcasting in Japan.or.
NHK opened the first stage of its current headquarters in Shibuya, Tokyo as an international broadcasting center for the 1964 Summer Olympics, the first widely-televised Olympic Games. The complex was gradually expanded through 1973, when it became the headquarters for NHK. The previous headquarters adjacent to Hibiya Park was redeveloped as the Hibiya City high-rise complex.
NHK began satellite broadcasting on the NHK BS 1 channel in 1984, followed by NHK BS 2 in 1985.or. It became free-to-air over the Astra 19.2°E (Astra 1L) and Eurobird satellites in Europe in 2008.co."
NHK began digital television broadcasting in December 2000 on the BS Digital (BShi) station, followed by terrestrial digital TV broadcasts in three major metropolitan areas in 2003. Its digital television coverage gradually expanded to cover almost all of Japan by July 2011, when analog transmissions were discontinued (except in certain areas affected by the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami).

Organization

NHK is an independent corporation chartered by the Japanese Broadcasting Act and primarily funded by license fees. NHK World broadcasting (for overseas viewers/listeners) is funded by the Japanese government. The annual budget of NHK is subject to review and approval by the Diet of Japan. The Diet also appoints the 12-member Board of Governors (経営委員会 keiei iinkai) that oversees NHK.
NHK is managed on a full-time basis by an Executive Board (理事会 rijikai) consisting of a President, Vice President and seven to ten Managing Directors who oversee various areas of NHK operations. The Executive Board reports to the Board of Governors.

License fee

NHK is funded by , a system analogous to the license fee employed in some English-speaking countries. The Broadcast Law which governs NHK's funding stipulates that any television equipped to receive NHK is required to pay. The fee is standardized,NHK.or. For viewers making annual payments by credit card with no other special discounts, the reception fee is 13,600 yen per year for terrestrial reception only, and 24,090 yen per year for both terrestrial and broadcast satellite reception.nhk.or.html
However, the Broadcast Law lists no punitive actions for nonpayment; as a result of this, after a rash of NHK-related scandals, the number of people who had not paid the license fee surpassed one million users. This incident sparked debate over the fairness of the fee system.com: IHT/Asahi: February 24, 2005 In 2006, the NHK opted to take legal action against those most flagrantly in violation of the law.or.jp Summary of Press Conference (November 2006): On the demanding of fee payment through legal proceedings

NHK domestic broadcasting stations

TV programming

NHK General TV broadcasts a variety of programming. The following are noteworthy:

News

Local, national, and world news reports. NHK News 7 offers bilingual broadcasts on NHK General TV, NHK World TV and NHK World Premium. Its current flagship news program is News Watch 9, also broadcast throughout the whole NHK network. NHK also offers news for the deaf, regional news and children's news. News Today 30 Minutes is the new name of NHK NEWSWATCH which ran for 6 years. It is an English newscast designed for foreign viewers. On 2 February 2009, NHK World TV changed and the flagship newscast, Newsline, also changed and is currently the flagship newscast on NHK and NHK World TV.
In his book 'Broadcasting politics in Japan:NHK and television news', ES Krauss states:' in the 1960s and 1970s, external critics of  NHK news were complaining about the strict neutrality, the lack of criticism of government, and the 'self-regulation in covering events' ' Krauss claims that little had changed by the 1980s and 1990s.Ellis S Krauss Broadcasting politics in Japan: NHK and television news  Cornell University Press 2000 pp39-40 After the Fukushima nuclear disaster in 2011 NHK was criticised for underplaying the 
dangers from radioactive contamination.infiniteunknown.ex-skf.com, accessed 5th Jan 2012

Emergency reporting

Under the Broadcast Act, NHK is under the obligation to broadcast early warning emergency reporting in times of natural disasters such as earthquakes and tsunamis. Their national network of seismometers in cooperation with the Japan Meteorological Agency makes NHK capable of delivering the news in just 2–3 minutes after the quake. They also broadcast air attack warnings in the event of war, using the J-Alert system. 9. 
All warnings are broadcast in five languages: English, Mandarin, Korean and Portuguese (Japan has  small Chinese, Korean and Brazilian populations), as well as Japanese. The warnings were broadcast in these languages during the 11 March 2011 earthquake and tsunami.youtube.com/watch?v=gYLh6AroU20&feature=related An actual recording of an emergency broadcast in English, Mandarin, Korean and Portuguese

Education

Education programmes are watched nation-wide at primary schools. Tensai Terebikun MAX (better known as TTK) is a show combining a small amount of education with entertainment. TTK is currently hosted by the Yasuda Big Circus, Maki Nishiyama and a cast of 24 children ranging from ages 8 to 14.

Weather

Weather in detail, nationwide, and international for travellers.

Sports

NHK broadcasts the six annual Grand Sumo tournaments (having done so since the 1953 Natsu Basho), high-school baseball championships from Koshien Stadium, Olympic Games (under the Japan Consortium), National Sports Festival of Japan, and a range of other sports. NHK also broadcasts Boston Red Sox games when Daisuke Matsuzaka pitches. NHK also holds rights to broadcast the FA Premier League in Japan.premierleague.html

News analysis

The network carries in-depth reports on current topics, political debate, and similar programming.

Music

The annual Kōhaku Uta Gassen on New Year's Eve is the highlight. The weekly schedule includes an amateur hour, and prime-time shows for all ages. Music Japan is shown each week with brand new Japanese pop, and rock acts.
J-Melo is NHK's first music program to be recorded entirely in English for international consumption.
The NHK Symphony Orchestra, financially sponsored by NHK, was formerly (until 1951) the Japanese Symphony Orchestra. Its website details the orchestra's history and ongoing concert programme."NHK Symphony Orchestra website" Referenced 24 November 2010

Drama

A sentimental morning show, a weekly jidaigeki and a year-long show, the ''Taiga drama'', spearhead the network's fiction offerings.
NHK is also making efforts to broadcasting the drama made in foreign countries as "".

Documentaries

NHK has become known for its documentary series, first for the popular mini-series Legacy for the Future, and later for the NHK Tokushu (later known as NHK Special) .

Children

The longest running children's show in Japan, , still airs to this day on NHK-ETV.
Sesame Street was one of the first imports, debuting in 1971. It resumed in 1988, until 2004, when a local adaptation was announced, which NHK refused to be involved in. Teenagers and adults watched the program to learn English (though much later on, a dubbed version was also available). When the American Sesame Street aired on NHK, the channel produced episode guides. In the 2000s, when the show was available in both English and Japanese, Sesame English was interspersed within the program, first as a replacement for Elmo's World, but later in addition to it.

Other

Cooking, comedy, exercise, gardening, crafts, anime, igo, shogi.

Notable programs

Series: Silk Road

Silk Road IV: Central and West AsiaNHK's Silk Road series
Launched in 1980, NHK's renowned Silk Road series was the first foreign TV program allowed to film Silk Road inside communist China. The series sparked enormous interest. A quarter of a century later, NHK re-visits Silk Road with high-definition cameras. The first half of the journey is to Loolan, Tibet, Taklamakan Desert and Xian. The trip then continues from former Soviet Central Asia to the Middle East and Turkey. With its swirling mix of ethnic identities, this region is now carving out a new period of history led by the resurgence of Islam. NHK provides a new look at this modern-day Silk Road giving you a clear view of the regions' momentous changes.
Surrounded by 5,000-meter high mountains, the South Caucasus was a strategic point tying together all directions of the Silk Road. Home to 50 ethnic groups, the region is a cultural treasure trove of unique ethnic music, religious architecture, wines, and so on. It has also been invaded by the Roman, Mongol, and Ottoman empires. Wars still rage even now, and over one million people have become refugees. The region is truly representative of both the blessings and the historical calamities brought on by the Silk Road. This leg of the journey will take you to three countries—Azerbaijan, Armenia, and Georgia—countries that have long fostered unique cultures tempered by the flames of war.
With the end of the civil war, the people of Yemen are now building a new country. The remains of the palace of the Queen of Sheba, or Bilqs, are being excavated as a way of regaining Yemeni ethnic pride. North of Yemen lies the current oil kingdom, Saudi Arabia. Until 50 years ago, half of the Saudi people led nomadic lives. With the sharp rises in oil prices, people in Saudi Arabia gained enormous wealth, and as a result, the historical character of their cities began to change its shape. The tale of rise and fall transcending time and space echoes through the 1,500-kilometer journey across the Arabian Peninsula.
The next destination is the countries in Central Asia. A visitto  a new city that has emerged near the border between Kyrgyzstan and China. The city shows rapid growth due to the huge influx of Chinese goods. Heading west, we will see the cotton fields spread out across a huge oasis in Uzbekistan. We also explore the beautiful, white-bricked city of Bukhara, which still maintains an atmosphere of the Middle Ages. In one of the city's narrow streets, Uzbekis, Russians, Jews, and others live together side-by-side in harmony. Visit these people who live to the fullest amidst the uncertainties after the collapse of the former Soviet Union.
From Kazakhstan, this episode cuts through the steppe regions of Central Asia to Russia and the Ukraine. We meet ethnic Kazakhs in China seeking to return to their homeland and displaced Chechens deciding whether to return to their war-torn homeland or stay where it is peaceful. And Cossacks, many of whom are now reviving their proud heritage of military service in Imperial Russia, asserting themselves as bastions of support for the Putin government. As we continue our journey through Central Asia, we listen to the songs and stories of these people who are longing to return to the homelands of their distant memories.
Syria and Lebanon are the "last 100km" of the Silk Road. This area is also where various religions coexist. Here are found a hidden village where Christianity has been protected for 2,000 years, a temple of the Roman Empire, a Shiite holy city, and Christian Maronites who have continued to treasure the legendary Lebanon cedar. However, this area is also plagued by endless wars. The voices of prayers for peace are heard as we wonder if those of a family who's lost a son amid the confrontations can appease the continuous conflicts.

Criticism and controversies

NHK has faced various accusations regarding many topics including its treatment of Japan's wartime history.

2014 NHK crisis over Comfort Women in World War Two

Katsuto Momii (籾井勝人), 21st Head of NHK, caused controversy  by discussing Japan's actions in the Second World War at his first news conference after being appointed on the 20th December 2013.  It was reported that Momii said that NHK should support the Japanese government in its territorial dispute with China and South Korea.japantimes.co.UuV2nCg4mog He also caused controversy by playing down the issue of the  enforced sexual slavery of the so-called comfort women by the Japanese military in World War Two by, according to the Taipei Times stating ""South Korea's statements that Japan is the only nation that forced this are puzzling. 'Give us money, compensate us,' they say, but since all of this was resolved by the Japan-Korea peace treaty, why are they reviving this issue? It's strange." .  It was subsequently reported by the Japan Times that on his first day at NHK Momii asked members of the executive team to hand in their resignation on the grounds that they had all been appointed by his predecessor.

2014 World War II documentary controversy

Aired on NHK WORLD in February 2014, this documentary implied that Japan was duped into entering into war with the United States of America due to, simply, faulty intelligence and the work of spies.  The NHK documentary goes to lengths to describe how Churchill, through the use of military intelligence, apparently manipulated the US government, and implied that Japan's attack on Pearl Harbor and subsequent war with the US could have been avoided—but for the misinterpretation and manipulation of intelligence gathered against the Japanese military.  The NHK program completely fails to mention Japan's then current multiple wars of aggression in Asia, its alliance with Nazi Germany, and its egregious humanitarian and human rights abuses.





Notes

Additional sources




