[[Nigel Kennedy]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, People from Brighton, Juilliard School alumni, English classical violinists, English classical violists, British expatriates in Poland, British socialists, English classical musicians, English violinists, English violists, People educated at Yehudi Menuhin School

Nigel Kennedy (born 28 December 1956) is a British-born violinist and violist. He made his early career in the classical field, and he has performed and recorded most of the major violin concerti. He later included jazz, klezmer, and other genres in his repertoire.

Musical background

Nigel Kennedy's grandfather was Lauri Kennedy, a British-born musician and principal cellist with the BBC Symphony Orchestra, Nigel Kennedy has about 30 close relatives in Australia, whom he visits whenever he tours there.Limelight, February 2008

Early life and musical career

Nigel Kennedy was born in Brighton, East Sussex.  A boy prodigy, as a 10-year-old he would pick out Fats Waller tunes on the piano after hearing his stepfather's jazz records.
At the age of 16, Kennedy was invited by Stéphane Grappelli to appear with him at New York's Carnegie Hall, under the threat from his teachers at the Juilliard that it would ruin his classical career."If you need a pillock, call me", The Guardian, 29 September 2006 He made his recording debut in 1984 with Elgar's Violin Concerto. Kennedy's recording of Vivaldi's The Four Seasons with the English Chamber Orchestra in 1989 sold over 2 million copies and earned a place as one of the best-selling classical recordings ever.com – 23 August 1999. The album remained top of the UK classical charts for over a year with sales equivalent to one copy sold every 30 seconds."We may play dead composers' works, but we don't have to look as if we're still at the funeral", – Nigel Kennedy ClassicFM
He gave numerous performances for The Prince's Trust, the Royal Variety Performance and private performances at St. James's Palace and Buckingham Palace.  He published his biography Always Playing in 1991. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson, 1991 ISBN 0-297-81209-2 He then took the controversial and highly publicised decision to withdraw completely from public performance, at which point he made the album Music in Colours with Stephen Duffy. He made a triumphant return to the international concert platform to critical acclaim five years later. In 1997, Kennedy received an award for Outstanding Contribution to British Music at the BRIT Awards, and in 2001 received the 'Male Artist of the Year' award.
Kennedy recorded a cover of Jimi Hendrix's "Fire" for the 1993 album Stone Free: A Tribute to Jimi Hendrix.  In 1999 Sony Classical released The Kennedy Experience, which featured improvisational recordings of Hendrix compositions.  According to a BBC interview with Kennedy, the violinist stated that the recording is "an album of music inspired by Jimi Hendrix. It is an extended instrumental work in six movements, each movement a classical interpretation of a Hendrix song". With cellist Lynn Harrell, he has recorded an album of duets.
In 2000, he recorded Riders on the Storm: The Doors Concerto (with Jaz Coleman), a violin based orchestral version of some Doors songs, including "Strange Days", "LA Woman", "The End", and "Riders on the Storm".  And, on 27 November, Kennedy joined rock group The Who at the Royal Albert Hall to play the violin solo on the song "Baba O'Riley", released three years later on the album Live at the Royal Albert Hall. Kennedy has played on several tracks - notably "Experiment IV"- by British singer/songwriter Kate Bush, who was a guest on Kennedy's episode of This Is Your Life.  He was featured on two of Sarah Brightman's songs for her 2003 album Harem.
He has been exploring Klezmer music with the Polish jazz band Kroke. The band consists of musicians "who have been knocking around with Kennedy for five years. ... explains, 'I met them all separately at jam sessions in the jazz club near where I live in Cracow, ... I thought: that's the drummer I want, that's the bass player, and so on. They've all got their own projects.'"Richard Morrison "Nigel Kennedy returns to the BBC Proms", The Times, 11 July 2008.
In late 2005, Kennedy went to New York to record his first album for the jazz label Blue Note Sessions. Other musicians on the album were Ron Carter on double bass, Jack DeJohnette on drums; and saxophonist Joe Lovano. Kennedy has since stated that "from now on, at least 50 per cent of my endeavour is going to be in the jazz field".
Kennedy appointed a new manager, Terri Robson, and returned to the Proms after an absence of 21 years, performing Elgar's Violin Concerto and a late-night Prom with the Nigel Kennedy Quintet.
He also plays the viola, and has recorded Sir William Walton's Viola Concerto.
In 1991, he was awarded an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Letters) by the University of Bath.

Image and controversies

Kennedy's persona is seen by some as abrasive and limiting to his career,
Kennedy was attacked for his approach to classical music by John Drummond in 1991, who called him "a Liberace for the Nineties" and criticised his "ludicrous clothes and grotesque, self-invented accent."
Until 2006 he had expressed his intention of not appearing on the classical London concert scene with a London orchestra, seen by some as arrogance and stated by Kennedy in terms of frustrated perfectionism: "It all comes down to the amount of rehearsal you get, or don't get, in this country. I insist on three or four sessions prior to a concert, and orchestral administrators won't accommodate that. If I didn't care about getting it right I could do three concerts in the same amount of time and earn three times the money. But you can't do something properly in less time than it takes."
Kennedy expresses a preferencebooklet Beethoven violin concerto (1992) for the immediate appeal of live performance, and often records entire works or movements in single 'takes' to preserve this sense in his recordings.  He also introduces improvisatory elements in his performances, as in his Jimi Hendrix-inspired cadenza to the Beethoven Violin Concerto and his jazz and fusion recordings.
In the 2013 BBC Proms he appeared with the Palestine Strings and made passing reference to Israeli 'apartheid', later accusing the BBC of 'censoring' his remark.artsjournal.html

Personal life and politics

When not touring, Kennedy divides his time between residences in Malvern, Worcestershire (where his former girlfriend and son Sark live), and London and Kraków, where he lives with his Polish second wife, Agnieszka."Nigel Kennedy tries less spit, more Polish", The Times, 26 October 2007."Out of the woods."
In the late 1980s, Kennedy was romantically involved with singer/guitarist Brix Smith.
Kennedy is a well-known Aston Villa F.C. supporter. At Przystanek Woodstock 2010, he had his orchestra wear Aston Villa shirts, while directing the crowd in the team's chants. Whilst living and recording in Poland he also took an active interest in KS Cracovia, in whose 100th anniversary club replica kit he appeared.
On 24 October 2006, Kennedy broke his arm in a cycling accident, confirmed  in an interview on BBC Radio 3 on 20 April 2007.musicalamerica.cfm?archived=0&storyid=14824&categoryid=2&cookies=1
Kennedy has acknowledged regularly smoking cannabis in order to aid his creativity.

Politics

Kennedy is a socialist.  He supported David Davis's campaign when he quit his shadow home secretary post to force a by election in protest over proposals to allow terrorist suspects to be locked up for 42 days without charge.
The musician is a vocal opponent of Israel's policies in the West Bank, and, in the summer of 2007, he told a Ha'aretz reporter:

In 2013, the BBC censored the violinist's attribution of Apartheid to Israel which had been made during a Proms performance, from its broadcast of the event. Kennedy said:

BBC governor Baroness Deech called on Kennedy to apologise for his "offensive and untrue" comment,

Discography

Instruments

Nigel Kennedy has owned or played instruments by:






