[[David Norris (politician)]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, Living people, Alumni of Trinity College, Dublin, Candidates for President of Ireland, Gay politicians, Independent politicians in Ireland, Irish Anglicans, Irish people of British descent, James Joyce scholars, LGBT Christians, LGBT politicians from Ireland, LGBT rights activists from Ireland, Members of the 18th Seanad, Members of the 19th Seanad, Members of the 20th Seanad, Members of the 21st Seanad, Members of the 22nd Seanad, Members of the 23rd Seanad, Members of the 24th Seanad, People educated at The High School, Dublin, People from Kinshasa, People from Dublin (city)

David Patrick Bernard Norris (born 1 July 1944) is an Irish scholar, independent Senator, and gay and civil rights activist.com.bbc.co.David Norris wins Irish presidency nomination The Guardian. Internationally, Norris is credited with having "managed, almost single-handedly, to overthrow the anti-homosexuality law which brought about the downfall of Oscar Wilde", a feat he achieved in 1988 after a fourteen-year campaign. He has also been credited with being "almost single-handedly responsible for rehabilitating James Joyce in once disapproving Irish eyes".
Norris is a former university lecturer and a member of the Oireachtas, serving in Seanad Éireann since 1987. Founder of the Campaign for Homosexual Law Reform, he is also a prominent member of the Church of Ireland.
He was a candidate for President of Ireland in the October 2011 election. He topped numerous opinion polls and was favourite among members of the Irish public for the position but withdrew from the race months before the election,

Early and personal life

David Norris was born in Leopoldville in the Belgian Congo, now known as Kinshasa, capital of the Democratic Republic of Congo, where his father (John Norris) worked as chief engineer for Lever Brothers. John Norris served in the British Armed Forces during World War I and World War II; he died while Norris was still a child. David Norris was then sent to Ireland to be cared for by his mother, Aida Fitzpatrick, and her extended family.
After first meeting in 1975, Norris was in a long-term relationship with Israeli activist Ezra Nawi for a number of years until 1985.thejournal.jpg They continued a platonic friendship after that. In a Today FM interview with Matt Cooper in Summer 2011 Norris said (paraphrasing) "nowadays people think of a romantic relationship as a sexual one and Ezra and myself have not had that kind of relationship since the 1980s."

Education and academic career

Norris attended school at St. Andrew's College and The High School. He then entered Trinity College, the University of Dublin, to read for the degree of B.A. in English Literature and Language, where he was elected a Foundation Scholar in that subject before achieving a 1st Class Moderatorship and editing Icarus, the University literary magazine.  He remained at Trinity as a lecturer and college tutor between 1968 and 1996.senatordavidnorris.htm His love of Joyce is borne out in Dublin's annual Bloomsday celebrations.
After contracting the waterborne variation of Hepatitis while visiting Central Europe in 1994, Norris received disability payments from a private income continuance insurer worth thousands of euro over 16 years. Trinity College paid for this, and not the State. He has rarely drunk alcohol since the diagnosis.

Campaigning and activism

Norris took the Attorney General to the High Court over the criminalisation of homosexual acts. His claim was based on the fact that the law infringed on his right to privacy and that since the introduction of the Constitution of Ireland the law passed under British rule became repugnant to the constitution. The High Court ruled against Norris. He appealed his case to the Supreme Court of Ireland. Dublin In 1983, the Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the law by a three to two verdict.
Having lost the Supreme Court case, Norris took his case to the European Court of Human Rights (See Norris v. Ireland). In 1988, the European Court ruled that the law criminalising same sex activities was contrary to the European Convention on Human Rights, in particular Article 8 which protects the right to respect for private life. The law was held to infringe on the right of adults to engage in acts of their own choice. Ireland - 10581/83 (European Court of Human Rights)
This law was repealed in 1993.
Norris has since then expanded his activism to a concept of "universal rights".

Political career

Norris represents the University of Dublin constituency in the Seanad as an Independent. He was first elected to the Seanad in 1987, and has been re-elected at each election since.

2011 presidential campaign

=Entry=

In March 2011, Norris announced his intention to run in the 2011 Irish presidential election.
On 14 March 2011, Norris launched his campaign to secure a nomination.
Norris's candidacy was endorsed by British actor and writer Stephen Fry, who said Ireland "couldn't have a more intelligent passionate and knowledgeable witty or committed President".
In late July, it was revealed that Norris had written a letter in 1992 (29 August 1992) to an Israeli court asking clemency for his former partner Ezra Nawi, who had been convicted of the statutory rape of a 15-year-old Palestinian boy in 1992 but was awaiting sentencing. Norris's letter, written on parliamentary notepaper, said that Nawi had been lured into a "carefully prepared trap" and had unwisely pleaded guilty to the charges. The story was publicised by a pro-Israel blogger John Connolly. Connolly stated that he had received a tip from "someone in the trade union movement". and the controversy did not affect his poll standings.

=Withdrawal=

As of 22 July, Norris had secured the support of 15 of the 20 members of the Oireachtas required for a nomination.

=Re-entry=


Despite withdrawing from the presidential race in July 2011, Norris maintained considerable and, in some cases, increased public support. A poll taken one week after Norris withdrew from the presidential race, showed a large increase in public support for his Presidency if they were given the choice to vote for him (topping the poll by a considerable margin) with 40 per cent of respondents now saying they would vote Norris number one in the proportional representation electoral system and 50 per cent saying they would give him a vote."Byrne tops poll for presidency" 11 August 2011, The Irish Times
In Galway city alone, more than 1,000 signatures in support of Norris for President were gathered from members of the public in just 12 hours on the weekend of 11 September.
Despite attempts, Norris didn't receive sufficient support from Oireachtas members to gain a nomination, having been nominated by 18 members, two short of the minimum number of 20. However, he received a nomination from four county councils (Fingal, Laois, Waterford and Dublin City), which is sufficient to gain a nomination.
According to The Irish Times Norris had four times as many followers on Twitter as any of the other candidates as of 30 September.
In the first debate, held on RTÉ Radio 1's News at One, Norris promised the electorate he would have no difficulty in either visiting Israel or in meeting Pope Benedict XVI as President of Ireland.
He came fifth (of seven candidates) in the election receiving 109,469 (6.2%) first preference votes.

Views

On his website Norris lists his concerns as "Human Rights Issues, Foreign Policy, Immigration/Asylum, European Union, Luas/Metro".
He owns a Georgian house in North Great George's Street in Dublin, He has campaigned for the transfer of the Abbey Theatre (National Theatre of Ireland) to the GPO in the centre of O'Connell Street.30 P.M. IN CHRIST CHURCH CATHEDRAL ON SUNDAY THE 17TH OF MAY 2009." at Norris web site Norris is also a well-known Joycean scholar, and plays a large part in Dublin's annual Bloomsday celebrations.
Norris is a Christian and regularly attends Church of Ireland services. He said the following of his religious beliefs:
 I am the kind of Christian who believes that the most important theological principle is the principle of positive doubt. Even Christ doubted, on the cross. And I think if people say they hear the voice of God all the time and say they know what to do, then impose that on you, politically, it is theological tyranny. Whereas if you have doubt, it stops you from abusing your religious belief. Religion can be so abused in the interests of power, especially on behalf of institutions and governments. 
Norris believes himself to be an "outsider" of "accepted society" and claims this gives him a heightened awareness of other minority or "outsider" groups. He says he wishes society to become more accepting of diversity. He has campaigned on mental health and child abuse issues.
When questioned on drug legalisation he said: The blunt instrument of criminalisation is not working because of the vast profits it generates for organised crime ... my view is that the welfare of the community, including the victims of drug abuse, may be better served by having access to quality controlled, legally prescribed drugs. 

Controversy

Fairytale of Kathmandu

On 11 March 2008, Norris called for the broadcast of the documentary Fairytale of Kathmandu (scheduled to be shown that evening on RTÉ) to be postponed. The film documented visits to Nepal by Irish poet Cathal Ó Searcaigh, during which he had sex with young boys. It questioned whether he was sexually exploiting the boys or engaging in child sex tourism. Norris criticised that the film had been leaked beforehand and that Ó Searcaigh had been treated harshly by the media before its broadcast. He announced to the Seanad that the film should be checked for factuality, because he claimed that "public money" had been spent on it. The issue was conveyed to Deputy John Cregan, the Chairman of the Joint Committee on Communications, Energy and Natural Resources.

Easter Rising comments

An article in The Sunday Times claimed that Norris had, on more than one occasion, denounced the leaders of the 1916 Easter Rising as "terrorists". The newspaper printed a retraction.

Criticism of Pope John Paul II

Norris has made statements about Catholic social teaching on homosexuality, particularly in relation to the Papacy. He criticised Pope John Paul II's statements on homosexuality because he said they led to anti-gay violence, saying that the pope was an "instrument for evil as far as I'm concerned because these constant, unremitting, ignorant, ill-informed attacks on the gay community have led to violence against the gay community". Norris also described the pope's position as "calculated and deliberate wickedness" because he "closes down scholarly enquiry" and because he "marginalised all the wonderful people like Oscar Romero, Leonardo Boff, Hans Kung, Charles Curran, all these marvellous people who are the future and the hope of the Church and, instead, put into place these mindless bureaucrats, which is intensely sad."

2002 Magill magazine interview

In a January 2002 interview for politics/current affairs magazine Magill, Norris discussed the age of consent, incest,  paedophilia and pederasty.
According to Norris, he was only read two paragraphs of the interview before publication, and he asked for corrections to be made to those paragraphs, and these corrections were not made.
During the initial interview on 30 May 2011, Burke explained on Liveline that she had "a tape somewhere around but I cant find it, its twelve years old and I don't know whether it would be viable now". Also, when Burke was asked if she had a tape while being interviewed on RTÉ News: Six One on 31 May 2011 by Caitriona Perry, Perry asserted that "despite originally believing that she had a recording of the interview, Helen Lucy Burke is now not so sure". Burke explained, "I don't think so, I thought I had a taped cassette, but it turns out that it was in the one, I wasn't able to open it because it was a different length from the one in my existing cassette box". When Caitriona Perry asked "do you think you have a tape anywhere else", Burke replied "it could be under the mountains of stuff that came down when my ceiling came in". In the last days of the campaign the tape was released and according to the Irish Independent, Ms. Burke "said yesterday she found the tape recently but only released it in the last days of the campaign for "impact." She said "it would give people something to think about when they went to the polls.

Awards






