[[Angus Deayton]]

CATEGORIES: 1956 births, Living people, Alumni of New College, Oxford, English game show hosts, English male television actors, English television presenters, People educated at Caterham School, People from Caterham, The Hee Bee Gee Bees members

Gordon Angus Deayton ( is an English actor, writer, musician, comedian and broadcaster. He was the original presenter of the satirical panel game Have I Got News for You, a job from which he was dismissed in October 2002 after a second round of tabloid allegations about his personal life. He also played Victor Meldrew's long-suffering neighbour Patrick Trench in the comedy series One Foot in the Grave.

Early life

The youngest of three sons of a Prudential plc insurance broker/manager and a home economics school teacher, Deayton was brought up in Banstead, Surrey, and attended Oakhyrst Grange School and Caterham School. He showed early promise as a footballer, and had a trial with Crystal Palace.
Deayton read languages at New College, Oxford, where he was recruited into the Oxford Revue, performing with them at the Edinburgh Festival Fringe. This led to the creation of the parody band the Hee Bee Gee Bees in 1980, with the songs written by Richard Curtis and Philip Pope. Their best-selling single "Meaningless Songs (In Very High Voices)" (plus the B-side "Posing in the Moonlight") was a parody of the falsetto style of disco hits by the Bee Gees.

Radio and television career

Deayton founded his career on Radio Active,  a parody of British local radio stations broadcast on BBC Radio 4 between 1981 and 1987, which he co-wrote and performed. It transferred to television as KYTV between 1989 and 1993. Deayton presented a tribute to Radio Active and KYTV colleague and friend (and long-time BBC producer) Geoffrey Perkins for BBC Radio 4 on 4 October 2008. Deayton was frequently a straight man alongside Rowan Atkinson. He starred with Atkinson as a pool attendant and a man on a park bench in the Mr. Bean episode "The Curse of Mr. Bean" and appeared opposite Atkinson in the Black Adder episode "Born to be King" (1983) as one of the Jumping Jews of Jerusalem. He also appeared in sketches on Alexei Sayle's Stuff.
In 1990 Deayton was cast as the Meldrews' neighbour Patrick Trench in the British suburban sitcom One Foot in the Grave and was selected as host of Have I Got News for You. The same year, he featured in a TV advert for the Vauxhall Nova. Andre Ptaszynski tried to persuade him to take the lead role in Steven Moffat's sitcom Chalk, a role eventually taken by David Bamber.co. & dir. Craig Robins
Deayton's suave manner as host of Have I Got News for You led to his being nicknamed "TV's Mr Sex", by a Time Out listings writer. He was much in demand as a presenter of television specials including the BBC's New Year's Eve show and the BAFTA Awards. He also featured in a series of advertisements for Barclaycard and the films Savage Hearts and Elizabeth.
In one episode of Coupling, he appears in a fantasy sequence alongside Mariella Frostrup. In addition, he hosted the late-1990s BBC show Before They Were Famous, which showed early and frequently embarrassing clips of TV and film stars (including Deayton himself) when they were relatively unknown.
In May 2002, the News of the World suggested he had taken cocaine and had sex with prostitutes. After more allegations in October, Deayton was sacked two episodes into the new series after Merton and Hislop repeatedly implied during the programme that Deayton should resign. 
After Have I Got News for You, his work included a reunion of the Radio Active cast in a new episode broadcast in December 2002. In 2003, he guest-starred as Downing Street's spin doctor in an episode of the BBC comedy Absolute Power, starring Stephen Fry and John Bird. He starred in the BBC comedy Nighty Night shown from January 2004. Deayton had a cameo role as a hotel receptionist in the 2004 Fat Slags film. A few months later, he presented ITV's cookery reality show Hell's Kitchen and then the quiz Bognor or Bust. In January 2006 he hosted an ITV show based upon self-help videos called Help Your Self.
Deayton is associated with Comic Relief/Sport Relief and featured in its broadcasts. He co-presented the Sport Relief charity programme Only Fools on Horses in July 2006. Deayton appeared for the England team as a second-half substitute in the Soccer Aid match in support of UNICEF on 27 May 2006. He returned as a starting player for England in the 7 September 2008 rematch.
In 2007 he was in Casualty, playing an exaggerated version of himself in a Comic Relief-related story. Deayton returned to the BBC in June 2007, hosting a comedy panel game, Would I Lie to You?. In November 2007, he was censured by the BBC for making a "pungently personal" joke about Jimmy Savile and his mother on the show.
In 2008 he also presented Comedy Sketchbook, a nostalgic look at classic comedy sketches, on BBC1. He presented the 2008 British Comedy Awards on 6 December 2008, after host Jonathan Ross stepped down because of controversy surrounding The Russell Brand Show prank telephone calls row.
His feature film appearances include the mysterious, all-knowing man in That Deadwood Feeling (2009, co-starring Jack Davenport, Dexter Fletcher and David Soul), Swinging with the Finkels (2011, written and directed by Jonathan Newman, with Mandy Moore and Martin Freeman),
On 12 December 2012, Deayton joined the BBC drama series Waterloo Road as  a cynical teacher and for a further season as deputy head, George Windsor. He made his first appearance in episode 27 of the eighth series, which was broadcast in 2013.   He co-stars with Anna Chancellor in the BBC sitcom Pramface (2013).

Personal life

At Oxford, Deayton was in a relationship with the actress Helen Atkinson-Wood (a co-star on Radio Active and KYTV). Whilst touring with the HeeBeeGeeBees in Australia in the 1980s, Deayton saved Atkinson-Wood's life when he rescued her after she was caught in a rip tide whilst swimming off Sydney's Manly Beach.
Deayton later
Since the early 1990s, he has been in a long-term relationship with scriptwriter Lise Mayer.
Deayton is a Manchester United supporter and a friend of former player and current Director of Manchester United's youth academy, Brian McClair.

Tabloid allegations and reaction

In May 2002 the British tabloid newspaper News of the World published allegations about Deayton's affair with a woman who later claimed she was a prostitute and about his use of cocaine. In October there were further reports of another affair, and he was asked to step down as the quizmaster of Have I Got News For You on 29 October 2002.[ref]

 
The BBC said Deayton's position as a satirical commentator on the week's news had become "untenable". Deayton's Have I Got News for You co-star Paul Merton, speaking on the interview show Parkinson, compared Deayton's sacking to "the Marx Brothers -- we lost Zeppo, it's not a big deal".  He also stated that he believed Deayton would soon return to television on other programmes because "you can't keep talent like that down".youtube.com/watch?v=aMXiR089ARQ @ 2:37
Merton later revealed that he never got on with Deayton, finding him "arrogant and aloof". However, he refused to condemn Deayton's behaviour in relation to the sex scandals, saying, "I wouldn't have done it myself, but disapprove? I don't want to set myself up as a moral arbiter". Merton denied all knowledge of Deayton's allegedly blaming him and co-star Ian Hislop for his dismissal from the programme, revealing that the only time Deayton discussed his predicament with him was when he thanked Merton for making the scandal "funny on television". Merton also stated that despite their differences he wished Deayton well for the future.
Stephen Fry has supported Deayton by refusing to appear on the show again.

Filmography

Bibliography






