[[Hinamatsuri]]

CATEGORIES: Festivals in Japan, March observances, Japanese traditional dolls, Fixed holidays



Origin and customs

The custom of displaying dolls  began during the Heian period. Formerly, people believed the dolls possessed the power to contain bad spirits. Hinamatsuri traces its origins to an ancient Japanese custom called  take the boats out of the water and bring them back to the temple and burn them.
The customary drink for the festival is shirozake, a sake made from fermented rice. A colored hina-arare, bite-sized crackers flavored with sugar or soy sauce depending on the region, and hishimochi, a diamond-shaped colored rice cake, are served. Chirashizushi (sushi rice flavored with sugar, vinegar, topped with raw fish and a variety of ingredients) is often eaten. A salt-based soup called ushiojiru containing clams still in the shell is also served. Clam shells in food are deemed the symbol of a united and peaceful couple, because a pair of clam shells fits perfectly, and no pair but the original pair can do so.
Families generally start to display the dolls in February and take them down immediately after the festival.  Superstition says that leaving the dolls past March 4 will result in a late marriage for the daughter.

Placement

The Kantō region and Kansai region have different placement orders of the dolls from left to right, but the order of dolls per level are the same.
The term for the platform in Japanese is , a red carpet with rainbow stripes at the bottom.

First platform, the top

The top tier holds two dolls, known as  respectively.
The dolls are usually placed in front of a gold folding screen  and placed beside green Japanese garden trees.
Optional are the two lampstands, called , which are usually decorated with cherry or ume blossom patterns.
Complete sets would include accessories placed between the two figures, known as 
The traditional arrangement had the male on the right, while modern arrangements had him on the left (from the viewer's perspective).

Second platform

The second tier holds three court ladies .
Accessories placed between the ladies are , stands with round table-tops for seasonal sweets, excluding hishimochi.

Third platform

The third tier holds five male musicians . Each holds a musical instrument except the singer, who holds a fan.
Left to right, from viewer's perspective, they are the:

Fourth platform

Two ministers (daijin) may be displayed on the fourth tier: the . The Minister of the Right is depicted as a young person, while the Minister of the Left is much older. Also, because the dolls are placed in positions relative to each other, the Minister of the Right will be on the viewer's left and the Minister of the Left will be on the viewer's right.  Both are sometimes equipped with bows and arrows.
Between the two figures are covered bowl tables .
Just below the ministers: on the rightmost, a mandarin orange tree .

Fifth platform

The fifth tier, between the plants, holds three helpers or samurai as the protectors of the Emperor and Empress.  From left to right (viewer's perspective):

Other platforms

On the sixth and seventh tiers, a variety of miniature furniture, tools, carriages, etc., are displayed.

=Sixth platform=

These are items used within the palatial residence.

=Seventh platform, the bottom=

These are items used when away from the palatial residence.

Elsewhere

Hinamatsuri is also celebrated in Florence (Italy), with the patronage of the Embassy of Japan, the Japanese Institute and the historical Gabinetto Vieusseux.
Hinamatsuri is also celebrated in Hawai'i.

Collectors

Japanese dolls or Hina are broken down into several subcategories. Two of the most prominent are Girl's Day, hina-ningyo, and the Boy's Day musha-ningyo, or display dolls, sagu-ningyo, gosho-ningyo, and isho-ningyo (Scott, 2008). Collections can be categorized by the material they are made of such as wood dolls kamo-ningyo and nara-ningyo and, clay forms such as fushimi-ningyo and Hakata ningyo.
In the nineteenth century ningyo were introduced to the West. Doll collecting has since become a popular pastime in the West (Scott, 2008  A majority of Adeline's collection consisted of ningyo, and only a few prints.
During the Meiji Era, three men became pioneers in collecting ningyo, Kurihara Sokosut (1851-1913), Nishizawa, Senko (1864–1914), and Tsuboi Shogoro (1863–1913). The three men are referred to as "Gangu San Ketsu" (the three great toy collectors). They introduced a systematic approach to collecting ningyo in an effort to preserve and document the various forms of ningyo (Scott, 2008), was the most trained of the three, and he brought a scientific element to the collecting of ningyo.  Dolls have been a part of Japanese culture for many years, and the phenomenon of collecting them is still practiced. Many collections are preserved in museums, including the Peabody Essex Museum, Kyoto National Museum, and the Yodoko Guest House.





Further reading




