[[PricewaterhouseCoopers]]

CATEGORIES: Management consulting firms of the United States, Management consulting firms of the United Kingdom, International management consulting firms, Privately held companies based in New York, Privately held companies in the United States, Companies based in London, Companies established in 1849, Accounting firms, Accounting firms of the United Kingdom, Accounting firms of the United States, PricewaterhouseCoopers, Economics consulting firms

PricewaterhouseCoopers (trading as PwC) is a multinational professional services network headquartered in London, United Kingdom. It is the world's second largest professional services network measured by 2013 revenues, and is one of the Big Four auditors, along with Deloitte, Ernst & Young (EY) and KPMG.5 billion revenue, regains lead, Reuters, 3 October 2011. Retrieved 4 October 2012.
PwC has offices in 776 cities across 157 countries and employs over 184,000 people. It had total revenues of $31.5 billion in FY 2012, of which $14.9 billion was generated by its Assurance practice, $7.9 billion by its Tax practice and $8.7 billion by its Advisory practice.
The firm was formed in 1998 by a merger between Coopers & Lybrand and Price Waterhouse. The trading name was shortened to PwC in September 2010 as part of a rebranding.


Name

The PricewaterhouseCoopers name was formed by the combination of the names of Price Waterhouse and Coopers & Lybrand, following their merger in 1998. On 20 September 2010, PricewaterhouseCoopers rebranded as PwC, although the legal name of the firm remained PricewaterhouseCoopers.

History

The firm was created in 1998 when Coopers & Lybrand merged with Price Waterhouse. The two firms each had histories dating back to the 19th century.

Coopers & Lybrand

In 1854 William Cooper founded an accountancy practice in London, which became Cooper Brothers seven years later when his three brothers joined.
In 1898, Robert H. Montgomery, William M. Lybrand, Adam A. Ross Jr. and his brother T. Edward Ross formed Lybrand, Ross Brothers and Montgomery in the United States.
In 1957 Cooper Brothers; Lybrand, Ross Bros & Montgomery and a Canadian firm McDonald, Currie and Co, agreed to adopt the name Coopers & Lybrand in international practice. In 1973 the three member firms in the UK, US and Canada changed their names to Coopers & Lybrand.

Price Waterhouse

Samuel Lowell Price, an accountant, founded an accountancy practice in London in 1849.
By the late 19th century, Price Waterhouse had gained significant recognition as an accounting firm. As a result of growing trade between the United Kingdom and the United States, Price Waterhouse opened an office in New York in 1890, and the American firm itself soon expanded rapidly. The original British firm opened an office in Liverpool in 1904 and then elsewhere in the United Kingdom and worldwide, each time establishing a separate partnership in each country: the worldwide practice of PW was therefore a federation of collaborating firms that had grown organically rather than being the result of an international merger.
In a further effort to take advantage of economies of scale, PW and Arthur Andersen discussed a merger in 1989

1998 to present

In 1998, Price Waterhouse merged with Coopers & Lybrand to form PricewaterhouseCoopers (written with a lowercase 'w').Price Waterhouse and Coopers & Lybrand to merge Weekly Corporate Growth Report 29 September 1997
After the merger the firm had a large professional consulting branch, as did other major accountancy firms, generating much of its fees. Management Consulting Services (MCS) was the fastest growing and often most profitable area of the practice, though it was cyclical. The major cause for growth in the 1990s was the implementation of complex integrated ERP systems for multi-national companies.
PwC came under increasing pressure to avoid conflicts of interests by not providing some consulting services, particularly financial systems design and implementation, to its audit clients. Since it audited a large proportion of the world's largest companies, this was beginning to limit its consulting market. These conflicts increased as additional services including outsourcing of IT and back office operations were developed. For these reasons, in 2000, Ernst & Young was the first of the Big Four to sell its consulting services, to Capgemini.Ernst & Young sells consulting unit to Cap Gemini Cnet News, 29 February 2000
The fallout from the Enron, Worldcom and other financial auditing scandals that led to the passage of the Sarbanes–Oxley Act severely limited the interaction between management consulting and auditing (assurance) services.  PwC Consulting began to conduct business under its own name rather than as the MCS division of PricewaterhouseCoopers. PwC therefore planned to capitalize on MCS's rapid growth through its sale to Hewlett Packard (for a reported $17 billion) but negotiations broke down in 2000.Hewlett-Packard drops PWC bid BBC News, 13 November 2000
In 2000, PwC acquired Canada's largest SAP consulting partner Omnilogic Systems.Passion for business takes entrepreneur from software to cars to music
In March 2002 Arthur Andersen, LLP affiliates in Hong Kong and China completed talks to join PricewaterhouseCoopers, China.Andersen Affiliates in China to Join Rival Singapore News, 21 March 2002
PwC announced in May 2002 that its consulting activities would be spun off as an independent entity and hired an outside CEO to run the global firm. An outside consultancy, Wolff Olins, was hired to create a brand image for the new entity, called "Monday"."Monday name change for PwC, BBC News, 10 June 2002. These plans were soon revised, however. In October 2002, PwC sold the entire consultancy business to IBM for approximately $3.9 billion in cash and stock. PwC's consultancy business was absorbed into IBM Global Business Services, increasing the size and capabilities of IBM's growing consulting practice.IBM buying PricewaterhouseCoopers' consulting business Technology, 31 July 2002
PwC started to rebuild its consulting practice with acquisitions such as Paragon Consulting Group and the commercial services business of BearingPoint in 2009.PwC acquires global consulting firm PRTM International Accounting Bulletin, 23 August 2011 In August 2012 the firm acquired Ant's Eye View, a social media strategy development and consulting firm to build upon the its growing Management Consulting customer impact and customer engagement capabilities.
The company currently offers a growing range of enterprise-level software services to meet rising data management challenges. In 2013, the company partnered with data integration firm Pneuron Corporation to help firms manage big data.

Operations

PricewaterhouseCoopers' operations are Global, but with Europe accounting for 42% of the total.
PwC audits 33% of companies in the FT Global 500 and 29% of the companies in the Fortune Global 500.

Service lines

PricewaterhouseCoopers is organised into the following three main service lines:
PwC's service lines face the market in each country by broad industry specialisations such as:
These sub-divisions may vary slightly in some territories.

Consulting

PwC has developed several broader consulting initiatives in the Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) framework, including a global effort to assist corporations with outsourcing, as well as a global political risk assessment with the political risk advisory firm Eurasia Group.
Advisory services offered by PwC also include two actuarial consultancy departments; Actuarial and Insurance Management Solutions (AIMS) and a sub branch of "Human Resource Services" (HRS). Actuarial covers mainly 4 areas: pensions, life insurance, non-life insurance, and investments.  AIMS deals with life and non-life insurance and investments, while HRS deals mainly with pensions.
PwC serves the US Federal Government through their Public Sector practice. PwC has over 2000 professionals based in the Washington Metro Corridor.
The firm announced on October 30, 2013 that it will acquire Booz & Company, including the company's name and its 300 partners, after a December vote by Booz & Company partners authorizes the deal.

Offices

PwC has offices in 776 cities across 158 countries.

Legal structure

The legal structure of a limited liability partnership (LLP) is very different from that of a corporation, and as such the global firm is in fact a collection of member firms, that are run autonomously in their respective jurisdictions. The senior partners of member firms sit on a global board of partners and there is also an 'umbrella' company called PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited, a UK-based company which provides co-ordination. Dennis Nally, the former Chairman of the US firm, became Chairman of PwC International on 1 July 2009.Nally named Global Chair of PwC Accountancy Age, 17 March 2009

Notable clients

PwC provides auditing services to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and has  since 1934.PricewaterhouseCoopers to safeguard Hollywood's biggest secret for 72nd year

Logo

The current PwC logo was introduced in September 2010, to coincide with the firm changing its trading name from PricewaterhouseCoopers to PwC. It was designed by Wolff Olins.Logos in the news

Image:COaLY.gif|The Coopers & Lybrand logo prior to the 1998 merger
Image:Pw logo.png|The Price Waterhouse logo prior to the 1998 merger
Image:PricewaterhouseCoopers.svg|The PwC logo from 1998 to 2010
File:Pwc logo.svg|The PwC logo from 2010 to the present

Controversies

Willie Nelson

In 1990, the US Internal Revenue Service seized most of the assets of Willie Nelson, claiming he owed $32 million in back taxes, including penalties and interest. He sued Price Waterhouse, contending that they put him into tax shelters that were later disallowed by the IRS.

American International Group Inc.

BusinessWeek said that PwC was American International Group Inc.'s auditor through years of "questionable dealings." AIG on 30 March 2005 said that deals with a Barbados-based insurance company, for instance, may have been incorrectly accounted for over the past 14 years, because an AIG-affiliated company may have been secretly covering that insurer's losses.Tough Questions For AIG's Auditors – Regulators are probing if PwC let the financial shenanigans slip through Businessweek, Joseph Weber, Mike McNamee, Marcia Vickers and Diane Brady, 11 APRIL 2005
BusinessWeek said that PwC appears to have "dropped the ball" on the deals between AIG and Berkshire Hathaway Inc.'s General Re Corp. General Re transferred $500 million in anticipated claims and premiums to AIG. BusinessWeek asked: "Did the auditor do its job by verifying that AIG was assuming risk on claims beyond the $500 million, thus allowing AIG to account for the deal as insurance? That's Accounting 101 in any reinsurance transaction."

ChuoAoyama Suspension

From 2000 to 2006, PwC's affiliate of assurance service in Japan was 
Shortly after the suspension of ChuoAoyama, PwC acted quickly to stem any possible client attrition as a result of the scandal. It set up the PricewaterhouseCoopers Aarata, and some of ChuoAoyama's accountants (but most of the international divisions) moved to the new firm. ChuoAoyama resumed operations on 1 September under the Misuzu name. However, by this point the two firms combined had 30% fewer clients than did ChuoAoyama prior to its suspension. Misuzu was dissolved in July 2007.New Japanese Internal Controls Framework Fraud Magazine, November/December 2007

Tyco settlement

In July 2007, PwC agreed to pay US$229 million to settle a class-action lawsuit brought by shareholders of Tyco International Ltd. over a multibillion-dollar accounting fraud.
The chief executive and chief financial officer of Tyco were found guilty of looting $600 million from the company.

Satyam case

In January 2009 PwC was criticised,

Yukos prosecutions

In November 2010, The New York Times reported that PwC had been assisting the Russian Government with prosecutions in relation to alleged tax evasion at Yukos stating "... Khodorkovsky and Platon Lebedev), again, bringing a new round of Kafkaesque charges."New York Times issue of 6 November 2010, business columnist Joe Nocera
A cable from the US embassy in Moscow stated that the trial was politically motivated and that a deposition in a US court by PricewaterhouseCoopers may show that PwC was pressured by the Russian government to withdraw its prior Yukos audits. An embassy source noted that if the audits were not properly withdrawn it "would greatly tarnish PWC's international reputation."

Global Trust Bank Ltd and DSQ Software

India's accounting standards agency ICAI is investigating partners of PwC for professional negligence in the now-defunct Global Trust Bank Ltd. case of 2007. Like Satyam, Global Trust Bank was also based in Hyderabad. This led to Reserve Bank of India banning PwC from auditing any financial company for over a year.

Transneft Russia case

The construction of the ESPO (East Siberia-Pacific Ocean) pipeline by Transneft was estimated to cost in excess of US$13 billion. A leaked report of the Audit Chamber of the Russian Federation indicated that the total amount stolen and siphoned from the company during construction through various mechanisms and schemes reaches up to USD 4 billion.
A Moscow Times editorial stated that one of the chamber's auditors attempted "damage control" by saying in effect, "Yes, money was stolen, but not as much the media reported." PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) was Transneft's auditor and denied wrongdoing saying "We believe there are absolutely no grounds for such allegations, and we stand behind our work."

House of Lords inquiry in the UK

In 2011, a House of Lords inquiry specifically criticized PwC for not drawing attention to the risks in the business model followed by Northern Rock, a client of the firm, which was rescued by the UK government during the financial crisis.Adam Jones, Auditors criticised for role in financial crisis, Financial Times, 30 March 2011

JP Morgan Securities audit

In 2012, the Accountancy and Actuarial Discipline Board (AADB) of the UK fined PwC a record £1.4m for wrongly reporting to the Financial Services Authority that JP Morgan Securities had complied with client money rules which protects client funds. The accountants neglected to check whether JP Morgan had the correct systems in place, and failed to gather sufficient evidence to form opinions on the issue, and as a result, failed to report that JP Morgan failed to hold client money separate from JP Morgan's money. It is the greatest penalty administered to a professional accountancy firm in the UK.

World Bank Favouring for Water Privatization in Delhi

PricewaterhouseCoopers was found to be unethically favored by the World Bank in a bid to privatize the water distribution system of Delhi, India, an effort that was alleged as corrupt by investigators. Money Life. January 1, 2012. When bidding took place, PwC repeatedly failed in each round, and the World Bank in each case pressured PwC to be pushed to the next round and eventually win the bid. The effort at privatization fell through when an investigation was conducted by Arvind Kejriwal and the non-governmental organization (NGO) Parivartan in 2005. After submitting a Right to Information (RTI) request, Parivartan received 9000 pages of correspondence and consultation with the World Bank, where it was revealed that the privatization of Delhi's water supply would provide salaries of $25,000 a month to four administrators of each of the 21 water zones, which amounted to over $25 million per year, increasing the budget by over 60% and water taxes 9 times. Independent Peoples Tribunal on the World Bank in India.
. BharatKiAwaaz.
The Delhi Jal Board (DJB), which administers the water system of Delhi, was first approached by Parivartan in November 2004, following a report by the newspaper The Asian Age, where the scheme was revealed to the public for the first time. The DJB denied the existence of the project, but after an appeal, the RTI request was granted. The documents revealed that the project began in 1998, in complete secrecy within the DJB administration. The DJB approached the World Bank for a loan to improve the water system, which it approved, and the effort began with a $2.5 million consultation loan. The Delhi government could have easily provided the money, and the interest rate of 12% that was to be loaned by the World Bank could have been raised on capital markets for 6%. Following the consultation, 35 multi-national companies bid, of which six were to be short listed. When PwC was in 10th place, the World Bank said that at least one company should be from a developing country, and since PwC made the bid from its Kolkata office, it was dubbed an "Indian" company, and its rank was dropped to 6th. When PwC failed in the second round, the World Bank pressured the DJB to start over with a fresh round of bidding. Only one company succeeded in the new round that was not PwC, and the World Bank had the lowest marks from an evaluator thrown out. The contract was awarded to PwC in 2001. Commonwealth Human Rights Initiative. Following the investigation by Parivartan, a campaign was waged by Kejriwal, Aruna Roy, and other activists across Delhi, and the DJB withdrew the loan application to the World Bank.

Cattles

Cattles plc has brought a legal action against PwC in the UK in respect of the 2006 and 2007 audits claiming that they had failed to carry out adequate investigations.  PwC has disputed this legal claim.Cattles' failure was nothing to do with us, says angry PwC The Times, 17 July 2013

PCAOB report on audit inspections

The Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) report on audit work carried out by PwC in 2012 in respect of US public companies identified significant deficiencies in 21 of 52 audits examined.Report on 2012 Inspection of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLPPwC and KPMG audits fall foul of PCAOB

Quinn Insurance

PwC Ireland is being sued by the joint administrators of Quinn Insurance Limited for €1bn over alleged negligent auditing.PwC Ireland sued for €1bn over Quinn audit Accounting web





Further reading




