[[City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra]]

CATEGORIES: Culture in Birmingham, West Midlands, English orchestras, Musical groups established in 1920, Symphony orchestras

The City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra (CBSO) is a British orchestra based in Birmingham, England.  The Orchestra's current chief executive, appointed in 1999, is Stephen Maddock.  Since 2008, the CBSO's music director is Andris Nelsons.

History

Founded by Neville Chamberlain, the orchestra first rehearsed at 9.30am on 4 September 1920, in the band room at the Birmingham City Police's Steelhouse Lane station. The first public performance, as the City of Birmingham Orchestra occurred later that month, with Appleby Matthews, the orchestra's first chief conductor, at the baton. The programme included Overture: Saul by Granville Bantock, a strong supporter of the orchestra's foundation. However, its official foundation is generally reckoned to have been the "First Symphony Concert" in November 1920, when Edward Elgar conducted a programme of his own music in Birmingham Town Hall.
Adrian Boult was chief conductor from 1924 to 1930.  The CBO became a full-time organisation in 1944, changing its name to the City of Birmingham Symphony Orchestra in 1948.  Chief conductors since then included Rudolf Schwarz, the composer Andrzej Panufnik, Boult in an emergency return for a season after Panufnik's sudden resignation, Hugo Rignold and Louis Frémaux. During this time, the orchestra made recordings and gave regular concerts.
The CBSO began to gain greater international renown after Simon Rattle became chief conductor in 1980. Under him, the orchestra increased its recording profile and became one of the leading ensembles in Europe, and gained a name for its interpretations of late romantic and 20th century works, especially those of Sibelius and Gustav Mahler. During this period, the orchestra moved from Birmingham Town Hall to a new home venue, Symphony Hall, inside Birmingham's International Convention Centre. The nearby CBSO Centre, a converted factory, houses management offices, rehearsal facilities, and is a concert venue in its own right, for more intimate performances.  The CBSO Youth Orchestra has been affiliated with the CBSO since 2004.
Rattle was named music director of the CBSO in 1990.  That same year, the post of Radcliffe Composer in Association was created, with Mark-Anthony Turnage filling the role. In 1995 Judith Weir became Fairbairn Composer in Association, followed in 2001 by Julian Anderson.
After Rattle relinquished his posts with the CBSO, the Finnish conductor Sakari Oramo became chief conductor in 1998, and music director in 1999.  His CBSO work has included the Floof! festival of contemporary music.
In October 2007, the CBSO named Andris Nelsons as its 12th music director, effective with the 2008–2009 season.
In 2001, the players rejected a contract that would have stopped extra payments for broadcasts and recordings, in the context of financial crisis at the CBSO.
The CBSO has recorded substantially for labels such as EMI Classics, Warner Classics,
In January 2014 Sub Principal Second Violin Catherine Arlidge was awarded the Royal Philharmonic Society's 2014 Salomon Prize, highlighting talent and dedication within UK orchestras.org.php/awards/Salomon/

Chief Conductors and Music Directors








