[[Middlesex]]

CATEGORIES: Middlesex, Counties of England disestablished in 1965, Counties of England established in antiquity, Greater London predecessors

Middlesex (
The City of London was a county in its own right from the 12th century and was able to exert political control over Middlesex. Westminster Abbey dominated most of the early financial, judicial and ecclesiastical aspects of the county. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. As London grew into Middlesex, the Corporation of London resisted attempts to expand the city boundaries into the county, which posed problems for the administration of local government and justice. In the 18th and 19th centuries the population density was especially high in the southeast, including the East End and West End of London. From 1855 the southeast was administered with sections of Kent and Surrey as part of the area of the Metropolitan Board of Works., Politics and the people of London: the London County Council (1889-1965), (1989) When county councils were introduced in England in 1889 about 20% of the area of Middlesex, along with a third of its population, was transferred to the new County of London and the remainder became an administrative county governed by the Middlesex County CouncilBarlow, I., Metropolitan Government, (1991) that met regularly at the Middlesex Guildhall in Westminster, in the County of London. The City of London and Middlesex became separate counties for other purposes and Middlesex regained the right to appoint their own sheriff, lost in 1199.
In the interwar years suburban London further expanded, with improvement and expansion of public transport,Wolmar, C., The Subterranean Railway, (2004) and the setting up of new industries. After the Second World War, the population of the County of London and inner Middlesex was in steady decline, with high population growth continuing in the outer parts. After a Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London, almost all of the original area was incorporated into an enlarged Greater London in 1965, with the rest transferred to neighbouring counties. After 1965 Middlesex continued to be an area name used, on various borders, in cricket and a minority of sports. Middlesex is the former postal county of 25 post towns.

History

Toponomy

The name means territory of the middle Saxons and refers to the tribal origin of its inhabitants. The word is formed from the Anglo-Saxon, 

Early settlement

There were settlements in the area of Middlesex that can be traced back thousands of years before the creation of a county.twickenham-museum.uk/detail., The History of England, (1840) The county had parliamentary representation from the 13th century. The title Earl of Middlesex was created twice, in 1622 and 1677, but became extinct in 1843.

Economic development

The economy of the county was dependent on the City of London from an early time and was primarily agricultural. All manner of goods were provided for the City, including crops such as grain and hay, livestock and building materials. Tourism and recreation in day trip destinations such as Hackney, Islington, Highgate and Twickenham, but exceeding this coaching, inn-keeping and offering goods and services at daily shops and stalls to the considerable passing trade provided much local industry. also formed part of the early economy. However, during the 18th century the inner parishes of Middlesex started to function as suburbs of the City and were increasingly urbanised. The Middlesex volume of John Norden's Speculum Britanniae (a chorography) of 1593 summarises:
 Similarly Thomas Cox wrote in 1794:
In 1803 Sir John Sinclair, president of the Board of Agriculture spoke of the need to cultivate the more than town-sized Finchley Common and Hounslow Heath in a manner prophetic of the Dig for Victory campaign of World War II and fellow Board member Middleton at the time estimated one tenth of the county,  which contrasts neatly with its agricultural description.
The introduction of radial railway lines from 1839 caused a fundamental shift away from agricultural supply for London towards large scale house building. Tottenham, Edmonton and Enfield in the northeast developed first as working class residential suburbs with easy access to central London. The line to Windsor through Middlesex was completed in 1848, to Potter's Bar in 1850 and the Metropolitan and Metropolitan District Railways started a series of extensions into the county in 1878. Closer to London, the districts of Acton, Willesden, Ealing and Hornsey came within reach of the tram and bus networks, providing cheap transport to central London.
Following World War I, the availability of labour and proximity to London made areas such as Hayes and Park Royal ideal locations for the developing new industries. New jobs attracted more people to the county and the population continued to rise, reaching a peak in 1951.

Governance

The Metropolis

By the 19th century, the East End of London had expanded to the eastern boundary with Essex, and the Tower division had reached a population of over a million. Following the coming of the railways, the north western suburbs of London steadily spread over large parts of the county. The areas closest to London were served by the Metropolitan Police from 1829 and, from 1840, the entire county was included in the Metropolitan Police District.Local Government Areas 1834 -1945, V D Lipman, Oxford, 1949Joseph Fletcher, The Metropolis; its Boundaries, Extent, and Divisions for Local Government in Journal of the Statistical Society of London, Vol. 7, No. 2. (June 1844), pp. 103-143. In 1855, the parishes of the densely populated area in the south east, but excluding the City of London, came within the responsibility of the Metropolitan Board of Works. Despite this innovation, the system was described by commentators at the time as one "in chaos". In 1889, under the Local Government Act 1888, the metropolitan area of approximately  became part of the County of London. The Act also provided that the part of Middlesex in the administrative county of London should be "severed from Middlesex, and form a separate county for all non-administrative purposes".
The part of the County of London that had been transferred from Middlesex was divided in 1900 into 18 metropolitan boroughs, which were merged in 1965 to form seven of the present-day inner London boroughs:

Extra-metropolitan area

Middlesex outside the metropolitan area remained largely rural until the middle of the 19th century and so the special boards of local government for various metropolitan areas was late in developing. Other than the Cities of London and Westminster, there were no ancient boroughs. Retrieved on 26 July 2009. The importance of the hundred courts declined, and such local administration as there was divided between "county business" conducted by the justices of the peace meeting in quarter sessions, and the local matters dealt with by parish vestries. As the suburbs of London spread into the area, unplanned development and outbreaks of cholera forced the creation of local boards and poor law unions to help govern most areas, even in a few cases parishes appointed improvement commissioners. In rural areas, parishes began to be grouped for different administrative purposes. From 1875 these local bodies were designated as urban or rural sanitary districts. 6, No. 2. (Dec., 1962), pp. 121-150.
Following the Local Government Act 1888, the remaining county came under the control of Middlesex County Council except for the parish of Monken Hadley, which became part of Hertfordshire. The area of responsibility of the Lord Lieutenant of Middlesex was reduced accordingly. Middlesex did not contain any county boroughs, so the county and administrative county (the area of county council control) were identical.
The Local Government Act 1894 divided the administrative county into four rural districts and thirty-one urban districts, based on existing sanitary districts. One urban district, South Hornsey, was an exclave of Middlesex within the County of London until 1900, when it was transferred to the latter county.I : Southern England, London, 1979 The rural districts were Hendon, South Mimms, Staines and Uxbridge. Because of increasing urbanisation these had all been abolished by 1934.
After 1889 the growth of London continued, and the county became almost entirely filled by suburbs of London, with a big rise in population density. This process was accelerated by the Metro-land developments, which covered a large part of the county., Revisiting the Metro-Land Route, Harrow Times. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. Public transport in the county, including the extensive network of trams,Reed, J., London Tramways, (1997) buses and the London Underground came under control of the London Passenger Transport Board in 1933Office of Public Sector Information - London Passenger Transport Act 1933 (as amended). Retrieved on 20 February 2008. and a New Works Programme was developed to further enhance services during the 1930s. Partly because of its proximity to the capital, the county had a major role during the Second World War. The county was subject to aerial bombardment and contained various military establishments, such as RAF Uxbridge and RAF Heston, which were involved in the Battle of Britain. Retrieved on 20 February 2008.

County town

Middlesex arguably never had a single, established county town, and certainly not since 1789. London which could be termed its county town for a majority of purposes devoted different locations for the various, mostly judicial, county purposes.  The County Assizes for Middlesex were held at the Old Bailey in the City of London. Until 1889, the High Sheriff of Middlesex was chosen by the City of London Corporation.  The sessions house for the Middlesex Quarter Sessions was at Clerkenwell Green from the early eighteenth century.  The quarter sessions at the former Middlesex Sessions House performed most of the limited administration on a county level until the creation of the Middlesex County Council in 1889. New Brentford was first promulgated as the county town in 1789, on the basis that it was where elections of knights for the shire (or Members of Parliament) from 1701. This was however in that year placed into the new County of London, and thus outside the council's area of jurisdiction.

Arms of Middlesex County Council

Coats of arms were attributed by the mediaeval heralds to the Kingdoms of the Anglo-Saxon Heptarchy. That assigned to the Kingdom of the Middle and East Saxons depicted three "seaxes" or short notched swords on a red background. The seaxe was a weapon carried by Anglo-Saxon warriors, and the term "Saxon" may be derived from the word., The Anglo Saxon Broken Back Seax. Retrieved on 20 February 2008Online Etymology Dictionary - Saxon. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. These arms became associated with the two counties that approximated to the kingdom: Middlesex and Essex. County authorities, militia and volunteer regiments associated with both counties used the attributed arms.
In 1910, it was noted that the county councils of Essex and Middlesex and the Sheriff's Office of the County of London were all using the same arms. Middlesex County Council decided to apply for a formal grant of arms from the College of Arms, with the addition of an heraldic "difference" to the attributed arms. Colonel Otley Parry, a Justice of the Peace for Middlesex and author of a book on military badges, was asked to devise an addition to the shield. The chosen addition was a "Saxon Crown", derived from the portrait of King Athelstan on a silver penny of his reign, stated to be the earliest form of crown associated with any English sovereign. The grant of arms was made by letters patent dated 7 November 1910. 7 November 1910.C. Fox-Davies, 2nd edition, London, 1915Civic Heraldry of England and Wales, W.C. Scott-Giles, 2nd edition, London, 1953 

The undifferenced arms of the Kingdom were eventually granted to Essex County Council in 1932. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. Seaxes were also used in the insignia of many of the boroughs and urban districts in the county, while the Saxon crown came to be a common heraldic charge in English civic arms. Retrieved on 20 February 2008C W Scott-Giles, Royal and Kindred Emblems, Civic Heraldry of England and Wales, 2nd edition, London, 1953, p.11 On the creation of the Greater London Council in 1965 a Saxon crown was introduced in its coat of arms. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. Seaxes appear in the arms of several London borough councils and of Spelthorne Borough Council, whose area was in Middlesex. Retrieved on 20 February 2008Civic Heraldry of England and Wales - Greater London. Retrieved on 20 February 2008.

Creation of Greater London

The population of Inner London (then the County of London) had been in decline as more residents moved into the outer suburbs since its creation in 1889, and following the Second World War, this continued. From 1951 to 1961 the population of the inner districts of the county started to drop and growth was experienced only in eight of the suburban outer districts. According to the 1961 census, Ealing, Enfield, Harrow, Hendon, Heston & Isleworth, Tottenham, Wembley, Willesden and Twickenham had each reached a population greater than 100,000, which would normally have entitled each of them to seek county borough status. If this status were granted to all those boroughs it would mean that the population of the administrative county of Middlesex would be reduced by over half, to just under one million.
Evidence submitted to the Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London included a recommendation to divide it into two counties of North Middlesex and West Middlesex. However, the commission instead proposed abolition of the county and merging of the boroughs and districts. This was enacted by Parliament as the London Government Act 1963, which came into force on 1 April 1965.
The Act abolished the administrative counties of Middlesex and London.[ref]London Government Act 1963, Section 3: (1) As from 1st April 1965— 
(a) no part of Greater London shall form part of any administrative county, county district or parish; 
(b) the following administrative areas and their councils (and, in the case of a borough, the municipal corporation thereof) shall cease to exist, that is to say, the counties of London and Middlesex, the metropolitan boroughs, and any existing county borough, county district or parish the area of which falls wholly within Greater London; 
(c) the urban district of Potters Bar shall become part of the county of Hertfordshire; 
(d) the urban districts of Staines and Sunbury-on-Thames shall become part of the county of Surrey. 
Section 89: (1) In this Act, except where the context otherwise requires, the following expressions have the following meanings respectively, that is to say—
 
 'county' means an administrative county;[/ref] The Administration of Justice Act 1964 abolished the Middlesex magistracy and lieutenancy, and altered the jurisdiction of the Central Criminal Court. In April 1965, nearly all of Middlesex became part of Greater London, under the control of the Greater London Council, and formed the new outer London boroughs of Barnet (part only), Brent, Ealing, Enfield, Haringey, Harrow, Hillingdon, Hounslow and Richmond upon Thames (part only). Retrieved on 20 February 2008. The remaining areas were Potters Bar Urban District, which became part of Hertfordshire, while Sunbury-on-Thames Urban District and Staines Urban District became part of Surrey. Following the changes, local acts of Parliament relating to Middlesex were henceforth to apply to the entirety of the nine "North West London Boroughs".I. 1965 No. 533) In 1974, the three urban districts that had been transferred to Hertfordshire and Surrey were abolished and became the districts of Hertsmere (part only) and Spelthorne respectively.Office of Public Sector Information - Berkshire, Buckinghamshire and Surrey (County Boundaries) Order 1994. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. Additionally, since 1965 the Greater London boundary to the west and north has been subject to a significant number of small changes. Retrieved on 23 February 2008. 4) Order 1993. Retrieved on 23 February 2008.

Geography

The county lay within the London BasinNatural England - London Basin Natural Area. Retrieved on 23 February 2008. and the most significant feature was the River Thames, which formed the southern boundary. The River Lea and the River Colne formed natural boundaries to the east and west. The south west of Middlesex was entirely a gently descending meander of the Thames without hills. "Middlesex bank" is more accurate often here than "north bank" — at Teddington (on a south bank) the river almost flows due westward (i.e. back on itself).  In the north, the boundary was the near and far side of a WSW/ENE aligned ridge of hills broken by Barnet or 'Dollis' valleys (south of which these feed into the Welsh Harp Lake or Brent Reservoir which becomes the River Brent).,The Mountains of England and Wales - Historic County Tops. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. which is now one of the highest points in London. Retrieved on 2 February 2008.

Legacy

Middlesex is still used in the names of organisations based in the area such as Middlesex County Cricket Club,Middlesex County Cricket Club. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. the Middlesex Cricket Board and Middlesex University. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. There is a Middlesex County Football Association and two teams that are now within Surrey, Staines Town and Ashford Town (Middlesex) as well as Potters Bar Town in Hertfordshire,Potters Bar Town F.C. - Fixtures. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. compete in the Middlesex County Cup. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. Sir John Betjeman, a native of North London and Poet Laureate, published several poems about Middlesex and the suburban experience. Many were featured in the televised readings Metroland., Betjeman, (2006) As part of a 2002 marketing campaign, the plant conservation charity Plantlife chose the wood anemone as the county flower. In 2003, an early day motion with two signatures noted that 16 May is the anniversary of the Battle of Albuera and in recent years has been celebrated as Middlesex Day, commemorating the valiant efforts of the Middlesex Regiment (the "Die-hards") in that battle. The idea is to recognise and celebrate the historic county.,  Early Day Motion 13 May 2003. Retrieved on 20 February 2008. On its creation in 1965, Greater London was divided into five commission areas for the administration of justice. One was named "Middlesex" and consisted of the boroughs of Barnet, Brent, Ealing, Enfield, Haringey, Harrow, Hillingdon and Hounslow. 42) This was abolished on 1 July 2003. 640). Retrieved on 20 February 2008.

Family history

The county was used generally for London as well in birth, baptism, marriage and death registers as well as in censuses and has for archiving and note-taking since the 1970s had Chapman code MDX.
Former postal county=== 
Middlesex (abbreviated Middx)
Before 1965, a long, narrow belt of central Middlesex (especially the entire old large parishes of Tottenham, Willesden, Hornsey and Chiswick)HMSO, Names of Street and Places in the London Postal area, (1930). Retrieved on 20 February 2008. were already within the London postal district so their addresses included "LONDON" and technically did not include a county, though by readers a county would naturally be mistaken for the narrower County of London which kept its borders until it was disbanded some 75 years later.
Royal Mail retained the postal county in 1965 with one modification because it refused on financial grounds to follow all the changes to county boundaries so did not adopt Greater London as a postal county nor the transfers of the post towns Staines, Ashford, Shepperton and Sunbury to Surrey but chose to espouse the transfer of the post town Potters Bar to Hertfordshire.
From 1965 until 1996 the postal county consisted of two unconnected areas,  apart (the smaller area around Enfield and the larger area to the west) and comprised 25 post towns:
† = postal county was not required
The postal county had many border inconsistencies where the post towns it consisted of encroached on neighbouring counties, such as the villages of Denham, Buckinghamshire and Wraysbury, Berkshire which are in the post towns of Uxbridge and Staines and were therefore in the postal county of Middlesex. Egham Hythe, Surrey also had postal addresses of Staines, Middlesex. Conversely, Hampton Wick was conveniently placed in Kingston, Surrey with its sorting offices just across the river.
The Enfield post town in the EN postcode area was in the former postal county. All post towns in the HA postcode area and UB postcode area were in the former postal county. Most of the TW postcode area was in the former postal county.



Notes and References




