[[Psychedelic trance]]

CATEGORIES: Goa trance music, Psychedelic trance, Trance genres

Psychedelic trance, psytrance or just psy (derived from the Ancient Greek word ψυχή "psyche", mind; soul; breath; spiritEtymology of the English word psychedelic. myetymology. Retrieved 25 May 2013.) is an electronic music style characterized by arrangements of synthetic as with reporting of the trend of Goa trance.
Psytrance lies at the hardcore, underground end of the diverse trance spectrum.  The genre offers variety in terms of mood, tempo, and style. Some examples include full on, dark, progressive, suomi, psybreaks and psybient. Goa Trance continues to develop alongside the sub genres.

History

Root of the movement

The first hippies who arrived in Goa, India in the mid-1960s were drawn there for many reasons, including the beaches, the low cost of living, the friendly locals, the Indian religious and spiritual practices and the readily available Indian hashish, which until the mid-1970s was legal.
During the 1970s the first Goa DJs were generally playing psychedelic rock bands such as the Grateful Dead, Pink Floyd and The Doors. In 1979 the beginnings of electronic dance music could occasionally be heard in Goa in the form of tracks by artists such as Kraftwerk but it wasn't until 1983 that DJs Laurent and Fred Disko, closely followed by Goa Gil, began switching the Goa style over to electro-industrial/EBM which was now flooding out of Europe from Frontline Assembly, Front 242, Nitzer Ebb as well as Eurobeat.
The tracks were remixed, removing the lyrics, looping the melodies and beats and generally manipulating the sounds in all manner of ways before the tracks were finally presented to the dancers as custom Goa-style mixes.
The music played in the 80s was a blend of styles loosely defined as techno and various genres of computer music e.g.: high energy gay disco without vocals, acid house, electro, industrial gothic, electronic body music, exotic wacky styles of house, electronic/rock hybrids.

Development

By 1992 the Goa trance scene had a pulse of its own,  New artists were appearing from all over the world and it was in this year that the first Goa trance festivals began, including the Gaia Festival in France and the still-running VuuV festival in Germany.
In 1993 the first 100% Goa trance album was released, Project 2 Trance, featuring tracks by Man With No Name and Hallucinogen to name two.
While the genre may have been incubated in the goa trance scene it went on to proliferate globally. The genre evolved in conjunction with a multimedia psychedelic arts scene.

Style

Many consider the difference between goa trance and psychedelic trance are minimal at best and really just a matter of opinion. Psychedelic trance is distinguished from other sub-genres because of the unique sounds it typically features.  Psychedelic trance has a distinctive, energetic sound (generally between 140 and 150 BPM) that tends to be faster than other forms of trance or techno music. The different leads, rhythms and beats generally change every 8 bars. A definition of genre.. Retrieved 25 May 2013. Layering is used to great effect in psychedelic trance, with new musical ideas being added at regular intervals, often every 4 to 8 bars. New layers will continue to be added until a climax is reached, and then the song will break down and start a new rhythmic pattern over the constant bass line. Psychedelic trance tracks tend to be 6–10 minutes long. "Psytrance and the Spirituality of Electronics". April 2004.  Psychedelic trance makes heavy use of the cutoff frequency control of the modulating filter on the synthesizer.  Reverb and delay are used heavily, with large, open sounding reverb present on most of the lead synthesizers in the track.
The Roland TB-303 (acid) sequencer, Juno 106, and Roland SH-101 are heavily used and sampled in psychedelic trance, usually processed through a distortion effect.

Related sub-genres

In 1996, the music had changed so much from its Goa beginnings that the term Goa trance no longer seemed suitable, and the new term of psychedelic trance, or psytrance for short, was coined to refer to this new style of music. The multi-layered melodies of Goa trance were stripped away, and a darker and more repetitive form of music concentrating on rhythm and groove appeared.
In 2002, melodies became popular again, heralding the beginning of full-on psytrance.
Currently, there are many sub-genres within the psytrance scene, including ambient psy (psybient), minimal/progressive psy, morning psy, full-on psy, and dark psy. There has recently been a movement attempting to 'return to the source' and bring back the original Goa trance sound. Examples include Metapsychic Records (2006 - December 2007) and Suntrip Records. These labels are dedicated to reviving the roots of the scene, and promoting artists trying to recapture the original feeling of the music.

Underground

In the early days of psychedelic trance scene a side project was established by the pioneers who produced special tracks intended to be exclusively played at chosen parties around the world.

Psybreaks

Psybreaks or psychedelic breakbeat is a form of psychedelic trance originating in the late 1990s, splicing breakbeat basslines and rhythms into otherwise heavily psytrance-influenced tracks.  At times there is a fine line of a difference between Nu skool breaks and Psybreaks, but usually you can distinguish the difference depending on the synth lines.  Psybreaks tracks would be closer to Goa and Psy trance with 16th note arppegiated synths and or bass line driven tracks with lots of sound effects.  Where as many Nu skool breaks tracks use the same elements but a different way and tends to use distorted heavy basslines with lots of glitch edits.  Another noticeable difference between the two is Nu skool is more club driven in the sense of upbeat and rowdy as opposed to Psybreaks which leans more towards dark and mysterious.   

Full on

Full on is  psychedelic trance that originated in Israel during the late 1990s.  The expression "full on" is taken from the first out of a seven compilation albums series and the first album ever to be released under Hom-mega Productions in 1998, titled Full On, which comes from English slang. Other sources say it comes from the "Full" "moon" festival's name, whilst others argue that it is derived from a phrase widely used to describe particularly high-energy music ("That tune is really full-on!"). Full On is with out a doubt the most popular form of Psychedelic Trance. Owing to big basslines, catchy hooks and some borderline commercial and pop elements this style has the most mass market appeal.
The most easily recognizable elements of full-on psy-trance are the so-called "rolling" bassline, which crams two or three short bass notes in between each hit of the 4/4 drum, the fast changes in music sequences (max 32 beat for sequence), and a more energetic melodic/uplifiting nature.  Often heard in clubs or during the nighttime hours at festivals it is popular in Israel, Brazil, Goa, Florida, Victoria and the United Kingdom.  Some big names of Full On style on nowadays:Talamasca, Alien Project, Azax Syndrom, Bizzare Contact, Bliss, Bubble, Gataka, XSI, Sesto Sento, Spectro Senses, Ananda Shake, Quality Sound, Solstice, Freaked Frequency,Prototype, Atomic Pulse, Faders, Digital Tribe, Liquid Sound,Ohm Project ,Burn in Noise ,Vibe Tribe and System Nipel..

Dark

Dark psytrance (neuro, dark psy, forest trance) is a darker, moodier and faster form of psychedelic trance music. With tempo ranges generally from 145 to 200 BPM. Originating in Denmark, Russia and Germany, the style has developed a loyal following over the years. Becoming popular in 2004, it has continued to grow. Dark psytrance is a popular variation and can include melodies from morning trance, though these tend to be more haunting than uplifting. 'Forest Trance' is a style within the dark sub genre that inspires and creates a "forest" like mood. Mainly produced in Denmark, this type of trance is popular at outdoor events. The 'Neuro' style is more abstracted and experimental, less reliant on melodic musical aspects and formulas. The speed of the music and the experimental nature it embraces makes it more appealing to a younger crowd. Owing to its non-conformist approach to the normal conventions of trance, this style is almost considered to have a "punk rock" element to it. Some examples of Dark Psy Labels are Parvati Records (Denmark), Lost Theory Records (Belgium) and Insomnia Records (Russia).

Suomisaundi or freeform psytrance

This is the "freeform" variation of psytrance where the artist has almost no limits but still bear a specific "Finnish" style (which is also produced in other countries but the originating Suomi designation is in wide use).

Festivals

Large psytrance festivals are both culturally and musically diverse.  They have attracted a following amongst international backpackers. Earthdance, the world's largest synchronized music and dance festival for peace, has its roots in the psychedelic trance scene.  In Australia, Earthcore occurred between 1992 and 2008 and predominately featured psytrance.  Rainbow Serpent Festival, Maitreya Festival, and Yemaya Festival are by far are the most popular ones and held in Victoria.
The Boom Festival in Portugal was originally a psytrance festival but now includes world music.  It is held every second year in August and combines social activism with cultural and spiritual elements.
South Africa has numerous psytrance festivals.cttp.co.
There are three well-known recurring psytrance festivals in the USA: Chilluminati's Sacred Earth Open-Air Festival, T.O.U.C.H. Samadhi's Equinox and Spacecamp Psyfari.

Sub-cultural research

In 2006 research was conducted on the global psytrance scene.  600 people from 40 countries provided detailed information via an online questionnaire.
In 2013 Graham St. John published Global Tribe: Technology, Spirituality and Psytrance on Equinox Publishing.

Notable albums



Sources






