[[Tasmin Little]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Living people, Musicians from London, Alumni of the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, Academics of the Royal Academy of Music, English classical violinists, Officers of the Order of the British Empire, People educated at Yehudi Menuhin School

Tasmin Little, OBE  (born 13 May 1965) is an English classical violinist. She is best known and widely acclaimed as a concerto soloist, and also performs as a recitalist and chamber musician. She has released multiple albums, winning the Critics Award at the Classic Brit Awards in 2011 for her recording of Elgar's Violin Concerto.

Early life and education

Little was born in London and is the daughter of actor George Little, best known for his role in Emmerdale Farm. She first learned to read music at age six while learning to play a recorder that her mother had given her. As recounted during an appearance on BBC Radio 3's In Tune program (10 April 2013) She grew up in northwest London, attending the Yehudi Menuhin School on a scholarship as a weekly boarder between the ages of 8 and 18; among her fellow pupils was violinist Nigel Kennedy. 
In 1982 she was a finalist in the string section of BBC Young Musician of the Year.

Career

Little's first professional performance as a soloist was in 1988 with The Hallé. She made her first appearance at the BBC Proms in 1990, Over the course of her career Little has performed with the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra, London Symphony Orchestra, Royal Liverpool Philharmonic, the New York Philharmonic and other major orchestras, and has released over 20 albums.
Little has been an exponent of the works of composer Frederick Delius throughout her career, and was the artistic director of "Delius Inspired", an eight-day festival held in Bradford in July 2006 celebrating his work which was broadcast on BBC Radio 3. She has also made a documentary on Delius for BBC Two.
In 2008 Little released a three-track recording, The Naked Violin, as a free download from her website in a move aimed at making classical music more accessible.
Little received an honorary doctorate from the University of Bradford in 1996,






