[[H]]

CATEGORIES: ISO basic Latin letters

H (named aitch , plural aitches;"H" Oxford English Dictionary, 2nd edition (1989); Merriam-Webster's Third New International Dictionary of the English Language, Unabridged (1993); "aitch", op. cit. is the eighth letter in the ISO basic Latin alphabet.

History

The Semitic letter 'ח' (). The form of the letter probably stood for a fence or posts.
The  Greek eta 'Η' in the Archaic period still represented ). In this context the letter eta is also known as heta to underline this fact.
Thus, in the Old Italic alphabets the letter heta of the Euboean alphabet was adopted with its original sound value .
Etruscan and Latin had  in German.

Name in English

In most dialects of English, the name for the letter is pronounced  In Australia, this has also been attributed to Catholic school teaching and is estimated to be in use by 60% of the population.Ab(h)ominable (H)aitch by Frederick Ludowyk, Australian National Dictionary Centre
The perceived name of the letter affects the choice of indefinite article before initialisms beginning with H: for example "an HTML page" or "a HTML page". The pronunciation  may be a hypercorrection formed by analogy with the names of the other letters of the alphabet, most of which include the sound they represent. & Hancock I.: "International English Ipod", page 254. Routledge, 1990.
The non-standard haitch pronunciation of h has spread in England, being used by approximately 24% of English people born since 1982John C Wells, Longman Pronunciation Dictionary, page 360, Pearson, Harlow, 2008 and polls continue to show this pronunciation becoming more common among younger native speakers. Despite this increasing number, pronunciation without the  sound is still considered to be standard, although the non-standard pronunciation is also attested as a legitimate variant.'Haitch' or 'aitch'? How do you pronounce 'H'?, BBC News, 98 October 2010
Authorities disagree about the history of the letter's name. The Oxford English Dictionary says the original name of the letter was 

Use in English

In English, 'h' occurs as a single-letter grapheme (being either silent or representing ).

Use in other languages

In the German language, the name of the letter is pronounced  ('throne'), which continue to be spelled with 'th' even after the last German spelling reform.
In Spanish and Portuguese, 'h' ("hache" in Spanish, agá in Portuguese, pronounced  in Portuguese, whose spelling is inherited from Occitan.
In French, the name of the letter is pronounced  pronunciations before the introduction of the distinction between the letters 'v' and 'u': huit (from uit, ultimately from Latin octo), huître (from uistre, ultimately from Greek through Latin ostrea).
In Italian, 'h' has no phonological value. Its most important uses are to differentiate the spellings of certain short words that are homophones, for example some present tense forms of the verb avere ('to have') (such as hanno, 'they have', vs. anno, 'year'), in short interjections (oh, ehi), and in the digraphs 'ch' .
Some languages, including Czech, Slovak, Hungarian, and Finnish, use 'h' as a breathy voiced glottal fricative  in a voiced environment.
In Ukrainian and Belarusian, when written in the Latin alphabet, 'h' is also commonly used for , normally written with the Cyrillic letter 'г'.
In Irish, h is not considered an independent letter, except for a very few non-native words, however 'h' placed after a consonant is known as a "séimhiú" and indicates lenition of that consonant; 'h' began to replace the original form of a séimhiú, a dot placed above the consonant, after the introduction of typewriters.
In most dialects of Polish, both 'h' and the digraph 'ch' always represent .
The Russian language has no /h/ sound and there is no letter to represent this sound in the Russian (Cyrillic) alphabet.

Use in science

H is the symbol for the henry, the SI derived unit of inductance.
The chemical symbol of Hydrogen is H.
The Heaviside step function is usually denoted by H.
The symbol of the Higgs boson is H0.
The Planck constant is denoted by h.
As a phonetic symbol in the International Phonetic Alphabet, variations of the letter are used to represent two sounds. The lowercase form,  is used to represent aspiration.

Related letters and other similar characters

Computing codes

1 and all encodings based on ASCII, including the DOS, Windows, ISO-8859 and Macintosh families of encodings.

Other representations








