[[Shirley MacLaine]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Virginia, American Christians, American female dancers, American female singers, American film actresses, American musical theatre actresses, American people of Canadian descent, American spiritual writers, American stage actresses, American women comedians, Baptists from the United States, Best Actress Academy Award winners, Best Drama Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Best Foreign Actress BAFTA Award winners, Best Musical or Comedy Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Cecil B. DeMille Award Golden Globe winners, Primetime Emmy Award winners, Living people, New Age writers, Paramount Pictures contract players, People from Arlington County, Virginia, People from Richmond, Virginia, Silver Bear for Best Actress winners, Transcendental Meditation practitioners, Volpi Cup winners, American women writers, Writers from Virginia

Shirley MacLean Beaty (born 24 April 1934), known professionally as Shirley MacLaine, is an American film and theater actress, singer, dancer, activist and author. She has won the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Musical or Comedy twice, for her roles in The Apartment and Irma la Douce, and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama twice for Terms of Endearment and Madame Sousatzka. She was honored with the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 1998. She was nominated for an Academy Award five times before winning the Academy Award for Best Actress in 1983 for her role as Aurora Greenway in Terms of Endearment. She won the 1976 Emmy Award for Outstanding Special – Comedy-Variety or Music for Gypsy in My Soul in addition she has also won two BAFTA Awards from seven nominations.
In 2012 she received the 40th AFI Life Achievement Award, the highest honor for a career in the US film industry, by the American Film Institute, and in 2013 received the Kennedy Center Honors for lifetime contributions to American culture through the performing arts.
MacLaine's younger brother is actor Warren Beatty. Known for her New Age beliefs and interest in spirituality and reincarnation, she has written a large number of autobiographical works, many dealing with her spiritual beliefs as well as her Hollywood career.

Early life

Named after Shirley Temple, Shirley MacLean Beaty was born in Richmond, Virginia. Her father, Ira Owens Beaty,New England Historic Genealogical Society was a professor of psychology, public school administrator, and real estate agent, and her mother, Kathlyn Corinne (née MacLean), was a drama teacher, originally from Wolfville, Nova Scotia, Canada. Shirley's younger brother is the actor/writer/director Warren Beatty; he changed the spelling of his surname when he became an actor.
She had weak ankles as a toddler, so her mother decided to enroll her in ballet class at the age of three. Also slowly realising ballet's propensity to be too all-consuming, and ultimately limiting, she moved on to other forms of dancing, acting and musical theatre.
She attended Washington-Lee High School, where she was on the cheerleading squad and acted in school theatrical productions. The summer before her senior year, she came to New York City to try acting on Broadway, and had some success. After she graduated, she returned and within a year became an understudy to actress Carol Haney in The Pajama Game; Haney broke her ankle, and Shirley replaced her. A few months after, with Haney still injured, film producer Hal B. Wallis saw Shirley's performance, and signed her to work for Paramount Pictures. She later sued Wallis over a contractual dispute, a suit that has been credited with ending the old-style studio star system of actor management. Parker, 19 Misc. 2d 467, 469 (N.Y. Misc. 1959)

Career

MacLaine made her film debut in Alfred Hitchcock's The Trouble with Harry (1955), for which she won the Golden Globe Award for New Star of the Year – Actress. In 1956, she had roles in Hot Spell and Around the World in 80 Days. At the same time she starred in Some Came Running, the film that gave her first Academy Award nomination – one of five that the film received – and a Golden Globe nomination. Her second Oscar nomination came two years later for The Apartment, starring with Jack Lemmon. The film won five Oscars, including Best Director for Billy Wilder. She later said, "I thought I would win for The Apartment, but then Elizabeth Taylor had a tracheotomy." She starred in The Children's Hour (1961) also starring Audrey Hepburn and James Garner, based on the play by Lillian Hellman and directed by William Wyler. She was again nominated, this time for Irma la Douce (1963), which reunited her with Wilder and Lemmon. Don Siegel, her director on Two Mules for Sister Sara (1970) said of her: "It's hard to feel any great warmth to her. She's too unfeminine and has too much balls. She's very, very hard."Patrick McGilligan, Clint: The Life and Legend (1999), p. 182
In 1975, she received an Academy Award nomination for Best Documentary Feature for her documentary film The Other Half of the Sky: A China Memoir. Two years later, she was once again nominated for an Oscar for The Turning Point co-starring Anne Bancroft, in which she portrayed a retired ballerina much like herself. In 1978, she was awarded the Women in Film Crystal Award for outstanding women who, through their endurance and the excellence of their work, have helped to expand the role of women within the entertainment industry.org/past-recipients In 1980, she starred in A Change of Seasons alongside Anthony Hopkins. The pair famously didn't get along, with Hopkins saying of MacLaine: "She was the most obnoxious actress I have ever worked with." In 1983, she won an Oscar for Terms of Endearment, playing Debra Winger's mother. The film won another four Oscars; one for Jack Nicholson and three for director-screenwriter-producer James L. Brooks. In 1988, MacLaine won a Golden Globe for Best Actress (Drama) for Madame Sousatzka.
She continued to star in major films, such as Steel Magnolias with Julia Roberts and other stars. In 2000 she made her feature-film directorial debut and starred in Bruno, which was released to video as The Dress Code.  Other notable films in which MacLaine has starred include Sweet Charity (1968); Being There (1979) with Peter Sellers; Postcards from the Edge (1990) with Meryl Streep, playing a fictionalized version of Debbie Reynolds with a screenplay by Reynolds's daughter, Carrie Fisher; Used People (1992) with Jessica Tandy and Kathy Bates; Guarding Tess (1994) with Nicolas Cage; Mrs. Winterbourne (1996), with Ricki Lake and  Brendan Fraser; Rumor Has It… (2005) with Kevin Costner and Jennifer Aniston; In Her Shoes with Cameron Diaz and Toni Collette; and Closing the Ring (2007) directed by Richard Attenborough and starring Christopher Plummer.
MacLaine has also appeared in numerous television projects including an autobiographical miniseries based upon the book Out on a Limb; The Salem Witch Trials; These Old Broads written by Carrie Fisher and co-starring Elizabeth Taylor, Debbie Reynolds, and Joan Collins; and Coco, a Lifetime production based on the life of Coco Chanel. She had a short-lived TV sitcom called Shirley's World. She appeared in the third and fourth seasons of the British drama Downton Abbey as Martha Levinson, mother to Cora, Countess of Grantham in 2012-2013.
MacLaine was awarded the Kennedy Center Honors for lifetime contributions to American culture through the performing arts in December 2013.
In 2011, the government of France made her a Chevalier de la Legion d'honneur.

Personal life

MacLaine was married to businessman Steve Parker from 1954 until their divorce in 1982; they have a daughter, Sachi. In April 2011, while promoting her new book, I'm Over All That, she revealed to Oprah Winfrey that she had an open relationship with her husband.
MacLaine has claimed that, in a previous life in Atlantis, she was the brother to a 35,000 year old spirit named Ramtha channeled by American mystic teacher and author J. Z. Knight.
She has a strong interest in spirituality and metaphysics, the central theme of some of her best-selling books including Out on a Limb and Dancing in the Light. She has undertaken such forms of spiritual exploration as walking the Way of St. James, working with Chris Griscom,
Her well-known interest in New Age spirituality has also made its way into several of her films. In Albert Brooks's romantic comedy Defending Your Life (1991), the recently deceased lead characters, played by Brooks and Meryl Streep, are astonished to find MacLaine introducing their past lives in the "Past Lives Pavilion". In Postcards from the Edge (1990), MacLaine sings a version of "I'm Still Here", with customized lyrics created for her by composer Stephen Sondheim. One of the lyrics was changed to "I'm feeling transcendental – am I here?" In the made-for-television movie These Old Broads, MacLaine's character is a devotee of New Age spirituality.
She has an interest in UFOs, and gave numerous interviews on CNN, NBC and Fox news channels on the subject during 2007–2008. In her book Sage-ing While Age-ing (2007), she described alien encounters and witnessing of Washington DC UFO incidents in the 1950s.
MacLaine is godmother to the daughter of former Democratic U.S. Representative Dennis Kucinich.
Along with her brother, Warren Beatty, MacLaine used her celebrity status in instrumental roles as a fundraiser and organizer for George McGovern's campaign for president in 1972. W. Norton & Company, 1972., Grassroots: The Autobiography of George McGovern, New York: Random House, 1977, pp. 126, 172White, Theodore H., The Making of the President 1972, Atheneum Publishers, 1973, pp. 236, 258, 425 That year, she authored the book McGovern: The Man and His Beliefs.
On February 7, 2013, Penguin Group USA published Sachi Parker's autobiography Lucky Me: My Life With – and Without – My Mom, Shirley MacLaine.Nicki Gostin, "Shirley MacLaine's Daughter Says 'My Mom Thought My Dad Was Clone Astronaut'", Fox News (February 12, 2013)

Filmography

TV work

Bibliography






