[[Sid Meier]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, American Lutherans, American video game designers, Living people, MicroProse, University of Michigan alumni, Video game producers, Video game programmers, American people of Dutch descent

Sidney K. "Sid" Meier (born February 24, 1954 in Sarnia, Ontario, Canada) is a Canadian-American programmer, designer and producer of several popular strategy video games and simulation video games, most notably Civilization. Meier co-founded MicroProse in 1982 with Bill Stealey and is the Director of Creative Development of Firaxis Games, which he co-founded with Jeff Briggs and Brian Reynolds in 1996. He has won several prestigious accolades for his contributions to the video game industry.

Life and career

Sid Meier was born in the Canadian city of Sarnia to parents of Dutch descent.  He later moved to Michigan and studied history and computer science, graduating with a degree in computer science Meier lives in Hunt Valley, Maryland, with his wife, Susan. He met his wife at Evangelical Lutheran Church in Cockeysville, where he plays organs and they both sing in the choir."Game Boy" article about Meier from Baltimore magazine (Typeset version in PDF)
Meier founded MicroProse together with Bill Stealey in 1982, Meier is not always the main designer on titles that carry his name. For instance, Brian Reynolds has been credited as the primary designer behind Sid Meier's Civilization II, Sid Meier's Alpha Centauri, and Sid Meier's Colonization,Interview with Brian Reynolds from GameSpy"The Sid Meier Legacy: Sid Meier's Colonization" from GameSpot while Jeff Briggs designed Sid Meier's Civilization III, Soren Johnson led Sid Meier's Civilization IV, and Jon Shafer led Sid Meier's Civilization V.
After the release of F-19 Stealth Fighter, Meier decided to focus on developing strategy games. He later said, "Everything I thought was cool about a flight simulator had gone into that game." Inspired by SimCity and Empire!, Meier created Sid Meier's Railroad Tycoon and later the game series for which he is most widely recognized, Sid Meier's Civilization,

Awards

Games

The games developed, co-developed and/or produced by Sid Meier:Sid Meier bio from Firaxis Games website
According to PC Gamer, "Though his games are frequently about violent times and places, there is never any blood or gore shown. He designs and creates his games by playing them, over and over, until they are fun." Meier worked with a team on a dinosaur-themed game starting early 2000, but announced in an online development diary in 2001 that the game had been shelved. Despite trying various approaches, including turn-based and real-time gameplay, he said he found no way to make the concept fun enough. In 2005, he said, "We've been nonstop busy making other games over the past several years, so the dinosaur game remains on the shelf. However, I do love the idea of a dinosaur game and would like to revisit it when I have some time."Firaxis Games: Community: Ask Sid from Firaxis' official website In 2010, Meier said he wished he made Tetris as well as Guitar Hero, adding: "I think music games are really cool, and if I had a great idea I'd probably be working on it."






