[[Revolution (Beatles song)]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 songs, 1968 singles, The Beatles songs, Song recordings produced by George Martin, Protest songs, Number-one singles in New Zealand, Rascal Flatts songs, Songs written by Lennon–McCartney, Thompson Twins songs, 1985 singles, Stone Temple Pilots songs, Apple Records singles, Songs published by Northern Songs, Hard rock songs, Music videos directed by Michael Lindsay-Hogg, Counterculture of the 1960s

"Revolution" is a song by the Beatles written by John Lennon and credited to Lennon–McCartney. They released two distinct arrangements of the song in 1968: a hard rock / heavy metal version as the B-side of the single "Hey Jude", and a slower blues version titled "Revolution 1" on the album The Beatles (commonly called the "White Album"). Although "Revolution" was released first, it was recorded several weeks after "Revolution 1" as a re-make specifically designed to be released as a single. A third connected piece written by Lennon is the experimental track "Revolution 9", which evolved from an unused portion of "Revolution 1", and also appears on the White Album.
Inspired by political protests in early 1968, Lennon's lyrics expressed doubt about some of the tactics. When the single version was released in August, the political left viewed it as betraying their cause. The release of the album version in November indicated Lennon's uncertainty about destructive change, with the phrase "count me out" recorded differently as "count me out, in". In 1987, the song became the first Beatles recording to be licensed for a television commercial, which prompted a lawsuit from the surviving members of the group.

Background and composition

In early 1968, media coverage in the aftermath of the Tet Offensive spurred increased protests in opposition to the Vietnam War, especially among university students.
The Beatles had avoided expressing political viewpoints, with "Taxman" being their only prior song with an overt political topic. During his time in Rishikesh, Lennon decided to write a song about the recent wave of social upheaval. He recalled, "I thought it was about time we spoke about it revolution, the same as I thought it was about time we stopped not answering about the Vietnamese war. I had been thinking about it up in the hills in India."
Despite Lennon's antiwar feelings, he had yet to become anti-establishment, and expressed in "Revolution" that he wanted "to see the plan" from those advocating toppling the system. Another influence on Lennon was his burgeoning relationship with avant-garde artist Yoko Ono; Ono attended the recording sessions, and participated in the unused portion of "Revolution 1" which evolved into "Revolution 9".
Around the fourth week of May 1968, the Beatles met at Kinfauns (George Harrison's home in Esher) to demonstrate their compositions to each other in preparation for recording their next studio album. A bootleg recording from that informal session shows that "Revolution" had two of its three verses intact.

Recording

Revolution 1

The Beatles began their studio sessions for the new album on 30 May, starting with "Revolution 1" (simply titled "Revolution" for the first few sessions). The first day concentrated on recording the basic rhythm track. Take 18 lasted 10:17, much longer than the earlier takes, and it was this take that was chosen for additional overdubs recorded over the next two sessions.
During overdubs which brought the recording to take 20, Lennon took the unusual step of performing his lead vocal while lying on the floor. He also altered one line into the ambiguous "you can count me out, in".
"Revolution 1" has a blues style, performed at a relaxed tempo. The basic time signature is 12/8 (or 4/4 with a swing feel), but the song has several extra half-length bars during the verses.

=Take 20=

Low-quality monitor mixes of the full-length version of Revolution appeared on various bootlegs, such as From Kinfauns to Chaos, throughout the 90s. It was an attempt by Lennon to augment the full-length version of "Revolution" in a way that satisfied him before he chose to split the piece between the edited "Revolution 1" and the musique concrete "Revolution 9".
The bootlegged recording starts with engineer Geoff Emerick announcing the remix as "RM1 of Take..." and then momentarily forgetting the take number, which Lennon jokingly finishes with "Take your knickers off and let's go," hence the name of the bootleg CD. Several elements of this coda appear in the officially released "Revolution 9". Throughout the body of that song, Lennon's histrionic vocal track periodically appears (albeit minus the speed distortion), as do the tape loops.
After the band track ends, the song moves into avant-garde territory, with Yoko Ono reciting some prose over an unknown, vaguely operatic recording (possibly captured live from the radio). Yoko's piece begins with the words, "Maybe, it's not that..." with Yoko trailing off at the end; John (or George) jokingly replies, "It is 'that'!" As the piece continues, John quietly mumbles "Gonna be alright" a few times. Then follows a brief piano riff, some comments from John and Yoko on how well the track has preceded, and final appearances of the tape loops.) and minus Lennon's (or Harrison's) joking reply.

=Splitting of Revolution 1 and Revolution 9=

Lennon soon decided to divide the existing ten-minute recording into two parts: a more conventional Beatles track and an avant-garde sound collage.
On 21 June, the first part of take 20 received several overdubs and became officially titled "Revolution 1". The overdubs included a lead guitar line by Harrison and a brass section of two trumpets and four trombones. Final stereo mixing was completed 25 June.

Revolution (single version)

Lennon wanted "Revolution 1" to be the next Beatles single, but McCartney was reluctant to invite controversy, and argued along with Harrison that the track was too slow for a single.
The song begins with "a startling machine-gun fuzz guitar riff", with Lennon's and Harrison's guitars prominent throughout the track.
"Revolution" was performed in a higher key, B major, compared to the A major of "Revolution 1", although the distortion changes the key slightly, leaving the song halfway between B flat and B. The "shoo-bee-do-wah" backing vocals were omitted in the re-make, and an instrumental break was added. "Revolution" was given a climactic end, as opposed to the fade out of "Revolution 1".

Release and reception

"Revolution" was released as the B-side of the "Hey Jude" single in late August 1968. The song reached number 12 in the US and was certified gold. and reached number 1 in New Zealand. The "Hey Jude"/"Revolution" single was listed as a double-sided number 1 in Australia. "Revolution 1" was released on The Beatles in late November 1968. It was the first track on the fourth side, four spots ahead of the companion piece "Revolution 9".
"Revolution" later appeared on the 1970 US compilation album Hey Jude, the first time the song appeared in stereo. Lennon disliked the stereo mix, saying in a 1974 interview that the mono mix of "Revolution" was a "heavy record" but "then they made it into a piece of ice cream!" The song was released on other compilations, including 1967–1970 and Past Masters. It was remixed for the 2006 soundtrack album Love, appearing in full length on the DVD-Audio version and as a shortened edit on other versions.
Music journalist Greil Marcus noted that the political critics had overlooked the music; he wrote that while "there is sterility and repression in the lyrics", the "freedom and movement in the music ... dodges the message and comes out in front."

Political reception

Politically, the release of "Revolution" prompted immediate responses from the New Left and counterculture press: Ramparts branded it a "betrayal", and the New Left Review said the song was "a lamentable petty bourgeois cry of fear".
The far right remained suspicious of the Beatles, saying they were moderate subversives who were "warning the Maoists not to 'blow' the revolution by pushing too hard".

Promotional clips

Filming for promotional clips of "Hey Jude" and "Revolution" took place on 4 September 1968 under the direction of Michael Lindsay-Hogg. Two finished clips of "Revolution" were produced, with only lighting differences and other minor variations. The Beatles sang the vocals live over the pre-recorded instrumental track from the single version. Their vocals included elements from "Revolution 1": McCartney and Harrison sang the "shoo-bee-doo-wah" backing vocals, and Lennon sang "count me out, in". Lennon also substituted "we'd all love" for "we all want" in the opening verse.  Later it was correctly pointed out that a track of Lennon's voice is in fact playing in the background during the performance and can be heard quite noticeably at the end of the song when he fails to shout out his last and most explosive 'All right.' Instead, the shout is heard from the soundtrack after he has already stopped singing and backed away from the microphone.
While the "Hey Jude" clip debuted on David Frost's ITV television programme, the "Revolution" clip was first broadcast on the BBC1 programme Top of the Pops on 19 September 1968. The first US screening of "Revolution" was on the 13 October 1968 broadcast of The Smothers Brothers Comedy Hour.

Personnel

Use in Nike advertisement


In 1987, "Revolution" became the first Beatles recording to be licensed for use in a television commercial.A cover version of "Help!" had been used two years earlier in a Lincoln–Mercury commercial. Nike paid $500,000 for the right to use the song for one year, split between recording owner Capitol-EMI and song publisher ATV Music Publishing (owned by Michael Jackson). Commercials using the song started airing in March 1987.
The three surviving Beatles, through their record company Apple, filed a lawsuit in July 1987 objecting to Nike's use of the song. The suit was aimed at Nike, its advertising agency Wieden+Kennedy,The ad was conceived by copywriter Janet Champ and art directors Susan Hoffman and Kristi Myers, directed by Peter Kagan and Paula Greif and edited by Larry Bridges (Communication Arts, vol. 29, no. 5, p. 112). and Capitol-EMI Records.
The "Revolution" lawsuit and others involving the Beatles and EMI were settled out of court in November 1989, with the terms kept secret.

Cover versions

Thompson Twins version

Thompson Twins covered "Revolution" on the 1985 album Here's to Future Days, from which it was released as the fourth and final single. The single peaked at #56 in the UK, spending five weeks on the chart. A promotional music video was made to the single version of the song. The B-side, "The Fourth Sunday", was exclusive to this single.
Thompson Twins also performed the song with Madonna and Nile Rodgers at Live Aid

=Formats=

Side A
Side B
Side One
Side Two
Side One
Side Two

=Chart performance=

=Official versions=

=Personnel=

Stone Temple Pilots version

In October 2001, Stone Temple Pilots performed "Revolution" live during Come Together: A Night for John Lennon's Words and Music, a television special in tribute to Lennon that raised funds for victims of the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center. After their performance received significant radio airplay, the group recorded a studio version, which was released as a single in November 2001.

Other covers






