[[Richard Simmons]]

CATEGORIES: 1948 births, Living people, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Male actors from New Orleans, Louisiana, American exercise instructors, American male film actors, American film producers, American health and wellness writers, American motivational writers, American people of Jewish descent, American radio personalities, American restaurateurs, American male television actors, American television personalities, American cookbook writers, Florida State University alumni, University of Louisiana at Lafayette alumni

Milton Teagle Simmons (born July 12, 1948), better known as Richard Simmons, is an American fitness personality and actor. Simmons promotes weight-loss programs, prominently through his Sweatin' to the Oldies line of aerobics videos and is known for his eccentric, outgoing and energetic personality.
Simmons began his weight-loss career by opening a gym called Slimmons in Beverly Hills, California, catering to the overweight, and he became widely known through exposure on television and through the popularity of his consumer products. He is often parodied and is a frequent guest of late night television talk shows, such as the Late Show with David Letterman. Simmons continues to promote health and has broadened his activities to include political activism, notably in support of a bill mandating non-competitive physical education in public schools as a part of the "No Child Left Behind" Act.

Early life

Simmons was born Milton Teagle Simmons in New Orleans, Louisiana on July 12, 1948, the son of Shirley May (née Satin) and Leonard Douglas Simmons, Sr. Simmons was born to show business parents and raised in the French Quarter of New Orleans.21-32 His father was Episcopalian and his mother Jewish; Simmons later converted to Catholicism and attended Cor Jesu High School, known today as Brother Martin High School.google.com/newspapers?nid=1915&dat=19840212&id=eTJSAAAAIBAJ&sjid=HTYNAAAAIBAJ&pg=1636,1983164
His first job in New Orleans was selling pralines at Leah's. After starting college at the University of Southwestern Louisiana, he transferred to Florida State University. While enrolled there, he studied as an exchange student in Florence, Italy. He graduated with a BA in Art. After graduation, Simmons moved to New York City where he worked in advertising, as a waiter, and for cosmetics companies Revlon and Coty Cosmetics.

Fitness career

Simmons had an uncredited appearance in Fellini Satyricon which was released in 1969 showing him as obese.
Upon moving to Los Angeles, in the 1970s, Simmons worked as the Maître d'hotel at Derek's, a restaurant in Beverly Hills.157 He developed an interest in fitness, but was dissatisfied with the unhealthy fad diet methods.
Simmons later opened his own exercise studio, originally called The Anatomy Asylum, where emphasis was placed on healthy eating in proper portions and enjoyable exercise in a supportive atmosphere. He opened the studio with the help and support of his lover Edwin Colon Jr. The business originally included a salad bar restaurant called "Ruffage," the name a pun on the word roughage (dietary fiber), though it was eventually removed as the focus of the Asylum shifted solely to exercise. (1999) p.177-184 Now called Slimmons, the establishment continues operations in Beverly Hills, and Simmons teaches motivational classes and aerobics throughout the week.
Simmons stated in 2010 that he had kept off his own 100+ pound weight loss for 42 years, had been helping others lose weight for 35 years, and that in the course of his fitness career had helped humanity lose approximately 12,000,000 pounds.

In media

Simmons began to draw media attention due to the success of his health club that began with him on the television show Real People where he was shown at work. He introduced customers whom he had helped to lose weight. He later made guest roles on the celebrity game shows: Battlestars; Body Language; Super Password; Win, Lose or Draw; the ABC version of Match Game; the syndicated version of Hollywood Squares; and Nickelodeon's Figure It Out.
Positive viewer reaction landed Simmons a recurring role as himself on the American soap opera General Hospital,Richard Simmons – IMDb over a four-year period. This in turn led to further media notoriety, as well as being in shopping malls, where he taught exercise classes. In the early 1980s, Simmons hosted two shows; Slim Cookin, and an Emmy Award-winning talk show, The Richard Simmons Show, in which he focused on personal health, fitness, exercise, and healthy cooking. "The Richard Simmons Show" drew thousands of exercise enthusiasts including SAG/AFTRA actress Lucrecia Sarita Russo who reportedly transported an entire bus filled with ladies from Pam's Figure Tique, for a lively workout on the show.
In 1998, Simmons voiced Boone the elf in the animated film Rudolph the Red-Nosed Reindeer: The Movie.
Simmons has been featured as himself on numerous TV shows, including Whose Line Is It Anyway?, CHiPs, Saturday Night Live, The Larry Sanders Show and on an episode of Arrested Development, "Bringing Up Buster". In 1999, he hosted a short lived TV show called DreamMaker. Eight years later he filmed a pledge drive special for PBS, called Love Yourself and Win.
Simmons has been featured in TV advertisements for Sprint, Yoplait, Herbal Essence Shampoos,and toward the end of 2007, he was in a "This is SportsCenter" commercial on ESPN as the show's "conditioning coach." In Canada, Simmons was in an advertisement for Simmons mattresses. The mattress company hired the exercise celebrity because of the similarity in name, and for his appeal to the company's target audience of women over 35. Beyond this, there is no further business partnership between the two.
For three years, he hosted a radio show on Sirius Stars, Sirius Satellite Radio channel 102, called Lighten Up with Richard Simmons. The show is no longer in production.

Personal life

Personality

Simmons is noted for his energetic motivational demeanor; an attribute he uses to help encourage people to lose weight. His high energy level is always featured in his workout videos. His trademark attire is candy-striped Dolfin shorts and tank tops decorated with Swarovski crystals.
Is known for interacting at a personal level with people using his products. This began by personally answering fan mail he received as a cast member of General Hospital. Simmons still personally answers emails and letters, and makes hundreds of phone calls each week to those who seek his help.
Simmons claims to have few friends, saying, "I don't have a lot to offer to one person. I have a lot to offer to a lot of people." Aside from his three Dalmatians and two maids, Simmons lives alone in Beverly Hills. While Simmons' sexual orientation has been the subject of much speculation, he has never publicly discussed his sexuality.

Hurricane Katrina response

In September 2005, Simmons was on Entertainment Tonight to discuss the effects of Hurricane Katrina on his family in his hometown of New Orleans, Louisiana, and his involvement in aiding those affected by the hurricane. On August 29, 2006, Simmons was on Your World with Neil Cavuto while making a return visit to New Orleans one year after the flooding, a visit he repeated on March 2, 2007, now talking about his recent trip to Washington, D.C. to promote and raise awareness about The Strengthening Physical Education Act of 2007 (bill HR 1224).

Print and other media

Books

Audio

=Analog compact cassette=

=Compact disc=

=Vinyl record=

=Singles=

=Digital compact cassette=

Visual media

=DVD=

=Video cassette=

Notes



Love yourself, lose weight |author= |date= March 13, 2006 |website= Canada.com |publisher= Canwest |accessdate=}}




