[[Kanaloa kahoolawensis]]

CATEGORIES: Mimosoideae, Plants described in 1994, Endemic flora of Hawaii

Kanaloa kahoolawensis, the Ka palupalu o Kanaloa or kohe malama malama o kanaloa,USFWS. Kanaloa kahoolawensis Species Profile is a species of flowering plant in the legume family, Fabaceae, subfamily Mimosoideae, tribe Mimoseae, and is endemic to Hawaii. Kanaloa is a monotypic genus with the only species Kanaloa kahoolawensis.

History

Kanaloa was discovered in 1992 by the botanists Ken Wood and Steve Perlman of the National Tropical Botanical Garden on Kaho

Habitat and range

Only two plants have ever been found in the wild.i. New Zealand Journal of Archaeology 14: 9–34. & Burney, David A. (1997): The diet and ecology of Hawaii's extinct flightless waterfowl: evidence from coprolites. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 62(2): 279–297. HTML abstract

Description

K. kahoolawensis is an unarmed shrub reaching 0.75–1 m in height. Branches are dense, decumbent and measure 0.75-1.5 m long. New growth is densely brown hirtellous-villosulous with straight and curly, white and brown simple trichomes 0.1-0.3 mm long. Stipules free, paired, ovate, villosulous, 1.5–2 mm x 1.2-1.5 mm. Leaves alternate, bipinnately compound with one pair of pinnae, each pinna bears 3 leaflets, a terminal pair and a single proximal leaflet on the abaxial side, leaflets nearly sessile, pulvinus 
Phylogeny

Based on molecular phylogenetic studies, Kanaloa is closely related to Schleinitzia and Desmanthus.  Shared features include: lack of spines or prickles, presence of sessile petiolar glands, petals free to the base, and inflorescence a capitulum. Kanaloa differs from Schleinitzia in lacking glands at the apex of the anthers and having simple rather than compound pollen grains.  Fruits are dehiscent along the sutures in Kanaloa; in Schleinitzia the sutural ribs separate from the valves forming a craspedium similar to that in Mimosa. Kanaloa is most closely related to Desmanthus, sharing peltate floral bracts and inertly dehiscent fruits.  Kanaloa differs from Desmanthus in having 3 leaflets per pinna and cordiform seeds.

Conservation

Other than preserving the wild plants, efforts have been put into establishing ex-situ stocks (in a nursery or arboretum), and increasing plant populations with a minimum of 25 individuals.




