[[Simon Rex]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, American male film actors, American hip hop musicians, American male pornographic film actors, American male television actors, Jewish American male actors, Jewish American musicians, Nightclub owners, Male actors from San Francisco, California, Pornographic film actors from California, VJs (media personalities)

Simon Rex Cutright (born July 20, 1974), better known as Simon Rex or Dirt Nasty, is an American actor, comedian, television host, recording artist, record producer, former VJ and former pornographic film actor. He is known for being an MTV VJ turned rapper/comedian with his alter ego, Dirt Nasty, which has received a cult following on social media websites. He has starred as Jeff Campbell in the first season of What I Like About You, as the clumsy George Logan in Scary Movie 3 and 4, and as Dan Sanders in 5.

Personal life

Rex was born Simon Rex Cutright in San Francisco, California, and is the only child of Paul and Zoe Cutright, a relationship coach and an environmental consultant. He attended Alameda High School in Alameda, California. He is Jewish on his mother's side.immaculateinfatuation.com/friday-fives/simon-rex

Career

Adult films

In 1993, at age 19, he appeared solo in scenes for two masturbation porn films, Young, Hard & Solo II; Young, Hard & Solo III. In 1998, at 24, he appeared in Hot Sessions III. He appeared in two movies in 2000: Hot Sessions XII11 and Hot Sessions XIII''.
Acting

In 1995, Simon Rex was introduced to television audiences by MTV who hired Rex to work as a VJ and kept him on the air for over two years.
Rex soon after hit fame and popularity delving into acting and in 1999 was cast in the television show Jack & Jill, which ran for two seasons. He appeared as "Eli" in the TV show Felicity and television guest appearances followed including Baywatch, Everwood, and Summerland. In 2002, the pilot for the show What I Like About You was picked up by The WB, which now has become The CW. Rex starred in the first season.  He later appeared on the Lifetime show, Monarch Cove which ran for 11 episodes in 2006.  He also co-produced a pilot for a show called Rex, with supporting roles performed by Paris Hilton, Lance Bass and Jaime Pressley.
Rex has appeared in The Forsaken, Scary Movie 3, Superhero Movie, Scary Movie 4, Scary Movie 5, and The Karate Dog. He also starred in National Lampoon's Pledge This! with Paris Hilton.

Music

Rex entered the music industry as a rap artist after becoming friends with Mickey Avalon. Rex adopted his alter-ego "Dirt Nasty" and formed the rap group Dyslexic Speedreaders, along with Mickey Avalon, Andre Legacy, and Beardo. Rex often toured with the group and collaborated to create the Shoot To Kill mixtape. The group ended abruptly, as Mickey Avalon left due to personal problems involving Rex and Andre Legacy.
In 2007, he released his self-titled debut album which included viral exposure from the single "1980". Rex has appeared on Paris Hilton's My New BFF in his "Dirt Nasty" persona and in Kesha's video for her song "Tik Tok". He appeared in the LMFAO music video for "Yes" and "Sexy and I Know It" .
In 2011, he created a rap duo called Chain Swangz with Grammy Award-winning producer Jack Splash, leading up to the release of his second album titled Nasty As I Wanna Be which featured guest appearances from artists such as Too Short, Warren G, Kesha, LMFAO. It debuted and stayed at the top of Billboard (magazine)'s comedy charts for weeks.
In 2012, he created the rap trio Three Loco, with Andy Milonakis, previously known for The Andy Milonakis Show, and RiFF RaFF. In November, the trio teamed up with producer Diplo and released the group's eight-song EP on Diplo's own Mad Decent label which garnished them critical acclaim from the likes of MTV, Pitchfork Media, Vice magazine and Perez Hilton. He is credited under his Dirt Nasty persona.

Business ventures

Rex was a co-owner of the New York City nightclub Plumm with partners Noel Ashman, Samantha Ronson, Chris Noth, and others. However, Plumm is now closed.

Filmography

Discography






