[[Little Richard]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, African-American Christians, African-American male singers, African-American pianists, African-American rock musicians, African-American rock singers, African-American songwriters, American rhythm and blues singer-songwriters, American rock pianists, American rock singer-songwriters, American soul singers, Bisexual men, Bisexual musicians, Brunswick Records artists, Grammy Lifetime Achievement Award winners, LGBT African Americans, LGBT Christians, LGBT musicians from the United States, Living people, Mercury Records artists, Musicians from Georgia (U.S. state), Okeh Records artists, People from Macon, Georgia, RCA Records artists, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, Rockabilly Hall of Fame inductees, Songwriters from Georgia (U.S. state), Songwriters Hall of Fame inductees, Specialty Records artists, Vee-Jay Records artists, Warner Music Group artists

Richard Wayne Penniman (born December 5, 1932), known by his stage name Little Richard, is an American recording artist, songwriter, and musician. He has been an influential figure in popular music and culture for over six decades. Penniman's most celebrated work dates from the mid 1950s where his dynamic music and charismatic showmanship laid the foundation for rock and roll. His music also had a pivotal impact on the formation of other popular music genres, including soul and funk. Penniman influenced numerous singers and musicians across musical genres from rock to rap.
Penniman has been honored by many institutions, including inductions into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the Songwriters Hall of Fame. He is the recipient of Lifetime Achievement Awards from The Recording Academy and the Rhythm and Blues Foundation. Penniman's "Tutti Frutti" (1955)  was included in the Library of Congress' National Recording Registry in 2010, claiming the "unique vocalizing over the irresistible beat announced a new era in music." 

Early life

Little Richard was born Richard Wayne Penniman in a community locally known as Logtown inside Yatesville, Georgia, on December 5, 1932, the third-eldest of twelve. His parents were Leva Mae (née Stewart) and Charles "Bud" Penniman. His father was a church deacon who sold bootlegged moonshine on the side and owned his own nightclub, the Tip In Inn.
Penniman's family was highly religious, joining various A.M.E., Baptist and Pentecostal churches, with some family members becoming ministers. Penniman enjoyed the Pentecostal churches the most due to its charismatic worship and live music.
Penniman's initial musical influences were gospel performers, such as Brother Joe May, Sister Rosetta Tharpe, Mahalia Jackson and Marion Williams. May, who as a singing evangelist was known as the "Thunderbolt of the Middle West" due to his phenomenal range and vocal power, inspired the boy to become a preacher.

Music career

Beginnings

On October 27, 1947, Sister Rosetta Tharpe heard fourteen-year-old Penniman singing two of her gospel recordings before her concert at the Macon City Auditorium. Tharpe was so impressed that she invited him to sing onstage during the concert.
In October 1951, Wright put Penniman in contact with his manager, Zenas Sears, a local deejay. Sears recorded Penniman at his station backed by Wright's band. The recordings soon led to a deal with RCA's Camden subsidiary.
Under the suggestion of Lloyd Price, Penniman sent a two-song demo for Price's label, Specialty Records, in February 1955. Time passed before Penniman got a call to record for the label.

Initial success and conversion


"Tutti Frutti" became an instant hit, reaching No. 2 on Billboard's Rhythm and Blues Best-Sellers chart and crossing over to the pop charts in both the United States and overseas in the United Kingdom.  It reached No. 17 on the  Billboard Top 100 in America and No. 29 on the British singles chart, eventually selling a million copies.
Penniman's show, according to Barnum, was the first rock and roll show to use spotlights and flicker lights, which had been a show business tradition.
Penniman had nine hits in America in 1956 and five in Britain, with recordings such as "Slippin' and Slidin'", "Rip It Up" "Ready Teddy", "The Girl Can't Help It" and "Lucille". Most of Penniman's earlier hits inspired covers by the likes of Pat Boone, Elvis Presley and Bill Haley. Described as having "electrifying movie-star looks", Penniman accepted brief roles in movies such as Don't Knock the Rock, Mister Rock and Roll and The Girl Can't Help It.
In May 1957, Penniman released his first album, Here's Little Richard, which reached No. 13 on the Billboard Top LPs chart, then a rare feat for a rock and roll artist. Penniman's success made him a millionaire and in late 1956, he settled in Los Angeles, purchasing a mansion in a wealthy section of the city, where he lived next door to boxer Joe Louis.
Around this time, Penniman began recording gospel and had some chart success with songs such as "He's Not Just a Soldier" and "Crying in the Chapel".  Another gospel single, "He Got What He Wanted", reached the top 40 in the UK.

Return to secular music


In 1962, concert promoter Don Arden convinced Penniman to tour Europe after telling him his records were still selling well there. Arden booked him as the headline artist with Sam Cooke second on the bill. Back in the U.S., Penniman recorded six rock and roll songs with the Upsetters for Little Star Records, under the name "World Famous Upsetters", allowing him to keep his options open in the ministry.
Penniman returned to the UK the following fall, with the Rolling Stones as openers. Leaving Okeh in late-1967, Penniman briefly recorded with Brunswick but left shortly after his final session.
Penniman struggled when he returned to secular music in the 1960s. He often complained to producers in the 1960s that he felt unappreciated as producers pushed him towards a horn-oriented Motown sound and felt he wasn't treated with appropriate respect.
Following this, Penniman signed with Reprise Records in 1970, releasing the album, The Rill Thing, which included the charted singles "Freedom Blues" and "Greenwood, Mississippi". Penniman's follow-ups for Reprise failed to produce similar success and Penniman spent much of the decade performing as a guest instrumentalist on sessions with rockers such as Delaney and Bonnie, Joey Covington and Joe Walsh. The sessions for Canned Heat's "Rockin' with the King" (1972) and Bachman-Turner Overdrive's "Take It Like a Man" (1976) resulted in chart successes. Penniman and three of his brothers formed a management company, Bud Hole Incorporated, around this time.

Comeback

In 1984, Penniman filed a $112 million lawsuit against Specialty Records, Art Rupe and his publishing company Venice Music and ATV Music for not paying him royalties after he left the label in 1959.
Reconciling his roles as evangelist and rock and roll musician for the first time, Penniman stated that the genre could be used for good or evil.
In 1990, Penniman contributed a spoken-word rap on Living Colour's hit song, "Elvis Is Dead", from their album Time's Up. The following year, he was one of the featured performers on the hit single and video "Voices That Care" that was produced to help boost the morale of U.S. troops involved in Operation Desert Storm.  He also recorded a rock and roll version of "The Itsy Bitsy Spider" that year that led to a deal with Disney Records, resulting in the release of a hit 1992 children's album, Shake It All About. Throughout the 1990s, Penniman performed around the world and appeared on TV, film, and tracks with other artists, including Jon Bon Jovi, Elton John and Solomon Burke.

Later years

In 2000, Penniman's life was dramatized for the biopic Little Richard, which focused on his early years including his heyday, religious conversion and return to secular music in the early 1960s. Penniman was played by actor Leon, who earned a NAACP Image Award nomination for his role as the musician. In 2002, Penniman contributed to the Johnny Cash tribute album, Kindred Spirits: A Tribute to the Songs of Johnny Cash. In 2006, Penniman was featured in a popular advertisement for the GEICO brand.  In June 2010, Penniman recorded a gospel track for an upcoming tribute album to songwriting legend Dottie Rambo.
Towards the end of the first decade of the new millennium, Rolling Stone reported that Penniman remained "one of the most recognized and quotable celebrities in the world." Throughout the decade, he kept up a stringent touring schedule, performing primarily in the States and Europe. However, sciatic nerve pain in his left leg and then replacement of the involved hip began affecting the frequency of his performances by 2010. Despite his health issues, Penniman continued to receive critical acclaim for his performances, with Rolling Stone reporting after a performance at the Howard Theater in Washington, D.C. in June 2012 that Penniman was "still full of fire, still a master showman, his voice still loaded with deep gospel and raunchy power."
In 2014, Disney actor Brandon Mychal Smith will appear as young Little Richard in the upcoming Universal Pictures bio-pic of James Brown, "Get On Up."

Personal life

Relationships and family

In 1956, Penniman began a romantic relationship with Audrey Robinson, a 16-year-old college student, originally from Savannah, Georgia.
Penniman met his only wife, Ernestine Campbell, at an evangelical rally in October 1957. They began dating that year and wed in July 1959. According to Campbell, she and Penniman initially enjoyed a happy marriage at first with "normal" sexual relations. Campbell claimed when the marriage ended in divorce in 1963, it was due to Penniman's celebrity status, noting that it had made life difficult for her. Penniman claimed the marriage fell apart due to him being a neglectful husband.

Sexual orientation

Penniman's sexual orientation has long been a topic of debate. Penniman claimed that as a child he felt feminine and played with girls, which was the source of jokes at his expense.
During the early 1950s, Penniman had appeared as a drag performer in various vaudeville groups.  By the time he entered the chitlin' circuit, he began using makeup regularly, influenced by Billy Wright, who recommended him his brand of makeup, Pancake 31.
While attending Oakwood College, Penniman recalled a male student showed himself to him. After the incident was reported to the student's father, Penniman withdrew from the college.

Drug and alcohol use

Penniman reportedly was a heavy drinker and cigarette smoker during the mid-1960s. By 1972, he was using cocaine, developing an addiction to the drug. He later lamented during that period, "they should have called me Little Cocaine, I was sniffing so much of that stuff!"

Religion

Penniman's family had deep evangelical (Baptist and AME) Christian roots, including two uncles and a grandfather who were preachers.
After he was born again in 1957, Penniman enrolled at Oakwood College in Huntsville, Alabama, to study theology. Penniman returned to secular music in the early 1960s.
During the 1980s and 1990s, Penniman officiated at celebrity weddings. In 2006, Penniman wedded twenty couples who won a contest in one ceremony. He somberly told a Howard Theatre, Washington, D.C. audience in June 2012, "I know this is not Church, but get close to the Lord. The world is getting close to the end. Get close to the Lord."  In 2013, Penniman elaborated on his spiritual philosophies, stating "God talked to me the other night. He said He's getting ready to come. The world's getting ready to end and He's coming, wrapped in flames of fire with a rainbow around his throne."  Rolling Stone reported his apocalyptic prophesies generated snickers from some audience members as well as cheers of support.  Penniman responded by stating: "When I talk to you about Jesus, I'm not playing. I'm almost 81 years old. Without God, I wouldn't be here."

Health issues

In October 1985, Penniman returned to the United States from England, where he had finished recording his album Lifetime Friend, to film a guest spot on the show, Miami Vice. Following the taping, he accidentally crashed his sports car into a telephone pole in West Hollywood, California. He suffered a broken right leg, broken ribs and head and facial injuries. His accident prevented him from being able to attend the inaugural Rock and Roll Hall of Fame ceremony in January 1986 where he was one of several inductees. He instead supplied a recorded message.
In 2007, Penniman was having problems walking due to sciatica in his left leg, requiring him to use crutches.

Legacy

Music

Penniman's music and performance style had a pivotal impact on the shape of the sound and style of popular music genres of the 20th century.
Penniman was blessed with a phenomenal voice able to generate croons, wails, and screams unprecedented in popular music. He was cited by two of soul music's pioneers, Otis Redding and Sam Cooke, as contributing to that genre's early development. Redding stated that most of his music was patterned after Penniman's and that he had "done a lot for him and his soul brothers in the music business." Cooke had a top 40 hit with his cover of "Send Me Some Loving" in 1963.
James Brown said that Penniman and the Upsetters, including drummer Charles "Chuck" Connor, were "the first to put the funk in rhythm", with a biographer stating that their music "sparked the musical transition from fifties rock and roll to sixties funk".
Penniman's hits of the mid-1950s, such as "Tutti Frutti", "Long Tall Sally", "Keep A-Knockin'" and "Good Golly Miss Molly", were generally characterized by playful lyrics with sexually suggestive connotations. Allmusic writer Richie Unterberger stated that Penniman "merged the fire of gospel with New Orleans R&B, pounding the piano and wailing with gleeful abandon", and that while "other R&B greats of the early '50s had been moving in a similar direction, none of them matched the sheer electricity of Richard's vocals. With his high speed deliveries, ecstatic trills, and the overjoyed force of personality in his singing, he was crucial in upping the voltage from high-powered R&B into the similar, yet different, guise of rock and roll." Due to his innovative music and style, he's often widely acknowledged as the "architect of rock and roll".
Ray Charles introduced him at a concert in 1988 as "a man that started a kind of music that set the pace for a lot of what's happening today."

Society

In addition to his musical style, Penniman was cited as one of the first crossover black artists, reaching audiences of all races. His concerts broke the color line, drawing blacks and whites together despite attempts to sustain segregation. As H.B. Barnum explained in Quasar of Rock, Penniman "opened the door. He brought the races together." 

Influence

Penniman influenced generations of performers across musical genres. James Brown and Otis Redding both idolized Penniman.

Awards and honors

Penniman received the Cashbox Triple Crown Award for "Long Tall Sally" in 1956.
Included in numerous Rolling Stone lists, Penniman's Here's Little Richard was ranked fifty on the magazine's list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.

Discography

Filmography

Notes

Citations

Sources




