[[The Singing Nun]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, 1985 deaths, Alcohol-related deaths, Belgian female singers, Belgian guitarists, Belgian Roman Catholic religious sisters and nuns, Burials at Cheremont Cemetery, Dominican Sisters, French-language singers of Belgium, Belgian singer-songwriters, Female guitarists, Female singer-songwriters, Belgian activists, Birth control activists, Drug-related suicides in Belgium, Female suicides, Folk guitarists, Folk singers, Former Roman Catholic religious sisters and nuns, LGBT singers, LGBT writers from Belgium, Musicians who committed suicide, People from Brussels, Philips Records artists, Roman Catholic activists, Roman Catholic writers, Women activists

Jeanine Deckers (17 October 1933 — 29 March 1985), better known as Sœur Sourire ("Sister Smile", often credited as The Singing Nun in English-speaking countries), was a Belgian singer-songwriter and initially a member of the Dominican Order in Belgium as Sister Luc Gabrielle. She acquired world fame in 1963 with the release of the French-language song "Dominique", which topped the U.S. Billboard and other charts.

Early years

She was born Jeanne  Paule Deckers in  Laeken in 1933, the daughter of a patisserie shop owner, and was educated in a Catholic school in Brussels. She was a keen Girl Guide who bought her first guitar to play at Guide evening events. Though she was thinking about becoming a nun even as a young woman, she trained and then worked as a teacher.   In September 1959 she entered the Missionary Dominican Sisters of Our Lady of Fichermont, headquartered in the city of Waterloo, where she took the name Sister Luc-Gabrielle. 

Music career

While in the convent, Deckers wrote, sang and performed her own songs, which were so well received by her fellow Sisters and by visitors, that her religious superiors encouraged her to record an album, which visitors and retreatants at the convent would be able to purchase.
In 1961, the album was recorded in Brussels at Philips. The single "Dominique" became an international hit, and in 1962 her album sold nearly 2 million copies. Many radio stations in the U.S. played it and other softer hits more often in the wake of the John F. Kennedy assassination. Overnight, the Dominican Sister was an international celebrity, with the stage name of  "Dominique" was the first Belgian song to be a number one hit single in the United States.
Deckers found it difficult having to live up her to her publicity as "a true girl scout", always happy and in a good mood.  "I was never allowed to be depressed", Deckers remembered in 1979. "The mother superior used to censor my songs and take out any verses I wrote when I was feeling sad."
In 1963 she was sent by her order to take theology courses at the University of Louvain. She liked the student life, if not her courses. She reconnected with a friend from her youth, Annie Pécher, with whom she slowly developed a very close relationship.

Effects of fame and further musical career

In 1965, Debbie Reynolds starred in The Singing Nun, a biographical film about Deckers. Deckers reportedly rejected the film as "fiction".
Deckers did not gain much from this international fame, and her second album, Her Joys, Her Songs, did not get much attention and disappeared almost as soon as it was released.  Most of her earnings were in fact taken away by Philips, her producer, while the rest automatically went to her religious congregation, which made at least $100,000 in royalties.
Pulled between two worlds and increasingly in disagreement with the Catholic Church, she left the convent in 1966, to pursue a life as a lay Dominican of the order. She later reported that her departure resulted from a personality clash with her superiors, and that she had been forced out of the convent, and did not leave of her own free will. She still considered herself a nun, praying several times daily, and maintaining a simple and chaste lifestyle.
The recording company required her to give up her initial professional names of "Sœur Sourire" and "The Singing Nun".   She attempted to continue her musical career under the name "Luc Dominique" and she pursued social work. She moved in with her childhood friend, Anne Pecher.
Deckers released an album entitled I Am Not a Star in Heaven. Her repertoire consisted of religious songs and songs for children. Despite her renewed musical emphasis, Deckers' career failed to prosper. She blamed lack of success of the album on not being able to use the names by which she had become known, saying that "nobody knew who it was." She suffered a nervous breakdown followed by two years of psychotherapy.
Deckers became increasingly critical of Catholic doctrines and eventually became a public advocate for contraception, including release of a single entitled "Glory Be to God for the Golden Pill". It was a commercial failure.

Later years

In 1973, Deckers became involved with the  Catholic Charismatic Renewal.  Cardinal Suenens requested that she write songs for the movement, and this led to a brief but successful return to the stage, including a visit to Pittsburgh where she sang before several thousand people.  Under the name "Sister Smile", she released another album in 1979, which she described as containing "honest, religious songs" and commented that the album would help listeners to "know who I really am."
In the late 1970s, the Belgian government claimed that she owed $63,000 in back taxes. Deckers countered that the royalties from her recording were given to the convent and therefore she was not liable for payment of any personal income taxes. As her former congregation refused to take any responsibility for the debt, claiming both that they no longer had any responsibility for her and that they did not have the funds, Deckers ran into heavy financial problems. In 1982, she tried, once again as Sœur Sourire, to score a hit with a disco synthesizer version of "Dominique", but this last attempt to resume her singing career failed.
In addition to the other financial worries, an autism centre for children started by Annie Pécher had to close its doors for financial reasons in 1982. After this Decker tried to make a living by giving lessons in music and religion.

Death

Citing their financial difficulties in a note, she and her companion of ten years,Mansour, David (2005). From Abba to Zoom: A Pop Culture Encyclopedia of the Late 20th Century. Andrews McMeel Publishing, p. 433. On This Day in Music History. Hal Leonard Corporation, p. 93. Annie Pécher, both committed suicide by an overdose of barbiturates and alcohol on 29 March 1985.
In their suicide note, Decker and Pécher stated they had not given up their faith and wished to be buried together after a church funeral. They were buried together in Cheremont Cemetery in Wavre, Walloon Brabant, the town where they died.

Theatrical portrayals

In 1996, The Tragic and Horrible Life of the Singing Nun premiered Off-Broadway at the Grove Street Playhouse. The play, which was written and directed by Blair Fell, was loosely based on the events in Deckers' life. The production featured several musical numbers and followed the renamed character Jeanine Fou's life from her entry into the convent until her death with Pécher. The New York Times review stated the play "milks much of its comic mileage from the incongruous, and willfully tasteless, pairing of its holy setting and its trashy, Jacqueline Susann-style dialogue ... In dressing up despair in barbed frivolity, Mr. Fell provides his own skewed equivalent of tragic catharsis." The Catholic League spoke out publicly against the production.
In 2006, a musical version of Fell's play was staged during the New York Musical Theater Festival, produced by George DeMarco and David Gerard, both of whom produced the 1996 production. The musical featured music and lyrics by Andy Monroe and a book by Fell (who also contributed additional lyrics); it was directed by Michael Schiralli.

Films

The Singing Nun is a 1966 American semi-biographical film about the life of Deckers. It stars Debbie Reynolds in the title role. The film also stars Ricardo Montalbán, Katharine Ross, Chad Everett, and Ed Sullivan as himself.
In 2009, Sœur Sourire, a Franco-Belgian biopic,  starring Cécile de France as Deckers, was released.





Further reading




