[[Ladder]]

CATEGORIES: Ladders, Tools

A ladder is a vertical or inclined set of rungs or steps. There are two types: rigid ladders that can be leaned against a vertical surface such as a wall, and rope ladders that are hung from the top. The vertical members of a rigid ladder are called stringers or rails (US) or stiles (UK). Rigid ladders are usually portable, but some types are permanently fixed to buildings. They are commonly made of metal, wood, or fibreglass, but they have been known to be made of tough plastic.

Variations

Rigid ladders are available in many forms, such as:
Rigid ladders were originally made of wood, but in the 20th century aluminium became more common because of its lighter weight. Ladders with fiberglass stiles are used for working on or near overhead electrical wires, because fiberglass is an electrical insulator."Preventing Worker Deaths and Injuries from Contacting Overhead Power Lines with Metal Ladders". National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health. Workplace Solutions, Publication No. 2007-155, September 2007. Henry Quackenbush patented the extension ladder in 1867.

Safety

The most common injury made by ladder climbers is bruising from falling off a ladder, but bone fractures are common and head injuries are also likely, depending on the nature of the accident. For safety, a rigid ladder should be leaned at an angle of about fifteen degrees to the vertical, or 75 degrees to the horizontal. In other words, the distance from the foot of the ladder to the wall should be about one quarter of the height of the top of the ladder. At steeper angles, the ladder is at risk of toppling backwards when the climber leans away from it. At shallower angles, the ladder may lose its grip on the ground. Ladders can also slip backwards owing to faulty base pads which usually fit into the ladder stiles. If badly worn, they can allow the aluminium to contact the ground rather than plastic or rubber, and so lower the friction with the ground. Ladder stabilizers are available that increase the ladder's grip on the ground. One of the first ladder stabilizers or ladder feet was offered in 1936 and today they are standard equipment on most large ladders."Metal Rubber Feet for Ladder Prevents Slipping" Popular Science, April 1936 article at bottom left of pg 499
A ladder standoff, or stay, is a device fitted to the top of a ladder to hold it away from the wall. This enables the ladder to clear overhanging obstacles, such as the eaves of a roof, and increases the safe working height for a given length of ladder.
It has become increasingly common to provide anchor points on buildings to which the top rung of an extension ladder can be attached, especially for activities like window cleaning, especially if a fellow worker is not available for "footing" the ladder. Footing occurs when another worker stands on the lowest rung and so provides much greater stability to the ladder when being used. The anchor point is usually a ring cemented into a slot in the brick wall to which the rungs of a ladder can be attached using rope for example, or a karabiner.

Ladder classes

The European Union and the United Kingdom established a ladder certification system – ladder classes, for any ladders manufactured or sold in Europe. The certification classes solely apply to ladders that are portable such as stepladders and extension ladders and are broken down into three types of certification. Each ladder certification is colour-coded to indicate the amount of weight the ladder is designed to hold, the certification class and its use. The color can be found on the rubber feet of each ladder and on the certification symbol.
In the UK there are a number of British standards included in the three main ladder certifications relative to the particular ladder type. Relevant classifications include BS 1129:1990 (British) which applies to Timber Ladders and Steps; BS 2037:1994 (British) which applies to Metal and Aluminium Ladders and Steps and BS EN 131:1993 (European) which applies to both Timber and Aluminium Ladders and Steps.

Uses

Historical usage

Ladders are ancient tools and technology. A ladder is depicted in a Mesolithic rock painting that is at least 10,000 years old, depicted in the Spider Caves in Valencia, Spain. The painting depicts two humans using a ladder to reach a wild honeybee nest to harvest honey.  The ladder is depicted as long and flexible, possibly made out of some kind of grass. The Hive: The Story Of The Honeybee. London, Great Britain: John Murray (Publishers). ISBN 0-7195-6598-7

Gallery

File:dog and pawl.
File:La-cat.
File:La-main.gif|Sketch of double extension ladder
File:Bamboo ladder in Hainan - 02.JPG|Detail of a bamboo ladder, the most common type of ladder in China








