[[Clemson University]]

CATEGORIES: Clemson University, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, American Association of State Colleges and Universities, Educational institutions established in 1889, Glass science institutes, Land-grant universities and colleges, Oak Ridge Associated Universities, Education in Pickens County, South Carolina, Universities and colleges accredited by the Southern Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges in South Carolina, Buildings and structures in Pickens County, South Carolina, Visitor attractions in Pickens County, South Carolina

Clemson University  as the first vowel. is an American public, coeducational, land-grant and sea-grant research university located in Clemson, South Carolina, United States.
Founded in 1889, Clemson University consists of five colleges: Agriculture, Forestry and Life Sciences; Architecture, Arts and Humanities; Business and Behavioral Sciences; Engineering and Science; and Health, Education and Human Development. According to US News and World Report, Clemson University ranks 21st among all national public universities.

History

Thomas Green Clemson, the university's founder, came to the foothills of South Carolina in 1838, when he married Anna Maria Calhoun, daughter of John C. Calhoun, a South Carolina statesman and seventh U.S. Vice President.  When Clemson died on April 6, 1888, he left most of his estate, which he inherited from his wife, in his will to be used to establish a college that would teach scientific agriculture and the mechanical arts to South Carolinians."Thomas Green Clemson 200 - The Will." Clemson University. Retrieved 17 September 2011. His decision was largely influenced by South Carolina Governor Benjamin Tillman. Tillman lobbied the South Carolina General Assembly to create the school as an agricultural institution for the state and the resolution passed by only one vote.
In his will, Clemson explicitly stated that he wanted the school to be modeled after what is now Mississippi State University: "This institution, I desire, to be under the control and management of a board of trustees, a part of whom are hereinafter appointed, and to be modeled after the Agricultural College of Mississippi as far as practicable."
In November 1889, South Carolina Governor John Peter Richardson III signed the bill, thus establishing the Clemson Agricultural College of South Carolina. As a result, federal funds for agricultural education from the Morrill Land-Grant Colleges Act and the Hatch Act of 1887 were transferred from South Carolina College to Clemson.
Clemson Agricultural College formally opened in July 1893 with an initial enrollment of 446. From its beginning, the college was an all-white male military school. The school remained this way until 1955 when it changed to "civilian" status for students and became a coeducational institution.
In 1963, the school admitted its first African-American student, future Charlotte, North Carolina, mayor Harvey Gantt.

Academics

Admissions

The Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching classifies the university as more selective,"Clemson Freshman Admissions Data".
Clemson University emphasizes on the rigor of high-school study and standardized test scores, either SAT or ACT. The university also considers class rank, extracurricular activities, and an optional personal statement. The average incoming freshman had a combined SAT score of 1220 and a high-school weighted grade-point average (GPA) of 3.99 in 2010. In 2008, admission was the most competitive in university history.
Clemson University had over 15,000 applications for its freshman class of approximately 2,800 students. It was especially competitive for out-of-state students in that it is a state-supported institution. Of those 15,000+ applications, over 10,000 were from outside of South Carolina; however, a little over 1,000 freshmen from other states gained admission.{

Research and rankings

The university endeavors to become a "Top 20" public institution, undergoing a process of enhancing its graduate programs while continuing to emphasize the quality of the undergraduate experience. It has steadily moved up the rankings for public universities from 34,
However, some have questioned Clemson's efforts to improve its rankings. In 2009, an administrator revealed that "Clemson manipulated class sizes, artificially boosted faculty salary data and gave rival schools low grades in the rankings' peer reputation survey" with the goal of manipulating its U.S. News & World Report ranking.  Since then the administrator retracted some of her statements and the university denied any wrongdoing.
As part of its push to enhance graduate-level education, several new Ph.D. programs have been created including interdisciplinary doctoral programs in Rhetorics, Communication, and Information Design (RCID), and Planning, Design, and the Built Environment (formerly Environmental Design and Planning). Also noteworthy is a new master's degree in historic preservation, jointly offered in collaboration with the College of Charleston.
The university's currently most ambitious academic and research endeavor is the Clemson University International Center for Automotive Research (CU-ICAR). automotive and motorsports research campus located in nearby Greenville, South Carolina. ICAR will include a graduate school offering master's and doctoral degrees in automotive engineering, and offering programs focused on systems integration. The campus also includes an Information Technology Research Center being developed by BMW. BMW, Microsoft, IBM, Bosch, The Timken Company and Michelin are all major corporate partners of the CU-ICAR. Private-sector companies that have committed so far to establishing offices and/or facilities on the campus include the Society of Automotive Engineers and Timken. Plans for the campus also include a full-scale, four-vehicle capacity rolling-road model wind tunnel.
In 2004 the Restoration Institute was founded. Its mission is to "advance knowledge in integrative approaches to the restoration of historic, ecological, and urban infrastructure resources." The institute is located in North Charleston and subsume the Hunley Commission that is currently undertaking the stabilization of the H.L. Hunley, the world's first submarine to sink a ship. As of 2013, the institute is constructing a 7.5MW and a 15MW wind turbine test facility for $100 million, to open on November 21. "State investigating investment into wind energy" Clemson Energy, July 17, 2013. Accessed: September 28, 2013."Wind Turbine Drivetrain Testing Facility" Clemson Energy. Accessed: September 28, 2013.
In 2011, The Princeton Review ranked Clemson #1 for town-gown relations are great, #2 for happiest students, #2 for jock schools, #3 for everyone plays intramural sports, #8 for students pack the stadiums, and #9 for best career services."Clemson University." 2011. The Princeton Review. Retrieved 16 September 2011.
In 2012, SmartMoney named Clemson University as 7th best salary returns on tuition.
In 2012, U.S. News ranked Clemson University 3rd for having the most financial resources per student. $26,293 was spent on the average student at Clemson University.

Colleges and Schools

In July 1955, the four schools that made up Clemson ― Agriculture, Arts & Sciences, Engineering and Textiles ― were transformed into nine colleges: Architecture, Arts and Sciences, Liberal Arts, Sciences, Commerce and Industry, Education, Engineering, Forestry and Recreation Resources, and Nursing.

=College of Agriculture, Forestry, and Life Sciences=

The College of Agriculture, Forestry and Life Sciences (CAFLS) supports Clemson University's land-grant mission to provide education, research and service to the public. CAFLS faculty members teach major subjects and core curricula while preparing students to be leaders, creative thinkers, and communicators.  Emphasis is placed on engaging students in research, internships/coops, study abroad, and service learning. CAFLS research is focused on the sustainability of agriculture, forests, and natural resources; food and packaging systems to ensure a healthy and safe food supply; and biomedical sciences to improve human and non-human health.

=College of Architecture, Arts, and Humanities=

The College of Architecture, Arts, and Humanities (CAAH) contains three schools: the School of the Arts, the School of Design and Building, and the School of the Humanities. One of the departments of the College, the School of Architecture, was ranked as the #16 graduate school for architecture in the country by Design Intelligence.

=College of Business and Behavioral Sciences=

The College of Business and Behavioral Science (CBBS) is an Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business accredited college within the university specializing in business fields as well as the social sciences such as economics. Through high levels of interaction and collaboration between students, faculty, business and industry, non-profit centers, and civic and governmental agencies, the college nurtures individual development, bolsters entrepreneurial thinking, spurs social and economic prosperity, provides customized professional education, and sparks a lifelong desire for learning.
With a unique college structure that combines traditional social and behavioral science disciplines with applied business disciplines, CBBS merges the strengths of the two disciplines to develop students prepared for a wide variety of opportunities.

=College of Engineering and Science=

The College of Engineering and Science (CoES) specializes in engineering as well as the physical sciences such as physics and chemistry. Inspired by Thomas Green Clemson's dream to create a "high seminary of learning to benefit the agricultural and mechanical arts," engineering and sciences have been an integral part of the University's development. Since the first degrees were granted in 1896, Clemson engineers and scientists have made significant contributions to South Carolina, the nation and the world.
CoES was formed in 1995, joining the engineering disciplines with the chemistry, computer science, geological science, mathematical science, and physics and astronomy departments.

=College of Health, Education, and Human Development=

The College of Health, Education and Human Development (HEHD)  teaching, research and service efforts focus on public health sciences, nursing, education, and parks, recreation and tourism management. Inspired by the motto "The Engaged College with a Personal Touch," the college's vision and mission are to create collaborative models that enhance community well-being and to prepare skilled professionals and creative leaders who build healthy, well-educated communities.

=Calhoun Honors College=

Established in 1962, Calhoun Honors College strives to enrich the educational experience of highly motivated, academically talented students by providing opportunities for study and research that are usually unavailable to undergraduates. The college provides accelerated learning programs to the university's most talented undergraduates as well as unique research opportunities. Entrance to the college is very competitive, with only 250 incoming freshmen accepted each year with an average SAT score of 1400 or higher and finished in the top 3% of their high school graduating class.

=Graduate School=

The Graduate School offers more than 100 graduate degree programs in 85 disciplines on the college's main campus and at sites such as Clemson at the Falls, the Clemson University International Center for Automotive Research and the Clemson Architecture Center as well as some online/distance-learning programs. Many of the graduate programs are highly ranked nationally, and the school offers several unique interdisciplinary programs.

Student life

Athletics

Clemson University teams are known as the Tigers. They compete as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) Division I level (Football Bowl Subdivision (FBS) sub-level for football), primarily competing in the Atlantic Coast Conference (ACC) for all sports since the 1953-54 season. Men's sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, football, golf, soccer, tennis and track & field; while women's sports include basketball, cross country, golf, rowing, soccer, swimming and diving, tennis, track & field and volleyball.
The most-prominent athletics facilities on campus are Memorial Stadium, Littlejohn Coliseum, Doug Kingsmore Stadium, Historic Riggs Field, and Fike Recreation Center. Clemson has won four national championships including football (1981), two in men's soccer (1984 and 1987), and men's golf (2003).

Fraternity and sorority life

The university's fraternities and sororities system (or Greek system) is somewhat different from other large universities in the southern U.S. in that there are no Greek houses on campus as interfraternity activity did not begin until 1970 following the abolishing of the military cadre requirements at the university. There are residence halls designated for fraternities and sororities, but there are no traditional Greek houses on campus. However, there are a few fraternity houses off campus near the college. The Fraternity Quad on campus (consisting of seven fraternity and sorority halls) is certified by the U.S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program. The remaining sororities' on-campus housing is located on the other end of campus, in what is commonly referred to as "the horseshoe," in Smith and Barnett Halls.
The College Panhellenic Council Chapters at Clemson University include Alpha Phi, Alpha Chi Omega, Alpha Delta Pi, Chi Omega, Delta Delta Delta, Delta Zeta, Gamma Phi Beta, Kappa Alpha Theta, Kappa Delta, Kappa Kappa Gamma, Sigma Kappa, and Zeta Tau Alpha.
As of the 2010-2011 school year there are twenty IFC Fraternities, twelve NPC Sororities, and nine NPHC Chapters, which make up approximately 20 percent of the undergraduate student body.
In the Spring of 2011, there were 3,370 students involved in Greek life, which is about 23% of the 14,531 undergraduate students. Also, the mean GPA of each sorority was above the all university mean."Clemson University Fraternity and Sorority Life." Clemson Greek Life. Clemson University, 2011. Web. 15 Sept. 2011. .

Military heritage

Although the university became a coeducational civilian institution in 1955, it still maintains an active military presence. The university is home to detachments for U.S. Army and U.S. Air Force Reserve Officers' Training Corps (ROTC) as well as a host school for the U.S. Marine Corps PLC program adjacent to the Semper Fi Society.
In addition to students from the university, these organizations also serve students from Anderson University, Southern Wesleyan University, and Tri-County Technical College. The following organizations are present among the military personnel at Clemson:
The university's AAS squadron was selected to be home of Arnold Air Society's National Headquarters for the 2005–2006 year, and again for the 2006–2007 year. This is the first time in AAS's history that any university has served as national headquarters two years in a row.
The C-4 Pershing Rifles have won the national society's drill meet eight times: 1999, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, 2008, 2009 and 2011. Company C-4 also performs colorguards, twenty-one-gun salutes, exhibition-drill performances, and POW/MIA ceremonies. Company C-4 performs colorguard performance at the university's home football games. In addition to the C-4 drill company, the university is the former home of the 4th Regimental Headquarters (4RHQ), the National Headquarters for the Junior ROTC level of Pershing Rifles (BlackJacks) and the Co-ed Auxiliary for Pershing Rifles (CAPeRs).
Its Air Force ROTC Detachment 770 "Flyin' Tigers" was selected as the #1 "medium-sized" Air Force ROTC detachment in the nation for 2006 (the "High Flight" and "Right of Line" awards), #1 Detachment in the "Southeast" in 2006 ("medium-sized") and 2007 ("large-sized"), and #1 in the state of South Carolina (out of three — University of South Carolina and The Citadel) three consecutive years (2005, 2006 and 2007).
The university has also developed a group of Marines and Marine Officer Candidates within an organization called the Semper Fi Society. The society is not associated with the ROTC, but can lead to a commission into the U.S. Marine Corps via the Platoon Leaders Course program.

Student Media

Clemson University has two student-run newspapers. Founded in 1907, The Tiger is the oldest student-run newspaper in South Carolina. The Tiger publishes local and university related news pieces. Additionally, the paper publishes opinion articles on general and national issues, lifestyle articles on topics such as beer, sex, and music, and a large section on sports topics. The Tiger is published weekly, on Fridays and maintains a staff of 20 senior members and 75 junior staff members. 
Additionally, Clemson University Student Media produces Taps, the university's official yearbook since 1908, and the Chronicle, a literary magazine since 1897.
Clemson University also has a student-run television station, CTV, which was established in 1994
Clemson University's student-run radio station, WSBF-FM, broadcasts in the upstate on 88.1FM and online at wsbf.

Traditions

Tiger Paw

The Tiger paw became the official logo for Clemson University in 1970, in place of the previous tiger logo. The change was inspired by President Robert Edwards to "upgrade the image of the university." The company tasked with creating the new logo contacted the Museum of Natural History in Chicago and requested a plaster imprint of a tiger paw.  The paw is now used on all athletic teams and collegiate documents. The tiger paw is also painted on surfaces throughout campus and in footprint patterns on highways leading to the campus.

Homecoming and Tigerama

Every year Clemson students have the opportunity to attend Homecoming and Tigerama. The Clemson Homecoming tradition began in 1914 and has been held annually at Clemson University ever since. During homecoming week, various student organizations design and build Homecoming floats on Bowman Field. The floats are then revealed on the Saturday of the football game and judged by a select panel. Since 1957, Clemson has held "Tigerama" on the Friday night of homecoming week. Tigerama is one of the nation's largest student-run-pep rallies, averaging about 40,000 people. This Clemson event includes the crowning of Miss Homecoming, skits by various academic organizations, as well as a fireworks show.


Welcome Back Festival

Clemson University's Welcome Back Festival is held every year, on College Avenue in Downtown Clemson, on the Monday after University housing opens. At the festival surrounding stores, businesses, and restaurants provide free gifts, merchandise, and samples to new and returning students.

Tiger Prowl

Tiger Prowl is held on either the Monday or Tuesday after University housing opens, on Bowman Field and a portion of Highway 93 on Clemson's campus. More than 400 registered student organizations attend Tiger Prowl, including organizations in volunteer and service, recreational activities, and Greek life.

First Friday Parade

The First Friday Parade has been held on the Friday before the first home football game every year since 1974. The parade includes fraternities, sororities, the Clemson marching band, the university President, as well as many other student organizations.  The parade route travels through portions of Highway 93 and Main Street and concludes at the university's amphitheatre, where the first pep rally of the year is held. In 1985, the parade had its highest attendance when accompanying CBS commentators were the Grand Marshalls.

Spirit Blitz Week

Spirit Blitz Week is annually held a week before a prominent football game. The Spirit Blitz Week tradition originated in the 1980s, and encourages students to wear orange during the entire week and promotes athletic events throughout the week. It also includes the Spirit Blitz Pep Rally, which is held during any available day of the week before the football game.

Two-dollar bills

A university tradition has been in place, since September 24, 1977, for the school's fans to spend two-dollar bills on trips to away football games. The tradition began when Clemson played against Georgia Tech "for the last time", as Georgia Tech did not wish to travel to Clemson for future football games. Of the seventeen games played between Georgia Tech and Clemson between 1953 and 1977, only once, in 1974, did the Georgia Tech Yellow Jackets come to Memorial Stadium. In Atlanta, Georgia, Clemson fans purchased items with two-dollar bills stamped with "Tiger Paws" to show how they contributed to the local economy, which began the tradition.  The tradition became very popular in the 1980s and 1990s, but has waned since then. Clemson: Where The Tigers Play. Sports Publishing, L.L.C. (Champaign, Illinois. Page 144. ISBN 1-58261-369-9.

Tiger push-ups

During home football games, after Clemson scores a touchdown, the Clemson tiger mascot performs push-ups equal to the number of points Clemson has scored at the time. The tiger is in full mascot attire and has been rumored to lose 12 pounds in a single game. The Tiger pushup tradition began in 1978 by the Tiger mascot at the time - Zack Mills. The Tiger mascot outfit weighs 45 pounds, with the head itself weighing 20 pounds.

Ring Ball

The annual Ring Ball, organized by the Clemson Undergraduate Student Government and Student Alumni Council, is a nighttime celebration on the Carillon Gardens for graduating seniors as they receive their Clemson rings. The tradition began in the 1930s but was canceled in 1936 due to a flu epidemic. The tradition was reestablished on April 26, 2013.

Blood Bowl

Clemson University and the University of South Carolina host a blood drive competition to determine who can donate the most blood during a week before their annual rivalry football game. Since the tradition began in 1985, more than 90,000 pints of blood have been donated. The blood drive is sponsored by the Alpha Phi Omega National Service Fraternity, and donations at Clemson benefit The Blood Connection and the AnMed Blood Center.

Memorial Stadium traditions

Alma Mater

The Clemson University alma mater originated in the 1910s after a group of Clemson ROTC cadets in May 1918 was asked to sing the school's song at a gathering of ROTC cadets at Plattsburg, New York; they were unable to do so as Clemson had no song at the time. One of the cadets in attendance, A.C. Corcoran of Charleston, South Carolina, decided to remedy the situation and wrote the words to the alma mater and set them to Annie Lisle, which was the melody of Cornell University's alma mater as well as many others. The words were later officially accepted by the then-named Clemson Agricultural College as the alma mater and was first performed by the Clemson Glee Club on February 17, 1919.
In 1947 the club "Tiger Brotherhood" decided that, rather than continue borrowing another school's melody, the university should compose its own. As a result, the Tiger Brotherhood sponsored a contest for Clemson students to compose a unique melody. On May 5, 1947, Clemson University's school newspaper "The Tiger" announced Robert E. Farmer of Anderson, South Carolina, as the winner and a member of the glee club at the time. Farmer's melody was slightly altered in 1970, but was restored to its original tune in 2009.
The lyrics to the alma mater:
 
 Where the Blue Ridge yawns its greatness
Where the Tigers play,
Here the sons of dear old Clemson
Reign supreme alway.
CHORUS
Dear old Clemson we will triumph
And with all our might,
That the Tiger's roar may echo
O'er the mountain height!

Fight song

The university's fight song is the jazz standard, the "Tiger Rag"."Traditions." Clemson University. 2011. Retrieved 16 September 2011.

Public Safety

The Clemson University operates with the Clemson University Police Department and the Clemson University Fire & EMS, for public safety needs. Both Departments are staffed 24 hours a day 7 days a week. The University Fire & EMS has one station, located at 1521 Perimeter Road. The Police Department is located at the West End Zone of Frank Howard Field.

Notable alumni

Brian Patrick Dawkins|publisher= databaseFootball.com |accessdate= December 21, 2012 }}[/ref]

Notable faculty








