[[Claudette Colvin]]

CATEGORIES: African-Americans' civil rights activists, American child activists, Youth activists, People from Montgomery, Alabama, 1939 births, Living people, 20th-century African-American activists, American women activists, African-American activists

Claudette Colvin (born September 5, 1939) is a pioneer of the African-American civil rights movement. In 1955, she was the first person arrested for resisting bus segregation in Montgomery, Alabama, preceding the better publicized Rosa Parks incident by nine months.
She was among the five women originally included in the federal court case, filed on February 1, 1956 as Browder v. Gayle (1956), and testified before the three-judge panel that heard the case in the United States District Court. On June 13, 1956, the judges determined that the state and local laws requiring bus segregation in Alabama were unconstitutional. The case went to the United States Supreme Court, which upheld their ruling on December 17, 1956. Three days later, the Supreme Court issued an order to Montgomery and the state to end bus segregation in Alabama.
For a long time, Montgomery's black leaders did not publicize Colvin's pioneering effort because she was a teenager and became pregnant while unmarried. Given the social norms of the time and her youth, the NAACP leaders worried about using her to represent their movement."Her circumstances would make her an extremely vulnerable standard-bearer." ISBN 0-671-68742-5 p. 123

Early life

Colvin was born September 5, 1939 and grew up in one of the poorer neighborhoods of Montgomery, Alabama."Claudette Colvin", Montgomery Boycott In 1955 Colvin was a student at the segregated Booker T. Washington High School in the city. Colvin was a good student in school, earning mostly A's in her courses and she even said she had high aspirations of being President one day. Colvin was a member of the NAACP Youth Council and was actively learning about the civil rights movement in school.
She was returning home from school on March 2, 1955 when she got on a Capital Heights bus downtown. She relied on the city's buses to get to and from school. She sat in the middle section. If the bus became so crowded that all the "white seats" in front were filled and a white person was standing, the blacks were supposed to leave these seats and move to the back and stand if needed. When a white woman got on the bus and was standing, bus driver Robert W. Cleere ordered Colvin and two other black passengers to get up and move to the back. When Colvin refused, she was removed from the bus and arrested by two police officers.
"The bus was getting crowded and I remember the bus driver looking through the rear view mirror asking her to get up for the white woman, which she didn't," said Annie Larkins Price, a classmate of Colvin's. "She had been yelling it's my constitutional right. She decided on that day that she wasn't going to move."  Colvin was handcuffed, arrested and forcibly removed from the bus. She shouted that her constitutional rights were being violated. Price testified for Colvin in the juvenile court case. Colvin was convicted of violating the segregation law and assault. "There was no assault," Price said.

Court trial

Colvin was also one of four women plaintiffs in the court case Browder v. Gayle. This trial determined that bus segregation in Montgomery, Alabama was unconstitutional.N.p.. Web. 2 Nov 2013. . During the trial, Colvin described her arrest: 
 "I kept saying, 'He has no civil right... this is my constitutional right... you have no right to do this.' And I just kept blabbing things out, and I never stopped. That was worse than stealing, you know, talking back to a white person." 
The case was appealed by state and local officials to the United States Supreme Court. On November 13, 1956, the case was heard by the Supreme Court who affirmed the District Court's ruling. In December, the Supreme Court declined to reconsider and on December 20, 1956, it ordered Montgomery and Alabama to end bus segregation in the state.

Personal life

In December 1955, Colvin gave birth to a son, Raymond. He was so light-skinned (like his father) that people frequently said she had a baby by a white man. Colvin left Montgomery for New York in 1958, because she had difficulty finding and keeping work after the notoriety of the federal court case overturning bus segregation. (Similarly, Parks left Montgomery for Detroit in 1957.) Colvin said after her actions on the bus she was branded as a troublemaker by those in her community and had to drop out of college.N.p.. Web. 2 Nov 2013. .
In New York, the young Colvin and Raymond first lived with her older sister, Velma Colvin. She got a job as a nurse's aide in a nursing home in Manhattan, where she worked for 35 years.  She retired in 2004. Colvin never married. While living in New York, she had a second son, who became an accountant in Atlanta, married and had his own family. Raymond Colvin died in 1993 at age 37 in New York.

Legacy

Although Colvin did have a "spark" that may have ignited the Montgomery Bus Boycott movement, she rarely told her story once she moved to New York City. Conversation in the black community focused on black enterprise by this time rather than on integration issues. NPR's Margot Adler said that black organizations felt that Rosa Parks made a better test case for integration because she was an adult, and she had the right hair and look to make her appear as middle class. Before Rosa Parks, There Was Claudette Colvin. NPR. March 15, 2009. Retrieved November 24, 2013.
In 2005, Colvin told the Montgomery Advertiser that she would not have changed her decision to remain seated. 
 "I feel very, very proud of what I did. I do feel like what I did was a spark and it caught on." 
Colvin has often said that she is not angry she didn't get the recognition she deserved, but instead disappointed. She said she felt as if she was "getting her Christmas in January rather than the 25th."N.p.. Web. 2 Nov 2013. .

In popular culture

Quotes

Colvin said this as she was getting arrested by the two police officers on the bus.
Colvin later told Newsweek this in an interview as to how she was feeling staying in her seat on the bus.





Further reading




