[[Cedar Point]]

CATEGORIES: Cedar Point, Cedar Fair amusement parks, Landmarks in Ohio, Buildings and structures in Sandusky, Ohio, Amusement parks in Ohio, Visitor attractions in Erie County, Ohio, 1870 establishments in Ohio

Cedar Point is a 
Cedar Point's normal operating season runs from mid-May until Labor Day, when the park is open daily. The park is then open only on weekends until the beginning of November for HalloWeekends, a Halloween event. and several nearby resorts.
The park has reached several milestones. It is the only amusement park in the world with four roller coasters taller than  As of 2012, the park is the most visited seasonal amusement park in the United States with an estimated 3.22 million visitors in 2012. The park also has several buildings that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

History

In the mid-19th century, the south shore region of Lake Erie was a popular vacation destination for the emerging middle class in the United States. The lake islands, such as Kelleys Island and South Bass Island, were gaining a reputation for their freshwater bathing resorts.
In the 1860s during the American Civil War, housing for a battery of four field artillery pieces was constructed at the tip of the peninsula. It was used to defend a prison for Confederate soldiers on nearby Johnson's Island. Louis Zistel, a German immigrant, built two boats to transport the prisoners. In 1870, he began to ferry locals to the Cedar Point peninsula, which was regaining popularity as a summer picnic destination. Zistel opened a bathhouse on the north shore of the peninsula and the same year built a beer garden with a small dance floor. He charged 25 cents per person to ride from Sandusky to Cedar Point on his boat, Young Reindeer. This marked the beginning of Cedar Point as an amusement park.
Benjamin F. Dwelle and Captain William Slackford leased land on the peninsula in 1882 and built eight new bathhouses, a dance hall and wooden walkways on the beach. The steamboats R.B. Hayes and Lutts provided transport to Biemiller's Cove and Cedar Point Lighthouse. Building on early success, Dwelle and Slackford continued to expand the park each year and added picnic tables, cleared acres of brush, and built a baseball diamond. In 1888, after Slackford became ill, Dwelle entered a more lucrative partnership with Adam Stoll and Louis Adolph, who owned land at Cedar Point, and investors Charles Baetz and Jacob Kuebeler.. The Switchback Railway was designed as two identical tracks side-by-side – one for the ride down and the other for the train to be hauled back to the top by the ride attendant.

Boeckling era

Representatives of the Lake Erie and Western Railroad purchased the peninsula for $256,000 in 1897, and formed the Cedar Point Pleasure Resort Company. The company appointed George A. Boeckling, a businessman from Indiana, as the park's new manager. Under his tenure, the peninsula was transformed from a picnic ground into a nationally recognized amusement park and resort destination.
The second roller coaster at Cedar Point, the Figure-Eight Roller Toboggan, debuted in 1902. It was moved several years later and renamed The Racer. A pony track was built near the beach the same year. Mosquitos were becoming a problem, so in 1904, the park hired the Detroit Dredging Company to drain swampy areas on the peninsula. Detroit Dredging connected a series of lagoons to form a water passageway that quickly became one of the park's signature attractions. Aside from sightseeing passenger boats, the passageway was used to transport coal to power plants near the center of the peninsula. The historic Hotel Breakers opened in 1905 as one of the largest in the Midwest; it had 600 guest rooms and a cafe that could seat 400 guests. A new area of the park called "Amusement Circle" was designed in 1906 to link the pier to the beach. It was located southeast of the Coliseum, a large arena built the same year that featured a grand ballroom and other attractions.
In 1908, the Dip the Dips Scenic Railway roller coaster opened but was soon overshadowed in 1912 by the larger Leap the Dips ride. In 1917, Dip the Dips was razed and replaced by the Leap Frog Scenic Railway. With three roller coasters and a growing variety of other rides, Cedar Point was beginning to grow as an amusement park, though that was not Boeckling's priority. He marketed the peninsula primarily as a bathing resort complete with shows, exhibits, motion pictures, and other forms of entertainment, but did not emphasize the park's rides.
Many more hotels and restaurants were constructed in the remaining years of Boeckling's tenure, including Hotel Cedars, White House Hotel, Crystal Rock Castle, and Crystal Gardens Ballroom. The Cyclone, a rickety and rough coaster, was built in 1926. Cedar Point continued to update its ride attractions, replacing the Racer, the Circle Swing, and many other rides to make way for a Shoot-the-Chutes water ride, a Tilt-A-Whirl, and fun houses such as Noah's Ark and Bluebeard's Palace. Boeckling's health began to deteriorate in the late 1920s. In 1931, Boeckling became confined to a wheelchair, but he continued to oversee park operations, and was pushed around Cedar Point by an employee or relative. His condition worsened, however, and he eventually had to remain indoors. Boeckling died on July 24, 1931 from Uremia. His portrait in the lobby of Breakers Hotel was draped in black. Flags in the resort and on the G.A. Boeckling steamboat were lowered to half mast.

After Boeckling

Edward Smith took over Cedar Point's management after the death of Boeckling. Little expansion happened through the 1930s; one of the few rides built in that period was the Tumble Bug. The decaying Leap the Dips coaster was demolished in the mid-1930s. In the late 1930s, the resort was on the brink of being sold to the state of Ohio for $3,000,000. After the 1938 season, the directors had the second floor of the Coliseum modernized in the art deco style with a new stage. In the middle, the giant dance floor remained. Some of the top bands of the time played in the ballroom. As a result, it kept Cedar Point operating through the rest of the Depression. Momma Berardi's Home Made French Fries came to Cedar Point, Momma Berardi's family played an important role in the food industry at Cedar Point. Momma Berardi's fries were sold there from 1942 until 1978, winning four Reader's Choice Awards.
By the end of World War II, Cedar Point was in need of financial help. The wood of the Cyclone roller coaster was rotting, the boardwalk was cracked in many places, and the fishing dock was in need of repair. In 1946, Cedar Point's oldest still-existing ride, the Midway Carousel, was installed. By 1951, the Cyclone coaster was razed because of its poor condition, leaving the resort without a roller coaster. While the Cyclone was departing, the Laff-in-the-Dark, Rocket Ships, and Loop-A-Plane were newly installed. Cedar Point Causeway was built in 1957, and is still in use. The president of Cedar Point, Bernie Zeiher, was replaced by George Roose around 1958, and Emile Legros was elected chairman that same year.
In the 1950s, the Pagoda Gift Shop was a post-office and the Crystal Rock Castle was turned into a maintenance shop in the late-1950s. In 1959, the hotels were repainted, new admission gates were installed, and over $1,200,000 was spent to refresh Cedar Point. The park's first roller coaster since the Cyclone, the Wild Mouse, was built. The resort also got a new kind of ride, a monorail that was the most popular ride in 1959. Breakers Hotel was restored, and the neglected cottages were demolished. The Coliseum and Grand Pavilion were both painted and remodeled. The Crystal Rock Castle Maintenance Shop, bathhouses, and the old powerhouse were demolished, and a new $50,000 bathhouse, boiler house, and maintenance shop were built in their place.
In the 1960s, the idea of  "pay one price" season passes became common. On March 28, 1960, Cedar Point announced plans to transform the park into a "Disneyland" amusement center. The Cedar Creek Mine Ride opened in 1969; it is currently the second oldest roller coaster at Cedar Point.
In 1970, the Centennial Theatre, named in honor of Cedar Point's 100th anniversary, was built. 1972 brought Giant Wheel and the now-defunct Jumbo Jet coaster which was noted for being the fastest around. In 1975, Robert L. Munger Jr. took over as president of Cedar Point after Roose retired. The record-breaking  Corkscrew roller coaster was built in 1976; it was the first roller coaster to span a midway and have three inversions. The Gemini opened in 1978 and was advertised as the tallest, fastest and steepest roller coaster in the world. A kiddie coaster, named Jr. Gemini, opened the following year across from the original version. White Water Landing opened in 1982, replacing the original Shoot the Rapids log flume. In 1983, Demon Drop was built at the front of the park. Avalanche Run opened in 1985 close to the beach, and was later be re-themed as Disaster Transport. That same year, the San Francisco Earthquake Ride was transformed into the Berenstain Bear Country.

Dick Kinzel era

In 1986, Robert L. Munger Jr, the President and CEO of Cedar Fair, stepped down due to health issues, and was replaced by Richard "Dick" Kinzel. Thunder Canyon, a river rafting ride manufactured by Intamin, also opened in 1986. In 1987, the Iron Dragon, a suspended roller coaster, debuted on the Million Dollar Midway near the Cedar Point & Lake Erie Railroad station. In 1988, Soak City, Cedar Point's outdoor water park, was constructed near Hotel Breakers. It features speed slides, more than 10 body and tube slides, a family raft ride, a water playhouse and two lazy rivers.
Several new rides and roller coasters opened at Cedar Point since 1989 have been record-breakers. The Magnum XL-200 debuted in 1989, breaking the world height and speed records. It was the first roller coaster to exceed a height of . Challenge Park was built between Hotel Breakers and Soak City in 1992. Challenge Park includes a go kart car race track and two eighteen-hole mini-golf courses.
Snake River Falls was constructed in 1993 because of the popularity of Soak City. The 
Cedar Point built the first giga coaster, Millennium Force, in 2000. When it debuted, it was the tallest and fastest complete circuit coaster in the world, reaching speeds of 

Matt Ouimet era

On June 20, 2011, Cedar Fair announced that Dick Kinzel would retire on January 3, 2012, and Matt Ouimet would become the CEO of the company. Ouimet was employed by The Walt Disney Company for 17 years, served as president of Disney Cruise Line and the Disneyland Resort.
In 2012, Cedar Point added Dinosaurs Alive!, a walk-through exhibit featuring approximately 50 life-size animatronic dinosaurs. It is located on Adventure Island and replaced the Paddlewheel Excursions boat cruise ride.
On July 13, 2012, Cedar Point announced the removal of Disaster Transport and Space Spiral.
In 2014, Cedar Point will add two new family attractions called Pipe Scream and Lake Erie Eagles. Many improvements will also be made to Camp Snoopy and the Gemini Midway, including relocating and retheming a few rides.

Attraction timeline

=Before 1960=

=1960s and 1970s=

=1980s and 1990s=

=2000s and 2010s=

Sources:

Present attractions

Roller coasters

Cedar Point has 16 roller coasters, which is the second-most in the world.

Thrill rides

Cedar Point has 16 thrill rides. The newest is SlingShot, introduced in 2014.

Family rides

Cedar Point has 10 family rides; two new rides will be introduced in the 2014 season.

Water rides

Cedar Point has three water rides, excluding the rides in Soak City.

Kids' rides

Kiddy Kingdom opened in 1970 as Kiddieland but was renamed in 1993. It is located near the first aid station and maXair. It contains 12 rides.
Opened in 2008, Planet Snoopy is Cedar Point's newest children's area. All of its rides come from the defunct Geauga Lake park. It is located near WindSeeker and contains seven rides.
Camp Snoopy opened in 1999 and is located near the entrance to Dinosaurs Alive!. It contains 6 rides and two kiddie coasters.

Challenge Park

Challenge Park, located between Cedar Point and Soak City, was opened in 1992. Its attractions require extra payment over the Cedar Point admission charge.
On January 14, 2002, one of the three towers of the  VertiGo ride in Challenge Park, which had been opened four months before, collapsed. No one was in the park and only minimal damage was reported. The ride was demolished later that year.

=Attractions=

All rides and attractions require an extra fee.

Soak City

Opened in 1988, Soak City is Cedar Point's water park. It is adjacent to Cedar Point and requires separate admission. Guests must get their hands stamped to re-enter Cedar Point.

Live entertainment

Venues

Shows

All shows are about 25 minutes.

Fast Lane

Fast Lane, introduced at Cedar Point in 2012, is a secondary queue system that offers shorter wait times on the park's most popular rides.

Awards/rankings

Awards

Cedar Point has won the Golden Ticket Award from Amusement Today for "Best Amusement Park in the World" for 16 consecutive years. The park has also placed in categories for "Friendliest Park Staff" (2002, 2004 - 2006), "Cleanest Park" (2004, 2005), "Best Capacity" (1998 - 2002), "Best Kid's Area" (2004, 2013), "Best Outdoor Night Production" (2004 - 2007), "Best Shows" (2004, 2005), "Best Games Area" (2002), "Best Souvenirs" (2002), and "Best Halloween Event" (2005 - 2008, 2013). The park also won the Golden Ticket Award for "Best New Ride of 2007" with the roller coaster Maverick.

Rankings

Cedar Point's roller coasters are commonly ranked high in the Golden Ticket Awards. In the 2013 rankings, GateKeeper debuted at 28th, making it the first time ever that the park has six steel roller coasters in the top 50.  The following steel and wooden coasters were ranked by Amusement Today in 2013:

=Steel=

=Wood=

Attendance

The park was the 15th most visited amusement park in North America in 2012. It was also the most visited seasonal amusement park in the United States with an estimated 3.22 million visitors.
In 1960, the parks attendance reached 1 million for the first time. Just five years later, the attendance reached 2 million. In 1975, attendance reached 3 million for the first time.  The park's attendance has yet to reach 4 million.

Resorts

Cedar Point owns and operates six resorts located either on park grounds or less than a mile away. Most of the resorts are within walking distance of the Cedar Point Beach. All facilities are non-smoking, and all Cedar Point Resort guests can enter the park one hour before it opens to the general public. Rides that operate during this early-entry session are: GateKeeper, Iron Dragon, Maverick, Midway Carrousel, Millennium Force, Ocean Motion, Raptor, and Planet Snoopy Children's Area.
On December 2, 2012, Cedar Point announced that it would invest $60 million in its hotel resorts over three years, starting in the 2013–2014 offseason. No additional rooms will be added to any of the hotels.

On-site resorts and campgrounds

Hotel Breakers, the oldest resort at Cedar Point, was built in 1905. The hotel has 650 rooms and suites and is the closest resort to Cedar Point and Soak City. In 1997, Hotel Breakers was renovated and expanded, doubling its size. Hotel Breakers has standard hotel rooms, suites with views of Lake Erie, Snoopy-themed rooms and Wi-Fi in the lobby, rotunda and conference center. It has three pools, beach access, a conference center, and five restaurants including T.G.I. Friday's and Perkins Restaurant and Bakery.
Sandcastle Suites is a hotel at the northernmost part of the peninsula that contains 187 suites. It has Wi-Fi in the lobby and guest suites, an outdoor heated pool and whirlpool, beach access, tennis courts, a shuttle to both Cedar Point and Soak City, and two restaurants ‒ the Breakwater Cafe and the Sand Bar.
Lighthouse Point contains 64 cottages and 40 cabins and is located along the west bank of the peninsula. The centerpiece of Lighthouse Point is the Cedar Point Lighthouse, which was built in 1862 and is the oldest existing structure on the peninsula. It has an outdoor pool and outdoor whirlpool spa, a shuffleboard court, a game room, and shuttle service.
Camper Village is the only place at Cedar Point where it is possible to hook up an RV to water and electricity. Camper Village sites range from deluxe sites with electricity, water, sewer and cable to 112 electric-only sites. The Camper Village has the Camper Village Store, an outdoor pool, a shuffleboard court, a game room, a shuttle service on Cedar Point Peninsula, a dump station and laundry facilities.

Off-site Cedar Point-owned resorts

Castaway Bay is an indoor waterpark resort opened by Cedar Fair in November 2004. It has over 
Breakers Express, a sister resort to the Hotel Breakers, is located one mile (1.6 km) from Cedar Point and is the closest hotel to the peninsula. It opened in 2000 and includes 350 guest rooms. Breakers Express has an outdoor heated pool, outdoor whirlpool spa, game room, and Wi-Fi in guest rooms.

National Register of Historic Places

Cedar Point features several historic buildings on the peninsula. Many of the buildings and structures on the peninsula are from the late 1800s or early 1900s. The oldest structure on the peninsula is the Cedar Point Light. It is a restored lighthouse that was built in 1862 and was added to the National Register of Historic Places on July 19, 1984.
All three of Cedar Point's carousels are listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The Midway Carousel, otherwise known as the Daniel C. Muller Carousel, is located at the front of the park. It opened in 1912 and was brought to Cedar Point in 1946. A Sandusky family purchased the ride and operated it at the park. It became property of Cedar Point in 1963. It is Cedar Point's oldest operating ride and was added to the NRHP on October 20, 1982.
Cedar Point used to have a fourth carousel located in Frontiertown, next to the Wave Swinger. It was known as the Frontier Carousel or William H. Dentzel 1921 Carousel. It opened at Cedar Point in 1972 when it was bought from a family in Lansing, Michigan. It was listed on the NRHP on November 8, 1990. After the 1994 season, the carousel closed and was moved to Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom, where it operates under the name Antique Carousel. Its building is currently used for the HalloWeekends attraction, Eternity Infirmary.

Former

Cedar Point's oldest hotel is the Hotel Breakers. It opened in 1905 during the "golden age" of resort hotels. It was added to the NRHP on March 9, 1987. After several major alterations, most notably the Breakers Tower in 1998, the National Park Service removed the Hotel Breakers from the NRHP on August 7, 2001.

Popular culture

Cedar Point has been mentioned in several movies, TV shows, and books:





Further reading




