[[Boys Over Flowers]]

CATEGORIES: Boys Over Flowers, 1992 manga, 1996 anime television series, 1997 anime films, Romantic comedy anime and manga, School anime and manga, Winners of the Shogakukan Manga Award for shōjo manga, Shōjo manga, TV Asahi shows, Viz Media anime, Viz Media manga, Shueisha manga, Toei Animation, Manga adapted into films, Japanese films, Japanese-language films, Films based on manga

 is a Japanese shōjo manga series written and illustrated by Yoko Kamio. The story is set in Eitoku Academy, an elite school for children from rich families. It follows lead protagonist Tsukushi Makino, a student from a working-class family, and the members of Eitoku Academy's elite Flower Four, commonly known as the "F4".
Hana Yori Dango was serialized in Shueisha's bi-weekly Margaret magazine from October 1992 to September 2003, and was collected into 37 tankōbon volumes. The manga has been adapted into a 51-episode anime series (which closely follows the manga) and an anime film. The manga has been licensed by Viz Media for publication in the United States. The manga series has also been adapted into live-action television drama series in Japan, Taiwan and Korea it was also adapted into two live-action films.
Boys Over Flowers won the 41st Shogakukan Manga Award for Shōjo.

Plot

 is a school that caters to children from rich, high-society families. Hence, Tsukushi, who comes from a poor family, is considered by others as the "weed" of the school. The school is ruled by the "Flower Four" group, more commonly known as the F4. The F4 leader, and son of the wealthiest, most powerful family in Japan, Tsukasa Domyouji, takes an interest in Tsukushi because she is the only girl at Eitoku who does not fawn over him. However, his hot-headed nature and bullying ways are originally a major turn-off for Tsukushi, who has her sights set on Rui Hanazawa.
The violinist Rui Hanazawa, Tsukasa's best friend, becomes Tsukushi's first serious romantic interest. He is a quiet and cool guy, but he has a soft spot for his close friend and Tsukushi's idol, the model Shizuka Todou, whom he harbored feelings for since childhood. His character is a bit complex, and always has changing feelings for Tsukushi, but above all cares about her a lot.
The other two members of the F4 are Akira Mimasaka, the laid-back peacemaker of the group, and Sojirou Nishikado, an unrepentant playboy. They both usually have at least one girlfriend at any one time; Akira prefers older women because the women of his household (his mother and two younger sisters) are quite childish. Sojirou is happy to be in casual relationships with many women, although we later discover that at one time he was in love with a childhood friend.
Over time, Tsukushi's feelings towards Tsukasa evolve, as she begins to appreciate the degree of change that occurred in Tsukasa once he fell in love with her. Tsukasa becomes fiercely loyal to Tsukushi and believes in her beyond all doubt, and slowly gets her to see him in a different light. However, because of the difference in their family background, Tsukushi and Tsukasa's relationship received a lot of opposition from Tsukasa's mother. Tsukasa's mother then tries all ways and means to break the pair up.

Characters

Media

Manga

Hana Yori Dango was serialized in Shueisha's bi-weekly Margaret magazine from October 1992 to September 2003 and was collected into 37 volumes. The manga has been licensed by Viz Media for publication in the United States.
In July 2006, a short story based on the manga was published in issue 15 of Margaret magazine. Another two-installment short story was published in January 2007. Both short stories were done by Yoko Kamio.

Anime

In 1997, an anime series was produced by Toei Animation and broadcast by Asahi Broadcasting Corporation. It was shown from 8 September 1996 to 31 August 1997, with a total of 51 episodes. The storyline is closely based on the manga version with little changes to the storyline. The opening sequence for this anime series features Tsukushi dancing with F4 and the whole of the student population.

=Episode list=

An anime film was also produced in 1997. However, this film deviated from the plot of the actual manga, and was set in an alternate universe. The characters were placed into new roles to suit the film's plot. In this film, Tsukushi is an aspiring dancer that is attempting to win a role in a large stage production.

Live-action adaptations

Television series

Hana Yori Dango had been adapted into several live-television dramas: 

Films

In 1995, the manga was first adapted into a Japanese feature-length film entitled Hana Yori Dango. This film starred Yuki Uchida as the main character Makino Tsukushi.
Another film, entitled Hana Yori Dango Final, was released in theaters on June 28, 2008 This film is an ending to the Japanese TV series, with the actors from the television series reprising their roles. The film focuses solely on Tsukasa and Tsukushi's adventure to retrieve the precious family heirloom: a tiara called "Smile of Venus" which was stolen by a mysterious man in black who was obsessed with sex games. A cameo appearance was made by Naohito Fujiki, who played Hanazawa Rui in the 1995 live-action film.- 'Hana Yori Dango: Final', Naohito Fujiki's cameo casting at Nikkan Sports
The film was a box office success in the Japanese box office, grossing a total of 7,750,000,000 yen. The DVD for the drama became the best-selling DVD in 2008, and is also the third Best-Selling Japanese Film DVD of all time.Article - 'Hana Yori Dango: Final' enters Top 3 Best-selling Japanese Film DVDs of all time at Oricon

Chronological list of Boy Over Flowers adaptations



Further reading




