[[Hans Christian Andersen]]

CATEGORIES: Hans Christian Andersen, 1805 births, 1875 deaths, 19th-century Danish writers, 19th-century novelists, Collectors of fairy tales, Danish children's writers, Danish Christians, Danish fantasy writers, Danish folklore, Danish novelists, Danish poets, Disease-related deaths in Denmark, People from Odense, Prometheus Award winners, Scandinavian folklore

Hans Christian Andersen ( in Danish, or "fairy-tales" in English, express themes that transcend age and nationality.
Andersen's fairy tales, which have been translated into more than 125 languages, Some of his most famous  fairy tales include "The Little Mermaid", "The Ugly Duckling", "The Nightingale", "The Emperor's New Clothes" and many more.
His stories have inspired plays, ballets, and both live-action and animated films.

Early life

Hans Christian Andersen was born in the town of Odense, Denmark, on Tuesday, April 2, 1805. He was an only child. Andersen's father, also Hans, considered himself related to nobility. His paternal grandmother had told his father that their family had in the past belonged to a higher social class, Theories that Andersen may have been an illegitimate son of King Christian VII persist.
Andersen's father, who had received an elementary education, introduced Andersen to literature, reading him Arabian Nights. Andersen's mother, Anne Marie Andersdatter, was uneducated and worked as a washerwoman following his father's death in 1816, remarrying in 1818. Andersen was sent to a local school for poor children where he received a basic education and was forced to support himself, working as a weaver's apprentice and, later, for a tailor. At 14, he moved to Copenhagen to seek employment as an actor. Having an excellent soprano voice, he was accepted into the Royal Danish Theatre, but his voice soon changed. A colleague at the theatre told him that he considered Andersen a poet. Taking the suggestion seriously, Andersen began to focus on writing.
Jonas Collin, director of the Royal Danish Theatre, felt a great affection for him, and sent him to a grammar school in Slagelse, persuading King Frederick VI to pay part of his education. Danishnet. Andersen had already published his first story, The Ghost at Palnatoke's Grave, in 1822. Though not a keen student, he also attended school at Elsinore until 1827.
He later said his years in school were the darkest and most bitter of his life. At one school, he lived at his schoolmaster's home. There he was abused in order "to improve his character," he was told. He later said the faculty had discouraged him from writing in general, causing him to enter a state of depression.

Career

Early work

A very early fairy tale by Andersen called The Tallow Candle (
In 1829, Andersen enjoyed considerable success with a short story titled A Journey on Foot from Holmen's Canal to the East Point of Amager. In the book, the protagonist meets characters ranging from Saint Peter to a talking cat. He followed this success with a theatrical piece, Love on St. Nicholas Church Tower and a short volume of poems. Though he made little progress writing and publishing immediately thereafter, in 1833 he received a small traveling grant from the King, enabling him to set out on the first of many journeys through Europe. At Jura, near Le Locle, Switzerland, he wrote the story, Agnete and the Merman. He spent an evening in the Italian seaside village of Sestri Levante the same year, inspiring the name, The Bay of Fables.) which was published in 1835, receiving  instant acclaim.

Fairy tales and poetry

His initial attempts at writing fairy tales were revisions of stories that he heard as a child. Andersen brought this genre to a new level by writing a vast number of fairy tales that were both bold and original. Initially they were not met with recognition, due partly to the difficulty in translating them and capturing his genius for humor and dark pathos.
It was during 1835 that Andersen published the first two installments of his immortal Fairy Tales (; lit. "fantastic tales"). More stories, completing the first volume, were published in 1837. The collection consists of nine tales that includes The Tinderbox, The Princess and the Pea, Thumbelina, The Little Mermaid and The Emperor's New Clothes. The quality of these stories was not immediately recognized, and they sold poorly. At the same time, Andersen enjoyed more success with two novels, O.T. (1836) and Only a Fiddler (1837); the latter was reviewed by the young Søren Kierkegaard.
After a visit to Sweden in 1837, Andersen became inspired by Scandinavism and committed himself to writing a poem that would convey the relatedness of Swedes, Danes, and Norwegians.
Andersen returned to the fairy tale genre in 1838 with another collection, Fairy Tales Told for Children. New Collection. First Booklet (), which consists of The Daisy, The Steadfast Tin Soldier and The Wild Swans.
The year 1845 heralded a breakthrough for Andersen with the publication of four different translations of his fairy tales. The Little Mermaid appeared in the periodical Bentley's Miscellany. It was followed by a second volume, Wonderful Stories for Children. Two other volumes enthusiastically received were A Danish Story Book and Danish Fairy Tales and Legends. A review that appeared in the London journal The Athenæum (February 1846) said of Wonderful Stories, "This is a book full of life and fancy; a book for grandfathers no less than grandchildren, not a word of which will be skipped by those who have it once in hand."
Andersen would continue to write fairy tales, and he published them in installments until 1872.

Travelogues

In 1851, he published to wide acclaim In Sweden, a volume of travel sketches. A keen traveler, Andersen published several other long travelogues: Shadow Pictures of a Journey to the Harz, Swiss Saxony, etc. etc. in the Summer of 1831, A Poet's Bazaar, In Spain, and A Visit to Portugal in 1866. (The latter describes his visit with his Portuguese friends Jorge and Jose O'Neill, who were his fellows in the mid-1820s while living in Copenhagen.) In his travelogues, Andersen took heed of some of the contemporary conventions about travel writing, but always developed the genre to suit his own purposes. Each of his travelogues combines documentary and descriptive accounts of the sights he saw with more philosophical passages on topics such as being an author, immortality, and the nature of fiction in the literary travel report. Some of the travelogues, such as In Sweden, even contain fairy-tales.
In the 1840s, Andersen's attention returned to the stage, but with little success. He had better fortune with the publication of the Picture-Book without Pictures (1840). A second series of fairy tales began in 1838 and a third in 1845. Andersen was now celebrated throughout Europe, although his native Denmark still showed some resistance to his pretensions.
Between 1845 and 1864, H. C. Andersen lived at 67 Nyhavn, Copenhagen, where a memorial plaque now stands.

Personal life

Meetings with Dickens

In June 1847, Andersen paid his first visit to England and enjoyed a triumphal social success during the summer. The Countess of Blessington invited him to her parties where intellectual people could meet, and it was at one party that he met Charles Dickens for the first time. They shook hands and walked to the veranda which was of much joy to Andersen. He wrote in his diary, "We had come to the veranda, I was so happy to see and speak to England's now living writer, whom I love the most."
The two authors respected each other's work and had something important in common as writers: Depictions of the poor and the underclass, who often had difficult lives affected both by the Industrial Revolution and by abject poverty. In the Victorian era there was a growing sympathy for children and an idealization of the innocence of childhood.
Ten years later, Andersen visited England again, primarily to visit Dickens. He extended a brief visit to Dickens' home at Gads Hill Place into a five-week stay, to the distress of Dickens' family. After Anderson was told to leave, Dickens stopped all correspondence between them, much to the great disappointment and confusion of Andersen, who had quite enjoyed the visit and never understood why his letters went unanswered.

Love life

In Andersen's early life, his private journal records his refusal to have sexual relations.
Andersen often fell in love with unattainable women and many of his stories are interpreted as references.
Andersen wrote to Edvard Collin:Hans Christian Andersen's correspondence, ed Frederick Crawford6, London. 1891 "I languish for you as for a pretty Calabrian wench... my sentiments for you are those of a woman. The femininity of my nature and our friendship must remain a mystery." Collin, who preferred women, wrote in his own memoir: "I found myself unable to respond to this love, and this caused the author much suffering." Likewise, the infatuations of the author for the Danish dancer Harald Scharff did not result in any relationships.

Death

In the spring of 1872, Andersen fell out of his bed and was severely hurt, never recovering.  Soon after he started to show signs of liver cancer, and died on August 4, 1875, in a house called Rolighed (literally: calmness), near Copenhagen, the home of his close friends, the  banker Moritz Melchior and his wife.12 Shortly before his death, he had consulted a composer about the music for his funeral, saying: "Most of the people who will walk after me will be children, so make the beat keep time with little steps." His body was interred in the Assistens Kirkegård in the Nørrebro area of Copenhagen.
At the time of his death, Andersen was internationally treasured. The Danish Government paid him an annual stipend as a "national treasure". Even before his death, steps had already been taken to erect a large statue in his honor by sculptor August Saabye, which can now be seen in the Rosenborg Castle Gardens in Copenhagen.

Legacy

The "Hans Christian Andersen Awards" are given biennially by the International Board on Books for Young People to an author and illustrator whose complete works have made lasting contributions to children's literature."Hans Christian Andersen Awards", International Board on Books for Young People
Andersen's stories laid the groundwork for other children's classics, such as Wind in the Willows by Kenneth Grahame and Winnie the Pooh by A.A. Milne. The technique of making inanimate objects, such as toys, come to life (Little Ida's Flowers) would later be used by Lewis Carroll and Beatrix Potter.
April 2, Andersen's birthday, is celebrated as International Children's Book Day.  was the bicentenary of Andersen's birth, and his life and work was celebrated around the world. In Denmark, a well-attended "once in a lifetime" show  was staged in Copenhagen's Parken Stadium to celebrate the writer and his stories.
A $13-million theme park based on Andersen's tales and life opened in Shanghai at the end of 2006. Retrieved July 2, 2008. Multi-media games and cultural contests related to the fairy tales are available to visitors. Andersen is said to have been celebrated because he was "a nice, hardworking person who was not afraid of poverty". The Japanese city of Funabashi also has a children's theme park named after Andersen.
In the United States, statues of  Andersen may be found in New York City's Central Park, Chicago's Lincoln Park, and in Solvang, California, a city founded by Danes. The Library of Congress Rare Book and Special Collections Division was bequeathed an extensive collection of Andersen materials by the Danish-American actor, Jean Hersholt. Of particular note is an original scrapbook Andersen prepared for the young Jonas Drewsen."Billedbog til Jonas Drewsen." (15 April 2009) Retrieved 2 November  2009.

Film

The 1952 film Hans Christian Andersen, though inspired by Andersen's life and literary legacy, was meant to be neither historically nor biographically accurate; it begins by saying, "This is not the story of his life, but a fairy tale about this great spinner of fairy tales." A more accurate biographical treatment was attempted in Hans Christian Andersen: My Life as a Fairytale in 2003.
Andersen is a vital character in the Disney TV series The Little Mermaid's episode, "Metal Fish". Here, his inspiration for writing his tale The Little Mermaid is shown to have been granted by an encounter with the show's protagonists.
In 1966, Rankin/Bass Productions produced a fantasy film called The Daydreamer, which depicts the young Hans Christian Andersen imaginatively conceiving the stories he would later write.

Statues

Bibliography

Some of his fairy tales include:

Influence

Contemporary literary and artistic works inspired by Andersen's stories include:





Bibliography




