[[Otto von Habsburg]]

CATEGORIES: 1912 births, 2011 deaths, 20th-century Austrian people, Austrian royalty, Austrian anti-communists, Pretenders to the Austrian throne, Pretenders to the Hungarian throne, House of Habsburg-Lorraine, Heirs apparent who never acceded, Austrian nobility, Austrian Roman Catholics, German Roman Catholics, Catholic University of Leuven alumni (pre-1968), Christian Social Union of Bavaria politicians, Archdukes of Austria, Bohemian princes, Austrian princes, Hungarian princes, Mont Pelerin Society members, Knights of the Golden Fleece, Knights of Malta, Knights of the Order of Saint Januarius, Grand Masters of the Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary, Grand Masters of the Order of the Golden Fleece, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Immaculate Conception of Vila Viçosa, Commander's Crosses of the Order of the Lithuanian Grand Duke Gediminas, Bailiffs Grand Cross of the Order of St John, Grand Crosses of the Order of Charles III, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Gregory the Great, Knights of the Order of Saint Hubert, Grand Order of King Dmitar Zvonimir recipients, Knights of the Order of the Most Holy Annunciation, Recipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class, Grand Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Republic of Hungary (civil), Grand Croix of the Légion d'honneur, Recipients of the Order of the Three Stars, Grand Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, Knights of the Order of the Gold Lion of the House of Nassau, Members of the Bavarian Order of Merit, People educated at the Benedictine High School of Pannonhalma, Christian Social Union of Bavaria MEPs, MEPs for Germany 1979–84, MEPs for Germany 1984–89, MEPs for Germany 1989–94, MEPs for Germany 1994–99, People from Neunkirchen District, Austria, Knights of St. Sylvester, Claimant Kings of Jerusalem, Integrism

Otto von HabsburgOtto was born as His Imperial and Royal Highness Archduke and Imperial Prince Otto of Austria, Royal Prince of Hungary and Bohemia, and became the Crown Prince of these countries in 1916. After 1918, titles of nobility were formally abolished in Austria, thus von Habsburg turned into Habsburg. The same applied after Habsburg became a German citizen (see Printausgabe der deutschen Wochenzeitung die Zeit vom 21 July 2011, p.36). By courtesy, he would also be referred to by European courts by his former style and title, i.e. as His Imperial and Royal Highness Archduke Otto of Austria. In the Austrian republic, the authorities referred to him, from 1919, as Otto Habsburg-Lothringen, a name he never used himself. However, Otto did not live in Austria after 1918 and his citizenship there was revoked by Adolf Hitler in 1941, making him stateless. His Austrian citizenship was only restored in 1965. Otto later became a citizen of or was issued passports of multiple other countries, where his official name was Otto von Habsburg. As a Member of the European Parliament for Germany, his official name in the European Union was Otto von Habsburg. On his website, he used the style and name His Imperial and Royal Highness Dr. Otto von Habsburg. (20 November 1912 in 1922, upon the death of his father. He resigned as Sovereign of the Golden Fleece in 2000 and as head of the Imperial House in 2007.
The eldest son of Charles I and IV, the last Emperor of Austria and King of Hungary, and his wife, Zita of Bourbon-Parma, Otto was born as third in line to the thrones, as His Imperial and Royal Highness Archduke and Imperial Prince Otto of Austria, Royal Prince of Hungary and Bohemia. With his father's accession to the thrones in 1916, he was himself likely to become the Emperor. As his father never abdicated, Otto was considered by himself, his family and Austro-Hungarian legitimists to be the rightful Emperor-King from 1922.
Otto was active on the Austrian and European political stage from the 1930s, both by promoting the cause of Habsburg restoration and as an early proponent of European integration—being thoroughly disgusted with nationalism—and a fierce opponent of Nazism and communism.
Otto von Habsburg was Vice President (1957–1973) and President (1973–2004) of the International Paneuropean Union, and served as a Member of the European Parliament for the Christian Social Union of Bavaria (CSU) 1979–1999. As a newly elected Member of the European Parliament in 1979, Otto had an empty chair set up for the countries on the other side of the Iron Curtain in the European Parliament, and took a strong interest in the countries behind the Iron Curtain during his tenure. Otto von Habsburg played a central role in the revolutions of 1989, as a co-initiator of the Pan-European Picnic. Later he would be a strong supporter of the EU membership of central and eastern European countries.
Otto was exiled in 1918 and grew up mostly in Spain. His devout Catholic mother raised him according to the old curriculum of Austria-Hungary, preparing him to become a Catholic monarch. During his life in exile, he lived in Switzerland, Madeira, Spain, Belgium, France, the United States, and from 1954 until his death, finally in Bavaria (Germany), in the residence Villa Austria. At the time of his death, he was a citizen of Germany, Austria, Hungary and Croatia, having earlier been stateless de jure and de facto and possessed passports of Monaco, the Order of Malta, and Spain.
His funeral took place at St. Stephen's Cathedral in Vienna on 16 July 2011; he was subsequently entombed in the Imperial Crypt in Vienna and his heart buried in Pannonhalma Archabbey in Hungary.

Early life

Otto was born at Villa Wartholz in Reichenau an der Rax, Austria-Hungary. He was baptised Franz Joseph Otto Robert Maria Anton Karl Max Heinrich Sixtus Xavier Felix Renatus Ludwig Gaetan Pius Ignatius on 25 November 1912 at Villa Wartholz by the Prince-Archbishop of Vienna, Cardinal Franz Xaver Nagl. His godfather was the Emperor Franz Joseph I of Austria (represented by Archduke Franz Ferdinand of Austria); his godmother was his grandmother Infanta Maria Antonia of Portugal.
In November 1916, Otto became Crown Prince of Austria, Hungary and Bohemia when his father, Archduke Charles, acceded to the throne. However, in 1918, at the end of the First World War, the monarchies were abolished, the Republics of Austria and Hungary founded instead, and the family was forced into exile in Madeira.  Hungary did become a kingdom again, but Charles was never to regain the throne. Instead, Miklós Horthy ruled as regent until 1944, in a kingdom without a king.
He spoke German, Hungarian, Croatian, English, Spanish, French and Latin fluently. In later life, he would write some 40 books in German, Hungarian, French and Spanish.

Years in exile

Otto's family spent the subsequent years in Switzerland, and on the Portuguese island of Madeira, where Charles died prematurely in 1922, leaving the 9-year-old Otto pretender to the throne. On his father's deathbed, his mother, then-Empress Dowager Zita, told the 9-year-old, "your father is now sleeping the eternal sleep—you are now Emperor and King". The family eventually relocated to the Basque town of Lekeitio, where 40 Spanish grandees bought them a villa. Meanwhile, the Austrian parliament had officially expelled the Habsburg dynasty and confiscated all the official property (Habsburg Law of 3 April 1919).
In 1935, he graduated with a PhD degree in Political and Social Sciences from the University of Louvain in Belgium. From his father's death throughout the remainder of his time in exile, Otto considered himself the rightful emperor of Austria and stated this on many occasions. In 1937 he wrote,Gedächtnisjahrbuch 1937, 9. Jg.: Dem Andenken an Karls von Österreich Kaiser und König. Arbeitsgemeinschaft österreichischer Vereine – Wien, W. Hamburger 1937 "I know very well that the overwhelming majority of the Austrian population would like me to assume the heritage of the peace emperor, my beloved father, rather earlier than later. (...) The Austrian people have never cast a vote in favor of the republic. They have remained silent as long as they were exhausted from the long fight, and taken by surprise by the audacity of the revolutionaries of 1918 and 1919. They shook off their resignation when they realized that the revolution had raped their right to life and freedom. (...) Such trust places a heavy burden on me. I accept it readily. God willing, the hour of reunion between the Duke and the people will arrive soon." 
He continued to enjoy considerable public support in Austria; from 1931 to 1938, 1,603 Austrian municipalities named Otto an honorary citizen. Garscha, Rudolf G. Ardelt, Christa Mitterrutzner, Anschluß 1938, Dokumentationsarchiv des Österreichischen Widerstandes, Österreichischer Bundesverlag, 1988, ISBN 3-215-06824-9

Nominal King of Hungary

In 1920 Admiral Miklós Horthy overthrew the Hungarian republic and established a kingdom with himself as regent for the Habsburgs. Horthy made it clear that he did not wish the old king to take up his old position, and after his father's death, Otto was the nominal king, albeit still in exile. In the late 1920s, when Otto came of age, there was talk about him indeed taking up his position. On the advice of the Admiral, he decided not to do so.

World War II

Otto strongly opposed the Anschluss of Austria to Nazi Germany. In 1938 he requested Austrian Chancellor Kurt Schuschnigg to resist the Nazis and supported an international intervention, and offered to return from exile to take over the reins of government in order to repel Hitler.
Following the German annexation of Austria, Otto was sentenced to death by the Nazis. including thousands of Austrian Jews, flee the country at the beginning of the Second World War.heraldscotland.1110433
During his exile in the US, Otto along with his younger brothers was in direct contact with President Roosevelt and the federal government. Otto tried to found an "Austrian Battalion" in the US Army, which was delayed and never actually happened. Nevertheless Otto successfully tried to avoid the bombardment of Austrian cities, especially the capital, Vienna, which were consequently delayed by high-ranking commanding personnel; bombardments on Vienna began later in the war (1943). Otto tried hard to set symbolic steps for the will of Austria and Austrians to be free, independent and democratic. Also Otto advised the US government that after the war there should be great concerns about Austria becoming a Soviet satellite state. Otto was commonly known in the US as "Otto of Austria", trying to keep Austria and its neighbors in the minds of the American people via starting a series of stamps (the Overrun Countries series) containing the German occupied nations of Europe and much more. 
Rudolf Hess ordered that Otto was to be executed immediately if caught."  For his own safety, he left the European continent and lived from 1940 to 1944 in Washington, D.C. In his wartime exile in the United States, he worked to stop or limit the bombing campaign against Austria. In the United States, he initiated the Austrian Day and was able to get Austria included in a postage stamp series on "Occupied Nations". He obtained the support of Winston Churchill for a conservative "Danube Federation", in effect a restoration of Austria-Hungary, but Joseph Stalin put an end to these plans. He lobbied for the recognition of an Austrian government-in-exile, for the rights of the German-speaking population of South Tyrol, against the deportation of the German-speaking inhabitants of Bohemia and eastern Europe, and against letting Stalin rule Eastern Europe.
In 1941, Adolf Hitler personally revoked the citizenship of Otto, his mother, and his siblings, and the imperial-royal family found themselves stateless. Die Biografie. Amalthea, Wien 2002, ISBN 3-85002-486-5, p. 122.

After World War II

At the end of the war, Otto returned to Europe and lived for some years in France and Spain.
In 1949, he ennobled several people, granting them Austrian noble titles, although not recognized by the Austrian republic. As he did not possess a passport and was effectively stateless, he was given a passport of the Principality of Monaco, thanks to the intervention of Charles de Gaulle in 1946. As a Knight of Malta, the Order also issued him a diplomatic passport. Later, he was also given a Spanish diplomatic passport.kathweb.html
On 8 May 1956, Otto was recognized as an Austrian citizen by the provincial government of Lower Austria. A Life for Europe - Republican Recognition in Black and Yellow.  "Ottos Anwalt verfassten Text vom 21. Februar 1958, in dem es heißt: "Um in meine Heimat zurückkehren zu können, erkläre ich im eigenen Namen und im Namen meiner Gemahlin und meiner minderjährigen Kinder als österreichischer Staatsbürger, die derzeit in Österreich geltenden Gesetze anzuerkennen und mich als getreuer Bürger der Republik zu bekennen." July 2011  Otto Habsburg-Lothringen, on 8 February 1957. But this only entitled him to a passport "valid in every country but Austria".gedenkdienst.php?id=679  Otto had already submitted a written statement, on 21 February 1958, that he and his family would renounce all privileges formerly entitled a member of the House of Habsburg, but this first declaration did not satisfy the requirements of the Habsburg Law, which stated that Otto and other descendants of Charles could only return to Austria if they renounced all royal claims and accepted the status of private citizens.  He officially declared his loyalty to the Republic of Austria on 5 June 1961, but this statement was ruled insufficient as well.
In a declaration dated 31 May 1961, Otto renounced all claims to the Austrian throne and proclaimed himself "a loyal citizen of the republic", a move that he made only after much hesitation and certainly "for purely practical reasons". 181 In a 2007 interview on the occasion of his approaching 95th birthday, Otto stated:
The Austrian administrative court found on 24 May 1963 that Otto's statement was sufficient to meet this requirement.  His wife and he were then issued a Certified Proof of Citizenship on 20 July 1965.  However, several elements in the country, particularly the Socialists, were ill-disposed to welcoming back the heir of the deposed dynasty. This touched off political infighting and civil unrest that almost precipitated a crisis of state, and later became known as the "Habsburg Crisis." It was only on 1 June 1966, after the People's Party won an outright majority in the national election, that Otto was issued an Austrian passport, and was finally able to visit his home country again on 31 October 1966 for the first time in 48 years.  That day, he traveled to Innsbruck to visit the grave of Archduke Eugen of Austria. Later, he visited Vienna on 5 July 1967.omeidl.jpgA Life for Europe:Republican Recognition in Black and Yellow "... Oktober 1966 nach Österreich ein und besuchte in Innsbruck das Grab von Erzherzog Eugen."   Feigl, Otto von Habsburg, Profil eines Lebens, 1992 ISBN 3-85002-327-3Austria-Online-Lexicon (German)  Presse Agentur with backing from ÖRF (press archive, 1955–1985) (German) 

Political career

An early advocate of a unified Europe, Otto was president of the International Paneuropean Union from 1973 to 2004. Cloud, "Dr. Ian Paisley's Stand for the Old Bible", Free Press, 11 June 2011, with excerpts from excFor Love of the Bible: The Battle for the King James Bible and the Received Text from 1800 to Present, by David W. Cloud, 1995, published by Way of Life Literature
He was one of the men instrumental in organising the so-called Pan-European Picnic at the Hungary-Austria border on 19 August 1989. This event is considered a milestone in the collapse of Communist dictatorships in Europe.
He was reportedly a patron of the Three Faiths Forum, a group which aims to encourage friendship, goodwill and understanding amongst people of the three monotheistic faiths of Christianity, Judaism and Islam in the United Kingdom and elsewhere. 
In December 2006, he observed that, "The catastrophe of 11 September 2001 struck the United States more profoundly than any of us, whence a certain mutual incomprehension. Until then, the United States felt itself secure, persuaded of its power to bombard any enemy, without anyone being able to strike back. That sentiment vanished in an instant. Americans understand viscerally for the first time the risks they face."
On 5 July 2007, Otto von Habsburg received the Freedom of the City of London from the hands of Sir Gavyn Arthur, a former Lord Mayor of London.
He was known as a supporter of the rights of refugees and displaced people in Europe, notably of the ethnic Germans displaced from Bohemia where he was once the Crown Prince.
In 2002, he was named the first ever honorary member of the European People's Party group.
On the 2008 anniversary of the Anschluss,Südtirol Online, 4 July 2011 "Was eigentlich ein Skandal war, nämlich die Diskussion hier in Österreich über die Frage, ob Österreich ein Mitschuldiger war oder ob es ein Opfer war. Meine Damen und Herren, ich glaube es gibt keinen Staat in Europa, der mehr Recht hat, sich als Opfer zu bezeichnen, als es Österreich gewesen ist."   Zeitung, 12 March 2008 (German)   Wien, July 8, 2011 (German)...     Zeitung, 9 April 2008 (German)   Online, 4 July 2011 (German)   Jahre AnschlussHabsburg plädiert für Opferrolle Österreichs Ö1 Inforadio 03/10/2008 (German) "Was eigentlich ein Skandal war, nämlich die Diskussion hier in Österreich über die Frage, ob Österreich ein Mitschuldiger war oder ob es ein Opfer war. Meine Damen und Herren, ich glaube es gibt keinen Staat in Europa, der mehr Recht hat sich als Opfer zu bezeichnen, als es Österreich gewesen ist."  The context of this statement left little room for the media to interpret it in a better light. Although his speech received an ovation,ÖRF Online (German)  12 March 2008 (German)   Social Democratic Party Defence Minister Norbert Darabos was quoted as saying that the remarks were "unacceptable", "a veritable democratic-political scandal" and that he had "insulted the victims of National Socialism". Otto von Habsburg was also quoted as saying that "a discussion as to whether Austria was an accomplice or a victim is an outrage".tt.csp
Austrian People's Party military spokesman Walter Murauer defended Otto's statement at the timeAustrian Times, 11 March 2008 (English) Habsburg Claims Austria Was Victim  Meaning the "thousands in the resistance and thousands in prison waiting to be transported to Dachau" near Munich. Murauer also recalled that Engelbert Dollfuß had been the only head of government in Europe to have been murdered by the Nazis. Murauer advised Darabos "to avoid populist pot-shots against an honourable European of the highest calibre."
His son, Karl von Habsburg, also defended his father's words, in a 2011 statement, stating that "there were guilty parties in practically every country".at/1308680832243/Karl-Habsburg-verteidigt-revisionistische-Aussagen-seines-Vaters

Death and funeral

After the death of his wife, Regina in 2010, Otto stopped appearing in public. He died at the age of 98 on Monday, 4 July 2011, at his home in Pöcking, Germany. His spokeswoman reported that he died "peacefully and without pain in his sleep". He was survived by his younger brother, Felix, as well as 7 children, 22 grandchildren and 2 great-grandchildren.
On 5 July, his body was laid in repose in the Church of St. Ulrich near his home in Pöcking, Bavaria, and a massive 13-day period of mourning started in several countries formerly part of Austria-Hungary. Otto's coffin was draped with the Habsburg flag decorated with the imperial–royal coats of arms of Austria and Hungary in addition to the Habsburg family coat of arms.
In line with the Habsburg family tradition, Otto von Habsburg was buried in the family's crypt in Vienna, while his heart was buried in a monastery in Pannonhalma, Hungary.

Family

He was married to Princess Regina of Saxe-Meiningen from 1951 until her death in 2010. At the time of his death, he left seven children, 23 grandchildren and 2 great-grandchildren (as of 2011):
Otto lived in retirement at the Villa Austria in Pöcking near Starnberg, upon Starnberger See, Upper Bavaria, Bavaria, Germany.

Titles and styles

Titles of pretence from 1 April 1922
Official in Austria
Official in Germany
Otto von Habsburg became a German citizen in 1978, and was allowed by German the official name:

Ancestry

Honours and awards

Habsburg/Austrian orders and awards

Other dynastic orders

Governmental orders and awards

Non-governmental awards

Academic awards

Footnotes

Bibliography




