[[Homomorphism]]

CATEGORIES: Morphisms

In abstract algebra, a homomorphism is a structure-preserving map between two algebraic structures (such as groups, rings, or vector spaces). The word homomorphism comes from the ancient Greek language: ὁμός (homos) meaning "same" and μορφή (morphe) meaning "shape". Isomorphisms, automorphisms, and endomorphisms are special types of homomorphisms.

Definition and illustration

Definition

A homomorphism is a map that preserves selected structure between two algebraic structures, with the structure to be preserved being given by the naming of the homomorphism.
Particular definitions of homomorphism include the following:
Not all structure that an object possesses need be preserved by a homomorphism. For example, one may have a semigroup homomorphism between two monoids, and this will not be a monoid homomorphism if it does not map the identity of the domain to that of the codomain.
For example, a group is an algebraic object consisting of a set together with a single binary operation, satisfying certain axioms. If .
Since inverses exist in G and H, one can show that the identity of G maps to the identity of H and that inverses are preserved.
The algebraic structure to be preserved may include more than one operation, and a homomorphism is required to preserve each operation. For example, a ring has both addition and multiplication, and a homomorphism from the ring  for any elements r and s of the domain ring. If rings are not required to be unital, the last condition is omitted. In addition, if defining structures of (e.g. 0 and additive inverses in the case of a ring) were not necessarily preserved by the above, preserving these would be added requirements.
The notion of a homomorphism can be given a formal definition in the context of universal algebra, a field which studies ideas common to all algebraic structures. In this setting, a homomorphism  is a function between two algebraic structures of the same type such that
for each n-ary operation μ and for all elements .

Basic examples

The real numbers are a ring, having both addition and multiplication.  The set of all 2 × 2 matrices is also a ring, under matrix addition and matrix multiplication.  If we define a function between these rings as follows:
where r is a real number, then f is a homomorphism of rings, since f preserves both addition:
and multiplication:
For another example, the nonzero complex numbers form a group under the operation of multiplication, as do the nonzero real numbers.  (Zero must be excluded from both groups since it does not have a multiplicative inverse, which is required for elements of a group.)  Define a function f from the nonzero complex numbers to the nonzero real numbers by
That is, ƒ(z) is the absolute value (or modulus) of the complex number z.  Then f is a homomorphism of groups, since it preserves multiplication:
Note that ƒ cannot be extended to a homomorphism of rings (from the complex numbers to the real numbers), since it does not preserve addition:
As another example, the picture shows a monoid homomorphism f from the monoid .

Informal discussion

Because abstract algebra studies sets endowed with operations that generate interesting structure or properties on the set, functions which preserve the operations are especially important. These functions are known as homomorphisms.
For example, consider the natural numbers with addition as the operation.  A function which preserves addition should have this property: .  Note that this homomorphism maps the natural numbers back into themselves.
Homomorphisms do not have to map between sets which have the same operations.  For example, operation-preserving functions exist between the set of real numbers with addition and the set of positive real numbers with multiplication.  A function which preserves operation should have this property: .
If we are considering multiple operations on a set, then all operations must be preserved for a function to be considered as a homomorphism. Even though the set may be the same, the same function might be a group homomorphism, (a single binary operation, an inverse operation, being a unary operation, and identity, being a nullary operation) but not a ring isomorphism (two binary operations, the additive inverse and the identity elements), because it may fail to preserve the additional monoid structure required by the definition of a ring.

Specific kinds of homomorphisms

|-
|
|-
|
|}
In abstract algebra, several specific kinds of homomorphisms are defined as follows:
These descriptions may be used in order to derive several interesting properties. For instance, since a function is bijective if and only if it is both injective and surjective, in abstract algebra a homomorphism is an isomorphism if and only if it is both a monomorphism and an epimorphism.
An isomorphism always has an inverse f−1, which is a homomorphism, too (cf. Proof 1).
If there is an isomorphism between two algebraic structures, they are completely indistinguishable as far as the structure in question is concerned; in this case, they are said to be isomorphic.

Relation to category theory

Since homomorphisms are morphisms, the above specific kinds of homomorphisms are specific kinds of morphisms defined in any category as well. However, the definitions in category theory are somewhat technical. 
For endomorphisms and automorphisms, the descriptions above coincide with the category theoretic definitions; the first three descriptions do not. 
In category theory, a morphism f : A → B is called:
For instance, the inclusion of Z as a (unitary) subring of Q is not surjective (i.e. not epi in the abstract algebra sense), but an epimorphic ring homomorphism in the sense of category theory.5, in Saunders Mac Lane, Categories for the Working Mathematician, ISBN 0-387-90036-5 This inclusion thus also is an example of a ring homomorphism which is (in the sense of category theory) both mono and epi, but not iso.

Kernel of a homomorphism

Any homomorphism ; this fact is one of the isomorphism theorems. Note in some cases (e.g. groups or rings), a single equivalence class K suffices to specify the structure of the quotient; so we can write it X/K. (X/K is usually read as "X mod K".) Also in these cases, it is K, rather than ~, that is called the kernel of f (cf. normal subgroup).

Homomorphisms of relational structures

In model theory, the notion of an algebraic structure is generalized to structures involving both operations and relations. Let L be a signature consisting of function and relation symbols, and A, B be two L-structures. Then a homomorphism from A to B is a mapping h from the domain of A to the domain of B such that
In the special case with just one binary relation, we obtain the notion of a graph homomorphism. For a detailed discussion of relational homomorphisms and isomorphisms see.4, in Gunther Schmidt, 2010. Relational Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-76268-7

Homomorphisms and e-free homomorphisms in formal language theory

Homomorphisms are also used in the study of formal languagesSeymour Ginsburg, Algebraic and automata theoretic properties of formal languages, North-Holland, 1975, ISBN 0-7204-2506-9. (although within this context, often they are briefly referred to as morphismsT. Harju, J. Karhumӓki, Morphisms in Handbook of Formal Languages, Volume I, edited by G. Rozenberg, A. Salomaa, Springer, 1997, ISBN 3-540-61486-9.). Given alphabets Σ1 and Σ2, a function  in Σ1∗, then h is called an e-free homomorphism.
This type of homomorphism can be thought of as (and is equivalent to) a monoid homomorphism where Σ∗ the set of all words over a finite alphabet Σ is a monoid (in fact it is the free monoid on Σ) with operation concatenation and the empty word as the identity.



Notes



 
 
A monograph available free online:


