[[Mochi]]

CATEGORIES: Hawaiian cuisine, Japanese cuisine, Japanese words and phrases, Glutinous rice dishes

 While also eaten year-round, mochi is a traditional food for the Japanese New Year and is commonly sold and eaten during that time. Mochi is called môa-chî (麻糬) in Taiwan.
Mochi is a multicomponent food consisting of polysaccharides, lipids, protein and water. Mochi has a heterogeneous structure of amylopectin gel, starch grains and air bubbles.

Viscoelasticity of Mochi

Mochi's characteristic chewiness is due to the polysaccharides in it. The viscosity and elasticity that account for this chewiness are  affected by many factors such as the starch concentration, configuration of the swollen starch granules, the conditions of heating (temperature, heating period and rate of heating) as well as the junction zones that interconnect each polymer chain. The more junction zones the substance has, the stronger the cohesiveness of the gel, thereby forming a more solid like material. The perfect mochi will have the perfect balance between viscosity and elasticity so that it is not inextensible and fragile but rather extensible yet firm. 
Many tests have been conducted on the factors that affect the viscoelastic properties of mochi. As puncture tests show, samples with a higher solid (polysaccharide) content show an increased resistance and thereby a stronger and tougher gel. This increased resistance to the puncture test indicate that an increase in solute concentration leads to a more rigid and harder gel with an increased cohesiveness, internal binding, elasticity and springiness which means a decrease in material flow or an increase in viscosity. These results can also be brought about by an increase in heating time. Sensory assessments of the hardness, stickiness and elasticity of mochi and their relationship with solute concentration and heating time were also performed. Similar to the puncture test results, sensory tests also determine that hardness and elasticity increase with increasing time of heating and solid concentration. However, stickiness of the samples increase with increasing time of heating and solid concentration until a certain level, above which the reverse trend is observed. It is important to understand these relationships because too hard or elastic of a mochi is undesirable, as is one that is too sticky and will stick to walls of the container.

Preparation

Traditionally, mochi was made from whole rice, in a labor-intensive process. The traditional mochi-pounding ceremony in Japan is Mochitsuki:
Mochi can also be prepared from a flour of sweet rice (mochiko). The flour is mixed with water to a sticky opaque white mass that is cooked on the stovetop or in the microwave until it becomes elastic and slightly transparent. 14.

Popular uses for mochi

Confectionery

Many types of traditional wagashi and mochigashi (Japanese traditional sweets) are made with mochi. For example, daifuku is a soft round mochi stuffed with sweet filling, such as sweetened red bean paste (an) or white bean paste (shiro an). Ichigo daifuku is a version containing a whole strawberry inside.
Kusa mochi is a green variety of mochi flavored with yomogi (mugwort). When daifuku is made with kusa mochi, it is called yomogi daifuku.

=Ice cream=

Small balls of ice cream are wrapped inside a mochi covering to make mochi ice cream. In Japan this is manufactured by the conglomerate Lotte under the name Yukimi Daifuku, "snow-viewing daifuku". In the United States the grocery chains Trader Joe's, H Mart, Lotte, and Mollie Stone's sell mochi ice cream in flavors of chocolate, mango, coconut, green tea, coffee, red bean, vanilla, and strawberry. Mikawaya, a Japanese American-owned company operating in Los Angeles, manufactures the variety that is sold by Trader Joe's, H Mart, and Mollie Stone's. The New Central Market in Anchorage, Alaska, provides a variety of mochi and mochi ice cream products throughout Alaska. The Pinkberry, Yogen Fruz, Yogurtland, Smackers, Spoon Me, Sweet Frog, Kiwi Loco, Peachwave, U-Swirl, Tutti Frutti, Kiwi Kraze, Menchie's, Moochi, and Red Mango frozen yogurt chains also offer mochi as standard topping on their desserts (with Pinkberry offering it on their secret menu), available upon request from customers. International frozen yogurt chains that offer mochi as a topping include Indonesia's J.

Soup

New Year specialties

Other variations



Similar foods in other countries




