[[Paolo Maldini]]

CATEGORIES: Italian footballers, Italy international footballers, A.C. Milan players, FIFA 100, Association football defenders, Serie A footballers, UEFA Euro 1988 players, 1990 FIFA World Cup players, 1994 FIFA World Cup players, UEFA Euro 1996 players, 1998 FIFA World Cup players, UEFA Euro 2000 players, 2002 FIFA World Cup players, 1968 births, Living people, FIFA Century Club, Sportspeople from Milan, World Soccer Magazine World Player of the Year winners, Italy under-21 international footballers

Paolo Cesare Maldini (born 26 June 1968) is a former Italian footballer who played as a left or central defender, being adept with either foot although naturally right-footed. He spent all 24 seasons of his career at Serie A club Milan, before retiring at the age of 41 in 2009, becoming a symbol and a legend of the club. During that period, he won the Champions League five times, as well as seven Serie A titles, one Coppa Italia, five Supercoppa Italiana, five European Super Cups, two Intercontinental Cups. He played for 14 years for the Italian national team, making his debut in 1988 before retiring in 2002 with 126 caps and four World Cup participations.
He is regarded to be one of the greatest defenders of all time.
Maldini was also the Milan and Italy captain for many years and was considered a leader amongst leaders by fellow footballers, leading to the nickname "Il Capitano" (the Captain). Paolo's father Cesare formerly played for and captained Milan, and is a successful national U-21 manager.

Club career

Maldini made his league debut in the 1984–85 season on 20 January 1985, replacing the injured Sergio Battistini in a match against Udinese at the age of 16. He was also part of Milan's undefeated Serie A champion side in the 1991–92 season. The back four that included Maldini and fellow long-timers Franco Baresi, Alessandro Costacurta and Mauro Tassotti is widely considered one of European football's most formidable defensive quartets of the 1990s. Following Baresi's retirement, he would also form a formidable and successful partnership with Alessandro Nesta.
In addition to winning his third Champions League and reaching the 1994 World Cup final, Maldini became the first defender ever to win World Soccer magazine's annual World Player of the Year Award. During his acceptance speech, Maldini called his milestone "a particular matter of pride because defenders generally receive so much less attention from fans and the media than goalscorers. We are more in the engine room rather than taking the glory." He then singled out Milan captain Franco Baresi as a player who "really deserved to receive the sort of award I have received."
Maldini played his 600th Serie A match on 13 May 2007 in a 1–1 draw at Catania.
Maldini has participated in eight UEFA Champions League finals during the course of his career, which is bettered only by Francisco Gento, who also appeared in a Cup Winners' Cup final, bringing his total European finals to nine. Maldini has lifted the trophy five times, the latest coming in Milan's 2–1 victory over Liverpool in the 2007 Champions League final on 23 May 2007 in Athens. In an interview with ESPN that aired prior to the broadcast of the 2007 final, he labeled the 2005 Champions League final, a match that Milan lost on penalties to Liverpool after blowing a 3–0 half-time lead, the worst moment of his career, even though he had scored the fastest-ever goal in a European Clubs' Cup final just 51 seconds into the match, in the process also becoming the oldest player ever to score in a final.
Maldini announced his plans to retire at the end of the 2007–08 season, saying that he would do so with "no regrets." On 18 April 2009, Maldini announced that he will be finally retiring at the end of the 2008–09 season.
On 17 May, in the Friuli Stadium, Maldini played his 900th official match for Milan in a league game against Udinese. Maldini's last match in San Siro was on 24 May, in a game lost 3–2 against Roma. There was a small controversy when the Milan fans known as "Brigate Rossonere", protested against Maldini as he said goodbye. His last appearance for Milan, and his last game as an active player was on 31 May 2009, in the last match of the season, against Fiorentina, which Milan won 2–0.
Milan retired his number 3 shirt, but it will be bequeathed to one of his sons if one makes the club's senior side.

International career

In 1986, Maldini was called up by his father Cesare to the Italian U-21 side, where he earned twelve caps and scored five goals in two years. He made his Azzurri debut at the age of nineteen on 31 March 1988, in a 1–1 friendly draw against Yugoslavia, and made one appearance for Italy at the 1988 Olympics. Maldini featured in all four of Italy's games at Euro 1988, and participated in his first World Cup in 1990, where Italy lost to Argentina in the semi-finals on penalties.
Maldini's first international goal came in his 44th career match, in a 2–0 friendly win over Mexico on 20 January 1993. He was vice-captain for Italy at the 1994 World Cup, deputising for the injured  Franco Baresi in matches against Mexico, Nigeria, Spain and Bulgaria. Maldini helped Italy keep a clean sheet in the final against Brazil as the team eventually lost on penalties. He was named in the Team of the Tournament, 32 years after his father received the same honour at the 1962 World Cup.
After Baresi's international retirement in 1994, Maldini was appointed the team's full-time captain. Euro 1996 would see Italy eliminated in the group stage, and at the quarter-finals of the 1998 World Cup.  Italy did reach the final of Euro 2000, but lost to France in extra time.
Immediately after Italy were eliminated in the 2002 World Cup round of sixteen, Maldini retired trophyless from international competition as Italy's most capped player. He scored seven international goals, all coming in home games. He spent over half of his 16 years as an international as team captain, wearing the armband a record 74 times.
In February 2009, Italian head coach Marcello Lippi declared his support for a testimonial match for Maldini, stating that it would give him a chance to play for the Azzurri for a final time. Italian Football Federation offered him a place in the line-up in a friendly match against Northern Ireland. However, Maldini rejected the offer, saying that he wanted to part with football in an "official" match.

Retirement

Prior to his retirement, Maldini expressed that he would never be moving into a coaching career.

Style of play

Maldini's sliding tackles, athleticism and energetic forward runs as a left-back were legendary. However, in the final few years of his career, as he lost speed, he was moved to a center-back position, where he relied more on his experience, positioning and timing to win the ball.

Legacy

Maldini has been described as an icon and gentleman of the game and is considered as one of the greatest defenders ever.

Personal life

Maldini has been married to Venezuelan former model Adriana Fossa since 1994.
In 2003, he lifted the European Cup/Champions League as club captain exactly 40 years after his father Cesare accomplished the same feat for the same side. The only other father-son pairs to have done so are Manuel Sanchis Martínez and Manuel Sanchís Hontiyuelo of Real Madrid, and Carles and Sergio Busquets of Barcelona.

Career statistics

Club

1European competitions include the UEFA Champions League and UEFA Cup

2Other tournaments include the Supercoppa Italiana, UEFA Super Cup, Intercontinental Cup and FIFA Club World Cup

3Play-off for UEFA Cup admission

International



International goals

Honours

Milan

Winner
Runner-up

National team

Individual

Records

Orders




