[[Aquemini]]

CATEGORIES: 1998 albums, Outkast albums, LaFace Records albums, Albums produced by Organized Noize

Aquemini is the third studio album by American hip hop duo Outkast, released on September 29, 1998 through LaFace Records. The title is a portmanteau of the two performers' Zodiac signs: Aquarius (Big Boi) and Gemini (André 3000).  Released as the follow-up to the duo's 1996 album ATLiens, Aquemini expands on the previous record's outer space-inspired compositions by incorporating live instrumentation.  Lyrically, Outkast explores various themes including human nature, addiction, and interpersonal relationships.
The album was certified platinum in November 1998, only two months after its release, and was certified double platinum on July 2, 1999 by the Recording Industry Association of America. Aquemini peaked at number two on both the Billboard 200 and the Top R&B/Hip-Hop charts. Four of the album's tracks had already or would later become singles, although some were limited (promotional) releases and not available commercially. The record also received nearly universal acclaim from music critics, who praised the album's musicality and unique lyrical themes. It was ranked as number 500 in the book version of Rolling Stone's 500 Greatest Albums of All Time.  

Background

In 1994, the American hip hop duo OutKast released their debut album, Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik, which was recorded when members Big Boi and André 3000 were eighteen years old. Bolstered by the success of the single "Player's Ball", the record established OutKast as prominent figures in the Southern hip hop scene. 32–33. After the album was certified platinum, LaFace Records gave OutKast more creative control and advanced money for their 1996 follow-up album ATLiens.
The group originally planned to create a film in conjunction with Aquemini, completing a script three months before the release of the record. Outkast met with MTV for the project, who, despite liking the idea for the film, hoped to instead buy the project and cast Missy Elliott and Busta Rhymes instead, feeling the latter two had more "star power."

Recording

Due to Outkast's newfound commercial success and higher budget for the album, the group enjoyed a more relaxed schedule and "could really just live" at the studio. For Aquemini, the duo utilized live instrumentation and improvisation, bringing a baby grand piano into the studio and hiring musicians who played "everything from stoner funk to prog rock". p. 110  Producer Neal H. Pogue recalled, "That was the beauty of making all those records - having musicians come in and out. It was almost like a Motown, that's what we had. Or like a Stax Records thing. That's what I loved about it. It brought back that whole feeling of making records. It was organic." Much of the music on Aquemini was formulated during jam sessions, in which one musician would begin with creating a chord pattern and the rest would incorporate their instruments following that sequence. After the musical aspects of a song were developed, André 3000 and Big Boi would then create lyrics that they felt would fit with the tone of the song.
For the record, Big Boi undertook the responsibility of crafting the songs' hooks, while André 3000 involved himself with the album's production.  André 3000 and producer Mr. DJ learned about beat creation through observing the members of Organized Noize at work, with Mr. DJ observing that despite André 3000's normally frugal lifestyle, his enthusiasm for production led him to splurge on costly recording equipment.  At one point, André 3000 attempted singing and modifying his voice with pitch-correction equipment, but Big Boi warned him that this would alienate the group's urban audience. p. 111 While recording Aquemini, André 3000 drew influence from reggae music and listened to Bob Marley constantly during the sessions. The album features the song "West Savannah", which had been recorded during the Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik sessions, and was included on Aquemini to give listeners a "bonus" that had sentimental value for the duo, as well as to pay homage to Big Boi's family living in Savannah.

Music

The album is vaguely futuristic, synthesizer-drenched and punctuated with anthemic choruses and bluesy beats. Lyrically, much of Aquemini features introspection about the desolation of the human condition. Overarching themes addressed on the record include drug addiction, precarious relationships, and freedom from self-inflicted struggles.  Other subjects include over-reliance on technology and the club scene. In contrast to much of hip hop music in the late 1990s, OutKast did not tone down the regional qualities, like the harmonica break on "Rosa Parks" and distinctive Atlanta slang and diction throughout."
Big Boi described the music on the album as "very experimental" noting that the creative freedom afforded to the duo allowed them to "really dive" into the production. AllMusic's Steve Huey detected the "ethereal futurism" of ATLiens in the music on Aquemini, but also noted that "more often Aquemini plants its feet on the ground for a surprisingly down-home flavor". He also observed a "Southern earthiness and simultaneous spirituality" in Organized Noize's production work on the record.
Aquemini also features live instrumentation and poetic lyricism, such as the reggae horns on the seven-minute long "SpottieOttieDopaliscious," which included the observant narration of their Atlanta upbringing - referencing the Charles Disco and Hollywood Courts; while also including a wah-wah guitar on the closing track "Chonkyfire". The album also included "West Savannah," which was an outtake from Outkast's debut album "Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik." The track was also featured as an intro to the "Benz Or Beamer" video, but was held off "Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik" and not used on the duo's follow-up album "ATLiens," finally to surface on this album. The song is the original version and was not re-recorded for the album. A small intro to the song begins at the end of "Slump," with Big Boi referring to the song's history.

Content

The intro to the album, "Hold On, Be Strong," was written by session guitarist Donny Mathis and was originally a full song with verses, but the group preferred to only use the hook. André 3000 played a kalimba on the song after purchasing the instrument at a flea market, drawing inspiration from Earth, Wind & Fire. "Return of the G" addresses concerns from fans who felt that the group's style had changed too drastically since the release of Southernplayalisticadillacmuzik, as well as those who make poor decisions in order to keep their street credibility.  The next track, "Skew It On the Bar-B" features rapper Raekwon of the Wu-Tang Clan and discusses the disappointment of the group's debut album not achieving the coveted "five-mic" rating from The Source: "I gotta hit the Source / I need my other half mic / because that Southernplayalisticadillacmusik was a classic right?".  "Skew It On the Bar-B" is followed by the title track, which has been compared to the music of soul singer Isaac Hayes. Pogue experimented with delays and echos in his production to make the song "dimensional, like you could actually put your hands through the song."
"Synthesizer" contains elements of electrofunk and features funk musician George Clinton.  Emma Warren of The Guardian called the track "raw and woozy", dubbing it the "weirdest moment of the record".  On "West Savannah", Big Boi discusses his Southern roots, and references individuals who grew up outside of the South who fail to recognize different regional Southern identities by stating "You might call us country, but we's only Southern". pp. 38-39 "Da Art of Storytellin' (Part 1)" tells the story of a self-destructive childhood friend named Sasha Thumper who dies of a drug overdose. 462  Commenting on the song's lyrical content, author Mickey Hess remarks that André 3000 "manages to walk the fine line between emotionalism and masculinity by articulating this highly emotional narrative with an almost emotionless tone."  The next track, "Da Art of Storytellin' (Part 2)", is an apocalyptic song that represents the group's vision of "the last song recorded in the world", with André 3000 commenting, "I do remember thinking, 'What if it was the end of the world and we had to get to the Dungeon on some X-Men superhero shit. I think I was vibing on some end-of-the-world, last-recorded-song shit'".  "SpottieOttieDopalicious" relates a story of ill-fated romance, with André 3000 describing the infatuation during an encounter with a woman at a club and Big Boi noting the hopelessness of the relationship as the song progresses. p. 133 The eight minute-long "Liberation" combines a variety of musical styles, including gospel, jazz, blues, and world music. The song is notable for not including rapped vocals and instead features vocal alternations between singing and spoken word styles. 172  Lyrically, the track utilizes images of slavery to symbolize artistic freedom and not being concerned with the opinions of the public and record labels.

Critical reception

Aquemini received general acclaim from music critics upon its release. AllMusic's Steve Huey called it "a stroke of brilliance". He praised the record for avoiding the "hardcore clichés" and summed up his review by saying that Aquemini is "a virtuosic masterpiece, and a landmark hip-hop album of the late '90s". Robert Christgau also commented positively on the album, stating that the record "evolved G-funk with denser instrumental crosstalk." In a brief review for "Entertainment Weekly," Cheo Tyehimba qualified Aquemini as the hip-hop album of the year.
Fernando Jr. of Rolling Stone wrote "OutKast prove that you don't have to sell out to sell records. Sporting plenty of live chops and soulful harmonies, Aquemini's fresh, original feel defies rap's coastal clichés." 
Steve Jones of USA Today commented that the duo's "molasses-smooth raps speak to the stark realities of urban streets. And with the hard-driving, Southern-fried grooves provided by live studio musicians, these songs not only make you dance, they make you sweat". Tony Green of Spin said that although they are not as spiritual as Goodie Mob, Outkast's "streetcorner signifying" offers listeners more than simple musical pleasure and that they "have crafted some of the most seductive and dramadelic textures." Giving it a five out of five "mic"-rating, Charlie Braxton of The Source praised the duo's "submersion into the baptismal waters of the African American musical continuum" and "their superb use of the urban narrative." Braxton called Aquemini "a brilliant record" and commented that it "possesses an uncanny blend of sonic beauty, poignant lyricism and spirituality that compels without commanding".
In a retrospective review, Tim Stelloh from PopMatters described the album as "loud, unpretentious, eclectic kick in the ass". He praised it for being "full of both fear and curiosity, and those emotions were channeled through its production." Dave Hughes, writing in Slant Magazine, stated: "Ten years on, Aquemini is the single strongest aspect of one of the art form's deepest benches. Snappier and more experimental than the pair's early work, and focused enough to feel comfortable in a sprawl, it's the moment when OutKast came fully into itself."

Accolades

Aquemini has been included in several publications' best album lists. In 2003, Rolling Stone ranked it number 500 on its list of 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. The staff explained the inclusion by stating: "OutKast unleashed an explosive hip-hop that deployed live musicians, social commentary and a heavy dose of deep funk".
Paste named the album "the best Atlanta hip-hop album of all time". New Nation named it the 80th best album by black artists.
The album was included in Blender

Legacy


Critics hailed the recording as OutKast's most fully realized up to that time and one of the best of the 1990s.
Los Angeles Times labeled the album "OutKast's third brilliant slice of hip-hop". Rolling Stone wrote that "Atlanta's reputation as hip-hop's most avant-garde area code — the Long Island of the Nineties — was cemented" with this effort. In a column for Jazz Times, Tony Green wrote that "Outkast's Aquemini dispels any notion that hip-hop is out of sonic ideas. If anything, it shows that the genre's appetite for new sounds is as ravenous as ever.", and made the group one of those rare commercial anomalies—kind of like Nirvana, Rage Against the Machine, or Public Enemy".

Track listing

Track listing and samples compiled from album liner notes.

The clean version of the album has all of the skits in between the songs removed.  The interlude "Nathaniel" was omitted, as was verse five of "Liberation".

Personnel

Credits are adapted from AllMusic.

Musicians

Technical personnel

Charts

Certifications



Notes

Bibliography




