[[Spin glass]]

CATEGORIES: Magnetic ordering, Theoretical physics, Mathematical physics

A spin glass is a disordered magnet with frustrated interactions, augmented by stochastic positions of the spins, where conflicting interactions, namely both ferromagnetic and also antiferromagnetic bonds, are randomly distributed with comparable frequency. The term "glass" comes from an analogy between the magnetic disorder in a spin glass and the positional disorder of a conventional, chemical glass, e.g., a window glass.
Spin glasses display many metastable structures, leading to a plenitude of time scales which are difficult to explore experimentally or in simulations.

Magnetic behavior

It is the time dependence which distinguishes spin glasses from other magnetic systems.
If a magnetic field is applied as the sample is cooled to the transition temperature, magnetization of the sample increases as described by the Curie law. Upon reaching Tc, the sample becomes a spin glass and further cooling results in little change in magnetization. This is referred to as the field-cooled magnetization.
When the external magnetic field is removed, the magnetization of the spin glass falls rapidly to a lower value known as the remanent magnetization.
Magnetization then decays slowly as it approaches zero (or some small fraction of the original value—this remains unknown).  This decay is non-exponential and no simple function can fit the curve of magnetization versus time adequately.
Spin glasses differ from ferromagnetic materials by the fact that after the external magnetic field is removed from a ferromagnetic substance, the magnetization remains indefinitely at the remanent value. Paramagnetic materials differ from spin glasses by the fact that, after the external magnetic field is removed, the magnetization rapidly falls to zero, with no remanent magnetization.  In each case the decay is rapid and exponential.
If the sample is cooled below Tc in the absence of an external magnetic field and a magnetic field is applied after the transition to the spin glass phase, there is a rapid initial increase to a value called the zero-field-cooled magnetization. A slow upward drift then occurs toward the field-cooled magnetization.
Surprisingly, the sum of the two complicated functions of time (the zero-field-cooled and remanent magnetizations) is a constant, namely the field-cooled value, and thus both share identical functional forms with time,(Nordblad et al.) at least in the limit of very small external fields.

Edwards–Anderson model

Free energy of this system can be found, both under assumptions of replica symmetry as well as considering replica symmetry breaking. Under the assumption of replica symmetry, the free energy is given by the expression:

The model of Sherrington and Kirkpatrick

In addition to unusual experimental properties, spin glasses are the subject of extensive theoretical and computational investigations. A substantial part of early theoretical work on spin glasses dealt with a form of mean field theory based on a set of replicas of the partition function of the system.
An important, exactly solvable model of a spin glass was introduced by D. Sherrington and S. Kirkpatrick in 1975. It is an Ising model with long range frustrated ferro- as well as antiferromagnetic couplings. It corresponds to a mean field approximation of spin glasses describing the slow dynamics of the magnetization and the complex non-ergodic equilibrium state.
Unlike the Edwards–Anderson (EA) model, in the system though only two spins interactions are considered, the range of each interaction can be potentially infinite (of the order of the size of the lattice). Therefore we see that any two spins can be lined with a ferromagnetic or an antiferromagnetic bond and the distribution of these is given exactly as in the case of Edwards–Anderson model. The Hamiltonian for SK model is very similar to the EA model:
The formalism of replica mean field theory has also been applied in the study of neural networks, where it has enabled calculations of properties such as the storage capacity of simple neural network architectures without requiring a training algorithm (such as backpropagation) to be designed or implemented.
More realistic spin glass models with short range frustrated interactions and disorder, like the Gaussian model where the couplings between neighboring spins follow a Gaussian distribution, have been studied extensively as well, especially using Monte Carlo simulations. These models display spin glass phases bordered by sharp phase transitions.
Besides its relevance in condensed matter physics, spin glass theory has acquired a strongly interdisciplinary character, with applications to neural network theory, computer 
science, theoretical biology, econophysics etc.

Infinite-range model

Non-ergodic behavior and applications



Notes



Literature

 | last1 = Mezard
 | first1= Marc
 | last2=Parisi|first2=Giorgio|author2-link=Giorgio Parisi
 | last3=Virasoro|first3=Miguel Angel|author3-link=Miguel Ángel Virasoro (physicist)
 | year = 1987
 | title = Spin glass theory and beyond
 | publisher = World Scientific
 | location = Singapore
 | isbn =  9971-5-0115-5
}}.




