[[Foreign relations of the Maldives]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of the Maldives, Maldives and the Commonwealth of Nations

The Maldives has remained an independent nation throughout its recorded history, save for a brief spell of Portuguese occupation in the mid-16th century.  From 1887 to 1965, the country was a British protectorate while retaining full internal sovereignty. At its independence in 1965, the Maldives joined the United Nations on 20 September.
Since 1978, the Maldives has followed a policy of international engagement, intensifying links with strategic partners and the international system. It joined the Commonwealth of Nations in 1982. A founder member of South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), the Maldives is also a member of the Bretton Woods system. It is also party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) as well as numerous conventions on the protection of the environment, the suppression of terrorism, disarmament and on the promotion and protection of human rights.
In the transition towards a liberal democracy, the Maldives has successfully established dialogue and collaboration with the international human rights organizations, such as Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch, and acceded to numerous human rights instruments such as the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR). During the same period, the country has also intensified links with the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association (CPA) and joined the Inter-Parliamentary Union (IPU).
The Maldives maintain resident diplomatic missions in Colombo, New Delhi, Islamabad, Dhaka, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, New York, Tokyo, Beijing, Riyadh, London, Geneva, and the European Union, and non-resident accreditation in a number of countries including Nepal and Bhutan.
Key issues of interest include advancing national development, supporting international peace and security, including the protection of the environment and the promotion of human rights, and upholding the purposes and principles enshrined in the Charter of the United Nations.

Ministers of Foreign Affairs

Human Rights

The Maldives has become a very strong advocate for the promotion and protection of human rights following the democratic transition in 2008. At the United Nations, the Maldives has since then called for all countries to adhere to their obligations under international law, and to respect fundamental freedoms and rights. In 2005, the Maldives became one of the promoters of the Optional Protocol to the UN Convention Against Torture after having earlier acceded to the Convention. The Maldives is party to the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), the Convention on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination (CERD), Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) and its optional protocol. In April 2006, the Maldives issued a standing invitation to all special procedures mandates of the UN human rights machinery to visit to the Maldives.
The Maldives was elected to the Human Rights Council in 2010 for the term 2010-2013, in which it has actively supported and contributed to the promotion and protection of human rights for all. It has co-sponsored a number of resolution establishing United Nations Special Mandates, and supported resolutions on improving human rights situation in the Middle East during the Arab Spring, namely on investigating human rights violations in Libya and Syria.
Maldives has especially close relations with India and Sri Lanka, countries with which it shares much culture.

International organizations

United Nations

Maldives became a member state of United Nations on 21 September 1965. The nation became a member of United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) on the same date.
The Maldives became a member of the following UN agencies and conferences on the following dates:
The United Nations Development Programme has a representative resident in Malé, as do UNICEF and World Health Organization (WHO).
At the UN, the Maldives has highlighted the vulnerability of small states to various threats including terrorism, activities of mercenaries and transnational organized crime. It is also a strong advocate of counter-terrorism and is party to all the main UN conventions against terrorism. Development co-operation is a major priority of the Maldives and it has been campaigning at the UN for a more structured means of graduation from the list of least developed countries targeted for preferential assistance. The main donors to the Maldives are Japan, India, and Australia.

Other intergovernmental organizations

The Maldives became a member of Non-Aligned Movement on 15 August 1976.
The Maldives were a founder member in 1985 of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) and the nation plays a very active role in the association. It has taken the lead in calling for a South Asian Free Trade Agreement, the formulation of a Social Charter, the initiation of informal political consultations in SAARC forums, the lobbying for greater action on environmental issues, the proposal of numerous human rights measures such as the regional convention on child rights and for setting up a SAARC Human Rights Resource Centre. The Maldives is also an advocate of greater international profile for SAARC such as through formulating common positions at the UN. 
The Maldives is a member of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation (OIC) and maintains close cultural relations with Islamic countries. However, the Maldives has often distanced itself from positions taken by the OIC on matters such as the Kashmir dispute, which it regards as a bilateral issue to be settled peacefully between India and Pakistan. It has also not supported the OIC position on issues such as that of Cyprus, subscribing instead to the international stance taken by the United Nations. The Maldives became a member of OIC in August 1974. 

The Maldives and the Commonwealth of Nations

The Maldives joined the Commonwealth of Nations on 9 July 1982 as a special member and became a full member on 20 June 1985 
The Maldives became a member of Commonwealth Parliamentarian Association (CPA) on 1 January 2000.
The Maldives became a member of Commonwealth of Learning (COL) on September 1989.
The Maldives became a member of Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation (CFTC) in 1985.
The Maldives became a member of Commonwealth Youth Programme (CYP) on 9 July 1982.foreign.mv/v3/?p=mem_in_int

Bilateral relations

Asia

=Bhutan=

Diplomatic relations between Maldives and Bhutan were established on 13 July 1984. {00}

=Brunei=

Diplomatic relations between Maldives and Brunei were established on 31 March 1984. {001}

=China (People's Republic of China)=

China and Maldives established diplomatic relations on 14 October 1972. Sino-Maldivian economic cooperation and trade volume were for long insignificant, with total trade in 2002 of only US$3 million. Economic ties have recently become more important with large inflows of Chinese tourists to the Maldives since 2010.[ref]
</ref>
Capital inflows from China have also rapidly increased since 2008. China's main exports to Maldives are rice and consumer goods.[ref]
</ref>  The relations between China and Maldives have increased in Mohamed Nasheed's presidential term. However, before being elected for president, Mohamed Nasheed criticized the Communist Party of China saying relations with Communist Chinese were never acceptable due to their views regarding modern democracy.

=India=

Bilateral relations between the Republic of India and the Republic of Maldives have been friendly and close in strategic, economic and military cooperation.
India and Maldives officially and amicably decided their maritime boundary in 1976, although a minor diplomatic incident occurred in 1982 when the brother of the President of Maldives Maumoon Abdul Gayoom declared that the neighbouring Minicoy Island that belonged to India were a part of Maldives; Maldivies quickly and officially denied that it was laying claim to the island. India and Maldives signed a comprehensive trade agreement in 1981. Both nations are founding members of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), the South Asian Economic Union and signatories to the South Asia Free Trade Agreement. Indian and Maldivian leaders have maintained high-level contacts and consultations on regional issues.
Diplomatic relations between Maldives and India were established on 1 November 1965.43

=Indonesia=

Maldives and Indonesia established diplomatic relations on 2 September 1974.deplu.go.aspx?Name=BilateralCooperation&IDP=52&P=Bilateral&l=en
Indonesia was the 22nd country to establish diplomatic relations with Maldives.

=Japan=

Maldives and Japan established diplomatic relations on November 1967.27

=Malaysia=

The Malaysian High Commission in Colombo is also cross-accredited to the Maldives,

=Mongolia=

Maldives and Mongolia established diplomatic relations on 6 November 1985. 

=Myanmar=

Maldives and Myanmar established diplomatic relations on 15 January 1970.40

=Nepal=

Diplomatic relations between Maldives and Nepal were established on 1 August 1980. 41

=North Korea (Democratic People's Republic of Korea)=

Maldives and Democratic People's Republic of Korea established diplomatic relations on 14 June 1970. 35

=Pakistan=

In November 2004, Pakistan Prime Minister Shaukat Aziz visited the Maldives and met with President Maumoon Abdul Gayoom. Aziz offered to extend credit facility, scholarships, collaboration in scientific and technological fields and training of civil servants, defence and security personnel to Maldives.

=Palestine=

The Maldives has had no diplomatic ties with Palestine since 1988.

=Singapore=

Diplomatic relations between Maldives and Singapore were established on 20 February 1975.

=South Korea (Republic of Korea)=

Diplomatic relations between Maldives and the Republic of Korea were established on 30 November 1967. {001}

=Sri Lanka=

Official and economic relations between the neighbouring Indian Ocean countries of the Maldives and Sri Lanka, have been positive since the Maldives became independent in 1965. The Maldives first established a mission in Sri Lanka in July 1965, and today has a High Commission in Colombo.[ref]
