[[Queen Latifah]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Queen Latifah, A&M Records artists, African-American Christians, African-American comedians, African-American feminists, African-American actresses, African-American female rappers, American cosmetics businesspeople, American dance musicians, American television talk show hosts, Baptists from the United States, Best Miniseries or Television Movie Actress Golden Globe winners, Businesspeople from New Jersey, Christian feminists, Grammy Award-winning artists, American hip hop singers, Five percenters, Living people, Motown artists, Musicians from Newark, New Jersey, Native Tongues Posse, Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Screen Actors Guild Award winners, Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie Screen Actors Guild Award winners, Actresses from Newark, New Jersey, People from Colts Neck Township, New Jersey, People from Rumson, New Jersey, People from East Orange, New Jersey, Rappers from New Jersey, Tommy Boy Records artists, Verve Records artists, American women comedians, African-American female singer-songwriters, American rhythm and blues singer-songwriters, American soul singers, American jazz singers, American gospel singers, American television actresses, American film actresses, American voice actresses, African-American female models, African-American pianists, Interscope Records artists, Warner Bros. Records artists, Walt Disney Records artists, Feminist musicians, East Coast hip hop musicians, Songwriters from New Jersey, African-American women, African-American businesspeople, American women in business



Dana Elaine Owens (born March 18, 1970), Her work in music, film, and television has earned her a Golden Globe award, two Screen Actors Guild Awards, two Image Awards, a Grammy Award, six additional Grammy nominations, an Emmy Award nomination and an Academy Award nomination.

Early life

Latifah was born in Newark, New Jersey, and lived primarily in East Orange, New Jersey.com, date February 24, 2009. Retrieved June 13, 2009 She is the daughter of Rita (née Bray), a teacher at Irvington High School (Latifah's alma mater) and Lancelot Owens, Sr., a police officer.. Owens attended Essex Catholic Girls' High School in Irvington, but graduated from Irvington High School,  She performed the number "Home" from the musical The Wiz in a high school play. MTV (March 18, 1970).

Music career

Beginning (1988–1989)

She started beat boxing for the hip-hop group Ladies Fresh and was one of the members of the original version of the Flavor Unit, which, at that time, was a crew of MCs grouped around producer DJ King Gemini, who made a demo recording of Queen Latifah's rap Princess of the Posse. He gave the recording to Fab 5 Freddy, the host of Yo! MTV Raps. The song got the attention of Tommy Boy Music employee Dante Ross, who signed Latifah and in 1988 issued her first single, "Wrath of My Madness".

Rapping (1989–2002)

Latifah made her mark in Hip-Hop by rapping about issues of black women. Her songs covered topics on domestic violence, harassment on the streets, and relationship problems. 
Freddy helped Latifah sign with Tommy Boy Records, which released Latifah's first album All Hail the Queen in 1989, when she was nineteen. That year, she appeared as Referee on the UK label Music of Life album 1989—The Hustlers Convention (live). In 1998, co-produced by Ro Smith, now CEO of Def Ro Inc., she released her fourth hip-hop album Order in the Court, which was released by Motown Records. Latifah was also a member of the hip hop collective Native Tongues.

Singing (2003–2007)

After Order in the Court, Latifah shifted primarily to singing soul music and jazz standards, which she had used sparingly in her previous hip-hop-oriented records. In 2004, she released the soul/jazz standards The Dana Owens Album. On July 11, 2007, Latifah sang at the famed Hollywood Bowl in Los Angeles as the headlining act in a live jazz concert. Before a crowd of more than 12,400, she was backed by a 10-piece live orchestra and three backup vocalists, which was billed as the Queen Latifah Orchestra. Latifah performed new arrangements of standards including "California Dreaming", first made popular by 1960s icons The Mamas & the Papas. Later in 2007, Latifah released an album titled Trav'lin' Light. Jill Scott, Erykah Badu, Joe Sample, George Duke, Christian McBride, and Stevie Wonder made guest appearances.
In 2009, Latifah, along with the NJPAC Jubilation Choir,

Return to hip hop (2008–present)

In 2008, Latifah was asked if she would make another hip-hop album.  She was quoted saying the album was done already and it would be called "All Hail the Queen II". The following year, in 2009, she released her album Persona. The song "Cue the Rain" was released as the album's lead single. She also has a song with Missy Elliott. In January 2012, while appearing on 106 & Park with Dolly Parton, to promote Joyful Noise, Latifah stated that she had been working on a new album.

Film and television

Early career (1991–2001)

From 1993–1998, Latifah had a starring role on Living Single, the FOX sitcom, which gained high ratings among black audiences; she also wrote and performed its theme music. Her mother Rita played her mother on-screen. She began her film career in supporting roles in the 1991 and 1992 films House Party 2, Juice and Jungle Fever. She had her own talk show, The Queen Latifah Show, from 1999 to 2001. She also had recurring roles during the second season (1991–1992) of the NBC hit The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air. She made a guest role as herself on Hangin' with Mr. Cooper in 1993. Latifah appeared in the 1996 box-office hit, Set It Off and subsequently had a supporting role in the Holly Hunter film Living Out Loud (1998). She played the role of Thelma in the 1999 movie The Bone Collector, alongside Denzel Washington and Angelina Jolie.

Mainstream success (2002–present)

Although Latifah had previously received some critical acclaim, she gained mainstream success after being cast as Matron "Mama" Morton in Chicago, a musical film that subsequently won the Academy Award for Best Picture. Latifah herself received the nomination for Best Supporting Actress for her role, but lost to co-star Catherine Zeta-Jones. Latifah is one of three hip-hop artists to receive an Academy Award nomination in an acting category. The others are Will Smith (Best Actor, Ali, 2001, and Best Actor, The Pursuit of Happyness, 2006), and Jamie Foxx, (Best Actor, Ray, and Best Supporting Actor Collateral, both in 2004, also winning the first).
In 2003, she starred with Steve Martin in the film Bringing Down the House, which was a major success at the box office. She also recorded a song "Do Your Thing" for the soundtrack. Since then, she has had both leading and supporting roles in a multitude of films that received varied critical and box office receptions, including films such as Scary Movie 3, Barbershop 2: Back in Business, Taxi, Kung Faux, Beauty Shop, and Hairspray. In early 2006, Latifah appeared in a romantic comedy/drama entitled Last Holiday. Film critic Richard Roeper stated that "this is the Queen Latifah performance I've been waiting for ever since she broke into movies". Also in 2006, Latifah voiced Ellie, a friendly mammoth, in the animated film, Ice Age: The Meltdown (her first voice appearance in an animated film), and appeared in the drama Stranger Than Fiction.
The summer of 2007 brought Latifah triple success in the big-screen version of the Broadway smash hit Hairspray, in which she acted, sang, and danced. The film rated highly with critics. It starred, among others, John Travolta, Michelle Pfeiffer, Allison Janney, James Marsden, Christopher Walken, and Zac Efron. Also in 2007, she portrayed an HIV-positive woman in the film Life Support, a role for which she garnered her first Golden Globe Award, Screen Actors Guild Award and an Emmy nomination. For her work, Queen Latifah received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame, on January 4, 2006, located at 6915 Hollywood Blvd.
Latifah produced the 2007 film The Perfect Holiday. In addition to producing the film, Latifah starred alongside Terrence Howard, Morris Chestnut, Gabrielle Union, Charles Q. Murphy, Jill Marie Jones, and Faizon Love.

Products and endorsements

Latifah is a celebrity spokesperson for CoverGirl cosmetics, Curvation ladies underwear, Pizza Hut and Jenny Craig."Queen Latifah is the Newest Face of Jenny Craig", ETonline.Covergirl. Covergirl. Latifah has also launched a perfume line called "Queen" and "Queen of Hearts."

Personal life

Raised in East Orange, New Jersey, Latifah has been a resident of Colts Neck, New Jersey; Wayne, New Jersey; and Beverly Hills, California."The Robertson Treatment Vol. 6.7; Queen Latifah holding court in Hollywood!", Baltimore Afro-American, March 28, 2003. She is 6 foot 1, about 200 pounds. Accessed December 11, 2007. "'I've always loved musicals,' admits the actress who was born Dana Owens and was raised in the East Orange, NJ area and who presently lives in Rumson, NJ."
Latifah's older brother, Lancelot Jr., was killed in 1992 in an accident involving a motorcycle that Latifah had recently bought him. Latifah still wears the key to the motorcycle around her neck, visible throughout her performance in her sitcom Living Single. She also dedicated Black Reign to him. In her 1999 autobiography, Ladies First: Revelations of a Strong Woman, Latifah discussed how her brother's death had led to a bout of depression and drug abuse, from which she later recovered.
In 1995, Latifah was the victim of a carjacking, which also resulted in the shooting of her boyfriend, Sean Moon."Two Teen-Agers Arrested in Carjacking Involving Rap Star", New York Times, July 18, 1995.
In 1996, she was arrested and charged with possession of marijuana and possession of a loaded handgun.
In early 2003, Latifah had breast reduction surgery which downsized her F size breasts to a DD cup size, as a way to reduce back and shoulder pain. She also works out with a trainer and kickboxes.
Latifah was asked by Maya Angelou, who was unable to attend, to recite a poem written by Angelou at the memorial service for Michael Jackson in July 2009.

Feud with Foxy Brown

Disagreements between Foxy Brown and Queen Latifah ensued in mid–1996, where media reports indicated that Brown was a prime target in Latifah's diss record "Name Callin'," which was featured in the movie soundtrack Set It Off.
By late spring of 1998, Latifah responded to Brown through another diss record titled, "Name Callin' Part II."
A significant part of media dubbed Latifah as "the winner" of the feud. Hip-hop magazine ego trip stated that Latifah won the feud with her diss record "Name Callin' Part II" and added that she showed that "the lady's still first," in reference to Latifah's 1990 single, "Ladies First." In 2000, both Brown and Latifah reconciled and squashed the beef; to show truce, Brown performed her song "Na Na Be Like" on The Queen Latifah Show.

Discography

Tours

Queen Latifah, Jill Scott and Erykah Badu joined together to create and own the rights to the Sugar Water Festival Tour, LLC. All three singers toured together, while inviting music duo Floetry in 2005 and singer Kelis in 2006 as opening acts. Comedian/actress Mo'Nique served as host for the 2006 Sugar Water Tour.

Filmography

Film

Television film

Television






