[[Terracotta Army]]

CATEGORIES: Archaeology of China, British Museum, Infantry, Military and war museums in China, Archaeological museums in China, Qin Dynasty, World Heritage Sites in China, Visitor attractions in Xi'an, Terracotta, 1974 archaeological discoveries, Mausoleums in China, Museums in Xi'an, AAAAA-rated tourist attractions

The Terracotta Army or the "Terracotta Warriors and Horses" is a collection of terracotta sculptures depicting the armies of Qin Shi Huang, the first Emperor of China. It is a form of funerary art buried with the emperor in 210–209 BC and whose purpose was to protect the emperor in his afterlife.
The figures, dating from approximately the late third century BC, were discovered in 1974 by local farmers in Lintong District, Xi'an, Shaanxi province. The figures vary in height according to their roles, with the tallest being the generals. The figures include warriors, chariots and horses. Current (2007) estimates are that in the three pits containing the Terracotta Army there were more than 8,000 soldiers, 130 chariots with 520 horses, and 150 cavalry horses, the majority of which are still buried in the pits nearby Qin Shi Huang's mausoleum. 167 Other terracotta non-military figures were also found in other pits and they include officials, acrobats, strongmen, and musicians.

Background

) a region riddled with underground springs and watercourses. For centuries, there had been occasional reports of pieces of terracotta figures and fragments of the Qin necropolis {–}roofing tiles, bricks, and chunks of masonry having been dug up in the area. The First Emperor of China. Sutton Publishing. ISBN 0-7509-3959-1. pp. 155, 157, 158, 160–161, 166.  This most recent discovery prompted Chinese archaeologists to investigate, and they unearthed the largest pottery figurine group ever found in China.
In addition to the warriors, an entire necropolis built for the emperor also has been found surrounding the first emperor's tomb mound. The earthen tomb mound is located at the foot of Mount Li and built in a pyramid shape  of reddish, sandy soil had accumulated over the site in the two millennia following its construction, but archaeologists found evidence of earlier disturbances at the site. During the excavations near the Mount Li burial mound, archaeologists found several graves dating from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, where diggers had apparently struck terracotta fragments. These were discarded as worthless and used along with soil to back fill the excavations. The First Emperor of China. p. 160.

History

According to the writings of the historian Sima Qian (145{–}90 BC), work on the mausoleum began in 246 BC soon after Emperor Qin (then aged 13) ascended the throne, while the building work later involved 700,000 workers. Geographer Li Daoyuan, writing six centuries after the death of the First Emperor, recorded in Shui Jing Zhu that Mount Li was a favoured location due to its auspicious geology: "... famed for its jade mines, its northern side was rich in gold, and its southern side rich in beautiful jade; the First Emperor, covetous of its fine reputation, therefore chose to be buried there". Translation:  When the First Emperor ascended the throne, the digging and preparation at Mount Li began. After he unified his empire, 700,000 men were sent there from all over his empire. They dug down deep to underground springs, pouring copper to place the outer casing of the coffin. Palaces and viewing towers housing a hundred officials were built and filled with treasures and rare artifacts. Workmen were instructed to make automatic crossbows primed to shoot at intruders. Mercury was used to simulate the hundred rivers, the Yangtze and Yellow River, and the great sea, and set to flow mechanically. Above, the heaven is depicted, below, the geographical features of the land. Candles were made of "mermaid"'s fat which is calculated to burn and not extinguish for a long time. The Second Emperor said: "It is inappropriate for the wives of the late emperor who have no sons to be free", ordered that they should accompany the dead, and a great many died. After the burial, it was suggested that it would be a serious breach if the craftsmen who constructed the tomb and knew of its treasure were to divulge those secrets.  Therefore after the funeral ceremonies had completed, the inner passages and doorways were blocked, and the exit sealed, immediately trapping the workers and craftsmen inside. None could escape. Trees and vegetation were then planted on the tomb mound such that it resembled a hill. 17
Recent scientific work at the site has found high levels of mercury in the soil of the tomb mound,The first emperor: China's Terracotta Army Scientific Studies of High Level of Mercury in Qin Shihuangdi's tomb, by Duan Qingbo giving some credence to Sima Qian's account of the emperor's tomb. The tomb appears to be a hermetically-sealed space that is as big as a football pitch and located underneath the pyramidal tomb mound.
Only a section of the site is currently excavated, while photographs and video recordings are prohibited in some viewing areas. Only a few foreign dignitaries, including Britain's monarch Elizabeth II, have been permitted to walk through the pits to observe the army at close quarters.  There also is speculation of a possible Hellenistic link to these sculptures, due to the lack of life-sized and realistic sculptures prior to the Qin Dynasty according to some scholars.Early links with West likely inspiration for Terracotta Warriors, argues SOAS scholar, School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS), University of LondonLukas Nickel, The First Emperor and sculpture in China, SOAS, University of London, Cambridge University Press, 2013

Construction of the Terracotta Army

The terracotta army figures were manufactured in workshops by government laborers and local craftsmen using materials originated on Mount Li. Heads, arms, legs, and torsos were all created separately and then assembled. Studies show that a total of eight face moulds were most likely used, with clay then added to provide individual facial features after assembly. 170 It is believed that the warriors' legs were made in much the same way that terracotta drainage pipes were manufactured at the time. This would classify the process as assembly line production, with specific parts manufactured and assembled after being fired, as opposed to crafting one solid piece and subsequently firing it. In those times of tight imperial control, each workshop was required to inscribe its name on items produced to ensure quality control. This has aided modern historians in verifying which workshops were commandeered to make tiles and other mundane items for the terracotta army. Upon completion, the terracotta figures were placed in the pits in precise military formation according to rank and duty.
The terracotta figures are life-sized. They vary in height, uniform, and hairstyle in accordance with rank.  Most originally held real weapons such as spears, swords, or crossbows. Originally, the figures were  also painted with bright pigments, variously coloured pink, red, green, blue, black, brown, white, and lilac. The coloured lacquer finish, individual facial features, and weapons used in producing these figures created a realistic appearance.  Most of the original weapons were thought to have been looted shortly after the creation of the army, or have rotted away, while the colour coating has flaked off or greatly faded.

Excavation site

Pits

There are four main pits approximately  above the surrounding ground level when completed. 260–167 Pit two has cavalry and infantry units as well as war chariots and is thought to represent a military guard. Pit three is the command post, with high-ranking officers and a war chariot. Pit four is empty, perhaps left unfinished by its builders.
Some of the figures in pit one and two show fire damage while remains of burnt ceiling rafters have also been found. These, together with the missing weapons, have been taken as evidence of the reported looting by Xiang Yu and the subsequent burning of the site, which is thought to have caused the roof to collapse and crush the army figures below. The terracotta figures currently on display have been restored from the fragments.
A large number of other pits that formed the necropolis also have been excavated.

Weaponry

Weapons such as swords, spears, battle-axes, scimitars, shields, crossbows, and arrowheads were found at the pits of the terracotta warriors.
An important element of the army is the chariot, and four types of chariots were found. In battle the fighting chariots form pairs at the head of a unit of infantry. The principal weapon of the charioteers was the ge or dagger-axe, an L-shaped bronze blade mounted on a long shaft used for sweeping and hooking at the enemy. Infantrymen also carried ge on shorter shafts, ji or halberds, and spears and lances. For close fighting and defence, both charioteers and infantrymen carried double-edged straight swords. The archers carried crossbows, with sophisticated trigger mechanisms, capable of firing arrows farther than 800 meters.

Exhibitions

A collection of 120 objects from the mausoleum and 20 terracotta warriors were displayed at the British Museum in London as its special exhibition "The First Emperor: China's Terracotta Army" from 13 September 2007 to April 2008. The British Museum This Terracotta Army exhibition made 2008 the British Museum's most successful year, and made the British Museum the United Kingdom's top cultural attraction between 2007 and 2008. During the day of events to mark the Chinese New Year, the crush was so intense that the gates to the museum had to be shut. The Terracotta Army has been described as the only other set of historic artifacts (along with the remnants of wreck of the RMS Titanic) that can draw a crowd by the name alone.
A number of terracotta warriors and other artifacts were exhibited to the public at the Forum de Barcelona in Barcelona between 9 May and 26 September 2004, and it was their most successful exhibition ever.
The exhibition has travelled to North America and visited museums such as the Asian Art Museum of San Francisco, Bowers Museum in Santa Ana, California,  Houston Museum of Natural Science, High Museum of Art in Atlanta, Subsequently the exhibition travelled to Sweden and was hosted in the Museum of Far Eastern Antiquities between 28 August 2010 and 20 January 2011.[ref]
 An exhibition entitled 'The First Emperor – China's Entombed Warriors', presenting 120 artefacts from the First Emperor's burial site, was hosted at the Art Gallery of New South Wales, between 2 December 2010 and 13 March 2011.[ref]
