[[Hawar Islands]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of Bahrain, Islands of Bahrain, Disputed territories in the Persian Gulf, Lists of coordinates, Former municipalities (regions) of Bahrain, Territorial disputes of Bahrain, Territorial disputes of Qatar, Bahrain–Qatar border, Ramsar sites in Bahrain

The Hawar Islands (; transliterated: Juzur Ḩawār) is an archipelago of desert islands owned by Bahrain.  They are situated off the west coast of Qatar in the Gulf of Bahrain of the Persian Gulf.

Description

Despite their proximity to Qatar (they are only about 
The islands were listed as a Ramsar site in 1997.
Although there are 36 islands in the group, many of the smaller islands are little more than sand or shingle accumulations on areas of exposed bedrock moulded by the ongoing processes of sedimentation and accretion. The WHS application named 8 major islands (see table below), which conforms to the description of the islands when first surveyed as consisting of 8 or 9 islands.
The islands used to be one of the settlements of the Bahraini branch of the Dawasir who settled there in the early 19th century. Fresh water has always been scarce; historically it was obtained by surface collection and even today, with the desalinisation plant, additional supplies have to be brought in.

List of islands

Hawar archipelago

By far the largest island is Hawar, which accounts for more than 41 km² of the 52 km² land area. Following in size are Suwād al Janūbīyah, Suwād ash Shamālīyah, Rubud Al Sharqiyah, Rubud Al Gharbiyah and Muhazwarah (Umm Hazwarah).
The following were not considered as part of the Hawar islands in the ICJ judgment, being located between Hawar and the Bahrain Islands and not disputed by Qatar, but have been included in the Hawar archipelago by the Bahrain government as part of the 2002 World Heritage Site application.

Janan island

Janan island, a small island south of Hawar island, was also considered in the 2001 ICJ judgment.  Based on a previous agreement when both Qatar and Bahrain were under British protection, it was judged to be separate from the Hawar islands and so considered by the court separately. It was awarded to Qatar.





Maps

Media


