[[Kings Island]]

CATEGORIES: Kings Island, 1972 establishments in Ohio, Amusement parks in Ohio, Cedar Fair amusement parks, Visitor attractions in Cincinnati, Ohio, Buildings and structures in Warren County, Ohio, Visitor attractions in Warren County, Ohio

Kings Island is a  
Throughout its history, Kings Island has appeared in popular sitcoms and has been highly publicized for its record-breaking attractions and events. One of the park's most well-known attractions, The Racer, is often credited with reviving worldwide interest in the roller coaster industry during the 1970s. Other attractions such as The Beast and Banshee set new world records including some that are still held. The park has also suffered through times of negative publicity particularly regarding the early demise of roller coasters The Bat and Son of Beast.
Kings Island is divided into several themed sections. The seasonal amusement park is open from April through Labor Day and reopens for a short time on weekends beginning in September for Halloween-themed events. As of 2012, Kings Island is the second-most visited seasonal amusement park in the United States behind Cedar Point with an estimated 3.21 million visitors. It is third overall for seasonal attendance in North America which is led by Canada's Wonderland.

History

Kings Island was conceived as early as 1964 when Coney Island, a popular park on the banks of the Ohio River, 
Gary Wachs, who with friends and family owned a majority of stock in Coney Island, decided it was time to relocate the park to stay competitive. After years of research and traveling abroad, he presented ideas for a new theme park to the company's board of directors. Board members such as Charles Sawyer, a significant stockholder, opposed the idea. It wasn't taken seriously until 1968, when actor Fess Parker announced plans to build a theme park in Northern Kentucky. Coney Island's primary market extended as far south as Louisville. The announcement highlighted the need for change and gave Wachs' proposal credibility within the organization.
In July 1969, Coney Island was sold to the Taft Broadcasting Company, a business interested in promoting its recently acquired Hanna-Barbera division, for $6.5 million USD. Taft Broadcasting then purchased 

Taft Broadcasting and KECO (1970–1992)

Construction began on June 15, 1970. Later that year, a public contest was held to name the new park. "Kings Island" emerged the most popular for its recognition of the Kings Mills area as well as its predecessor Coney Island. Most of the former park's rides were relocated, while the rest were demolished. Coney Island's popular Sunlite Pool attraction remained open, however, and the original park was partially restored in later years.
Less than two years after breaking ground, Kings Island opened its gates to the public on April 29, 1972.  It was the first of several preview events. The grand opening came the following month on May 27, 1972.
At the heart of the amusement park, visitors are greeted by International Street which lies just beyond the main entrance. The area's main attractions include the Royal Fountain, a  and the signature Eiffel Tower, a 1/3 scale replica of the original which offers a view of the entire park to its guests. Also located here is Grand Carousel, Kings Island Theater and a variety of restaurants and souvenir shops.
Arguably, the most crowd-pleasing attraction featured at the park in its early days was The Racer, a wooden roller coaster consisting of two trains that race each other side-by-side on identical tracks. Designed by legendary designer John C. Allen, The Racer was an integral part of the roller coaster renaissance of the 1970s. Years later, it would be awarded the Roller Coaster Landmark plaque from American Coaster Enthusiasts (ACE) for its achievement.:Image:Racer (Kings Island) ACE Coaster.
Kings Island was nationally promoted in two well-known sitcoms on ABC. Each filmed an episode on location at the park: The Partridge Family in 1972 and The Brady Bunch the following year in 1973. The Brady Bunch was produced by Paramount Studios, a large Taft shareholder.

Paramount's Kings Island (1992–2006)

In 1992, Paramount Communications Inc. (formerly Gulf+Western) purchased Kings Island and the rest of KECO's parks for $400 million. Paramount formed a new division known as Paramount Parks. They bought out the remaining 80% stake in Canada's Wonderland in 1993, raising the number of parks to five. That same year, Paramount Parks began incorporating themes from its movies into the park. Viacom entered the picture after acquiring Paramount in 1994, paving the way for the appearance of Nickelodeon themes. First was Nickelodeon Splat City, followed by Nickelodeon Central and eventually Nickelodeon Universe.
In 1997, a year after leaving Deerfield Township, the city of Mason annexed most of Kings Island.

Cedar Fair era (2006–present)

On June 30, 2006, Cedar Fair Entertainment Company purchased Kings Island and the rest of Paramount Parks for approximately $1.24 billion.
In late 2009, the Mason City Council decided to put a measure on its 2010 ballot that would mandate a 3-percent ticket tax and a 5-percent parking tax at both Kings Island and The Beach waterpark. Council member Tony Bradburn argued that it was necessary for the city to help pay for infrastructure improvements, as well as cover police and fire expenses.

Park attractions

Action Zone

Action Zone opened in 1974 as Lion Country Safari, a 
Early in its tenure after purchasing Kings Island, Paramount unveiled Top Gun, a suspended roller coaster built by Arrow Dynamics that opened in 1993 next to the habitat attraction. Titled after a film of the same name, it was the first ride to be added to the park with a Paramount theme. For the following season in 1994, Paramount renamed the area Adventure Village and removed both the monorail ride and animal habitat. In 1999, a two-year expansion initiative began with the area's renaming to Action Zone and the addition of two new attractions – Drop Zone: Stunt Tower and Face/Off. When it debuted, Action Zone resembled a movie stunt set featuring a water tower as the centerpiece. The water tower was originally part of a skit with stunts and special effects that imitated a live movie set with a director and stunt performers. The performance depicted a stunt crew on a tower coming under heavy gunfire and escaping on a zip line, with the final performer falling as the tower was exploding.
In the second year of the area's two-year expansion, Kings Island unveiled Son of Beast, the tallest and fastest of its kind and the first modern-day wooden roller coaster to feature a vertical loop. Due to a number of structural issues and two accidents, the ride closed for good in 2009 and was eventually demolished in 2012.

Coney Mall

When Kings Island first opened in 1972, a section of the park was dedicated to its predecessor, Coney Island. The area was constructed to resemble the former park's carnival-style layout and featured many of its flat rides that were relocated. Originally called Coney Island, the area was later renamed Old Coney in 1980 and again to Coney Mall in 1986.

=X-Base=

This sub-area opened in 2007. Flight of Fear had existed previously, but with the addition of Firehawk, the area took on its own theme, centered around flight and propulsion. Although the area is designated by a sign, it is not listed on the park map and is officially part of Coney Mall.

International Street

International Street is the first themed area to greet guests entering the park. It was one of the park's original staples in 1972. Through its architecture, the area represents the cultures of Italy, Spain, France, Germany and Sweden. It has restaurants, souvenir shops, the Royal Fountain with light and water shows and a one-third-scale replica of the Eiffel Tower. The area  features three family rides.

Oktoberfest

Oktoberfest, relating to the eponymous German festival, opened with the park in 1972. The area resembles a German town with timber-framed German-style architecture. The Festhaus is the central attraction, featuring live shows with several indoor eateries. A full-service bar is located atop a portion of Oktoberfest lake. Rides include one roller coaster, one thrill ride and one family ride.

Planet Snoopy

The area initially opened with the park in 1972 as The Happy Land of Hanna-Barbera and was later shortened to Hanna-Barbera Land. The upper part that borders Rivertown saw the addition of a kids' play area, stage and water attraction in 1995 and was renamed Nickelodeon Splat City. In 2001, Kings Mills Log Flume became The Wild Thornberrys River Adventure and Rugrats Runaway Reptar roller coaster was introduced. The expansion of this area into the lower part of Rivertown became known as Nickelodeon Central. At the start of the 2006 season, when Cedar Fair purchased the rights to the park from Paramount, Hanna-Barbera Land was gradually converted and renamed "Nickelodeon Universe". Nickelodeon-themed elements remained in the park until 2010, when Nickelodeon Universe was rethemed and renamed Planet Snoopy based on the comic strip.
Planet Snoopy contains many rides intended for smaller children, including four roller coasters, a skater coaster and a log flume ride. Amusement Today has awarded Kings Island with the Golden Ticket Award for Best Kids' Area in the World for the past thirteen years, 2001–2013. Kings Island's Planet Snoopy was also the largest in the Cedar Fair chain, until 2013 when Kings Dominion opened their expanded Planet Snoopy.

Rivertown

The area known as Rivertown has been in the park since its opening in 1972. The area adopts a western theme as a town with ranch-style buildings, old wooden signs and an old water tower. Swan lake was the centerpiece until Diamondback arrived in 2009. The area was originally going to be titled Frontier Land. It features two roller coasters and two family rides.

Soak City

Included with park admission, Soak City is a 

Halloween Haunt (Seasonal)

Halloween Haunt, formerly known as Fear Fest from 2000–2007, is a Halloween-themed event at Kings Island that runs on weekends from late September until the last weekend of October. It features haunted houses, mazes, live shows, and most of the park's regular season attractions. It has been a yearly event at Kings Island since its debut in 2000. The following section contains the lineup of attractions for 2013.

=Current attractions=

=Live shows=

Entertainment

Fast Lane

Fast Lane, introduced at Kings Island in July 2011, is a secondary queue system that offers shorter wait times on the park's most popular rides.

Significant facts

Notable additions

Notable events

Notable people

The following is a list of former employees at Kings Island that later became well known in another industry:

Other

=Dogstreet Cemetery=

Dogstreet cemetery is located at the north end of the Kings Island parking lot and is maintained by Deerfield Township. The historic cemetery dates back to 1803. The Warren County Genealogical Society documented nearly 70 grave sites in the cemetery, though 
On January 11, 2012, the amusement park and cemetery were featured on season 8, episode 1 of Ghost Hunters entitled Roller Ghoster. The show investigated claims of haunted occurrences inside the park and around the cemetery, particularly of a ghost reportedly known as "Missouri Jane." 

=Kings Island resort=

As part of the Kings Island resort, in 1972 Taft Broadcasting Company built a world class golf course, hotel and campground.

=Kings Island greenhouse=

The park has its own greenhouse just off of Columbia Road. It can be seen from the top of The Bat's lift hill. It produces the flowers and topiary for the park. Some of their notable work is the "Living Liberty Bell" topiary and working "Flower Clock" near the Eiffel Tower.

Awards






