[[Alberto Dávila]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, Living people, Boxers from California, American boxers of Mexican descent, Sportspeople from Pomona, California, World boxing champions, World bantamweight boxing champions, World Boxing Council champions

Albert "Alberto" Dávila (born August 10, 1954) is a Mexican-American boxer who boxed during the 1970s and 1980s in the bantamweight division. During parts of 1983 and 1984, he held the World Boxing Council (WBC) championship. Dávila lost world bantamweight championships matches three times, and temporarily left the sport. After his return, he was given a fourth title fight, versus Kiko Bejines, in 1983. Trailing after 11 rounds, Dávila scored a knockout of Bejines to win the title, but Bejines died shortly afterward due to injuries suffered during the fight. Following one successful title defense, Dávila suffered back injuries, leading the WBC to strip him of his title. He later fought in two more world championship fights, losing both. Dávila is a member of the World Boxing Hall of Fame.

Boxing career

Early life and career

Originally from Texas, and later Pomona, California, Dávila was inactive for all of 1981, returning in early 1982 and going seven fights without a loss through April 1983.

Kiko Bejines fight

In March 1983, Pintor suffered a motorcycle accident and was forced into a lengthy absence,

WBC title reign

Dávila returned to the ring two months after the Bejines bout for a fight against Julio Rodrigues in which the WBC title was not at stake. Dávila scored a knockdown near the end of round ten, and continued his attack on Sanchez at the start of the next round, earning a technical knockout to retain his title. After the fight, he compared to rain to "holy water", saying "It revived me. It was a miracle."  
The WBC stated that Dávila would automatically give up his championship if he did not fight Pintor by August 15, 1984. Later, he worsened his injury while doing yardwork, leading to a yearlong absence from fighting. As a result, his belt was stripped by the WBC.

Later career

In 1987, he attempted to become a world champion again by traveling to Colombia and challenging Lora, but he lost a 12 round decision. He won a few fights after his loss to Lora, including a decision victory over Edel Geronimo in March 1987.
His next fight came three months later against Frankie Duarte, whom he had knocked out in a 1977 bout.
The NABF bantamweight championship was later vacated by the federation due to Duarte's "inactivity".

Fighting style

Dávila was not considered a powerful puncher during his career, with fewer than half his career wins coming by knockout. Instead, he was thought of as a strong technical boxer. Los Angeles Times columnist Jim Murray called Dávila "a picture boxer", saying that he fought "with his brains instead of his face." Murray credited Dávila's style to his childhood gym experience, when he discovered that he could avoid being punched if his opponent made the first move. Scott Ostler, another Los Angeles Times columnist, wrote of Dávila, "There's nothing marketable about him, except for one thing. He can fight." However, Dávila did attempt to gain support from Latino fans by fighting as Alberto Dávila, rather than using his given name, Albert.

Later life and personal life

Following his career as a boxer, Dávila began to work as a trainer. However, he quit in 1995 after one of the fighters he trained, David Kamau, lost to Julio César Chávez in a decision he disagreed with; he believed that Kamau would not have been able to win a decision, regardless of the circumstances. He later said, "I thought to myself, I can't do this to a fighter. I can't betray him, so I got out. Dávila then worked in Irvine, California, as a laborer. In 1997, the World Boxing Hall of Fame inducted him. As of 2007, he resided in Upland. Dávila got married around 1985; he had met his wife, Roberta, in high school. The couple has six children: three sons and daughters each. One of their daughters, Alyssa, played soccer at the University of Southern California, and was a member of the Trojans' 2007 National Collegiate Athletic Association Women's Soccer Championship-winning team.






