[[JoJo's Bizarre Adventure]]

CATEGORIES: JoJo's Bizarre Adventure, 2007 anime films, 2012 anime television series, Action anime and manga, Adventure anime and manga, Anime series based on manga, Horror anime and manga, Light novels, Manga adapted into films, Seinen manga, Supernatural anime and manga, Vampires in manga, Vampires in anime, Viz Media manga

 is a Japanese manga series written and illustrated by Hirohiko Araki. It was originally serialized in Weekly Shōnen Jump from 1986 to 2004, before being transferred to the monthly seinen magazine Ultra Jump in 2005. The current story arc, JoJolion, started in 2011. JoJo's Bizarre Adventure is currently Shueisha's second largest manga series with 110 tankōbon volumes and counting (only Kochira Katsushika-ku Kameari Kōen-mae Hashutsujo, with over 180, has more).
A six-volume original video animation adaptation of the later half of the series' third story arc, Stardust Crusaders, was released from 1993 to 1994 by studio A.P.P.P. Six years later, they produced a seven-volume series adapting the arc's first half from 2000 to 2002. A.P.P.P. also produced a theatrical film of the first arc, Phantom Blood, in 2007. From 2003 to 2005, Super Techno Arts released an English dub of both OVA series as one on DVD in North America. Only the third story arc of the manga, which is the most popular and well-known, received an English release in North America by Viz Media from 2005 to 2010. A 26-episode television anime, produced by David Production and covering the first two arcs, aired on Tokyo MX and other stations starting in October 2012 and ending in April 2013. A second season covering the third arc began broadcast in April 2014.
The JoJo's Bizarre Adventure manga has sold over 80 million copies in Japan alone, making it one of the best-selling manga series in history, and has spawned a large media franchise that includes several novelizations and video games, action figures, a jewelry line, and even snack foods.

Plot

The story of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure centers around the misadventures of the Joestars, a powerful family with English roots. The series spans several generations, with each part featuring a descendant of the Joestars as the main protagonist along with a large cast of characters. Parts 1 to 6 occur in the same timeline while parts 7 and 8 take place in a separate, alternate universe.
The series' title is a reference to the fact that each part's main character's name can be read as JoJo, a nickname derived by putting together the letters "J" and "O" from their first and last names. Later installments have additional variations on the JoJo wordplay. For example, in the name .

Supernatural powers

The first supernatural item introduced in Part 1 Phantom Blood is the , which Vampires can create by imparting some of their vampiric essence into the once living or even the long deceased.
Part 2 Battle Tendency introduces the , a naturally occurring gem that amplifies light into nearly laser precision, as its power is able to perfect the transformation into a truly immortal being with control over all life's forces. However, only a flawless stone can produce these results, and it is this reason that the Hamon users protect the flawless Super Aja so it can never fall into the hands of the Pillar Men.
Part 3 Stardust Crusaders begins by introducing the supernatural power of ; it could conjecturally be said to be a semi-physical manifestation of one's Hamon powers. The exact requirements for a person to obtain a Stand are unclear, although the series hints that it can be linked to bloodline, rigorous spiritual and/or Hamon training, and/or exceptionally strong willpower and/or desire. A Stand may never manifest itself in one's life until it is amplified by certain conditions or factors. However, not everyone able to manifest a Stand has the ability to control it; despite her father Joseph Joestar and her son Jotaro Kujo being powerful Stand users, Holy Kujo, due to her lack of physical strength, resolve, and her peaceful nature, is brought to the brink of death by her Stand, which saps away her life in an attempt to manifest itself. Generally, destroying a Stand will result in the death of its user. Likewise, if the Stand user is incapacitated, the Stand will no longer be a threat. There are instances of automatic Stands that act on the user's subconscious level until recognized, and there are rare cases of Stands that exist after the user's death, becoming nigh unstoppable and unpredictable without anyone controlling it. Some Stands appear to have a separate and autonomous personality from their users, able to act on their own to protect them, or speak to them.
A Stand can also be brought forth after one is pierced by the  Stand, achieving limitless powers.
In Part 5 there are examples of a single person possessing two Stands because of the ability of an extraordinary Stand. Enrico Pucci of Part 6 Stone Ocean is able to produce artificial Stand users with his own, by stealing others' Stands and transforming them into . It first absorbs the souls of 36 sinners and transforms into the strange Green Baby, and grants Pucci a new and more powerful Stand that ultimately leads to his Way to Heaven and an even more powerful time and reality warping Stand. His powers and his ultimate defeat creates a new universe that rewrites all of the rules of reality.
Part 7 Steel Ball Run introduces the , producing a Rotation that is able to transcend dimensional walls and even produce a Stand manifestation. Such an effect can only be attained after achieving a certain speed on horseback and using the horse to extend control over the golden rectangle.
Also introduced in Part 7 is the , a geographic place that seems to move on its own accord and tests those who come across it. If the person survives, he or she is granted a Stand.
Part 8 JoJolion introduces another method of obtaining a Stand, interaction with the , strange fault-like structures that have risen from the ground following the 2011 Tōhoku earthquake and tsunami. They disrupt all forms of transportation, communication, and utilities, but all users of Stands have come in contact with the Wall Eyes at some point. Three (Josuke Higashikata, Yasuho Hirose, and Joshu Higashikata) have all received painful bite marks from their proximity to the Wall Eyes, and the three of them have developed Stands as of the 21st chapter. Other users of Stands have either fallen into the faults (as with Daiya Higashikata) or grown up in an area where the Wall Eye has erupted later in their life (Ojiro Sasame).

Development

For JoJo's Bizarre Adventure, Araki wanted to use a classical method as a base and then introduce modern elements in the singular. As an example, he often draws in a realistic style but then colors completely impossible colors. Araki has been aiming to draw real spirits in JoJo resulting in him going to the Kappa River in Tōno, Iwate, to get a better understanding of the concept.

Media

Manga

Written and illustrated by Hirohiko Araki, JoJo's Bizarre Adventure began serialization in Weekly Shōnen Jump in its combined issue #1-2 of 1987, which was released on December 2, 1986. The chapters are collected and published into tankōbon volumes by Shueisha, with the first released on August 10, 1987.
In the early 1990s Viz Media had planned to release an English-language version of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure in North America as "The Strange Adventures of Jojo", evident by an ad in their newsletter at the time, Viz-In. It is suspected the plans were canned after Baoh, another series by Hirohiko Araki, sold poorly. The series was brought up again for talks in 2002, for release as individual monthly chapters. However by this time, that publication format for manga was on its way-out in North America.
JoJo's Bizarre Adventure finally received a North American release in 2005, in the graphic novel format, similar to its Japanese tankōbon. However, it is only of the series' third part, Stardust Crusaders, which is the most popular and well-known. Originally published bimonthly, the volumes were later reduced to a quarterly release. The first volume was released on November 8, 2005 and the last on December 7, 2010. Taiwan by Da Ran Culture Enterprise and Tong Li Publishing, and in Malaysia by Comics House.

=Spin-offs=

Araki has also drawn several spin-offs of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure. The first being 

Anime

=Original video animations and film=

Two OVA adaptations of Part 3 Stardust Crusaders were produced by A.P.P.P. The original six-volume series begins during the middle of the arc and was released from November 19, 1993 to November 18, 1994. A seven-volume prequel series, titled , was released from May 25, 2000 to October 25, 2002 and adapted the beginning of the arc. Super Techno Arts produced an English adaptation of both, the original series and the prequel series, releasing all thirteen episodes in North America as a six-volume DVD series between 2003 and 2005, with the episodes in order of its fictional chronology.
, a feature film adaptation of the original first story arc, was released theatrically on February 17, 2007 in Japan. The film was produced to commemorate 25th anniversary of creator Hirohiko Araki's career as a manga artist. The theme song was "Voodoo Kingdom", a single by the group Soul'd Out. This film has yet to be released on any form of home video.

=Television anime series=

At a July 5, 2012, press conference celebrating the 25th anniversary of the series and promoting an upcoming Hirohiko Araki art exhibition, Araki and his people announced that an anime adaptation was in production and will premiere in October 2012.
A teaser scene for Part 3 Stardust Crusaders was shown following the credits of the final episode, and in the home video releases the final scene has a "To Be Continued" arrow appearing in it. On October 18, 2013, Warner Bros. Japan announced through an obi strip on JoJolion volume 5 and a special feature in Weekly Shōnen Jump that a season covering Stardust Crusaders would premiere in 2014.

Novels

Several light novels based on the JoJo series have been written, each by a different author, but all including illustrations by Hirohiko Araki. The first, based on Part 3, was simply titled JoJo's Bizarre Adventure, released on November 4, 1993 and written by Mayori Sekijima and Hiroshi Yamaguchi.
In 2000, it was announced that Otsuichi would be writing a novel based on Part 4. The novel proved difficult to complete; in Kono Mystery ga Sugoi! 2004, Otsuichi claimed to have written over 2000 pages, but thrown them all out.
In April 2011, it was announced that Nisio Isin, Kouhei Kadono, and Ōtarō Maijō were each writing novel adaptations of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure in celebration of the series' 25th anniversary. It tells the story of George Joestar II, son of Jonathan and father of Joseph, in his childhood growing up on La Palma where he is known as "Jorge Joestar" as well as an alternate version living in Japan named "Joji Joestar" investigating mysteries behind the appearance of a moving island. It features characters from and inspired by nearly every part of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure

Drama CDs

From 1992 to 1993, a drama CD adaptation of Part 3 was released in three volumes, titled  They starred Kiyoyuki Yanada as Jotaro, Kenji Utsumi (volumes 1-2) and Gorō Naya (volume 3) as Joseph Joestar, Akio Ōtsuka as Avdol, Shō Hayami as Kakyoin, Ken Yamaguchi as Polnareff, Keiichi Nanba as Hol Horse, Shigeru Chiba as J. Geil, and Norio Wakamoto as Dio.

Art books

Araki has released multiple books containing original artwork he has produced for JoJo's Bizarre Adventure. JoJo6251 was released in 1993 and features artwork, story details, and behind the scenes information for Phantom Blood, Battle Tendency, Stardust Crusaders, and Diamond Is Unbreakable. This was followed in 2000 by JOJO A-GO!GO! which features original artwork from Vento Aureo and Stone Ocean. In 2013, he released JoJoveller, a multimedia set that includes a book featuring original artwork for Stone Ocean, Steel Ball Run, and JoJolion; a book detailing the history of the publications; and a book detailing every Stand featured since Stardust Crusaders. The limited edition has two Blu-rays showing the 25th anniversary art exhibition in Tokyo and a behind-the-scenes look at Araki's creative process.

Video games

Several video games based on JoJo's Bizarre Adventure have been created. The first was a titular role-playing video game, based on the third story arc, which was released in 1993 for the Super Famicom. A fighting game for the arcade was also adapted from the third arc by Capcom in 1998, and also titled simply JoJo's Bizarre Adventure (released as JoJo's Venture in the west), with an updated version retitled JoJo's Bizarre Adventure: Heritage for the Future released later that year. The arcade game was ported to both the PlayStation and Dreamcast in 1999, and a high-definition version was released for PlayStation Network and Xbox Live Arcade in August 2012. These fighting games were the first pieces of JoJo related media released in North America, exposing the characters to many western players. A third Capcom game was based on Part 5, titled Le Bizzarre Avventure di GioGio: Vento Aureo and released for the PlayStation 2 in 2002. This game was scheduled for release in Europe as Le Bizzarre Avventure di GioGio, but this did not come through because of the heavy references to band names, and Araki is unwilling to compromise in the change of names to avoid lawsuits. Capcom originally intended to release the game in the United States, even showing a playable version at the 2002 Electronic Entertainment Expo, but no further plans or official release date has been announced since then.
A tie-in with the theatrical release, a game by Bandai, titled JoJo's Bizarre Adventure: Phantom Blood, was released on October 26, 2006, for the PlayStation 2. The story is based on the first arc and features action/adventure gameplay, similar to Le Bizzarre Avventure di GioGio: Vento Aureo. Araki has personally checked the quality of the game and its faithfulness to the original. The release of the game coincided with the release of the theatrical film and the 25th anniversary of Hirohiko Araki's manga career. The game itself includes a bonus disc celebrating 20 years of the JoJo franchise.
At a July 5, 2012 press conference celebrating the 25th anniversary of JoJo, Araki himself announced JoJo's Bizarre Adventure: All Star Battle, produced by CyberConnect2 and published by Bandai Namco Games. The fighting game was released for the PlayStation 3 in 2013 and is currently set for international releases in 2014.
Before the first JoJo's Bizarre Adventure game was released, Bandai released a Weekly Shōnen Jump crossover adventure game titled Famicom Jump: Hero Retsuden in 1989. Joseph Joestar from the second arc is one of the playable characters, while Santana and Speedwagon made cameo appearances. Its sequel Famicom Jump II: The Strongest Seven, released in 1991, features Jotaro as a selectable character. Joseph, Avdol, Kakyoin and Polnareff also appear in this game. Both games were available on the Famicom. Characters from JoJo's Bizarre Adventure were also featured in the 2005 Nintendo DS Weekly Shōnen Jump crossover game Jump Super Stars and its sequel Jump Ultimate Stars, including Jotaro Kujo and Dio Brando as playable characters. The magazine's 2014 crossover game, J-Stars Victory Vs, features both Jonathan and Joseph Joestar as playable characters.

Reception

JoJo's Bizarre Adventure has sold over 80 million copies in Japan alone,
The first volume of JoJolion was the second best-selling manga for its debut week, its second volume was number three and its third was number two.
The JoJo's Bizarre Adventure TV anime was named one of the best of 2012 by Otaku USA.

Controversy

In May 2008, both Shueisha and studio A.P.P.P. halted manga/OVA shipments of JoJo's Bizarre Adventure after a complaint had been launched against them from Egyptian Islamic fundamentalists, after noticing a scene in the OVAs that has the villain, Dio Brando, reading a book depicting pages from the Qur'an.

Legacy and collaborations

The September 2007 issue of Cell had a cover drawn by Hirohiko Araki with a ligase represented as a JoJo's Bizarre Adventure Stand.

The Louvre

In 2009, Araki's artwork for JoJo's Bizarre Adventure was one of five artists featured in the Louvre's Le Louvre invite la bande dessinée ("The Louvre Invites Comic-Strip Art") exhibition. To commemorate this honor, he wrote 

Gucci

From September 17 to October 6, 2011, the Gucci store in Shinjuku hosted the Gucci x Hirohiko Araki x Spur "Rohan Kishibe Goes to Gucci" Exhibition, a collaboration between the luxury Italian clothing brand, JoJo's creator and the fashion magazine Spur. The exhibit celebrated the 90th anniversary of Gucci and featured a life-size figure of Rohan Kishibe, as well as numerous illustrations by Araki; including actual pieces of the brand's own 2011-2012 fall/winter collection and his own original fashion designs.

25th anniversary and the JoJo Gallery

There were several art exhibitions in 2012 in Japan for the manga's 25th anniversary. The first was in Araki's birthplace of Sendai, which included a Lawson store remodeled to look like the "Owson" store that appears in Diamond Is Unbreakable and JoJolion. The exhibit was taken to Italy from June 28 to July 14, 2013 and shown at the Gucci showroom in Florence.
The October 2012 issue of Ultra Jump contained a special booklet titled 25 Years With JoJo, also in celebration of the anniversary, featuring messages and tribute art from well-known manga artists such as Akira Toriyama, Yoshihiro Togashi, Eiichiro Oda, Clamp, and 18 others.
To celebrate the release of the All Star Battle video game, created for the 25th anniversary, a special JoJo-themed train traveled the Yamanote Line in Tokyo from August 29 to September 9, 2013. Illustrations and advertisements of the series littered the interior, with videos of the game shown on displays, while the exterior had 33 characters as livery.






