[[Gordon–Conwell Theological Seminary]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in Massachusetts, New England Association of Schools and Colleges, Seminaries and theological colleges in Massachusetts, Educational institutions established in 1969, Evangelical seminaries and theological colleges, Gordon–Conwell Theological Seminary, Wenham, Massachusetts, Universities and colleges in Essex County, Massachusetts, Universities and colleges in Charlotte, North Carolina, 1969 establishments in Massachusetts

Gordon–Conwell Theological Seminary (GCTS) is an evangelical seminary whose main campus is based in South Hamilton, Massachusetts, with three other campuses in Boston, Massachusetts; Charlotte, North Carolina; and Jacksonville, Florida. The current president of Gordon-Conwell is Dennis Hollinger, a Christian ethicist.

History

The history of Gordon-Conwell goes back to the late 1800s. while Conwell's theological school was originally chartered as Temple College in 1888.
In 1969, both Gordon Divinity School and Conwell School of Theology experienced a downturn. The reorganization of both schools into Gordon-Conwell was the result of the financial backing of J. Howard Pew and the unifying influence of evangelist Billy Graham. Boston pastor and theologian Harold Ockenga was selected as its first president.
Ockenga had wanted a strong evangelical voice in New England to contend with more theologically liberal schools like Harvard and Boston University. He also envisioned Gordon-Conwell as an east-coast equivalent to Fuller Theological Seminary on the west coast. Other former presidents include Robert Cooley (1981–1997), Walter Kaiser, Jr. (1997–2006), and James Emery White (2006–2007), and Haddon Robinson (2007–2008). Currently the President is Dennis Hollinger (2009- ) and the Chair of the Board of Trustees for Gordon-Conwell is John A. Huffman, Jr., an accomplished pastor and author.

Campus

The main   In August 2013, a donor generously gifted several hand-carved tables, chairs, couches, and art work for the Great Hall. In honor of this donor, the space was renamed the Pierce Great Hall. Dennis Hollinger. August 22, 2013.

Organization

Gordon Divinity School and Conwell Theological Seminary were both from the Baptist heritage. When Gordon-Conwell was refounded in 1969, however, the seminary was purposefully founded with no specific Christian denominational affiliation. Today, Gordon-Conwell has students from over 80 different denominations, as well as students from over 40 countries around the world. Theologically, the Statement of Faith of the seminary are based on Protestant and evangelical doctrines, such as biblical inerrancy and penal substitution.
Gordon-Conwell is part of the Boston Theological Institute (BTI), a consortium of nine theological schools in the Greater Boston area and the Carolina Theological Consortium, a consortium of four theological schools in North and South Carolina.
Gordon-Conwell is overseen by the main administration at the Hamilton campus. Each of the other three campuses is overseen by a campus dean, who reports directly to the Vice President for Academic Affairs and main campus administration.

Academics

According to the seminary's accreditation record, there are 2,137 students enrolled at Gordon-Conwell. The seminary offers 23 degrees including the Master of Divinity (M.), Master of Theology (Th.M.), Doctor of Ministry (D.), and a wide range of specialized master's degrees.
Gordon-Conwell has been accredited by the Association of Theological Schools in the United States and Canada since 1964The Association of Theological Schools and by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges since 1985. It is also certified by the United States Government for the training of veterans and the education of chaplains for military service.

Notable faculty

Former faculty

Notable alumni






