[[Malaysian English]]

CATEGORIES: English dialects, English language, Languages of Malaysia

Malaysian English (MyE), formally known as Malaysian Standard English (MySE), is a form of English used and spoken in Malaysia as a second language. Malaysian English should not be confused with Malaysian Colloquial English, which is famously known as Manglish, a portmanteau of the word Malay and English, or Street English.

Features

Varieties of English in Malaysia

According to The Encyclopedia of Malaysia: Languages & Literature, p 61, English in Malaysia has been categorized into three levels: the acrolect, mesolect and basilect. The acrolect is near-native. Only those educated in core English-speaking countries from early schooling up to university may be found to speak the acrolect variety, and only a small percentage of Malaysians are proficient in it.  As with other similar situations, a continuum exists between these three varieties and speakers may code-switch between them depending on context. Most academics, professionals and other English-educated Malaysians, speak mesolect English. Malaysian English belongs to mesolect, and it is Malaysian English that is used in daily interaction.
Manglish refers to the colloquial, informal spoken form of Malaysian English. It is the most common form of spoken English on the street, but is discouraged at schools where only Malaysian Standard English is taught. Imported words are actually minimal except for just a handful of common non-English nouns and verbs in Malaysia. The use of Manglish is therefore a style-based decision. Colloquialisms exist that are not common outside of Malaysia, which are used colloquially as substitutes in other languages in Malaysia. Using Malay, or Chinese grammar in conjunction with English words, is often done quite spontaneously, sometimes even for comic effect.

Malaysian English and British English

In the first half of the 20th century, Malaysian English was exactly similar to British English (Br E) (albeit spoken with a Malaysian accent). However in the post-colonial era (after 1957), the influx of American TV programmers has influenced the usage of Malaysian English. There is no official language board, council or organization to ensure the correct and standard usage of Malaysian English, because after independence, Malay replaced English as the official language. The University of Cambridge Local Examinations Syndicate continues, however, to set and mark the GCE O-Level English Language "1119" paper which is a compulsory subject for the Malaysian Certificate of Education (the English Language paper set by the Malaysian Ministry of Education is the same as the English Language "1119" paper for GCE O-Level).
Unofficially, however, NST English (named after the New Straits Times, the oldest English language daily in Malaysia) is often used as the reference point for Malaysian English.

Words only used in British English

To a large extent, Malaysian English is descended from British English, largely due to the country's colonisation by Britain beginning from the 18th century. However, because of influence from American mass media, particularly in the form of television programmers and movies, Malaysians are also usually familiar with many American English words. For instance, both "lift/elevator" and "lorry/truck" are understood, although the British form is preferred. Only in some very limited cases the American English form more widespread, e.g. "chips" instead of "crisps", "fries" instead of "chips" and "diaper" instead of "nappy".

Words with different meaning in Malaysian English

Some words and phrases used in Malaysia have different meanings than in British or American English.

Words only used in Malaysian English

Malaysian English has its own vocabulary which comes from a variety of influences.  Typically, for words or phrases that are based on other English words, the Malaysian English speaker may be unaware that the word or phrase is not present in British or American English. These words are also present in the vocabulary of some continuums of Singapore Standard English.
Many words of Malay origin have made it into the standard form of Malaysian English used in the media, literature and formal speech. For example, Menteri Besar (Malay for Chief Minister) even has a plural form in English - Menteris Besar.bernama.php?id=474426 Malaysian National News Agency The suffix lah, a very common feature in Manglish, is not considered standard in Malaysian English.

Syntax

Syntactical differences are few although in colloquial speech 'shall' and 'ought' are wanting, 'must' is marginal for obligation and 'may' is rare. Many syntactical features of Malaysian English are found in other forms of English, e.g. British English and North American English:

Phonology and Pronunciation

Officially, Malaysian English uses the same pronunciation system as British English. However, most Malaysians speak with a distinctive accent. The accent has recently evolved to become more American, due to the influx of American TV programmes, the large number of Malaysians pursuing higher education in the United States and also because a large number of English speaking Malaysians in cities are employed in American companies. For example, this increased the emphasis on "r" in words such as "referring" and "world".

Role of Malaysian English in Independent Malaysia

Even though Malaysian English is no longer the official language of Malaysia, it is still used among Malaysians and is recognised as the language of business. About 80% of urban businesses in Malaysia conduct their transactions in English (both Malaysian English and Manglish). However, American English has quite a strong foothold in international businesses in Malaysia.
There are several English newspapers in Malaysia namely The Star, The Sun, New Straits Times and Malay Mail. There are also many English radio stations such as Hitz. However, Malaysia does not have any television station which broadcasts purely in English. The Government National Language policy requires local TV stations to air at least 25% Malaysian-made programmes (either Malay or English). Some privately owned TV stations (such as TV3, NTV7, 8TV and Astro Hitz. A few Malaysian-made TV programmes in Malay carry English subtitles and vice-versa.








