[[MAX Light Rail]]

CATEGORIES: TriMet, MAX Light Rail, Passenger rail transportation in Oregon, Light rail in Oregon, Railway lines opened in 1986, Proposed public transportation in the United States, Transportation in Multnomah County, Oregon, Transportation in Hillsboro, Oregon, Transportation in Washington County, Oregon, 1986 establishments in Oregon

MAX Light Rail, or Metropolitan Area Express, is a light rail system consisting of four separate lines (Blue, Green, Red, and Yellow lines) serving 87 stations in the Portland metropolitan area in  Oregon. The system, which has an average daily weekday ridership between 125,000 and 135,000, is owned and operated by TriMet and began service in 1986.
Since its inception, about $3 billion has been invested in light rail in Portland (as of 2004).

Early system history

In the mid-1970s, TriMet (or Tri-Met, as it was known until 2002) began a study for light rail using funds intended for the cancelled Mount Hood Freeway. The light rail project was known as the Banfield Light Rail Project, named for the freeway (I-84) that part of the alignment followed.  The TriMet board approved the project in September 1978. "Tri-Met board votes to back Banfield light-rail project". The Oregonian, p. F1.
Construction of the  route started in 1982,Federman, Stan (March 27, 1982). "At ground-breaking: Festivities herald transitway". The Oregonian, p. A12. and the system opened on September 5, 1986. "Riders swamp light rail as buses go half-full and schedules go by the way". The Oregonian, p. A1. Of the project's total cost of $214 million, 83 percent was funded by the federal Urban Mass Transportation Administration (now known as the Federal Transit Administration). "All aboard! MAX on track; ride free". The Oregonian, p. A1. Less than two months before the opening, TriMet adopted the name Metropolitan Area Express, or MAX, for the new system following an employee contest.  Light rail name announced. Press release.
As planning of a second light rail line, to the west side, gained momentum in the late 1980s, the MAX line came to be referred to as the Eastside MAX line, so as to distinguish it from the Westside MAX project.  The  east-west line has always been operated as a single, through route, and it became known as the Blue Line in 2001, after TriMet adopted color designations for its separate light rail routes. "Local colors roll out: Tri-Met designates the Blue, Red and Yellow lines". The Oregonian.

Current system

Lines

The MAX system currently consists of four lines, each designated by a color.
The MAX system was built in a series of five separate projects, and each line runs over one or more of the previously opened segments.  The use of colors to distinguish the separately operated routes was first adopted in 2000 and brought into use in 2001.  The 2004-opened Yellow Line originally followed the same routing in downtown Portland as the Red and Blue lines, along First Avenue, Morrison Street and Yamhill Street, but it was shifted to a new alignment along the Portland Transit Mall on August 30, 2009, introducing light rail service along the Mall. The Green Line began serving the Mall on September 12, 2009.
The system currently has a total of 87 stations. 51 stations are served by the Blue Line, 28 stations by the Green Line, 29 by the Red Line, and 22 by the Yellow Line, with 40 stations served by two or more lines and 8 by three. The system's central stations are at Pioneer Courthouse Square, on the Portland Transit Mall. All four lines pass through the Rose Quarter and cross the Steel Bridge.
The trains operate on direct current and utilize two voltages, 750V DC nominal on sections west of NE 9th Avenue & Holladay Street and 825V DC nominal on the remainder.  The two systems are electrically isolated.
After the Yellow Line was rerouted to the Portland Transit Mall, the Steel Bridge consists of the only portion of the MAX Light Rail system that is shared by all four lines.
Trains run every 15 minutes from early in the morning Monday through Friday until late at night, while weekends consists of every 18 minutes. The Blue Line runs every 10 minutes during rush hour.  Headways between trains are shorter in the central section of the system, where lines overlap.  Actual schedules vary by location and time of day. At many stations, a live readerboard shows the destination and time-to-arrival of the next several trains, using data gathered by a vehicle tracking system.
In addition to regular MAX service, the Portland Vintage Trolley has operated on the MAX system since late 1991, on most weekends, serving the same stops.  This service uses 1991-built replicas of 1904 Portland streetcars.  Until 2009, the Vintage Trolley service followed a section of the original MAX line, between the Galleria/Library stations and Lloyd Center, but in September 2009 the service moved to the newly opened MAX alignment along the transit mall, running from Union Station to Portland State University,

Stations

Fares

MAX uses a proof-of-payment system; riders must carry a receipt at all times. Fares are purchased before boarding, and receipt is retained as proof of paid fare. Passengers must board the train before the receipt's expiration, and are allowed to ride past the time on the receipt, provided the train was boarded before the expiration time. Receipts are good for 2 hours after purchase, and can be used an unlimited number of times, for travel in any direction, as well as for buses, Portland Streetcar, and C-Tran.  From 1986 until 2012, TriMet's fare system was zonal, or distance-based, with higher fares for longer rides, and three fare zones (five until 1988).  However, in September 2012 the agency discontinued all use of fare zones.
MAX fares (as of September 1, 2012) are:
Seven-day, 14-day and 30-day passes are available for each category of passenger.  One-month passes are available from TriMet ticket outlets, but as of September 2012, the ticket-vending machines at MAX stations issue 30-day passes instead of one-month passes, with the period of validity starting on the day of purchase, rather than the beginning of a calendar month. One-year passes can also be purchased from TriMet at the office in Pioneer Square, for the price of 11 months' fare.
Transfer receipts from buses are also valid fare on MAX, provided they have not expired before boarding, and MAX tickets are valid on bus routes, under the same condition.  On the Portland Streetcar system, a new streetcar-only ticket priced at $1 was introduced in September 2012,
Until 2012, riding was free in Fareless Square, which included all of downtown and part of the Lloyd District, but the 37-year-old fare-free zone was discontinued on September 1, 2012, as part of systemwide cost-cutting measures.

Expansions

Future

Under construction

Proposed lines and extensions

=Vancouver=

=Other extensions=

Operations

General description

In parts of the MAX system, particularly in central Portland and Hillsboro, MAX trains run on surface streets. Except for on the Portland Transit Mall, trains run in reserved lanes closed to other motorized vehicles. On the Transit Mall, trains operate on the same lanes as TriMet buses (although MAX trains have traffic priority). Elsewhere, MAX runs within its own exclusive right-of-way, in street medians, alongside freeways, and on former freight railroad lines.
Where the tracks run in a street median, such as two segments of the Blue Line (downtown Hillsboro and along Burnside Avenue between Gateway Transit Center and Ruby Junction), intersections are generally controlled by traffic signals which give trains preemption. Where the tracks occupy a completely separate right-of-way, the tracks are protected by automated grade crossing gates. A three-mile (4.8 km) section consists of two tunnels below Washington Park. While this section has only one station, it is  and one of the deepest in the world.
Because of Portland's relatively small 

Rolling stock

There are currently four models of MAX cars, designated by TriMet as "Type 1", "Type 2", "Type 3", and "Type 4".

=Type 1=

The Type 1 cars were manufactured by a joint venture between La Brugeoise et Nivelles and Bombardier Corporation before the latter acquired the former, and featured a raised floor with steps at the doors.  These cars are based on a La Brugeoise et Nivelles design used in Rio de Janeiro Line Line 2 The first car was completed at the factory in late 1983"'Roomy, good-looking' light-rail cars please Tri-Met official" (November 27, 1983). The Sunday Oregonian, p. B5. and arrived in Portland in 1984."First car for light rail delivered" (April 11, 1984). The Oregonian, p. C4.

=Types 2 and 3=

With the partial opening of Westside MAX in 1997, new cars made by Siemens and called Type 2 by TriMet were introduced. These cars have a low-floor design, a first for light rail cars in North America,Oliver, Gordon (April 15, 1993). "Tri-Met prepares to purchase 37 low-floor light-rail cars". The Oregonian, p. D4. (July 1993). "Tri-Met goes low-floor: Portland's Tri-Met has broken new ground with a procurement of low-floor light rail vehicles. The cars will be North America's first low-floor LRVs." Railway Age, pp. 49–51. digital readerboards and a slightly more open floor plan. The floor is nearly level with the platforms, and small ramps called "bridge plates" extend (on request) from two of the four doors, enabling passengers in wheelchairs to roll on and off of the car easily.  These permitted the elimination of wheelchair lifts that had been located at every station and were time-consuming to use.O'Keefe, Mark (September 1, 1997). "New MAX cars smooth the way for wheelchairs". The Oregonian, p. B12. Type 1 cars are now always paired with a Type 2 or 3 car so that each train is wheelchair-accessible.
The first low-floor light rail car was delivered in 1996Oliver, Gordon (August 1, 1996). "MAX takes keys to cool new model". The Oregonian, p. D1. and the type was first used in service on August 31, 1997. The new cars also came equipped with air-conditioning, a feature originally lacking from the Type 1 cars, but TriMet later retrofitted air-conditioning to all of the older MAX cars, in 1997–98.  The initial order of 39 Type 2 cars was expanded, in stages, eventually to a total of 52 cars. "Tri-Met expands light-rail car order". The Oregonian, p. B6.
Some of the later models of light rail cars had automatic passenger counters retrofitted; in these models, they are on the floor of the doorways.
The Type 3 cars are essentially identical to the Type 2 cars in design, but have TriMet's new paint scheme. They began to enter service in fall 2003, but were not in use in large numbers until the opening of the Yellow Line in 2004, which was the reason for their acquisition.  They include automatic passenger counters which are located above the doorways, using photoelectric sensors.
In 2001–02, TriMet modified the interior of the Type 2 cars to add space for bicycles.  Eight seats per car were removed and replaced—in four places per car—with hooks from which a bicycle can be hung. "MAX will add racks for bikes, not bags". The Oregonian.  The Type 3 cars carried this newer layout as built.

=Type 4=

Twenty-two new Siemens S70 vehicles, designated Type 4 cars, were purchased in conjunction with the I-205 and Portland Mall MAX projects. They feature a more streamlined design than previous models, have more seating and are lighter in weight and therefore more energy-efficient. At about  The Type 4 MAX cars began to enter service in August 2009. All four different types of cars are used on all four MAX lines.
For the new Orange Line (under construction), TriMet placed an order with Siemens in April 2012 for another 18 S70 cars, the same model as the Type 4.  These are expected to include some minor modifications, such as improved interior seating.   The agency has designated them Type 5, and their fleet numbers are planned to be 521–538. 235. UK: LRTA Publishing. ISSN 1460-8324. (The numbers 511–514 are already in use for TriMet's Vintage Trolley cars.) They are scheduled to be delivered in 2014–15.
The Type 1, 2 and 3 cars have destination signs of the roll-type, whereas the signs in the Type 4 cars are LED-type.  In the rollsigns, the designated route color (blue, green, red or yellow) is shown as a colored background under white (or black) text in the display, while in the LED signs the route color is indicated by a colored square at the left end of the display, and all text is orange lettering against a black background.
Notes on capacities:








