[[Joss Whedon]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, American atheists, American comics writers, American feminists, American film directors, American humanists, American science fiction writers, American screenwriters, American television directors, American television producers, American television writers, Atheist feminists, Feminist artists, Feminist writers, Hugo Award winning writers, Living people, Male feminists, People educated at Winchester College, People from New York City, Prometheus Award winners, Science fiction film directors, Wesleyan University alumni, Writers from New York

Joseph Hill "Joss" Whedon; born June 23, 1964) is an American screenwriter, film and television director, film and television producer, comic book author, composer and actor. He is the founder of Mutant Enemy Productions and co-founder of Bellwether Pictures. He is best known as the creator of the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1997–2003), Angel (1999–2004), Firefly (2002–03), Dollhouse (2009–10) and Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D. (2013–present) as well as Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog (2008). Whedon co-wrote Toy Story (1995), wrote and directed Serenity (2005), co-wrote and produced the horror film The Cabin in the Woods (2012), and wrote and directed The Avengers (2012), the third highest-grossing film of all time.
Whedon is notable for his signature dialogue, which often features dry humor and heavy emphasis on subtext. His work in comic books includes Astonishing X-Men, Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Angel: After the Fall and Runaways. He is also known for his collaborations in online media. Many of Whedon's projects have cult status.
From a family of screenwriters, he is the grandson of John Whedon, the son of Tom Whedon, and the brother of Zack and Jed Whedon. In May 2013, Whedon was awarded an honorary Doctorate of Letters from Wesleyan University.

Early life

Joss Whedon was born in New York City. He has been described as the world's first third-generation TV writer,Joss Whedon Biography (1964?-) filmreference. Whedon is the younger brother of Samuel and Matthew Whedon and older brother of writers Jed and Zack Whedon. Thomas. "Is Dollhouse a family affair?" TV Guide March 16, 2009; Page19
Whedon graduated from Wesleyan University in 1987. Before going to Wesleyan, he spent two years at Winchester College in England. He attended Riverdale Country School in New York City where his mother taught history.

Career

Buffy the Vampire Slayer

In 1997, Whedon created his first TV show, Buffy the Vampire Slayer. The series depicts Buffy Summers, the latest in a line of young women called to battle against vampires, demons, and other forces of darkness. The inspiration for the idea came directly from his aversion to seeing the Hollywood formula of "the little blonde girl who goes into a dark alley and gets killed in every horror movie".
Most of Buffy the Vampire Slayer was shot on locations in and around Los Angeles, California. Whedon worked primarily with composers like Christophe Beck (seasons 2–4),
The series received numerous awards and nominations,

Angel

As a result of Buffy the Vampire Slayer
Angel premiered on October 5, 1999. It was praised for presenting a unique and progressive version of the archetypal noir hero as a sympathetic vampire detective.
The WB Network announced on February 14, 2004, that Angel would not be brought back for a sixth season.

Firefly

Whedon followed Angel with the space western Firefly (2002), starring Nathan Fillion, Gina Torres, Alan Tudyk, Morena Baccarin, Adam Baldwin, Jewel Staite, Sean Maher, Summer Glau and Ron Glass. Set in the year 2517, Firefly explores the lives of the people who, on the outskirts of society, make their living as the crew of Serenity, a "Firefly-class" spaceship.
An ever present element was Whedon's injection of anti-totalitarianism,
Tim Minear, who had worked with Whedon in the past, was selected to serve as the series' showrunner.
Following Firefly was Serenity, a follow-up film taking place after the events of the final episode.

Serenity

In 2005, Whedon had written and directed Serenity. After Universal Pictures acquired the film and distribution rights from Fox, Whedon started writing the screenplay.
Serenity was released in North America on September 30, 2005. The score was composed by David Newman, and according to Whedon was intended to "deglorify space - to feel the intimacy of being on a ship as opposed to the grandeur".

Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog

During the 2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike, Whedon directed, co-wrote and produced Dr. Horrible's Sing-Along Blog (2008). He funded the project himself with the investment of just over $200,000,

Dollhouse

In 2009, Whedon created his fourth television series Dollhouse. Whedon explored themes in the show that were initially present in an unproduced spec script of his called Afterlife.

The Cabin in the Woods

Whedon co-wrote and produced a horror film titled The Cabin in the Woods with director Drew Goddard, which finished production in 2009. Whedon described it as an attempt to revitalize horror, calling it a "loving hate letter" to the genre, continuing:

The Cabin in the Woods was released on April 13, 2012 to critical acclaim,

The Avengers

In July 2010, it was confirmed that Whedon would write and direct The Avengers, a live-action adaptation of the Marvel Comics superhero team of the same name. and Metacritic giving it a 69/100 based on 43 reviews.
Principal photography for The Avengers commenced in late April 2011.
Whedon commented on the conversion of The Avengers from 2D to 3D, saying that "current 3D conversion technology is really amazing, and Marvel is very picky. Having a sense for things in a 3D space and filming while feeling that space was a very easy thing for me. I'm just tired of seeing just things flying toward the camera. So I had to make things look good for 3D in 2D. My eyes and senses work that way, so the conversion from 2D was no problem".

Much Ado About Nothing

On October 23, 2011 Bellwether Pictures confirmed they had completed principal photography on Much Ado About Nothing, which Whedon scripted, produced, directed, edited and composed,
Whedon and his DP Jay Hunter took advantage of natural lighting in order to make it feel "very found", noting, "Our lighting package rose in the east and set in the west".

Agents of S.H.I.E.L.D.

In March 2012, Whedon stated that although television involves more compromise than film:

In August 2012, Whedon signed a deal to develop an upcoming Marvel TV show for ABC.

In Your Eyes

Whedon wrote and executive produced the paranormal romance film In Your Eyes, the second feature film by Bellwether Pictures.

Future projects

Avengers: Age of Ultron

On August 7, 2012, it was confirmed that Whedon would return to write and direct a sequel to The Avengers,
Whedon also served as a creative consultant on the films in the Marvel Cinematic Universe leading up to Age of Ultron.

Other work

Film

As a script doctor, Whedon worked as an uncredited writer on films like The Getaway, Speed, Waterworld, Twister, X-Men and Atlantis: The Lost Empire.

Television

From 1989 to 1990, Whedon worked as a writer on the sitcoms Roseanne and Parenthood.

Comic books

Serenity: Those Left Behind was released in 2005 as a limited three-issue comic book series, and a tie-in to Serenity. Set between Firefly and the film, it was intended to bridge the two storylines together.
Whedon, a lifelong comic book fan, is the author of the Dark Horse Comics miniseries Fray, which takes place in the far future of the Buffyverse.
Like many Buffy the Vampire Slayer writers, he contributed to the show's comic book continuation, writing three stories in the anthology Tales of the Slayers (including the one featuring Melaka Fray from Fray),
Following Buffy the Vampire Slayer
Buffy the Vampire Slayer Season Nine was published from August 2011 to September 2013.
Whedon wrote Marvel Comics' popular comic book line Astonishing X-Men,
Whedon is the second writer of the critically acclaimed and fan-favorite Marvel comic Runaways, taking over after series creator Brian K. Vaughan completed his run.
Whedon's other comic-related work includes writing the introduction to Identity Crisis trade paperback and a contribution to the "jam issue" Superman/Batman #26 (to date his only published work for DC Comics).

Online media

The R. Tam sessions, starring himself and Summer Glau, served as a form of viral marketing for 2005's Serenity.
Whedon appeared in all three episodes of Husbands season two as Wes,

Unrealized projects

Whedon had a number of planned projects that became stuck in development or terminally stalled. Among these, a Buffy animated series, a set of television movies for The WB based on Angel and Buffy characters, and Ripper, a proposed BBC pilot about Rupert Giles. Ripper was announced to be in development at the 2007 San Diego Comic-Con. The development process was set to begin in 2008, and Ripper to be aired that summer, yet the pilot did not materialize due to copyright issues.
Goners was announced in 2005. According to Variety magazine, it was a fantasy thriller under development by Universal Studios, and was to be produced by Mary Parent and Scott Stuber.
Whedon had been hired to write and direct a Warner Bros. adaptation of Wonder Woman. However, in February 2007, Whedon announced that he would no longer be involved with the project. "We just saw different movies, and at the price range this kind of movie hangs in, that's never gonna work. Non-sympatico. It happens all the time".

Style, themes and influences

Whedon spoke about his approach to screenwriting.

He also spoke about his penchant to kill off characters.

Whedon prefers to incorporate as many practical effects as possible when using computer-generated imagery.

On working with high or low budgets, he says: "It's the exact same job. The money has never mattered".

Whedon has kept ambivalent on whether to shoot on film or digital video, saying that he has "no allegiance to film as film. If the story is in front of me, I'm fine".
Many of Whedon's altered phrases, and heavily popularized words have entered a common usage called "Slayer Slang", which PBS included an entire section of in their article series Do You Speak American?.
In terms of characters, Whedon's works usually revolve around an ensemble of protagonists,
Thematically, Whedon's films and TV series feature several allusions to components like contemporary philosophy; existentialism, anti-authoritarianism, power, powerlessness, betrayal, revenge, deception, sexuality, sacrifice, misogyny, and feminism.
His influences include Ray Bradbury,
Whedon has been described as "the gravitational center of the Whedonverse, a galaxy that spins recurring actors and themes through an orbital system of TV shows, films and comic books that all share similar traits: a unique brand of witty dialogue, relatable characters and fantasy/sci-fi mythology".

Personal life

Whedon is married to Kai Cole, producer and co-founder of Bellwether Pictures.

Religious and philosophical views

Whedon has identified himself as an atheist, absurdist and humanist. Talking about the exploration of religion and morality through his own work, he stated:

In April 2009, the Humanist Chaplaincy at Harvard University presented Whedon with the 2009 Outstanding Lifetime Achievement Award in Cultural Humanism.
Whedon has spoken about existentialism, explaining in detail how it, and more specifically Jean-Paul Sartre's Nausea, was used as a basis for the Firefly episode "Objects in Space".

Political views

In July 2012, at the San Diego Comic-Con International, in response to one woman who noted the anti-corporate themes in many of his movies, and asked him to give his economic philosophy in 30 seconds or less, Whedon spoke out against both the socialism he was brought up listening to and capitalism as well, stating that "ultimately all these systems don't work".  He went on to say that America is "turning into Tsarist Russia".
Endorsing Barack Obama in the 2012 United States presidential election,

Television credits

Frequent casting

Whedon often hires the same actors for his projects.
Note: Due to the frequency Whedon casts the same actors in various projects, the above list only includes those that have played three or more different roles in a Whedon production (actors that have only played the same role in multiple Whedon productions are not included).

Filmography

Accolades



Further reading




