[[River Derwent, Derbyshire]]

CATEGORIES: Geography of Derby, Rivers of Derbyshire, Geography of Amber Valley, Rivers and valleys of the Peak District, Tributaries of the River Trent

The Derwent is a river in the county of Derbyshire, England. It is  For half its course, the river flows through the Peak District.
Much of the river's route, with the exception of the city of Derby, is rural. However the river has also seen many human uses, and between Matlock and Derby was one of the cradles of the Industrial Revolution, providing power to the first industrial scale cotton mills. Today it provides a water supply to several surrounding cities, and its steeply sided valley is an important communications corridor through the uplands of the Peak District.
Because of its scenic qualities, the valley of the River Derwent sees many tourist visitors. The upper reaches pass through the Peak District National Park, whilst the middle reaches around the old spa town of Matlock Bath which attracts tourists because of its souvenir shops and amusement arcades, together with attractions such as the Heights of Abraham and its cable car.
The name "Derwent" is Celtic and means "a valley thick with oaks".

Course

The River Derwent rises at Swains Greave (590 metres above sea level) on the eastern flank of Bleaklow, opposite Howden Moors, and some 
Further south, the Derwent passes by the village of Bamford, where it is joined by the River Noe. Below this confluence, it flows through Hathersage, Grindleford, Calver and Baslow, and through the estate of Chatsworth House, before it is joined by the River Wye at Rowsley.
After passing through Darley Dale, the Derwent reaches Matlock, where, at an oxbow, it collects the great millstream Bentley Brook. It then flows past the villages of Matlock Bath, Cromford, Whatstandwell, and Ambergate, where it is joined by the River Amber.
Below Ambergate, the river flows by the town of Belper and the villages of Milford and Duffield. It then enters the city of Derby near Darley Abbey and flows through the centre of the city. The river ends at Derwent Mouth, . Its waters ultimately reach the North Sea via the Humber Estuary.

Natural history

The River Derwent is the habitat for many different animals such as otters,

River uses

The lower river from Derwent Mouth upstream as far as Derby was made navigable under an Act of Parliament of 1720, and this stretch opened to navigation in 1721. Traffic ceased about 1795 and the navigation was acquired by the owners of the competing Derby Canal. The river is no longer considered navigable, although the upper river is widely used by kayakers and canoeists who enjoy the fast flowing water and the slalom course at Matlock Bath.
The river was also used to power the many textile mills that were built along the Derwent between Matlock Bath and Derby. Initially, the need for water power was quite modest, for example Lombe's Silk Mill in Derby, which is considered to be the forerunner of the later cotton mills, only needed to use the power provided by a small mill fleam, and Richard Arkwright's Cromford Mill, the world's first water-powered cotton spinning mill, only used a small tributary of the Derwent in conjunction with a lead mine sough.
These sites were all important in the development of the Industrial Revolution, and Arkwright's innovation, along with several local competitors, is recognised today, by the designation of the area as the Derwent Valley Mills World Heritage Site.
The power of the Derwent is still utilised at a number of these historic mill sites, producing hydro-electricity from turbines instead of driving mill wheels, with a recent development being the construction of a hydro-electric station at Longbridge weir, adjacent to the Riverside Gardens in Derby.
The Howden Reservoir and Derwent Reservoir in the upper valley were both completed in 1916 to supply the cities of Sheffield, Nottingham, Derby, and Leicester. The adjacent Ladybower Reservoir was completed in 1945 to cover increasing demand.  Treated water from these reservoirs flows down the 
The valley of the Derwent provides an important communications route. Between Derby and Rowsley the valley is followed by the A6 road, which was the main road from London to Manchester until the creation of the motorway network, and is still a busy single-carriageway road. The former Midland Railway's lines from Derby to Sheffield and Manchester also followed the Derwent, the former as far as Ambergate and the latter as far as Rowsley. The Sheffield line still operates as part of the Midland Main Line, but the Manchester line was severed north of Matlock in 1968, and the section from Ambergate to Matlock now forms the Derwent Valley Line, a single-track branch line. Between Ambergate and Cromford, the river, road and railway are also paralleled by the Cromford Canal.

Tributaries

Alphabetical listing of tributaries, extracted from the Water Framework Directive list of water bodies for the Derbyshire Derwent:

Naming

The River Derwent provides the name for the oldest hockey club in Derbyshire. Derwent Hockey Club was established in 1897 and played its matches on the banks of the Derwent in Darley Dale, before relocating to Wirksworth.

Gallery

File:Boggy Ground in Swains Greave - geograph.uk - 1495447.jpg|Boggy Ground in Swains Greave, on Bleaklow
Image:Upper Derwent from Oaken Bank.jpg|The river in its highest stretch, on Howden Moor close to the source
Image:Island in Derwent Reservoir, with Howden Dam behind.jpg|Derwent Reservoir, with river water cascading over Howden Dam, and Howden Moor in the background
Image:River Derwent at Calver.jpg|The river at Calver
Image:ChatsworthWeir.jpg|Weir in the river at Chatsworth House
Image:River Derwent at Matlock Bath.jpg|The river at Matlock Bath, as seen from the Heights of Abraham cable car
Image:Derwent Valley upstream of Whatstandwell.jpg|The valley of the Derwent upstream of Whatstandwell
Image:RiverDerwent.jpg|The river just south of Duffield
Image:Derby Council house and River derwent.jpg|The river outside the Council House in Derby








