[[Mewtwo]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional clones, Fictional psychics, Genetically engineered characters in video games, Nintendo antagonists, Pokémon species, Super Smash Bros. fighters, Telepath characters in video games, Video game bosses, Video game characters in film, Video game characters introduced in 1996, Video game secret characters

 Actress Reiko Takashima voices a separate Mewtwo character in the prequel special Mewtwo: Prologue to Awakening and the film ExtremeSpeed Genesect: Mewtwo Awakens.
In the video games, the player can fight and capture Mewtwo to pit it against other Pokémon. The player first learns of Mewtwo late in Pokémon Red and Blue by reading research documents left in a ruined laboratory on Cinnabar Island. The documents reveal that a solitary scientist spent years genetically engineering a descendant of the Pokémon Mew. Mewtwo eventually escaped after proving too strong to contain.
Regarded as one of the series' strongest Pokémon, it changed the way players approached the games by forcing them to find ways to counteract those using Mewtwo. Studies found the character popular with older male children, which contrasted with its counterpart Mew. Reactions to the character's anime portrayal have been divided, as reviewers such as Daily Record cited him as a cliché villain, while others such as Animerica and Sight & Sound praised the character's depth.

Design and characteristics

Japanese video game designer Ken Sugimori designed Mewtwo for the first generation of Pocket Monsters games, Red and Green, known outside of Japan as Pokémon Red and Blue.
Its build is very different compared to Mew's, appearing as a large bipedal feline, with a white body, pronounced purple tail and stomach, feline head, and a mass of flesh connecting the center of its back to its head behind its neck. Its appearance has been likened to "an oversized cross of cat, squirrel and kangaroo". tall.
As a character in the games, Mewtwo seldom has spoken dialogue, but when it does it is presented as vicious Mewtwo: "Who am I and why am I here? I just appeared here. I haven't even been born to this world yet. Who am I?"

Appearances

In video games

In Pokémon Red and Blue, the player learns of Mewtwo's existence by reading research notes left in the ruined "Pokémon Mansion" on Cinnabar Island. The notes describe it as being born from Mew following the efforts of a solitary scientist.
Since its debut, Mewtwo has appeared in other Nintendo games. In Pokémon Stadium and Pokémon Pinball, Mewtwo appears as a final boss after all competitions have been completed. For all appearances in which the character has spoken dialogue, Mewtwo is voiced by Masachika Ichimura, with the exception of Pokémon Puzzle League, where it is voiced by Phillip Bartlett.

In anime and related media

Mewtwo is featured in the 1998 animated film Pokémon: The First Movie as the main antagonist, in which it is shown to be the creation of the criminal organization Team Rocket. After Mewtwo destroys the laboratory where it was born, Team Rocket's leader, Giovanni, convinces it he can help it control its powers. He instead uses Mewtwo as a weapon. After escaping Giovanni, Mewtwo questions its reason for existence and declares revenge on its creators. To this end, it lures several Pokémon trainers, among them movie protagonist Ash Ketchum, to its island in order to clone their Pokémon. Once it does so, Mewtwo forces the originals to battle the clones in an effort to determine which set is superior, while Mewtwo faces its own original, Mew. Ash sacrifices himself to stop the fighting, though he is later revived. Mewtwo, Mew, and the clones then leave to find a sanctuary, striking memory of the events from those gathered. In the film, Mewtwo is voiced by Phillip Bartlett in English, and by Ichimura in Japanese. In this film, Mewtwo displayed unique abilities and powers unseen in other Pokémon, such as blocking all Pokémon moves in his arena when the clones face off against the originals.
In September 1999, Nintendo published Sound Picture Box Mewtwo, which included The Birth of Mewtwo: Pokémon Radio Drama, a CD drama that expands upon Mewtwo's origins. Created by scientist Dr. Fuji, Mewtwo is one of several cloning attempts, amongst which includes a clone of Fuji's deceased daughter. Voiced by Fujiko Takimoto, the child Mewtwo befriends her, communicating telepathically; however the cloning process proves unstable, and she dies. To save the traumatized Mewtwo, Fuji erases its memories and puts it under sedation until its body finishes developing, leading to the events of the film. The CD drama was later adapted into a short anime, and was included with Japanese home releases and broadcasts of Mewtwo Strikes Back and later in North America in December 2001 as part of Mewtwo Returns. Dan Green and Masachika Ichimura provide the English and Japanese voices for the adult Mewtwo. The child version is voiced in Japanese by Fujiko Takimoto for the CD drama and Showtaro Morikubo for the anime, while in the English localization the voice actor is uncredited. Sound Picture Box: Mewtwo's Origin: Myutsuu No Tanjou: Pocket-Monster Radio Drama (in Japanese). Catalog# ZMCP-596.
In December 2000, the film was followed by a sequel, Pokémon: Mewtwo Returns, which was broadcast on Japanese television in December 2000 and released worldwide on home video and DVD in 2001. Voiced by Dan Green in English with Ichimura reprising the role in Japanese, Mewtwo and the clones have since found peace in another region. However, Giovanni, whose memories were left intact after the first film, locates and pursues Mewtwo. Assisted by Ash and his companions, Mewtwo comes to terms with its existence and defeats Giovanni, removing any memory of itself from his and his soldiers' minds, while leaving the others unaffected. As everyone departs, Mewtwo sets out on its own.
Mewtwo also appears in the musical Pokémon Live!, a live action adaptation of the anime set after Pokémon: The First Movie, and is portrayed by Marton Fulop. In it, Mewtwo faces a robotic replica of itself, MechaMew2, created by Giovanni and able to learn any attacks used against it. However, after learning compassion from Mewtwo, the machine rebels and self-destructs. (2006) Pokémon Live!. Act 2, Scene 5. The 2006 television special Pokémon: The Mastermind of Mirage Pokémon features a hologram version of Mewtwo, created and controlled by the story's antagonist Dr. Yung. With help from a hologram Mew, Ash and his companions destroy the Mewtwo hologram and defeat Yung. ASIN B000GLL1C4
Another Mewtwo appears in the anime special Mewtwo: Prologue to Awakening and the film Genesect and the Legend Awakened, voiced by the actress Reiko Takashima, to protect Ash, Iris, Cilan, and Eric from the rampaging Genesect army. This Mewtwo is able to Mega Evolve into Mega Mewtwo Y, referred to in the film as Mewtwo's  Pokémon Origins, which is generally based on the plot of the video games Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen. As such, Red goes to Cerulean Cave, and uses the Mega Evolution mechanic introduced in Pokémon X and Y to Mega Evolve his Charizard for the fight with Mewtwo, whom Red captures.

In printed adaptations

Mewtwo has appeared as a central character in several books related to the Pokémon franchise, including novelizations of Mewtwo Strikes Back and Mewtwo Returns, both of which closely follow the events of the films.
In the manga series Pokémon Adventures, Team Rocket creates Mewtwo, but some of his DNA is placed inside of the Gym leader Blaine. Because of the DNA that they share, the two are unable to be separated for very long without becoming ill.
In 1998, Toshihiro Ono was asked to write a story detailing Mewtwo's origin to coincide with the release of Mewtwo Strikes Back.

Reception and legacy

In the games, Mewtwo is consistently noted as being one of the strongest opponents, and has been described in Pokémon Red and Blue as being "the best Pokémon in the game",
The book Pikachu's Global Adventure: The Rise and Fall of Pokémon noted Mewtwo as popular with older male children who tend to be drawn to "tough or scary" characters; Mew in contrast was described as a polar opposite, a character popular with young girls who tend to be drawn to "cute" characters.
In reception to extended media for the Pokémon franchise, Mewtwo has been likened to Frankenstein's monster as a being born from artificial means and discontent with the fact.
Mewtwo's image is utilized for merchandise related to the Pokémon franchise, which includes toys, children's toothbrushes,

Notes and references




