[[Under Pressure]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 singles, 1982 singles, 1999 singles, 2005 singles, David Bowie songs, Joss Stone songs, My Chemical Romance songs, The Used songs, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, Queen (band) songs, Vocal duets, Songs written by David Bowie, Songs written by Freddie Mercury, Songs written by Brian May, Songs written by John Deacon, Songs written by Roger Meddows Taylor, Elektra Records singles, Parlophone singles, Reprise Records singles, Songs from We Will Rock You (musical)

"Under Pressure" is a 1981 song originally recorded by Queen and David Bowie, and was originally featured on Queen's 1982 album Hot Space. The song reached No. 1 on the UK Singles Chart. It was also number 31 on VH1's 100 Greatest Songs of the '80s.
The song was played live at every Queen concert from 1981 until the end of Queen's touring career in 1986. Retrieved 23 July 2011Queen live on tour: The Works 1985 Queen Concerts. Retrieved 23 July 2011Queen live on tour: Magic tour Queen Concerts. Retrieved 23 July 2011 It is recorded on the live albums Queen Rock Montreal and Queen at Wembley. Retrieved 23 July 2011Live At Wembley 1986 Ultimate Queen. Retrieved 23 July 2011 The song was included on some editions of Queen's first Greatest Hits compilations, such as the original 1981 Elektra release in the US. It is included on the band's compilation albums Greatest Hits II, Classic Queen, and Absolute GreatestQueen Album: Classic Queen MTV. Retrieved 2 July 2011 as well as the compilation Best of Bowie. Retrieved 18 November 2011

Creation

Queen had been working on the song under the title "Feel Like" but were not yet satisfied with the result. Retrieved 29 August 2011Queen – Feel Like demo (pre-Under Pressure) Retrieved 15 January 2011 David Bowie had originally come to Mountain Studios in order to sing backing vocals on another Queen song, "Cool Cat", which would end up being edited out since he was not satisfied with it. Once he got there, they worked together for a while and wrote the song.78. Omnibus Press. Retrieved 15 January 2011 The final version that became "Under Pressure" evolved from a jam session that Bowie had with the band at Queen's studio in Montreux, Switzerland; therefore it was credited as co-written by the five musicians. The scat singing that dominates much of the song is evidence of the jam-beginnings as improvisation. According to Queen bassist John Deacon (as quoted in a French magazine in 1984), however, the song's primary musical songwriter was Freddie Mercury — though all contributed to the arrangement. Brian May recalled to Mojo magazine in October 2008 that, "It was hard, because you had four very precocious boys and David, who was precocious enough for all of us. David took over the song lyrically. Looking back, it's a great song but it should have been mixed differently. Freddie and David had a fierce battle over that. It's a significant song because of David and its lyrical content.""Queen, The Second Coming". Mojo, October 2008, The earlier, embryonic version of the song without Bowie, "Feel Like", is widely available in bootleg form, and was written by Queen drummer Roger Taylor.
There has been some confusion about who created the song's bassline. John Deacon said (in Japanese magazine Musiclife in 1982, and in the previously mentioned French magazine) that David Bowie had created it. In more recent interviews, Brian May and Roger Taylor have credited the bass riff to Deacon. Bowie, on his website, said that the bassline was already written before he became involved.O'Casey, Matt, dir. (2002) Queen – Days of Our Lives. Part 2. Queen Productions Ltd. Retrieved 9 June 2011

Music video

The video for the song features neither Queen nor David Bowie due to touring commitments. Retrieved 20 September 2011 Taking the theme of pressure, director David Mallet edited together stock footage of traffic jams, commuter trains packed with passengers, explosions, riots, cars being crushed and various pieces of footage from silent films of the 1920s, most notably Sergei Eisenstein's influential Soviet film Battleship Potemkin, the silent Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde starring John Barrymore, and F.W. Murnau's Nosferatu, a master work of the German Expressionist movement. Retrieved 20 September 2011 The video celebrates the pressure-cooker mentality of a culture willing to wage war against political machines, and at the same time love and have fun (there is also footage of crowds enjoying concerts, and lots of black and white kissing scenes).

Track listing

1981 single
EMI released a 3-inch CD version of the single in 1988 with "Body Language" as an additional B-side.

Personnel

Musicians on original version:

Reception

The September 2005 edition of online music magazine Stylus singled out the bassline as the best in popular music history.

Live performances

Although very much a joint project, only Queen incorporated the song into their live shows at the time. Bowie chose not to perform the song before an audience until the 1992 Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert, when he and Annie Lennox sang it as a duet (backed by the surviving Queen members). However, since Mercury's death and the Outside tour in 1995, Bowie has performed the song at virtually every one of his live shows, with bassist Gail Ann Dorsey taking Mercury's vocal part. The song also appeared in setlists from A Reality Tour mounted by Bowie in 2004, when he frequently would dedicate it to Freddie Mercury. Queen + Paul Rodgers have recently performed the song; and in summer of 2012, Queen + Adam Lambert toured, including a performance of the song by Lambert and Roger Taylor in each show. 
While Bowie was never present for a live performance of the song with Mercury, Taylor instead filled for backing vocals usually in unison with Mercury, as Mercury took over all of Bowie's parts.

Live recordings

Remixes & Other Releases

Rah Mix

A remixed version (called "Rah Mix") was issued in December 1999 to promote Queen's Greatest Hits III compilation, reaching No. 14 on the UK Singles Chart. The video for Under Pressure "Rah Mix" was directed by DoRo and features footage of Freddie Mercury from the Wembley concert on 12 July 1986 and David Bowie at the Freddie Mercury Tribute Concert also at Wembley on 20 April 1992 spliced together due to digital technology (and with Annie Lennox carefully edited out) and features on Greatest Flix III VHS, Under Pressure "Rah Mix" cd single CD1 and Queen Hot Space 2011 iTunes edition.

=Track listing=

Two CD singles (one multimedia enhanced) released 6 December 1999 and 7" picture disc released 13 December 1999. As Bohemian Rhapsody wins The Song of The Millennium award, this released as b-side under the title "The Song of The Millenium – Bohemian Rhapsody"

Juno Ray Club Mix

This trance influenced, Nu-House remix was featured on a notable, multi-genre music blog called TheMusicNinja.  Not much is known about the origin of this remix, however the sound of it is reminiscent of earlier work by Trance/Nu-House artist, Kaskade.

Lazy Kiss Edit

Released in October of 2013 by Brazilian Electro-House duo, Lazy Kiss. This edit/mashup gained exposure through blog filter site, HypeMachine and the Italian music blog, Frequenze Indipendenti.

Chart positions

Under Pressure (1981):
Under Pressure – Rah Mix (1999):

Cover versions

My Chemical Romance and The Used version

The song was covered in 2005 by American Alternative rock bands The Used and My Chemical Romance for tsunami relief. The cover was originally released as an Internet download track but has subsequently been featured as a bonus track on the 2005 re-release of The Used's second studio album In Love and Death, and received wide airplay in 2005.
On the Billboard charts, the single reached number 28 on Modern Rock and Pop 100 charts and number 41 on the Hot 100.used|chart=all}} Artist Chart History – The Used – Singles, Billboard

Other cover versions

Live cover performances

Remixes/sampling

Other uses

Controversy

Controversy arose when Vanilla Ice sampled the bassline for his 1990 single "Ice Ice Baby". Initially he denied the accusation, and then said he had modified it,

Rock Band music gaming platform

The song was made available to download on 7 December 2010 for use in the Rock Band 3 music gaming platform in both Basic rhythm, and PRO mode which allows use of a real guitar / bass guitar, and MIDI compatible electronic drum kits / keyboards in addition to up to three-part harmony or backup vocals.







