[[Dodi Fayed]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 births, 1997 deaths, Alumni of Institut Le Rosey, British film producers, British people of Egyptian descent, Collège Saint Marc, Alexandria alumni, Diana, Princess of Wales, Egyptian emigrants to the United Kingdom, Egyptian film producers, Egyptian Muslims, Harrods, People from Alexandria, Road accident deaths in France

Emad El-Din Mohamed Abdel Moneim Fayed (; 15 April 1955 – 31 August 1997), was the son of Egyptian billionaire Mohamed Al-Fayed. He was the boyfriend of Diana, Princess of Wales, with whom he died in a car crash in Paris, on 31 August 1997.
He was employed by his father and also worked as a film producer.

Life and career

Dodi was Born in Alexandria, Egypt, Fayed was the eldest son of billionaire Mohamed Al-Fayed, former owner of Harrods department store and the former owner of Fulham Football Club and the Hôtel Ritz Paris. He also briefly attended Sandhurst. After completing his education, he served as an attaché at the United Arab Emirates Embassy in London.
Fayed was the executive producer of the films Chariots of Fire, Breaking Glass, F/X, F/X2, Hook, and The Scarlet Letter. He also served as the Executive Creative Consultant for the F/X television series. Fayed also worked for his father on Harrods' marketing.Obituary

Personal life

In 1986, Fayed married model Suzanne Gregard, but the couple divorced after eight months of marriage.
In July 1997, Fayed became romantically involved with Diana, Princess of Wales. At the time of his romance with Diana in the Summer of 1997 Dodi was engaged to an American model, Kelly Fisher. Dodi had bought a house in Malibu for him and Fisher with money from his father.

Death

In the early morning hours of 31 August 1997, Diana and Fayed died in a car crash in the Pont de l'Alma underpass in Paris. They had stopped in Paris en route to London, after having spent nine days together on holiday in the French and Italian Riviera aboard his family yacht, the Jonikal. Neither Fayed nor Diana was wearing a seatbelt. Investigations by French and British police concluded that their chauffeur Henri Paul was driving under the influence of alcohol, and paparazzi chasing the couple are also believed to have contributed to the accident.Mohamed al-Fayed: The outsider The Independent, 6 October 2007 Fayed's former spokesman Michael Cole has claimed that the couple had become engaged before their deaths,Diana and Dodi 'were engaged' BBC although their is evidence which suggests otherwise. 
Fayed was originally interred in Brookwood Cemetery near Woking, Surrey, but was moved to the Fayed estate in Oxted, Surrey.

Memorials

Fayed's father has erected two memorials to his son and Princess Diana at Harrods. The first, unveiled on 12 April 1998, consists of photos of the two behind a pyramid-shaped display that holds a wine glass still smudged with lipstick from Diana's last dinner as well as a ring Fayed purchased the day before they died. The second, unveiled in 2005 and titled "Innocent Victims", is a three meter high bronze statue of the two dancing on a beach beneath the wings of an albatross. The memorials were designed by 80-year-old Bill Mitchell, a close friend of Fayed and architect for Harrods for more than 40 years.Princes lead Diana remembrance BBC






