[[Department for Protection and Security]]

CATEGORIES: National Front (France), Paramilitary organizations, Military wings of political parties

Department for Protection and Security (DPS) or Département Protection et Sécurité is the "security" branch of the National Front (FN) political party of France, which depends directly from the FN's president and is now led by Eric Staelens.Organigramme: Les autres services du FN, National Front website.

Mission

The mission of the DPS is providing physical protection of the leaders of the National Front and the monitoring of events or meetings of the party. One feature of DPS compared to other security services political parties is its quasi-military character, both in the origin of many of its members (former military, police or security guards). Its equipment consists of helmets and uniforms similar to those worn by the mobile brigades of law enforcement. There is a fairly strong tradition of red berets (Paratroops) and Green Berets (Foreign Legion).

1998 Parliamentary Commission on the acts of the DPS

In 1998, a Parliamentary Commission, led by Socialist MP Bernard Grasset (Green MP Noël Mamère and conservative MP Patrick Devedjian were also part of it  Assembly report The report was published on June 3, 1999, and pinpointed several cases of DPS member checking identity card of demonstrators instead of the police.
A former member of the DPS has given a long interview to daily Libération. Using the pseudonym "Dominique", he explained that the DPS has special "unofficial" intervention squads made up of former paratroopers and Foreign Legionnaires, veterans of French interventions in Chad, Lebanon, and the Central African Republic. Some members of the DPS were present in covert operations in Zaire (1997 and 2001), Madagascar (in 2002, Didier Ratsiraka called for some mercenaries to resolve the political crisis  Côte d'Ivoire (2001–2003) (translations available in English and Persian) According to the Voltaire network, the DPS had been created with the help of Jacques Foccart and François de Grossouvre (leader of the French branch of Gladio, NATO's secret armies) after the dissolving of the Service d'Action Civique (SAC) 

Bernard Courcelle's leadership until Bruno Mégret's scission

DPS is equipped with helmets and shields, gas masks, tear gas launchers, guns that fire rubber bullets, bulletproof vests, clubs, and gloves with lead weights. DPS is alleged to have compiled computerized lists of journalists and antifascist activists with their names, addresses, and photos. They engage in punitive actions against their opponents but have, Dominique said, excellent relations with the police, including the police commissioners. They are organized in terms of military ranks such as colonel and captain. According to Liberation, the DPS now has 3,000 members. Since 1993, the group has been commanded  by Bernard Courcelle, who claims, "We only defend ourselves. We never attack the meetings of other groups." According to Reporters Sans Frontières, the DPS has records on journalists who follow the Front National's activities and, on several occasions, was responsible for the beating up of reporters.
In 1980, Bernard Courcelle was a member, along with Bruno Gollnisch, of the Direction de la Protection de la Sécurité et de la Défense (DPSD), an official Ministry of Defence organization in charge of recruiting mercenaries and informing on weapons traffic. The DPSD allegedly has or had ties, between the two wars, with the terrorist group La Cagoule. In 1983, Bernard Courcelle allegedly created a mercenary firm with his brother. The next year, he became the former security director of the French armaments manufacturer, Luchaire. In 1989, he was in charge of security for the Musée d'Orsay, which responsibility was assumed by none other than Anne Pingeot, president François Mitterrand's secret mistress. In 1993, Courcelle became the leader of the DPS, before becoming in 1999 the leader of Republic of the Congo's president Denis Sassou-Nguesso's personal guard. He then takes charge of the security of the oil company Elf's infrastructures in Pointe-Noire.








