[[Boron deficiency (plant disorder)]]

CATEGORIES: Physiological plant disorders, Boron

Boron (B) deficiency is the most widespread micronutrient deficiency around the world and causes large losses in crop production both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Plants contain Boron both in a water-soluble and insoluble form. In intact plants, the amount of water-soluble boron fluctuates with the amount of boron supplied, while insoluble boron does not. The appearance of a boron deficiency coincides with the decrease of water-insoluble boron. It appears that the insoluble boron is the functional form while the soluble boron represents the surplus.
Boron is essential for the growth of higher plants. The primary function of the element is to provide structural integrity to the cell wall in plants. Other functions likely include the maintenance of the plasma membrane and other metabolic pathways.

Symptoms

Symptoms include dying growing tips and bushy stunted growth, extreme cases may prevent fruit set. Crop-specific symptoms include;

Soil Conditions

Boron is present in the soil in many form, the most common being Boric Acid (H3BO3).  An adequate amount of boron in the soil is 12 mg/kg.  If the boron content of the soil drops below 0.14 mg/kg then boron deficiency is likely to be observed.  Boron deficiency is also observed in basic soils with a high pH because in basic conditions boric acid exists in an undissociated form which the plant is unable to absorb.Boron the Overlooked Essential Element  Soils with low organic matter content (
Boron Requirements

Boron is an essential micronutrient which means it is essential for plant growth and development, but is required in very small quantities.  Although Boron requirements vary among crops, the optimum boron content of the leaves for most crops is 20-100 ppm.

Treatment

Boric acid (16.5%boron), borax (11.3% boron) or SoluBor (20.5% boron) can be applied to soils to correct boron deficiency. Typical applications of actual boron are about 1.1 kg/hectare or 1.0 lb/acre but optimum levels of boron vary with plant type.  Borax, Boric Acid or Solubor can be dissolved in water and sprayed or applied to soil as a dust. Excess boron is toxic to plants so care must be taken to ensure correct application rate and even coverage. Leaves of many plants are damaged by boron; therefore, when in doubt, only apply to soil.  Application of boron may not correct boron deficiency in alkaline soils because even with the addition of boron, it may remain unavailable for plant absorption.  Continued application of boron may be necessary in soils that are susceptible to leaching such as sandy soils.  Flushing soils containing toxic levels of boron with water can remove the boron through leaching.

Functions

Once boron has been absorbed by the plant and incorporated into the various structures that require boron, it is unable to disassemble these structures and re-transport boron through the plant resulting in boron being a non-mobile nutrient. Due to translocation difficulties the youngest leaves often show deficiency symptoms first.

Cell Wall

Boron is part of the dRG-II-B complex which is involved in the cross linking for pectin located in the primary cell wall and the middle lamella of plant cells.Agr.  This cross linking is thought to stabilize the matrix of plant cell walls.

Carbohydrate Metabolism

Protein Synthesis

Germination and Pollination

The B requirement is much higher for reproductive growth than for vegetative growth in most
plant species. Boron increases flower production and retention, pollen tube elongation and
germination, and seed and fruit development.borax.aspx
A deficiency of B can cause incomplete pollination of corn or prevent maximum pod-set in
soybeans.

Sugar Translocation

Photosynthesis transforms sunlight energy into plant energy compounds such as sugars. For this
process to continue in plants, the sugars must be moved away from the site of their development,
and stored or used to make other compounds.
Boron increases the rate of transport of sugars (which are produced by photosynthesis in mature
plant leaves) to actively growing regions and also in developing fruits.
Boron is essential for providing sugars which are needed for root growth in all plants and also for
normal development of root nodules in legumes such as alfalfa, soybeans and peanuts.




