[[Tefillin]]

CATEGORIES: Hebrew calligraphy, Hebrew words and phrases, Jewish ritual objects, Jewish scribes (soferim), Positive Mitzvoth, Uses of leather in Judaism, Armwear, Jewish life cycle

Tefillin (Askhenazic:  from Ancient Greek phylacterion, form of phylássein, φυλάσσειν meaning "to guard, protect") are a set of small black leather boxes containing scrolls of parchment inscribed with verses from the Torah, which are worn by observant Jews during weekday morning prayers. Although "tefillin" is technically the plural form (the singular being "tefillah"), it is loosely used as a singular as well. The hand-tefillin, or shel yad, is placed on the upper arm, and the strap wrapped around the arm, hand and fingers; while the head-tefillin, or shel rosh, is placed above the forehead. The Torah commands that they should be worn to serve as a "sign" and "remembrance" that God brought the children of Israel out of Egypt.
The scriptural texts for tefillin are obscure in literal meaning. For example, the verse in Deut. 11:18 does not designate what specifically to "bind upon your arm," and the definition of totafot is not obvious. It is the Talmud, the authoritative oral tradition for Rabbinic Judaism, which explains what are to be bound to the body and the form of tefillin.

Biblical source

The obligation of tefillin, as expounded by the Oral Law, is mentioned four times in the Torah: twice when recalling the The Exodus from Egypt:


and twice in the shema passages:

Etymology

The ultimate origin of Hebrew "tefillin" is uncertain. The word "tefillin" is not found in the Bible, which calls them ṭoṭafot. The Septuagint renders "ṭoṭafot" ἀσαλευτόν, "something immovable."Phylacteries, Jewish Encyclopedia (1906). Some believe it refers to a charm, similar to the Hebrew neṭifot, "round jewel." The Talmud (Sanhedrin 4b) explains that the word ṭoṭafot is combination of two foreign words: Tot means "two" in the "Caspi" language and Fot means "two" in the "Afriki" language,The Targum often substitutes the word Afriki for Tarshish, see Kings I 10:22  hence tot and fot means "two and two", corresponding to the four compartments of the head-tefillin.v. U'letotafot bein ei'neicha Menahem ben Saruq explains that the word is derived from the Hebrew Ve'hateif and Tatifoo, both expressions meaning "speech", "for when one sees the tefillin it causes him to remember and speak about The Exodus from Egypt."Rashi to Exodus 13:16, s.v. U'letotafot bein ei'neicha
The first texts to use "tefillin" are the Targumim and Peshitta and it is also used in subsequent Talmudic literature, although the word "ṭoṭafah" was still current, being used with the meaning of "frontlet." "Tefillin" may have derived from the Aramaic palal, "to plead, pray," a word closely related to the Hebrew tefillah, "prayer." Jacob ben Asher (14th century) suggests that "tefillin" is derived from the Hebrew pelilah, "justice, evidence," for tefillin act as a sign and proof of God's presence among the Jewish people.
The only instance of the name "phylacteries" in ancient times occurs once in the Greek New Testament ( Neither Aquila nor Symmachus use the word "phylacteries."

Purpose

The tefillin are to serve as a reminder of God's intervention at the time of the Exodus from Egypt.

Manufacture and contents

The manufacturing process of both the boxes and the parchment scrolls are intricate and governed by hundreds of detailed rules.), one of the names of God.

Parchment scrolls

Four biblical passages which refer to the tefillin are placed inside the leather boxes. 
They are written by a scribe with special ink on parchment scrolls (klaf). The Hebrew Ashuri script must be and there are three main styles of lettering used: Beis Yosef – generally used by Ashkenazim; Arizal – generally used by Hasidim; Velish – used by Sefardim. The passages contain 3,188 letters usually take between 10–15 hours to complete.stam. Retrieved 1 July 2011, The arm-tefillin has one large compartment, which contains all four biblical passages written upon a single strip of parchment. The head-tefillin has four separate compartments in each of which one scroll of parchment is placed.
There was considerable discussion among the commentators of the Talmud as to the order in which the scrolls should be inserted into the four compartments of the head-tefillin. In the Middle Ages, a famous debate on the issue was recorded between Rashi and his grandson Rabbeinu Tam. Rashi held that the passages are placed according to the chronological order as they appear in the Torah: Kadesh Li, Ve-haya Ki Yeviehcha, Shema, Ve-haya Im Shemoa, while according to Rabbeinu Tam, the last two passages are switched around.

Obligation

The duty of laying tefillin rests upon males after the age of thirteen years. Although women are exempt from the obligation, some early codifers allowed them to do so. See Grossman, Avraham (2004). Pious and Rebellious - Jewish Women in Medieval Europe. Brandeis Univ. Moses Isserles (16th century), however, strongly discourages it. See also Targum Yerushalmi on Deuteronomy 22:5. Historically, the mitzvah of tefillin was not performed by women, but the ritual was apparently kept by some women in medieval France and Germany. Mothers and Children - Jewish Family Life in Medieval Europe. Princeton. Traditions exist of some prominent women laying tefillinRashi's daughters allegedly wore tefillin, as did the wife of Chaim ibn Attar and the female Hasidic Rebbe known as Maiden of Ludmir.  and Tefillin : The United Synagogue for Conservative Judaism (USCJ) In 2013 SAR High School in Riverdale, New York began allowing girls to wrap tefillin during Shacharit-morning prayer; it is probably the first Modern Orthodox high school in the U.S. to do so. 
Others who are not obliged to lay tefllin include a mourner during the first day of his mourning period, and a bridegroom on his wedding-day. A sufferer from stomach-trouble or one who is otherwise in pain and can not concentrate his mind is also exempt. One who is engaged in the study of the Law and scribes of and dealers in tefillin and mezuzot while engaged in their work if it can not be postponed, are also free from this obligation.
The codes view the commandment of tefillin as important and call those who neglect to observe it "transgressors." Maimonides counts the commandment of laying the arm-tefillin and head-tefillin as two separate positive mitzvot. The Talmud cites Rav Sheshet who said that by neglecting the precept, one transgresses eight positive commandments. It may have arisen from the fear of persecution, similar to what had occurred to the Jews living in the Land of Israel under Roman rule in the 2nd-century.

Performance

Originally tefillin were worn all day, but not during the night. Nowadays the prevailing custom is to wear them only during the weekday morning service,Shulchan Aruch Orach Chayim 37:2 although some individuals wear them at other times during the day as well.
Tefillin are not donned on Shabbat and the major festivals  because these holy days are themselves considered "signs" which render the need of the "sign" of tefillin superfluous. On Chol HaMoed (intermediate days) of Pesach and Sukkot, there is a great debate among the early halachic authorities as to whether tefillin should be worn or not. Those who forbid it consider the "sign" of intermediate days as having the same status as the festival itself, making the ritual of tefillin redundant. Others argue and hold that Chol HaMoed does not constitute a "sign" in which case tefillin must be laid. Three customs evolved resulting from the dispute:
In light of the conflicting opinions, the Mishna Berura (20th-century) recommends Ashkenazim make the following stipulation before donning tefillin: "If I am obligated to don tefillin I intend to fulfill my obligation and if I am not obligated to don tefillin, my doing so should not be considered as fulfilling any obligation" and that the blessing not be recited.Mishna Berura 31:8
On the fast day of Tisha B'Av, tefillin are not worn in the morning as tefillin are considered an "adornment", symbols of beauty, which is deemed inappropriate for a day of mourning. They are worn instead at the afternoon Mincha service. There are those however who have a Custom(Jews from Allepo,Syria) on Tisha B'Ab to privately put on tefillin at home and pray privately, say the Amida and take off the tefilin and go to synagogue to finish the prayers.

How to put on tefillin

Ashkenazim put on and remove the tefillin while standing, while Sephardim do so while sitting. The Sephardic custom is that no blessing is said for the head-tefillin, the first blessing sufficing for both.  Many members of the Chabad Orthodox movement only recite the blessing on the Head-Tefillah if they spoke about something not related to tefillin since reciting the blessing on the Hand-Tefillah.(this is also the Sephardic custom).
The arm-tefillin is laid on the inner side of the bare left arm, two finger breadths above the elbow, so that when the arm is bent the tefillin faces towards the heart. If one is left-handed, it is placed on the right arm in the same place. After the blessing is said, the arm-tefillin is tightened, and the strap wound seven times round the arm. Then the head-tefillin is placed on the middle of the head just above the forehead, so that no parts rests below the hairline.) according to Sephardim. There are various customs regarding winding the strap on the arm and hand. In fact, the arm strap is looped for clockwise wrapping with Ashkenazi tefillin while it is knotted for counter clockwise wrapping with Sephardic and Chabad tefillin. On removing the tefillin, the steps are reversed.







Further reading


