[[Sigur Rós]]

CATEGORIES: Sigur Rós, Icelandic post-rock groups, Icelandic alternative rock groups, Dream pop musical groups, Winners of the Shortlist Music Prize, Musical groups established in 1994, XL Recordings artists, MCA Records artists, Geffen Records artists, Musical quartets, Musical trios

Sigur Rós (

History

1997–1998: Von and Von brigði

Jón Þór "Jónsi" Birgisson (guitar and vocals), Georg Hólm (bass) and Ágúst Ævar Gunnarsson (drums) formed the group in Reykjavík in January 1994. ( They soon won a record deal with the local Sugarcubes-owned record label, Bad Taste. In 1997, they released Von (pronounced 

1999–2000: Ágætis byrjun

International acclaim came with 1999's Ágætis byrjun ( as did the Emmy-winning 2005 TV film The Girl in the Café. In Enki Bilal's Immortel (Ad Vitam) the song "Hjartað hamast (bamm bamm bamm)" is used. The song "Svefn-g-englar" was also used on V on 24 November 2009 and features prominently in Café de Flore released in 2011.
After the release of Ágætis byrjun, the band became well known for Jónsi's signature style of reverb accentuated guitar work using a cello's bow.

2001: Rímur

In 2001, Sigur Rós christened their newly completed studio by recording an EP with an Icelandic fisherman named Steindór Andersen. The EP contains six songs, all of which feature Steindór Andersen reciting traditional Icelandic poetry called rímur. Sigur Rós accompany him on three songs. Two songs feature Steindór alone. The last song on the EP, "Lækurinn", is a duet with Sigurður Sigurðarson. A thousand copies of the EP were printed and sold during the spring tour of 2001. The EP was sold in a blank-white-paper case.

2002–2004: ( )

Drummer Ágúst left the band after the recording of Ágætis byrjun and was replaced by Orri Páll Dýrason. In 2002, their highly anticipated follow-up album ( ) was released. Upon release all tracks on the album were untitled, though the band later published song names on their website. All of the lyrics on ( ) are sung in Vonlenska, also known as Hopelandic, a constructed language without semantic meaning, technically glossolalia, which resembles the phonology of the Icelandic language. It has also been said that the listener is supposed to interpret their own meanings of the lyrics which can then be written in the blank pages in the album booklet.
In 2002, the band also wrote an original score for the Bodyscript dance production by Wayne McGregor Random Dance in collaboration with Sadler's Wells Theatre and the Arts Council England.
Sigur Rós collaborated with Radiohead in October 2003 to compose music for Merce Cunningham's dance piece Split Sides; Sigur Rós's three tracks were named Ba Ba Ti Ki Di Do and released in March 2004 while Radiohead's contribution was never released. Sigur Rós' 1997 debut album Von found a US and UK release in October 2004.
"Untitled 3" (a.k.a. Samskeyti) from the album is used on the video 6AM by film maker Carmen Vidal, winner of the 2006 Student Academy Award.
"Untitled 3" is also used at the end credits of the indie drama movie, Mysterious Skin. It can also be heard in Skins and CSI: Miami and the British TV Documentary Protecting Our Children as well as during a section of the London 2012 summer Olympics on the BBC.

2005–2006: Takk...

Their fourth album, Takk... ( "Ocean Sun"), a song that was previously released on the band's 1997 debut, Von. "Hoppípolla" was used in the trailers for the BBC's natural history series Planet Earth in 2006, as well as the closing credits for the 2006 FA Cup final, ITV's coverage of the 2006 Oxford and Cambridge Boat Race, advertisements for the BBC's coverage of England games during the 2006 FIFA World Cup, on television advertisements for RTÉ's Gaelic games coverage in Ireland, and on an advertisement for Oxfam. It was also used in the final scene of the movie Penelope, for the trailer of the film Children of Men and for the trailer of the film Slumdog Millionaire. Following this, demand for the single grew. It was made more widely available by EMI in consequence. This song is also used in the trailer for the Disney movie Earth as well as in the 2011 film We Bought a Zoo, in 2012 it was also the chosen music to the debut time-lapse short movie of Portuguese photographer João Pedro Jesus.
An extended Sæglópur EP () was released in July 2006 in most parts of the world and in August in the United States. Its original release was scheduled in May, but because of the sudden demand of "Hoppípolla" it was pushed back from that date. Sigur Rós recorded three new songs to appear on the EP ("Refur", "Ó friður", and "Kafari"). In July 2006, Sigur Rós finished a major world tour with stops in Europe, the United States (where they played a headline show at the Hollywood Bowl), Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Hong Kong and Japan. Upon return to their homeland, Sigur Rós provided a series of free surprise outdoor concerts throughout Iceland in July and August, playing in various venues such as abandoned bunkers and community coffee shops, all of which were included in the 2007 documentary film Heima. They also performed twice in the United States in February.[ref]

[/ref]

2007: Heima and Hvarf/Heim

In August 2007, a limited DVD+CD edition of the 2002 soundtrack to the documentary Hlemmur was released. Hvarf/Heim (
To promote their film Heima, the band scheduled a series of premiere screenings throughout the world, featuring a short acoustic set before the film and a question-and-answer session afterwards.

2008: Með suð í eyrum við spilum endalaust

The band's fifth regular studio album ( and had more pop-oriented songs, making it "the group's most accessible effort" while maintaining the "majestic beauty that defines the band's music." The final track "All Alright" is the band's first to be sung in English, though all the other lyrics are in Icelandic.
The band were announced as a headlining act for the 2008 Splendour in the Grass Festival in Byron Bay, Australia, where they blew a speaker at the end of their second song. Jónsi Birgisson commented, "The piano is exploding, I think," one of the few things spoken in English.
The band released the first song from the album entitled "Gobbledigook" for free on their website, along with a music video.
On June 8, the whole album was made available for free streaming on their website
In the fall of 2008 Sigur Rós embarked on a world tour supporting their newly released album. The band played as a four-piece without Amiina and the brass band, the first time the band had played as a four-piece in seven years. The tour started on 17 September 2008 in the United States, at the United Palace Theater in New York City, and finished with a concert in Reykjavík at Laugardalshöll on 23 November 2008. The majority of the tour was European with the exception of concerts in the United States, Australia, Canada and Japan.
The track "Festival" from the album features in the score of the 2010 film 127 Hours, providing the euphoric backing to the climax of the movie. It is also featured at the end of  HBO mini-series "24/7 - Flyers-Rangers".

2009-2012: Hiatus, Inni, Valtari

On 28 May 2009, Sigur Rós announced that they had almost completed recording their latest album.
On 11 August 2011 Sigur Rós's official website unveiled a trailer for a project called Inni,
On 3 November 2011, following the UK premiere of Inni at the British Film Institute in London, the band members participated in a Q&A session during which Georg promised that 2012 would be a "very busy" year for Sigur Rós. The band hinted at a new album and tour in the second half of 2012. The Q&A session was curtailed when a stage light began to emit smoke and the room was evacuated.
 "The band's next album is scheduled for release in the spring. Based on excerpts presented by Mr. Sveinsson, the new music promises to be as exceptional as the best of the band's catalog. Mr. Hólm called it "introverted", while Mr. Birgisson said it was "floaty and minimal". "An ambient album" was how Mr. Dýrason described it, with "a slow takeoff toward something". For a visitor who heard a preliminary recording in which Mr. Birgisson's falsetto was surrounded by rich choral voices and what sounded like a pipe organ, the music was thrilling". 
In February 2012, Sigur Rós announced their live return with festival appearances at Bestival in England, Summer Sonic Festival in Japan, and other shows in Ireland, Switzerland, Germany, Austria, France, Poland, and Italy.
An interview with the band in the March 2012 issue of Q magazine confirmed the completion of a new album, titled Valtari and scheduled for release on 28 May 2012. On 26 March 2012, the band released the first official single from the album, "Ekki Múkk."
It was rumored that an already-complete additional album would follow-up their sixth release, Valtari. However, the band has dismissed the rumor as a "fabrication".
On 2 November 2012, Georg Hólm confirmed that the band had already started work on a new album, due to be released some time in 2013. He described it as a dramatic change of direction, "an anti-Valtari".

2013-present: three-piece band, Kveikur

thumb|Sigur Rós performing live (in 2013) at the Wolverhampton Civic Hall in Wolverhampton, West Midlands, England. On January 24, 2013, the band held a Q&A session via the social news website Reddit. Through this, the band announced the departure of Kjartan Sveinsson was confirmed during the Reddit Q&A session, where Sigur Rós stated "Yes, he has left the band. He said he spent half his life in the band and it was time to do something different." 
In spite of Kjartan's departure, the band announced their 7th studio album, entitled Kveikur, on March 22. On the same day, they also released the album's first single: "Brennisteinn." The album itself was finally released on June 14 (releasing 2 days earlier in Japan, and 4 days later in the US) and marked both a musical and thematical change for the band, providing a more aggressive sound, compared to their previous albums. The album was well received by critics, scoring 80 on metacritic, with several reviewers praising for the band's new musical approach, as well as a lack of commercialism.com/releases/17694/reviews/4146512 The release was marked, by the band, with a new tour, as well as an interactive musical experience, where fans could live stream a concert, taking control of the camera.co.sigur-ros.co.
The band provided original music, as well as brief cameo, and a rendition of "The Simpsons Theme", for The Simpsons episode, "The Saga of Carl", which aired on May 19, 2013.sigur-ros.co., In addition to this, they also covered the song "The Rains of Castamere," which were originally recorded by The National for the 2nd season of the show.com/news/54643-sigur-ros-will-cover-the-rains-of-castamere-for-game-of-thrones-soundtrack/

Vonlenska

Vonlenska is the non-literal language that forms the unintelligible lyrics sung by the band on some songs, in particular by Jónsi. It is also commonly known by the English translation of its name, Hopelandic. It takes its name from "Von", a song on Sigur Rós's debut album Von where it was first used. However, not all Sigur Rós songs are in Hopelandic; many are sung in Icelandic.
Vonlenska has no fixed syntax and differs from constructed languages that can be used for communication. It focuses entirely on the sounds of language; it lacks grammar, meaning, and even distinct words. Instead, it consists of emotive non-lexical vocables and phonemes; in effect, Vonlenska uses the melodic and rhythmic elements of singing without the conceptual content of language. In this way, it is similar to the use of scat singing in vocal jazz. The band's website describes it as "a form of gibberish vocals that fits to the music"; it is similar in concept to the 'nonsense' language often used by Cocteau Twins singer Elizabeth Fraser in the 1980s and 1990s or by Icelandic singer Björk. Most of the syllable strings sung by Jónsi are repeated many times throughout each song, and in the case of ( ), throughout the whole album.

Members

Former members

Touring members

Occasional additional ensembles

Discography






