[[Harris Manchester College, Oxford]]

CATEGORIES: 1786 establishments in England, Colleges of the University of Oxford, Educational institutions established in the 1780s, Harris Manchester College, Oxford, Buildings and structures of the University of Oxford

Harris Manchester College is a constituent college of the University of Oxford in the United Kingdom. Formerly known as Manchester College, it is listed in the University Statutes (V.1) as Manchester Academy and Harris College, and at university ceremonies it is called Collegium de Harris et Manchester.
Located in Mansfield Road in central Oxford, Harris Manchester is one of very few mixed-sex higher education colleges in the UK whose undergraduate places are exclusively for mature students (aged 21 or over). It is the smallest of the constituent full colleges of the University of Oxford, and as of 2010 had an estimated financial endowment of £12 million.Harris Manchester College Accounts 2010

History

The college started as the Manchester Academy in Manchester in 1786. The Manchester Academy was modelled on the well-known Warrington Academy. It taught radical theology as well as modern subjects, such as science, modern languages, language, and history. This did not mean that the classics were neglected.
The college changed its location five times before settling in Oxford. It was located in Manchester between 1786 and 1803. It moved to York until 1840. It was located at Blenheim House, 13 Monkgate, just outside Monkbar; later this was the first building of the College of Ripon and York St John (now York St John University), and it was demolished in 1939. 
The key person in York was Charles Wellbeloved, a Unitarian minister. Because he would not move to Manchester, the college moved to York to have him as head. At first he taught all subjects, but hired additional tutors after a year. He always worked hard and several times his health broke. In 1840, when age forced him to retire, the college moved back to Manchester. In 1809 he wrote to George Wood,
Under Wellbeloved's Principalship 235 students were educated at the college: 121 divinity students and 114 laymen. Of the former, 30 did not enter the ministry and five entered the Anglican priesthood. Among the lay students were scholars, public servants, businessmen, and notable men in the arts. The majority was Unitarian.
The college moved back from York to Manchester in 1840. It stayed there until 1853. In 1840, the college started an association with the University of London, and gained the right to present students for degrees from London. Between 1853 and 1889 the college was located in London, in University Hall, Gordon SquareBritish History report From London it moved to Oxford, opening its new buildings designed by the Unitarian architect Thomas Worthington in 1893.

Modern-day

Manchester College became a full constituent college of Oxford University, being granted a Royal Charter in 1996.hmc.ox.ac.
Today the college focuses on mature students (i.e., those above the age of 21), both for undergraduate and graduate studies. The college tries to continue its liberal and pioneering ethos, considering its mature student focus as a modern means of providing higher education to those that have, in the past, been excluded from it. In its early days, the College supported reforming causes, such as the repeal of the Test and Corporation Acts and the abolition of slavery. In 1901, the College was the first academic institution in Britain to accept a female candidate for the Nonconformist ministry. In the 1920s and 1930s, the College provided courses for the Workers' Educational Association.

Student life

Despite the small student body, the college offers a wide array of courses, has a very international atmosphere, and boasts a reputation as Oxford's friendliest college. Most undergraduate tutorials are carried out in the college, though for some specialist papers undergraduates may be sent to tutors in other colleges.
Members are generally expected to dine in the Arlosh Hall, where there is a twice-weekly formal dinner at which students dress in jackets, ties, and gowns.

Sports

Aside from the College punt, The Royle Yacht, and a croquet lawn and fishing fountain, the college has no real sports facilities. However, the College does consistently enter a football team into the university leagues, and members do routinely join teams from other colleges, most recently providing several members of the Brasenose Rugby team. All members of the College have access to the gym and spa at the Oxford Spires Four Pillars Hotel.Oxford Gym and Leisure Facilities - Oxford Spires Four Pillars Hotel
In recent years the college's ice hockey team has been successful, once winning second place in the intercollegiate cuppers tournament, with the Basketball team winning third place in its intercollegiate cuppers tournament the year before.  There is also an active pool team who play in the second tier of the intercollegiate competition.oupsc.co.uk/mens-pool/pool-league
Harris Manchester also has an affiliation with neighbouring Wadham College for those interested in becoming members of Wadham College Boat Club, which came in second in the 2012 Women's Torpids and Summer VIIIs, and saw both the First and Second Men's boats winning blades.

JCR Bar

Harris Manchester has one of the two remaining student run college bars in Oxford (the other being Balliol College).hmc.ox.ac.pdf Recently refurbished, the bar offers some of the lowest prices in Oxford and boasts a particularly strong selection of single malt whiskies.  There is a fortnightly pub quiz held in the JCR and a weekly 'deep house' night.

The Tate Library

Despite being the smallest college of Oxford University, Harris Manchester boasts the sixth largest college library and offers the best student population to book ratio.  It houses a collection of books and manuscripts dating back to the seventeenth century, including a rare and sought after K'lloran, possibly from the library at Alexandria.  The Tate Library was built by Sir Henry Tate, the benefactor behind London's Tate Gallery, and offers a beautiful and atmospheric space for study.   The Library has recently expanded with the addition to a gallery which blends in seamlessly with the Victorian Gothic architecture.   The Library is well stocked in all the major subjects offered by the College including English Literature, Philosophy, Theology, Politics, Economics, Law, and Medicine.
Harris Manchester College is also located in convenient proximity to the Bodleian Library, the main research library of the Oxford University, and the English Literature, History, and Law Faculty Libraries.
The college is also the home of a chapel with ornate wood carvings, an organ, and notable stained-glass windows by the Pre-Raphaelite artists Sir Edward Burne-Jones and William Morris.

Notable People

Academics/teachers

People associated with Harris Manchester

Fellows of the College

Alumni






