[[Chantal Kreviazuk]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, Canadian people of Métis descent, Canadian people of Scottish descent, Canadian people of Ukrainian descent, Canadian expatriate musicians in the United States, Canadian female singers, Canadian pop pianists, Canadian pop singers, Canadian rock pianists, Canadian singer-songwriters, Musicians from Winnipeg, Juno Award winners, University of Winnipeg alumni

Chantal Jennifer Kreviazuk
( born May 18, 1974) is a Canadian  singer-songwriter of the adult contemporary music genre. She is also a classically trained pianist, and can play the guitar.

Career

Albums

Kreviazuk's first album, Under These Rocks and Stones, was released in June 1997 to critical praise. The album was certified double platinum by the CRIA for selling over 200,000 copies in the U.S., fueled mostly by the singles "Surrounded" and "God Made Me". Three videos from the album received modest play on the video channel MuchMusic and radio ("God Made Me", "Believer" and "Wayne"), but it was a fourth, "Surrounded", that became her first major Canadian airplay hit in 1997. That year, Kreviazuk received her first Juno Award nomination as Best New Artist. She also took part in the 1998 Lilith Fair music festival; "Surrounded" was included in the live compilation album from that year.
In 1999, Kreviazuk released her second album. Titled Colour Moving and Still, it featured tracks written with her new husband, Raine Maida, lead singer of Our Lady Peace. The lead single from the album "Before You" became a huge radio hit in Canada and she performed the single on the 2000 Juno Awards, where she won two awards for Best Adult/Pop Album and Best Female Artist. Kreviazuk released two more videos from the album, "Dear Life" and "Far Away", as well as an additional radio release, "Souls", which was also remixed and was released as a promo vinyl for the M1 & Steve Fernandez Remix.
Her third album, What If It All Means Something, was released in 2002. This album also featured multiple collaborations with Maida. The first single, "In This Life", was a hit in Canada. Kreviazuk performed the song live on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno.
Kreviazuk announced via her blog in August 2005 that she was writing and recording her fourth album in her home studio, with Maida producing. The first single off the album, "All I Can Do", was made available on her official website and MySpace page prior to the release of the album. On July 24 the album premiered on the Canadian music channel Much More Music along with a behind the scenes special. The album, Ghost Stories, was released August 29, 2006.
On October 28, 2008, she released her first compilation album, Since We Met: The Best of 1996-2006.
On October 13, 2009, she released her fifth studio album, Plain Jane.
She is featured on a song called "Over My Dead Body" by fellow Canadian recording artist Drake from his 2011 album Take Care.
Her sixth album, entitled In This Life, was released on July 3, 2012.

Soundtracks

Kreviazuk's work has appeared on many soundtracks for films and television shows. In 1998, Kreviazuk scored her only international hit to date with a cover of "Leaving on a Jet Plane", a song written by John Denver and popularized by Peter, Paul and Mary. The song appeared on the soundtrack to the blockbuster film Armageddon and was that album's follow-up single to Aerosmith's "I Don't Want to Miss a Thing".  The soundtrack album also featured a remix of Our Lady Peace's single "Starseed".
In 1999, Kreviazuk recorded a cover of the Randy Newman ballad "Feels Like Home" for the Dawson's Creek soundtrack, as well as How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days.  She also performed a cover version of The Beatles' "In My Life" for the television drama Providence.
In 2002, Kreviazuk recorded Another Small Adventure which was played in Stuart Little 2 and was on the soundtrack.
In this Life was featured in the film Saved! and also in a trailer for the film The Door in the Floor starring Jeff Bridges, as well as in an episode of the CW Television Network's Smallville. In May 2003 was the soundtrack of the "Episode 20" from "Everwood" in WB. Kreviazuk's "Time" was played in the credits of the movie Uptown Girls, and featured in an episode of the MTV reality show, Laguna Beach: The Real Orange County, the pilot episode of the ABC romantic comedy/drama Men in Trees, the CBS drama Joan of Arcadia, and the ABC family movie Lucky 7. Her song "This Year" was featured on the Serendipity soundtrack. In 2005, two new songs written and performed by Kreviazuk were also featured on the soundtrack of the movie The Sisterhood Of The Traveling Pants. In 2006, "It's All About a Kiss" played during the film Just My Luck. The song "Weight of the World" is also featured during the credits of the 2003 film How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days and in the us television series Wildfire.

Songwriting for others

Since 2003, Kreviazuk has co-written many songs for other artists, often collaborating with her husband Raine Maida. In 2003, Kreviazuk and Maida collaborated on a number of tracks with Avril Lavigne for Lavigne's second album Under My Skin. Kreviazuk and Maida also contributed songs to Kelly Clarkson's 2004 album Breakaway, The Veronicas' The Secret Life of the Veronicas, Marion Raven's 2005 and 2007 albums Here I Am and Set Me Free and recently Cheyenne Kimball's debut Hanging On in 2006.   Their most recent collaboration came on the song "Permanent" for David Cook's self-titled album David Cook. She also helped write a song called "Gardenia" which appears on Mandy Moore's 2007 album Wild Hope. In 2011, she appeared on the rapper Drake's latest album Take Care; she wrote part of the song "Over My Dead Body" and sang the chorus. In 2012 Chantal wrote the Pitbull ft. Christina Aguilera single Feel This Moment with The Messengers. She also wrote Josh Groban's single "Brave" with Josh Groban and Twags Salter.
In 2014 she wrote a song with Shakira, released on her self-titled album. The song is called "You Don't Care About Me".

Other work

In 2001, Kreviazuk made her big-screen debut as a main character in David Weaver's indie film Century Hotel (co-starring alongside Sandrine Holt and Mia Kirshner). She also co-wrote the movie's theme song, "Can't Make it Good", with Maida.
Kreviazuk sang background vocals on a Nightmare of You song called "I Want to Be Buried in Your Backyard", which was released on their 2005 self-titled debut album. She has also contributed to Maida's solo EP, Love Hope Hero.
Kreviazuk also provided additional vocals on a Men, Women & Children song titled "Monkey Monkee Men", from their 2006 self-titled debut album.
In 2007, Kreviazuk starred in Pretty Broken, a short film about a woman dealing with mental illness. Kreviazuk also co-produced the movie.Pretty Broken Credits on its official site
She also writes a MySpace page, where she posts about her daily life, her thoughts on world politics, as well as updating fans with the latest on how writing/recording for her album is going.
On March 27, 2010, Kreviazuk headlined a concert held at Yonge-Dundas Square in Toronto to celebrate WWF's Earth Hour.
In 2010, she contributed the song "Na Miso" to the Enough Project and Downtown Records' Raise Hope for Congo compilation with Bibiana Mpoyo. Proceeds from the compilation fund efforts to make the protection and empowerment of Congo's women a priority, as well as inspire individuals around the world to raise their voice for peace in Congo.
Kreviazuk also appears on Canadian singer-songwriter Ryan MacGrath's 2010 record, "Cooper Hatch Paris". She performs a duet with the artist entitled "Bird & Cage".

Personal life

Kreviazuk was born in Winnipeg, Manitoba and attended Balmoral Hall School for Girls. In 1994 she received multiple jaw and leg fractures in a serious motorcycle accident in Italy and she spent several months recuperating. Kreviazuk met Raine Maida, the lead singer of Our Lady Peace, at a Pearl Jam concert September 21, 1996 in Toronto. They married in December 1999. The family lives in Toronto and also has a home in the USA.
Kreviazuk's parents are Carol and John Kreviazuk. John Kreviazuk is a successful businessman having founded and owned Krevco Pools in Winnipeg. Kreviazuk is of Ukrainian descent from her father and maternal grandfather. Her family roots also include Scottish and First Nations descent through her 5th great grandmother on her mother's side.
Chantal is also 2nd Cousins with curler and 2013 Scotties Tournament of Hearts champion Alison Kreviazuk

Albums

Studio albums

Live Albums

Singles

Music videos

Non-album tracks

Tracks co-written for other artists

Awards

Juno Awards








