[[Skid row]]

CATEGORIES: Neighborhoods in the United States, Poverty, Urban decay, Economy of Seattle, Washington, History of Seattle, Washington

Skid row or skid road is a shabby urban area with cheap taverns, dive bars, and dilapidated hotels frequented by lowlifes, alcoholics, and itinerants. Downtown Eastside in Vancouver; Skid Row in Los Angeles, San Francisco's Tenderloin District, Montreal's Saint Catherine street's District and the Bowery section in lower Manhattan.

Origins

The term "skid road" dates back to the 17th century, when it referred to a log road, used to skid or drag logs through woods and bog.
The source of the term "skid road" as an urban district is heavily debated, and is generally identified as originating in either Seattle or Vancouver.

Seattle

The name "Skid Road" was in use in Seattle by 1865 when the city's historic Pioneer Square neighborhood began to expand from its commercial core.
Henry Yesler acquired land from Doc Maynard at a small point of land at what is today near the intersection of 1st Ave and Yesler Way. His steam-powered logging mill was built in 1853 on the point of land that looked south towards a small island (Denny's Island, part of his land purchase from Doc Maynard) that has since been filled in around and is the heart of today's Pioneer Square. The mill operated seven days a week, 24 hours per day on the waterfront. The street's end near the mill, attracted cookhouses and inexpensive hotels for itinerant workers, along with several establishments that served beer and liquor.
The Skid Road was built on that 450 foot wide slice of land from the top of First Hill to the logging mill on the point. Timber cut in nearby forests was greased and skidded down a long, steeply sloping dirt road. Since the building of the mill much of what is today's Seattle is the result of extensive terra-forming by the local people to make the hilly landscape of Seattle habitable. At the time of the building of the mill it was some of the only flat land available. The Skid Road became the demarcation line between the affluent members of Seattle and the mill workers and more rowdy portion of the population. Speidel, "Sons of the Profits, The Seattle Story 1851 to 1901" The road became Mill Street, and eventually Yesler Way, but the nickname "Skid Road" was permanently associated with the district at the street's end.

Vancouver

The 100-block of East Hastings Street in Vancouver, British Columbia, the heart of that city's "skid road" neighborhood, lies on a historical skid road. The Vancouver Skid Road was part of a complex of such roads in the dense forests surrounding the Hastings Mill and adjacent to the settlement of Granville, Burrard Inlet (Gastown).
The city began as a sawmill settlement called Granville, in the early 1870s.
Opium and heroin use became popular early on; Vancouver was for many years the main port-of-entry for the North American opium supply. During the Great Depression, the railway rights-of-way and other vacant lots in the area were thronged by the unemployed and poor, and the pattern of social decay became well-established. In the 1970s, the endemic alcohol and poverty problems in the area were exacerbated by the expansion of the drug trade, with crack cocaine becoming high-profile in the 1980s as well as a reconcentration of the prostitution trade in the area because of the relocation of hooker strolls in conjunction with city policy for Expo 86.
A portion of Vancouver's Skid Row, Gastown, has also been gentrified; however it is in a difficult coexistence with the nearby impoverished Downtown Eastside along East Hastings Street.
The poorest urban area in Canada,

Los Angeles

Local homeless count estimates have ranged from 3,668 to 5,131. In 2011, the homeless population estimate for Los Angeles' Skid Row was 4,316.
Several of the city's homeless and social-service providers (such as Weingart Center Association, Volunteers of America, Frontline Foundation, Midnight Mission, Union Rescue Mission and Downtown Women's Center) are based in Skid Row. Between 2005 and 2007, several local hospitals and suburban law-enforcement agencies were accused by Los Angeles Police Department and other officials of transporting those homeless people in their care to Skid Row.
In recent years, the Safer City Initiative set to clean up Skid Row was enacted by the city and police department and has resulted in dramatic changes in the area. City-journal. Retrieved on 2012-09-16.

San Francisco

The Tenderloin neighborhood is a small, dense neighborhood near downtown San Francisco. In addition to its history and diverse and artistic community, there is significant poverty, homelessness, and crime. City-journal. Retrieved on 2012-09-16.
It is known for its immigrant populations, single room occupancy hotels, ethnic restaurants, bars and clubs, alternative arts scene, large homeless population, public transit and close proximity to Union Square, the Financial District, and Civic Center. The 2000 census reported a population of 28,991 persons, with a population density of 44,408/mi² (17,146/km²), in the Tenderloin's 94102 Zip Code Tabulation Area, which also includes the nearby Hayes Valley neighborhood.
During the 1960s, when development interests and the Redevelopment Agency were using eminent domain to clear out a large area populated by retired men in the South of Market area, that area was termed "Skid Row" in the media. The City's convention center was built after the clearing of long term low-income residents. 1984. The Transformation of San Francisco. Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Allanheld. 1973. "San Francisco's South of Market District, 1858-1958: The Emergence of a Skid Row." California Historical Quarterly 52(3):196223.

New York

In New York, Skid Row was a nickname given to the Bowery during much of the 20th century.

Chicago

Traditional Skid Row areas in Chicago were centered along West Madison Street just west of the Chicago River Since the 1980s both of these areas have been gentrified.

Philadelphia

Philadelphia once had a highly visible skid row centered on Vine Street, just west of the approaches to the Benjamin Franklin Bridge. This area was essentially obliterated by highway construction starting in the 1970s.google.bepress.cgi?article=1018&context=metraux Waiting for the Wrecking Ball: Skid Row in Postindustrial Philadelphia

Popular references





Notes

Bibliography

 | last =Holbrook
 | first =Stewart H.
 | year =1961
 | title =Yankee Loggers
 | place =New York
 | publisher =International Paper Company
 | ref =harv
 | postscript =
}}.
 | last =Newell
 | first =Gordon
 | year =1956
 | title =Totem Tales of Old Seattle
 | place =Seattle
 | publisher =Superior Publishing Company
 | ref =harv
 | postscript =
}}.
 | last =Morgan
 | first =Murray
 | year =1960
 | title =Skid Road
 | publisher =Ballantine Books
 | ref =harv
 | postscript =
}} (revised edition; first edition was 1951).




