[[U.S. Route 12]]

CATEGORIES: U.S. Highway System, U.S. Route 12, U.S. Highways in Montana, U.S. Highways in North Dakota, U.S. Highways in South Dakota, Northwest Indiana

U.S. Route 12 (US 12) is an east–west United States highway, running from Grays Harbor to downtown Detroit, for almost . As a thoroughfare, it has mostly been supplanted by I-90 and I-94, but remains an important road for local and regional travel.
The highway begins in downtown Detroit, at the corner of Michigan and Woodward Avenue. Its western terminus is in Aberdeen, Washington at an intersection with US 101.

Route description

Washington

The western terminus of US 12 is located in Aberdeen, Washington.  In the 1960s, a portion of US 12 was moved north to the town of Morton, when the Mossyrock Dam was built and flooded the towns of Kosmos and Riffe, along the Cowlitz River in Lewis County.  A large portion of old, two-lane US 12 was replaced by Interstate 82 and Interstate 182 in the 1980s, between Yakima and the Tri-Cities, though the freeways are still cosigned with the US 12 designation.  The old two-lane highway now bears the name Wine Country Road.  The highway loosely follows the eastbound leg of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, between Wallula, Washington and Clarkston, Washington, thus being marked as part of the Lewis and Clark National Historic Trail.  The east end of the highway in the state is at Clarkston, where the highway crosses the Snake River into Idaho at Lewiston.
The Washington section of US 12, other than a concurrency with Interstate 5, is defined at Washington Revised Code § 47.17.055.

Idaho

US 12 enters the state at Lewiston, crossing the Snake River from Clarkston, Washington. It ascends the Clearwater River, concurrent with US 95 for 

Montana

The longest portion of US 12 in any of the states in which it traverses is in Montana. The highway enters Montana at Lolo Pass,   to southwestern North Dakota, passing through Baker on the way.

North Dakota

US 12 is a two-lane undivided highway that runs , through Adams, Bowman and Slope counties in southwest North Dakota.  The speed limit is 65 mph (105 km/h) on rural segments, with slower posted speeds within the cities of Marmarth, Rhame, Bowman, Scranton and Hettinger. US 12 meets with US 85 in Bowman, and the routes are concurrent for a short distance through the city.

South Dakota

US 12 enters South Dakota from North Dakota, as a rural two lane highway about 

Minnesota

From the South Dakota/Minnesota state line at Ortonville, to Wayzata, US 12 is mostly a rural two-lane highway with a  speed limit, with slower speed limits through towns and a four-lane surface arterial segment through the city of Willmar.  From western Wayzata to Interstate 394 in Minnetonka, US 12 is a six-lane freeway.  East of I-494, US 12 is invisibly concurrent with Interstates 394 and 94 through Minneapolis and St. Paul to the Minnesota/Wisconsin state line at Hudson.
The Minnesota section of US 12 is defined as Routes 149, 26, and 10 in Minnesota Statutes §§ 161.115(80) and 161.114(2).

Wisconsin

From Elkhorn, Wisconsin to near the Illinois/Wisconsin state line, U.S. 12 is a freeway with a 65 mph (105 km/h) speed limit.  It continues as a two-lane highway until it approaches the city of Whitewater, where a new bypass has been constructed. It is currently two lane, but can be expanded to four lanes. U.S. 12 continues west to Madison. As US 12 nears Madison, it merges with US 14, US 151 and US 18, to form the West Beltline Highway, a four to six-lane freeway that encircles the south and west portions of the city, with a speed limit of 55 mph (90 km/h).
From Middleton, the highway continues, on a 15 mile (24 km) four-lane road completed in 2004, to cross the Wisconsin River at Sauk City.

Illinois

In Illinois, US 12 is an arterial surface road that runs from Richmond, southeast to Des Plaines. It then turns due south, continuing through the Chicago metropolitan area, joining with U.S. Route 45. In Stone Park, U.S. Route 20 joins U.S. 12/45. In Hickory Hills, U.S. 45 continues south, while U.S. 12/20 runs due east along 95th Street in the southwest suburbs. From Hickory Hills, U.S. 12/20 runs east nearly to the Lake Michigan lakefront and then joins with U.S. Route 41, as all three routes travel southeast into the state of Indiana.
US 12 is referred to as Rand Road in Chicago's northwest suburbs.  Rand is an original name for the area around Des Plaines, Illinois, the location where the road resumes its westerly direction. South of Des Plaines, U.S. 12 follows Mannheim Road, La Grange Road, and then 95th Street, before merging with U.S. 41 on Ewing and Indianapolis Avenues toward the Indiana state line.

Indiana

In Indiana, US 12 is a historically significant route, that winds along the southern coast of Lake Michigan. It runs from an interchange with the Indiana Toll Road, concurrent with US Routes 20 and 41 in Whiting, to Michiana Shores, at the Michigan state line. A large portion of this segment is known as the Dunes Highway.

Michigan

US 12 is now the only U.S. highway route still serving downtown Detroit, whose street grid was laid by Augustus B. Woodward, to have a five-way intersection of the roads that would become US 12, US 10, US 16, US 112 and US 25.  US 24 still travels through Detroit from Puritan to 8 Mile Road on the far-west-side.
As from the earliest days of its existence, US 12 enters Michigan from Indiana, southwest of New Buffalo and continues to the old junction of US 12 and US 112 in New Buffalo. It is now assigned between New Buffalo and Detroit (except through Ypsilanti), along what was US 112 until 1962.
On May 4, 2004, the Michigan Department of Transportation (MDOT) designated  of US-12 from New Buffalo to Detroit as a Historic Heritage Route. The east-west corridor traverses the counties of Berrien, Cass, St. Joseph, Branch, Hillsdale, Lenawee, Washtenaw and Wayne. MDOT's Heritage Route Committee has approved the route's nomination as a premier addition to the Michigan Heritage Route Program.

The U.S. 12 Heritage Trail also opens their doors annually the second weekend of August for what has been dubbed "Michigan's Longest Yard Sale" on Friday, Saturday and Sunday.

History

Since the highway's creation in 1926, the eastern terminus has always remained within a few blocks of this point.
The western terminus was gradually extended westward, until it met up with the Pacific Ocean.

Former ferry crossing

In 1925, U.S. 12 in Michigan was originally proposed to run from Detroit to Ludington, across Lake Michigan, via the Pere Marquette Railway car ferry to Manitowoc, Wisconsin and then continuing into Wisconsin, on what later became US-10, in those two states.

Wyoming

U.S. 12 originally went into Wyoming, before being rerouted into Montana and was proposed to go into Oregon, but did not.

Chicago freeway

U.S. 12 was originally planned to be a freeway from Chicago to Madison, Wisconsin. The portion from Genoa City, WI, to Elkhorn, WI was already being built when the Interstate system was announced. After the Interstate program was announced and due to the fact that Wisconsin was not able to obtain some right-of-way land north of Elkhorn, construction was stopped. Since construction was stopped, Illinois never built any of it, but the rough grading and off-ramps are still there in Illinois. In Elkhorn, the ramps also continue past the intersection where the construction stopped, but they are not used. Much of U.S. 12 in Illinois is a divided highway and it is surface road.



Related US Routes

Notes






