[[Humus]]

CATEGORIES: Composting, Soil improvers, Soil science, Organic gardening, Organic farming, Sustainable agriculture

In soil science, humus (coined 1790–1800; In agriculture, humus is sometimes also used to describe mature, or natural compost extracted from a forest or other spontaneous source for use to amend soil."humus." Encyclopædia Britannica. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. Encyclopædia Britannica Inc., 2011. Web. 24 Nov 2011. . It is also used to describe a topsoil horizon that contains organic matter (humus type,Chertov, O.G., Kornarov, A.S., Crocker, G., Grace, P., Klir, J., Körschens, M., Poulton, P.R., Richter, D., 1997. Simulating trends of soil organic carbon in seven long-term experiments using the SOMM model of the humus types. Geoderma 81:121–135.

Humification

Transformation of organic matter into humus

The process of "humification" can occur naturally in soil, or in the production of compost. The importance of chemically stable humus is thought by some to be the fertility it provides to soils in both a physical and chemical sense,Hargitai, L., 1993. The soil of organic matter content and humus quality in the maintenance of soil fertility and in environmental protection. Landscape and Urban Planning 27:161–167. This suggests a fuzzy boundary between humus and organic matter. In most literature, humus is considered an integral part of soil organic matter.Humintech® | Definition Of Soil Organic Matter & Humic Acids Based Products
Plant remains (including those that passed through an animal gut and were excreted as feces) contain organic compounds: sugars, starches, proteins, carbohydrates, lignins, waxes, resins, and organic acids. The process of organic matter decay in the soil begins with the decomposition of sugars and starches from carbohydrates, which break down easily as detritivores initially invade the dead plant organs, while the remaining cellulose and lignin break down more slowly., McClaugherty, C., 2007. Plant litter: decomposition, humus formation, carbon sequestration, 2nd ed. Springer, 338 pp., ISBN 3-540-74922-5 Simple proteins, organic acids, starches and sugars break down rapidly, while crude proteins, fats, waxes and resins remain relatively unchanged for longer periods of time. Lignin, which is quickly transformed by white-rot fungi,Levin, L., Forchiassin, F., Ramos, A.M., 2002. Copper induction of lignin-modifying enzymes in the white-rot fungus Trametes trogii. Mycologia 94:377–383  is one of the main precursors of humus,González-Pérez, M., Vidal Torrado, P., Colnago, L.A., Martin-Neto, L., Otero, X.L., Milori, D.M.B.P., Haenel Gomes, F., 2008. 13C NMR and FTIR spectroscopy characterization of humic acids in spodosols under tropical rain forest in southeastern Brazil. Geoderma 146:425–433 activity. The end-product of this process, the humus, is thus a mixture of compounds and complex life chemicals of plant, animal, or microbial origin that has many functions and benefits in the soil. Earthworm humus (vermicompost) is considered by some to be the best organic manure there is.Vermiculture

Stability

Compost that is readily capable of further decomposition is sometimes referred to as effective or active humus, though scientists would say that, if it is not stable, it is not humus at all. This kind of compost, rich in plant remains and fulvic acids, is an excellent source of plant nutrients, but of little value with respect to long-term soil structure and tilth. Stable (or passive) humus consists of humic acids and humins, which are so highly insoluble, or so tightly bound to clay particles and hydroxides, that they cannot be penetrated by microbes and are greatly resistant to further decomposition. Thus stable humus adds few readily available nutrients to the soil, but plays an essential part in providing its physical structure. Some very stable humus complexes have survived for thousands of years. The most stable humus is that formed from the slow oxidation of black carbon, after the incorporation of finely powdered charcoal into the topsoil. This process is at the origin of the formation of the fertile Amazonian dark earths or Terra preta do Indio., Kern, D.C., Glaser, B., Woods, W.I., 2004. Amazonian Dark Earths: origin, properties, management. Springer, 523 pp. ISBN 978-1-4020-1839-8

Benefits of soil organic matter and humus



 AJMA





|publisher=Agricultural University of Wroclaw, Poland|accessdate=2013-12-12}}

