[[San Jose International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures in San Jose, California, Transportation in San Jose, California, Airports in Santa Clara County, California, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in California, United States Army airfields

Norman Y. Mineta San Jose International Airport  near the intersections of U.S. Route 101, Interstate 880, and State Route 87. The dominant carrier is Southwest Airlines with Alaska Airlines as the second largest. The airport has free Wi-Fi in all terminals.



Despite San Jose being the largest city in the Bay Area, SJC is the smallest of the three Bay Area airline airports (8.4 million annual passengers in 2011), with less than a quarter of the passengers of San Francisco International Airport (SFO) and fewer passengers than Oakland International Airport (OAK). Like Oakland airport it attracts Bay Area residents who find SFO too distant from their homes.
SJC is a "downtown airport", unlike SFO and OAK which are on opposite shores of San Francisco Bay. SJC's convenient location near downtown San Jose has drawbacks: it is surrounded by the city and had little room for expansion.  The proximity to downtown causes limits on building heights in downtown San Jose, by FAA rules.[ref]
</ref><ref>
</ref><ref>
</ref>

History

The first honey bees in California were brought to Santa Clara County. In March 1853, Christopher A. Shelton introduced honey bees at the Rancho Potrero de Santa Clara on the land, which now operates as San Jose International Airport (KSJC / SJC) (Source: History Channel)

Beginnings and expansion

In 1939 Ernie Renzel, a wholesale grocer and future mayor of San Jose, led a group that negotiated an option to buy  of this land to build a runway, hangar and office building for a flight school. When the city of San Jose decided to develop a municipal airport, Nissen sold his share of the aviation business and became San Jose's first airport manager. Renzel and Nissen were instrumental in the development of San Jose Municipal Airport over the next few decades, culminating with the 1965 opening of what later became Terminal C. Mineta San Jose International Airport Public Art Master Plan, Rome Group and City of San Jose Office of Cultural Affairs, November 16, 2004. Mineta San Jose International Airport, 2(8), January 2004
The runway that became 12R/30L was .
In the early 1980s San Jose International Airport (KSJC / SJC) was one of the first U.S airports to participate in the noise regulation program enacted by the U.S. Congress for delineation of airport noise contours and developing a pilot study of residential sound insulation.  This program showed that residences near the airport could be retrofitted cost-effectively to reduce indoor aircraft noise substantially.C. Michael Hogan and Ballard George, Design of Acoustical Insulation for Existing Residences in the Vicinity of San Jose Municipal Airport, Issues in Transportation Related Environmental Quality, Transportation Research Board, National Research Council, Transportation Research Record 1033, Washington, D.C. (1985)
In 1990 San Jose International Airport greatly expanded with the opening of Terminal A. (Terminal B between Terminals A and C was planned for someday.)
In November 2001 the airport was renamed after Norman Yoshio Mineta, a native of San Jose, its former mayor and congressman, former United States Secretary of Commerce and former United States Secretary of Transportation. In December 2003 the airfield was named after former mayor Ernie Renzel. Mineta San Jose International Airport, 4(3), August 2005

Passenger service history

=Early days=

San Jose's first airline flights were Southwest Airways DC-3s on the multistop run between San Francisco (SFO) and Los Angeles (LAX), starting in 1948. Southwest  — later called Pacific  — was the only airline until 1966, when Pacific Southwest Airlines (PSA) started flying Lockheed Electra turboprops nonstop from LAX, with Boeing 727s later that year. SJC's first airline jets were Pacific Boeing 727 nonstops to LAX earlier in 1966.  In 1968 United Airlines arrived, with Boeing 727 nonstop flights from Denver, Chicago and LAX, and Douglas DC-8s from New York Kennedy and Baltimore.

=1988–2008=

American Airlines opened a hub at San Jose in 1988, using slots it obtained in the buyout of Air California in 1986. Reno Air, a startup based in Reno, Nevada, took over many of American's gates until it was bought out by American in 1998. By summer 2001, American served Paris, Taipei and Tokyo nonstop from San Jose, and had domestic flights to Austin, Boston, Denver, Honolulu, Las Vegas, Maui, Orange County, Portland, Phoenix, San Diego and Seattle, in addition to its hubs in Chicago, Dallas, Miami, Los Angeles, New York and St. Louis.
After the September 11 attacks and the dot-com bubble burst in 2001, the city lost several flights. Air Canada dropped its flights to Toronto and Ottawa, Canada, and American Airlines ended its nonstops to Taipei, Vancouver, and Paris. American also dropped its flights to Miami, St. Louis, Seattle,  Portland, Denver, and Phoenix; the airline's flights to Southern California were downgraded to American Eagle regional flights.
Reduction at SJC continued throughout 2004.  Alaska Airlines halted its San Jose–Puerto Vallarta and Cabo San Lucas seasonal routes, Horizon Air ended its twice daily San Jose-Tucson service. and American Airlines ended its San Jose–San Luis Obispo and San Jose–Boston Logan links.
In October 2005, Hawaiian Airlines began daily nonstops to Honolulu. San Jose was Hawaiian's fifth city in California, along with San Diego, Los Angeles, Sacramento and San Francisco. In October 2006 American Airlines ended the San Jose–Tokyo-Narita route, San Jose's last nonstop beyond North America and Hawaii.
SJC suffered with many mid-tier airports during the 2008 rise in oil prices as airlines reduced marginal services. SJC lost much of its transcontinental U.S. service in the fall with Continental ending Newark flights, JetBlue ending Boston nonstops, and United ending flights to its Chicago-O'Hare and Washington Dulles hubs.mercurynews.

=2009–present=

In the summer of 2009 American Airlines ended flights to Austin, Texas. Alaska Airlines announced it would begin new routes to Austin from SJC and would upgrade some service to Portland, Oregon, which was run by regional subsidiary Horizon Air, to jet flights that began on September 2, 2009.
In September 2009, San Jose Airport Management announced the 90-day closure of the general aviation runway 11/29 as part of a reconstruction project. The runway closure was later continued indefinitely and studies are underway to determine the future of runway 11/29.
In 2010, service expanded at SJC for the first time in several years. JetBlue Airways resumed San Jose/Boston, although it ended service to Long Beach on the same day. Volaris began service at SJC in May 2010 with flights to Guadalajara, Mexico. Alaska Airlines added service to Kahului, Kona, Lihue, and Los Cabos/San José del Cabo. The airline also doubled its flights to several cities on its regional subsidiary, Horizon Air and added service to Guadalajara, Mexico, which began on December 15, 2010. Alaska now operates most of its Bay Area flights from San Jose.
Frontier Airlines pulled out of SJC in May 2010, citing lack of profitability on its single flight from the airport to Denver, Colorado.
In August 2010, Mexicana Airlines also suspended all flights permanently due to bankruptcy. In the same month, Southwest Airlines announced it would begin nonstops to Austin, Texas. Several months later Alaska announced it was ending service to Austin, likely due to competition from Southwest.
In September 2011, Hawaiian Airlines announced that it would begin service to Maui on January 10, 2012. The same day Alaska Airlines announced that it would upgrade its service to Kahului and Kauai to daily; Alaska flies daily to Kahului, Kauai, Kona, and Honolulu.
In December 2011, All Nippon Airways announced it would begin service between San Jose and Tokyo in 2012, restoring the link between the two cities that was lost when American ended the route in 2006. The airline uses the Boeing 787 Dreamliner, making San Jose one of the first two cities in the United States to see scheduled 787s.
On February 4, 2013, Virgin America announced it will begin service from San Jose to Los Angeles International Airport on May 1, 2013, with four daily nonstop flights each way. Virgin America will be the only carrier with first class service on all SJC-LAX and LAX-SJC flights. Virgin America will utilize its Airbus A320 aircraft on all flights between the two airports.

Terminal B North Concourse

In August 2004 the city broke ground on the North Concourse, the first phase in a three-phase, nine-year expansion plan. The plan, designed by Gensler and The Steinberg Group, called for a single consolidated terminal with 40 gates (eight more than present), an international concourse, and expanded security areas. The terminal would be named after James Nissen. The sail-shaped facade would greet up to 17.6 million passengers a year. A people mover system would link the new terminal with VTA light rail and the planned BART station next to the Santa Clara Caltrain station. Cargo facilities would be moved to the east side of the airport. A long term parking garage would be built where the rental car operations are now. A short term parking lot was built on the site of Terminal C.
In November 2005 a scaled-back plan was approved and announced. The second phase, adding a South Concourse to Terminal B, is to be built when demand is sufficient.

Public art

SJC's new consolidated parking and rental facility, CONRAC, has been fitted with new public art featuring hands of people in Silicon Valley. The art is on the outside of the facility and can be seen from more than one mile away. Artist Christian Moeller designed the new "Hands" mural.

Facilities and aircraft

Norman Y. Mineta San Jose International Airport covers  asphalt surface. The runway separation is less than ideal: 700 feet between centerlines.
In 2012, the airport had 134,947 aircraft operations, an average of 370 per day: 60% scheduled commercial, 16% air taxi, 23% general aviation and From 1960 to 2010 San Jose State University operated a flight-simulator facility for its aviation program in buildings at the southeast corner of the airport.  The university has since relocated to the Reid-Hillview Airport about 5 miles southeast.

Terminals

There are two terminals at the airport, Terminal A, opened in 1990, and Terminal B, opened in 2010. The terminals are connected airside. The airport's first modern terminal building, Terminal C, was opened in 1965 and closed in 2010.
In 2009, the gates at the airport were renumbered in preparation for the addition of Terminal B. Gate A16B at the north end became Gate 1, and Gate A1A at the south end became Gate 16.

Terminal A

Terminal A has 16 gates: 1–16.
Designed by a team of architects and engineers led by HTB, Inc., Terminal A and its adjoining parking garage were originally designed and built in 1990 for American Airlines. The overall program was led by a joint team of San Jose Airport and Public Works staff known as the "Airport Development Team". The project was awarded the Public Works Project of the Year by the California Council of Civil Engineers. It underwent extensive renovation and expansion in 2009, with larger ground-level ticketing counters, more curbside parking space, larger security checkpoints, and more concessions. The renovations and expansion was designed by Curtis W. Fentress, FAIA, RIBA of Fentress Architects.
The terminal includes an international arrivals building, which contains Gates 15 and 16.  All international flights (all of which depart at Terminal A) at the airport must clear customs and immigration from this building in order to proceed to their gates. The gates used in this building are also used for arrivals of Volaris and ANA flights.
Terminal A had an Admirals Club across from Gate 8 for American Airlines passengers, however the club closed in September 2010, with the airline citing rising costs, and cutbacks in its flight schedule at San Jose for the club's closure.

Terminal B

The concourse was designed by Gensler (see inset photo) and the Terminal by Fentress Architects. Construction management was provided by Hensel Phelps Construction Co. The terminal officially opened on June 30, 2010. Its design features dramatic daylit spaces, modern art, shared use ticket counters/gates, and chairs with power cords and USB ports on the armrest to charge laptops or handheld devices.
The terminal earned a LEED Silver certification from the U.S. Green Building Council in 2010 in recognition of the airport's significant commitment to environmentally sustainable design and construction.

=North concourse=

The North Concourse of Terminal B has 12 gates: 17–28. The first six gates of the new concourse were opened to the public on July 15, 2009. The remaining gates were opened on June 30, 2010. Southwest Airlines is the primary tenant, along with Alaska Airlines and Horizon Air.

Airlines and destinations

Passenger

Cargo

Busiest routes from San Jose

Accidents and incidents involving SJC

  | title = 2 Killed as Police Helicopter Crashes
