[[American Bobtail]]

CATEGORIES: Cat breeds, Cat breeds originating in the United States, Cat breeds and types with suppressed tails

The American Bobtail is an uncommon breed of domestic cat which was developed in the late 1960s.
American Bobtails are a very sturdy breed, with both short- and long-haired coats. Their coat is shaggy rather than dense or fluffy. They can have any color of eyes and coat, with a strong emphasis on the "wild" tabby appearance in show animals.

History

Urban legend says that Bobtails are the result of a crossbreeding between a domestic tabby cat and a wild bobcat.  The unusual tail is actually the result of a random spontaneous genetic mutation within the domestic cat population, and may be related to the Manx gene, which is also dominant. Yodie, a short-tailed brown tabby male, was mated with a seal-point Siamese female to create the American Bobtail's original bloodline. Most of the early bloodlines have died out.
This cat's original appearance genetics were modified in the breed to form a new and improved strain which comes in essentially all colors and coat types.  It is still permitted to outcross the American Bobtail with other domestic stock, so long as the currently small gene pool is kept healthy.  Manx and Japanese Bobtails are not used in the integrated Most looks like Tigers and some look like they are mixed with different breeds of cats.   matrix.
The breed was first recognized, by The International Cat Association (TICA, US-based), in 1989.   The specific sections for each competitive division do not include this breed in any of them:  long-haired, semi-long-haired, short-haired and Siamese & oriental.

Appearance

American Bobtails require two to three years to develop, slower than many domestic cat breeds.
The American Bobtail is hearty, short-tailed cat. Its body is moderately long, with substantial boning, and stocky. The stance is noticeably rectangular. The chest is full and broad. The hips are substantial, almost as wide as chest, and hind legs longer than fore legs with large round feet which may have toe tufts. The head is a broad wedge without flat planes, size proportionate to body. There is a concave curve from nose to brow, or rise to prominent brow, a broad unpinched muzzle, prominent whisker pads, a gently sloped wide nose and full, strong jaws. The ears are medium-sized, wide-based, and equally mounted on top and side of head with rounded tips. The eyes are almost almond shape,with size proportionate to head. The aperture is angled to base of ear, and with medium wide spacing and deep sockets. Eye color varies with coat color. The end of the tail is visible above the back, but not beyond the hock while the animal is in repose. The tail is straight or curved, slightly knotted or may have bumps.

Behavior

Breeders claim They have been known to escape from closed rooms and fastened cages. 
Bobtails also have a tendency to steal shiny objects and stash them away in a hiding place, requiring owners to know where their cat keeps their hoard when the owner wants to retrieve the items.






