[[Pertinax]]

CATEGORIES: 2nd-century Roman emperors, Roman governors of Britain, Roman emperors murdered by the Praetorian Guard, Deified Roman emperors, People from Alba, Piedmont, Imperial Roman consuls, 126 births, 193 deaths, 193 crimes, Roman governors of Lower Moesia, Helvii

Pertinax (;In Classical Latin, Pertinax's name would be inscribed as PVBLIVS HELVIVS PERTINAX AVGVSTVS. 1 August 126 – 28 March 193) was Roman Emperor for three months in 193. 158. Although Commodus was killed on 31 December 192, Pertinax was not acclaimed emperor until 1 January 193.  He is known as the first emperor of the tumultuous Year of the Five Emperors. A high-ranking military and Senatorial figure,Bowman, pg. 1 he tried to restore discipline in the Praetorian Guards, whereupon they rebelled and killed him. Upon his death he was succeeded by Didius Julianus, whose reign was similarly short.

Early life

His career before becoming emperor is documented in the Historia Augusta and confirmed in many places by existing inscriptions. Born in Alba Pompeia in Italy,Dio, 74:3 the son of freedman Helvius Successus,Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 1:1 originally Pertinax made his way as a grammaticus (teacher of grammar),Canduci, pg. 50  but he eventually decided to find a more rewarding line of work and through the help of patronage he was commissioned an officer in a cohort.Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 1:6 
In the Parthian war that followed,Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 2:1  he was able to distinguish himself, which resulted in a string of promotions, and after postings in Britain (as military tribune of the Legio VI Victrix)Birley, pg. 173 and along the Danube, he served as a procurator in Dacia.Dio, 74:3  In 175 he received the honor of a suffect consulshipMeckler, www.org/pertinax.Birley, pg. 173
In the decade of the 180s, Pertinax took a pivotal role in the Roman Senate until the praetorian prefect Sextus Tigidius Perennis forced him out of public life.Dio, 74:4  He tried to quell the unruly soldiers there but one legion mutinied and attacked his bodyguard, leaving Pertinax for dead. 174 When he recovered, he punished the mutineers severely, which led to his growing reputation as a disciplinarian. 50  When he was forced to resign in 187, the reason given was that the legions had grown hostile to him because of his harsh rule.Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 3:10
He served as proconsul of Africa during the years 188–189,Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 4:1 and followed this term of service with the urban prefecture of Rome,Victor, 18:2 and a second consulship as ordinarius with the emperor as his colleague. 174

Emperor

When Commodus' behaviour became increasingly erratic throughout the early 190s, Pertinax is thought to have been implicated in the conspiracy that led to his assassination on 31 December 192. 50  The plot was carried out by the Praetorian prefect Quintus Aemilius Laetus, Commodus' mistress Marcia, and his chamberlain Eclectus. 1  After the murder had been carried out, Pertinax, who was serving as urban prefect at this time, was hurried to the Praetorian Camp and proclaimed emperor the following morning. He attempted to emulate the restrained practices of Marcus Aurelius, and made an effort to reform the alimenta but he faced antagonism from many quarters. 4
Ancient writers detail how the Praetorian Guard expected a generous donativum on his ascension, and when they were disappointed, agitated until he produced the money, selling off Commodus' property,Bowman, pg. 2 including the concubines and youths Commodus kept for his sexual pleasures.22 grams to 2.75 grams.Tulane University "Roman Currency of the Principate"
His currency reform was far-sighted, but would not survive his death. He attempted to impose stricter military discipline upon the pampered Praetorians.Dio, 74:8 The plot was betrayed; Falco himself was pardoned but several of the officers behind the coup were executed.Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 10:4
On 28 March 193, Pertinax was at his palace when, according to the Historia Augusta, a contingent of some three hundred soldiers of the Praetorian Guard rushed the gatesHistoria Augusta, Pertinax, 11:1 (two hundred according to Cassius Dio).Dio, 74:8  Neither the guards on duty nor the palace officials chose to resist them. Pertinax sent Laetus to meet them, but he chose to side with the insurgents instead and deserted the emperor.Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 11:7
Although advised to flee, he then attempted to reason with them, and was almost successful before being struck down by one of the soldiers. 1 thus protecting them from the aftermath of his own assassination. He did however appoint his father-in-law Titus Flavius Claudius Sulpicianus as Praefectus urbi of Rome.

Aftermath

The praetorian guards auctioned off the imperial position, which Senator Didius Julianus won and became the new Emperor,Canduci, pg. 50 an act which triggered a brief civil war over the succession, won later in the same year by Septimius Severus.Dio, 74:17:4
After his entry to Rome, Septimius recognized Pertinax as a legitimate emperor, executed the soldiers who killed him, and not only pressured the Senate to deify him and provide for him a state funeral,Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 15:1  but also adopted his cognomen of Pertinax as part of his name,Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 15:2 and for some time held games on the anniversary of Pertinax's ascension and his birthday.Historia Augusta, Pertinax, 15:5

Cultural references

Pertinax's leadership style is criticised in Machiavelli's The Prince. Though Machiavelli appears to disapprove of the Praetorians' licentiousness, he implies that Pertinax's kind and courteous life was unwise in that it made them hate and scorn him. XIX
Pertinax was the pseudonymn of the French journalist  (1882–1974).
In Romanitas, a fictional alternate history novel by Sophia McDougall, Pertinax's reign is the point of divergence. In the history as established by the novel, the plot against Pertinax was thwarted, and Pertinax introduced a series of reforms that would consolidate the Roman Empire to such a degree that it would still be a major power in the 21st century.

Sources

Primary sources

Secondary sources






