[[Lanai]]

CATEGORIES: Islands of Hawaii, Lanai, Maui County, Hawaii, Maui Nui, Private islands, Volcanoes of Maui Nui

Lānai City. As of 2012, the island is 98% owned by Larry Ellison (CEO of Oracle), with the remaining 2% owned by the state of Hawaii.
Lāna
There is one school, Lanai High and Elementary School, serving the entire island from kindergarten through 12th grade. There are no traffic lights on the island.

History

Lānai was under the control of nearby Maui before recorded history. Its first inhabitants may have arrived as late as the 15th century.
The name Lāna`i is of uncertain origin, but the island has historically been called Lānaʻi o Kauluāʻau, which can be rendered in English as "day of the conquest of Kauluāʻau." This epithet refers to the legend of a Mauian prince who was banished to Lānaʻi for some of his wild pranks at his father's court in Lāhainā. The island was reportedly haunted by Akua-ino, ghosts and goblins. Kauluāʻau chased them away and brought peace and order to the island and regained his father's favor as a consequence.
The first people to migrate here, most likely from Maui and Moloka
Lānai was first seen by Europeans on February 25, 1779, when Captain Charles Clerke sighted the island from aboard James Cook's HMS Resolution. Clerke had taken command of the ship after Cook was killed at Kealakekua Bay on February 14 and was leaving the islands for the North Pacific.
By the 1870s, Walter M. Gibson had acquired most of the land on the island for ranching. Prior to this he had used it as a Mormon colony. In 1899, his daughter and son-in-law formed Maunalei Sugar Company, headquartered in Keomuku, on the windward (northeast) coast downstream from Maunalei Valley. The company failed in 1901.
In 1922, James Dole, the president of Hawaiian Pineapple Company (later renamed Dole Food Company), bought the island and developed a large portion of it into the world's largest pineapple plantation.
With Hawaii statehood in 1959, Lānai became part of the County of Maui.
In 1985, Lānai passed into the control of David H. Murdock, as a result of his purchase of Castle & Cooke, then owner of Dole.
In June 2012, Oracle Corporation CEO Larry Ellison purchased Castle & Cooke's 98 percent share of the island. The state owns the remaining 2 percent.

Legends

According to the Hawaiian legends, man-eating spirits occupied the island before that time. For generations, Maui chiefs believed in these man-eating spirits. Differing legends say that either  the prophet Lanikāula drove the spirits from the island or the unruly Maui prince Kauluāi, accounting for the historic lack of them on that island.

Geography

The highest point in Lanai is Mount Lanaihale.  It is an inactive volcano near the center of the island and to the east of Lanai City.  The elevation of Mount Lanaihale is 3,366 ft., or 1026 meters.
Lānaʻi was traditionally administered in 13 political subdivisions (Ahupuaʻa), grouped into two districts (mokuoloko): kona (Leeward) and koolau (Windward). The ahupuaʻa are listed below, in clockwise sequence, and with original area figures in acres, starting in the northwest of the island.The Mahele Aina on Lanai,About Hawaiian Land Management and Land Tenure
Kamoku hosts the largest share of population, because the bigger part of Lānai City falls into it. Parts of Lanaʻi City stretch to Kaa and Paomai. As of 2010, the remaining ahupuaʻa were virtually uninhabited. According to the census of 2000, Lanaʻi City accounts for 99 percent of the island population (3164 of 3193). As a census-designated place, Lanaʻi City is defined solely for statistical purposes, and not by administrative boundaries.

Tourism

Tourism on Lānai began to be prominent in more recent history as the pineapple and sugarcane industries were phased out in the islands.
As of 2011, the two resort hotels on Lānai City was built in 1923 by James Dole of the Hawaiian Pineapple Company as a lodge to house the executives overseeing the island's pineapple production. It was the island's only hotel until 1990.
Lānai and was designed by Greg Norman.  Bill Gates was married on the 12th hole tee-box at The Challenge at Manele.  "Shipwreck Beach" on the north shore of the island is so named because of the remains of a wrecked vessel aground a short distance offshore.  This is popularly referred to as a WW II Liberty Ship, although its hull shape is nothing like one; it is most likely one of a few ferrocement cargo ships built during the war.
In Lānai City, there are no traffic lights, no shopping malls, and public transportation is supplied by a hotel contractor. For a one-time fee, hotel guests enjoy unlimited rides on small and large buses that go between the hotels and the ferry landing on Manele Bay. Bicycles and off-road vehicles are for rent. Most attractions outside of the hotels and town can be visited only via dirt roads that require an off-road vehicle.

Notable People

Danny Lockin, actor,dancer, born in Lanai in 1943.  Best known for his role as Barnaby Tucker in the 1969 movie "Hello Dolly!", he played the same role in the Broadway play and when it went on tour across The United States. 

Gallery

File:Lanai city houses.jpg|View of some local houses in Lānai City
File:Garden of the Gods2.jpg|Garden of the Gods
File:Mountains lanai.jpg|Mountains on Lānai
File:Shipwreck - Shipwreck Beach.jpg|View of the shipwreck at Shipwreck Beach
File:Starr 060406-7121 Asclepias curassavica.jpg|Kaneapua Rock
File:Heiau-walls.JPG|Walls of Halulu Heiau at Kaunolu Village Site








