[[Epicanthic fold]]

CATEGORIES: Human eye anatomy, Facial features, Skin anatomy, Eye

Epicanthic fold,. One of the primary facial features often closely associated with the epicanthic folds is the nasal bridge; all else equal, a lower-based nose bridge is more likely to cause epicanthic folds, and a higher-based nose bridge is less likely to do so. (1989) Growing Young N.Y.: McGraw Hill pp. 40 There are various factors influencing whether someone has epicanthic folds, including geographical ancestry, age, and certain medical conditions.

Factors

Geographic distribution

Epicanthic folds can appear in East Asians, Southeast Asians, Central Asians, Indigenous Americans, the San people and "occasionally in Europeans (e.g., Scandinavians and Poles)". (1989). Growing Young. Bergin & Garvey: CT.
Anthropologist Carleton S. Coon said that the "median fold" appears in "Finnic" and "Slavic" populations while the "true inner or mongoloid fold" appears in populations of the "east" and the "far north". The Races of Europe. Distribution of Bodily Characters. 

Age

Many fetuses lose their epicanthic folds after 3 to 6 months of gestation.I. Modified Z-Epicanthoplasty in the Asian Eyelid. ARCH FACIAL PLAST SURG/VOL 2, JAN-MAR 2000.

Medical conditions

Epicanthic fold is sometimes found as a congenital abnormality. Medical conditions that cause the nasal bridge not to mature and project are associated with epicanthic folds. One of the characteristics of a number of people with Down syndrome is prominent epicanthic folds. (2010). COMMON OTOLARYNGOLOGICAL CONGENITAL ABNORMALITIES. UTMB, Dept. of Otolaryngology.   He used the term mongoloid for the condition.  This was derived from then-prevailing ethnic theory
In Zellweger syndrome, epicanthic folds are prominent. (2010). Peroxisomal Disorder-Unusual Presentation as Failure to Thrive in Early Infancy. In Indian Journal of Pediatrics. 77:1151–1152
Other examples are fetal alcohol syndrome, phenylketonuria, and Turner syndrome.MedlinePlus Medical Encyclopedia

Neoteny

According to Ashley Montagu who taught anthropology at Princeton University, "The Mongoloid skull, whether Chinese or Japanese, has been rather more neotenized than the Caucasoid or European". In his list of "neotenous structural traits in which Mongoloids... differ from Caucasoids", Montagu lists "Larger brain, larger braincase, broader skull, broader face, flat roof of the nose, inner eye fold, more protuberant eyes, lack of brow ridges,.... less hairy, fewer sweat glands, fewer hairs per square centimeter and long torso".
[ref]Montagu, Ashley. Growing Young. Published by Greenwood Publishing Group, 1989 ISBN 0-89789-167-8
[/ref]

Evolutionary origin

It is hypothesized that epicanthic folds are caused by climatic factors and it may have originated more than once during human evolution. The genetic basis of epicanthic folds is not well understood.
The fat above the eyes insulates the eyes, conserving body heat. Climate and the Human body. 2003. September 14, 2006. Race, Genetics History. 2000. September 14, 2006






