[[Condoleezza Rice]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, African-American academics, African-American Christians, African-American diplomats, African-American members of the Cabinet of the United States, African-American women in politics, Alabama Republicans, American people of Cameroonian descent, American people of European descent, American people of Tikar descent, American political scientists, American Presbyterians, Council on Foreign Relations, Female diplomats, Female foreign ministers, George W. Bush Administration cabinet members, Hoover Institution people, Josef Korbel School of International Studies people, Living people, People from Birmingham, Alabama, Stanford University Department of Political Science faculty, Provosts of Stanford University, United States National Security Advisors, United States Secretaries of State, University of Denver alumni, University of Notre Dame alumni, Women members of the Cabinet of the United States, American writers

Condoleezza Rice (; born November 14, 1954) is an American political scientist and diplomat. She served as the 66th  United States Secretary of State, and was the second person to hold that office in the administration of President George W. Bush. Rice was the first female African-American secretary of state, as well as the second African American secretary of state (after Colin Powell), and the second female secretary of state (after Madeleine Albright). Rice was President Bush's National Security Advisor during his first term, making her the first woman to serve in that position. Before joining the Bush administration, she was a professor of political science at Stanford University where she served as Provost from 1993 to 1999. Rice also served on the National Security Council as the Soviet and Eastern Europe Affairs Advisor to President George H.W. Bush during the dissolution of the Soviet Union and German reunification.
Following her confirmation as Secretary of State, Rice pioneered the policy of Transformational Diplomacy directed toward expanding the number of responsible democratic governments in the world and especially in the Greater Middle East. That policy faced challenges as Hamas captured a popular majority in Palestinian elections, and influential countries including Saudi Arabia and Egypt maintained authoritarian systems with U.S. support. She has logged more miles traveling than any other Secretary of State. While in the position, she chaired the Millennium Challenge Corporation's board of directors.
In March 2009, Rice returned to Stanford University as a political science professor and the Thomas and Barbara Stephenson Senior Fellow on Public Policy at the Hoover Institution.

Early life

Rice was born in Birmingham, Alabama, the only child of Angelena (née Ray) Rice, a high school science, music, and oratory teacher, and John Wesley Rice, Jr., a high school guidance counselor and Presbyterian minister. neighborhood of Birmingham, and then Tuscaloosa, Alabama, at a time when the South was racially segregated.

Early education

Rice began to learn French, music, figure skating and ballet at the age of three.

High school and university education

In 1967, the family moved to Denver, Colorado. She attended St. Mary's Academy, an all-girls Catholic high school in Cherry Hills Village, Colorado, and graduated at age 16 in 1971. After studying piano at the Aspen Music Festival and School, Rice enrolled at the University of Denver, where her father was then serving as an assistant dean.
Rice's initial college major was piano, but after realizing she lacked the talent to play professionally, she began to consider an alternative major.
In 1974, at age 19, Rice was inducted into the Phi Beta Kappa Society, and was awarded a B.A., cum laude, in political science by the University of Denver. While at the University of Denver she was a member of Alpha Chi Omega, Gamma Delta chapter.uscaxo. She obtained a master's degree in political science from the University of Notre Dame in 1975. She first worked in the State Department in 1977, during the Carter administration, as an intern in the Bureau of Educational and Cultural Affairs. She would also study Russian at Moscow State University in the summer of 1979, and intern with the RAND Corporation in Santa Monica, California. In 1981, at age 26, she received her Ph.D. in political science from the Josef Korbel School of International Studies at the University of Denver. Her dissertation centered on military policy and politics in what was then the communist state of Czechoslovakia.
From 1980–1981, she was a fellow at Stanford University's Arms Control and Disarmament Program, having won a Ford Foundation Duel Expertise Fellowship in Soviet Studies and International Security. The award granted a year-long fellowship at Harvard, Stanford, Columbia University, Massachusetts Institute of Technology or University of California Los Angeles – Rice contacted both Harvard and Stanford but claims Harvard ignored her. Her fellowship at Stanford began her academic affiliation with the University and time in Northern California.

Early political views

Rice was a Democrat until 1982, when she changed her political affiliation to Republican, in part because she disagreed with the foreign policy of Democratic President Jimmy Carter,

Academic career

Rice was hired by Stanford University as an assistant professor of political science (1981–1987). She was promoted to associate professor in 1987, a post she held until 1993. She was a specialist on the Soviet Union and gave lectures on the subject for the Berkeley-Stanford joint program led by UC Berkeley Professor George Breslauer in the mid-1980s.
At a 1985 meeting of arms control experts at Stanford, Rice's performance drew the attention of Brent Scowcroft, who had served as National Security Advisor under Gerald Ford.[ref]
