[[Studio Ghibli]]

CATEGORIES: Film production companies of Japan, Japanese animation studios, Companies established in 1985, Studio Ghibli, Topcraft, Western Tokyo, 1985 establishments in Japan, Koganei, Tokyo, Animation studios in Tokyo

 is a Japanese animation film studio based in Koganei, Tokyo, Japan."会社情報." Studio Ghibli. The studio is best known for its anime feature films. Studio Ghibli began in June 1985 after the success of Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind with funding by Tokuma Shoten. The company's logo features the character Totoro (a large forest spirit) from Miyazaki's film My Neighbor Totoro. At one time the studio was based in Kichijōji, Musashino, Tokyo."The Animerica Interview: Takahata and Nosaka: Two Grave Voices in Animation." Animerica. Volume 2, No. 11. Page 11. Translated by Animerica from: Takahata, Isao. Eiga o Tsukurinagara, Kangaeta Koto ("Things I Thought While Making Movies") Tokuma Shoten, 1991. Originally published in Animage, June 1987. This is a translation of a 1987 conversation between Takahata and Akiyuki Nosaka. "Kichijoji is the Tokyo area where "Studio Ghibli," frequent Takahata collaborator Hayao Miyazaki's studio, is located.
The studio has produced nineteen feature films, several short films, television commercials and a television film. Eight of Studio Ghibli's films are among the 15 highest-grossing anime films made in Japan, with Spirited Away being the highest, grossing over $274 million worldwide.
Many anime features created by Studio Ghibli have won the Animage Anime Grand Prix award and four have won the Japan Academy Prize for Animation of the Year. In 2002, Spirited Away won a Golden Bear and an Oscar for Best Animated Feature.

Name

The name Ghibli was given by Hayao Miyazaki bearing the Caproni Ca.309 Ghibli in mind.

History

Founded in June 1985, the studio is headed by the directors Hayao Miyazaki and Isao Takahata and the producer Toshio Suzuki. Prior to the formation of the studio, Miyazaki and Takahata had already had long careers in Japanese film and television animation and had worked together on Hols: Prince of the Sun and Panda! Go, Panda!; and Suzuki was an editor at Tokuma Shoten's Animage manga magazine.
The studio was founded after the success of the 1984 film Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind, written and directed by Miyazaki for Topcraft and distributed by Toei Company. The origins of the film lie in the first two volumes of a serialized manga written by Miyazaki for publication in Animage as a way of generating interest in an anime version. Suzuki was part of the production team on the film and founded Studio Ghibli with Miyazaki, who also invited Takahata to join the new studio.
The studio has mainly produced films by Miyazaki, with the second most prolific director being Takahata (most notably with Grave of the Fireflies). Other directors who have worked with Studio Ghibli include Yoshifumi Kondo, Hiroyuki Morita and Gorō Miyazaki. Composer Joe Hisaishi has provided the soundtracks for most of Miyazaki's Studio Ghibli films. In their book Anime Classics Zettai!, Brian Camp and Julie Davis made note of Michiyo Yasuda as "a mainstay of Studio Ghibli's extraordinary design and production team".
In August 1996, Disney and Tokuma Shoten Publishing agreed that Disney would distribute international Tokuma's Studio Ghibli animated films.
Many of Ghibli's works are distributed in Japan by Toho. Internationally, The Walt Disney Company has rights to all of Ghibli's output that did not have previous international distribution, including the global, non-Japan distribution rights to Princess Mononoke and Spirited Away. As of September 2011, they share North American theatrical rights with GKids while domestic right remain with Disney.GKids to distribute 13 Ghibli anime films in US
Over the years, there has been a close relationship between Studio Ghibli and the magazine Animage, which regularly runs exclusive articles on the studio and its members in a section titled "Ghibli Notes." Artwork from Ghibli's films and other works are frequently featured on the cover of the magazine. Between 1999 and 2005 Studio Ghibli was a subsidiary of Tokuma Shoten, the publisher of Animage.
In October 2001, the Ghibli Museum opened in Tokyo. It contains exhibits based on Studio Ghibli films and shows animations, including a number of short Studio Ghibli films not available elsewhere.
The studio is also known for its strict "no-edits" policy in licensing their films abroad due to Nausicaä of the Valley of Wind being heavily edited for the film's release in the United States as Warriors of the Wind. The "no cuts" policy was highlighted when Miramax co-chairman Harvey Weinstein suggested editing Princess Mononoke to make it more marketable. A Studio Ghibli producer is rumoured to have sent an authentic Japanese sword with a simple message: "No cuts".
On February 1, 2008, Toshio Suzuki stepped down from the position of Studio Ghibli president, which he had held since 2005, and Koji Hoshino (former president of Walt Disney Japan) took over. Suzuki said he wanted to improve films with his own hands as a producer, rather than demanding this from his employees. Suzuki decided to hand over the presidency to Hoshino because Hoshino has helped Studio Ghibli to sell its videos since 1996, also helping to release the Princess Mononoke film in the United States. Suzuki still serves on the company's board of directors.
Two Studio Ghibli short films created for the Ghibli Museum were shown at the Carnegie Hall Citywise Japan NYC Festival: "House Hunting" and "Mon Mon the Water Spider" were screened on March 26, 2011.
As of 2012, Takahata is developing a project for release after Gorō Miyazaki's (director of Tales from Earthsea and Hayao's son) From Up on Poppy Hill. Takahata is working on an adaptation of the tale of The Tale of the Bamboo Cutter. Hayao Miyazaki is developing a project called The Wind Rises which is about the Mitsubishi A6M Zero and its founder.
Sunday, September 1, 2013, Hayao Miyazaki held a press conference in Venice, confirming his retirement saying: "I know I've said I would retire many times in the past. Many of you must think, `Once again.' But this time I am quite serious..." Now it is time for Hayao's son, Goro Miyazaki, to take the torch and follow in his father's footsteps.ew.com/2013/09/06/hayao-miyazaki-retirement/
On January 31, 2014, it was announced that Gorō Miyazaki will direct his first anime TV series, Sanzoku no Musume Rōnya, an adaptation of Astrid Lindgren's Ronia the Robber's Daughter for NHK. The series is computer-animated, produced by Polygon Pictures, and co-produced by Studio Ghibli.
In March 2014 Toshio Suzuki retired as a producer and assumed a new position of general manager. Yoshiaki Nishimura replaced Suzuki in the producer role.

Works

Significant achievements

Films

While Nausicaä of the Valley of the Wind is often considered one of the Studio Ghibli films, it was produced and released before the studio's official founding.

Anime series

Short films (television, theatrical, Ghibli Museum, OVA)

Music videos (television and theatrical)

Commercials

Video games

Stage productions

Other works

The works listed here consist of works that do not fall into the above categories. All of these films have been released on DVD in Japan as part of the Ghibli Gakujutsu Library.

Related works

These works were not created by Studio Ghibli, but were produced by a variety of studios and people who went on to form or join Studio Ghibli. This includes members of Topcraft that went on to create Studio Ghibli in 1985; works produced by Toei Animation, TMS Entertainment, Nippon Animation or other studios and featuring involvement by Hayao Miyazaki, Isao Takahata or other Ghibli staffers. The list also includes works created in cooperation with Studio Ghibli.

Pre-Ghibli

Cooperative works

Distributive works

These Western animated films (plus one Japanese film) have been distributed by Studio Ghibli, and now through their label, Ghibli Museum Library.

Contributive works

Studio Ghibli has made contributions to the following anime series and movies:

Notable animators and character designers from Studio Ghibli





Further reading




