[[George Carlin]]

CATEGORIES: 1937 births, 2008 deaths, 20th-century American male actors, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American male actors, 21st-century American writers, Male actors from California, Male actors from New York City, American humorists, American male film actors, American male television actors, American people of Irish descent, American political writers, American skeptics, American social commentators, American stand-up comedians, American male voice actors, American satirists, Censorship in the arts, Counterculture of the 1960s, Critics of religions, Deaths from heart failure, Former Roman Catholics, Free speech activists, Grammy Award-winning artists, Mark Twain Prize recipients, Obscenity controversies, People from Manhattan, United States Air Force airmen, Writers from California, Writers from New York City

George Denis Patrick Carlin (May 12, 1937 – June 22, 2008) was an American comedian, writer, social critic, and actor who won five Grammy Awards for his comedy albums.
The first of his 14 stand-up comedy specials for HBO was filmed in 1977. From the late 1980s, Carlin's routines focused on sociocultural criticism of modern American society. He often commented on contemporary political issues in the United States and satirized the excesses of American culture. In 2004, Carlin was placed second on the Comedy Central list of the 100 greatest stand-up comedians, ahead of Lenny Bruce and behind Richard Pryor. He was a frequent performer and guest host on The Tonight Show during the three-decade Johnny Carson era, and hosted the first episode of Saturday Night Live. His final HBO special, It's Bad for Ya, was filmed less than four months before his death. In 2008, he was posthumously awarded the Mark Twain Prize for American Humor.

Early life

George Denis Patrick Carlin was born in Manhattan, New York.
He grew up on West 121st Street, in a neighborhood of Manhattan he said he and his friends called "White Harlem", because that "sounded a lot tougher than its real name" of Morningside Heights.Carlin in 
Carlin joined the United States Air Force when he was old enough, and was trained as a radar technician. He was stationed at Barksdale Air Force Base in Bossier City, Louisiana. He also began working as a disc jockey at radio station KJOE, in nearby Shreveport. Labeled an "unproductive airman" by his superiors, Carlin was discharged early on July 29, 1957. During his time in the Air Force he had been court martialed three times, and also received many nonjudicial punishments.Comedian George Carlin dies at 71 Variety, June 22, 2008

Career

In 1959, Carlin and Jack Burns began as a comedy team when both were working for radio station KXOL in Fort Worth, Texas. After successful performances at Fort Worth's beat coffeehouse, The Cellar, Burns and Carlin headed for California in February 1960 and stayed together for two years as a team before moving on to individual pursuits.

1960s

Within weeks of arriving in California in 1960, Burns and Carlin put together an audition tape and created The Wright Brothers, a morning show on KDAY in Hollywood. The comedy team worked there for three months, honing their material in beatnik coffeehouses at night. Burns and Carlin recorded their only album, Burns and Carlin at the Playboy Club Tonight, in May 1960 at Cosmo Alley in Hollywood.
In the 1960s, Carlin began appearing on television variety shows, where his routines included:
Variations on these routines appear on Carlin's 1967 debut album, Take Offs and Put Ons, recorded live in 1966 at The Roostertail in Detroit, Michigan.
During this period, Carlin became a frequent performer and guest host on The Tonight Show, initially with Jack Paar as host, then with Johnny Carson. Carlin became one of Carson's most frequent substitutes during the host's three-decade reign. Carlin was also cast in Away We Go, a 1967 comedy show that aired on CBS. His material during his early career and his appearance, which consisted of suits and short-cropped hair, had been seen as "conventional", particularly when contrasted with his later anti-establishment material.
Carlin was present at Lenny Bruce's arrest for obscenity. As the police began attempting to detain members of the audience for questioning, they asked Carlin for his identification. Telling the police he did not believe in government-issued IDs, he was arrested and taken to jail with Bruce in the same vehicle.
In the late 1960s, Carlin was making about $250,000 annually. As a tax shelter he bought a private jet: a twin-engine Aero Commander 1121 Jet Commander. Carlin hired pilots to fly him to various tour dates.

1970s

Eventually, Carlin changed both his routines and his appearance. Carlin hired talent managers Jeff Wald and Ron De Blasio to help him reinvent his image, making him look more hip for a younger audience. Wald put Carlin into much smaller clubs such as The Troubadour in West Hollywood and The Bitter End in New York City. Wald says that Carlin's income was thus reduced by 90%, but his later career arc was greatly improved. In 1970, record producer Monte Kay formed the Little David Records subsidiary of Atlantic Records, with comedian Flip Wilson as co-owner. 114. Kay and Wilson signed Carlin away from RCA Records, and recorded a Carlin performance at Washington DC's The Cellar Door in May 1971—this was released as FM & AM in January 1972. De Blasio was busy managing the fast-paced career of Freddy Prinze, and was about to sign Richard Pryor, so he released Carlin to Little David general manager Jack Lewis, who was somewhat wild and rebellious, similar to Carlin. 158. Carlin lost some TV bookings by dressing strangely for a comedian of the time, wearing faded jeans and sporting long hair, a beard, and earrings at a time when clean-cut, well-dressed comedians were the norm. Using his own persona as a springboard for his new comedy, he was presented by Ed Sullivan in a performance of "The Hair Piece" and quickly regained his popularity as the public caught on to his sense of style.
Starting in 1972, singer-songwriter Kenny Rankin was Carlin's label mate on Little David Records, and Rankin served many times as Carlin's musical guest or opening act during the early 1970s. The two flew together in Carlin's private jet; Carlin says that Rankin relapsed into using cocaine while on tour, since Carlin had so much cocaine available.
The album FM & AM proved very popular. It marked Carlin's change from mainstream to counterculture comedy. The "AM" side was an extension of Carlin's previous style, with zany but relatively clean routines parodying aspects of American life. The "FM" side introduced Carlin's new style, with references to marijuana and birth control pills, and a playful examination of the word "shit". In this manner, Carlin renewed a style of radical social commentary comedy that Lenny Bruce had utilized in the late 1950s.
In this period Carlin perfected what is perhaps his best-known routine, "Seven Words You Can Never Say on Television", recorded on Class Clown. On July 21, 1972 Carlin was arrested after performing this routine at Milwaukee's Summerfest and charged with violating obscenity laws.
The controversy increased Carlin's fame. He eventually expanded the dirty-words theme with a seemingly interminable end to a performance (ending with his voice fading out in one HBO version, and accompanying the credits in the Carlin at Carnegie special for the 1982–83 season) and a set of 49 web pages organized by subject and embracing his "Incomplete List of Impolite Words".
On stage, during a rendition of his "Dirty Words" routine, Carlin learned that his previous comedy album FM & AM had won the Grammy. Midway through the performance on the album Occupation: Foole, he can be heard thanking someone for handing him a piece of paper. He then exclaimed "Shit!" and proudly announced his win to the audience.
Carlin hosted the premiere broadcast of NBC's Saturday Night Live, on October 11, 1975, the only episode to date in which the host did not appear (at his request) in sketches. Carlin however loved the show and encouraged Michael McKenzie to write a book on it, which he did in 1978 [ The following season, 1976–77, he appeared regularly on CBS Television's Tony Orlando & Dawn variety series.
Carlin unexpectedly stopped performing regularly in 1976, when his career appeared to be at its height. For the next five years he rarely performed stand-up, although it was at this time that he began doing specials for HBO as part of its On Location series. He later revealed that he had suffered the first of three heart attacks during this layoff period. His first two HBO specials aired in 1977 and 1978.

1980s and 1990s

In 1981, Carlin returned to the stage, releasing A Place for My Stuff and returning to HBO and New York City with the Carlin at Carnegie TV special, videotaped at Carnegie Hall and airing during the 1982–83 season. Carlin continued doing HBO specials every year or every other year over the following decade and a half. All of Carlin's albums from this time forward are from the HBO specials.
He hosted SNL for the second time on November 10, 1984, this time appearing in several sketches.
Carlin's acting career was primed with a major supporting role in the 1987 comedy hit Outrageous Fortune, starring Bette Midler and Shelley Long; it was his first notable screen role after a handful of previous guest roles on television series. Playing drifter Frank Madras, the role poked fun at the lingering effect of the 1960s counterculture. In 1989, he gained popularity with a new generation of teens when he was cast as Rufus, the time-traveling mentor of the titular characters in Bill & Ted's Excellent Adventure, and reprised his role in the film sequel Bill and Ted's Bogus Journey as well as the first season of the cartoon series. From 1991 to 1995, he narrated the American version of the children's show Thomas the Tank Engine & Friends, and played "Mr. Conductor" on Shining Time Station from 1991 to 1993, Mr. Conductor's Thomas Tales, and Storytime with Thomas and Carlin left Thomas the Tank Engine & Friends after the fourth season and was replaced in 1998 by Alec Baldwin for the fifth and sixth seasons.
Also in 1991, Carlin had a major supporting role in the movie The Prince of Tides, which starred Nick Nolte and Barbra Streisand.
Carlin began a weekly Fox sitcom, The George Carlin Show, in 1993, playing New York City taxicab driver George O'Grady.  The show, created and written by The Simpsons co-creator Sam Simon, ran 27 episodes through December 1995. In his final book, the posthumously published Last Words, Carlin said about The George Carlin Show, "I had a great time. I never laughed so much, so often, so hard as I did with cast members Alex Rocco, Chris Rich, Tony Starke. There was a very strange, very good sense of humor on that stage ... but ... I was incredibly happy when the show was canceled. I was frustrated that it had taken me away from my true work."''Last Words', Simon & Schuster, 2009'
Carlin later explained that there were other, more pragmatic reasons for abandoning his acting career in favor of standup.   In an interview for Esquire magazine in 2001, he said, "Because of my abuse of drugs, I neglected my business affairs and had large arrears with the IRS, and that took me eighteen to twenty years to dig out of. I did it honorably, and I don't begrudge them. I don't hate paying taxes, and I'm not angry at anyone, because I was complicit in it. But I'll tell you what it did for me: It made me a way better comedian. Because I had to stay out on the road and I couldn't pursue that movie career, which would have gone nowhere, and I became a really good comic and a really good writer."What I've Learned: George Carlin. Esquire. Retrieved April 25, 2013
Carlin was honored at the 1997 Aspen Comedy Festival with a retrospective, George Carlin: 40 Years of Comedy, hosted by Jon Stewart.  His first hardcover book, Brain Droppings (1997), sold nearly 900,000 copies and spent 40 weeks on the New York Times best-seller list.
In 1999 Carlin played a supporting role as a satirical Roman Catholic cardinal in Kevin Smith's movie Dogma. He worked with Smith again with a cameo appearance in Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back, and later played an atypically serious role in Jersey Girl as the blue-collar father of Ben Affleck's character.

2000s

In 2001 Carlin was given a Lifetime Achievement Award at the 15th Annual American Comedy Awards.
In December 2003 Representative Doug Ose (R-California) introduced a bill (H.R. 3687) to outlaw the broadcast of Carlin's "seven dirty words",Library of Congress. Bill Summary & Status 108th Congress (2003 - 2004) H.R.3687. THOMAS website. Retrieved July 20, 2008. including "compound use (including hyphenated compounds) of such words and phrases with each other or with other words or phrases, and other grammatical forms of such words and phrases (including verb, adjective, gerund, participle, and infinitive forms)." (The bill omitted "tits", but included "asshole", which was not one of Carlin's original seven words.) The bill was referred to the House Judiciary Committee on the Constitution in January 2004, where it was tabled.
Carlin performed regularly as a headliner in Las Vegas, but in 2004 his run at the MGM Grand Las Vegas was terminated after an altercation with his audience. After a poorly received set, filled with dark references to suicide bombings and beheadings, Carlin complained that he could not wait to get out of "this fucking hotel" and Las Vegas; he wanted to go back east, he said, "where the real people are".  He continued:
An audience member shouted, "Stop degrading us!"  Carlin responded, "Thank you very much, whatever that was. I hope it was positive; if not, well, blow me." He was immediately fired, and soon thereafter his representative announced that he would begin treatment for alcohol and prescription painkiller addiction on his own initiative.
Following his thirteenth HBO Special on November 5, 2005, entitled Life Is Worth Losing and aired live from the Beacon Theatre in New York City – during which he mentioned, "I've got 341 days of sobriety" — Carlin toured his new material through the first half of 2006.  Topics included suicide, natural disasters, cannibalism, genocide, human sacrifice, threats to civil liberties in America, and the case for his theory that humans are inferior to other animals.  At the first tour stop at the Tachi Palace Casino in Lemoore, California in February, Carlin mentioned that the appearance was his "first show back" after a six-week hospitalization for heart failure and pneumonia.
Carlin voiced a character in the Disney/Pixar animated feature Cars, which opened on June 9, 2006. The character, Fillmore, is an anti-establishment hippie VW Microbus with a psychedelic paint job and the license plate "51237" — Carlin's birthday.  In 2007 Carlin voiced the wizard in Happily N'Ever After, his last film.
Carlin's last HBO stand-up special, It's Bad for Ya, aired live on March 1, 2008 from the Wells Fargo Center for the Arts in Santa Rosa, California. Themes included "American bullshit", rights, death, old age, and child rearing.  He told his audience to cut through the "bullshit" and "enjoy the carnival".

Personal life

Carlin met Brenda Hosbrook while touring with Burns and Carlin in Dayton, Ohio in August 1960. They were married at her parents' home in Dayton on June 3, 1961. The couple's only child, Kelly, was born on June 15, 1963. In 1971 the couple renewed their wedding vows in Las Vegas. Brenda died of liver cancer on May 11, 1997, the day before Carlin's 60th birthday.
In November 1997, Carlin met Sally Wade, a comedy writer based in Hollywood; Carlin described it as "love at first sight", but was hesitant to act on his feelings so soon after Brenda's death.
Carlin often criticized religion, God, and religious adherents in his comedy. He described what he saw as the flaws of organized religion in interviews and performances, such as his "Religion" and "There Is No God" routines in You Are All Diseased. In his last HBO stand up show, It's Bad for Ya, he mocked traditional oath affirmations on the Bible as "bullshit",

Themes

Carlin's material falls under one of three self-described categories: "the little world" (observational humor), "the big world" (social commentary), and the peculiarities of the English language (euphemisms, doublespeak, business jargon), all sharing the overall theme of (in his words) "humanity's bullshit", which might include murder, genocide, war, rape, corruption, religion and other aspects of human civilization. He was known for mixing observational humor with larger social commentary. His delivery frequently treated these subjects in a misanthropic and nihilistic fashion, such as in his statement during the Life is Worth Losing show: I look at it this way... For centuries now, man has done everything he can to destroy, defile, and interfere with nature: clear-cutting forests, strip-mining mountains, poisoning the atmosphere, over-fishing the oceans, polluting the rivers and lakes, destroying wetlands and aquifers... so when nature strikes back, and smacks him on the head and kicks him in the nuts, I enjoy that. I have absolutely no sympathy for human beings whatsoever. None. And no matter what kind of problem humans are facing, whether it's natural or man-made, I always hope it gets worse. 
Language was a frequent focus of Carlin's work. Euphemisms that seek to conceal or distort meaning, and the use of pompous, presumptuous, or silly vocabulary, were often the target of Carlin's routines. When asked on Inside the Actors Studio what turned him on, he responded, "Reading about language." When asked what made him proudest of his career, he said the number of his books that have been sold, close to a million copies.
Carlin also gave special attention to prominent topics in American and Western culture, such as obsession with fame and celebrity, consumerism, conservative Christianity, political alienation, corporate control, hypocrisy, child raising, fast food diet, news stations, self-help publications, blind patriotism, sexual taboos, certain uses of technology and surveillance, and the pro-life position,"Abortion" in the HBO Special Back in Town among many others. For example, Carlin often criticized elections as an illusion of choice.
Carlin openly communicated in his shows and in his interviews that his purpose for existence was entertainment, that he was "here for the show." He professed a hearty schadenfreude in watching the rich spectrum of humanity slowly self-destruct, in his estimation, of its own design, saying, "When you're born, you get a ticket to the freak show. When you're born in America, you get a front-row seat." He acknowledged that this is a very selfish thing, especially since he included large human catastrophes as entertainment. In his You Are All Diseased performance, he elaborated somewhat on this, telling the audience, "I have always been willing to put myself at great personal risk for the sake of entertainment. And I've always been willing to put you at great personal risk, for the same reason!"
In the same interview, he recounted his experience of a California earthquake in the early 1970s as "an amusement park ride. Really, I mean it's such a wonderful thing to realize that you have absolutely no control, and to see the dresser move across the bedroom floor unassisted is just exciting."
A routine in Carlin's 1999 HBO special You Are All Diseased focusing on airport security leads up to the statement: "Take a fucking chance! Put a little fun in your life! Most Americans are soft and frightened and unimaginative and they don't realize there's such a thing as dangerous fun, and they certainly don't recognize a good show when they see one."
Along with wordplay and sex jokes, Carlin had always included politics as part of his material, but by the mid-1980s he had become a strident social critic in both his HBO specials and the book compilations of his material, bashing both conservatives and liberals alike.

Influences

Carlin's influences included Danny Kaye,[ref]
[/ref] Jonathan Winters, Lenny Bruce,

Health problems, death, and legacy

Carlin had a history of cardiac problems spanning several decades. These included three heart attacks (in 1978 at age 41, 1982 and 1991), an arrhythmia requiring an ablation procedure in 2003, and a significant episode of heart failure in late 2005. He twice underwent angioplasty to reopen narrowed arteries. (2009). Last words. New York, NY: Simon & Schuster. pp. 75–76. In early 2005 he entered a drug rehabilitation facility for treatment of addictions to alcohol and Vicodin.
In tribute, HBO broadcast 11 of his 14 HBO specials from June 25–28, including a 12-hour marathon block on their HBO Comedy channel. NBC scheduled a rerun of the premiere episode of Saturday Night Live, which Carlin hosted. Larry King devoted his entire June 23 show to a tribute to Carlin, featuring interviews with Jerry Seinfeld, Bill Maher, Roseanne Barr and Lewis Black, as well as Carlin's daughter Kelly and his brother, Patrick.
On June 24, The New York Times printed an op-ed piece on Carlin by Jerry Seinfeld. Cartoonist Garry Trudeau paid tribute in his Doonesbury comic strip on July 27. Retrieved November 15, 2010.
Four days before his death the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts named Carlin its 2008 Mark Twain Prize for American Humor honoree.com; June 18, 2008 He became its first posthumous recipient on November 10 in Washington, D.C.. Comedians honoring him at the ceremony included Jon Stewart, Bill Maher, Lily Tomlin (a past Twain Humor Prize winner), Lewis Black, Denis Leary, Joan Rivers, and Margaret Cho.
Louis C.K. dedicated his stand-up special Chewed Up to Carlin, and Lewis Black dedicated his entire second season of Root of All Evil to him.
For a number of years Carlin had been compiling and writing his autobiography, to be released in conjunction with a one-man Broadway show tentatively titled New York City Boy.  After his death Tony Hendra, his collaborator on both projects, edited the autobiography for release as Last Words. The book, chronicling most of Carlin's life and future plans (including the one-man show) was published in 2009. The audio edition is narrated by Carlin's brother, Patrick.
The George Carlin Letters: The Permanent Courtship of Sally Wade,Wade, Sally (March 8, 2011). The George Carlin Letters: The Permanent Courtship of Sally Wade. Gallery. ISBN 1-4516-0776-8. by Carlin's widow, a collection of previously-unpublished writings and artwork by Carlin interwoven with Wade's chronicle of the last ten years of their life together, was published in March 2011. The subtitle is a phrase on a handwritten note that Wade found next to her computer upon returning home from the hospital after her husband's death.LA Weekly
In 2008 Carlin's daughter Kelly announced plans to publish an "oral history", a collection of stories from Carlin's friends and family." Wloszczyna, Susan. November 4, 2008. She later indicated that the project had been shelved in favor of completion of her own project,Kelly Carlin-McCall (December 30, 2009). Comedy Land Retrieved March 14, 2011. an autobiographical play about her life with her father, A Carlin Home Companion: Growing Up with George, performed by Carlin as a one-woman show.afofest.com/companion/

Works

Discography

Filmography

Television

Video games

HBO specials

Bibliography

Audiobooks

Internet hoaxes

Many writings found on the internet have been falsely attributed to Carlin, including various joke lists, rants, and other pieces. The web site Snopes, an online resource that debunks urban legends and myths, has addressed these forgeries. Many of them contain material that runs counter to Carlin's viewpoints; some are especially volatile toward racial groups, gays, women, the homeless, and other targets. Carlin was aware of these bogus emails and debunked them on his own web site, saying, "Here's a rule of thumb, folks: Nothing you see on the Internet is mine unless it comes from one of my albums, books, HBO specials, or appeared on my web site", and "It bothers me that some people might believe that I would be capable of writing some of this stuff."Barbara Mikkelson. "George Carlin on Aging" snopes.com; June 27, 2008








