[[Slipknot (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 debut albums, Roadrunner Records albums, Slipknot (band) albums, Albums produced by Ross Robinson, Albums certified gold by the Nederlandse Vereniging van Producenten en Importeurs van beeld- en geluidsdragers, Albums certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan, Albums certified multi-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Albums certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association, Albums certified platinum by the British Phonographic Industry, Albums certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association, Nu metal albums

Slipknot is the debut studio album by American metal band Slipknot. It was released on 29 June 1999 through Roadrunner Records, following a demo containing a few of the songs which had been released in 1998, and was reissued in December 1999 with a slightly altered track listing and mastering as the result of a lawsuit. It was the first release by the band to be produced by Ross Robinson, who sought to refine Slipknot's sound rather than alter the group's musical direction.
The album spans several genres, but is generally noted for its extensive percussion and overall heavy sound. It was well received by fans and critics alike and was responsible for bringing Slipknot a large increase in popularity. The album peaked at number 51 on the Billboard 200, and has gone on to become certified double platinum in the United States, making it the band's best selling album. It was voted the best debut album of the last 25 years by readers of Metal Hammer magazine.

Recording and production

In 1997, following the band's first release Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat., the members of Slipknot continued to write new material and work in SR Audio, a local studio, with new vocalist Corey Taylor.
On September 29, 1998, Slipknot left Des Moines, Iowa for Indigo Ranch Studios in Malibu, California, anxious to record an album after a long wait to be signed.
The album's recording process was "very aggressive and chaotic", as producer Robinson strove to capture the intensity that the band created when performing live. Within three days all the drums were recorded, which contributed to the raw, live sound on the album that the band considers integral to its musical direction.

Musical and lyrical themes

The musical style of Slipknot is a constantly contested issue and the genres that the band are categorized in vary depending on the source, however, the band is generally regarded as nu metal, while showing influences of many different genres. Slipknot also includes melody, most notably in the single "Wait and Bleed".
"742617000027" is the intro track to the album. It contains some guitar scratches and abstract sound samples from the sampler Craig Jones. Some of the dialogue was taken from a Charles Manson documentary. The dialogue is "The whole thing, I think, is sick." 742617000027 was the shipping code on their 1996 self-released album Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat. All of the band members wear that number on their jumpsuits. When Slipknot played this in concert, it opened their set and was often accompanied by a clip from the film Gummo. The sample can be found during a scene in which two youths are smashing car windows.
The album features Corey Taylor as lead vocalist; he had previously appeared on their second demo, which, in turn, resulted in them signing to Roadrunner Records.

Reception

Slipknot was well received by critics and fans; following its release the band gained popularity beyond their own expectations.
A single from the album, "Wait and Bleed", was nominated for Best Metal Performance at the 2001 Grammy Awards, but lost to Deftones' "Elite".

Controversy


After the release of the album, the band was accused of copyright infringement regarding the concept of the song "Purity". Corey Taylor, during a Q&A, claimed that the song's lyrics had been written five years prior to the song's release and that only the song's name had been inspired by the Purity Knight story, which was claimed by the authoring website as being fictional. Taylor, to his defense, said the song's inspiration came from films such as Boxing Helena and The Collector, and not the story itself. The band later won their case, and was subsequently able to still play the song during live performances. It is included in the band's second DVD Disasterpieces (the studio version appears here as well) as well as the live album 9.0: Live and Antennas to Hell, and the 10th anniversary edition of the self-titled album.

10th Anniversary Edition

On September 9, 2009, Slipknot released a Special Edition version of the album to commemorate the tenth anniversary of its release. It was released in two forms, a digipak and a box set. The release date (09/09/09) is a reference to the fact that the band had nine band members and have sustained the same lineup since the original release of the album. The Special Edition box set includes: a CD and DVD set featuring all new digipak packaging, with a total of 25 songs, including the original album plus several previously unreleased cuts, demo tracks and "Purity". A "super deluxe" box set version of the re-release contains a T-shirt, patch, collectible cards, key chain, beanie and a note from vocalist Corey Taylor, and comes in packaging that resembles a safety deposit box.

Track listing

All songs written and composed by Shawn Crahan, Paul Gray, Joey Jordison and Corey Taylor.

Chart positions

Certifications

Personnel

Aside from their real names, members of the band are referred to by numbers zero through eight.

Release history



Literature


