[[Kirov, Kirov Oblast]]

CATEGORIES: Kirov, Kirov Oblast, Vyatka Governorate



Kirov (

History

The fort of Khlynov, situated just west of the Ural Mountains, was founded by Novgorodian entrepreneurs in 1181. It was first mentioned as a town in documents from 1374. Khlynov was incorporated into the Grand Duchy of Moscow in 1489 and became known throughout Russia for its clay statuettes and whistles. It was also managed by Khanate of Kazan and was known as "Hılın". The town's oldest surviving monument is the Assumption Cathedral (1689), an imposing structure surmounted by five globular domes.
In 1781, Catherine the Great renamed the town Vyatka and made it the seat of Vyatka Governorate. it was renamed for the Soviet leader Sergey Kirov, who had been assassinated on December 1.  However, whilst the name Kirov has remained since the dissolution of the Soviet Union, numerous institutions such as the university bear the former name of Vyatka.

Administrative and municipal status

Kirov is the administrative center of the oblast. As a municipal division, the City of Kirov is incorporated as Kirov Urban Okrug.Law #284-ZO

Economy

Kirov is a major transport hub (railway; Trans-Siberian main) and river port. It is served by Kirov Pobedilovo airport. During the 1990s this airport was closed and for several years provided only irregular service. During the 2003-2006 summer seasons there were signs of a revival in air transportation as several companies attempted to establish flight routes from Kirov to Moscow and Krasnodar. Since 2006 Kirov airport has been used by a local company operating flights to Moscow.
The Kirov River port went bankrupt in the late 1990s and all its river boats were sold to other regions. Kirov is a center of machine building; metallurgy, light, the printing trade, biochemical and the timber industry.

Culture

Museums

Vyatka Museum of Art, one of the oldest museums in Russia, was founded in 1910 by local artists.
The idea of creation belongs to natives of Vyatka land Victor and Apollinaria Vasnetsov. At the core of the collection — works that received the most part in the 1910-1920s from the State Museum Fund, private collections and as gifts — from patrons and artists. Today the museum has more than fifteen thousand exhibits and is located in four buildings in Kirov downtown.kirov.html

Theaters

Circus

According to a report in Pravda dated January 4, 2005, Kirov is known as the "city of twins" for the unusually high number of multiple births there.
According to a report, the city is home to a high concentration of red-haired individuals. 

Sports

Rodina

Education

Kirov is the home of Vyatka University, Vyatka University for the Humanities and Vyatka Agricultural Academy.

Climate

Kirov has a humid continental climate (Köppen climate classification Dfb).
 
 

Gallery

File:Kiron_new_bridge.jpg|Kirov New bridge
File:Kirov_The_bottom_pond_at_a_diopama.jpg|Kirov The bottom pond at a diorama
File:Armenian church Kirov.JPG|Armenian church Kirov
File:Spasskaya street Vyatka.JPG|Spasskaya Street
File:Киров - Железнодорожный вокзал.jpg|Kirov railway station
File:Stadium «Rodina».JPG|The bandy stadium

International relations

Twin towns – sister cities

Kirov is twinned with:



Notes

Sources

Further reading


