[[Hercules]]

CATEGORIES: Heroes in mythology and legend, Heracles, Fictional characters with superhuman strength

Hercules is the Roman name for the Greek divine hero Heracles, who was the son of Zeus (Roman equivalent Jupiter) and the mortal Alcmene. In classical mythology, Hercules is famous for his strength and for his numerous far-ranging adventures. 
The Romans adapted the Greek hero's iconography and myths for their literature and art under the name Hercules. In later Western art and literature and in popular culture, Hercules is more commonly used than Heracles as the name of the hero. Hercules was a multifaceted figure with contradictory characteristics, which enabled later artists and writers to pick and choose how to represent him."Hercules," in The Classical Tradition (Harvard University Press, 2010), p. 426. This article provides an introduction to representations of Hercules in the later tradition.

Labours

Hercules is known for his many adventures, which took him to the far reaches of the Greco-Roman world. One cycle of these adventures became canonical as the "Twelve Labours," but the list has variations. One traditional order of the labours is found in the Bibliotheca as follows:Pseudo-Apollodorus, Bibliotheke 2.5.1-2.5.12.

Side adventures

Hercules had a greater number of "deeds on the side" (parerga) that have been popular subjects for art, including:

File:Hercules killing Cacus at his Cave.jpg|Killing a fire-breathing Cacus (Sebald Beham, 1545)
File:Taten des Herakles dt 16Jh Atlas.jpg|Holding up the world for Atlas (based on Heinrich Aldegrever, 1550)
File:Annibale Fontana - Plaque with Hercules and Achelous - Walters 4171.jpg|Wrestling with Achelous (16th-century plaque)
File:Herakles Antaeus Couder decoration Louvre INV3378.jpg|Fighting the giant Antaeus (Auguste Couder, 1819)
File:Paul Cézanne 045.jpg|Retrieving Alcestis from the underworld (Paul Cézanne, 1867)
File:Prometheus and Hercules.jpg|Freeing Prometheus (Christian Griepenkerl, 1878)

Roman era

The Latin name Hercules was borrowed through Etruscan, where it is represented variously as Heracle, Hercle, and other forms. Hercules was a favorite subject for Etruscan art, and appears often on bronze mirrors. The Etruscan form Herceler derives from the Greek Heracles via syncope. A mild oath invoking Hercules (Hercule! or Mehercle!) was a common interjection in Classical Latin.W. M. Lindsay, "Mehercle and Herc(v)lvs. and Herc(u)lus" The Classical Quarterly 12.2 (April 1918:58).
Hercules had a number of myths that were distinctly Roman. One of these is Hercules' defeat of Cacus, who was terrorizing the countryside of Rome. The hero was associated with the Aventine Hill through his son Aventinus. Mark Antony considered him a personal patron god, as did the emperor Commodus. Hercules received various forms of religious veneration, including as a deity concerned with children and childbirth, in part because of myths about his precocious infancy, and in part because he fathered countless children. Roman brides wore a special belt tied with the "knot of Hercules", which was supposed to be hard to untie. 142; Karen K. Hersch, The Roman Wedding: Ritual and Meaning in Antiquity (Cambridge University Press, 2010), pp. 101, 110, 211. The comic playwright Plautus presents the myth of Hercules' conception as a sex comedy in his play Amphitryon; Seneca wrote the tragedy Hercules Furens about his bout with madness. During the Roman Imperial era, Hercules was worshipped locally from Hispania through Gaul.

Germanic association

Tacitus records a special affinity of the Germanic peoples for Hercules. In chapter 3 of his Germania, Tacitus states:
 
 ... they say that Hercules, too, once visited them; and when going into battle, they sang of him first of all heroes.  They have also those songs of theirs, by the recital of this barditusor, baritus, there being scribal variants. In the 17th century, the word entered the German language as barditus and was associated with the Celtic bards. as they call it, they rouse their courage, while from the note they augur the result of the approaching conflict. For, as their line shouts, they inspire or feel alarm.

In the Roman era Hercules' Club amulets appear from the 2nd to 3rd century, distributed over the empire (including Roman Britain, c.f. Cool 1986), mostly made of gold, shaped like wooden clubs. A specimen found in Köln-Nippes bears the inscription "DEO HERculi", confirming the association with Hercules.
In the 5th to 7th centuries, during the Migration Period, the amulet is theorized to have rapidly spread from the Elbe Germanic area across Europe. These Germanic "Donar's Clubs" were made from deer antler, bone or wood, more rarely also from bronze or precious metals. The amulet type is replaced by the Viking Age Thor's hammer pendants in the course of the Christianization of Scandinavia from the 8th to 9th century.

Medieval mythography

After the Roman Empire became Christianized, mythological narratives were often reinterpreted as allegory, influenced by the philosophy of late antiquity. In the 4th century, Servius had described Hercules' return from the underworld as representing his ability to overcome earthly desires and vices, or the earth itself as a consumer of bodies.395; Jane Chance, Medieval Mythography: From Roman North Africa to the School of Chartres, A.D. 433–1177 (University Press of Florida, 1994), p. 91.  In medieval mythography, Hercules was one of the heroes seen as a strong role model who demonstrated both valor and wisdom, with the monsters he battles as moral obstacles. 168, 218, 413. One glossator noted that when Hercules became a constellation, he showed that strength was necessary to gain entrance to Heaven. 219.
Medieval mythography was written almost entirely in Latin, and original Greek texts were little used as sources for Hercules' myths.

Renaissance mythography

The Renaissance and the invention of the printing press brought a renewed interest in and publication of Greek literature. Renaissance mythography drew more extensively on the Greek tradition of Heracles, typically under the Romanized name Hercules, or the alternate name Alcides. In a chapter of his book Mythologiae (1567), the influential mythographer Natale Conti collected and summarized an extensive range of myths concerning the birth, adventures, and death of the hero under his Roman name Hercules. Conti begins his lengthy chapter on Hercules with an overview description that continues the moralizing impulse of the Middle Ages:
 
 Hercules, who subdued and destroyed monsters, bandits, and criminals, was justly famous and renowned for his great courage. His great and glorious reputation was worldwide, and so firmly entrenched that he'll always be remembered. In fact the ancients honored him with his own temples, altars, ceremonies, and priests. But it was his wisdom and great soul that earned those honors; noble blood, physical strength, and political power just aren't good enough. 2, p. 566.

In art

In Roman works of art and in Renaissance and post-Renaissance art, Hercules can be identified by his attributes, the lion skin and the gnarled club (his favorite weapon); in mosaic he is shown tanned bronze, a virile aspect. The Classical and Hellenistic convention in frescoes and mosaics, adopted by the Romans, is to show women as pale-skinned and men as tanned dark from their outdoor arena of action and exercising in the gymnasium.(See also Reed. Reed.

Roman era

File:Heracles Pio-Clementino Inv252.jpg|Hercules of the Forum Boarium (Hellenistic, 2nd century BCE)
File:Hercules and Iolaus mosaic - Anzio Nymphaeum.jpg|Hercules and Iolaus (1st century CE mosaic from the Anzio Nymphaeum, Rome)
File:Hercules Hatra Iraq Parthian period 1st 2nd century CE.jpg|Hercules (Hatra, Iraq, Parthian period, 1st-2nd century CE)
File:Muze 001.jpg|Hercules bronze statuette, 2nd century CE (museum of Alanya, Turkey)
File:Missorium Herakles lion Cdm Paris 56-345 n3.jpg|Hercules and the Nemean Lion (detail), silver plate, 6th century (Cabinet des Médailles, Paris)

Modern era

File:Hendrik Goltzius - De reus Hercules.jpg|The Giant Hercules (1589) by Hendrik Goltzius
File:Peter Paul Rubens cat01.jpg|The Drunken Hercules (1612-1614) by Rubens
File:Brooklyn Museum - Les Écuries d'Augias - Honoré Daumier.jpg|Hercules in the Augean stable (1842, Honoré Daumier)
File:Hercules Comic Cover.1958)
File:Bartholomäus Spranger - Hercules, Deianira and the Centaur Nessus - Google Art Project.jpg|Hercules, Deianira and the Centaur Nessus, by Bartholomäus Spranger, 1580 - 1582
File:Henry IV en Herculeus terrassant l Hydre de Lerne cad La ligue Catholique Atelier Toussaint Dubreuil circa 1600.e. the Catholic League), by Toussaint Dubreuil, circa 1600. Louvre Museum

In numismatics

Hercules was among the earliest figures on ancient Roman coinage, and has been the main motif of many collector coins and medals since. One example is the 20 euro Baroque Silver coin issued on September 11, 2002. The obverse side of the coin shows the Grand Staircase in the town palace of Prince Eugene of Savoy in Vienna, currently the Austrian Ministry of Finance. Gods and demi-gods hold its flights, while Hercules stands at the turn of the stairs.

File:Æ Triens 2710028.jpg|Juno, with Hercules fighting a Centaur on reverse (Roman, 215–15 BCE)
File:Denarius Publius Cornelius Lentulus Marcellinus 1 Obverse. 100 BCE)
File:MAXIMINUS II-RIC VI 77-251201.jpg|Maximinus II and Hercules with club and lionskin (Roman, 313 CE)
5 French francs Hercule de Dupré 1996 F346-2 obverse.jpg|Commemorative 5-franc piece (1996), Hercules in center

Other cultural references

File:PillarsHerculesPeutingeriana.jpg|Pillars of Hercules, representing the Strait of Gibraltar (19th-century conjecture of the Tabula Peutingeriana)
File:Maczuga Herkulesa (background Castle Pieskowa Skała).jpg|The Cudgel of Hercules, a tall limestone rock formation, with Pieskowa Skała Castle in the background
File:Royal Coat of Arms of Greece. The phrase "Ηρακλείς του στέμματος" ("Defenders of the Crown") has pejorative connotations ("chief henchmen") in Greek.

In films

A series of nineteen Italian Hercules movies were made in the late 1950s and early 1960s. The actors who played Hercules in these films were Steve Reeves, Gordon Scott, Kirk Morris, Mickey Hargitay, Mark Forest, Alan Steel, Dan Vadis, Brad Harris, Reg Park, Peter Lupus (billed as Rock Stevens) and Michael Lane. A number of English-dubbed Italian films that featured the name of Hercules in their title were not intended to be movies about Hercules.







}}

