[[Almaty]]

CATEGORIES: Almaty, Cities in Central Asia, Former national capitals, Populated places along the Silk Road, Populated places established in 1854, Populated places in Kazakhstan, Provinces of Kazakhstan, Semirechye Oblast

Almaty ( Despite losing its status as the capital to Astana, Almaty remains the major commercial and cultural centre of Kazakhstan, also with the biggest population. The city is located in the mountainous area of southern Kazakhstan.

Status

From 1929 to 1936, Almaty was the capital of Kazakh ASSR. From 1936 to 1991, it was the capital of Kazakh SSR, and from 1991 to 1997, it was the capital of Kazakhstan. Almaty remains the largest, most developed, and most ethnically and culturally diverse city in Kazakhstan. The city is located in the foothills of Trans-Ili Alatau (or Zailiysky Alatau) in the extreme south-east and has a relatively mild climate with warm summers and quite cold winters. Since the city is located in a tectonically active area, there is a constant possibility of earthquakes. Although most of them do not represent any significant danger or cause damage, historically Almaty does have a record of some large destructive earthquakes.
In 1997, the capital was moved to Astana. Since then, Almaty has been referred to as the southern capital of Kazakhstan.

Toponymy

The name Almaty has its roots in medieval settlement Almatu, that existed near the present-day city.
There is a theory, which is disputed, that the city derives its name from the Kazakh word for 'apple' (алма), and thus is often translated as "full of apples;" alma is also 'apple' in other Turkic languages, as well as in Hungarian and Mongolian. The Russian version of its name—Alma-Ata, used during the Soviet era—was often perceived by as a combination of two Kazakh words, meaning Father of Apples.
There is great genetic diversity among the wild apples in the region surrounding Almaty; the region is thought to be the ancestral home of the apple, and the wild Malus sieversii is considered a likely candidate for the ancestor of the modern domestic apple, which could explain the "Alma Ata" name.

History

Prehistoric Almaty

During 1000–900 BC in the Bronze Age the first farmers and cattle-breeders established settlements on the territory of Almaty.

Middle Ages

The next stage of Almaty evolution was the period of the Middle Ages (8–10th centuries) and was characterized by the development of a city culture, a transfer to a settled way of living, the development of farming and handicrafts, and the emergence of a number of towns and cities in the territory of Zhetysu.

15th–18th centuries

In the 15th–18th centuries, the city was in decline as trade activities were decreasing on this part of the Silk Road. Notwithstanding, this period was saturated with very important political events that had a significant impact on the history of Almaty and Kazakhstan as a whole. It was a period of crucial ethnic and political transformations. The Kazakh state and nation were founded here, close to Almaty.
These lands also witnessed tragic developments related to the Dzungar intervention and the rigorous efforts of the Kazakh people to protect their land and preserve independence. In 1730 the Kazakhs defeated the Dzungar in the Anyrakay mountains,  north-west of Almaty. It was a critical moment in the Patriotic War between the Kazakhs and the Dzungars.

Foundation of Verniy

On 4 February 1854 the modern history of the city began with the strengthening of the Russian piedmont Fort Verniy near the Zailiysky Alatau mountain range between the Bolshaya and Malenkaya Almatinka rivers. The construction of the Verniy Fort was almost finished by the autumn of 1854. It was a fenced pentagon and one of its sides was built along the Malaya Almatinka. Later, the wood fence was replaced with a brick wall with embrasures. Main facilities were erected around the large square for training and parading.150 ЛЕТ ИЗ ЖИЗНИ АЛМАТЫ. ХРОНИКА СОБЫТИЙ
In 1855 the first displaced Kazakhs appeared in Verniy. Since 1856, Verniy started accepting Russian peasants. They founded the Bolshaya Almatinskaya Stanitsa (Cossack village) near the fortification. The inflow of migrants was increasing and led to construction of the Malaya Almatinskaya Stanitsa and Tatarskaya (Tashkentskaya) sloboda. It was the place of settlement for Tatar merchants and craftsmen.
In 1867 Verniy Fort was transformed into a town and called Almatinsk. However, the population did not like the new name of the town and soon the town was renamed back to Verniy. 
According to the First City Plan, the city perimeters were 
On 28 May 1887, at 4 a.m., an earthquake almost totally destroyed Verniy in 11–12 minutes. 

Soviet Era

In 1918, Soviet power was established in Verniy. The city and the region became part of the Turkestan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (RSFSR).
On 3 April 1927 the capital of the Kazak ASSR moved from Kyzylorda to Alma-Ata, within the RSFSR. This was an additional impetus for intensive development in the city. From 1936 (since the formation of the Kazakh SSR), Alma-Ata was the capital of first the Kazakh SSR, then it became capital of independent Kazakhstan.
On 31 January 1928, Leon Trotsky, leader of the 1917 October Revolution, accompanied by his wife Natalia Sedova and his son Lev Sedov, was exiled to Alma Ata by the then head of the Bolshevik party, Joseph Stalin. Trotsky was expelled from Alma-Ata to Turkey in February 1929, and eventually murdered by his foe in 21 August 1940.

=Revolution of 1917 to World War II=

In 1921, a joint consultation of regional government representatives, professional trade associations, and local faith-based groups was summoned in an effort to rename Verniy. Alma-Ata was the preferred choice.
On 29 April 1927, it was officially decided to transfer the capital of the Kazakh Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic from Kyzyl-Orda to Alma-Ata.
During the transfer of the status of capital city from Kyzyl-Orda to Alma-Ata, a 1936 plan by the Architecture and Planning Bureau aimed to remodel Alma-Ata as the new cultural capital of the Kazakh SSR. The plan was based on the existing rectangular system of districts that would further be strengthened and reconstructed.

=World War II=

During World War II the city's territory was reshuffled quite dramatically. To better organize the home front and concentrate industrial and material resources, the residential areas were compressed to arrange accommodation for 26,000 people evacuated from the European theatre of war. 
Over 52,000 Alma-Ata residents received the title: Gratitude for Your Self-Denying Labour. 48 residents were granted the title of Hero of The Soviet Union. Three rifle divisions were raised in Alma-Ata, including the well-known 8th Guards Rifle Division 'Panfilov' (originally the 316th rifle division), along with 2 rifle battalions and 3 aviation regiments that were raised on the bases of the air club of Alma-Ata.

=Industrialisation in the Soviet period=

After 1941, due to the mass evacuation of factories and workers from the European part of the Soviet Union during World War II, Alma-Ata became an administrative and trading centre and although it had an underdeveloped industrial base it become one of the largest industrial centres of the Soviet Union. A special role in this process was played by the location of the city, which was in the rear in relation to the conflict.
During the years 1941–1945 the industrial potential of the city increased significantly. The economically active population of the city grew from 104,000 in 1919 to 365,000 in 1968. In 1967 the city had 145 enterprises, with the bulk of these being light industrial and food industries, which was slightly different from a typical Soviet city where the bias was usually towards heavy industry and capital goods production.
The main industries in Alma-Ata were:
food processing (36% of gross industrial output), based largely on locally abundant fruit and vegetable raw materials, light industry (31%), and heavy industry (33%). The main products of the region were:

1945 to 2000

From 1966 to 1971, 1,400,000 square metres of public and cooperative housing were built. Annually, around 300,000 square metres of dwellings were under construction, and most of the buildings made during this time were earthquake-proof multi-storey buildings. Furthermore, construction unification and type-design practice diversified architectural forms, leading to a more varied city-scape. During this period, many schools, hospitals, cultural, and entertainment facilities were constructed, including Lenin's Palace, the Kazakhstan Hotel, and the "Medeo" sports complex.
The Medeu Dam, designed to protect the city of Almaty and the Medeo skating rink from catastrophic mudflows, was built in 1966 and reinforced a number of times in the 1960s and 1970s.
The supersonic transport Tupolev Tu-144 went into service on 26 December 1975, carrying mail and freight between Moscow and Alma-Ata in preparation for passenger services, which began in November 1977. The Aeroflot flight on 1 June 1978 was the 55th and last scheduled passenger flight of the Tu-144.
Since 1981, the subway Almaty Metro project has been under construction and the subway was opened on 1 December 2011 after 23 years.
On 16 December 1986 the Jeltoqsan riot took place in response to General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev's dismissal of Dinmukhamed Kunayev.
In 1993 the government made a decision to rename the city from Alma-Ata to Almaty.
In 1997 the President of the Republic of Kazakhstan Nursultan Nazarbayev approved the Decree to transfer the capital from Almaty to Astana."Astana – new capital", official from AkOrda.kz
On 1 July 1998 a law was passed concerning the special status of Almaty as a scientific, cultural, historical, financial, and industrial centre.

21st century

The new General Plan of Almaty for 2030 was developed in 1998 and aims at creating ecologically safe, secure, and socially comfortable living conditions in the city. The main objective is to promote Almaty's image as a garden-city.
One of the components of the General Plan is to continue multi-storied and individual construction, reorganize industrial territories, improve transport infrastructure and expand Almaty Metro. The first line of Almaty metro was launched on 1 December 2011, two weeks ahead of schedule. The extension of the line to Kalkaman  is currently under construction and is planned to open in 2015.
The area of the city has been expanded during recent years with the suburban settlements of Kalkaman, Kok Tube, Gorniy Gigant (Mountain  Giant) being added to the city. Numerous apartment blocks, and office skyscrapers have transformed the face of the town, which climbs higher and higher up the mountains.

Climate

The climate in Almaty is a humid continental climate with very warm summers and cold winters.  It is characterized by the influence of mountain-valley circulation, which is especially evident in the northern part of the city, located directly in the transition zone of the mountain slopes to the plains.
Annual average air temperature is equal to 
It is not uncommon for snow and a cold snap to hit Almaty as late as the end of May. For example in the last quarter century, such snowfalls were recorded on 13 May 1985, 1 May 1989, 5 May 1993 and 18 May 1998. The record latest snowfall in Almaty was on 17 June 1987.
Almaty sometimes experiences winter rain, despite heavy preceding snowfall and low temperatures. The most memorable winter rain took place at 16 December 1996 during a military parade to celebrate the 5th anniversary of the Independence of the Republic.
Almaty Weather Station's GM mostly records south-easterly wind (30%), its resistance increases during the summer (37%) and falls in winter (19%). Wind speeds exceed 15 m/s on about 15 days a year, on average.

Seismic activity in the territory of Kazakhstan

Industrially developed and densely populated areas in the
south and southeast of Kazakhstan are situated in the zones
where the maximum magnitudes of expected earthquakes are from 6.0 to 8.3 (the intensity of I0=8–10).
The south seismic active zone of Kazakhstan is a part of the North Tian-Shan ridge system. The main city of Almaty is located near the Zailiski Alatau mountain base. In recorded history prior to the late Nineteenth century three catastrophic earthquakes are known to have taken place there. The following are the dates of occurrence and extracts from the historical chronicles of the times:
Within the past 125 years three more strong destructive earthquakes occurred here, with centres not more than 20 – . Centres were located in a south and south–east directions:
K – indicates the energy of the earthquake.
In each of these earthquakes the city was heavily destroyed.(Baimakhan, Dashdorj, 2006)
The Territory of the Kyrgyz State adjoins North Tian-Shan.(Aitmatov, Kojogulov, Nikolskaya, 1994.).

Demographics

Ethnic groups (2010)
According to the USSR Census of 1989, the population of Almaty was 1,071,900; the Kazakhstan Census of 1999 reported 1,129,400.(About some results of the Kazakhstan population census) 

Economy

Almaty generates approximately 20 per cent of Kazakhstan's GDP (or $36 billion in 2010); Almaty is a key financial centre in Central Asia and is considered to be a Gamma Global City
One of the largest industries in Almaty is finance, and its financial exports make it a large contributor to Kazakhstan's balance of payments. Almaty is home to BTA Bank, which is the largest bank in Central Asia, Kazkommertsbank and other major banks. The Kazakhstan Stock Exchange is based in Almaty.
Almaty is also developing as a regional financial and business centre – RFCA..
Currently under construction is the 'Almaty Financial District and Esentai Park'. This was designed by T.J. Gottesdiener, who designed 7 World Trade Center in New York City, Time Warner Center in New York City and Tokyo Midtown. Its publicised aim is to become the largest business centre in Central Asia. 
Along with professional services, media companies are concentrated in Almaty as well. The media distribution industry has been growing rapidly since 2006. Major broadcasting channels KTK and NTK are based in Almaty, as are several national newspapers.
There are plans to construct a Western Europe-Western China highway, passing through Almaty. A new airport in Almaty expects to handle about 45 million tonnes of cargo each year.
Air Astana is headquartered in the Air Astana Centre 1 in Almaty."Head Office." Air Astana. Retrieved on 8 October 2009. Prior to their dissolution, Air Kazakhstan"World Airline Directory." Flight Global. 16–22 March 2004. 66. and Kazakhstan Airlines"World Airline Directory." Flight Global. 29 March – 4 April 1995. 79. were also headquartered in Almaty.

Sights

Kök Töbe

An aerial tramway line connects downtown Almaty with a popular recreation area at the top of Kök Töbe (, which means 'Green Hill'), a mountain just to the southeast. The city television tower, Almaty Tower, is located on the hill, as well as a variety of tourist attractions, such as amusement-park style rides and restaurants.

Fountains

According to the city's Department of Natural Resources and Resource Use Management,Фонтаны города Алматы (The Fountains of Almaty)  as of 2007 the city has 125 fountains. Among them is the "Oriental Calendar" Fountain, whose 12 sculptural figures represent the 12 animals of the Kazakh 12-year animal cycle (similar to its Chinese counterpart).

Education

Universities

Sports

The historic Bandy hockey team Dinamo won the Soviet Championships in 1977Team picture of the 1977 league champions and 1990Team picture of the 1990 league champions and the European Cup in ice hockey 1978. Their home ground was Medeu. Bandy was introduced for the first time at the 2011 Winter Asian Games.kz/gis/menu/en/News_Center/news.Federation of International Bandy Official site The second arena built for the championships is an alternative field at Almaty Central Stadium.
Almaty will be the host of the 2017 Winter Universiade
It is also home to Almaty United Football club.,Congratulations! You have successfully set up your website!

Olympic aspirations

Almaty was a bidder to host the XXII Olympic Winter Games in 2014, The city was exploring possible future bids, such as the 2018 Winter Olympics, but did not actually submit a bid. Almaty submitted their bid to host the 2022 Winter Olympics in August 2013.go.com/olympics/story/_/id/9581262/kazakhstan-almaty-bids-host-2022-winter-gamesAlmaty Bids For 2022 Winter Olympic Games

People from Almaty

Yernar Yerimbetov (1980), gymnast

Twin towns – Sister cities

Almaty is twinned with:List of Almaty sister cities








