[[Eureka (organization)]]

CATEGORIES: Research and development organizations, Organizations established in 1985, Europe, Innovation

EUREKA, often abbreviated as "E!", or "Σ!" from the ancient Greek way to write "E" and unrelated to modern "Sigma", is an intergovernmental organization for pan-European research and development funding and coordination. EUREKA aims to coordinate efforts of governments, research institutes and commercial companies concerning innovation. It does not partake in military research and follows a "bottom-up" approach to R&D funding, industry itself deciding which projects should be developed.
As of July 2013, EUREKA has 41 full members, including the European Union (represented by the European Commission). All 28 EU Member States are also members of EUREKA.
EUREKA is not an EU research program, but rather an intergovernmental organization, of which the EU is a member. Cooperation and synergy are sought between EUREKA and the research activities of the EU proper, notably with European Union's Framework Programmes for Research and Technological Development and the European Research Area.

Objectives

The organization's primary objectives are in challenging the increasing migration of R&D and industrial innovation to Asian and North-American countries. More generally EUREKA's objective is to raise the productivity and competitiveness of European businesses through technology. It also aims to boost national economies on the international market and to strengthen the basis for sustainable prosperity and employment in Europe.

History

Founded in 1985 by major figures of the European political scene, EUREKA'steady growth over the years has helped to make it one of the longest running European organisations dedicated to the financing of joint European R&D projects.  EUREKA is loosely affiliated with COST, its non-competitive research counterpart, although the two focus on different aspects of R&D with COST's efforts geared towards more socially focused areas of public interest while EUREKA's mandate is to provide funding for projects envisaged, developed, and executed by private industry.

Foundation

EUREKA was established with the "Paris Declaration" of July 17, 1985, and its principles are based on the later Hannover Declaration, subscribed by Ministers on November 6, 1985. The two main founders were former head of states François Mitterrand (France) and Helmut Kohl (Germany). Other important personalities involved were Hubert Curien, French ex-Minister of Research and former Chairman of the European Space Agency and Jacques Attali, adviser to François Mitterrand.
 
 Briefly, it EUREKA is about assuring the technological independence of Europe in the key domains of the future; encouraging, wherever possible, co-operation between European businesses and researchers; mobilising the necessary financial resources; accompanying the efforts of our enterprises by creating the necessary environment and supporting the unification of our internal markets.

There are numerous obstacles. Once the initial idea of EUREKA was formulated, we were able to foresee the difficulties to be faced. But we know that each time we come together — for example to address high-energy physics, research into nuclear fusion, the development of an integrated space programme or the construction of crucial scientific equipment — our successes encourage us in the idea that we can work together in R&D areas close to industrial markets, despite the problems arising from the normal and legitimate competition between firms. 

Timeline

Structure

The EUREKA Chair rotates yearly among EUREKA's member countries, with a mandate running from July to June of the following year. It implements a three-year rolling programme in cooperation with the previous and future Chairs (the 'Troika') with a goal of sustaining the momentum of EUREKA's work. Its role is to assist the chair country in organising the coming year's ministerial or 
The ministerial conference is where the member country ministers lay down political guidelines, decide on further developments, approve/dismiss members, and officially announce new EUREKA projects endorsed during the Chairmanship year. It biennially gathers the ministers from each member country and a Commissioner from the European Commission (EC).
Taking place in alternate years to the ministerial conference, the  conference raises the public awareness of EUREKA's role and possibilities and makes recommendations on strategic issues to be presented to ministers.
The high-level group is the key decision-making body of EUREKA. The ministry responsible for EUREKA in each member country names its high-level representative (HLR) which in turn endorses new projects, takes decisions on the management of EUREKA and prepares new policy discussions for the ministerial conference.
The executive group is a small group with members from the Troika countries, meeting at least eight times a year. It reports and implements the decisions taken by the HLG. It represents a balance of EUREKA members, whose role is to act as an executive body on behalf of the HLG. An EC member is also invited to attend EG meetings. The EG is also responsible for debating key policy issues, deciding on topics delegated by the HLG and advising successive Chairs. 
The EUREKA Secretariat, based in Brussels, is an international non-profit association under Belgian law, acting as the central support unit for the network. The ESE manages the EUREKA project database and undertakes marketing, communications and network-development activities. It is also responsible for the collection and dissemination of information on projects, and in cooperation with the Chair and the national offices promotes the EUREKA philosophy.
The executive board has the same members as the executive group and is the body solely responsible for management of the ESE.
The general assembly is the highest-level body of the ESE. It is vested with all the powers necessary to perform the objectives of the association.
High Level Representatives (HLR) comprise the decision-making High Level Group (HLG).  Each member country names a HLR to EUREKA, who in turn endorses new projects, decides the management of EUREKA, and prepares policy discussions for the Ministerial Conferences.
National Project Coordinators run the national EUREKA offices at an operational level and are responsible for project generation, national and international support and follow-up. They are the direct contact with project participants facilitating the setting-up and running of a project. NPCs meetings (4-5 times annually) are the forum for the exchange of experiences and best-practices discussions.
Apart from preparing countries for full EUREKA membership, the national information points-status was set up to provide industry and research institutes with an easy interface with EUREKA and to facilitate participation in projects.

Chairs

Before 1989, EUREKA chairmanship changed hands every six months. Since then, the chairmanship rotates every 1st of July, for a period of one year.

Membership

