[[Phoebe Cates]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from New York City, American female models, American female singers, American film actresses, American models of Asian descent, American people of Chinese descent, American people of Filipino descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American women in business, Businesspeople from New York City, Jewish American actresses, Jewish American musicians, Jewish singers, Musicians from New York City, People from Manhattan

Phoebe Cates Kline (born Phoebe Belle Cates; July 16, 1963), better known as Phoebe Cates, is an American film actress, model, and entrepreneur. She is known for her roles in several teen films, most notably Fast Times at Ridgemont High and Gremlins.

Early life

Cates was born Phoebe Belle Cates in New York City to a family of television and Broadway production insiders.  Her parents are Lily and Joseph Cates (originally "Joseph Katz"
Cates attended the Professional Children's School and the Juilliard School. When she was ten, she wanted to become a dancer. She eventually got a scholarship to the School of American Ballet, but after suffering a serious knee injury at age 15, she gave up her dancing career. & S. Young and Famous: Hollywood's Newest Superstars, 1987. . Cates, however, did not like the industry: "It was just the same thing, over and over. After a while I did it solely for the money."

Acting career

After ending her modeling career, Cates decided to begin acting. Although her father was an actor as well, he was not enthusiastic about his daughter's  new acting career. Cates's acting debut was in Paradise (filmed 22 March 1981 - 6 May 1981 and released May 1982 a role she won after replying to a casting call in New York.imdb. In a 1982 interview, she recalled having trouble with the change of career, because as a model she had to be conscious of the camera, whereas in front of the movie camera, she could not. Cates later regretted being in the movie and said: "What I learned was never to do a movie like that again." According to her co-star Willie Aames, "she will have nothing to do with the film. She's really upset about it. She won't do any promotion with me.""Hollywood: Nude scenes too much for Aames" by Marilyn Beck, The Orange County Register, March 17, 1982. p. C3
Later in 1982, Cates starred in Fast Times at Ridgemont High, which features "the most memorable bikini-drop in cinema history". She was quoted as saying that she had the most fun in filming that movie. The following year, she was in the sex comedy Private School (which co-starred Matthew Modine and Betsy Russell), for which she sang on two songs of the film's soundtrack.
Her later film roles were more modest and largely oriented toward younger audiences, such as the two Gremlins films and the 1991 film Drop Dead Fred. Her face graced the covers of teen magazines such as Seventeen, Tiger Beat,  Teen Beat, and others. In 1984, she starred in the TV mini-series Lace. She played the role of Lili "to get away from a sameness in her movie portrayals"."'Lace' miniseries is soap-opera tangle" by Associated Press, Star-News, February 24, 1984. p. 5C During her audition, she so impressed the writer, that he wanted to hire her there and then. Cates struggled with the portrayal of a bitter movie star because, despite her character's vicious persona, she intended for the audience to sympathize with her."Angela Lansbury leads 'Lace' cast" by Julianne Hastings, Stars and Stripes, March 7, 1984. p. 12. She did not read the novel on which the movie was based because she did not want to have a "fixed image". Her line in the film, "Which one of you bitches is my mother?", was named the greatest line in television history by TV Guide in 1993. pg. 96 
In 1985, Cates appeared Off-Broadway in Rich Relations, written by David Henry Hwang of the Second Stage Theatre. In 1994, she starred in the romantic comedy Princess Caraboo.
Cates retired from acting in 1994 in order to raise her children. She returned to acting in 2001 for one film, The Anniversary Party,  as a favor to the director, her best friend, Jennifer Jason Leigh.

Music career

Cates sang the title song (of the same name) for the film Paradise.

Personal life

In the early 1980s, Cates shared an apartment in Greenwich Village with her then boyfriend Stavros Merjos. She met him in 1979, when she went out to her first night in Studio 54 with family friend Andy Warhol.
In 1983 during her audition for a role (that eventually went to Meg Tilly) in The Big Chill, Cates met actor Kevin Kline, and became romantically involved. In 1989 they were married, and she changed her name to Phoebe Cates Kline. Both Owen and Greta appeared along with their parents in the 2001 movie, The Anniversary Party. Owen also appeared in the 2005 film, The Squid and the Whale, while Greta is a musician currently performing as Frankie Cosmos.
In 2005, Cates opened her own boutique called Blue Tree on New York's Madison Avenue.

Filmography

Film and television






