[[Vurt]]

CATEGORIES: Novels by Jeff Noon, 1993 novels, 1990s science fiction novels, British science fiction novels, Novels set in Manchester, Debut novels

Vurt is a 1993 science fiction novel written by British author Jeff Noon.  Both Noon and small publishing house Ringpull's debut novel, and was later listed in The Best Novels of the Nineties. 95-96.

Plot summary

Vurt tells the story of Scribble and his "gang", the Stash Riders, as they search for his missing sister/lover Desdemona. The novel is set in an alternate version of Manchester, England, in which society has been shaped by Vurt, a hallucinogenic drug/shared alternate reality, accessed by sucking on colour-coded feathers. Through some (never explained) mechanism, the dreams, mythology, and imaginings of humanity have achieved objective reality in the Vurt and become "real".
Before the novel begins, Scribble and his sister-lover take a shared trip into a vurt called English Voodoo, but upon awakening Scribble finds his sister has been replaced by an amorphous blob that Mandy, a fellow Stash Rider, nicknames "The Thing from Outer Space". From that point on, Scribble is on a mission to find another copy of the rare and contraband Curious Yellow feather (found within English Voodoo), so that he can exchange The Thing for Desdemona.

Characters

Literary significance and reception

Vurt achieved both critical and commercial success, attracting praise from the science fiction community as well as the literary arena.
In High Anxieties, a book exploring the modern concept of addiction, Scribble is used as an example of a character who has traded addiction for a chance at transcendence. Brodie et al. liken Scribble's incorporation of Vurt technology into his biological body as a metaphor for the revelation potentially gained through drug use. They point out that the exchange rate between the real and the Vurt is tempered by Hobart's Constant, or "H"—which is "not incidentally", Brodie argues, "slang for heroin."Brodie and Redfield 2002, pp. 166-167.
The book has attracted criticism due to its implausible science

Allusions and references

Jeff Noon says Vurt originally began as an adaptation of Octave Mirbeau's The Torture Garden, an anti-authoritarian novel written at the turn of the 20th century. Noon, recently exposed to virtual reality technology by the magazine Mondo 2000, depicts the torture garden as a virtual world. Noon also credits Joseph Campbell's book The Hero with a Thousand Faces for inspiring the narrative structure of Vurt.
The character of Desdemona is based on the character of the same name from William Shakespeare's play Othello.
The Curious Yellow feather is a possible allusion to the 1967 Swedish film I Am Curious (Yellow), which uses non-linear narrative structures and postmodern techniques like the novel. It might also be a reference to computer worms (the Vurt is riddled with virtual reality serpents which propagate from game to game, like computer worms replicate themselves by hijacking computer programs).
Vurt has been described as a retelling of Orpheus' visit to the Underworld. 196. Orpheus and Scribble are both poets and musicians, and each attempts to rescue their idealized lovers from an alternate reality. As Joan Gordon points out, cyberspace represents "the underside of the human condition" and therefore the journey to virtual reality is comparable to the mythic journey to commune with the dead.MacCracken 1998, p. 127.
There are multiple allusions to stories by Lewis Carroll, such as a club the main character walks into, referred to as the Slithy Tove, which is a quote from Carroll's poem, the Jabberwocky

Adaptations

Although Noon began the screenplay for the film version of Vurt in 2002, with Iain Softley scheduled to direct,
There have been a few comic adaptations of the novel, most notably Vurt - The Comic Remix, with art by Lee O'Connor.
In 2000, Liam Steel directed Vurt: The Theatre Remix, which ran for three weeks at Contact Theatre in Manchester.

20th anniversary edition

In 2013, 20th anniversary edition of the novel was published, featuring three new stories and a foreword by Lauren Beukes.





 |isbn=0-520-22750-6}}




