[[Vivian Stanshall]]

CATEGORIES: 1943 births, 1995 deaths, English humorists, English male singers, English artists, English songwriters, English screenwriters, English poets, The Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band members, Accidental deaths in England, English spoken word artists, People from Muswell Hill, Alumni of the Central School of Art and Design

Vivian Stanshall (born Victor Anthony Stanshall; 21 March 1943 – 5 March 1995) was an English singer-songwriter, musician, author, poet and wit, best known for his work with the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band, for his exploration of the British upper classes in Sir Henry at Rawlinson End (as a radio series for John Peel, as an audio recording Charisma Records, as a book published by Eel Pie Publishing and as a motion picture Charisma Records), and for narrating Mike Oldfield's album Tubular Bells.

Early life and education

He was born on 21 March 1943 at the Radcliffe Maternity Home in Shillingford, and christened Victor Anthony Stanshall. His mother Eileen (née Wadeson) Stanshall lived with her young son while her husband, Victor Stanshall (1909–1990) (he had adopted this given name in preference to his christened name of Vivian), served in the RAF during World War II. Later Vivian Stanshall described this early period as the happiest time of his childhood.
When the war ended, his father returned. The young Victor had difficulty with his father, whom he found stern after being with only his mother., 1991 BBC Two, 1991 The family moved to the father's hometown of Walthamstow. Stanshall's younger brother Mark was born six years later in 1949.  The brothers were six years apart and never close.Vivian Stanshall: Essex Teenager to Renaissance Man'' (1994), BBC Radio 4
About this time, the Stanshall family moved to the Essex coastal town of Leigh-on-Sea. Vivian Stanshall earned money doing various odd jobs at the Kursaal fun fair in nearby Southend-on-Sea. These included working as a bingo caller and spending the winter painting the fairground attractions. To set aside enough money to get through art school (his father having refused to fund this), Stanshall spent a year in the merchant navy. He said he was a very bad waiter, but became a great teller of tall tales.
Stanshall eventually enrolled at the Central School of Art in London. Here, he joined fellow students (including Rodney Slater, Roger Ruskin Spear and Neil Innes, who was studying art at Goldsmiths College) in forming a band. Innes said of their first meeting: "We first met in a big Irish pub in South London, the New Cross Arms ... he was quite plump in those days, and he was wearing Billy Bunter check trousers, a Victorian frock coat, black coat tails, horrible little oval, violet-tinted pince-nez glasses, he had a euphonium under his arm, and large rubber false ears. And I thought, well, this is an interesting character."Stephen Fry's BBC Radio 4 tribute. About this time, Stanshall changed his first name to "Vivian," the name his father had abandoned. This was not made his legal name until 1977."Interview with Ki Longfellow-Stanshall", The Bristolian, May 1988 Those who knew him from his student days continued to call him Vic.

Bonzo years

They named their band after a word game which Stanshall played with Slater, in which they cut up sentences and juxtaposed fragments to form new ones. "Bonzo Dog/Dada" was one result which they liked. The band initially performed under this name, but soon grew tired of explaining what Dada meant. Thus they became the Bonzo Dog Doo-Dah Band, "Doo-Dah" being a quaint expression that both Rodney Slater's mother and Vivian used to describe everyday objects; later the name was shortened to The Bonzo Dog Band, or just The Bonzos.
According to the band's manager Gerry Bron, Stanshall had several weeks to write songs for the new professional Bonzo Dog Band. When people arrived at his studio, they found he had not written a single thing, instead building a variety of rabbit hutches.Originals – Vivian Stanshall: The Canyons of His Mind, BBC/October Films, BBC4, 2004
For a while the band existed as a semi-pro outfit playing the college circuit. After acquiring a manager, they went full-time, and were booked on the working men's club circuit, mainly in the north of England. The band dominated their lives, travelling to low-paying gigs in an old van crammed with any number of musical instruments, an assortment of props, and prop robots. In 1967, they appeared in The Beatles' Magical Mystery Tour television special, where they played Stanshall's "Death Cab for Cutie" during the strip club scene. The band gained a spot from this as the house band on Do Not Adjust Your Set. The weekly television revue show was notable for early appearances by most of the Monty Python team.
In 1968 the Bonzos scored a surprise top-ten hit with a number called "I'm the Urban Spaceman" (produced by Apollo C. Vermouth aka Paul McCartney). They toured incessantly and recorded several albums, which led to a tour of the United States. This was so successful that they were booked for another US tour soon after. Neil Innes remembers that the band were reportedly stopped by a local U.S. sheriff and asked if they were carrying any firearms or drugs. When they denied both, the officer asked how they were going to defend themselves. Vivian piped up from the back of the minibus, "With good manners!". In 1970, the band broke up.

After Bonzo

Stanshall went on to form various short-lived groups, including The Sean Head Showband, Bonzo Dog Freaks (featuring the guitar of Bubs White) and BiG GrunT. Although drinking heavily and suffering with anxiety, he continued to write music and tour. His longtime friend, Pete Moss (the original musical director of The Rocky Horror Show), toured with him, providing musical direction and support.
Stanshall never lost his sense of humour. His exploits with Keith Moon are legendary. In one example, Stanshall went into a tailor's shop where he admired a pair of trousers. Moon came in, posing as another customer, and admired the same trousers, demanding to buy them. When Stanshall protested, the two men fought, splitting the trousers in two, so they ended up with one leg each. The tailor was beside himself. A one-legged actor hired by Stanshall and Moon, came in, saw the split trousers and proclaimed, "Ah! Just what I was looking for."William Donaldson, Brewer's Rogues, Villains & Eccentrics, 2002.
Aside from such pranks, the two also worked together. For instance, when Stanshall took over the John Peel radio show for a while, Moon appeared as Lemmy in the saga of "Colonel Knutt," idiot adventurer-detective. Moon also produced Stanshall's recorded version of Terry Stafford's "Suspicion".
In early 1974, Stanshall wrote, arranged, and recorded his first solo album, Men Opening Umbrellas Ahead. Its lyrics were personal insights laced with poetry, as well as covert references to other musicians and the music business, as well as overt references to his penis. The album has a jazz-rock flavour, rich with African percussion. His friend Steve Winwood, Innes, Bubs White, Jim Capaldi, Ric Grech, Doris Troy, and Madeline Bell made guest appearances. Out of print for many years, the album was released on a limited edition CD in August 2010.

Rawlinson End

Stanshall developed Rawlinson End, originally as a spoken-word piece. (Much of the text can be found at "Vivarchive" "Sir Henry at Rawliinson End," tribute, VIV Archive and at "Rawlinson End Book""Rawlinson End Book", Sansun) In the 1970s he recorded numerous sessions for BBC Radio 1's John Peel show. In these he elaborated on the weird and wonderful adventures of the inebriated and blimpish Sir Henry Rawlinson, his dotty wife Great Aunt Florrie, his "unusual" brother Hubert, old Scrotum the wrinkled retainer, Mrs E, the rambling and unhygienic cook; and many other inhabitants of the crumbly Rawlinson End and its environs.
Stanshall had been playing with the Rawlinson characters for some time; they were first referred to on the Bonzos' 1967 number, "The Intro & The Outro": "Great to hear the Rawlinsons on trombone".
An LP, Sir Henry at Rawlinson End, which reworked some of the material from the Peel sessions, was released in 1978. This was adapted as a film version (1980), produced in a sepia-tinted black and white. It starred Trevor Howard as Sir Henry, and Stanshall as Hubert. Some of the film's music was provided by Stanshall's friend Steve Winwood. A book of the same title by Stanshall, illustrated with stills from the film, was published by Eel Pie Publishing in 1980. Nominally a film novelisation, it was distilled from the various versions and included considerable material that did not make it to the film. A projected second book, The Eating at Rawlinson End, was never completed.
A second Rawlinson album, Sir Henry at N'didi's Kraal (1984), recounts Sir Henry's disastrous African expedition, omitting the rest of the Rawlinson clan. Stanshall at the time was living on The Searchlight, a house boat he bought from Denny Laine and moored near Shepperton on the River Thames. He lived on it from 1977 to 1983 and produced the album on it.
At Christmas 1996, BBC Radio 4 retrieved some of the Peel show recordings from the vault for a late-night repeat.

Representation in other media

Sir Henry was last seen in a television commercial for Ruddles Real Ale (c. 1994), where he is portrayed by a cross-dressing Dawn French, presiding over a family banquet at a long table. Stanshall reprises the role of Hubert, reciting a poem loosely based on Edward Lear's "The Owl and the Pussycat."

Projects of 1970s and 1980s

Stanshall collaborated on numerous musical projects, including Robert Calvert's 1974 concept album Captain Lockheed and the Starfighters, and Mike Oldfield's 1973 Tubular Bells, where he played the Master of Ceremonies; he also recorded this role for Tubular Bells II in 1992 although the main album release featured Alan Rickman instead. Stanshall performed with Grimms and The Rutles, as well as occasionally working with The Alberts and The Temperance Seven.
In 1975 he provided the narration for a rock music version of Peter and the Wolf, produced by Robin Lumley and Jack Lancaster and featuring, among others, Gary Moore, Manfred Mann, Phil Collins, Bill Bruford, Stéphane Grappelli, Alvin Lee, Cozy Powell, Brian Eno and Jon Hiseman.
The BBC's One Man's Week, broadcast on 9 April 1975, documented a week in Stanshall's life and included footage of him at The Manor Studio recording studio, where he played with Gaspar Lawal, Mongezi Feza, Anthony White and Derek Quinn.
While living on the Searchlight, moored on the Thames between Chertsey and Shepperton, Stanshall wrote and recorded Sir Henry at Rawlinson End. He wrote the script for a film adaptation of the same name, later produced for Tony Stratton-Smith's Charisma Records company. Following this, he wrote the songs for his third album Teddy Boys Don't Knit and contributed a lyric to Steve Winwood's Arc of a Diver. With his second wife Ki Longfellow, he also wrote some of the songs they later used for Stinkfoot, a Comic Opera (a musical comedy).
In 1982, Stanshall provided a spoken word segment on "Lovely Money", a single by The Damned.
The Stanshalls lived and worked on The Thekla, a Baltic Trader, which Ki sailed 732 nautical miles (1,356 km) from the east coast of England to be moored in the Bristol Docks. Ki had bought the vessel and converted her into a floating theatre called "The Old Profanity Showboat". Stanshall joined her on it in 1983, when they opened their doors. In December 1985, their theatre on The Thekla produced the debut of their Stinkfoot, a Comic Opera. Stanshall wrote 27 original songs for the opera, sharing book and lyric writing with his wife. The show proved popular and was revived in London some years later with Peter Moss as musical director, and in concert form in Bristol in July of 2010.

Marriage and family

He was married in 1968 to fellow art student Monica Peiser (they had a son Rupert that year). They divorced in 1975.
On 9 September 1980, Stanshall married Pamela 'Ki' Longfellow, a writer who had a daughter from an earlier relationship.  The Stanshalls had a daughter together: Silky, born the year before they married, on 16 August 1979. She was named after Silky Sullivan, a racehorse that was a childhood favourite of her mother. Stanshall celebrated Silky's birth in "The Tube", and his marriage to Ki in the song, "Bewilderbeeste", both included on his second solo album, Teddy Boys Don't Knit (1981). He later gave his wife the name of "Ki" from a dream.

Memoirs

In 1991 Stanshall made a 15-minute autobiographical piece called Vivian Stanshall: The Early Years, aka Crank, for BBC2's The Late Show. He confessed to having been terrified of his father, who he said had always disapproved of him.
A later programme for BBC Radio 4, Vivian Stanshall: Essex Teenager to Renaissance Man (1994) included an interview with his mother. She insisted his father had loved him. Stanshall said that his father had never shown it, not even on his deathbed.

Death

Stanshall was found dead on the morning of the 6th of March 1995, after an electrical fire had broken out as he slept in his top floor flat in Muswell Hill, North London.

Legacy and honours

In 2001 Chris Welch and Lucian Randall wrote a biography of him entitled Ginger Geezer: The Life of Vivian Stanshall. Also in 2001 Jeremy Pascall and Stephen Fry produced a documentary about Stanshall for BBC Radio 4. Stephen Fry knew Stanshall quite well and, along with his personal thoughts, introduces a series of reminiscences. The show featured many clips from Stanshall's work. The recording includes one of Stanshall's last poems, entitled "With My Mouth Turned Down for the Night".
In 2003 Sea Urchin Editions published the script of the Stanshalls' Stinkfoot: An English Comic Opera, with an introduction by his widow, Ki Longfellow-Stanshall. She plans to publish The Last Showboat: an Illustrated Memoir of Vivian Stanshall, the Old Profanity Showboat, and Stinkfoot, a Comic Opera.
On October 11, 2011 the Blackpool Comedy Carpet, a large public artwork by Gordon Young, was unveiled in Blackpool on the city's seaside promenade. It is made of 300 slabs of granite that cover about 2200 square meters. Featuring catchphrases, jokes and names, it commemorates more than 1000 selected "influential" comics, most of whom have played Blackpool in the last hundred years. The project was commissioned by the Blackpool Council as part of its redevelopment plan, and it is one of the largest pieces of public art in the United Kingdom.
In 2012, Poppydisc Records reissued both a vinyl and CD version of Men Opening Umbrellas Ahead, remastered with new liner notes from his widow and daughter.
In June 2010 the seminal 1978 'Sir Henry at Rawlinson End' LP was re-imagined by Michael Livesley as a one man show, in which he stars as the narrator and all characters, backed by a 6 piece band replicating the instrumentation of the original. The show won rave reviews, then premiered in London on October 14, 2011. The Premiere was a huge success and the show drew praise from Neil Innes and Adrian Edmondson who were in the audience.  After this success, on 25 March 2013, to celebrate the 70th anniversary of Stanshall's birth, Michael Livesley was joined by Neil Innes, Rick Wakeman, Danny Thompson, Rodney Slater, Sam Spoons, Vernon Dudley, 'Legs' Larry Smith and John Otway, to perform Sir Henry at Rawlinson End at the Bloomsbury Theatre. So successful was this event that another event 'One Night Stanshall' will be held there again on 8th April 2014.

Solo discography

Further reading



Bibliography




