[[Fermi–Dirac statistics]]

CATEGORIES: Fermi–Dirac statistics, Concepts in physics, Quantum field theory, Statistical mechanics

In quantum statistics, a branch of physics, Fermi–Dirac statistics describes a distribution of particles in certain systems comprising many identical particles that obey the Pauli exclusion principle. It is named after Enrico Fermi and Paul Dirac, who each discovered it independently, although Enrico Fermi defined the statistics earlier than Paul Dirac.
Fermi–Dirac (F–D) statistics applies to identical particles with half-integer spin in a system in thermodynamic equilibrium. Additionally, the particles in this system are assumed to have negligible mutual interaction. This allows the many-particle system to be described in terms of single-particle energy states. The result is the F–D distribution of particles over these states and includes the condition that no two particles can occupy the same state, which has a considerable effect on the properties of the system. Since F–D statistics applies to particles with half-integer spin, these particles have come to be called fermions. It is most commonly applied to electrons, which are fermions with spin 1/2. Fermi–Dirac statistics is a part of the more general field of statistical mechanics and uses the principles of quantum mechanics.

History

Before the introduction of Fermi–Dirac statistics in 1926, understanding some aspects of electron behavior was difficult due to seemingly contradictory phenomena. For example,  the electronic heat capacity  of a metal at room temperature seemed to come from 100 times fewer electrons than were in the electric current.  It was also difficult to understand why the emission currents, generated by applying high electric fields to metals at room temperature, were almost independent of temperature.
The difficulty encountered by the electronic theory of metals at that time was due to considering that electrons were (according to classical statistics theory) all equivalent. In other words it was believed that each electron contributed to the specific heat an amount on the order of the Boltzmann constant k.
This statistical problem remained unsolved until the discovery of F–D statistics.
F–D statistics was first published in 1926 by Enrico Fermi
F–D statistics was applied in 1926 by Fowler to describe the collapse of a star to a white dwarf. Fermi–Dirac statistics continues to be an important part of physics.

Fermi–Dirac distribution

 
 
(Click on a figure to enlarge.)

Distribution of particles over energy

The above Fermi–Dirac distribution gives the distribution of identical fermions over single-particle energy states, where no more than one fermion can occupy a state. Using the F–D distribution, one can find the distribution of identical fermions over energy, where more than one fermion can have the same energy.
 
 
so that,

Quantum and classical regimes

Another example of a system that is not in the classical regime is the system that consists of the electrons of a star that has collapsed to a white dwarf. Although the white dwarf's temperature is high (typically T = 10,000K on its surface), its high electron concentration and the small mass of each electron precludes using a classical approximation, and again Fermi–Dirac statistics is required.

Three derivations of the Fermi–Dirac distribution

Derivation starting with grand canonical ensemble

The Fermi–Dirac distribution, which applies only to a quantum system of non-interacting fermions, is easily derived from the grand canonical ensemble.
Due to the non-interacting quality, each available single-particle level (with energy level ϵ) forms a separate thermodynamic system in contact with the reservoir.
In other words, each single-particle level is a separate, tiny grand canonical ensemble.
By the Pauli exclusion principle there are only two possible microstates for the single-particle level: no particle (energy E=0), or one particle (energy E=ϵ). The resulting partition function for that single-particle level therefore has just two terms:
and the average particle number for that single-particle substate is given by
This result applies for each single-particle level, and thus gives the Fermi–Dirac distribution for the entire state of the system.
The variance in particle number (due to thermal fluctuations) may also be derived (the particle number has a simple Bernoulli distribution):

Derivations starting with canonical distribution

It is also possible to derive Fermi–Dirac statistics in the canonical ensemble.

=Standard derivation=

Rearranging the summations,
  

=Derivation using Lagrange multipliers=

A result can be achieved by directly analyzing the multiplicities of the system and using Lagrange multipliers.
Suppose we have a number of energy levels, labeled by index i, each level
having energy εi  and containing a total of ni  particles.  Suppose each level contains gi  distinct sublevels, all of which have the same energy, and which are distinguishable. For example, two particles may have different momenta (i.e. their momenta may be along different directions), in which case they are distinguishable from each other, yet they can still have the same energy. The value of gi  associated with level i is called the "degeneracy" of that energy level. The Pauli exclusion principle states that only one fermion can occupy any such sublevel.
The number of ways of distributing ni indistinguishable particles among the gi   sublevels of an energy level, with a maximum of one particle per sublevel, is given by the binomial coefficient, using its  combinatorial interpretation
For example, distributing two particles in three sublevels will give population numbers of 110, 101, or 011 for a total of three ways which equals 3!/(2!1!). The number of ways that a set of occupation numbers ni can be realized is the product of the ways that each individual energy level can be populated:
Following the same procedure used in deriving the Maxwell–Boltzmann statistics,
we wish to find the set of ni for which W is maximized, subject to the constraint that there be a fixed number of particles, and a fixed energy. We constrain our solution using Lagrange multipliers forming the function:
Using Stirling's approximation for the factorials, taking the derivative with respect to ni, setting the result to zero, and solving for ni yields the Fermi–Dirac population numbers:





Footnotes


