[[Council on American–Islamic Relations]]

CATEGORIES: Islamic organizations based in the United States, Civic and political organizations of the United States, Civil liberties advocacy groups in the United States, Islamic activist organizations, Non-profit organizations based in Canada, Organizations established in 1994, Anti-racist organizations in the United States

The Council on American–Islamic Relations (CAIR) is a Muslim civil liberties advocacy organization that deals with civil advocacy. It is headquartered on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C., with regional offices nationwide.
Through media relations, lobbying, and education, CAIR presents an Islamic perspective on issues of importance to the American public, and seeks to empower the American Muslim community and encourage its social and political activism. Annual banquets, through which CAIR raises the majority of its funds, are attended by American politicians, statesmen, interfaith leaders, activists and media personalities. Critics of CAIR consider it to be pursuing an extremist Islamist agenda. 
In 2007 the organization was named, along with 245 others, by U.S. Federal prosecutors in a list of unindicted co-conspirators and/or joint venturers in a Hamas funding case involving the Holy Land Foundation,Islamic Groups Named in Hamas Funding Case – June 4, 2007 – The New York Sun. Nysun. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. which in 2009 caused the FBI to cease working with CAIR outside of criminal investigations due to its designation.Gerstein, Josh. (October 20, 2010). Judge: Feds violated U.S. Islamic group's rights – Josh Gerstein. Politico. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. Following a motion from CAIR and other groups, a federal appeals court sealed the list on October 20, 2010, ruling the designation violated the group's rights and was the result of "simply an untested allegation of the Government, made in anticipation of a possible evidentiary dispute that never came to pass.""CAIR: Court Says Government Violated Muslim Groups' Rights – WASHINGTON, Nov. 17, 2010". PRNewswire. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. JTA (October 22, 2010). Retrieved on 2011-03-19.
CAIR has been criticized numerous times by various officials and organizations. The organization was criticized as pursuing an extremist Islamist agenda, and putting out propaganda.

Mission and offices

CAIR's mission statement is "to enhance understanding of Islam, encourage dialogue, protect civil liberties, empower American Muslims, and build coalitions that promote justice and mutual understanding".CAIR's Vision, Mission, and Core Principles
CAIR's literature describes the group as promoting understanding of Islam and protecting Muslim civil liberties. It has intervened on behalf of many American Muslims who claim discrimination, profiling, or harassment.
CAIR is a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization with affiliates in 20 states (many of which manage multiple offices), and 33 chapters in the US. CAIR and its affiliates are managed by board members from 50 American cities, and combined employ more than 70 full-time staff, serving millions of American Muslims."25 Facts About CAIR". Cair. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. CAIR annual reports are available to all members and donors,"CAIR at a Glance". Cair. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. as well as internet users online."2006 Annual Report" (PDF). CAIR.

History

Early years (1994–2001)

CAIR was founded in June 1994The North American Muslim resource guide: Muslim community life in the United States and Canada. Mohamed Nimer, Taylor & Francis, 2002, ISBN 9780415937283. by three former officers of the Islamic Association of Palestine (IAP)—Omar Ahmad (IAP President; became CAIR President), Nihad Awad (IAP PR Director; became CAIR Secretary & Treasurer), and Rafeeq Jaber (IAP Chicago Chapter President; became CAIR Vice President). Also, Ibrahim Hooper became CAIR's communications director. As Nihad Awad later said in an interview, "Omar Ahmed suggested to me that we leave the IAP and concentrate on combating anti-Muslim discrimination." Testimony of Matthew Epstein Before the US Senate Judiciary Committee Subcommittee on Terrorism, Technology, and Homeland Security September 10, 2003 p. 10, accessed May 5, 2012
CAIR's first office was located in Washington D.C., as is its present-day headquarters on Capitol Hill. Its founding was partly in response to the film True Lies, starring Arnold Schwarzenegger which Arab and Muslim groups condemned for its stereotyping of Arab and Muslim villains. CAIR's first advocacy campaign was in response to an offensive greeting card that used the term "shia" to refer to human excrement. CAIR led a national campaign and used activists to pressure the greeting card company, which eventually withdrew the card from the market."News, July 2000". Islamic Voice. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. "CAIR Counters Anti-Islam Card." Washington Report on Middle East Affairs November/December 1994: 62–64 CAIR opened its first chapter in the San Francisco Bay area.
In 1995, CAIR handled its first case of hijab (the headscarf traditionally worn by Muslim women) discrimination, in which a Muslim employee was denied the right to wear the hijab; this type of complaint is now one of the most common received by CAIR's civil rights department. Hadda, Yazbeck, and Smith, Jane I. p. 35, Rowman Altamira, 2002, ISBN 0-7591-0218-X, 9780759102187, accessed November 30, 2009. p. 81, Randa A. Kayyali, Greenwood Publishing Group, 2006, ISBN 0-313-33219-3, 9780313332197, accessed November 30, 2009]
CAIR continued its advocacy work in the aftermath of the April 19, 1995 Oklahoma City bombing of the Murrah Federal Building. Following the attack, Muslim-Americans were subjected to an upsurge in harassment and discrimination, including a rise in hate crimes nationally;A Rush to Judgment: A Special Report on Anti-Muslim Stereotyping. Harassment and Hate Crimes Following the Bombing of Oklahoma City's Murrah Federal Building, April 19, 1995 (Washington, D.C.: Council on American-Islamic Relations, 1995), 9–20."Arab-Americans Suffer Hatred after Bombing," Chicago Sun-Times, May 13, 1995 222 hate crimes against Muslims nationwide were reported in the days immediately following the bombing. "Media Stumble Badly in Rush to Judgment". Chicago Sun-Times.S. Muslims Surge Even as Their Faith Takes Hold New York Times (accessed May 16, 2012) The bombing gave CAIR national stature for their efforts to educate the public about Islam and religious bias in America; their report was featured on the front page of The New York Times on August 28, 1995 and was subsequently mentioned on ABC World News Tonight.
In 1996, CAIR began "CAIR-NET", a read-only e-mail listserve aimed to help American Muslims identify and combat anti-Muslim prejudice in the U.S. and Canada. CAIR-NET contains descriptions of news, bias incidents or hate speech and hate crimes, often followed by information as to who readers may contact to influence resolution of an issue. Islam in America. New York. Columbia University Press, 1999. CAIR also held its first voter registration drive in 1996; CAIR continues to encourage active political participation by American Muslims, for them to address political candidates and elected representatives with greater frequency. "Making Muslim Voices Heard: To Promote the Vote, Leaders Provide Answers and Forms." Washington Post. September 14, 1996: B01.
In 1996 CAIR published a report The Usual Suspects regarding its perception of anti-Muslim rhetoric in the media after the crash of TWA Flight 800. Their research showed 138 uses of the terms "Muslim" and "Arab" in the 48 hours after the crash in Reuters, UPI, and AP articles covering the incident. The official NTSB report said that the probable cause was mechanical. Mohamed Nimer, p. 134, Taylor & Francis, 2002, ISBN 978-0-415-93728-3. Accessed December 9, 2009.
In 1997 CAIR objected to the production of sneaker made by Nike with a design on the heel similar to the Arabic word for "Allah"."Nike Recalls Disputed Logo" The Cincinnati Enquirer, June 25, 1997. Accessed October 24, 2011 As part of an agreement reached between CAIR officials and Nike representatives, Nike apologized to the Muslim community, recalled the products carrying the design, launched an investigation as to how the logo came about, and built a number of children's playgrounds near some Islamic centers in America. Mohamed Nimer, p. 134, Taylor & Francis, 2002, ISBN 978-0-415-93728-3. Accessed December 9, 2009.

Post-9/11 (2001–present)

CAIR condemned the September 11 attacks in 2001 "within hours of the first plane crashing into the World Trade Center", which it considers to be consistent with its general approach to terrorism."CAIR statements on the events of September 11". CAIR. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. CAIR published a paid advertisement in the Washington Post condemning 9/11 and terrorism in general.
CAIR increased its advocacy work again after the September 11 attacks. In October 2001 CAIR stated that it was opposed to the US's Afghan campaign. By January 2002, four months after the attacks, the CAIR said that it had received 1,658 reports of discrimination, profiling, harassment, and physical assaults against persons appearing Arab or Muslim, a three-fold increase over the prior year. The reports included beatings, death threats, abusive police practices, and employment and airline-related discrimination."Cole, David. Enemy Aliens. New York. The New Press, 2003. Page 47 In its 2002 civil rights report, CAIR concluded that "the status of Muslim civil rights has deteriorated sharply", and complained that "the sweeping actions of the government have disturbed the lives of individuals and ethnic and religious communities.""The Status of Muslim Civil Rights in the United States: Stereotypes and Civil Liberties. 2002". CAIR. The largest percentage of complaints had to do with alleged profiling of Muslims at US airports. 193–94, Joseph Farah, 2007, ISBN 978-0-9790451-0-3
CAIR has conducted investigations, issued reports, held press conferences, filed lawsuits, and organized political action to protest aspects of U.S. counterterrorism policy.
From 2002–2004 CAIR organized the Library Project, an effort to "put quality materials about Islam in all 17,000 public libraries in the United States." 
In 2003 CAIR employee Randall "Ismael" Royer was arrested for his role in the Northern Virginia jihad terrorist network.Hamas: Politics, Charity, and Terrorism in the Service of Jihad, Matthew Levitt, Dennis Ross, Yale University Press, 2007, ISBN 0-300-12258-6, 780300122589
In 2004 CAIR launched a "Not In the Name of Islam" petition in order to "disassociate the faith of Islam from the violent acts of a few Muslims." It encouraged Islamic organizations, mosques, and individuals to sign it. The petition repudiated terrorism and any group that committed such acts, citing a portion of the Quran that told believers to stand for justice even if it was against friends or family.August 2007 Archived version of CAIR's site prior to renovation
In 2005 CAIR coordinated the joint release of a fatwa by 344 American Muslim organizations, mosques, and imams nationwide that stated: "Islam strictly condemns religious extremism and the use of violence against innocent lives. There is no justification in Islam for extremism or terrorism. Targeting civilians' life and property through suicide bombings or any other method of attack is haram or forbidden—and those who commit these barbaric acts are criminals, not martyrs.""Full text of July 2005 Fatwa against terrorism with list of signatories". CAIR. The fatwa cited passages from the Quran and hadith that prohibit violence against innocent people and injustice, and was signed by the Fiqh Council of North America. Authors Kim Ezra Shienbaum and Jamal Hasan felt it did not go far enough in that it did not address attacks on military targets. Beyond jihad: critical voices from inside Islam. p. xxi. Academica Press LLC. ISBN 978-1-933146-19-5. Accessed November 30, 2009.
Also in 2005, following the Qur'an desecration controversy of 2005 at the Guantanamo Bay detention camp, CAIR initiated an "Explore the Quran" campaign, aimed at providing free copies of the Quran to any person who requested it. The Cartoons Cry. AuthorHouse. . Nearly 34,000 Americans requested a copy.
In 2006, during the protests over cartoons depicting Muhammad, CAIR responded by launching an educational program "Explore the Life of Muhammad", to bring "people of all faiths together to learn more about the Islamic Prophet Muhammad and to use mutual understanding as a counterweight to the tensions created by the cartoon controversy". CAIR. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. PRNewswire. February 14, 2006. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. It provided free copies of a DVD or book about the life of Muhammad to any person who requested it. Almost 16,000 Americans requested materials.S. Muslims' reaction to cartoons ($10 million per year for five years), in a project to be spearheaded by Paul Findley, a former US Congressman.
California Senator Barbara Boxer in December 2006 withdrew a "certificate of accomplishment" originally given to former CAIR official Basim Elkarra after Boxer's staff looked into CAIR, and she became concerned about some of CAIR's past statements and actions, and statements by some law enforcement officials that it provides aid to international terrorist groups.
In May 2007, the U.S. filed an action against the Holy Land Foundation (the largest Muslim charity in the United States at the time) for providing funds to Hamas, and federal prosecutors filed pleadings. Along with 245 other organizations, they listed CAIR (and its chairman emeritus, Omar Ahmad),
In response, National Association of Muslim Lawyers and National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers sent a letter to Attorney General Alberto R. Gonzales, saying that the move to list the largest Muslim organizations in America as unindicted co-conspirators was an effort to smear the entire Muslim community. They also stated that the list breached the department's own guidelines against releasing the names of unindicted co-conspirators.
The Investigative Project on Terrorism reported that on August 7, 2007, a Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) agent testified at the Holy Land Foundation trial that CAIR was "listed as a member of the Muslim Brotherhood's Palestine Committee", that it had received money from the Foundation (conflicting with Nihad Awad's Congressional testimony), and that co-founders Awad and Omar Ahmad were "listed as individual members of the Brotherhood Palestine Committee in America."Bawer, Bruce, Surrender: Appeasing Islam, Sacrificing Freedom, Random House, Inc., 2009, ISBN 0-385-52398-X, 9780385523981
On October 22, 2007, the Holy Land Foundation trial ended in a mistrial.
In 2008, the FBI discontinued its long-standing relationship with CAIR. Officials said the decision followed the conviction of the HLF directors for funneling millions of dollars to Hamas, revelations that Nihal Awad had participated in planning meetings with HLF, and CAIR's failure to provide details of its ties to Hamas. Worldtribune. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. During a 2008 retrial of the HLF case, FBI Special Agent Lara Burns labeled CAIR "a front group for Hamas."Trahan, Jason (October 14, 2008). "Judge due to rule on Holy Land defense evidence challenge". The Dallas Morning News. In January 2009, the FBI's DC office instructed all field offices to cut ties with CAIR, as the ban extended into the Obama administration. "FBI Cuts Ties With CAIR Following Terror Financing Trial," FOX News. Accessed December 3, 2009
U.S. Congressmen Sue Myrick (R-NC), Trent Franks (R-AZ), John Shadegg (R-AZ), and Paul Broun (R-GA) wrote Attorney General Eric Holder on October 21, 2009, that they were very concerned about CAIR's relationships with terrorist groups, and requesting that the Department of Justice (DOJ) provide each Congressman a summary of DOJ's evidence and findings that led DOJ to name CAIR an unindicted co-conspirator in the Holy Land Foundation terrorism trial."Letter to Attorney General Eric Holder from Representatives Sue Myrick, Trent Franks, John Shadegg, and Paul Broun". October 21, 2009. (investigativeproject. Accessed November 17, 2009."Letter to U.S. House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms Wilson "Bill" Livingood from Representatives Sue Myrick, Trent Franks, John Shadegg, and Paul Broun". October 21, 2009. (investigativeproject. Accessed November 17, 2009] Congresswoman Loretta Sanchez (D-CA), "appalled", said "I urge the rest of my colleagues to join me in denouncing this witch hunt."Sherman, Jake, and Kady II, Martin, "Islam group ridicules Muslim 'spies' claim", The Politico October 14, 2009, accessed November 17, 2009"Report: GOP Reps Accuse Group Of Planting "Spies", CBS4, October 14, 2009, accessed November 17, 2009 She was echoed by Keith Ellison (D-MN), the first Muslim elected to the U.S. Congress, in a speech that included a statement by the House's Tri-Caucus., "Speech Title: Tri-Caucus Welcomes All Interns And Staff", Location: Washington, D.C. House of Representatives, October 26, 2009, accessed November 17, 2009 The four Republican Congressmen, joined by Senator Tom Coburn (R-OK) and Congressman Patrick McHenry (R-NC), then wrote IRS Commissioner Douglas H. Shulman on November 16, 2009, asking that CAIR be investigated for excessive lobbying and failing to register as a lobbying organization. "Tom Coburn Joins Campaign Against Muslim Group". TPMMuckraker. Accessed November 18, 2009]
CAIR condemned the Fort Hood shooting and expressed prayers for the victims and condolences for their families.
CAIR pointed to an arrest of five men in Pakistan on December 10, 2009, as a "success story"
Hours after it was announced by President Barack Obama that Osama bin Laden had been killed, CAIR put out a statement: "We join our fellow citizens in welcoming the announcement that Osama bin Laden has been eliminated as a threat to our nation and the world through the actions of American military personnel. As we have stated repeatedly since the 9/11 terror attacks, bin Laden never represented Muslims or Islam. In fact, in addition to the killing of thousands of Americans, he and Al Qaeda caused the deaths of countless Muslims worldwide. We also reiterate President Obama's clear statement tonight that the United States is not at war with Islam.""Press Release: CAIR Welcomes Elimination of Osama Bin Laden". PRNewswire.
In June 2011, CAIR lost its federal tax-exempt status for failure to file the appropriate 990 forms for the previous three years. (This does not apply to the local chapters, however.)"CAIR loses IRS Status". Investigative Project on Terrorism. A spokesman blamed it on an incorrect filing. "Muslim charity CAIR scrutinized over missing IRS filings". The (Nashville) Tennessean. USA Today.
In January 2012 CAIR's Michigan chapter took a stance along with the American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee in defending four Muslim high school football players accused of attacking a quarterback during a game. The organizations claimed the players were targeted for criminal prosecution over the attack because of their ethnic origin.

Projects and media

CAIR conducts research on the American Muslim community, releasing annual reports on public opinion and demographic statistics on the community, as well as annual Civil Rights reports concerning issues such as hate crimes, discrimination, and profiling. It also sponsors voter registration drives and outreach, and interfaith relations with other religious groups in America.
Local CAIR chapters such as the Michigan chapter organized a "Remember Through Service" campaign which was a video and billboard media campaign which featured positive representations of Muslim-Americans including a Muslim first responder during the September 11th World Trade Center events.
CAIR officials are often interviewed by major national, local, and international media on news programs involving Muslims in America. In five years CAIR officials were cited over 11,000 times by media, including CNN, MSNBC, BBC, ABC, Fox, NBC, CBS, Washington Post, USA Today, and the New York Times. Editorials written by CAIR officials are published nationwide.

Partners and relationships

CAIR officials have met or regularly meet with current and former U.S. Presidents, members of their respective administrations, members of the United States Congress, governors, mayors, members of state legislatures, and county commissioners. Several CAIR affiliates have received proclamations and citations from mayors and county commissioners. Cair. Retrieved on 2011-03-19. The organization itself has received praise from congressmen and women to top military officials such as General Wesley Clark, who "applauded its efforts to ensure that all Americans…are treated equally and given the same constitutional rights.""CAIR National 2004 Annual Report v5.4. (PDF). Retrieved on 2011-03-19. CAIR also regularly meets with national, state, and local law enforcement officials including the Department of Homeland Security.Press Release: CAIR-MI Reps Join Effort to Counter Violent Extremism
CAIR has conducted diversity/sensitivity training on Islam and Muslims for the FBI, US Armed Forces, several local and state law enforcement agencies, and many U.S. corporations. CAIR works in close cooperation with other civic and civil liberties groups such as the American Civil Liberties Union, Amnesty International, NAACP, Hispanic Unity, Organization of Chinese Americans, Japanese American Citizens League, Sikh Mediawatch, Jewish Council on Urban Affairs, and Resource Task Force. CAIR has also formed a partnership with the National Council of Churches and held discussions with representatives of the National Association of Evangelicals. In 2003, the Ohio chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union gave its annual Liberty Flame Award to the Ohio chapter of CAIR "for contributions to the advancement and protection of civil liberties."
CAIR is also a member of the American Muslim Political Coordination Council (AMPCC), created in 1999, along with the American Muslim Alliance (AMA), American Muslim Council (AMC), and Muslim Public Affairs Council (MPC). AMPCC's primary concern is to coordinate the member organizations on activism and lobbying. 261, Elizabeth Boosahda, University of Texas Press, 2003, ISBN 0-292-70920-X, 9780292709201, accessed November 30, 2009Muslims in the United States: the state of research, Karen Isaksen Leonard, Russell Sage Foundation, 2003, ISBN 0-87154-530-6, 9780871545305, accessed November 30, 2009
Reverend Jesse Jackson was a keynote speaker at CAIR's 15 annual banquet.

Controversy

Allegations of ties to Hamas

Critics of CAIR have accused it of having past ties to Hamas. Federal Judge Jorge A. Solis said that there was evidence to show that that CAIR had an association with the Holy Land Foundation,  Islamic Association for Palestine and Hamas. However, Judge Solis' acknowledged that this evidence predates the official designation of these groups as terrorist organizations.
Critics of CAIR, including six members of the U.S. House of Representatives and Senate,
The Anti-Defamation League states that CAIR's work as a civil rights organization is tainted by past links to Hamas, sometime failure to condemn terrorist organizations by name, and the presence of anti-Semites at some of its rallies. Since then CAIR has denounced violence by Hamas, and in 2006 Nihad Awad said, "I don't support Hamas today ... we condemn suicide bombings."
As of 2007, FBI officials attended CAIR events. In 2009, Fox News said that the FBI broke off formal outreach contacts with CAIR, and shunned all of its local chapters, concerned about CAIR's ties to Hamas. In 2011, the New York Times said that while the FBI and CAIR had no "formal relationship", CAIR officials and chapters worked regularly with FBI officials.S. Muslims, 11 March 2011, retrieved 21 November 2012

Foreign funding

CAIR has an annual budget of around $3 million (as of 2007). It states that while the majority of its funding comes from American Muslims, it accepts donations from individuals of any faith and also foreigners. In the past CAIR has accepted donations from individuals and foundations close to Arab governments. Within CAIR there is debate regarding foreign funding, and several CAIR branches have criticized the national office for accepting foreign donations.
According to Zuhdi Jasser, founder of American Islamic Forum for Democracy, CAIR has received "significant Saudi financing". CAIR acknowledged that it received $500,000 Library project from Saudi Prince Alwaleed Bin Talal.
In April 2011, Rep. Frank Wolf, R-Va. cited a 2009 letter sent from CAIR's executive director, Nihad Awad, to Muammar Gaddafi asking Gaddafi for funding for a project called the Muslim Peace Foundation at a U.S. House of Representatives Appropriations sub-committee hearing with Robert Mueller. The letter also said, in part, "I am pleased to send to Your Excellency in my name most solemn assurances of thanks and appreciation for the efforts you exert in the service of Islam, Muslims and all mankind through your initiative to teach Islam, spread the culture of Islam, and solve disputes, for which you are known internationally." Steven Emerson called the funding request "hypocritical."Lawmaker Criticizes Muslim Group Director's 2009 Fundraising Letter to Qaddafi while CAIR spokesman, Ibrahim Hooper, said that the organization didn't receive any money from the Libyan government and also that CAIR was one of the first American organizations to call for a no-fly zone

Lobbying and victimology

Tawfik Hamid referred to CAIR as "perhaps the most conspicuous organization to persistently accuse opponents of Islamophobia". He criticised the way the organisation uses the "charge of 'Islamophobia' as a tool to intimidate and blackmail those ... who rightly criticize current Islamic practices and preachings", citing its lawsuit filed in the Flying imams incident. Zuhdi Jasser has been stridently critical of CAIR by claiming that its agenda focused on "victimology". Neuroscientist and best-selling author Sam Harris, noted mainly for his contribution to the New Atheism movement, criticized CAIR by doubting their legitimacy saying CAIR is "an Islamist public relations firm posing as a civil-rights lobby". Huffingtonpost. Retrieved on 2011-03-19.
Some Muslims criticize CAIR for taking a conservative religious approach on many issues. These critics claim that statements by the organization (for example, that all Muslim women are required to veil) often follow conservative Saudi religious doctrine and do not capture diverse religious perspectives.S.

Responses to criticisms

CAIR suggested that "the statements and agendas of our detractors will show that they represent the extremes in our society." although the article goes on to cite the suspicious background of some of CAIR's donors as a source of contention within members of the organization itself. The Times also noted that even though a handful of its former members had faced prosecution, no criminal charges had at the time ever been linked to CAIR.
CAIR also says that accusations against it have their roots in its refusal to endorse the U.S.'s blanket condemnation of Hezbollah and Hamas, though it says it did criticize Hamas for civilian deaths.
Senator Boxer's 2006 decision to withdraw a "certificate of accomplishment" originally given to former CAIR official Basim Elkarra on grounds of suspicions about the organization's background "provoked an outcry from organizations that vouch for the group's advocacy, including the ACLU and the California Council of Churches. "They have been a leading organization that has advocated for civil rights and civil liberties in the face of fear and intolerance, in the face of religious and ethnic profiling," said Maya Harris, executive director of the ACLU of Northern California.

Litigation

A book entitled Muslim Mafia: Inside the Secret Underworld That's Conspiring to Islamize America by Paul David Gaubatz and Paul Sperry was published in October 2009. According to the Charlotte Observer, it portrays CAIR "as a subversive organization allied with international terrorists."Doyle, Michael, "Judge: Controversial 'Muslim Mafia' used stolen papers", Charlotte Observer, November 10, 2009, accessed November 17, 2009
Consequently, CAIR brought a federal civil lawsuit against Dave Gaubatz and his son (who had obtained the book's CAIR source documents as a CAIR intern) for allegedly stealing the documents.25-page Opinion of Federal judge Kollar-Kotelly in Counsel on American-Islamic Relations vs. Gaubatz (November 3, 2009), accessed November 17, 2009Doyle, Michael, "Muslim Mafia Author Ordered to Remove Documents from Web", Kansas City Star, November 9, 2009, accessed November 15, 2009Abbott, Ryan (November 2, 2009). "Muslims Say Author Spied & Trespassed". Courthouse News. Accessed November 17, 2009]Levine, Mike (November 11, 2009). "FBI Ties to CAIR Remain Strained in Obama Administration". Fox News Accessed November 15, 2009. "What is Going On in America? Corporate Diversity is not National Security". Chicago Daily Observer. Accessed November 15, 2009. U.S. District Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly concluded that the Gaubatzs "unlawfully obtained access to, and have already caused repeated public disclosure of, material containing CAIR's proprietary, confidential and privileged information," which CAIR says included names, addresses, telephone numbers and e-mail addresses of CAIR employees and donors. As a result the judge ordered Gaubatz to remove certain documents from his website. Judge Kollar-Kotelly also said that CAIR's employees have reported a dramatic increase in the number of threatening communications since the release of Mr. Gaubatz's book.
Gaubatz agreed in early November to return more than 12,000 pages of disputed CAIR records while the judge considered the lawsuit, but in late November before he could do so the U.S. Government, which previously had no role in the lawsuit, filed a motion in the case under seal, and FBI agents served the Gaubatzes' attorneys with a grand jury subpoena demanding the CAIR records. Politico. November 28, 2009. Accessed November 28, 2009.








