[[Rupert Grint]]

CATEGORIES: 1988 births, 21st-century English male actors, People from Harlow, English male child actors, English male film actors, English male radio actors, English male television actors, Male actors from Essex, Living people, People of English descent

Rupert Alexander Lloyd Grint (born 24 August 1988) is an English actor who rose to prominence playing Ron Weasley, one of the three main characters in the Harry Potter film series. Grint was cast as Ron Weasley at the age of 11, having previously acted only in school plays and at his local theatre group. From 2001 to 2011, he starred in all eight Harry Potter films alongside Daniel Radcliffe and Emma Watson.
Beginning in 2002, Grint began to work outside of the Harry Potter franchise, playing a co-leading role in Thunderpants. He has had starring roles in Driving Lessons, a dramedy released in 2006, and Cherrybomb, a small budgeted drama of limited release in 2010. Grint co-starred with Bill Nighy and Emily Blunt in Wild Target, a comedy. His first project following the end of the Harry Potter series was the 2012 anti-war film, Into the White, in which he has a supporting role. In 2013, Grint's new film CBGB was released and he has been cast in CBS's new pilot Super Clyde. Grint made his stage debut in Jez Butterworth's Mojo in October 2013 at the Harold Pinter Theatre in London.

Early life

Grint was born in Harlow, Essex. His mother, Joanne Grint (née Parsons), is a housewife, and his father, Nigel Grint, is a memorabilia dealer. Grint is the eldest of five siblings. to focus on his acting career. "I didn't really like school that much," the actor later commented.

Career

Harry Potter (2001–11)

Starting in 2000, casting began for the film adaptation of Harry Potter and the Philosopher's Stone, the best-selling novel written by author J. K. Rowling. Rowling personally insisted that the cast be British and assisted Susie Figgis and director Chris Columbus in casting the roles. With a total of US$974 million in its theatrical run, Philosopher's Stone stands as the second most commercially successful entry in the series. It was also critically well-received, scoring mainly positive reviews from critics. However, a number or critics found the adaption staying faithful to the book to be both its best and worst quality. Grint won a Satellite Award in the category of "Outstanding New Talent", and a Young Artist Award for "Most Promising Young Newcomer".
A year later, Grint again starred as Ron in Harry Potter and the Chamber of Secrets (2002), the second instalment of the series. The film opened to positive reviews and critics generally enjoyed the lead actors' performances. Both Los Angeles Times and New York Magazine observed that Grint and his peers had matured between films, Despite this it remains the second highest rated in the series in terms of critical reaction.
In 2005, Grint reprised his role again for the fourth film in the series who would continue to direct all of the following movies.
Grint said the laid back director was "really good" and helped keep the material fresh.
On 15 July 2009, the series's sixth instalment, Harry Potter and the Half-Blood Prince, was released. This adaptation revolved around more being learnt about Lord Voldemort's dark past. It did considerably better financially than the previous film, again setting new box office records. an Otto Award from the German magazine Bravo.
Despite the success of the past films, the future of the franchise was put into question as all three lead actors were unsure about signing on to continue their roles for the final two films.
Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 1 (2010) was released in November and made over US$950 million.
Harry Potter's author J. K. Rowling gave a speech during the final, world premiere of Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 on 7 July 2011 in London, England. She announced that there are seven Harry Potter film series cast members, whom she refers to as "The Big Seven", and she named Grint as one of the seven members, alongside with Daniel Radcliffe, Emma Watson, Tom Felton, Matthew Lewis, Evanna Lynch and Bonnie Wright.J.K. Rowling's Emotional Speech at the Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows Part 2

Other work (2002–present)

In 2002, Grint starred in his first non-Harry Potter film: Thunderpants, which revolves around Patrick (played by Bruce Cook) whose remarkable capacity for flatulence scores him a job as an astronaut. In this film, Grint portrayed the co-lead, Alan, an anosmic boy who is Patrick's only friend. It was generally ignored by critics and audiences alike. Most of the critics that did take notice of Thunderpants did not respond well to it, with one writing: "This film should be shown in prisons so that inmates have a good reason to never return."
In July 2008, it was announced that Grint would star in the independent  thriller Cherrybomb with Robert Sheehan and Kimberley Nixon.
Grint found shooting this film very different from the Harry Potter films since he had to adjust to doing a dozen scenes per day. Grint's character
Jonathan Lynn directed Grint in Wild Target, a 2010 comedy thriller film, which he starred in alongside Emily Blunt and Bill Nighy. A remake of the 1993 French film Cible Emouvante, Wild Target was made on a relatively small production budget of US$8 million.
In January 2011, Grint made a cameo appearance in BBC popular comedy show Come Fly with Me starring comedy duo Matt Lucas and David Walliams (Little Britain).
In August 2011, Grint did a photo shoot with his friend and Harry Potter co-star Tom Felton in Los Angeles for the autumn/winter collection of the fashion label Band of Outsiders.
In March 2012 the "Visit Britain" TV ad was released, which features Grint alongside Julie Walters, Michelle Dockery and Stephen Fry. The TV ad promotes holidaying at home in the UK.
On 14 March 2012 Variety reported that Grint had been cast alongside Chloë Grace Moretz in The Drummer, a biopic about drummer Dennis Wilson of the Beach Boys. On the same day, Hollywood Reporter confirmed this and announced filming was scheduled to begin on 15 June 2012 in California and Savannah, Georgia
On 25 July 2012, Grint carried the 2012 London Olympic torch during the Olympic Torch Relay, which is part of 2012 Summer Olympic Games in London. In interviews, Rupert told the BBC News that it was an "overwhelming" experience that he hoped to remember forever,Harry Potter star Rupert Grint carries Olympic Flame. BBC. Retrieved on 25 July 2012 and told The Daily Telegraph "It was amazing, it was really overwhelming. It's just such an honour to be a part of this. I'm really proud"."London 2012 Olympics: Harry Potter star Rupert Grint carries torch". The Daily Telegraph. Retrieved on 26 July 2012
In October 2012 Grint narrated We Are Aliens, a 25min 3D Planetarium Fulldome film about the possibility of other intelligent life in our Universe.
On 13 February 2013,The Hollywood Reporter's Live Feed announced that Grint would star in a television show on CBS called Super Clyde. "Grint will play the title role of Clyde, the well-meaning and sweet yet slightly neurotic guy who never feels like he really fits in. The avid comic book reader considers himself a borderline agoraphobic with mild to severe anxiety issues who wishes he were a super hero himself. When Clyde inherits a $100,000 a month inheritance from his long-dead eccentric Uncle Bill, he decides that the cash will be his secret super power and will use it only for good and reward the good-hearted."
In July 2013, it was confirmed that Grint will be making his stage debut in Jez Butterworth's second run of his black comedy, Mojo, playing the role as a minor hood called Sweets who pops amphetamines like Smarties and does a sort of double act, full of comic menace. Grint will be starring alongside with actors Brendan Coyle, Ben Whishaw and Daniel Mays. The play is based on real-life events and ran from 26 October 2013 until 8 February 2014 at the Harold Pinter Theatre in London.com, Retrieved on 25 July 2013 He won the WhatsOnStage Award for Best London Newcomer for his role in this play. .co.uk, Retrieved on 26 February 2014
In September 2013, The Hollywood Reporter confirmed that in his next acting project, the Macbeth adaptation called Enemy of Man. Grint will be starring with Sean Bean, Charles Dance, Jason Flemyng, James D'Arcy, Neil Maskell and Joe Gilgun. The film director is Vincent Regan and distributed by Kaleidoscope Film Distribution.hypable.Toronto: Rupert Grint Lined Up for Macbeth Adaptation The Hollywood Reporter.com,Retrieved on 6 September 2013

Personal life

The actor enjoys close friendships with his Harry Potter co-stars Emma Watson and Daniel Radcliffe, stating that they have a sibling-like relationship, having known each other from an early age. Like his character, he has arachnophobia, a fear of spiders.
In May 2011, along with other celebrities, Grint took part in the ad campaign for "Make Mine Milk" to promote daily milk drinking. His ads can be seen on thousands of bus sides and posters across the United Kingdom.

Filmography

Film

Television

Theatre

Music videos

Other roles

Awards and nominations








