[[Godspeed You! Black Emperor]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 1994, Musical groups disestablished in 2003, Musical groups reestablished in 2010, Musical groups from Montreal, Canadian progressive rock groups, Canadian post-rock groups, Musical collectives, Anti-corporate activism, Constellation Records (Canada) artists, Polaris Music Prize winners

Godspeed You! Black Emperor (formerly punctuated Godspeed You Black Emperor! and commonly referred to as just "Godspeed", or abbreviated to GYBE or GY!BE) is a Canadian post-rock band which originated in Montreal, Quebec in 1994. They release their recordings through Constellation, an independent record label also located in Montreal.
After the release of their debut album in 1997, the group toured regularly from 1998 to 2002. In 2003, the band announced an indefinite hiatus in order for band members to pursue other musical interests. In the intervening period, the group was occasionally rumored to have broken up, but the band finally reconvened for a tour beginning in late 2010. In October 2012, the band released their fourth album, 'Allelujah! Don't Bend! Ascend!.
Even though the band has never broken into the mainstream, they have gained an extremely dedicated cult following, and remain very influential in the post-rock genre. In September, 2013, 'Allelujah! Don't Bend! Ascend! won the 2013 Polaris Music Prize.

History

The band took its name from God Speed You! Black Emperor, a 1976 Japanese black-and-white documentary by director Mitsuo Yanagimachi, which follows the exploits of a Japanese biker gang, the Black Emperors.
Godspeed You! Black Emperor was formed in 1994 in Montreal, Quebec, by Efrim Menuck (guitar), Mike Moya (guitar), and Mauro Pezzente (bass). The band initially assembled after being offered a supporting act for another local band named Steak 72.
After the limited release of the cassette, the band quickly expanded and continued to perform live periodically. According to Menuck, joining the group was quite simple: "It was like if anyone knew anybody who played an instrument and seemed like an okay person, they would sort of join up." In short order, the group's numbers ebbed and flowed. Local musicians would often join the band for a handful of performances, then depart. The revolving door nature of the group's membership frequently caused it strain before the release of F♯ A♯ ∞.  After that release, the group stabilized around a nine-person lineup with Menuck, Moya and David Bryant on guitars, Pezzente and Thierry Amar on bass guitars, Aidan Girt and Bruce Cawdron on drums, and Sophie Trudeau and Norsola Johnson on violin and cello respectively.  Moya would depart in 1998 to focus on HṚṢṬA, being replaced by Roger Tellier-Craig of Fly Pan Am.
Although various members of the band are often pinned down as anarchists, no one in the band has explicitly subscribed to this label; For example, the liner notes to Yanqui U.X.O. describe the song "09-15-00" as "Ariel Sharon surrounded by 1,000 Israeli soldiers marching on al-Haram Ash-Sharif & provoking another Intifada," and the back cover of that album depicts the relationships of several major record labels to the military-industrial complex. Several of their songs also incorporate voice samples which express political sentiments, most notably "The Dead Flag Blues" (on F♯A♯∞) and "BBF3" (on Slow Riot for New Zerø Kanada).
Members of the group have formed a number of side projects, including Thee Silver Mt. Zion Memorial Orchestra & Tra-La-La Band, Fly Pan Am, HṚṢṬA, Esmerine, and Set Fire to Flames.
The band released the CD versions of its first two albums on the Kranky record label, and released the LPs through Constellation Records.  The LP and the CD of Yanqui U.X.O. were produced by Constellation after their contract with Kranky ran out.
In 2004, long-time guitarist Roger Tellier-Craig left the band on amicable terms to devote more time to Fly Pan Am.
The group was once misconstrued as being a band of terrorists. The incident was mentioned in Michael Moore's book Dude, Where's My Country?
In 2010 the band reported they were reuniting for an All Tomorrow's Parties music event in the UK as well as further US dates . Mike Moya re-joined the band for the reunion, while original cellist Norsola Johnson declined to participate. The band played a full North American and European tour in 2011, and more dates in the UK including an appearance at the ATP 'I'll Be Your Mirror' music festival in London are confirmed for July.
In 2011 in an interview with Voir, band member Bruce Cawdron announced that the band was working on new material.
On February 28, 2012, it was announced that the band would be performing at the 2012 Pitchfork Music Festival in Chicago.  On March 15, 2012, it was announced that the band would be performing at the 2012 All Tomorrow's Parties I'll Be Your Mirror festival in New York, NY. Drummer Tim Herzog began touring with the band upon the departure of Bruce Cawdron.
In 2013 the band won the Polaris Music Prize, but they criticised the cost of the ceremony during the time of austerity, stating "maybe the next celebration should happen in a cruddier hall, without the corporate banners and culture overlord".

Live concerts

Film loop projections are an important aspect of the group's live show, explained by Efrim Menuck as "putting the whole into context".
Because the band is taper-friendly—that is, they allow audience members to record their live performances—fans often release new material before the band makes an official recording.
The band toured Australia/New Zealand for the first time in February 2013, including a performance at the All Tomorrow's Parties 'I'll Be Your Mirror' festival in Melbourne on February 16.
The band supported Nine Inch Nails on their Tension tour in October 2013, starting at the TD Garden in Boston on October 11. In November 2013 the band played at Brixton Academy in London.

Members

Discography






