[[Catalan language]]

CATEGORIES: Catalan language, Occitano-Romance languages, Languages of Andorra, Languages of France, Languages of Italy, Languages of Sardinia, Languages of Spain, Subject–verb–object languages

Catalan (
According to the Statistical Institute of Catalonia in 2008 the Catalan language is the second most commonly used in Catalonia, after Spanish, as a native or self-defining language. The Generalitat of Catalunya spends part of its annual budget on the promotion of the use of Catalan in Catalonia and in other territories.Datos lingüísticos en Cataluña
Catalan evolved from common Latin around the eastern Pyrenees in the 9th century.
Since the Spanish transition to democracy (1975–1982), Catalan has been recognized as an official language, language of education, and language of mass media, all of which have contributed to its increased prestige.
Compared to other Romance languages, Catalan dialects feature relative uniformity, is regulated by the Institute of Catalan Studies (IEC).
Catalan shares many traits with its neighboring Romance languages.
Catalan has an inflectional grammar, with two genders (masculine, feminine), and two numbers (singular, plural). Pronouns are also inflected for case, animacy and politeness, and can be combined in very complex ways. Verbs are split in several paradigms and are inflected for person, number, tense, aspect, mood, and gender. In terms of pronunciation, Catalan has many words ending in a wide variety of consonants and some consonant clusters, in contrast with many other Romance languages.

Etymology and pronunciation

The word Catalan derives from the territory of Catalonia, itself of disputed etymology. The main theory suggests that Catalunya (Latin Gathia Launia) derives from the name Gothia or Gauthia ("Land of the Goths"), since the origins of the Catalan counts, lords and people were found in the March of Gothia, whence Gothland > Gothlandia > Gothalania > Catalonia theoretically derived.
In English, the term referring to a person first appears in mid 14th century as Catelaner, followed in the 15th century as Catellain (from French). It is first attested a language name by 1792. The term Catalonian is first attested in 1707. Catalan can be pronounced as .
The endonym is pronounced  See also status of Valencian below.

History

Middle Ages

By the 9th century, Catalan had evolved from Vulgar Latin on both sides of the eastern end of the Pyrenees, as well as the territories of the Roman province of Tarraconensis to the south.
In the 11th century, documents written in macaronic Latin begin to show Catalan elements,
During the 11th and 12th centuries the Catalan rulers expanded up to north of the Ebro river,
In the Low Middle Ages, Catalan went through a golden age, reaching a peak of maturity and cultural richness.
Martorell's outstanding

Start of the modern era

With the union of the crowns of Castille and Aragon (1479), the use of Spanish gradually became more prestigious.

French state: 18th to 20th centuries

With the Treaty of the Pyrenees (1659), Spain ceded the northern part of Catalonia to France, and soon thereafter the local Catalan varieties came under the influence of French, which in 1700 became the sole official language of the region.
Shortly after the French Revolution (1789), the French First Republic prohibited official use of, and enacted discriminating policies against, the nonstandard languages of France (patois), such as Catalan, Alsatian, Breton, Occitan, Flemish, and Basque.
Following the French capture of Algeria (1833), that region saw several waves of Catalan-speaking settlers. People from the Spanish Alacant province settled around Oran, whereas Algiers received immigration from Northern Catalonia and Minorca. Their speech was known as patuet. By 1911, the number of Catalan speakers was around 100,000. After the declaration of independence of Algeria in 1962, almost all the Catalan speakers fled to Northern Catalonia (as Pieds-Noirs) or Alacant.
Nowadays, France only recognizes French as an official language. Nevertheless, on 10 December 2007, the General Council of the Pyrénées-Orientales officially recognized Catalan as one of the languages of the department and seeks to further promote it in public life and education.

Spanish state: 18th to 20th centuries

The decline of Catalan continued in the 16th and 17th centuries. The Catalan defeat in the War of Spanish Succession (1714) initiated a series of measures imposing the use of Spanish in all spheres of public life.
In parallel, however, the 19th century saw a Catalan literary revival (Renaixença), which has continued up to the present day.
In the 19th century, the region of Carche, in the province of Murcia was repopulated with Catalan speakers from the Land of Valencia.
The Second Spanish Republic (1931-1939) saw a brief period of tolerance, with most restrictions against Catalan being lifted.

Present day

Since the Spanish transition to democracy (1975–1982), Catalan has been institutionalizated as an official language, language of education, and language of mass media; all of which have contributed to its increased prestige. and it is not possible to use Spanish for studying in the public education system of Catalonia.

In Andorra, Catalan has always been the sole official language.
On the other hand, there are several language shift processes currently taking place. In Northern Catalonia, Catalan has followed the same trend as the other minority languages of France, with most of its native speakers being 60 or older (as of 2004). The cultural associacion La Bressola promotes a network of community-run schools engaged in Catalan language immersion programs.
In the Alicante province Catalan is being replaced by Spanish, and in Alghero by Italian.

Classification and relationship with other Romance languages

The ascription of Catalan to the Occitano-Romance branch of Gallo-Romance languages is not shared by all linguists, particularly those from the Castillian sphere, like Menéndez Pidal.
According to Pèire Bèc, its specific classification is as follows:
Catalan bears varying degrees of similarity to the linguistic varieties subsumed under the cover term Occitan language (see also differences between Occitan and Catalan and Gallo-Romance languages). Thus, as it should be expected from closely related languages, Catalan today shares many traits with other Romance languages.

Relationship with other Western Romance languages

Catalan shares many traits with the other neighboring Romance languages (Italian, Sardinian, Occitan, and Spanish).
According to Ethnologue, the lexical similarity between Catalan and other Romance languages is 87% with Italian, 85% with Portuguese and Spanish, 76% with Ladin, 75% with Sardinian, and 73% with Romanian.
|
|}
During much of its history, and especially during the Francoist dictatorship (1939-1975), the Catalan language has often been degraded as a mere dialect of Spanish.
There is evidence that, at least from the 
The Germanic superstrate has had different outcomes in Spanish and Catalan. For example, Catalan fang "mud" and rostir "to roast", of Germanic origin, contrast with Spanish lodo and asar, of Latin origin; whereas Catalan filosa "spinning wheel" and pols "temple", of Latin origin, contrast with Spanish rueca and sien, of Germanic origin.
The same happens with Arabic loanwords. Thus, Catalan alfàbia "large earthenware jar" and rajola "tile", of Arabic origin, contrast with Spanish tinaja and teja, of Latin origin; whereas Catalan oli "oil" and oliva "olive", of Latin origin, contrast with Spanish aceite and aceituna.
Situated between two large linguistic blocks (Ibero-Romance and Gallo-Romance), Catalan has many unique lexical choices, such as enyorar "to miss somebody", apaivagar "to calm down somebody", or rebutjar "reject".

Geographic distribution

Catalan-speaking territories

|-
| Andorra ||  Andorra ||Andorra || A sovereign state where Catalan is the national and the sole official language. The Andorrans speak a Western Catalan variety.
|-
|France|| 
|-
| rowspan=5 |Spain|| 
|-
|  The Western Catalan variety spoken there receives the denomination of "Valencian".
|-
| La Franja || La Franja || An part of the Autonomous Community of Aragon, in particular the adjacent strip bordering Western Catalonia. It comprises the comarques of Ribagorça, Llitera, Baix Cinca, and Matarranya.
|-
| Balearic Islands ||Illes Balears || It comprises the islands of Mallorca, Menorca, Eivissa and Formentera.
|-
| 
|-
| Italy|| 22px Alghero||L'Alguer|| A city in Province of Sassari, in the island of Sardinia, where the peculiar Alguerese dialect is spoken.
|}
These territories are sometimes referred to as the Països Catalans (Catalan Countries), a denomination based on cultural affinity and common heritage, that has also had a subsequent political interpretation but no official status. Various interpretations of the term may include some or all of these regions.

Number of speakers

The number of persons known to be fluent in Catalan varies depending on the sources used. A 2004 language study did not indicate the total number of speakers, but showed a total estimate of 9–9.5 million, by matching the percentage of speakers to the population of each area where Catalan is spoken. These figures only reflect potential speakers; today it is the native language of only 35.6% of the Catalan population. Datos comparados 2003-2008. Cataluña. Año 2008, Encuesta de Usos Lingüísticos de la población (2003 y 2008), Instituto de Estadística de Cataluña According to Ethnologue: Languages of the World, ed. 17, Catalan had a total of 7.2 million native speakers in 2010, and 5 million second-language speakers in 1994.
The most important social characteristic of the Catalan language is that all the areas where it is spoken are bilingual in practice: together with the French language in Roussillon, with Italian in Alghero, with Spanish and French in Andorra and with Spanish in the rest of the territories.

=Level of knowledge of the Catalan language=

(% of the population 15 year old and older).

=Social use=

(% of the population 15 year old and older).

=Native language=

Red Cruscat del Instituto de Estudios Catalanes


Phonology

The Catalan phonology varies depending on the dialect. Notable features include:
In contrast with other Romance languages, Catalan has many monosyllabic words; and those ending in a wide variety consonants and some consonant clusters.
Central Catalan is considered the standard pronunciation of the language. The descriptions below are mostly for this variety.

Vowels

Catalan has inherited the typical vowel system of Vulgar Latin, with seven stressed phonemes: 
In Central Catalan, unstressed vowels reduce to three:  The other dialects have different vowel reduction processes (see the section pronunciation of dialects in this article).

Consonants

The consonant system of Catalan is rather conservative, shared with most modern Western Romance languages.

Phonological evolution

Dialects

Overview

The dialects of the Catalan language feature a relative uniformity, especially when compared to other Romance languages;
Catalan is split in two major dialectal blocks: Eastern Catalan, and Western Catalan.
Western Catalan comprises the two dialects of North-Western Catalan and Valecian; the Eastern block comprises four dialects: Central Catalan, Balearic, Rossellonese, and Alguerese. Each dialect can be further subdivided in several subdialects.
Central Catalan is considered the standard pronunciation of the language and has the highest number of speakers.

Pronunciation

=Vowels=

Catalan has inherited the typical vowel system of Vulgar Latin, with seven stressed phonemes: 
In Eastern Catalan (except Majorcan), unstressed vowels reduce to three:  Alguerese has lowered ə to a.
In Majorcan, unstressed vowels reduce to four: 
In Western Catalan, unstressed vowels reduce to five: 
Central, Western, and Balearic differ in the lexical incidence of stressed /e/ and /ɛ/.
|
|}

=Consonants=

Morphology

In verbs, 1st person present indicative desinence is -e (∅ in verbs of the 2nd and 3rd conjugation), or -o. E.g. parle, tem, sent (Valencian); parlo, temo, sento (North-Western). In verbs, 1st person present indicative desinence is -o, -i or ∅ in all conjugations.  E.g. parlo (Central), parl (Balearic), parli (Northern), ('I speak').
In verbs, the inchoative desinences are -isc/-ixo, -ix, -ixen, -isca.
In verbs, the inchoative desinences are -eixo, -eix, -eixen, -eixi.
In nouns and adjectives, maintenance of  of medieval plurals in proparoxytone words. E.g. hòmens 'men', jóvens 'youth'.
In nouns and adjectives, loss of  of medieval plurals in proparoxytone words. E.g. homes 'men', joves 'youth'.

Vocabulary

Despite its relative lexical unity, the two dialectal blocks of Catalan (Eastern and Western) show some differences in word choices.

Standards

Standard Catalan, virtually accepted by all speakers,
The most notable difference between both standards is some tonic  like in ametla/ametlla ('almond'), espatla/espatlla ('back'), the use of elided demonstratives (este 'this', eixe 'that') in the same level as reinforced ones (aquest, aqueix) or the use of many verbal forms common in Valencian, and some of these common in the rest of Western Catalan too, like subjunctive mood or inchoative conjugation in -ix- at the same level as -eix- or the priority use of -e morpheme in 1st person singular in present indicative (-ar verbs): jo compre instead of jo compro ('I buy').
In the Balearic Islands, IEC's standard is used but adapted for the Balearic dialect by the University of the Balearic Islands's philological section. In this way, for instance, IEC says it is correct writing cantam as much as cantem ('we sing') but the University says that the priority form in the Balearic Islands must be "cantam" in all fields. Another feature of the Balearic standard is the non-ending in the 1st person singular present indicative: jo compr ('I buy'), jo tem ('I fear'), jo dorm ('I sleep').
In Alghero, the IEC has adapted its standard to the Alguerese dialect. In this standard one can find, among other features: the definite article lo instead of el, special possessive pronouns and determinants la mia ('mine'), lo sou/la sua ('his/her'), lo tou/la tua ('yours'), and so on, the use of -v-  in the imperfect tense in all conjugations: cantava, creixiva, llegiva; the use of many archaic words, usual words in Alguerese: manco instead of menys ('less'), calqui u instead of algú ('someone'), qual/quala instead of quin/quina ('which'), and so on; and the adaptation of weak pronouns.
In 2011, the Aragonese government passed a decree for the establishment of a new language regulator of Catalan in La Franja (the so-called Catalan-speaking areas of Aragon). The new entity, designated as Acadèmia Aragonesa del Català, shall allow a facultative education in Catalan and a standardization of the Catalan language in La Franja.

 Status of Valencian

The vast majority of linguists hold that Catalan and Valencian are the same language, a position that is also shared by the majority of Valencian scholars.

Valencian is classified as a Western dialect, along with the North-Western varieties spoken in Western Catalonia (provinces of Lleida and most of Tarragona). The various forms of Catalan and Valencian are mutually intelligible (ranging from 90% to 95%)Central Catalan has 90% to 95% inherent intelligibility for speakers of Valencian (1989 R. Hall, Jr.), cited on Ethnologue.
The AVL, created by the Valencian government, is in charge of dictating the official rules governing the use of Valencian, and its standard is based on that of the Institute of Catalan Studies (Institut d'Estudis Catalans, IEC).
Despite the position of the official organizations, which is also shared with the residents of Catalonia, the majority of Valencian speakers consider their language unique and different from Catalan.
This clash of opinions has sparked much controversy. For example, during the drafting of the European Constitution in 2004, the Spanish government supplied the EU with translations of the text into Basque, Galician, Catalan, and Valencian, but the latter two were identical. "Traducció única de la Constitució europea". I-Zefir. 30 Oct 2004. 29 Apr 2009.

Vocabulary

Word choices

Despite its relative lexical unity, the two dialectal blocks of Catalan (Eastern and Western) show some differences in word choices.
Literary Catalan allows the use of words from different dialects, except those of very restricted use.

Latin and Greek learned words

Like other languages, Catalan has a large list of learned words from Greek and Latin. This process started very early, and one can find such examples in Ramon Llull's work.

Word formation

The process of word derivation in Catalan follows the same principles as the other Romance languages,
There is greater regularity in the process of word-compouding, where one can find compounded words as much as in English.

Writing system

Catalan uses the Roman alphabet, with some added symbols and digraphs.

Grammar

The grammar of Catalan is similar to other Romance languages. Features include:

Gender and number inflection

|
|
|
|}
In gender inflection, the most notable feature is (compared to Portuguese, Spanish or Italian), the disapparition of the typical masculine suffix -o. Thus, the alternance of -o/-a, has been replaced by ø/-a.
Catalan has few suppletive couplets, like Italian and Spanish, and unlike French. Thus, Catalan has noi/noia ("boy"/"girl") and gall/gallina ("cock"/"hen"), whereas French has garçon/fille and coq/poule.
There is a tendency to abandon traditionally gender-invariable adjectives in favour of marked ones, something prevalent in Occitan and French. Thus, one can find bullent/bullenta ("boiling") in constrast with traditional bullent/bullent.
Like in the other Western Romance languages, the main plural expression is the suffix -s, which may create morphological alternations akin the ones found in gender inflection, albeit more rarely.
The most important one is the addition of -o- before certain consonant groups, a phonetic phenomenon that does not affect feminine forms: el pols/els polsos ("the pulse"/"the pulses") vs. la pols/les pols ("the dust"/"the dusts").

Determiners

|
|
|}
The inflection of determinatives is complex, specially because of the high number of elisions, but is similar to the neighboring languages.
Central Catalan has abandoned almost completely unstressed possessives (mon, etc.) in favour of constructions of article + stressed forms (el meu, etc.), a feature shared with Italian.

Personal pronouns

The morphology of Catalan personal pronouns is complex, specially in unstressed forms, which are numerous (13 distinct forms, compared to 11 in Spanish or 9 in Italian; French has such a different system that comparisons are not feasible). 
The Catalan pronouns exhibit T–V distinction, like all other Romance languages (and most European languages, but not English). This feature implies the use of a different set of second person pronouns for formality.
This flexibility allows Catalan to use extraposition extensively, much more than French or Spanish. Thus, Catalan can have m'hi recomanaren ("they recommended me to him"), whereas in French one must say ils m'ont recommandé à lui, and Spanish me recomendaron a él.

Verbs

Like all the Romance languages, Catalan verbal inflection is more complex than the nominal. Suffixation is omnipresent, whereas morphological alternations play a secondary role.
The Catalan verbal system is basically common to all Western Romance, except that most dialects have replaced the analytic indicative perfect with a periphrastic form of anar ("to go") + infinitive.
Catalan verbs are traditionally divided into three conjugations, with vowel themes -a-, -e-, -i-, the last two being split into two subtypes. However, this division is mostly theoretical.

Syntax

The grammar of Catalan follows the general pattern of Western Romance languages. The primary word order is SVO (subject–verb–object). wals.

Catalan names

In the Spanish state (as in Portugal), every person has officially two surnames, one of which is the father's first surname and the other is the mother's first surname.1 of Law 1/1998 stipulates that "the citizens of Catalonia have the right to use the proper regulation of their Catalan names and surnames and to introduce the conjunction between surnames"

Sample text

Selected text from Manuel de Pedrolo's 1970 novel Un amor fora ciutat ("A love affair outside the city").

Catalan loanwords in the English language





Bibliography



Institutions
About the Catalan language
Monolingual dictionaries
Bilingual and multilingual dictionaries
Automated translation systems
Phrasebooks
Learning resources
Catalan-language online encyclopedia


