[[Balaclava (clothing)]]

CATEGORIES: Headgear, Hiking apparel, Masks, Safety clothing

A balaclava , also known as a balaclava helmet or ski mask, is a form of cloth headgear designed to expose only part of the face. Depending on style and how it's worn only the eyes, eyes and nose, or just the front of the face are unprotected. Versions with a full face opening may be rolled into a hat to cover the crown of the head or folded down as a collar around the neck.
The name comes from their use at the Battle of Balaclava during the Crimean War, referring to a town near Sevastopol in Russia.[ref]
</ref>

History

Traditional balaclavas were knitted from wool. Modern versions are also made from silk, cotton, polypropylene, neoprene, acrylic or polar fleece.
This type of headgear was  known in the 19th century as an Uhlan cap or a Templar cap.  
During the Crimean War in 1854 handmade balaclavas were sent over to the British troops to help protect them from the bitter cold weather. British troops required this aid, as their own supplies (warm clothing, weatherproof quarters, and food) never arrived in time.

Uses

Warmth and safety

Modern balaclavas are used in outdoor winter sports such as skiing, snowboarding, and snowmobiling to protect the face from wind and maintain warmth.  They're also popular among motorcyclists.
Firefighters wear a fire-resistant version made of Nomex with a face opening that is covered by their self-contained breathing apparatus (SCBA)
Race drivers In Fédération Internationale de l'Automobile sanctioned events must wear balaclavas made of fire-retardant material underneath their crash helmets. In racing events, hill-climbs, special stages of rallies and selective sections of cross-country events entered on the International Sporting Calendar, all drivers and co-drivers must wear overalls as well as gloves (optional for co-drivers), long underwear, a balaclava, socks and shoes homologated to the FIA 8856-2000 standard.fia.nsf/4C1C7A762BC27980C12575B700525253/$FILE/Annexe%20L_2009_15.05.09.

Military and police

In the Indian subcontinent, balaclavas are commonly referred to as monkey caps, due to their typical earth tone colours, and the fact that they blot out most human facial features. Monkey caps sometimes have a small, decorative, woollen pom-pom on top. They are commonly worn by troops on Himalayan duty for protection from the cold.Ghosh, Subir (2005) "Thanda lege jabey" Article in 19 Nov Hindusthan Times
The United States Marine Corps has recently begun issuing balaclavas with hinged face guards as part of the Flame Resistant Organizational Gear program.
The balaclava became a part of standard OMON (special police task force) uniform as early as the Perestroyka years of the late 1980s. The original intent was to protect the identity of the officers to avoid intimidation from organized crime. Due to increased problems with organized crime of the 90s, TV shots of armed men in black balaclavas became a staple of sorts. As the organized crime went down, however, balaclavas became an instrument of intimidation as much as identity protection, as they don't allow one to see the facial expression of the enforcement officer or identify him conclusively. Armed Russian police commonly conduct raids and searches of white-collar premises (typically in Moscow) while wearing balaclavas.  Such raids have therefore come to be known in Russia as "maski shows", an allusion to popular comic TV show of the 1990s.
A news media term for men wearing balaclavas and military uniforms without insignia involved in the 2014 pro-Russian unrest in Ukraine is Green men.

Concealment

A balaclava may be used for concealment in the course of illegal activities and occupationally by SWAT and Special Forces personnel. It may also be used by irregular military forces or paramilitary organizations to conceal their identities and have been used as an identifying feature in fictional representations of such groups. The Provisional Irish Republican Army is known for its members wearing balaclavas in every situation.
British Police in Kent confiscated the War on Terror board game partly due to the inclusion of a balaclava. Police said it "could be used to conceal someone's identity or could be used in the course of a criminal act".
Some balaclava-wearing sympathisers of Pussy Riot were arrested in Marseille, France in August 2012 for being in breach of the French ban on face covering.








