[[Ben Affleck]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Male actors from Boston, Massachusetts, American activists, American male child actors, American Episcopalians, American male film actors, American film directors, American film producers, American people of English descent, American people of German descent, American people of Irish descent, American people of Scottish descent, American people of Swedish descent, American poker players, American screenwriters, American male television actors, American television producers, Best Director BAFTA Award winners, Best Director Golden Globe winners, Best Original Screenplay Academy Award winners, Film directors from California, Film producers from California, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Living people, Massachusetts Democrats, Occidental College alumni, Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture Screen Actors Guild Award winners, Male actors from Berkeley, California, People from Cambridge, Massachusetts, Producers who won the Best Picture Academy Award, Volpi Cup winners, People from Greater Boston, Writers from Massachusetts, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers, American humanitarians, American political activists, Activists from California, Best Screenplay Golden Globe winners, Golden Globe Award winning producers

Benjamin Géza Affleck-BoldtHe is listed as "Benjamin G. Affleckbold"; born on August 15, 1972 in Alameda County according to the State of California. California Birth Index, 1905–1995. Center for Health Statistics, California Department of Health Services, Sacramento, California. Searchable at   (born August 15, 1972), better known as Ben Affleck, is an American actor, film director, producer, and screenwriter. He first came to attention for his performances in the Kevin Smith films Mallrats (1995), Chasing Amy (1997), and Dogma (1999). In 1997, Affleck gained recognition as a writer when he won the Academy Award and Golden Globe Award for Best Original Screenplay for Good Will Hunting (1997), which he co-wrote and in which he co-starred with actor Matt Damon. He later achieved international recognition for starring in films such as Armageddon (1998), Pearl Harbor (2001), Changing Lanes (2002), The Sum of All Fears (2002), Daredevil (2003), Hollywoodland (2006), State of Play (2009), and The Town (2010).
Affleck is also a critically acclaimed film director. He gained recognition as a director for his directorial debut Gone Baby Gone (2007) for which he won the National Board of Review Award for Best Directorial Debut. He then directed and starred in The Town (2010) and Argo (2012), which won him the Golden Globe Award, BAFTA, and Directors Guild Award for Best Director, and the Golden Globe Award, BAFTA, the Producers Guild Award, and the Academy Award for Best Picture. He will continue his directorial career when he adapts Dennis Lehane's 2012 novel Live by Night for a 2015 theatrical release.
In addition to film work, Affleck has been actively involved in politics and charitable causes. He and Matt Damon founded the production company LivePlanet in 2000, and Pearl Street Films in 2012. He is scheduled to portray Nick Dunne in the 2014 feature film adaptation of Gillian Flynn's 2012 best-selling novel Gone Girl, and will portray Bruce Wayne/Batman in the 2016 sequel to the 2013 film Man of Steel.
Affleck has a younger brother, actor Casey Affleck, whom he has worked with on several films, including Good Will Hunting and Gone Baby Gone. He has been married to Jennifer Garner since June 2005, and they have two daughters and a son. Affleck previously dated Gwyneth Paltrow in 1998, and his relationship with actress/singer Jennifer Lopez, in which they were dubbed "Bennifer", attracted worldwide media attention before it ended in 2004.

Early life

Affleck was born in Berkeley, California. His mother, Christine Anne "Chris" Affleck (
His family moved to Cambridge, Massachusetts, when he was very young, and his parents divorced in 1984. At age eight, Affleck met 10-year-old Matt Damon, who lived two blocks away. Damon is Affleck's tenth cousin, once removed, through a common New England ancestor.

Career

Early work

Affleck worked as a child actor, appearing on the PBS children's series The Voyage of the Mimi, as well as in several movies made for television.

Box office

Affleck came to national attention working with Damon in Good Will Hunting in 1997, for which they shared writing credit and received the Oscar for Best Original Screenplay. They also starred in the film. Good Will Hunting's success transformed Affleck from a virtual unknown into a celebrity. Along with Damon and producers Chris Moore and Sean Bailey, Affleck founded the production company LivePlanet, through which the four created the documentary series Project Greenlight, as well as the failed mystery-hybrid series Push, Nevada, among other projects.
Affleck starred in Armageddon (1998) opposite Bruce Willis.
In 2002, he was cast as Jack Ryan, a role previously played by Alec Baldwin and Harrison Ford, in the fourth film in the techno-thriller series The Sum of All Fears. The movie, which ignored the story lines of the previous Jack Ryan films, also starred Morgan Freeman.
The following year, he starred as Matt Murdock/Daredevil in Mark Steven Johnson's film Daredevil (2003). Affleck said Daredevil was his favorite comic book as a kid Daredevil grossed over $179 million worldwide.
Despite some critical missteps, his box-office successes reportedly earned Affleck an average of $15 million per film. Following Daredevil, Affleck starred in several critically panned box-office flops, including Gigli (2003) and Surviving Christmas (2004).

2006–2009

Affleck starred in the critically acclaimed George Reeves noir biopic Hollywoodland, directed by HBO TV-series veteran Allen Coulter. His performance was well-received; Peter Travers of Rolling Stone wrote: "The irony is that Affleck's battering at the hands of fame has prepped him beautifully to play Reeves. He knows this character from the inside: the surface charm, the hidden vulnerability, the ache of watching a career become a joke and being helpless to stop it." and was a box-office failure.
Also in 2007, Affleck made his feature film directorial debut with Gone Baby Gone, for which he also co‑wrote the screenplay based on the book by Dennis Lehane about two Boston-area detectives investigating a little girl's kidnapping and how it affects their lives. His brother Casey starred in the film.
Affleck appeared in Jimmy Kimmel's 2008 video I'm Fucking Ben Affleck, a response to a video by Kimmel's girlfriend, Sarah Silverman, I'm Fucking Matt Damon. Many other celebrities appeared in the video including Good Charlotte's Joel and Benji Madden, Macy Gray, Dominic Monaghan, Lance Bass, Josh Groban, Don Cheadle, Brad Pitt, Cameron Diaz, Robin Williams, Harrison Ford, Huey Lewis, Joan Jett, Pete Wentz, Christopher Mintz-Plasse, Meat Loaf, Dicky Barrett and others.

2009–present

In 2009, Affleck returned to acting, starring in three features, He's Just Not That Into You, State of Play, and Extract. In He's Just Not That Into You, a romantic comedy, he was part of an ensemble cast that included Jennifer Aniston, Drew Barrymore, Scarlett Johansson, Bradley Cooper, Justin Long, and Jennifer Connelly.
Affleck directed his second feature, The Town, an adaptation of Chuck Hogan's novel Prince of Thieves, that was both a critical and commercial success when it was released in theaters in 2010. Along with directing and co-writing the film, he was part of the cast that included Jon Hamm, Jeremy Renner, Chris Cooper and Blake Lively.
Affleck was awarded the Chairman's Award in the 2011 Palm Springs International Film Festival. Commenting on Affleck, Festival Chairman Harold Matzner said:
Affleck starred alongside Olga Kurylenko, Javier Bardem, Rachel McAdams, and Rachel Weisz in To the Wonder, a romantic drama written and directed by Terrence Malick. Filming took place in fall 2010 in Bartlesville, Oklahoma, and Pawhuska, Oklahoma, and the film was released in cinemas in 2013.
Affleck also directed his third feature, Argo, for producers George Clooney and Grant Heslov. The film tells the story of a CIA operation to save six diplomats during the 1979 Iran hostage crisis by faking a production for a large-scale science fiction film.
Also with Argo, Affleck is the first director ever who failed to earn an Oscar nomination for Best Director, yet went on to win both the Golden Globe and the Directors Guild of America awards for best directing, in 2013.
Following his work on Argo, Affleck was selected to replace David Yates as the director for the Warner Bros. adaptation of Stephen King's novel, The Stand, as Yates thought the novel was suited for a miniseries instead.

Activities

Charitable and humanitarian projects

Affleck is a philanthropist. Affleck's support of the non-profit charitable organization the A-T Children's Project,
In June 2008 he appeared in an ABC News exclusive report exploring the humanitarian crisis in the Eastern Congo. Affleck travelled to the African nation and interviewed refugees, warlords, and members of parliament. "I think the more painful something is, the more you want to distance yourself from it," he said. "I think the hard part is actually to let some of that go and to realize that when you see some of these images of people suffering in some way or another, to kind of remember that these are people who are in fact just in different circumstances than you are, but that are kind of dealing with circumstances in a pretty brave and enduring way."

Political activism

In the final weeks of the 2000 Presidential campaign, Affleck promoted the Democratic ticket, supporting Al Gore and repeatedly delivering a get-out-the-vote plea: "It's very important to vote. The president will appoint three or four Supreme Court justices." "People in my generation have a low voter turnout. One of the reasons that I'm here is to demonstrate that no matter who you are going to vote for ...I think it's important to get involved and get out and vote," he told reporters. "But I'm going to tell people to vote for Gore."
On October 28, 2000, Affleck flew with Hillary Clinton, who was running for a Senate seat, to Ithaca, New York, where he introduced her at a Cornell University rally. He told the college crowd that Clinton had been advocating for women and working families since "Rick Lazio was running around the frat house in his underwear". Lazio, then a Long Island congressman, was Clinton's Republican opponent.
On November 6, 2000, the final day of the campaign, Affleck was one of several high-profile celebrities summoned to Miami Beach by Miramax Films boss Harvey Weinstein for a late-night Gore rally, just hours before polls opened nationwide. The Gore campaign's last event, a final effort to energize South Beach voters, did not end until about 1:00 am, but Affleck flew back to New York that morning and made a surprise live appearance on The Rosie O'Donnell Show. It was 10:15 am when he made his final public pitch from a Rockefeller Center studio, noting that he was "a little bit tired ... I've been out getting involved, doing stuff and trying to get people to vote. And that's why I came by here". Also, "Today is the get-out-the-vote day and ... I think this is the time to get involved, especially the young folks who are here ... I'm about to go vote," He then said, "I am personally gonna vote for Al Gore".
As votes were tallied that night, Affleck told Salon. No matter who wins, I think it's a healthy thing for our country that so many voters have come out and participated in the process. Either way, I think the most important number will be the turnout".
In the May 2001 issue of GQ, Affleck said, "My fantasy is that someday I'm independently wealthy enough that I'm not beholden to anybody, so I can run for Congress on the grounds that everyday people should be in government". However, when he was asked about his political ambitions in an April 2009 interview to promote the 2009 film, State of Play, Affleck said, "I really like my job that I have now. Plus, unlike in Hollywood where you need one director to hire you, in politics you have to have a lot of people to vote for you. I think it's harder work. I really am happy with what I'm doing now. In fact I've never been at a place where I've felt better about going to work everyday. I'm more engaged and very, very happy."
In 2004, Affleck actively campaigned for Democratic presidential nominee John Kerry.
Affleck supports legalizing gay marriage, saying in 2004, "I don't think the government should be involved in any way in people's bedrooms or lives. With so much hatred and unpleasantness in the world, why would you want to get in the way of people who love each other marrying each other? Anybody who wants to be able to get married to anybody else should be able to. It's not my business."
Despite his opposition to George W. Bush's policies as president, in an interview with Bill O'Reilly in July 2004 Affleck said, "I had the pleasure of and the honor of meeting the President of the United States at the Daytona 500. I found him to be a collegial, affable, kind guy." He went on to say Bush "is a patriot and he's a man who believes in the country. He's trying to further an agenda he believes in. I happen to disagree with most of his policies, but I respect the man."
On December 21, 2010, Affleck appeared on NPR and criticized CEOs for making so much money. "CEOs' pay shouldn't be 200 times the average worker. It used to be nine times."
On March 14, 2012, Affleck wrote an article endorsing the Kony 2012 campaign.
On 12 March 2013, Affleck was officially censured by the parliament of New Zealand for misportraying the role of New Zealand diplomats during the 1979 Iran hostage crisis in his film Argo.
On 26 February 2014, Affleck was set to appear before the Senate Foreign Relations Committee to discuss the mass killings of the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Affleck is criticized for not having a "qualified resume" to take part in such activities–his only experience consisting of his philanthropic organization, the Eastern Congo Initiative. One aide at the House Foreign Affairs Committee claimed "People serious about resolving problems - especially problems related to life and death - want to have serious conversations with experts and leaders in the field; not celebrities." In response, to defend Affleck, another aide state "I think there's value in having someone like Ben there, he's pretty invested in the issue."

Personal life

Affleck has described himself as a lapsed Protestant.
An avid poker player, Affleck has regularly entered local events. He has been tutored by poker professionals Amir Vahedi and Annie Duke, and won the California State Poker Championship on June 20, 2004, taking home the first prize of $356,000, which qualified him for the 2004 World Poker Tour final tournament.
Affleck entered alcohol rehab in 2001, with a spokesman for the actor saying that "Ben is a self-aware and smart man who had decided that a fuller life awaits him without alcohol".

Family and relationships

Affleck had a high-profile romance with actress Gwyneth Paltrow in 1998, following her breakup with actor Brad Pitt. The negative publicity and media attention carried over to the 2003 film Gigli, which was a box-office failure.
He subsequently began seeing his Daredevil co‑star, actress Jennifer Garner, and the two were engaged after nine months of dating. Affleck and Garner were married on June 29, 2005, in Turks and Caicos, located in the Atlantic Ocean north of Haiti and the Dominican Republic.THR Cover: Confessions of Ben Affleck

Filmography

Awards and nominations



Further reading




