[[Rosamund Pike]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, Actresses from London, Alumni of Wadham College, Oxford, Best Newcomer Empire Award winners, English film actresses, English stage actresses, English television actresses, English voice actresses, National Youth Theatre members, Living people, People educated at Badminton School, 20th-century English actresses, 21st-century English actresses, People from Hammersmith

Rosamund Mary Elizabeth Pike (born 27 January 1979) is an English actress who first came to international attention when she played Bond girl Miranda Frost in Die Another Day (2002). Since then her films roles have included Jane Bennet in Pride and Prejudice (2005), Nikki Gardner in Fracture (2007), Alex in Fugitive Pieces (2007), Helen in An Education (2009), Miriam Grant-Panofsky in Barney's Version (2010), Lisa Hopkins in Made in Dagenham (2010), Kate Sumner in Johnny English Reborn (2011), Queen Andromeda in Wrath of the Titans (2012), Helen Rodin in Jack Reacher (2012) and Sam Chamberlain in The World's End (2013).

Early life

Rosamund Pike was born in Hammersmith, London, Pike's father is now a professor of music and head of Operatic Studies at the Birmingham Conservatoire.
The family travelled across Europe until she was seven, following wherever her parents' performing career took them; as a result, she is conversant in French and German. Pike won a scholarship to Badminton School in Bristol, and while appearing as Juliet in a production of Romeo and Juliet at the National Youth Theatre, was noticed by an agent who helped her embark upon a professional career.
After being turned down by every stage school she applied to, she gained a place to read English Literature at Wadham College, Oxford from which she graduated. She took a year off to pursue her acting career, garnering stage experience in David Hare's Skylight, Arthur Miller's All My Sons, and several plays by Shakespeare; she achieved an Upper Second class degree in 2001.

Career

While she was still at the university, Pike made appearances on British television shows, including A Rather English Marriage (1998),  Wives and Daughters (1999), and Love in a Cold Climate (2001), a miniseries based on Nancy Mitford's novels The Pursuit of Love and Love in a Cold Climate. She also appeared as Sarah Beaumont in an episode of the series Foyle's War, during which she was required to smoke a cigarette almost constantly.
After graduating she considered working at Waterstone's bookshop, due to a lack of acting opportunities, but was offered a role as a Bond girl and MI6 agent assigned to aid James Bond in Die Another Day. She also appeared in the special show Bond Girls Are Forever and, shortly afterwards, the BAFTA tribute to the James Bond series. Pike then played Elizabeth Malet in The Libertine (2004), co-starring Johnny Depp, which won her the Best Supporting Actress award at the British Independent Film Awards. In the same year, she portrayed Rose in The Promised Land, a film about Israel, In 2005, she appeared as Jane, the elder sister of Elizabeth (played by Keira Knightley), in Pride & Prejudice. Pike then starred in the film adaptation of Anne Michaels's novel Fugitive Pieces. She also starred as a successful attorney in the film Fracture, opposite Anthony Hopkins and Ryan Gosling.
Her stage credits include Hitchcock Blonde by Terry Johnson (in a role requiring her to appear completely nude on stage with only a pair of high heels)Mail on Sunday, 18 October 2009. and Tennessee Williams' Summer and Smoke, both in London's West End, and Gaslight at London's Old Vic Theatre.
She appeared in the British film Made in Dagenham and in the Canadian film Barney's Version where she plays Miriam. In 2010, she starred in a production of Hedda Gabler on UK tour.
Pike has recorded voicework for a lead role in the film Jackboots on Whitehall and lent her voice to a new series of James Bond audio-books, narrating The Spy Who Loved Me. In 2010 Pike played the part of Pussy Galore in the BBC Radio 4 adaptation of Fleming's Goldfinger. In 2011, Pike played the part of Kate Sumner in the 2011 Bond spoof film Johnny English Reborn, playing a psychologist and English's love interest. The film is a sequel to the 2003 film Johnny English and was a box office success, taking over $160m.
In 2012, she played the role of Queen Andromeda in the fantasy epic Wrath of the Titans. She replaced Alexa Davalos, who had played the role in Clash of the Titans and had dropped out due to a scheduling conflict.

Personal life

While she was at Oxford, Pike had a two-year relationship with actor Simon Woods.
She was engaged in 2007 to film director Joe Wright, but he called off the wedding in 2008.
In May 2012, it was reported that she gave birth to her first child, a son, Solo. The father is Robie Uniacke, whom she has been dating since December 2009.
Pike is a skilled cellist.

Filmography

Film

Television

Stage






