[[Charisma Carpenter]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Nevada, American cheerleaders, American people of Cherokee descent, American people of French descent, American people of German descent, American people of Spanish descent, American television actresses, Living people, National Football League cheerleaders, People from Chula Vista, California, People from Las Vegas, Nevada, American film actresses

Charisma Lee Carpenter (born July 23, 1970)Charisma Carpenter
is an American actress. She is best known for her role as Cordelia Chase in the popular television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer (1997–1999) and its spin-off series Angel (1999–2004), for which she was nominated for four Saturn Awards. She was a regular on ABC Family's The Lying Game.

Early life

Carpenter was born in Las Vegas, Nevada, In 1992, she moved to Los Angeles.
While swimming in San Diego in 1991, she, along with two friends, were attacked by Henry Hubbard Jr., a former San Diego police officer and serial rapist who attempted to subdue her two male friends at gunpoint. During the altercation, her two friends and Hubbard were all shot, forcing him to flee the scene. Her friends survived. Hubbard was arrested, convicted and sentenced to 56 years in prison for a series of rapes and robberies. Carpenter brought Hubbard's police-issue flashlight from the beach, which he had left at the scene, and the flashlight became a key piece of evidence against him.thewrap.com/tv/article/charisma-carpenter-survivor-violent-attack-hosting-show-about-survivors-50661

Career

Carpenter was discovered by a commercial agent while waiting tables in Los Angeles to save money for her college education. This led to her role on theatrical productions and more than twenty commercials. She made her first television role in 1994 by appearing in an episode of Baywatch. Shortly after that, she landed a starring role on Aaron Spelling's short-lived soap opera Malibu Shores.
In 1996, Carpenter auditioned for the title role in the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer but instead was cast as Cordelia Chase," a snobby and popular high school student. After three seasons on Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Carpenter was offered an even larger role as the same character on the spin-off series Angel along with David Boreanaz. She played Cordelia Chase for four seasons on Angel. Although her character leaves the series during Angels fourth season, Carpenter returned for the 100th episode in the fifth and final season because she felt the character's fans deserved closure.
In 2004, Carpenter had a three episode guest appearance on the TV show Charmed as a psychic demon but instead chose to do a guest appearance on the show Back to You as well as a recurring role on the short-lived series Big Shots. Carpenter also had a guest appearance in an April 2009 episode of CSI: Crime Scene Investigation.
On March 20, 2008, Paley Fest hosted a Buffy the Vampire Slayer reunion. Carpenter attended the event alongside Buffy creator Joss Whedon, producers Marti Noxon and David Greenwalt, and other Buffy alumni including Sarah Michelle Gellar, Nicholas Brendon, James Marsters, Emma Caulfield, Amber Benson, Seth Green, and Michelle Trachtenberg.
Carpenter has starred in an assortment of made-for-TV and direct-to-video movies including the sex comedy What Boys Like, the horror film Voodoo Moon, and the romantic comedies See Jane Date and Relative Chaos on ABC Family (the latter of which co-starred fellow Buffy alum Nicholas Brendon). She also appeared in the mysteries Flirting with Danger and Cheaters' Club on Lifetime Television and the Syfy movie House of Bones broadcast in 2010, around the same time as her guest spot in Legend of the Seeker.
Also in 2009, Carpenter starred in production company Red Sparrow's first film, Psychosis, which was released in early 2011. In August 2010, she had a supporting role in Sylvester Stallone's The Expendables.
She appeared in an episode of the seventh season of Supernatural alongside Buffy co-star James Marsters.
In 2011, Carpenter landed a recurring role in ABC Family's drama The Lying Game. She was upgraded to a series regular for the second season.
In 2012, Carpenter reprised her role as Lacy in The Expendables 2.
On August 28, 2013, "Surviving Evil" (original working title: "I Survived Evil")

Public image

Carpenter was named #31 on Askmen.com's Top 99 Most Desirable Women 2002
In the June 2004 issue of Playboy magazine, Carpenter appeared on the cover and in a ten-page nude layout. When asked by People magazine in 2005 about her nude pictorial and whether or not she would ever pose for Playboy again, she replied, "I don't know. I did Playboy for a very specific reason. Not only was it a good financial move, but it was about the place I was at in my life. I had just had my son and I'd gained 50 lbs. during pregnancy. I wanted to get back to my old self. I wanted to feel desirable and sexy. So I thought, 'What if I went full throttle?'

Personal life

Carpenter married Damian Hardy on October 5, 2002.

Filmography

Film

Television






