[[City manager]]

CATEGORIES: Government occupations, Management occupations, Titles, Local government in the United States, Heads of local government

A city manager is an official appointed as the administrative manager of a city, in a council-manager form of city government. Local officials serving in this position are sometimes referred to as the chief executive officer (CEO) or chief administrative officer (CAO) in some municipalities.Svara, James H. and Kimberly L. Nelson. (2008, August). Taking Stock of the Council-Manager Form at 100. Public Management Magazine, pp 6-14, at: 

History

Most sources trace the first city manager to Staunton, Virginia in 1908. Some of the other cities that were among the first to employ a manager were Sumter, South Carolina (1912) and Dayton, Ohio (1914). The first "City Manager's Association" meeting of eight city managers was in December 1914. The city manager, operating under the council-manager government form, was created in part to remove city government from the power of the political parties, and place management of the city into the hands of an outside expert who was usually a business manager or engineer, with the hope that the city manager would remain neutral to city politics. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007
By the end of the early twentieth century, around forty-five cities in the United States used a city manager form of government.

Responsibilities

As the top appointed official in the city, the city manager is typically responsible for most if not all of the day-to-day administrative operations of the municipality, in addition to other expectations.
Some of the basic roles, responsibilities, and powers of a city manager include:
The responsibilities may vary depending upon charter provisions and other local or state laws, rules, and regulations. In addition, many states, such as the states of New Hampshire and Missouri, have codified in law the minimum functions a local "manager" must perform.MRS NH RSA
Manager members of the ICMA are bound by a rather rigid and strongly enforced code of ethics that was originally established in 1924. Since that time the code had been up-dated/revised on seven occasions, the latest taking place in 1998. The updates have taken into account the evolving duties, responsibilities, and expectations of the profession; however the core dictate of the body of the code--"to integrity; public service; seek no favor; exemplary conduct in both personal and professional matters; respect the role and contributions of elected officials; exercise the independence to do what is right; political neutrality; serve the public equitably and governing body members equally; keep the community informed about local government matters; and support and lead our employ-ees"—have not changed since the first edition.ICMA Code of Ethics page

Profile

In the early years of the profession, most managers came from the ranks of the engineering professions. (1974). The Rise of the City Manager: A Public Professional in Local Government. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. Today the typical and preferred background and education for the beginning municipal manager is a master's degree in Public Administration (MPA) and at least several years' experience as a department head in local government or as an assistant city manager. As of 2005 more than 60% of those in the profession had a MPA, MBA, or other related higher-level degree.ICMA statistics
The average tenure of a manager is now 7–8 years and has risen gradually over the years. Tenures tend to be less in smaller communities and higher in larger ones, and they tend to vary as well depending on the region of the country. Bosse. (2005). "Tenure of City Managers: Examining the Dual Meanings of 'Average Tenure'." State & Local Government Review, Vol. 37, No. 1, pp. 61-71. at: 
Traditionally, elected officials appoint city managers that represented the governing body.  Minority managers had to go to minority communities to get a city manager job.  



Notes

Further reading




