[[Rhonda Shear]]

CATEGORIES: 1954 births, American film actresses, American stand-up comedians, American television actresses, American television personalities, Jewish American actresses, Living people, Loyola University New Orleans alumni, Miss USA delegates, Actresses from New Orleans, Louisiana, American women comedians, GMTV presenters and reporters

Rhonda Shear (born November 12, 1954) is an American television personality, comedian, and actress.

Early life

Shear was born Rhonda Honey Shear in New Orleans, Louisiana, to a Jewish American family. She attended Loyola University, earning a B.A. in Communications. Among her other titles was Queen of the Floral Trail Society. While she sported the latter title, she posed fully clothed for Playboy, but the organizers of that title were opposed to her appearing in that magazine, and took the title away from her. Shear gained notoriety after this episode.forbes.

Career

Shear is best known for her role as a host of the USA Network's 1980s and '90s weekend B-movie show, USA Up All Night. From 1991 to 1998 (Over 450 episodes), she hosted in-studio and on-location segments that typically aired on Friday nights, replacing comedian Caroline Schlitt (the Friday night host for the show's first few years). She also occasionally hosted the show with her Saturday counterpart, Gilbert Gottfried, in addition to making cameos on his edition. Her trademark manner of speaking the show's title, by raising her voice an octave when saying the word "Up", became a catch phrase. Shear also briefly hosted a comedy program called Spotlight Cafe on WWOR-TV in Secaucus, NJ, hosted previously by comic Judy Tenuta.
In June 1991, Shear posed in Playboy magazine's Funny Girls pictorial. In October 1993, she appeared in her own Playboy pictorial titled "Rhonda Is Up All Night".
Shear also co-starred in numerous sitcoms from playing the Fonz's girlfriend on Happy Days to the sexy neighbor on Married... with Children, before making her mark as a comedian.  She then made her way into stand-up comedy, headlining as a successful comedian in Las Vegas, Los Angeles and New York, and eventually touring across the country with her popular "Comedy PJ Party", an on-stage slumber party with a number of comedic talents.

Shear Intimates LLC

In 2001, Rhonda Shear, with her husband Van Fagan, started a new career as the designer and entrepreneur behind Shear Enterprises, LLC and Rhonda Shear Intimates.  Shear began designing from her home office in 2003 with just 3 employees soon launching the Rhonda Shear Intimates line at HSN. She was later picked up on shopping networks around the world, including The Shopping Channel (Canada) and Ideal World Shopping (U.K.). Rhonda Shear Intimates has continued to grow and is now represented in over 40 countries with over 25 employees in her St. Petersburg, Florida offices (her home since 2005). In 2010, Shear designed the Ahh Bra, and the product was an overnight success.  The Ahh Bra is now the #1 selling bra worldwide with over 25 million sold internationally. In 2011 the company had 72 million dollars in sales.forbes.

Charity Work

In 2011, Shear was the event chair and a sponsor for American Cancer Society's Making Strides: Put on Your Pink Bra Event. Between speaking engagements, creating a giant ﬂying bra for the RedBull Flugtag, and helping with fundraising events, Shear got the chance to meet with women struggling in treatment or following surgery who needed bras that were affordable, feminine, and comfortable.  She was struck by their stories, strength, and sense of community. Shear stays connected by donating product every month to women's shelters around the country and continuing her work nationwide with various charitable organizations that fund research and empower women.forbes.com/sites/danschawbel/2012/06/14/rhonda-shear-from-playboy-model-to-millionaire-entrepreneur/2/

Credits

Filmography

Discography

Television

Awards & Recognitions






