[[Ariana Afghan Airlines]]

CATEGORIES: Airlines of Afghanistan, Airlines established in 1955, Ariana Afghan Airlines, Former IATA members, Government-owned airlines

Ariana Afghan Airlines Co. Ltd. (
Ariana Afghan Airlines is on the list of air carriers banned in the European Union .

History

Early years

The airline was set up on 27 January 1955. It was established as Aryana Airlines with the assistance of Indamer Co. Ltd., which initially held a 49% interest, and the government of Afghanistan owned the balance. At the beginning, services were operated to Bahrain, India, Iran, and Lebanon, with a fleet of three Douglas DC-3s. In 1957, Pan American World Airways became the minor shareholder of the airline when it took over the 49% interest from Indamer. Domestic scheduled services started the same year. By  from US aid to Afghanistan was used to capitalise the company.
By , the airline had 650 employees. At this time, the fleet comprised one Boeing 727-100C, one CV-440, one DC-3 and two Douglas DC-6s that worked on routes serving the Middle East, India, Pakistan, the USSR, and Istanbul, Frankfurt and London. Domestic services were then operated by Bakhtar Alwatana, which was established by the government in 1967 to this specific purpose.
The carrier's first widebody aircraft, a McDonnell Douglas DC-10-30, entered the fleet in early 

Taliban era

After the end of the Soviet war in 1989 and collapse of Najibullah's government, the Taliban took over Kabul in 1996. Afghanistan faced substantial economic sanctions from the international sector during the Taliban regime. The sanctions, along with the Taliban government's control of the company and the grounding of many of the carrier's international flights, had a devastating effect on the economic health of the company through the 1990s. The fleet was reduced to only a handful of Russian and Ukrainian built An-26s, Yakovlev Yak-40s and three Boeing 727s, which were used on the longest domestic routes. In October 1996, Pakistan provided a temporary maintenance and operational base at Karachi. With no overseas assets, by 1999 Ariana's international operations consisted of flights to Dubai only; also, limited cargo flights continued into China's western provinces. However, sanctions imposed by UN Security Council Resolution 1267 forced the airline company to suspend overseas operations. In , the airline was grounded completely.
According to the Los Angeles Times:
According to people interviewed by the Los Angeles Times, Viktor Bout's companies helped in running the airline. The Los Angeles Times. 19 May 2002

Post-Taliban era

Following the overthrow of the Taliban government during Operation Enduring Freedom, Ariana began to rebuild its operations in . About a month later, the UN sanctions were finally lifted, permitting the airline to resume international routes again.
In 2002, the government of India gave the carrier a gift of three ex-Air India Airbus A300s. Ariana's first international passenger flight since 1999 landed at Indira Gandhi International Airport in  the same year, respectively. In 2005, India signed an agreement on aviation cooperation with Afghanistan, with Air India training some 50 officials for Ariana.

EU ban

Ariana was mostly banned from flying into European Union airspace in .

Destinations

Fleet

The Ariana Afghan Airlines fleet includes the following aircraft (as of November 2013):Ariana Afghan Fleet

Historic

Ariana operated the following equipment all through its history:

Accidents and incidents

According to Aviation Safety Network,  The following list includes occurrences that led to at least one fatality, resulted in a write-off of the aircraft involved, or both.





}}[/ref]
[ref]
[/ref]







|2}}

Further reading




