[[Vienna International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in Austria, Wien-Umgebung District, Schwechat, Transport in Vienna, Buildings and structures in Lower Austria

Vienna International Airport (

History

Originally built as a military airport in 1938, and used during World War II as the Heinkel firm's southern military aircraft design and production complex, or Heinkel-Süd facility, it was taken over by the British in 1945. In 1954, the Betriebsgesellschaft was founded, and the airport replaced Aspern as Vienna's (and Austria's) principal aerodrome. There was just one runway, which in 1959 was expanded to measure . The erection of the new airport building starting in 1959. In 1972 another runway was built. In 1982 the airport was connected to the national motorway network (Ostautobahn).
The airport received Olympic teams as Austria has twice hosted the Winter Olympics. Pope John Paul II also used the airport during his visits to Austria. On December 27, 1985, the El Al ticket counter was attacked by Palestinians terrorists. (See Rome and Vienna Airport Attacks.) In 1986 the enlarged arrivals hall was opened, and in 1988 Pier East with 8 jetbridges.
 The shares are part of the Austrian Traded Index.
In 1992, the new Terminal 1 (today: Check-In 1) was opened and a year later the shopping area around the plaza in the transit area of the B, C and D gates. In 1996 Pier West with 12 jetbridges got in operation. Until its closing in 2003 the airport featured a Harrods. In 2006 the  tall control tower started operating. It allows a free overview of the entire airport area and offers a night laser show, which should welcome the passengers even from the aircraft. 2004–2007 an Office Park had been erected offering 69.000m² of rentable space. A VIP- and general aviation-terminal, including a separated apron, opened in 2006.
On June 5, 2012, the new Austrian Star Alliance terminal (formerly Skylink) was opened, which enables Vienna Airport to handle 30 million passengers per year. Construction started in 2004 and was suspended due to projected cost increases in 2009, but resumed in 2010. The maximum planned costs totaled less than € 770 million. Following concerns over the mismanagement of the Skylink project, chief executive Herbert Kaufman agreed to resign at the end of December 2010. The new building with its North Pier has 17 jetbridges and makes the airport capable of handling more aircraft, although further upgrades will be required to accommodate the Airbus A380.

Terminal

Vienna International Airport has one terminal separated into four check-in areas which connect to five concourses. Between 2004 and 2012, a new terminal building called Austrian Star Alliance Terminal (formerly known as Skylink) was built, where Check-in 3 and the new central arrivals hall for all terminal areas are now located.

Check-In Areas

Concourses

Planned expansion

Because of its constant growth in passenger numbers and freight Austria's biggest airport is undergoing major construction works with several new and extensively adapted buildings since 2004. Among others, major projects like the new 109-metre tall tower and the terminal expansion Check-in 3 have been completed by now while others are still planned or ongoing:

Renovations

Until January 2013 check-in 1 has been refurbished. Further construction work will concern pier east and pier west. The B and C-gates already got a central security control in June 2012. The airport's management will decide by spring 2014 either to refurbish or demolish and rebuild the old check-in 2.

Expanded railway station

The underground railway station will be completely expanded to offer space for long-distance trains. With the completion of the new Vienna central station in 2015, the airport will also get connected from there. It will allow long-distance trains and perhaps a new S-Bahn line to reach the airport, so that the frequency of S-Bahn trains becomes higher than the current 30 minutes.

Third runway

A third runway is to be constructed 

Airlines and destinations

Passenger

Cargo

Destinations map

Statistics

Ground transportation

Train

The Vienna S-Bahn line S7 provides a local service to the city centre. S-Bahn tickets also allow further travel by underground, bus or tram. The more expensive City Airport Train connects the airport directly to Wien Mitte railway station, close to the city centre, in just 16 minutes.

Car

The airport lies directly adjacent to motorway A4 which leads from central Vienna to Budapest. It has its own exit Exit named Flughafen Wien-Schwechat. Bratislava can be reached via motorway A6 which splits from the A4 in the east. Taxis and car rental facilities are available at the airport.

Bus

Furthermore there are also buses from the airport to various places in Vienna and to other cities including Bratislava, Budapest and Brno.

Accidents and incidents








