[[Nickelback]]

CATEGORIES: Atlantic Records artists, Canadian post-grunge groups, Juno Award winners, Musical groups established in 1995, Musical groups from Alberta, Musical quartets, Nickelback, Roadrunner Records artists, Canadian rock music groups, Canadian alternative metal musical groups, Canadian hard rock musical groups, Canadian heavy metal musical groups, Pop rock groups, Canadian alternative rock groups

Nickelback is a Canadian rock band formed in 1995 in Hanna, Alberta. The band is composed of lead guitarist and lead vocalist Chad Kroeger, rhythm guitarist, keyboardist and backing vocalist Ryan Peake, bassist Mike Kroeger, and drummer Daniel Adair. The band went through a few drummer changes between 1995 and 2005, achieving its current form when Adair replaced drummer Ryan Vikedal.
Nickelback is one of the most commercially successful Canadian groups, having sold more than 50 million albums worldwide
The band signed with Roadrunner Records in 1999 and re-released their once-independent album The State.
The band is based in Vancouver, Canada. The band's original domestic signing was with EMI Canada. They subsequently obtained an American deal with global distribution via Roadrunner Records. For the release of their seventh album, the band parted from EMI Canada and signed a new Canadian domestic distribution deal with Universal Music Canada.

History

Curb and The State (1995–2000)

The band was formed in the early 1990s as a cover band called the "Village Idiots" by Chad Kroeger, Ryan Peake, Mike Kroeger, and Brandon Kroeger. The band performed covers of songs from Led Zeppelin and Metallica. Chad Kroeger then asked his step-father to give him $4,000 so that the band could record their first demo, which was Hesher (EP). In Summer 1998, Ryan Vikedal joined the band.
Roadrunner A&R Ron Burman told HitQuarters that one of his West Coast scouts sent him the self-released album and, suitably impressed, he travelled to Vancouver to see them perform live. Although an unknown property in the industry at the time, the venue was packed out. In Burman's words: "I immediately got the chills! I thought their song "Leader of Men" was a smash hit." Off the stage he was impressed by their industry and initiative in managing their career: Despite this, it still took Burman three months for him to convince his label bosses' to approve the signing, a decision that would mark Roadrunner's first move into mainstream rock. Nickelback signed a record deal with EMI and Roadrunner Records in 1999.
The State, was released by Nickelback in 2000 by Roadrunner Records and EMI Canada. The State, was released in Europe in 2001. It spawned 4 singles: "Old Enough", "Worthy To Say", "Leader of Men" and "Breathe", the last two being Top 10 rock hits. The album was certified platinum status in 2008, after the success of their later albums.

Silver Side Up, The Long Road (2001–04)

Around 2001 Chad Kroeger started "studying every piece, everything sonically, everything lyrically, everything musically, chord structure. I would dissect every single song that I would hear on the radio or every song that had ever done well on a chart and I would say, 'Why did this do well?'" Nickelback's single How You Remind Me, Kroeger told Bliss, sold so well because it was about romantic relationships, a universal subject, and contained memorable hooks.

To record their third album Silver Side Up, Nickelback collaborated with producer Rick Parashar. The album was written before the release The State and was recorded at the same studio.
In 2002, Chad Kroeger collaborated with Josey Scott on the Spider-Man theme song, "Hero". This recording also featured Tyler Connolly, Mike Kroeger, Matt Cameron, and Jeremy Taggart. In 2002, Nickelback released their first DVD Live at Home.
In 2003, Nickelback released The Long Road. The album was certified 3x Platinum by the RIAA in March 2005 and it had sold 3,591,000 copies as of April 2011.
It was ranked No. 157 on Billboard's 200 Albums of the Decade. The band also released "Feelin' Way Too Damn Good" as a single, which peaked at number 3 on the Mainstream Rock Charts. "Figured You Out" was also released as a single and topped the Mainstream Rock Charts for 13 consecutive weeks.

All the Right Reasons (2005–07)

In 2005, the band confirmed that their drummer Ryan Vikedal had left the band.
Also, the band spent much time of 2006 and 2007 touring across the globe. The band opened for Bon Jovi on the European leg of the tour.
Chad Kroeger was arrested in the Surrey, British Columbia in June and charged with drunken driving. His attorney entered a plea of not guilty on his behalf at a court hearing in August. In November 2006, the band won an American Music Award for best pop/rock album, surprising the band itself. "We just kinda showed up because we were supposed to give one of these away tonight," Chad Kroeger said after receiving the award. Chad Kroeger added he had thought the Red Hot Chili Peppers would win the award.
It included appearances by Billy Gibbons of ZZ Top, who played a guitar solo on the song "Follow You Home" and sang backing vocals on "Rock Star"—and a posthumously sampled appearance by Chad Kroeger's friend Dimebag Darrell from Pantera, culled from guitar outtakes. The band also used more acoustic sound on some songs. "Savin' Me," for instance, included strings and piano as well as guitars. "We were a little scared of using piano," Chad Kroeger said in a biography on the band's website. "We just didn't think it was very rock and roll." But once they heard the result, he added, they liked it. All the Right Reasons had sold over 7 million copies in the US to June 19, 2010.
The group was inducted into Canada's Walk of Fame in 2007.

Dark Horse (2008–10)

After taking much of 2007 off, the band started recording a new album in earnest. In July 2008, the band signed with Live Nation for three touring and album cycles, with an option for a fourth.
On September 4, 2008, Roadrunner Records announced that the first single from the upcoming album would be "If Today Was Your Last Day", released on September 30, 2008. However, the song was replaced by "Gotta Be Somebody".com. Retrieved September 25, 2008. The new album, produced by Mutt Lange and titled Dark Horse, was released on November 18, 2008.
On November 26, 2008, the band announce the tour for  the support of the album. Livenation produced the tour and the band kicked off on Nashville, Tennessee, with Seether, and Saving Abel as their opening acts.
The album also remained in the top 20 on the Billboard 200 for weeks after its release. billboard. Accessed on December 15, 2008.  On January 29, 2010 they released a Tap-Tap rhythm game for on the App Store, contrary to the band's prior comments against other music related video games such as Guitar Hero.
On February 28, 2010, Nickelback gave a performance at the beginning of the concert portion of the 2010 Winter Olympics closing ceremony, performing "Burn It to the Ground". On October 2010 Nickelback finished their Dark Horse Tour.

Here and Now (2011–present)

Chad Kroeger said in an interview with Billboard.
Nickelback announced their new album, Here and Now, on September 8, 2011, along with its two lead singles, "Bottoms Up" and "When We Stand Together". Kroeger said "We're four people who love making music, the way we like to make it. We entered the studio this year with a vision, and it all came together. We're extremely happy with the results, and can't wait to share them with our fans." The album was released on November 21, 2011, with the band calling it "Nickelblack Monday", a play on Nickelback and Black Monday.
Here and Now peaked at number two on the Billboard 200, selling 226,714 copies in its first week of release, with Christmas by Michael Bublé taking number one by a margin of only 419 copies.
As part of promotion for the album, Nickelback was booked to perform at the halftime shows for both an NFL Thanksgiving Day game at Ford Field in Detroit on November 24, and the 99th Grey Cup in the band's hometown of Vancouver on November 27.
Nickelback announced their Here and Now Tour on January 11, 2012, they are going to tour with  Seether, Bush and My Darkest Days. The band released a music video for their fourth single off of the album Lullaby.
According to an interview with Chad Kroeger, the band planned to release a greatest hits album in 2013 and a new album in 2014. The band officially announced the compilation album The Best of Nickelback Volume 1 through social media on October 3, 2013.

Musical styles

Nickelback has been described as various genres, including hard rock,

Reception

Review aggregator Metacritic reports that four of their six most recent studio albums since becoming a mainstream act, The Long Road, All the Right Reasons, Dark Horse, and Here and Now, have scores of 62, 41, 49, and 51, respectively, out of 100.
AllMusic reviewer Liana Jones complimented Nickelback after their commercial breakthrough, Silver Side Up; "what gives the group an upper hand over its peers is intensity and raw passion... Nickelback ups the ante by offering realistic storytelling that listeners can relate to." support the band.
The band has been criticized over their over-use of themes involving "strippers, sex, prostitutes, drugs, sex, drinking and sex",

Discography

Band members

Awards








