[[Abraham in Islam]]

CATEGORIES: Muslim views of biblical figures, Prophets of Islam, Abraham

Ibrâhîm ( In this sense, Abraham has been described as representing "primordial man in universal surrender to the Divine Reality before its fragmentation into religions separated from each other by differences in form". Glasse, p. 18 The Islamic holy day Eid al-Adha is celebrated in memory of the bravery of Abraham, and Muslims perform the pilgrimage to pay homage at the Kaaba which Abraham had set up and reformed. Glasse, Kaaba
Muslims believe that the prophet Abraham became the leader of the righteous in his time and it was through him that the people of both Arabia and Israel came. Abraham, in the belief of Islam, was instrumental in cleansing the world of idolatry at the time. Paganism was cleared out by Abraham in both Arabia and Canaan. He spiritually purified both places as well as physically sanctifying the houses of worship. Abraham and Ismail (Ishmael) further established the rites of pilgrimage, or Hajj, which are still followed by Muslims today. Muslims maintain that Abraham further asked God to bless both the lines of his progeny, of Ismail (Ishmael) and Ishaq (Isaac), and to keep all of his descendants in the protection of God.

Family

Muslims maintain that Abraham's father was Azar ( which could be derived from the Syriac Athar,Geiger 1898 Judaism and Islam: A Prize Essay.,p. 100 who is known in the Hebrew Bible as Terah. Commentators and scholars believed that Abraham himself had many children, but Ismail (Ishmael) and Ishaq (Isaac) were the only two who became prophets. Abraham's two wives are believed to have been Sarah and Hājar (Hagar), the latter of whom was originally Sarah's handmaiden. "Muhammad". House of God Chap. I (cf. Index: "Abraham"), Suhail Academy Co. Abraham's nephew is said to have been the messenger Lut (Lot), who was one of the other people who migrated with Abraham out of their community. Abraham himself is said to have been of Semitic lineage, being a descendant of Nuh (Noah) through his son Shem."Ibrahim". Encyclopedia of Islam, Online version.

Miracles

Abraham encountered several miracles of God during his lifetime. The Quran records a few main miracles, although different interpretations have been attributed to the passages. Some of the miracles recorded in the Quran are:
The first passage has been interpreted both literally, allegorically and otherwise. Although some commentators feel that this passage referred to a physical miracle, where Abraham was physically shown the entire kingdom of Heaven (Jannah),The Book of Certainty, M. Lings, S. Academy Publishing others have felt that it refers to the spiritual understanding of Abraham; these latter scholars maintain that the Chaldeans were skilled in the observance of the stars, but Abraham, who lived amongst them, saw beyond the physical world and into a higher spiritual realm. The second passage has one mainstream interpretation amongst the Quranic commentators, that Abraham took four birds and cut them up, placing pieces of each on nearby hills; when he called out to them, each piece joined and four birds flew back to Abraham. As the physical cutting of the birds is not implied in the passage, some commentators have offered alternative interpretations, but all maintain that the miracle was for the same demonstrative purpose to show Abraham the power God has to raise the dead to life. 285 The third passage has also been interpreted both literally and metaphorically, or in some cases both. Commentators state that the 'fire' refers to main aspects. They maintained that, firstly, the fire referred to the physical flame, from which Abraham was saved unharmed. The commentators further stated that, secondly, the fire referred to the 'fire of persecution', from which Abraham was saved, as he left his people after this with his wife Sarah and his nephew Lot. 2703

Personality and wisdom

Abraham's personality and character is one of the most in-depth in the whole Quran, and Abraham is specifically mentioned as being a kind and compassionate man. Despite this, the Quran states that Abraham in his later years prayed to God to forgive the sins of all his descendants and his parents. Muslims have frequently cited Abraham's character as an example of how kind one must be towards people, and especially one's own parents. A similar example of Abraham's compassionate nature is demonstrated when Abraham began to pray for the people of Sodom and Gomorrah after hearing of God's plan for them. Although God told Abraham that His plan was the final word, and therefore Abraham's prayers would be of no effect, the Quran nonetheless reinforces Abraham's kind nature through this particular event. Azzam, Suhail Academy Co.
The Quran discusses a certain conversation between an unrighteous ruler and Abraham. Although identification for the unnamed king has been recognized as being least important in the narrative, many historical sources suggest that it was Nimrod,History of the Prophets and Kings, Tabari, Vol. I: Prophets and Patriarchs the king who had ordered the building of the Tower of Babel. According to the narrative, the king became extremely arrogant due to his wealth and power, to the point that he made the claim that he possessed the power of Creation. Claiming divinity for himself, the king quarreled with Abraham but the Quran describes that he only deepened in confusion. According to the Quran, Abraham told the king that it is God who makes the sun rise and set everyday, which rendered the king confounded. This event has been noted as particularly important because, in the Muslim perspective, it almost foreshadowed the prophetic careers of future prophets, most significantly the career of Moses. Abraham's quarrel with the king has been interpreted by some to be a precursor to Moses's preaching to Pharaoh. Just as the ruler who argued against Abraham claimed divinity for himself, so did the Pharaoh of the Exodus, who refused to hear the call of Moses and perished in the Red Sea. In this particular incident, scholars have further commented on Abraham's wisdom in employing "rational, wise and target-oriented" speech, as opposed to pointless arguments. web.
Abraham, in the eyes of many Muslims, also symbolized the highest moral values essential to any person. The Quran details the account of the angels coming to Abraham to tell him of the birth of Isaac. It says that, as soon as Abraham saw the messengers, he "hastened to entertain them with a roasted calf." This action has been interpreted by all the scholars as exemplary; many scholars have commentated upon this one action, saying that it symbolizes Abraham's exceedingly high moral level and thus is a model for how men should act in a similar situation. This incident has only further heightened the "compassionate" character of Abraham in Muslim theology. web.

Title

Khalilullah

Abraham is given the title Khalilullah ( The Quran says:

This particular title of Abraham is so famous in Muslim culture and tradition that, in the areas in and around Mecca, Abraham is often referred to solely as The Friend. Lings. Archetype Books This title of Friend of God is not exclusive to Islamic theology. Although the other religious traditions do not stress upon it, Abraham is called a Friend of God in the second Book of Chronicles and the Book of Isaiah in the Hebrew Bible (Old Testament)

Abraham and the Kaaba

One of Abraham's most important features in Islamic theology is his role as the constructor of the Kabba. Although tradition recounts that Adam constructed the original Kabba, which was demolished by the Great Flood at the time of Noah, Abraham is believed to have rebuilt it in its original form. The Quran, in the Muslim perspective, merely confirms or reinforces the laws of pilgrimage. The rites were instituted by Abraham and for all Muslims, as they perform the pilgrimage, the event is a way to return to the perfection of Abraham's faith. Lings, pg. 39, Archetype Just as Medina is referred to as the "City of the Prophet Muhammad" or simply the "City of Muhammad", Mecca is frequently cited as the "City of Abraham", because Abraham's reformation of the purified monotheistic faith took place purely in Mecca. Glasse, Kaaba, Suhail Academy

Scrolls of Abraham

The Quran refers to certain Scrolls of Abraham, which have alternatively been translated as the Books of Abraham. All Muslim scholars have generally agreed that no scrolls of Abraham survive, and therefore this is a reference to a lost body of scripture.A-Z of Prophets in Islam and Judaism, B. M. Wheeler, Abraham The Scrolls of Abraham are understood by Muslims to refer to certain revelations Abraham received, which he would have then transmitted to writing. The exact contents of the revelation are not described in the Quran.
The 87th chapter of the Quran, sura Al-Ala, concludes saying the subject matter of the sura has been in the earlier scriptures of Abraham and Moses. It is slightly indicative of what were in the previous scriptures, according to Islam:

Chapter 53 of the Quran, sura An-Najm, mentions some more subject matters of the earlier scriptures of Abraham and Moses.

Yet some scholars its authorship to Abraham. Other scholars, however, wrote of a certain Testament of Abraham, which they explained was available at the time of Muhammad. And if those would have existed, according to clear instructions in the Quran and hadith, no verification should take place.
The Quran contains numerous references to Abraham, his life, prayers and traditions and has a dedicated chapter named Ibrahim. Therefore verifying the scrolls of Abraham from other traditions, especially from Judaism has no basis. The advent of Islam was due to the alteration of all previous scriptures. On a relevant note, sura Al-Kahf was revealed as an answer from God to the Jews who inquired of Muhammad about past events. Here God directly instructed Muhammad in sura Al-Kahf, not to consult the Jews for verifying the three stories about which they inquired.

The reason being God declaring He Himself is relating what needs to be verified in another verse of sura Al-Kahf:

Regarding consultation with the People of the Book, it is also narrated by Abu Hurairah in Hadith literature:

Therefore relating to any ascription of the Scrolls of Abraham by the people of the book is not required.

Burial place

Muslims believe that Abraham was buried, along with his wife Sarah, at the Cave of the Patriarchs in Hebron. Known to Muslims as the Sanctuary of Abraham it is also thought to be the burial site of Isaac, his wife Rebecca and Jacob and his wife Leah.

Narrative in the Quran

References to Abraham in the Quran

There are numerous references to Abraham in the Quran, including, twice, to the Scrolls of Abraham; and the miracle of the dead birds.
All these events and more have been discussed with more details in Muslim tradition, and especially in the Stories of the Prophets and works of universal Islamic theology. An important Islamic religious holiday, Eid al-Adha, commemorates Abraham's willingness to sacrifice his son Ishmael as an act of obedience to God, before God intervened to provide him with a sheep to sacrifice instead.J. Eisenberg, EI, Ibrahim

Verses in the Quran



Notes



Further reading

=General=

=Abraham and the Kaaba=

=Abraham's life=




