[[New Jersey Route 66]]

CATEGORIES: Transportation in Monmouth County, New Jersey, State highways in New Jersey

Route 66 is a state highway located in Monmouth County, New Jersey, United States. It runs  between Route 33 in Tinton Falls and Route 35 at County Route 16 on the border of Ocean Township and Neptune Township, just to the west of Asbury Park.  The route serves as an important connector between the Garden State Parkway to the west and Route 18 and Asbury Park to the east. It runs concurrent with County Route 16 from Brown/Wayside Roads to the eastern terminus at Route 35. Route 66, which varies from a two-lane undivided road to a four-lane divided highway, passes through commercial areas for most of its length with some wooded areas. The route was created in 1953, replacing what had been Route 33-35 Link. There is currently a proposal to widen the two-lane portion between Jumping Brook Road and Wayside Road in order to better handle the traffic that uses this road.

Route description

Route 66 begins at an intersection with Route 33 in Tinton Falls, heading to the northeast as a  After the intersection with Jumping Brook Road, the divided highway ends and Route 66 becomes a two-lane undivided road.  The route heads through a patch of woods before passing more businesses and coming to an intersection with County Route 16 (Asbury Avenue). Here, the road becomes a four-lane divided highway again and heads east along the border of Ocean Township to the north and Neptune Township to the south, concurrent with County Route 16.  It passes through woodland before coming to a cloverleaf interchange with Route 18. Past Route 18, the road heads into commercial areas again, with the defunct Seaview Square Mall located to the north of the route. Route 66 ends at the Asbury Park Circle with Route 35, where County Route 16 continues east toward Asbury Park on Asbury Avenue.

History

thumb|200px|Signage where County Route 16 intersects Route 66Route 66 was legislated in the 1953 New Jersey state highway renumbering to replace what had been Route 33-35 Link.

Major intersections








