[[Arecibo Observatory]]

CATEGORIES: Buildings and structures completed in 1963, Astronomical observatories in Puerto Rico, Historic districts in Puerto Rico, Historic Mechanical Engineering Landmarks, National Register of Historic Places in Puerto Rico, National Science Foundation, Radio telescopes, Search for extraterrestrial intelligence, Science museums in Puerto Rico, University museums in Puerto Rico, Museums in Arecibo, Puerto Rico, SRI International

The Arecibo Observatory is a radio telescope in the municipality of Arecibo, Puerto Rico. This observatory is operated by SRI International, USRA and UMET, under cooperative agreement with the National Science Foundation (NSF). This observatory is also called the National Astronomy and Ionosphere Center, although "NAIC" refers to both the observatory and the staff that operates it.  From its construction in the 1960s until 2011, the observatory was managed by Cornell University.
The observatory's  radio telescope is the world's largest single-aperture telescope. It is used in three major areas of research: radio astronomy, aeronomy, and radar astronomy. Scientists who want to use the telescope submit proposals that are evaluated by an independent scientific board.
The telescope has made appearances in motion picture and television productions and got more recognition in 1999 when it began to collect data for the SETI@home project. It has been listed on the American National Register of Historic Places beginning in 2008.

Ángel Ramos Foundation Visitor Center

Opened in 1997, the Ángel Ramos Foundation Visitor Center  The center is named after the financial foundation that honors Ángel Ramos, the owner of the El Mundo newspaper and the founder of Telemundo. This foundation provided half of the money to build the visitors center, with the rest coming from private donations and from Cornell University. It is normally open Wednesday-Sunday, with additional opening hours on many holidays and school breaks. As of 2012, the admission fee is $10.00 for adults and $6.00 for seniors and children under 10.

General information

The main collecting dish is 
The telescope has three radar transmitters, with effective isotropic radiated powers of 20 TW at 2380 MHz, 2.5 TW (pulse peak) at 430 MHz, and 300 MW at 47 MHz.
The telescope is a spherical reflector of radius 870 ft, not a parabolic reflector. To aim the telescope, the receiver is moved to intercept signals reflected from different directions by the spherical dish surface. A parabolic mirror would have varying astigmatism when the receiver is off the focal point, but the error of a spherical mirror is the same in every direction.
The receiver is on a 900-ton platform suspended 150 m (500 ft) above the dish by 18 cables running from three reinforced concrete towers, one 110 m (365 ft) high and the other two 80 m (265 ft) high, placing their tops at the same elevation. The platform has a 93-meter-long rotating bow-shaped track, called the azimuth arm, carrying the receiving antennas and secondary and tertiary reflectors. This allows the telescope to observe any region of the sky in a forty-degree cone of visibility about the local zenith (between −1 and 38 degrees of declination). Puerto Rico's location near the Northern Tropic allows Arecibo to view the planets in the Solar System over the Northern half of their orbit. The round trip light time to objects beyond Saturn is longer than the 2.6 hour time that the telescope can track a celestial position, preventing radar observations of more distant objects.

Design and architecture

The Arecibo telescope was built between mid-1960 and November 1963, and designed by William E. Gordon of Cornell University, who intended to use it to study Earth's ionosphere. reflector to support the feed.
George Doundoulakis, who directed research at General Bronze Corporation in Garden City, New York, along with Zachary Sears, who directed Internal Design at Digital B & E Corporation, New York, received the RFP from Cornell University for the antenna design, and studied the idea of suspending the feed with his brother, Helias Doundoulakis, a civil engineer.  George Doundoulakis identified the problem that a tower or tripod would have presented around the center, the most important area of the reflector, and devised a better approach by suspending the feed.  He presented his proposal to Cornell for a doughnut truss suspended by four cables from four towers above the reflector, having along its edge a rail track for the azimuthal positioning of the feed.  A second truss, in the form of an arc, or arch, was to be suspended below, which would rotate on the rails through 360 degrees.  The arc also had rails on which the unit supporting the feed would move for the elevational positioning of the feed.  A counter-weight would move symmetrically opposite to the feed for stability, and the entire feed could be lowered and raised if a hurricane were present.  Helias Doundoulakis designed the cable suspension system which was finally adopted. Although the present configuration is substantially the same as the original drawings by George and Helias (though with three towers instead of the original four), the U.S. Patent office granted Helias a patent for the brothers' innovative idea. William J. Casey, later to be the director of the Central Intelligence Agency under President Ronald Reagan, was also an assignee on the patent.
Construction began in mid-1960, with the official opening on November 1, 1963. As the primary dish is spherical, its focus is along a line rather than at a single point (as would be the case for a parabolic reflector); therefore, complicated line feeds had to be used to carry out observations. Each line feed covered a narrow frequency band (2–5% of the center frequency of the band) and a limited number of line feeds could be used at any one time, limiting the flexibility of the telescope.
The telescope has been upgraded several times.  Initially, when the maximum expected operating frequency was about 500 MHz, the surface consisted of half-inch galvanized wire mesh laid directly on the support cables. In 1974 a high-precision surface consisting of thousands of individually adjustable aluminum panels replaced the old wire mesh, and the highest usable frequency was raised to about 5,000 MHz. A Gregorian reflector system was installed in 1997, incorporating secondary and tertiary reflectors to focus radio waves at a single point. This allowed the installation of a suite of receivers, covering the whole 1–10 GHz range, that could be easily moved onto the focal point, giving Arecibo more flexibility. At the same time, a ground screen was installed around the perimeter to block the ground's thermal radiation from reaching the feed antennas, and a more powerful 2,400 MHz transmitter was installed.
The telescope was damaged in an earthquake on January 13, 2014. The earthquake damaged one of the suspension cables at the location of a splice that was made during the original installation in the 1960s and repair took two months.

Research and discoveries

Many scientific discoveries have been made using the Arecibo telescope. On April 7, 1964, shortly after it began operations, Gordon Pettengill's team used it to determine that the rotation rate of Mercury was not 88 days, as previously thought, but only 59 days. This object spins 642 times per second, and until the discovery of PSR J1748-2446ad in 2005, it was the fastest-spinning pulsar known.
In August 1989, the observatory directly imaged an asteroid for the first time in history: 4769 Castalia.
In January 2008, detection of prebiotic molecules methanimine and hydrogen cyanide were reported from Arecibo Observatory radio spectroscopy measurements of the distant starburst galaxy Arp 220.

SETI / METI

The Arecibo message

In 1974, the Arecibo message, an attempt to communicate with potential extraterrestrial life, was transmitted from the radio telescope toward the globular cluster M13, about 25,000 light-years away.

The RuBisCo Stars

On November 7, 2009, as part of the 35th anniversary of the Drake/Sagan transmission to M13 the RuBisCO gene sequence was transmitted to three "nearby" stars: GJ 83.1, Teagarden's star SO 025300.5+165258, and Kappa Ceti (G5B). The project was by artist Joe Davis with support from Paul Gilster, Arecibo Observatory, Cornell University, and various others.

SETI searches

Arecibo is the source of data for the SETI@home and Astropulse distributed computing projects put forward by the Space Sciences Laboratory at the University of California, Berkeley and was used for the SETI Institute's Project Phoenix observations.

Other uses

Terrestrial aeronomy experiments at Arecibo have included the Coqui 2 experiment, which were supported by NASA. The telescope also has had military intelligence uses; among them, locating Soviet radar installations by detecting their signals bouncing off the Moon.Steve Blank "Secret history of Silicon Valley" talk
Limited amateur radio operations have occurred, using "moon bounce" or Earth-Moon-Earth communication, in which the Moon is used to reflect radio signals aimed at it back to the Earth . The first of these operations was on April 13-14, 1964, using the call KP4BPZ.  A dozen or so two-way contacts were made on 144 and 432 MHz.  On July 3 and July 24, 1965, KP4BPZ was again activated on 432 MHZ, making approximately 30 contacts on 432 MHz during the limited time-slots available.  For these tests a very wide-band instrumentation recorder captured a large segment of the receiving bandwidth, enabling later verification of other amateur station callsigns (though of course not two-way contacts).  From April 16 to 18, 2010, the Arecibo Amateur Radio Club KP4AO again conducted moon-bounce activity using the antenna.
On 10 November 2013, the KP4AO Arecibo Amateur Radio Club conducted a 50 Year commemoration activation, lasting 7 hours on 14.250 MHz SSB, though not using the main dish antenna.

Funding issues

A report by the division of Astronomical Sciences of the National Science Foundation, made public on November 3, 2006, recommended substantially decreased astronomy funding for Arecibo Observatory, ramping down from $10.5 million in 2007 to $4.0 million in 2011.[ref]
</ref><ref>
[/ref] If other sources of money could not be obtained, the observatory would have to close. The report also advised that 80 percent of the observation time be allocated to the surveys already in progress, reducing the time available for smaller programs. NASA gradually eliminated its share of the planetary radar funding at Arecibo from 2001 thorough 2006.
Academics and researchers responded by organizing to protect and advocate for the observatory. They established the Arecibo Science Advocacy Partnership (ASAP), which was meant to advance the scientific excellence of Arecibo Observatory research and to publicize its accomplishments in astronomy, aeronomy and planetary radar. ASAP's goals include mobilizing the existing broad base of support for Arecibo science within the fields it serves directly, the broad scientific community; provide a forum for the Arecibo research community and enhance communication within it; promote the potential of Arecibo for groundbreaking science; suggest the paths that will maximize it into the foreseeable future; showcase the broad impact and far-reaching implications of the science currently carried out with this unique instrument.
Contributions by the government of Puerto Rico may be one way to help fill the funding gap, but are controversial and uncertain. At town hall meetings about the potential closure, Puerto Rican Senate President Kenneth McClintock announced an initial local appropriation of $3.0 million during fiscal year 2008 to fund a major maintenance project to restore the three pillars that hold up the antenna platform to their original condition, pending inclusion in the next bond issue. These funds were made available in the second half of 2009.
José Enrique Serrano, a member of the U.S. House of Representatives Appropriations Committee, asked the National Science Foundation to keep Arecibo in operation in a letter published on September 19, 2007.
Language similar to that in the letter of September 19 was included in the FY-2008 omnibus spending bill. In October 2007, Puerto Rico's then-Resident Commissioner, Luis Fortuño, along with Dana Rohrabacher, filed legislation to assure the continued operation of the observatory.
Since the Arecibo observatory is owned by the Government of the United States, direct donations by private or corporate donors cannot be made. However, as non-profit (501(c)(3))  "public charities" under US law, Cornell University and subsequently SRI International can accept contributions on behalf of the Arecibo Observatory.
In September 2007, in an open letter to researchers, the NSF clarified the status of the budget for NAIC, stating that the present plan could hit the targeted budgetary revision. No mention of private funding was made. However, it need be noted that the NSF is undertaking studies to mothball or demolish the observatory to return it to its natural setting in the event that its budget target is not reached.
In November 2007, The Planetary Society urged the U.S. Congress to prevent the Arecibo Observatory from closing because of insufficient funding since its radar contributes greatly to the accuracy of predictions of asteroid impacts on the Earth. See JPL's list of all asteroid radar observations. The Planetary Society  believes that continued operation of the observatory will reduce the cost of mitigation (that is, deflection of a near-Earth asteroid on collision to Earth), should that be necessary.
Also in November of that year The New York Times described the consequences of the budget cuts at the site., "A Hazy Future for a 'Jewel' of Space Instruments.", New York Times, November 20, 2007 In July 2008, the British newspaper The Daily Telegraph reported that the funding crisis, due to federal budget cuts, was still very much alive.Jacqui Goddard,  "Threat to world's most powerful radio telescope means we may not hear ET", Daily Telegraph, July 12, 2008
The SETI@home program is using the telescope as a primary source for the research. The program is urging people to send a letter to their political representatives, in support of full federal funding of the observatory."Save Arecibo: Write to Congress". Retrieved July 19, 2008
The NAIC received $3.1 million from the American Recovery and Reinvestment Act of 2009, and this was used for basic maintenance and for a second, much smaller, antenna to be used for very long baseline interferometry, new Klystron amplifiers for the planetary radar system, and for student training. This allotment was an increase of around 30 percent over the FY-2009 budget. However, the FY-2010 funding request by NSF was cut by $1.2 million (−12.5 percent) over the FY-2009 budget) in light of their continued plans to reduce funding."FY2010 Budget Request to Congress". Retrieved May 26, 2009
The 2011 NSF budget was reduced by a further $1.6 million, −15 percent compared to 2010, with a further $1.0 million reduction projected by FY-2014."Major multi-user research facilities" p. 35–38. Retrieved 2010 Feb. 10 Beginning in FY-2010, NASA began contributing $2.0 million per year for planetary science, particularly the study of near-Earth objects, at Arecibo. NASA implemented this funding through its Near Earth Object Observations program."NASA Support to Planetary Radar" retrieved 2011 July 7
Also in 2010, the NSF issued a call for new proposals for the management of NAIC beginning in FY-2012. Upon the award of the new cooperative agreement for NAIC management and operation, NSF also decertified NAIC as a Federally Funded Research and Development Center (FFRDC), with the stated goal of providing the NAIC with greater freedom to establish broader scientific partnerships and pursue funding opportunities for activities beyond the scope of those supported by the NSF."Management and Operation of the NAIC" retrieved 2013 Apr 6

In popular culture

Arecibo Observatory Directors





Further reading

title=Research rockets, including an experiment from Cornell, are scheduled for launch into the ionosphere next year from Puerto Rico|
date=1997-11-14|
publisher=Cornell University|
last=Friedlander|
first=Blaine P. Jr.|
url=
}}
title=Activists protest US Navy radar project|
date=1998-03-03|
last=Ruiz|
first=Carmelo|
publisher=Global Network Against Weapons and Nuclear Power in Space|
url=
|title=Budget Cuts Threaten Arecibo Observatory
|author=Amir Alexander
|publisher=The Planetary Society
|date=July 3, 2008}}
|title=Arecibo joins global network to create  telescope
|author=Blaine Friedlander
|publisher=EurekAlert
|date=June 10, 2008}}
|title=Clintons (minus Hillary) visit Arecibo; former president urges more federal funding for basic sciences
|author=Lauren Gold
|publisher=Cornell university
|date=June 5, 2008}}
|title=Arecibo Radio Telescope Is Back in Business After 6-Month Spruce-Up
|author=Henry Fountain
|work=New York Times
|date=December 25, 2007}}
|url=
|first1=Marshall H. |last1= Cohen
|year=2009
|title=Genesis of the 1000-foot Arecibo Dish
|journal=Journal of Astronomical History and Heritage
|volume=12
|pages=141–152
|bibcode = 2009JAHH...12..141C }}
|first1=Daniel R. | last=Altschuler | first2=Christopher J. | last2=Salter
|title=The Arecibo Observatory: Fifty astronomical years | journal=Physics Today
|volume=66 | number=11 | page=43
|doi=10.1063/PT.3.2179 |year=2013}}




