[[David Boreanaz]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, Male actors from Buffalo, New York, Male actors from Pennsylvania, American male film actors, American people of Italian descent, American people of French descent, American people of Slovak descent, American people of Irish descent, American male television actors, American television directors, American television producers, Ithaca College alumni, Living people, People from Buffalo, New York, People from Delaware County, Pennsylvania, People from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, Television producers from New York, Television producers from Pennsylvania, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, American male actors

David Boreanaz (pronounced ; born May 16, 1969) is an American actor, television producer, and director, known for his role as the vampire Angel on the supernatural drama series Buffy the Vampire Slayer and Angel, and as FBI Special Agent Seeley Booth on the television crime drama Bones.

Early life

Boreanaz was born on May 16, 1969 in Buffalo, New York, where his father, Dave Roberts (né Boreanaz), was working as a weather forecaster and children's show Rocketship 7 host as Dave Thomas, for ABC affiliate WKBW-TV, and his mother, Patti Boreanaz, was a travel agent.The Bonnie Hunt Show, September 17, 2008
When Boreanaz was seven years old, the family moved to the Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, area after his father took a job at WPVI-TV, the ABC affiliate in Philadelphia. Boreanaz was raised Catholic

Career

Boreanaz's first paid acting appearance was a 1993 guest spot on the American sitcom, Married... with Children, as Kelly's two-timing biker boyfriend, who gets pummeled by her father, Al. "Before They Were Stars", TV Guide, January 3, 2011, page 22 He was cast in the television series Buffy the Vampire Slayer, after being suggested for the role to Marti Noxon by one of Boreanaz's neighbors, after walking his dog past their house. The show became enormously successful and Boreanaz starred in a spin-off series, Angel, which gave the character a chance to evolve and concentrated on Angel's battle for redemption for the sins he committed before he regained his soul. He appeared on Buffy from 1997 to 1999, at which point he began starring in Angel, which ran until 2004, with some guest appearances on Buffy after his departure. He also appeared in "Macabre Pair of Shorts" where ironically he plays a Vampire's victim (segment "MPS").
Boreanaz's only starring role in a major theatrical film was in 2001's slasher horror film, Valentine, alongside Denise Richards and Katherine Heigl. In 2002, he had a supporting role in a Lifetime television movie titled I'm with Lucy. He was also to appear in the 2002 film Resident Evil as the main character, but turned down the role. In 2003, he appeared in the music video for singer Dido's hit single "White Flag", and was the voice of Leon (Squall Leonhart) in the video game Kingdom Hearts, but he did not reprise his role in the sequel.
In 2005, Boreanaz began starring opposite Emily Deschanel on the current prime time television series, Bones. He also appeared in These Girls, a Canadian film in which he played a biker; the film received a limited theatrical release in Canada in March 2006, after premiering at the Toronto Film Festival and the Vancouver International Film Festival. He has also starred in the independent films Mr. Fix It and Suffering Man's Charity (released on DVD as Ghost Writer), as well as the direct-to-DVD sequel The Crow: Wicked Prayer in which he starred alongside Tara Reid. In 2006, he starred in another DVD release, The Hard Easy, which also starred Nick Lachey he also starred in "First Light", 2000.
In that same year, he also voiced Hal Jordan in the direct to video DC Comics animated feature Justice League: The New Frontier. In the season three finale of his TV series Bones, Boreanaz's character Seeley Booth is seen in his bathtub reading an issue of Green Lantern, the character he voiced in that feature.
As well as being a producer on Bones since its third season, Boreanaz also directed at least one episode every season since Season 4.

In 2013 David Starred in the mini series "Full Circle" as Jace Cooper.
In the 2011 movie "The Mighty Macs," Boreanaz played the role of Ed Rush, NBA referee and husband of Immaculata basketball coach Cathy Rush.
Boreanaz stars in an independently made fantasy drama Officer Down2013 as Detective Les Scanlon.
David has also appeared on "American Dad"! (TV Series) as the voice of Less Money, Mo' Problems (2012),
in 2010 "Family Guy (TV Series)" in the episode Road to the North Pole as himself, in 2002 "Baby Blues (TV Series" episode Teddy-Cam as the voice of Johnny.

Personal life

Boreanaz was married to Ingrid Quinn from 1997 to 1999.
In 2010, Boreanaz, admitted to having an extramarital affair with Rachel Uchitel, one of the same women Tiger Woods was alleged to have cheated on his wife with. Shortly after Boreanaz's admission of the affair, text messages emerged on the Internet showing that indeed the affair was sexual in nature. At the time of Boreanaz's affair Jaime Bergman, his wife, was pregnant.
In 2004, Boreanaz underwent reconstructive surgery on the anterior cruciate ligament of his left knee, a result of a running injury he suffered in high school that was not fully corrected at that time.
In 2013 Jaime, David and their friends Melissa and Aaron Ravo started a nail polish line called Chrome Girl.
Boreanaz is a hockey fan and an avid supporter of the Philadelphia Flyers.ca, by Jamey Ordolis; published April 12, 2012; retrieved March 14, 2014.

Filmography

Film

Television

Video games

Music videos






