[[Chad Kroeger]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, 20th-century Canadian singers, 21st-century Canadian singers, Alternative rock guitarists, Alternative rock singers, Canadian heavy metal guitarists, Canadian heavy metal singers, Canadian male singers, Canadian rock singers, Canadian rock guitarists, Musicians from Alberta, Nickelback members, People from Hanna, Alberta



Chad Robert Kroeger (born November 15, 1974) is a Canadian musician and  producer best known as the lead vocalist and guitarist for the Canadian rock band Nickelback. In addition to his work with Nickelback, Kroeger has been involved with a variety of collaborations, appearing as a guest musician in several songs and has contributed in both production and songwriting. He has co-written several songs for other artists and for films.

Biography

Kroeger was born Chad Robert Turton in Hanna, Alberta on November 15, 1974. He learned to play the guitar at age 13, and in the early 1990s was part of a grunge cover band, which also included future Nickelback members Mike Kroeger and Ryan Peake.
In 2002, Kroeger co-founded 604 Records, and has also produced music for other bands, such as Default, Theory of a Deadman, and Bo Bice.

Collaborations

Kroeger, along with Saliva vocalist Josey Scott, Theory of a Deadman lead vocalist (serving as guitarist for this track) Tyler Connolly  and Our Lady Peace drummer Jeremy Taggart, performed the theme song titled "Hero" for the hit movie Spider-Man in 2002. Also in 2002, Kroeger wrote and sang on "Why Don't You & I" for Santana's Shaman.  However, when Arista decided to release the song as a single in Summer 2003, Kroeger's label, Roadrunner, refused permission, citing concerns that Kroeger appearing on a "high-profile single" would compromise the excitement over Nickelback's fall 2003 release The Long Road. Kroeger recommended The Calling's Alex Band, another Arista artist, as a replacement for re-recording the single."Nickelback's Record Company Explains Chad Kroeger ban on Santana Single" - July 2, 2003  @ RoadrunnerRecords.com"Carlos Santana Says Label Politics Forced Chad Kroeger/Alex Band Change On New Single" @ Music. The track is called "Into the Night" and was released as a single on October 2, 2007. The album Ultimate Santana was released in October. Besides working with Santana, Kroeger also recorded with Travis Tritt on his album The Storm, where Tritt did a cover of Nickelback's "Should've Listened" track from The Long Road''.
Kroeger also wrote and played guitar on Bo Bice's You're Everything.
Chad Kroeger, Eric Dill, Rune Westberg and Chris Daughtry wrote the debut single of Daughtry's new album.

Personal life

Kroeger started dating fellow Canadian rocker Avril Lavigne on July 1, 2012. Lavigne and Kroeger honeymooned in Portofino, Italy.

Discography

Singles

=As featured artist=






