[[Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat.]]

CATEGORIES: 1996 albums, Slipknot (band) albums, -ismist Recordings albums

Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat. is the first official release by American metal band Slipknot. Released originally on October 31, 1996, it was limited to production of 1,000 copies. The band originally self-distributed some of these copies, but went on to release the remaining units through -ismist Recordings in 1997. Due to its limited release, the album has become much sought by fans since Slipknot's rise in fame.
Despite considering it their first album upon release, the band now considers Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat. to be a demo and have evolved and released the majority of the songs on future releases, albeit usually in radically altered forms. It was recorded in Des Moines, Iowa, over a period of four months. The music of the album contains many influences including funk, jazz, and disco which weren't as apparent in later material. Many of the lyrics and the album's title are derived from the role playing game Werewolf: The Apocalypse. The songs contain an "emphasis on non-traditional songwriting" and melodic themes more than subsequent releases.

Recording and production

In late 1995 Slipknot and producer Sean McMahon entered SR Audio, a studio in the band's home town of Des Moines, Iowa to work on what they intended to be their debut album.

Musical and lyrical themes

The musical style of Slipknot is constantly contested due to the genres their music covers, however Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat. is the band's most experimental release and is significantly different from the heavy style the band became known for. Vocalist Anders Colsefni and percussionist Shawn Crahan shared a mutual interest in the game which was a large influence on the band, Colsefni said: "The attraction was being able to play a different person", declaring that this was the essence of Slipknot.

Legacy

The original pressing of the album was limited to 1,000 copies and since the band's rise to fame in 1999 it has been a sought after rarity for Slipknot fans.
There is often deliberation whether Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat. is a demo or actually the band's debut album. The band currently strictly consider it to be a demo due to the drastic change in sound and major changes in the line-up before the band's self-titled debut. The band would also rework the majority of the songs on later albums. An example of this is evidenced by the band's third studio album Vol. 3: (The Subliminal Verses), which by title implies that it is their third album despite actually being the fourth record released by the band. However, at the time of the album's release the band intended Mate. Feed. Kill. Repeat. to be their debut album.

Track listing

Personnel



Collector's Information

Literature


