[[Nabonassar]]

CATEGORIES: Babylonian kings, 8th-century BC rulers, 734 BC deaths, Babylonia, Year of birth unknown

Nabû-nāṣir, inscribed in cuneiform as dAG-PAB or dAG-ŠEŠ-ir, Greek: Ναβονάσσαρος from whence comes "Nabonassar", and meaning "Nabû (is) protector",

History

Nothing is known of his provenance or origin. His three predecessors were Chaldean. The Dynastic ChronicleThe Dynastic Chronicle (ABC 18)  vi 11. may have been composed during his reign as it records the succession of kings from the antediluvian era until that of his immediate predecessor, Nabû-šuma-iškun. It records that the "dynasty of Chaldea was terminated" (with Nabû-šuma-iškun) and "its kingship was transferred," but the remainder is lost. He may also have commissioned a vituperative chronicleChronographic document concerning Nabu-šuma-iškun, excavation number W 22660/0, CM 52 in J. J. Glassner's "Chronique Mésopotamiennes," 1993, pp. 235–240. which vilifies his predecessor for his sacrilegious  actions and the Chronicle of the Market PricesChronicle of the Market Prices (ABC 23), tablet BM 48498. which mentions the volatile costs of various commodities in reigns up until that of his predecessor. His name appears in the Eclectic ChronicleThe Eclectic Chronicle (ABC 24), tablet BM 27859, r. 17. but the context has not been preserved.

Calendar reform

His reign marks the reform of the Babylonian calendar, introducing regular calculated intercalary months, the eighteen-year cycle texts (the 223 month "Saros" cycle, named for Edmund Halley's misreading of a passage in Pliny
According to Claudius Ptolemy in his work Almagest, this gave rise to an era beginning noon on February 26, 747 BC when the Anno Nabonassari began, but prior to the Hellenistic period there is no trace of this era.

Assyrian invasion

The country "inherited" from Nabû-šuma-iškun was one riven by internal divisions and conflicts with the Aramean and Chaldean tribes, where the central authority was greatly diminished. In Nabû-nāṣir's third year, the Assyrian general Tukultī-apil-Ešarra, better known under the Hebraic rendition "Tiglath-Pileser III", came to power
Whether or not he actually solicited military aid, Nabû-nāṣir seems to have been the main beneficiary of these actions as his regime was stabilized and he was subsequently able to put down a revolt in Borsippa.
In fact, according to the Babylonian Chronicle, Nabonassar may have  become a vassal king of Tiglath-Pileser III after the Assyrian invasion.1:5).

Economic activity

Twenty-three tablets
He is recorded as having succumbed to illness and died in his palace during his fourteenth year.

Inscriptions




