[[PLOS]]

CATEGORIES: Public Library of Science, Scholarly communication, Academic publishing, Open access (publishing), Organizations based in San Francisco, California, Science and technology in the San Francisco Bay Area

PLOS (for Public Library of Science) is a nonprofit open access scientific publishing project aimed at creating a library of open access journals and other scientific literature under an open content license. It launched its first journal, PLOS Biology, in October 2003 and publishes seven journals, all peer reviewed, 

History

The Public Library of Science began in 2000 with an online petition initiative by Nobel Prize winner Harold Varmus, formerly director of the National Institutes of Health and at that time director of Memorial Sloan–Kettering Cancer Center; Patrick O. Brown, a biochemist at Stanford University; and Michael Eisen, a computational biologist at the University of California, Berkeley, and the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory.
The 2000/2001 petition also prompted action by established journals. Some, including BioMed Central journals, became open access journals, making the full text of papers freely available immediately upon publication. The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences and others became delayed open access journals, making articles freely available some months after publication. Many others continue to rely on self-archiving.
The PLOS organizers turned their attention to starting their own journal, along the lines of the UK-based BioMed Central, which has been publishing open access scientific papers in the biological sciences in journals such as Genome Biology and the Journal of Biology since late 1999.
As a publishing company, the Public Library of Science officially launched its operation on 13 October 2003, with the publication of a peer-reviewed print and online scientific journal entitled PLOS Biology, and has since launched seven more peer-reviewed journals. One, PLOS Clinical Trials, has since been merged into PLOS ONE. Following the merger, the company started the PLOS Hub for Clinical Trials to collect journal articles published in any PLOS journal and relating to clinical trials.
The PLOS journals are what it describes as "open access content"; all content is published under the Creative Commons "attribution" license. The project states (quoting the Budapest Open Access Initiative) that: "The only constraint on reproduction and distribution, and the only role for copyright in this domain, should be to give authors control over the integrity of their work and the right to be properly acknowledged and cited."
In 2011, the Public Library of Science became an official financial supporting organization of Healthcare Information For All by 2015, a global initiative that advocates unrestricted access to medical knowledge, sponsoring the first HIFA2015 Webinar in 2012.
In 2012 the organization quit using the stylization "PLoS" to identify itself and began using only "PLOS".
In January 2013, PLOS confirmed  a partnership with figshare to make open science publishing more open.
In April 2013, PLOS announced their new initiative, the PLOS Text Mining Collection, to assist researchers in easily retrieving and extracting information from a digital text format.
In December 2013, PLOS announced the publication of its 100,000th article.
In December 2013, PLOS completed phase two  of their website redesign. The new landing page now enables visitors to navigate more quickly and easily to the information they need. The new design also includes a rotating carousel of PLOS' most recent announcements, a news feed and a featured article from its suite of journals. 
In December 2013, PLOS confirmed  CC BY v4.0 Creative Commons license.

Business model

To fund the journals, PLOS charges a publication fee to be paid by the author or the author's employer or funder. In the United States, institutions such as the National Institutes of Health and the Howard Hughes Medical Institute have pledged that recipients of their grants will be allocated funds to cover such author charges.  The Global Participation Initiative (GPI) was instituted in 2012, by which authors in group one countries are not charged a fee, and those in group two countries are given a fee reduction.  (In all cases, decisions to publish are based solely on editorial criteria.)
PLOS was launched with grants totaling US$13 million from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation and the Sandler Family Supporting Foundation. PLOS confirmed in July 2011 that it no longer relies on subsidies from foundations and is covering its operational costs itself. 
In September 2013, PLOS published their 2012-2013 Progress Update Report  which confirmed total liabilities and net assets standing at $20,511,000.

Impact

The initiatives of the Public Library of Science in the United States have initiated similar proposals in Europe, most notably the "Berlin Declaration" developed by the German Max Planck Society, which has also pledged grant support for author charges (see also the Budapest Open Access Initiative).

Publications

Headquarters

PLOS has its main headquarters in Suite 100 in the Koshland East Building in Levi's Plaza in San Francisco.



Footnotes






