[[Iowa (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2001 albums, Roadrunner Records albums, Slipknot (band) albums, Albums produced by Ross Robinson, Nu metal albums, Albums certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of Japan

Iowa is the second album by American metal band Slipknot. Released by Roadrunner Records on August 28, 2001, it was produced by Ross Robinson and Slipknot. The title derives from the band's home state, Iowa, which members have stated is one of their biggest sources of inspiration. With much anticipation for the band's second album following on the success of their 1999 self-titled debut, pressures on the band were high. Their relationships with each other suffered and was later described as the darkest time of their career. It was also the first time that guitarist Jim Root had been significantly involved in a Slipknot album due to his joining very late in recording of their debut album, as Root was only featured on two songs from that release. Despite troubles within the band and with Iowa's development, Slipknot promoted it for almost a year.
Iowa was a major success, premiering in the top ten album sales charts in nine countries. Generally positively received, it includes some of their notable songs, such as "Disasterpiece", "The Heretic Anthem", "People = Shit" and the two Grammy-nominated songs "Left Behind" and the remix of "My Plague". Critic John Mulvey proclaimed the album as the "absolute triumph of nu metal".

Recording and production

Iowa was recorded and produced at Sound City and Sound Image studios in Los Angeles, California with producer Ross Robinson, who had produced their debut album. Drummer Joey Jordison and bassist Paul Gray began working on new music together in October 2000 and together they wrote material for most of the tracks on the album. During this time other band members wanted a break following the extensive touring which followed their self-titled debut album. This period in the band's career has become known as one of their worst for several reasons. Jordison stated retrospectively, "that's where we got into a war" citing the lack of a break for himself and Gray. While other factors, including: vocalist Corey Taylor's alcohol addiction, several other members' drug addictions, management issues and more, affected relations in the band.
Despite being a member of Slipknot since 1999, it was the first album where guitarist Jim Root had been significantly involved. While recording vocals for the final song "Iowa" he was completely naked, vomiting all over himself and cutting himself with broken glass. Explaining this, he said, "that's where the best stuff comes from. You've got to break yourself down before you can build something great." While producing the album, Ross Robinson was injured from a dirt bike accident, fracturing his back. He returned to the studio after a day of hospital treatment, reportedly "putting all of his pain into the album", much to the admiration of the band.

Promotion

There was speculation over the title before its announcement with Nine Men, One Mission as the expected title in some sources.
Prior to the album's release, Slipknot gave away "Heretic Song", titled "The Heretic Anthem" on the album, free on their website and was limited to a quantity of 666 copies to coincide with the song's chorus; "If you're 555, then I'm 666."
Shawn called the goat on the cover of the 2001 pressing "Eeyore."

Musical and lyrical themes

The musical style of Slipknot is a contested issue due to the variety of genres their music covers. Sources usually group Slipknot within nu metal while also showing influences from other genres, such as rap metal and alternative metal. The band was also praised for its use of an extended line-up consisting of additional percussionists and electronics. NME stated that "every possible space is covered in scrawl and cymbals: guitars, percussion, electronic squall, subhuman screaming." Although Iowa is widely regarded as the band's heaviest album to date, some tracks do include melody, most apparent in "Everything Ends" and "Left Behind"; however these tracks are still considered heavy when compared to the likes of "Circle", "Danger-Keep Away", "Snuff", "Vermilion" or "Dead Memories".
Iowa follows the lyrical style that vocalist Corey Taylor established on Slipknot's debut album; it includes strong use of metaphors to describe overtly dark themes including misanthropy, solipsism, disgust, anger, disaffection, psychosis and rejection. The album also includes many expletives; David Fricke of the Rolling Stone magazine said "there isn't much shock value left in the words fuck and shit, which Taylor uses in some variation more than forty times in Iowa's sixty-six minutes." Fricke went on to praise Taylor's performance on the track "Iowa", comparing it to a "vivid evocation of a makeshift-cornfield grave at midnight."

Reception

Following the mass success of the band's self-titled album, author Dick Porter wrote that the anticipation for a follow up was intense. Reviewing for Yahoo, John Mulvey said, "They're an evolutionary dead end, the final, absolute triumph of alternative metal."
The album's first single, "Left Behind", was nominated for the 2002 Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance at the 44th Grammy Awards.

Track listing

Chart positions

Certifications



Chart procession and succession

Personnel

Aside from their real names, members of the band are referred to by numbers zero through eight.






