[[Penelope Keith]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, Living people, Alumni of the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art, BAFTA winners (people), Dames Commander of the Order of the British Empire, Deputy Lieutenants of Surrey, English film actresses, English radio actresses, English stage actresses, English television actresses, High Sheriffs of Surrey, Laurence Olivier Award winners, People from Sutton, London, Royal Shakespeare Company members, Actresses awarded British damehoods

Dame Penelope Anne Constance Keith, DBE, DL (née Hatfield, married name Timson, born 2 April 1940) is an English actress, best known for her roles in the British sitcoms The Good Life and To the Manor Born.
She began her career in repertory theatre before joining the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1963 and was a mainstay in the success of the Chichester Festival Theatre. Her theatre credits include Michael Frayn's The Norman Conquests in 1974 and Alan Ayckbourn's Donkey's Years in 1975, for which she won the Olivier Award for Best Comedy Performance.
Having started her television career in the 1960s, she became a household name in the UK in the 1970s, when she played Margot Leadbetter in the sitcom The Good Life (1975-1978), winning the BAFTA TV Award for Best Light Entertainment Performance in 1977. In 1978, she won the BAFTA TV Award for Best Actress for the television adaptation of The Norman Conquests. She then starred as Audrey fforbes-Hamilton in the BBC series, To the Manor Born (1979-1981), a show that received audiences of more than 20 million. In the 1980s and 1990s, she appeared as the lead character in six other comedy series.
Since the late 1990s, she has worked mainly in the theatre, including Keith Waterstone's Good Grief (1998), Noël Coward's Blithe Spirit (2004), Richard Everett's Entertaining Angels (2006) and as Lady Bracknell in Oscar Wilde's The Importance of Being Earnest (2007).
She succeeded Lord Olivier as president of the Actors' Benevolent Fund after his death in 1989. She was appointed Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in 1990, Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in 2007, and Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire (DBE) in the 2014 New Year Honours for services to the arts and to charity.

Early life

Keith was born in Sutton in 1940. Her father, who was a Major by the end of World War II, left her mother Connie when she was a baby, and Keith spent her early years in Clacton-on-Sea and Clapham. Her great uncle, John Gurney, was a partner in the coachbuilding firm J. Gurney Nutting & Company Ltd and Keith recalls sitting in the Prince of Wales's car. BBC Four – Penelope Keith and the Fast Lady, 19 February 2009
Although not a Roman Catholic, at the age of six she was sent to a Catholic boarding school in Seaford. It was here that a young Keith first became interested in acting, and frequently went to matinees in the West End with her mother. When she was eight years old, her mother remarried and Penelope adopted her stepfather's surname of Keith. While she did not get on with her stepfather, her mother was a "rock of love" to her. She was rejected from the Central School of Speech and Drama, on the grounds that, at 5'10", she was too tall. However, she was then accepted at the Webber Douglas Academy of Dramatic Art, and spent two years there while working at the Hyde Park Hotel in the evening.
She began her career working in repertory theatre across the UK, including Lincoln, Manchester and Salisbury. Keith's earliest appearances were in The Tunnel of Love, Gigi and Flowering Cherry. In 1963, she joined the Royal Shakespeare Company both in Stratford and at the Aldwych Theatre in London.

Early career

She started her television career in programmes such as The Army Game, Dixon of Dock Green, Wild, Wild Women and The Avengers. In the early 1970s, she appeared in The Morecambe & Wise Show, Ghost Story and The Pallisers. Her film appearances during this time included Every Home Should Have One, Take A Girl Like You, Rentadick and Penny Gold. In 1967, she had a minor role in Carry On Doctor, but the scene was cut from the final edit.
Her best known theatre appearance, in 1974, was playing Sarah in The Norman Conquests, opposite Richard Briers, her co-star in The Good Life. Keith and Briers would often film The Good Life during the day and perform on stage in the West End in the evening.

Television fame

Penelope Keith achieved popular fame in 1975 when the BBC sitcom The Good Life began. In the first episode, she was only heard and not seen in her role as Margo Leadbetter, but as the episodes and series went on, the scope of her role increased. In 1977, Keith won a BAFTA award for 'Best Comedy Performer' for her role of Margo Leadbetter.
From 1979–81, she played the lead role of Audrey fforbes-Hamilton in the TV series To the Manor Born. Following To the Manor Born, Keith has appeared in six other sitcoms as the main lead: Sweet Sixteen, Moving, Executive Stress, No Job for a Lady, Law and Disorder and Next of Kin. She also had the starring role in a TV adaptation of Agatha Christie's play Spider's Web. She won a second BAFTA award as 'Best Actress' in 1978 for The Norman Conquests. In 1982 Keith starred in a TV production of Frederick Lonsdale's On Approval. In 1988, she hosted one series of the ITV panel show What's My Line?, following the death of its original presenter, Eamonn Andrews. She had a featured role in the 1998 ITV serial Coming Home. 

Ongoing work

Keith has regularly appeared on stage, taking the classics and new plays across the country. These include Shakespeare, Shaw, Sheridan, Wilde, Rattigan and Congreve. She played Lorraine in Noël Coward's Star Quality, while in 2004 she played Madame Arcati in Coward's Blithe Spirit at the Savoy Theatre. In 2004, Keith starred in the first of 5 full-cast BBC radio dramatisations of M.C. Beaton's Agatha Raisin novels, playing the title role. Two years later, she appeared at the Chichester Festival in the premiere of Richard Everett's comedy Entertaining Angels, which she later took on tour. 
In 2007, she played the part of Lady Bracknell in The Importance of Being Earnest on tour, which transferred to the West End in 2008, at the Vaudeville Theatre.
In 1997, she provided the voice of the narrator for Teletubbies, and also starred in the radio adaptations of To the Manor Born. In 2003, she appeared opposite June Brown in the television film Margery and Gladys. In 2007, she starred in a one-off To the Manor Born Christmas Special, 
In 2009 she presented Penelope Keith and the Fast Lady, a one-off documentary for BBC Four about Dorothy Levitt, the Edwardian motoring pioneer. She returned to television in 2011 presenting the four-part BBC documentary The Manor Reborn.[ref]Keith, Penelope 
[/ref]

Awards

Personal life

In 1978, the year The Good Life ended, she married Rodney Timson, a policeman. They had met while he was on duty at Chichester Theatre where Keith was performing. Timson, who is four years her junior, had been married twice before. They adopted two children.
Keith and Timson live in Milford, Surrey. Keith has a great passion for gardening. In 1984, she had a rose named after her.
Her wide ranging long-term contributions to the public good and to charitable endeavours include main groups of veterans, crime reduction and welfare for people and for animals. Limelight was left behind in her hands-on and personal involvement. For over twenty years her vision, leadership and care have helped the Actors Benevolent Fund provide £400,000 a year in grants and allowances. Her vital assistance to the Armed Services Memorial at the National Arboretum  saved ministerial embarrassment and  more importantly helped the success of a loved place of national remembrance. She has not feared difficult causes. For ten years she has been continuously involved in KEEPOUT, the HMPs Coldingley and Send initiative to interrupt the succession of young offending, helping existing offenders to give back something of value to the community. She has been much more than a figurehead over 15 years for TRANSFORM, providing accommodation and support to vulnerable people across Surrey.
On 2 April 2002, her 62nd birthday, she began a one-year term as High Sheriff of Surrey,
She was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 1990 New Year Honours, In the 2014 New Year Honours, she became a Dame Commander of the Order of the British Empire for services to the Arts and to Charity.






