[[Jewel (singer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Actresses from Utah, American country guitarists, American country singer-songwriters, American female guitarists, American female singer-songwriters, American film actresses, American folk guitarists, American folk singers, American people of Swiss-German descent, American pop guitarists, American pop singer-songwriters, American rock guitarists, American rock singer-songwriters, American sopranos, Big Machine Records artists, American female rock singers, Living people, Musicians from Utah, People from Homer, Alaska, People from Payson, Utah, Yodelers, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, 20th-century American singers, 21st-century American singers, Feminist musicians, American feminists, Former Latter Day Saints

Jewel Kilcher (born May 23, 1974),
Jewel's debut album, Pieces of You, released on February 28, 1995, became one of the best-selling debut albums of all time, going 15 times platinum. One single from the album, "Who Will Save Your Soul", peaked at number eleven on the Billboard Hot 100; two others, "You Were Meant for Me" and "Foolish Games", reached number seven and two respectively on the Hot 100, and were listed on Billboards Top Country Albums chart and featured three singles, "Stronger Woman", "I Do", and "Til It Feels Like Cheating". Jewel released her first independent album Lullaby in May 2009.
Jewel is the co-host, as well as a judge, with Kara DioGuardi on the songwriting competition reality television series Platinum Hit, which premiered May 30, 2011 on the cable network Bravo. Jewel has the vocal range of a lyric soprano.

Early life, education and career beginnings

Jewel was born in Payson, Utah. Shortly after her birth, her family moved to Homer, Alaska where her grandfather Yule Kilcher, a delegate to the Alaska Constitutional Convention and a state senator,
Jewel spent most of her young life in Homer living with her father, Atz Kilcher.
Jewel learned to play the guitar while at the Interlochen Arts Academy in Interlochen, Michigan, where she majored in operatic voice. She started writing songs at the age of 16.
For a time, Jewel lived in her car while traveling around the country doing street performances and small gigs.

Music career

Early

Jewel was discovered in August 1994 by Inga Vainshtein, a former Paramount studio executive. John Hogan, the lead singer from a local San Diego (California, United States) band, Rust, signed to Atlantic Records, who Vainshtein was managing, called to tell Vainshtein about a female surfer who sang at Innerchange, a local Pacific Beach coffee shop on Thursdays. Jenny Price, an assistant to Rust's A&R, Tom Carolan, came along on a trip. After the show Vainshtein and Price called Danny Goldberg, the head of Atlantic Records' West Coast operations. and her subsequent appearance on the cover of Time, the first ever by an Atlantic artist.
It was Vainshtein's idea to ask Neil Young's long time engineer and producer, Ben Keith, who never worked with anyone else but Neil Young.  Keith, not only agreed to produce Jewel's debut, but suggested they use, The Stray Gators, to back her on non-acoustic songs. Jewel released her debut album, Pieces of You, in 1995 when she was 21.

Peak

Jewel was chosen to sing the American national anthem at the opening of the Super Bowl XXXII in January 1998 in San Diego. She was introduced as "San Diego's own Jewel!". However, she was criticized for lip syncing the anthem to a digitally recorded track of her own voice. This was especially noticeable due to her missing her cue and not mouthing the first words. Super Bowl producers have since admitted that they attempt to have all performers pre-record their vocals. She performed the "Star-Spangled Banner" again in the 2003 NBA Finals in one of the New Jersey Nets' home games.
Jewel parted ways with her original manager, Inga Vainshtein, in February 1998. At the time she was in talks with Daniel Lanois about producing what would have become her second album. However, upon letting Vainshtein go and handing her career management to her mother, she abruptly changed creative direction. Instead of Lanois, she ended up going with Patrick Leonard, who created a much more pop album.
A year later, in November 1999, Jewel released Joy: A Holiday Collection. The album sold over a million copies and peaked at No. 32 on the Billboard 200. She released a cover of "Joy to the World" from the album as a single.
In November 2001 the album This Way was released. The album peaked at No. 9 on the Billboard 200 and sold over 1.5 million copies in the U.S. A song from the album "Standing Still" hit the Top 30. Other singles released were "Break Me", "This Way", and "Serve the Ego", the latter giving Jewel her first number one club hit.

0304

In 2003 Jewel released the album 0304. Following the limited success of "Serve the Ego", Jewel moved to a more pop-oriented sound with the release of the single "Intuition". The song reached No. 5 on the Billboard Adult Pop Songs chart and No. 20 on the Billboard Hot 100.

Goodbye Alice in Wonderland

On May 2, 2006 Jewel released her sixth album Goodbye Alice in Wonderland. The album received mixed reviews, but still managed to debut at No. 8 on the Billboard Albums Chart and sold 82,000 copies in its first week. After a photo shoot at her Texas ranch, Jewel spontaneously decided to have photographer Kurt Markus shoot the music video for the song "Goodbye Alice in Wonderland". According to a single review appearing in the Market Wire business journal, widely duplicated in publicity material by her PR team, "The homegrown clip beautifully reflects both the song's organic, intimate sound and its powerfully autobiographical story.""Jewel Returns With "GOODBYE ALICE IN WONDERLAND"; New Album Due May 2; Homegrown Video Set for Exclusive Fan Site Premiere Jan. 25." Market Wire Jan 2006 Web.8 Jul 2009. 
 Rolling Stone, however, called the album "overdone and undercooked" with a rating of 2 stars out of 5.com Up to now, the album has only sold over 377,000 copies.

Arthur and the Invisibles

Jewel released a video for the new song "Quest for Love" as the lead single from the movie Arthur and the Invisibles. The song is only available on the soundtrack for the film, which was released in January 2007.

Perfectly Clear

In early February 2007 Jewel recorded a duet with Jason Michael Carroll, "No Good in Goodbye", that was featured on Carroll's debut CD, Waitin' in the Country. She also made a promotional appearance on the T in Boston for the Verizon Yellow Pages, playing songs on a moving subway car and then doing an hour-long acoustic concert in South Station.
In a 2007 interview with The Boston Globe, Jewel stated that she was no longer affiliated with a record label, confirming rumors that Atlantic Records had failed to renew her contract after the lackluster sales of her then-latest album. She also hinted that she would like to do a country album next.
In November 2007 Jewel was signed to Valory Records, a newly formed division of the independent Big Machine Records label.
Its lead single, "Stronger Woman", was released to country radio on January 17, 2008, and entered the Top 20 on the Billboard Hot Country Songs charts. On the April 26, 2008 country charts it peaked at No. 13. The next single, "I Do", was released to radio on June 23, 2008. The video for the single featured her cowboy husband, Ty Murray. This song peaked at No. 28. Following it was "Till It Feels Like Cheating", which peaked at No. 57.
Perfectly Clear was released in Australia in late May 2009. It was then released across Europe by Humphead Records in June 2009.

Lullaby

In early 2009 it was announced that Jewel would release a new studio album titled Lullaby, a collection of lullabies which she described as "not just for children, but also adults". Its lead single, "Somewhere Over The Rainbow", was released on iTunes on March 17, 2009. The album was released on May 5, 2009. "Somewhere Over The Rainbow" was No. 1 on The Top Children's Songs the week of release. Like 2011's The Merry Goes 'Round, it is sold under the Fisher Price brand
She also recorded a duet, "Make It Last", with R&B singer Tyrese in conjunction with the release of his comic book Mayhem!. It was intended to be used for the soundtrack to Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen but did not appear on the final tracklisting.

Sweet and Wild

In January 2010 Jewel released "Stay Here Forever" from the soundtrack to the film Valentine's Day. It also served as the lead-off single to Jewel's ninth studio album Sweet and Wild released on June 8, 2010. The single debuted at No. 48 on the Hot Country Songs chart and reached No. 34 in May 2010. "Satisfied" was released as the album's second single on May 17, 2010, reaching its highest peak of No. 57. On October 10, 2010 Jewel released the third single from Sweet and Wild, "Ten". It made its debut on the Hot Country Songs Chart at No. 55 on the week of October 15, 2010 and peaked at No. 51 two weeks later.

The Merry Goes 'Round

Jewel's second children's album, The Merry Goes 'Round, was released in August 2011.

Greatest Hits

On October 16, 2012 Jewel announced via Twitter a Greatest Hits album would be released in 2013. The Greatest Hits album was released February 5, 2013.

Let It Snow: A Holiday Collection

On August 6, 2013, Jewel announced the release of her second Christmas album, titled Let It Snow: A Holiday Collection, scheduled for release on November 12, 2013. In an interview with The Wall Street Journal, Jewel was quoted as saying "I wanted this record to have a resemblance to the first album. It's a continuation of mood and spirit of that record, with the mood and feel of the album artwork with an image and tone that evokes that spirit."

New Album

As of February 2014, Jewel has begun work on her next album and has confirmed that it will not be released by a major record label, and that she will be producing it herself. It will reportedly have a sound similar to Pieces of You.

Musical equipment and technique

Owning a wide variety of Taylor Guitars, Jewel uses a Taylor 912-C most often. Acoustic Guitar writer Jeffery Pepper Rodgers called the guitar her "steady companion".
All of her guitars are strung with D'Addario products. To strum, she employs a unique self-created fingerpicking technique or a hard pick.

Film and theater

Jewel starred as character "Sue Lee Shelley" in the 1999 Ang Lee film Ride with the Devil along with Tobey Maguire.
Jewel also starred as Dorothy in the 1995 "Dreams Come True" production of The Wizard of Oz. She had a cameo as herself in Walk Hard.com, June 9, 2012.  In June 2012 Jewel was cast in the lead role as June Carter Cash in the Lifetime original movie Ring of Fire.com, June 9, 2012.

Television

Minor

Dancing With the Stars

On February 8, 2009 it was announced that she would appear on the eighth season of Dancing With the Stars alongside new pro Dmitry Chaplin, which she did primarily as a bet against husband Ty Murray. However, five days before the season premiere, she suffered stress fractures in the tibia of both legs and was forced to withdraw. "Dancing Without Two Stars — Jewel, O'Dell" USA Today. March 5, 2009 It is unknown if Jewel might appear in a future season.

Writing

Jewel published a book of poetry titled A Night Without Armor in 1998. Although it sold over 1 million copies and was a The New York Times Best Seller list, it received mixed reviews.  The reviewer Edna Gundersen, writing in USA Today, noted, "Hers is flowery and sensitive.  His is wry and absurd."Gundersen, Edna, "A rare Jewel of a poetic parody," USA Today, September 16, 1998.
Jewel went on to write an autobiography titled Chasing Down the Dawn in 2000, a collection of diary entries and musings detailing her life growing up in Alaska, her struggle to learn her craft and life on the road.
Jewel was scheduled to release a third book called Love Poems, which was supposed to be an extremely intimate portrayal of her relationship with her boyfriend, Ty Murray. It was canceled several months before release because Jewel was worried about Murray's mother's reaction to her intimate confessions.

Philanthropy

In 1995 Jewel played Dorothy in The Wizard of Oz in Concert: Dreams Come True, a musical performance of the popular story at Lincoln Center to benefit the Children's Defense Fund. The performance was originally broadcast on Turner Network Television (TNT), and issued on CD and video in 1996.
She formed a nonprofit organization called Higher Ground for Humanity with her mother, Lenedra J. Carroll, and her older brother, Shane Kilcher. The organization's focus is education, sustainable improvements, and building alliances with like-minded organizations.  One early grantee was the Global Youth Action Network, which has become one of the largest youth movements around the United Nations.
In September 2006, as part of Lifetime's "Stop Breast Cancer for Life" campaign, Jewel delivered more than 12 million petition signatures to Capitol Hill, urging Congress to pass the bipartisan Breast Cancer Patient Protection Act of 2005 (S 910/HR1849). The bill would ban the practice of "drive-through" mastectomies, when women are discharged from the hospital just hours after their surgeries.
Jewel served as the honorary chairperson of the 2006 Help the Homeless Walk in Washington, DC.
In May 2013 Jewel served as ambassador for the ReThink: Why Housing Matters initiative. She was included in the initiative's public service announcement (PSA) which asked Americans to rethink their views on public housing and consider how it benefits people in their own communities.

Project Clean Water: Celebrity Lyrics Auction

In November 2008 Jewel began work on a project with several dozen singer-songwriters to write and auction their lyrics with donations benefiting her "Project Clean Water" charity.com/gossip/Lyrics-For-Life-Project-Clean-Water-Auction-is-LIVE-256696.html

Personal life

Jewel married pro rodeo cowboy Ty Murray on August 7, 2008 in the Bahamas after 10 years together.Ulrica Wihlborg Jewel and Ty Murray Welcome a Son, July 12, 2011, People Magazine
Jewel is the daughter of Atz Kilcher, who currently stars in the Discovery Channel show Alaska: The Last Frontier.
Her cousin is actress Q'orianka Kilcher who is best known for her role as Pocahontas opposite Colin Farrell and Christian Bale in director Terrence Malick Academy Award-nominated motion picture, The New World (2005).
Jewel identifies as a feminist and has said, "I don't think I started off young as a feminist. I read a lot of books in Alaska, I was pretty isolated where I grew up, and I think that I never thought I was any different than a man; I was raised in a place where pioneer women were very strong still. They'd shoe horses and build their own homes and were very self-sufficient. It wasn't really until I've gotten older that I really became a fan of women. And a fan of what women are capable of balancing and achieving, by just being them."

Discography

Albums

DVDs

Books

Major tours

Awards






