[[Harry Dean Stanton]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, Male actors from Kentucky, American male film actors, American military personnel of World War II, American male television actors, Living people, People from Estill County, Kentucky, United States Navy sailors, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, American male singers, Musicians from Kentucky

Harry Dean Stanton (born July 14, 1926) is an American actor, musician, and singer.  Stanton's career has spanned over fifty years, which has seen him star in such films as Escape From New York, Paris, Texas, Kelly's Heroes, Dillinger, Alien, Repo Man, Pretty In Pink, The Last Temptation of Christ, Wild at Heart, The Green Mile and The Pledge. In the late 2000s, he played a recurring role in the HBO television series Big Love.

Early life

Stanton was born in Kentucky, the son of Sheridan Harry Stanton, a tobacco farmer and barber, and  Ersel (née Moberly), a hair dresser  He has two younger brothers, Archie and Ralph, and a younger half-brother, Stan. The family had a musical background. Stanton attended Lafayette High School and the University of Kentucky in Lexington where he performed at the Guignol Theatre under the direction of UK theater icon Wallace BriggsCopley, Rich, "Lexington Film League has a hit in the Harry Dean Stanton Festival", kentucky. Retrieved 2013-09-20. and studied journalism and radio arts. "I could have been a writer," he told an interviewer for a 2011 documentary, Harry Dean Stanton: Crossing Mulholland, in which he sings and plays the harmonica.ket.php?nola=KMUSE+000402#details "I had to decide if I wanted to be a singer or an actor. I was always singing. I thought if I could be an actor, I could do all of it." Briggs encouraged him to leave the university and become an actor. He studied at the Pasadena Playhouse in Pasadena, California, where his classmates included his friends Tyler MacDuff and Dana Andrews.
Stanton is a US Navy veteran of World War II. He served as a cook aboard an LST during the Battle of Okinawa.Wild at Heart

Career

Stanton has appeared in indie and cult films (Two-Lane Blacktop, Cockfighter, Escape from New York, Repo Man), as well as many mainstream Hollywood productions, including Cool Hand Luke, The Godfather Part II, Alien, Red Dawn, Pretty in Pink, Stephen King's Christine and The Green Mile.  He has been a favorite actor of Sam Peckinpah, John Milius, David Lynch, and Monte Hellman, and is also close friends with Francis Ford Coppola. He appears as a complaining BAR (Browning Automatic Rifle) Man (uncredited) in the very beginning of the Gregory Peck film Pork Chop Hill in 1959.  He had a very small part in 1962's How The West Was Won as one of Charlie Gant's (Eli Wallach) gang, and followed with minor but eye-catching role as poetry-reciting beatnik in Danny Kaye film "The Man from the Diner's Club" in 1963.
His breakthrough partOney, Steve. A Character Actor Reaches Cult Status", The New York Times Magazine, November 16, 1986, Late City Final Edition, Section 6, p. 52. (Abstract free online; full article requires fee.) came with the lead role in director Wim Wenders' film Paris, Texas (1984). Playwright Sam Shepard, the movie's screenwriter had spotted Stanton at a Santa Fe, New Mexico, bar in 1983 while both were attending a film festival in that city, and the two fell into conversation. "I was telling him I was sick of the roles I was playing," Stanton recalled in a 1986 interview. "I told him I wanted to play something of some beauty or sensitivity. I had no inkling he was considering me for the lead in his movie." Not long afterward, Shepard phoned him in Los Angeles to offer Stanton the part of protagonist Travis, "a role that called for the actor to remain largely silent ... as a lost, broken soul trying to put his life back together and reunite with his estranged family after having vanished years earlier.""Harry Dean Stanton", TCM.d.
Stanton was a favorite of the late film critic Roger Ebert who has said that "no movie featuring either Harry Dean Stanton or M. Emmet Walsh in a supporting role can be altogether bad."  However, Ebert later admitted that Dream a Little Dream (1989), in which Stanton appeared, was a "clear violation" of this rule.
His television credits are extensive, including eight appearances between 1958 and 1968 on CBS' Gunsmoke and four on the network's Rawhide, as well as a cameo as himself on Two and a Half Men (having previously appeared with Jon Cryer in Pretty in Pink and with Charlie Sheen in Red Dawn), and alongside Sean Penn and Elvis Costello. He has been featured since 2006 as Roman Grant, the manipulative leader/prophet of a polygamous sect in the HBO television series Big Love.  He also played Henry in an episode of the television series Adam-12.
Stanton has also occasionally toured nightclubs as a singer/guitarist, playing mostly country-inflected cover tunes. He appeared in the Dwight Yoakam music video for "Sorry You Asked", portrayed a cantina owner in a Ry Cooder video for "Get Rhythm", participated in the video for Bob Dylan's "Dreamin' of You", and in 2003, appeared in the video for "Stop" by Black Rebel Motorcycle Club.
During 2010, he appeared on the NBC show Chuck for one episode, reprising his role as a repo man from the 1984 cult film Repo Man.
In 2011, the Lexington Film League created a festival to honor Stanton in the city where he spent much of his adolescence. The first Harry Dean Stanton Fest was three days of film screenings including Paris, Texas, Repo Man, Cool Hand Luke, and the premiere of a PBS documentary by director Tom Thurman entitled Harry Dean Stanton: Crossing Mulholland. All screenings were held at the historic Kentucky Theater. Hunter Carson, Stanton's co-star in Paris, Texas attended the festival and conducted a Q&A following the film.2011 > Harry Dean Stanton Fest, Lexington Film League website. Retrieved 2013-09-20."Harry Dean Stanton documentary to premiere at Kentucky Theatre", kentucky. Retrieved 2013-09-20.
The second annual Harry Dean Stanton Film Festival was held over a weekend in May 2012 at the Kentucky Theater and other venues in downtown Lexington. Festival co-producer Lucy JonesCo-Producers > Lucy Jones, Lexington Film League website. Retrieved 2013-09-20. visited with Stanton in California and brought back a filmed greeting for the festival, with introductions to the films and talk about films he was working on.
In 2012, he had brief cameos in the superhero blockbuster The Avengers, and in the action comedy Seven Psychopaths. He also had a brief role in the Arnold Schwarzenegger action film The Last Stand (2013).
Stanton is the subject of a 2013 documentary titled Harry Dean Stanton: Partly Fiction, directed by Sophie Huber and featuring film clips; interviews with collaborators including Wenders, Shepard, Kris Kristofferson, and David Lynch; and Stanton's singing."Harry Dean Stanton: Partly Fiction (2012)", IMDb page. Retrieved 2013-09-20.
The May 2013 Stanton festival in Lexington included an appearance by Crispin Glover, a co-star with Stanton in Wild at Heart, the 1989 comedy Twister and the Lynch-directed HBO original series Hotel Room in 1993; and a pre-release screening of the Partly Fiction.com, May 26, 2013. Retrieved 2013-09-20.

Filmography






