[[Assault weapon]]

CATEGORIES: Gun politics in the United States, United States firearms law

Assault weapon is a political and legal term that refers to different types of firearms, and that has differing meanings, usages and purposes. Whether or not assault weapons should be legally restricted more than other firearms, how they should be defined, and even whether or not the term "assault weapon" should be used at all, are questions subject to considerable debate. 
In discussions about firearms laws and politics in the U.S., assault weapon definitions usually include semi-automatic firearms with a detachable magazine and one or more cosmetic, ergonomic, or safety features, such as a flash suppressor,  pistol grip, or barrel shroud, respectively. Semi-automatic firearms fire and reload only one bullet (round) per trigger pull.
The exact definition of the term in this context varies among each of the various jurisdictions limiting or prohibiting assault weapon manufacture, importation, sale, or possession, and legislative attempts are often made to change the definitions.  Governing and defining laws include the now defunct Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994. At that time, the U.S. Justice Department said, "In general, assault weapons are semiautomatic firearms with a large magazine of ammunition that were designed and configured for rapid fire and combat use." State and local laws, sometimes modeled after the expired federal law, also define the term.
It has been asserted that the term is a media invention or a term that was intended by gun control activists to foster confusion with the public over differences between full automatic and semi-automatic firearms, while others argue that the term was promulgated by the firearms industry itself.
The term "assault weapon" is sometimes conflated with the term "assault rifle" which refers only to military rifles capable of switching between semi-automatic and fully automatic fire.  In the U.S., fully automatic firearms are regulated by laws such as the National Firearms Act of 1934 (NFA), which requires that they be registered and taxed, and the Firearm Owners Protection Act of 1986, as well as by state and local laws.
The term "assault weapon" is used to refer to anti-tank or anti-material explosive based weapons that are used by the military, such as the Shoulder-launched Multipurpose Assault Weapon (SMAW) portable rocket launcher.

Definitions and usage

The term "assault weapon" refers primarily but not exclusively to semi-automatic firearms that are able to accept detachable magazines and possess certain features.)
Only seven states have their own state-level assault weapon bans
Some semi-automatic pistols are defined as "assault weapons" Dictionary."Definition of "assault weapon", Dictionary. Retrieved December 29, 2012. Merriam-Webster's online definition is "any of various automatic or semiautomatic firearms; especially: assault rifle."Definition of "assault weapon", Merriam-Webster. Retrieved December 29, 2012.

History of terminology

During World War II, Adolf Hitler personally chose the name "Sturmgewehr" (literally, "storm rifle", translated in English as "assault rifle") to describe the first (the Sturmgewehr 44) of a new class of small arm, which combined the characteristics of a carbine, submachine gun and automatic rifle.  A half-decade earlier the propaganda-friendly term "Sturmgeschütz" ("storm gun") was similarly invented and applied to certain armored military vehicles, turretless tank chassis mounting artillery intended for direct fire support. Otherwise, in English, use of the term "assault weapon" was restricted, prior to the 1980s, to naming certain minor military weapons systems, for example, the Rifleman's Assault Weapon, an American grenade launcher developed in 1977 for use with the M16 assault rifle. 219.
In 1985, Art Agnos introduced a bill in the California State Assembly seeking to place restrictions on semi-automatic firearms capable of using detachable magazines of 20 rounds or more. The measure did not pass when it came up for a vote.
Popularization of the term "assault weapon" is attributed by many to the 1988 book "Assault Weapons and Accessories in America", written by gun-control activist Josh Sugarmann, and to subsequent public reaction to the January 1989 Cleveland School massacre in Stockton, CA.  Sugarmann wrote:

Others say the gun industry itself introduced the term "assault weapon" to build interest in new product lines. Phillip Peterson, the author of Gun Digest Buyer's Guide to Assault Weapons (2008) wrote:

Gun rights advocates consider the term "assault weapon" to be a misnomer intended to conflate civilian semi-automatic firearms with military assault rifles.
Civilian semi-automatic rifles identified as "assault weapons" are no more powerful than many other semi-automatic rifles legally used for hunting throughout the United States; they do not shoot faster or have greater range.

Defunct U.S. Federal Assault Weapons Ban

The Public Safety and Recreational Firearms Use Protection Act of 1994, more commonly known as the Federal Assault Weapons Ban, expired in 2004.  It banned the manufacture or importation of certain semi-automatic firearms that it defined as "semiautomatic assault weapons," commonly known as assault weapons.  Any firearms so defined that were already possessed at the time the law took effect were grandfathered in, and could be legally owned or transferred.  Another aspect of the law banned the manufacture or importation of magazines that could hold more than ten rounds of ammunition, with existing magazines grandfathered in as legal.
The Federal Assault Weapons Ban of 1994 defined certain firearms as assault weapons based on the features they possessed.  This included semi-automatic rifles with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features: a pistol grip, a folding or telescoping stock, a flash suppressor or threaded barrel, a bayonet mount, or a muzzle-mounted grenade launcher.  It included semi-automatic pistols with a detachable magazine and at least two of these features: a magazine that attaches outside the pistol grip, a threaded barrel, a barrel shroud, or an unloaded weight of 50 ounces or more. Additionally defined as assault weapons were semi-automatic shotguns with a rotating cylinder, or with at least two of these features: a pistol grip, a folding or telescoping stock, a detachable magazine, or a fixed magazine that can hold more than five rounds.
The ban also prohibited 19 specifically named models of firearms, as well as copies of those guns.  These included the AK-47, Uzi, Galil, AR-15, FN FAL, MAC-10, Steyr AUG, TEC-9, and Armsel Striker.

Failed Assault Weapons Ban of 2013 bill

On December 16, 2012, two days after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting, Senator Dianne Feinstein said she would introduce a new assault weapons ban on the first day of Congress. but the text of the bill introduced to the Senate did not include that provision.
On January 24, 2013, Feinstein introduced 

Differing state law definitions

Seven U.S. states have their own assault weapons bans.
In Illinois, proposed legislation in 2013 would have defined the term "semi-automatic assault weapon" to mean any semi-automatic firearm able to accept a detachable magazine. (January 4, 2013). Amendment to Senate Bill 2899, Illinois General Assembly web site. Retrieved January 18, 2013. "In this Section: "Semi-automatic assault weapon" means: ... (C-2) a semi-automatic rifle or a pistol with the capacity to accept a detachable magazine, a muzzle brake, or muzzle compensator..." The Illinois Rifle Association said most of the state's firearms owners owned one or more guns that would have been banned under the proposal.
Chicago defines certain firearms as assault weapons and bans those. Chicago which have no provision for the legal possession of guns that were owned before their laws were passed.

Relation to assault rifles

A common mistake stems from the conflation of the term "assault weapon" with the term "assault rifle", which refers to military rifles having selective fire capability.  Unlike assault rifles, semi-automatic firearms fire one round each time the trigger is pulled; the spent cartridge case is ejected and another cartridge is loaded into the chamber, without the manual operation of a bolt handle, a lever, or a sliding handgrip.  In contrast, a selective fire rifle may have the ability to fire in fully automatic mode, in which the rifle will repeatedly fire rounds in rapid succession with the trigger pulled once and held back, or fire in burst mode, in which two or three rounds will be fired as a burst each time the trigger is pulled, or fire in both fully automatic and burst modes.
Civilian ownership of assault rifles or any other full-automatic firearm is tightly regulated by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives under the National Firearms Act of 1934 as amended by Title II of the Gun Control Act of 1968.  Unlike "assault rifle", "assault weapon" has no consistent definition across all legal jurisdictions in the United States and is subject to varying definitions for varying purposes, including definitions that include common non-military firearms.  In this respect, it is primarily a legal term, with various statutory definitions in local, state, and federal laws that define them by a set of characteristics they possess, sometimes described as military-style cosmetic features.  Using lists of cosmetic features to define assault weapons was first codified by the language of the expired 1994 Federal Assault Weapons Ban.

Political and legislative issues

Whether or not the term "assault weapon" should be used at all and, if so, how the term should be defined and whether firearms defined as assault weapons should be legally restricted more than other firearms are questions subject to considerable debate as part of the arguments of gun politics in the United States. Gun-rights advocates prefer the term modern sporting rifles.
Prominent gun-control groups that support restrictions on ownership of firearms include the Brady Campaign"Federal Gun Laws: Assault-Style Weapons", Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence. Retrieved January 6, 2013. and the Coalition to Stop Gun Violence."Issues and Campaigns: Assault Weapons", Coalition to Stop Gun Violence. Retrieved January 6, 2013. Prominent opponents of assault-weapons bans include the National Rifle Association"Semi-Automatic Firearms and the 'Assault Weapon' Issue", National Rifle Association – Institute for Legislative Acton, June 3, 2011. Retrieved January 6, 2013. and Gun Owners of America."Assault Weapons Bans: A Solution in Search of a Problem", Gun Owners of America, December 24, 2008. Retrieved January 6, 2013. Gun-rights and sports shooting groups consider "assault weapon" to be a pejorative when used to describe civilian firearms,Amy Hunter, Gun sales booming across the nation (December 1, 2008). Culpeper Star-Exponent. Illinois Public Radio. Shooting Straight: Telling the Truth about Guns in America. Regnery Publishing. pp. 43–44.  considering it a politically driven catchphrase aimed to conflate non-automatic weapons with actual full-automatic assault rifles" which are already (since 1934) strictly regulated and cannot be obtained by civilians without prior clearance by US federal, state, and local authorities.
As of 2012, there are an estimated 2.5-3.7 million rifles from just the AR-15 family of rifles in civilian use in the United States; the total number of assault weapons in the United States among all types is not known.

Attributes commonly used in assault weapon definitions

Attributes commonly used in assault weapon definitions, and their purposes:



Notes

Further reading




