[[Aamir Khan]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Indian actors, Indian male voice actors, Indian male film actors, Indian film producers, Living people, Indian Muslims, Actors in Hindi cinema, Hindi-language film directors, Indian film directors, People from Mumbai, Filmfare Awards winners, Recipients of the Padma Shri, Recipients of the Padma Bhushan, Indian male child actors, People from Hardoi

Aamir Khan ( He is the recipient of numerous awards and nominations, including four National Film Awards and seven Filmfare Awards, and was honoured by the Government of India with the Padma Shri in 2003 and the Padma Bhushan in 2010.
Khan first appeared on screen as a child actor in his uncle Nasir Hussain's film Yaadon Ki Baaraat (1973). His first feature film role came with the experimental film Holi (1984), and he began a full-time career in film with a leading role in the highly successful tragic romance Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak (1988). His performance in the film and in the thriller Raakh (1989) earned him a Special Jury Award at the National Film Award ceremony. He established himself as a leading actor of Hindi cinema in the 1990s by appearing in several commercially successful films, including the romantic drama Dil (1990), the romance Raja Hindustani (1996), for which he won his first Filmfare Award for Best Actor, and the drama Sarfarosh (1999). He was also noted for playing against type in the critically acclaimed Canadian-Indian film Earth (1998).
In 2001, Khan started a production company, whose first release, Lagaan, was nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film and earned him a National Film Award for Best Popular Film and two more Filmfare Awards (Best Actor and Best Film). After a four-year absence from the screen, Khan continued to portray leading roles, most notably in the 2006 box-office hits Fanaa and Rang De Basanti. The following year, he made his directorial debut with Taare Zameen Par, a major success that garnered him the Filmfare Awards for Best Film and Best Director. Khan's greatest commercial successes came with the thriller Ghajini (2008), the dramedy 3 Idiots (2009), and the adventure film Dhoom 3 (2013), all of which held records for being the highest grossing Bollywood film of all-time.
In addition to acting, Khan is a humanitarian and has participated in and spoken out for various social causes, some of which have sparked political controversy. He has created, and featured as the host of the television talk show Satyamev Jayate through which he highlights sensitive social issues prevailing in India. Khan was married to his first wife, Reena Dutta, for fifteen years following which he married the film director Kiran Rao. He has three children{–}two with Dutta, and one with Rao through a surrogate.

Early life and background

Mohammed Aamir Hussain Khan was born on 14 March 1965 in Mumbai to Tahir Hussain, a film producer, and Zeenat Hussain.
As a child, Khan appeared on screen in two cameos. His first appearance was at the age of eight in a highly popular song in the Nasir Hussain-directed musical film Yaadon Ki Baaraat (1973).
At the age of sixteen, Khan was involved in the experimental process of making a 40-minute silent film entitled Paranoia that was directed by his school friend Aditya Bhattacharya.
Khan subsequently joined a theatre group called Avantar, where he worked backstage for a year and a half, following which he made his stage debut with a small role in their Gujarati play, Kesar Bina, at Prithvi Theatre.

Career

Actor

In addition to assisting Hussain, Khan acted in documentaries directed by the students of FTII, Pune.
Holi failed to garner a broad audience, but Nasir Hussain and his son Mansoor noticed Khan's performance in it and signed him on for Mansoor's directorial debut Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak (1988) alongside Juhi Chawla. The film was a tale of unrequited love and parental opposition based on the Shakespearean tragedy of Romeo and Juliet, with Khan portraying the leading role of Raj, a "clean-cut whole-some boy-next-door".
The year 1989 saw the release of Raakh, a crime thriller from Aditya Bhattacharya that was filmed before the production of Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak.
Khan had five film releases in 1990. He found no success with the sport film Awwal Number, the mythological thriller Tum Mere Ho, the romance Deewana Mujh Sa Nahin and the social drama Jawani Zindabad.
After that, he went on to appear in several other films in the late '80s and early '90s: Jo Jeeta Wohi Sikandar (1992), Hum Hain Rahi Pyar Ke (1993) (for which he also wrote the screenplay), and Rangeela (1995). Most of these films were successful critically and commercially.
Khan continued to act in just one or two films a year, then an unusual trait for a mainstream Hindi cinema actor. His only release in 1996 was the Dharmesh Darshan directed commercial blockbuster Raja Hindustani in which he was paired opposite Karisma Kapoor. The film earned him his first Filmfare Best Actor Award, after seven previous nominations, and went on to become the biggest hit of the year, as well as the third-highest grossing Indian film of the 1990s.
In 2001 he appeared in Lagaan. The film was a major critical and commercial success,
The success of Lagaan was followed by Dil Chahta Hai later that year, in which Khan co-starred with Saif Ali Khan and Akshaye Khanna, with Preity Zinta playing his love interest. The film was written and directed by the then newcomer Farhan Akhtar. According to critics, the film broke new grounds by showing Indian urban youth as they really are today. The characters depicted were modern, suave and cosmopolitan. The film did moderately well and was a success mostly in urban cities.
Khan then took a four-year break citing personal problems, and returned in 2005 with Ketan Mehta's Mangal Pandey: The Rising playing the title role of the real-life sepoy and a martyr who helped spark the Indian Rebellion of 1857.
Rakeysh Omprakash Mehra's award-winning Rang De Basanti was Khan's first release in 2006. His role was critically acclaimed, and the film went on to become one of the highest grossing Indian films of 2006.
His 2007 film, Taare Zameen Par was also produced by him and marked his directorial debut.
In 2008, Khan appeared in the movie Ghajini. The film was a major commercial success
In 2009, Khan appeared in the commercially and critically acclaimed film 3 Idiots as Ranchodas Chanchad. 3 Idiots has become the highest-grossing Bollywood film of all time in India,
On 6 May 2012, the highly anticipated show Satyamev Jayate debuted in English and all major Indian languages and received both popular and critical praise for its discussions on various social issues like female foeticide, child sexual abuse and dowry plaguing Indian society.
There was speculation that Khan had disagreements with Reema Kagti over the tone of the film, Talaash, which delayed its release date significantly.
Khan next venture was Dhoom 3 with Yash Raj Films. He has considered this to be his most difficult role in his career to date.
This was the third time that Khan topped the list of highest-grossing Bollywood films, having previously done so with Ghajini, in 2008, and with 3 Idiots a year later.

Film production and direction

In 2001 Khan set up a production company known as Aamir Khan Productions. Its first film was Lagaan. The movie was released in 2001, starring Khan as the lead actor. The film was selected as India's official entry to the 74th Academy Awards in the Best Foreign Language Film category. It was eventually chosen and nominated in that category but lost to No Man's Land. The film won numerous awards at several Indian award functions such as Filmfare and IIFA, and won the National Film Award for Most Popular Film, an award shared between Khan and the film's director, Ashutosh Gowariker. Khan later commented on the loss of Lagaan at the Oscars: "Certainly we were disappointed. But the thing that really kept us in our spirits was that the entire country was behind us".
For producing the documentary, Madness in the Desert, on the making of Lagaan, Khan and director Satyajit Bhatkal were awarded the National Film Award for Best Exploration/Adventure Film at the 51st National Film Awards ceremony.
In 2007 he produced the drama Taare Zameen Par which marked his directorial debut. Khan also played a supporting role in the film, sharing the screen with the debut of child actor Darsheel Safary. The film was initially conceived of and developed by the husband and wife team, Amole Gupte and Deepa Bhatia. It is the story of a young child who suffers in school until a teacher identifies him as dyslexic. The movie was critically acclaimed, as well as a box office success. Taare Zameen Par won the 2008 Filmfare Best Movie Award as well as a number of other Filmfare and Star Screen Awards. Khan's work also won him the Best Director. In 2008, Khan launched his nephew Imran Khan's debut in the film Jaane Tu... Ya Jaane Na under his production house. The film was a big hit in India, and eventually earned Khan another nomination for Best Movie at the Filmfare.
In 2011, Khan released his home production Dhobi Ghat.

Television

Khan made his television debut with his social issue based talk show Satyamev Jayte which started airing on 6 May 2012. Aamir was paid Rs. 30 million rupees per episode to host the Satyamev Jayate, and it makes him the highest paid host in Indian television industry (as on June 2012).
Satyamev Jayte opened to positive reviews and feedback from eminent personalities such as social activists, media houses, doctors, film and television personalities. Khan was also praised for his effort. The amount of research Aamir and his team has put into the show was clearly visible with the facts and figures presented. Every aspect of the issue was covered with great diligence."Satyamev Jayate: Aamir Khan's TV show is a movement – TV – Indian TV – ibnlive Parmita Uniyal from Hindustan Times praised the content and Khan for "steping in to do what journalists are supposed to do – make a difference. The show is a classic example of that."
Khan made to cover page of TIME magazine Asia edition in September 2012 issue with title "Khan's Quest" – "He is breaking the Bollywood mold by tackling India's social evils. Can an actor change a nation?"

Humanitarian and political causes

In April 2006, Aamir participated in the demonstrations put up by the Narmada Bachao Andolan committee with their leader Medha Patkar after the Gujarat government's decision to raise the height of the Narmada dam. He quoted to support adivasis (tribes), who might be displaced from their homes.
He has been supporting common causes; when asked about views on entertainment tax in 2012 budget Aamir said, "I don't want any reduction in that, all I expect is focus on education and nutrition."
On 30 November 2011, Khan was appointed national brand ambassador of UNICEF to promote child nutrition. He is part of the government organised IEC campaign to raise awareness about malnutrition.

In the media

In a 2009 interview, Khan states that he tends to take an independent approach to the world of filmmaking, noting that he does not "do different things; I try to do it in a different manner. I think every person should follow his/her dream and try and make it possible to create an ability to achieve it backed by its practicality." He has also indicated that he is more interested in the process of filmmaking than in the end result: "For me, the process is more important, more joyful. I would like to have my entire concentration on the process right from the first step."
Aamir Khan has a reputation for shunning award ceremonies and not accepting any popular Indian film awards. Though nominated many times, Khan has not attended any Indian film award ceremony as he feels "Indian film awards lack credibility".
In 2007, Khan was invited to have a wax imitation of himself put on display at Madame Tussauds in London.
In April 2013, he was among TIME magazine's list of the 100 Most Influential People in the World. He was honoured by the Government of India with the Padma Shri in 2003 and the Padma Bhushan in 2010. India.in. Retrieved 19 October 2011. The Times of India. Retrieved 19 October 2011. India.in. Retrieved 19 October 2011.

Personal life

Khan married Reena Dutta, who had a small part in Qayamat Se Qayamat Tak, on 18 April 1986. They have two children, a son named Junaid and a daughter, Ira. Reena was involved briefly in Khan's career when she worked as a producer for Lagaan. In December 2002, Khan filed for divorce, ending the 15-year marriage. Reena took custody of both children.
On 28 December 2005, Khan married Kiran Rao who had been an assistant director to Ashutosh Gowariker during the filming of Lagaan.
In 2007, Khan lost a custody battle for his younger brother Faisal to their father, Tahir Hussain. His father died on 2 February 2010.| Bollywood News | Hindi Movies News | News – BollywoodHungama.com

Filmography

Awards and honours








