[[American Psycho]]

CATEGORIES: 1991 novels, American novels adapted into films, Books about traders, Cannibalism in fiction, Fiction with unreliable narrators, Manhattan in fiction, Novels by Bret Easton Ellis, Novels set in New York City, Novels set in the 1980s, Obscenity controversies, Novels about prostitution, Adultery in novels, Novels with gay themes, Rape in fiction, Necrophilia in fiction, BDSM literature

American Psycho  is a novel by Bret Easton Ellis, published in 1991. The story is told in the first person by Patrick Bateman, a serial killer and Manhattan businessman. The book's graphic violence and sexual content generated a great deal of controversy before and after publication. A film adaptation starring Christian Bale was released in 2000 to generally favorable reviews.

Development

Ellis researched murders at the New York Public Library. His first draft of American Psycho left all the grisly scenes until last, to be added in later. In 2010, to one interviewer, Ellis commented: 

Plot

Set in Manhattan during the Wall Street boom of the late 1980s, American Psycho follows the life of wealthy young investment banker Patrick Bateman. Bateman, in his late 20s when the story begins, narrates his everyday activities, from his recreational life among the Wall Street elite of New York to his forays into murder by nightfall. Through present tense stream-of-consciousness narrative, Bateman describes his daily life, ranging from a series of Friday nights spent at nightclubs with his colleagues — where they snort cocaine, critique fellow club-goers' clothing, trade fashion advice, and question one another on proper etiquette — to his loveless engagement to fellow yuppie Evelyn and his contentious relationship with his brother and senile mother. Bateman's stream of consciousness is occasionally broken up by chapters in which he directly addresses the reader in order to critique the work of 1980s Pop music artists. The novel maintains a high level of ambiguity through mistaken identity and contradictions that introduce the possibility that Bateman is an unreliable narrator. Characters are consistently introduced as people other than themselves, and people argue over the identities of others they can see in restaurants or at parties. Whether any of the crimes depicted in the novel actually happened or whether they were simply the fantasies of a delusional psychotic is only perpetuated further by cinematic adaption.com/2010/05/18/bret-easton-ellis-on-american-psycho-christian-bale-and-his-problem-with-women-directors/
After killing Paul Owen, one of his colleagues, Bateman appropriates his apartment as a place to host and kill more victims. Bateman's control over his violent urges deteriorates. His murders become increasingly sadistic and complex, progressing from simple stabbings to drawn out sequences of torture, rape, mutilation, cannibalism, and necrophilia, and his grasp on sanity begins to slip. He introduces stories about serial killers into casual conversations and on several occasions openly confesses his murderous activities to his coworkers, who never take him seriously, do not hear what he says, or misunderstand him completely—for example, hearing the words "murders and executions" as "mergers and acquisitions." Bateman begins to experience bizarre hallucinations such as seeing a Cheerio interviewed on a talk show, being stalked by an anthropomorphic park bench, and finding a bone in his Dove Bar. These incidents culminate in a shooting spree during which he kills several random people in the street, resulting in a SWAT team being dispatched in a helicopter. This narrative episode sees the first-person perspective shift to a third-person one and the subsequent events are, although not for the first time in the novel, described in terms pertaining to cinematic portrayal. Bateman flees on foot and hides in his office, where he phones his attorney, Harold Carnes, and confesses all his crimes to the answering machine.
Later, Bateman revisits Paul Owen's apartment, where he had earlier killed and mutilated two prostitutes, carrying a surgical mask in anticipation of the decomposing bodies he expects to encounter. He enters the perfectly clean, refurbished apartment, however, filled with strong-smelling flowers meant, perhaps, to conceal a bad odor. The real estate agent, who sees his surgical mask, fools him into stating he was attending the apartment viewing because he saw an "ad in the Times" (when there was no such advertisement): she tells him to leave and never return.
At the end of the story, Bateman confronts Carnes about the message he left on his machine, only to find the attorney amused at what he considers a hilarious joke. Carnes tells Bateman that he is too much of a coward to have committed such acts. In the dialogue-laden climax, Carnes stands up to a defiant Bateman and tells him his claim of having murdered Owen is impossible, because he had dinner in London with him a few days before, not once but twice.
The book ends as it began, with Bateman and his colleagues at a new club on a Friday night, engaging in banal conversation.

Themes

According to Hunter, American Psycho is largely a critique of the "shallow and vicious aspects of capitalism."Contemporary Literary Criticism. Ed. Jeffrey W. Hunter. Vol. 229. Detroit: Thomson Gale, 2007. p228-294. From Literature Criticism Online. The characters are predominately concerned with material gain and superficial appearances, traits indicative of a postmodern world in which the 'surface' reigns supreme.  This leads Patrick Bateman to act as if "everything is a commodity, including people,"Contemporary Literary Criticism. an attitude that is further evident in the rampant objectification of women that occurs in the novel. This distancing allows Bateman to rationalize his actions,Brock, Leigh. "Distancing in Bret Easton Ellis' American Psycho. Notes on Contemporary Literature 24, no. 1 (January 1994): 6-8. in one anthropophagic scene, Bateman remarks "though it does sporadically penetrate how unacceptable some of what I'm doing actually is, I just remind myself that this thing, this girl, this meat, is nothing..."Ellis, Bret Easton. American Psycho. New York: Vintage Books, 1991. Page 345
Patrick Bateman's consumption of what he views as nothing more than a piece of meat is an almost parodically literal interpretation of a monster created by consumer culture.  This, combined with sex, violence, drugs, and other desires of the id, is how Bateman realizes his base urges in a superficial world. "Parodied to Death: The Postmodern Gothic of American Psycho. Modern Fiction Studies 46, no. 3 (fall 2000): 725-46.

Characters

Major characters

Minor characters

Controversy

The book was originally to have been published by Simon & Schuster in March 1991, but the company withdrew from the project because of "aesthetic differences". Vintage Books purchased the rights to the novel and published the book after the customary editing process. The book wasn't published in hardcover in the United States until 2012, when a limited hardcover edition was published by Centipede Press, Ellis received numerous death threats and hate mail after the publication of American Psycho.[ref]
 (University of Puerto Rico, Mayaguez). Chapter ''Pornography and Violence: The Dialectics of Transgression in Bret Easton Ellis's American Psycho'' provides an in-depth analysis of the novel.</ref><ref></ref>
In Germany, the book was deemed "harmful to minors", and its sales and marketing were severely restricted from 1995 to 2000. In Australia, the book is sold shrink-wrapped and is classified "R18" under national censorship legislation. The book may not be sold to those under 18 years of age. Along with other Category 1 publications, its sale is theoretically banned in the state of Queensland and it may only be purchased shrink-wrapped. In Brisbane, the novel is available to those over 18 from all public libraries and can still be ordered and purchased (shrink-wrapped) from many book stores despite this prohibition.classification.au/www/cob/find. I think it's cute. I love it."
Feminist activist Gloria Steinem was among those opposed to the release of Ellis' book because of its portrayal of violence toward women. Steinem is also the stepmother of Christian Bale, who played Bateman in the film. This coincidence is mentioned in Ellis' mock memoir Lunar Park.

Adaptations

2000 film

In 2000, writer Guinevere Turner and writer/director Mary Harron adapted American Psycho into a dark, comic film released by Lions Gate Films. This screenplay was selected over three others, including one by Ellis himself. Bateman is played by Christian Bale with Willem Dafoe and Reese Witherspoon in supporting roles. As a promotion for the film, one could register to receive e-mails "from" Patrick Bateman, supposedly to his therapist.
It polarized audiences and critics with some showering praise, others scorn. The film currently holds a 67% "Fresh" rating on Rotten Tomatoes.
A direct-to-video spin-off, American Psycho 2 was released and directed by Morgan J. Freeman. This spin-off was not based on the novel or the original film, as its only connection with the original is the death of Patrick Bateman (played by Michael Kremko wearing a face mask), briefly shown in a flashback.

Other adaptations

In 2009, Audible.Audible Announces New Modern Vanguard Line of Audiobooks. International Business Times A Hungarian version of the novel was written by Attila Hazai (1967-2012) called Budapesti skizo ("Budapest Psycho", 1997); it was Hazai's best known work but as of his death never translated into English.
In 2013, a Kickstarter campaign was launched by Ellis and others to get a musical stage adaptation made.kickstarter. The role of Patrick Bateman will be played by Matt Smith.
Also in 2013, FX was planning a TV series, set in the present, with Patrick Bateman in his 50s.





Further reading


