[[Hank Williams]]

CATEGORIES: 1923 births, 1953 deaths, Alabama Republicans, Alcohol-related deaths in West Virginia, American buskers, American country guitarists, American country singer-songwriters, American male singers, American people of English descent, Baptists from the United States, Country Music Hall of Fame inductees, Country musicians from Alabama, Drug-related deaths in West Virginia, Grammy Award-winning artists, Grand Ole Opry members, MGM Records artists, Musicians from Montgomery, Alabama, People from Greenville, Alabama, People with spina bifida, Pulitzer Prize winners, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, Songwriters Hall of Fame inductees, Yodelers

Hank Williams, Sr. (; September 17, 1923 – January 1, 1953), born Hiram King Williams, was an American singer-songwriter and musician. Regarded as one of the most significant country music artists, Williams recorded 35 singles (five released posthumously) that would place in the Top 10 of the Billboard Country & Western Best Sellers chart, including 11 that ranked number one.
Born in Mount Olive, Butler County, Alabama, Williams moved to Georgiana, where he met Rufus Payne, a black street performer who gave him guitar lessons in exchange for meals or money. Payne had a major influence on Williams's later musical style. During this time, Williams informally changed his name to Hank, believing it to be a better name for country music. He moved to Montgomery and his music career began there in 1937 when WSFA radio station producers hired him to perform and host a 15-minute program. He formed as backup the Drifting Cowboys band, which was managed by his mother, and dropped out of school to devote his time to his career.
When several of his band members were conscripted into military service during World War II, Williams had trouble with their replacements and was dismissed by WSFA due to his alcoholism. Williams eventually married Audrey Sheppard, who managed the singer for nearly a decade. After recording "Never Again" and "Honky Tonkin'" with Sterling Records, he signed a contract with MGM Records. In 1948 he released "Move It on Over", which became a hit, and also joined the Louisiana Hayride radio program. One year later, he released a cover of "Lovesick Blues", which carried him into the mainstream of music. After an initial rejection, Williams joined the Grand Ole Opry. He was unable to read or notate music to any significant degree. Among the hits he wrote were "Your Cheatin' Heart", "Hey, Good Lookin'", and "I'm So Lonesome I Could Cry".
Several years of back pain, alcoholism, and prescription drug abuse severely deteriorated Williams's health; he divorced Audrey and was dismissed by the Grand Ole Opry, citing unreliability and frequent drunkenness. Williams died in the early morning hours of New Year's Day in 1953 at the age of 29 from heart failure exacerbated by pills and alcohol. Despite his short life, Williams has had a major influence on twentieth-century popular music. The songs he wrote and recorded have been covered by numerous artists, and have been hits in various genres including pop, gospel, and blues.  He has been inducted into multiple music halls of fame.

Life and career

Early life

Williams's parents, Elonzo Huble "Lon" Williams and Jessie Lillybelle "Lillie" Skipper married on November 12, 1916.  Hank Williams was of English-American ancestry.smashwords.txt 
As a child, he was nicknamed "Harm" by his family and "Herky" or "Poots" by his friends.
