[[Las Palmas]]

CATEGORIES: Las Palmas, Port cities and towns on the Spanish Atlantic coast, Populated coastal places in Spain, Populated places established in the 1470s, 1478 establishments, Municipalities in Gran Canaria, Capitals in Africa, University towns

Las Palmas (), officially Las Palmas de Gran Canaria,{{efn|Full name pronunciation:
Las Palmas enjoys a subtropical climate, with mild to warm temperatures throughout the year. According to a study carried out by Thomas Whitmore, director of research on climatology at Syracuse University in the United States, Las Palmas enjoys "the best climate in the world".
It was founded as a city in 1478, considered the de facto only capital of the Canary Islands until the seventeenth century. Volumen I. Buenaventura Bonnet y Riveron. Real Sociedad Económica de Amigos del País de Tenerife, Editorial: Editorial Interinsular Canaria SA, publicado en Santa Cruz de Tenerife en 1980 (reedición de 1948) Páginas 104-106 Today, the city is capital of Canary Islands with Santa Cruz and home to the Canarian Ministry of Presidency (shared in a 4-year term with Santa Cruz de Tenerife), home to half of the Ministries and Boards of the Canarian Government, and home to the High Court of Justice of the Canary Islands. It is the judicial and commercial capital of the Canary Islands, and is also home to a great share of the executive power.

History

The city was founded by Juan Rejón on 24 June 1478, with the name "Real de Las Palmas". Rejón was head of the invading Castilian army, before engaging in war with the local Guanches (aboriginal people of the Canary Islands). In 1492, Christopher Columbus (Spanish:Cristóbal Colón) anchored in the Port of Las Palmas, and spent some time on the island on his first trip to the Americas. He also stopped on the way back to Spain. The  area of the city is named after him. In 1595 Francis Drake failed to plunder the island. The raid and partial destruction of Las Palmas by the Dutch under Vice Admiral Pieter van der Does in 1599 is considered a major event in the city's history. In 1927, Las Palmas was designated the premier capital of the Canary Island by decree of 30 November 1833,Real Decreto de 30 de noviembre de 1833 Wikisource
The Las Palmas seaport, Puerto de la Luz, known internationally as La Luz Port, benefited greatly from the closure of the Suez Canal during the Arab-Israeli conflict. Due to its situation as nexus of two continents and its importance as a tourist destination, many foreign workers have migrated to the city.
Las Palmas de Gran Canaria is a sister city of San Antonio, Texas in the United States, which was founded in 1718 by about 25 Canary Islanders.

Administrative divisions

Las Palmas is divided into five administrative districts, which in turn are subdivided into districts, not necessarily consistent with the traditional neighborhoods.

Climate

Las Palmas has a Subtropical—desert climate (BWh)  with Mediterranean precipitation patterns, with warm dry summers and moderately warm winters. Its average annual temperature is . Large fluctuations in temperature are rare.
On the August 1990 reported record, the average maximum temperature of the month during the day was . Las Palmas city has never recorded any snow."Valores Extremos for Las Palmas" (pdf) (www version) - Agencia Estatal de Meteorología
Annual average relative humidity is 68%, ranging from 65% in March to 71% in October. Sunshine duration hours is above 2,800 per year, from around 190 in winter (average above 6 hours of sunshine duration at day) to around 300 in summer (average 10 hours of sunshine duration at day).[ref]
</ref> It rains on average only 33 days a year, with total precipitation per year of only </ref>

Demographics

As of 2008 nearly 1/5 (18.35%) of all inhabitants of the Canary Islands live in Las Palmas.
Throughout history, Las Palmas received waves of immigrants from mainland Spain and countries from every continent. The majority of the population is Spanish, although there are large North and Sub-Saharan African and Latin American communities, as well as important historical minorities such as Indians (Sindhi) and Koreans and a growing population of Chinese.
Ethnically, most autochthonous Canarians are descendents of a mixture of Guanches (aboriginal people of the Canary Islands now extinct), the Spanish  and later European (mainly Spanish, Portuguese, Flemish, Irish, French, Italian and German) colonizers.

Higher education

Las Palmas is home to University of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria with appr. 25,000 students.

Culture

Las Palmas offers a variety of theater, cinema, opera, concerts, visual arts and dance performances. The city hosts the Canary Islands Music Festival, the Theatre and Dance and the International Film Festival. The main City Festival, celebrating the foundation of the "City Fiestas de San Juan" is held in June. The Carnival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria

Museums, theatres and exhibition halls

Auditorium and Convention Center

Libraries

The city has a wide network of libraries. Along with the 11 municipal libraries, there are three specialized centres:
A library is situated in the first floor of Woermann Tower.

Other cultural events

Neighborhoods

Nightlife

The historic district of Vegueta has regained great popularity in recent years, the meeting place of choice at weekends for many young people, who fill its bars and discos. In the port area are also numerous bars and nightclubs, particularly in the vicinity of Santa Catalina.
The Carnival of Las Palmas de Gran Canaria usually takes place between January and February each year; popular activities include Mogollon dances and queen and the drag queen galas. The WOMAD (World Of Music, Art & Dance) Festival usually occurs in November each year in the capital of Gran Canaria – 2010 marks the sixteenth edition.

Tourism

Beaches

The city has four main beaches: Las Canteras, Las Alcaravaneras, La Laja, and El Confital.

Parks and squares

