[[London Metropolitan University]]

CATEGORIES: London Metropolitan University, Educational institutions established in 2002, Daniel Libeskind buildings, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, 2002 establishments in England, Million+, Universities in London

London Metropolitan University, commonly known as London Met, is a public research university located in London, United Kingdom. It was established on 1 August 2002 by the amalgamation of the University of North London (formerly the Polytechnic of North London, established in 1896) and London Guildhall University (formerly the City  of London Polytechnic, established in 1848). the Irish Studies Collection and the Frederick Parker Collection.frederick-parker-foundation.org|The Fredrick Parker Collection
In 2011, following a review of its undergraduate education provision which revealed that 80% of its students were on just 80 courses, London Met announced it would be reducing the number of courses on offer. 
On 30 August 2012, the University's "highly-trusted status" with the UK Border Agency of the Home Office was revoked, revoking the University's right to sponsor new visa applications for non-EU/EEA foreign students, as well as revoking the existing visas of the University's pre-existing non-European foreign students, causing them to be excluded from the University, and compelling them to seek places with alternative institutions. The university's licence to recruit international students has now been reinstated.

History

London Metropolitan University was formed on 1 August 2002 by the merger of London Guildhall University and the University of North London. In October 2006, the University opened a new Science Centre, part of a £30m investment in its science department at the North campus close to Holloway Road, with a "Super Lab" claimed to be one of Europe's most advanced science teaching facilities, and 280 workstations equipped with digital audio visual interactive equipment.

London Guildhall University

In 1848 Charles Blomfield, the Bishop of London, called upon the clergy to establish evening classes to improve the moral, intellectual and spiritual condition of young men in London. In response, the bishop Charles Mackenzie, who instituted the Metropolitan Evening Classes for Young Men in Crosby Hall, Bishopsgate, London, with student fees at one shilling per session. Subjects on the original curriculum included Greek, Latin, Hebrew, English, History, Mathematics, Drawing and Natural Philosophy. This fledgling college came under royal patronage following the visit of Prince Albert to the classes in 1851. In 1860 the classes moved to Sussex Hall, the former Livery Hall of the Bricklayers' Company, in Leadenhall Street. By this time, some 800 students were enrolled annually.
In 1861 the classes were reconstituted and named the City of London College. Over the next twenty years, the College was one of the pioneers in the introduction of commercial and technical subjects. The college built new premises in White Street at a cost of £16,000 (contributions were received from Queen Victoria and the Prince of Wales) and were opened in 1881. In 1891 the college joined Birkbeck Institute and the Northampton Institute to form the City Polytechnic by a Charity Commissioners' scheme to facilitate funding for these institutions by the City Parochial Foundation, and to enable the three institutions to work cooperatively. However this attempted federation did not function in practice, as each institution continued to operate more or less independently. The City Polytechnic concept was dissolved in 1906 and the City of London College came under the supervision of London County Council.
In December 1940 the college's building was destroyed by a German air raid. City of London College subsequently moved into premises at 84 Moorgate in 1944. In 1948, the City of London College celebrated its centenary with a service of thanksgiving addressed by the Archbishop of Canterbury at St Paul's Cathedral. In 1970 the college merged with Sir John Cass College to form the City of London Polytechnic. From 1992 to July 2002, the institution was known as London Guildhall University.
Under the Further and Higher Education Act 1992 the Polytechnic was awarded University status, previously having awarded the degrees of the former Council for National Academic Awards. London Guildhall University was named in order to show its links with the City of London and the City's many guilds/livery companies. It was unassociated with the Guildhall School of Music and Drama, based at the Barbican Centre. The schools was ranked 30th out of the UK's 43 new universities in the 2001 Research Assessment Exercise.
The former LGU campus is now the city campus and is located at the intersection of the City of London financial district and the old East End, near Aldgate East, Tower Hill and Liverpool Street tube stations. There are buildings located at Minories, Jewry Street, Central House, Moorgate, Whitechapel High Street, Calcutta House, Commercial Road and Goulston Street. There is a gymnasium for the use of staff and students at the Whitechapel High St. building, thumb|Calcutta House which was named after the Indian port of Calcutta

University of North London

Founded as the Northern Polytechnic Institute in 1896, it merged in 1971 with the North Western Polytechnic which was established in 1929, to become the Polytechnic of North London. Until the passing of the Education Reform Act 1988, the Polytechnic was under the control of the Inner London Education Authority – part of the then Greater London Council and awarded the degrees of the former Council for National Academic Awards. Under the Further and Higher Education Act 1992, the institution, a pioneer of widening participation and access to higher education, was granted University status and the right to award its own degrees. Following the merger with London Guildhall University, London Metropolitan University became the largest unitary university in Greater London.
The former UNL campus is now the North campus and is located on Holloway Road, near Holloway Road and Highbury & Islington tube stations.

Dalai Lama Honorary Doctorate controversy

In May 2008, London Metropolitan University presented the 14th Dalai Lama with an Honorary Doctorate of Philosophy,London Metropolitan University – Dalai Lama visits, Times Higher Education Supplement 29 May 2008 for "promoting peace globally".UK University honours Dalai Lama, BBC 20 May 2008 This move caused controversy among the Chinese public and the overseas Chinese community,

Student number controversy

In July 2008 it was reported that a financial crisis was looming for the University. London Met had been misreporting data on student drop-outs for several years and, consequently, the Higher Education Funding Council for England (HEFCE) was proposing to claw back at least £15 million for the overpayment in 2008-9.
News of the crisis led to a demonstration of staff and students outside the universities Tower Building in January 2009. They were calling for the vice-chancellor to be sacked and standing against possible job cuts.
In February 2009 the figure of overpayment was revised to £56 million by HEFCE, who were seeking to recover the money.
On 19 March 2009, in response to the crisis, vice-chancellor Brian Roper resigned his position with immediate effect but continued to receive his salary until December 2009.
On 29 April 2009, the University and College Union (UCU) announced that members at London Metropolitan University voted overwhelmingly in favour of strike action and 'action short of a strike' against the loss of at least 550 jobs.
In May 2009 Alfred Morris, former vice-chancellor of the University of the West of England and University of Wales, Lampeter, was appointed interim vice-chancellor.
The government announced in May 2009 that there would be an independent inquiry, exploring the possibility that HEFCE had colluded with London Met by failing to query implausibly low drop-out rates. Following conclusion of the report, the chair of HEFCE called on "senior staff" and the entire Board of Governors to resign, noting that HEFCE was not convinced that the University's management could effectively safeguard public funds.Lucy Hodges and Richard Garner, "London Met warned that it could be closed", The Independent, 7 December 2009
A report commissioned by the University, published in November 2009, found that Roper had "the major responsibility and culpability" for the financial situation: Roper and some members of the executive were aware that the University had been applying its own interpretation of funding rules on student dropouts – rather than the funding council's – since 2003, but took no action. The University's board of governors and audit committee had an oversight role, which made them ultimately "accountable for a financial failure of this magnitude" and meant that they "must take overall responsibility".

2011 course changes

In early 2011, London Metropolitan University announced an overhaul of undergraduate education for students entering courses in 2012. This included a reduction in the number of courses from 557 to 160. The announcement also signalled a move from semester-long to year-long modules, and thirty weeks of teaching, a gain of six weeks on the current average. The University argues that the longer learning time will help increase the opportunity for development and guidance before students move to final examinations.John Morgan, "London Met applicants trapped in limbo by course closures and Ucas deadline", Times Higher Education, 5 May 2011

Proposed alcohol-free zones

In April 2012 the University was reported to be considering creating alcohol-free zones and events to enable Muslim students (who form 20% of the student population) to take part more comfortably.

UK Home Office/Border Agency action, and consequences

On 16 July 2012 the UK Border Agency of the UK Home Office suspended the University's "highly-trusted status" with the Border Agency, a status required in order for the University to be eligible to sponsor both new student visa applications as well as existing student visas, for foreign students from outside of the European Union and the European Economic Area (or Switzerland). The University was one of three institutions to have such a status suspended.
On 30 August 2012, the University's highly-trusted status was revoked, London Metropolitan's visa licence revoked
The Immigration Minister, Damian Green, cited a number of reasons for the decision, including the discovery that more than a quarter of the students in the test sample did not in fact have leave to remain in the UK, that the University did not have and could not provide sufficient proof of English-language proficiency standards for some of its students, and the fact that the University was unable to confirm the attendance of its students, in some 57% of the sampled cases.
In September the university announced it was beginning legal action against the border agency over the licence issue.
In April 2013 the university regained its licence to sponsor international students for Tier 4 visas. The High Court case against the UKBA continues.londonmet.ac.cfm

Campuses

The main university campus is at Holloway in Islington. There are smaller campuses at Aldgate and Moorgate in the City of London. The Aldgate campus includes the Sir John Cass Faculty of Art, Architecture and Design.

Academic profile

London Metropolitan is the largest "single university" in London, offering about 160 degree courses, The University's operations are overseen by a board of governors comprising external members and senior administrative and academic staff.

Faculties and schools

The University comprises four faculties each of which is subdivided into a number of schools. Research is conducted in a number of faculty-based research institutes and centres.

Scholarships

The University invests over £700,000 annually in its scholarship programme to help academically excellent students as well as students with outstanding achievements in various sports disciplines, such as hockey, tennis and basketball. The University also offers postgraduate scholarships, a range of full tuition scholarships, including some scholarships with free accommodation. Scholarships are offered in conjunction the BBC World Service, International Student House and Mahatma Gandhi Foundation. The University has several student exchange programmes with academic institutions in the US and Europe, with financial support for those who participate through the Erasmus programme.

Rankings and reputation

In the past, the University refused to participate in newspaper league tables on the grounds that Universities should be assessed by the UK Government and not (private) newspapers. The new management reversed this policy and in the 2013 rankings (published in 2012), the University was placed 118th out of 120 universities in the Guardian University Guide 2013.
In the 2011 Institutional Audit, the Quality Assurance Agency expressed "reasonable confidence" in the "academic standards" of the University's awards.
The architecture department was ranked 18th and 20th in 2011 and 2012 in the Guardian University League Tables. American Studies placed 20th, 17th and 18th in 2011, 2012 and more recently, at the newly published Complete University Guide 2013.thecompleteuniversityguide.co. It is also ranked 58th out of 96 in Research Assessment.thecompleteuniversityguide.co.uk/league-tables/rankings?s=Law
The university also entered the QS World University Rankings of top universities in the world for the first time placing at 651-700 bracket.theguardian.com/education/2013/sep/10/harvard-cambridge-world-university-rankings

Student life

Student union

The university student union is known as "MetSU", and is affiliated with the National Union of Students

Media

Student media at London Metropolitan University include:

In fiction

The 1997 Mike Leigh film Career Girls is about a reunion between two women who shared a flat six years earlier whilst studying at the Polytechnic of North London.

Notable people

Notable alumni

=Arts and media=

=Business, marketing and law=

=Politics and public affairs=

=Royalty=

=Sciences=

=Sports=

Notable staff






