[[High Fidelity (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 compilation albums, 2000 films, 2000 soundtracks, 2000s drama films, 2000s romantic comedy films, American comedy-drama films, American rock music films, American romantic comedy films, English-language films, Films about music and musicians, Films based on novels, Films directed by Stephen Frears, Films set in the 1980s, Films set in the 1990s, Films set in Chicago, Illinois, Films shot in Chicago, Illinois, Film soundtracks, Hollywood Records compilation albums, Hollywood Records soundtracks, Touchstone Pictures films, Working Title Films films, Films based on works by Nick Hornby, Film scores by Howard Shore

High Fidelity is a 2000 American comedy-drama film directed by Stephen Frears and starring John Cusack and Danish actress Iben Hjejle. The film is based on the 1995 British novel of the same name by Nick Hornby, with the setting moved from London to Chicago and the name of the lead character changed. After seeing the film, Hornby expressed his happiness with John Cusack's performance as Rob Gordon (changed from Rob Fleming in the book), saying, "At times, it appears to be a film in which John Cusack reads my book".

Plot

The film centers on Rob Gordon (John Cusack), a self-confessed music geek with a poor understanding of women. After getting dumped by his current girlfriend, Laura (Iben Hjejle), he decides to look up some of his old partners in an attempt to figure out where he keeps going wrong in his relationships.
He spends his days at his record store, Championship Vinyl, where he holds court over the customers that drift through. Helping Rob in his task of musical elitism are Dick (Todd Louiso) and Barry (Jack Black), the "musical moron twins," as he refers to them. Armed with an encyclopedic knowledge of all things musical, they compile "top five" lists for every conceivable occasion, openly mock the ignorance of their customers, and, every so often, sell a few records.
Rob and the staff have a strong dislike for two shoplifting skateboarder teenagers, Vince (Chris Rehmann) and Justin (Ben Carr). One day, he listens to a recording that they did (actually "The Inside Game" by Royal Trux) and offers them a record deal, starting his own label called "Top 5 Records". During his off hours, he pines for Laura and does his best to win her back.
Rob soon hears that Laura's father, who liked Rob, has died, and attends his funeral with Laura. Shortly after the reception, Rob realizes he never committed to Laura and always had one foot out the door. This made him realize he neglected his own future in the process. Afterwards, he and Laura move back in together again, and she organizes an evening where he has the opportunity to revisit a love of his youth: de-jaying. It is also a celebration of the recently released single by the two delinquents, where Barry's band plays "Let's Get It On".

Cast

Production

Nick Hornby's book was optioned by Disney's Touchstone Pictures in 1995 where it went into development for three years. They wrote a treatment that was immediately greenlit by Roth.

Screenplay

The writers decided to change the book's setting from London to Chicago because they were more familiar with the city and it also had a "great alternative music scene", according to Pink.
Cusack found that the greatest challenge adapting the novel was pulling off Rob Gordon's frequent breaking of the fourth wall and talking directly to the audience. The screenwriters did this to convey Rob's inner confessional thoughts and were influenced by a similar technique in the Michael Caine film, Alfie. Cusack rejected this approach because he thought that "there'd just be too much of me". Once director Stephen Frears signed on to direct, he suggested using this technique and everyone agreed to use it.
Cusack and the writers floated the idea that Rob could have a conversation with Bruce Springsteen in his head, inspired by a reference in Hornby's book where the narrator wishes he could handle his past girlfriends as well as Springsteen does in his song, "Bobby Jean" on Born in the U.S.A. They never believed they would actually get the musician to appear in the film, but thought putting him in the script would get the studio excited about it. Cusack knew Springsteen socially and called the musician up and pitched the idea. Springsteen asked for a copy of the script and afterwards agreed to do it.

Casting

Frears was at the Berlin Film Festival and saw Mifune's Last Song, starring Iben Hjejle, and realized that he had found the actress for the role. Frears read Hornby's book and enjoyed it but did not connect with the material because it was not about his generation.

Soundtrack

One of the challenges that the screenwriters faced was figuring out which songs would go where in the film because Rob, Dick, and Barry "are such musical snobs", according to Cusack. He and his screenwriting partners listened to 2,000 songs and picked 70 song cues.

Reception

High Fidelity premiered at the El Capitan Theater in Hollywood. The post-party was held at the Sunset Room where Tenacious D performed.

Reviews

The film received positive reviews. Critical aggregator Metacritic gave the film a score of 79 out of 100, based on reviews from 35 critics, and indicating "generally favorable reviews".
Film critic Roger Ebert gave the film four out of four stars and wrote, "Watching High Fidelity, I had the feeling I could walk out of the theater and meet the same people on the street — and want to, which is an even higher compliment".
After seeing the film, Hornby expressed his approval of John Cusack's performance as Rob Gordon (changed from Rob Fleming in the book), saying, "At times, it appears to be a film in which John Cusack reads my book."

Legacy

Empire magazine readers voted High Fidelity the 446th greatest film in their "500 Greatest Movies of All Time" poll.. Also in 2006 a musical based upon the movie High Fidelity (musical) premiered on Broadway and ran for 13 performances.



Further reading




