[[Blastoise]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional tortoises, Fictional turtles, Pokémon species, Video game characters introduced in 1996, Fictional reptilians, Video game characters with water abilities

Blastoise, known in Japan as , is a Water type Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak's Pokémon franchise. Created by Ken Sugimori, Blastoise first appeared in the video games Pokémon Red and Blue and subsequent sequels, later appearing in various merchandise, spinoff titles and animated and printed adaptations of the franchise. Its name is composed by the words "Blast" and "Tortoise" and is also a pun as "Blast Toys".

Concept and characteristics

Blastoise was one of several different designs conceived by Game Freak's character development team and finalized by Ken Sugimori for the first generation of Pocket Monsters games Red and Green, which were localized outside of Japan as Pokémon Red and Blue.
Blastoise, known as the Shellfish Pokémon, is the final stage in Squirtle evolution. It takes on an appearance radically different from its previous forms; the most obvious change is the addition of two retractable cannons on its shell. It is also a girthier and more imposing figure: the shape of its head is completely reformed; its limbs are now stout and segmented, bearing visible claws; and its once sought-after tail is short and somewhat stubby. The afore-mentioned cannon spouts are remarkable adaptations, allowing a Blastoise to shoot water with great power and accuracy. The jets of water it spouts from the rocket cannons on its shell can punch through thick steel, Despite being large and heavy, Blastoise can still move well on either two legs or all fours. Blastoise can be found living on island beaches near the ocean, but their preferred habitat seems to be freshwater ponds and lakes.

Appearances

In the video games

Blastoise first appeared in Pokémon Red and Blue as a Pokémon obtained by evolving the Pokémon Squirtle through leveling up. Squirtle is obtained at the beginning of the game where players may choose from it, Bulbasaur, or Charmander. It is the mascot for the Blue version. It also appears in the remakes Pokémon Yellow and Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen. Since then, Blastoise has appeared in each main Pokémon title. Outside of the main series, Blastoise is seen in Pokémon Pinball, Pokémon Trozei!, the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon titles, the Pokémon Ranger titles, Pokémon Rumble, and PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure. Blastoise also appears in Super Smash Bros. Melee as both a Pokémon that can be summoned from the Poké Ball item to use against opponents and a collectible trophy. Blastoise is one of several Pokémon in Pokémon X and Y that will able to use the new Mega Evolution mechanic, becoming Mega Blastoise.

In the anime

A handful of trainers in the anime series have owned Blastoise, notably Gary Oak who raised one from a Squirtle, his starter.

In the manga

In the Pokémon Adventures manga, Green stole a Squirtle from Prof. Oak's Lab. This Squirtle ultimately becomes a Blastoise, nicknamed Blasty, with a tricky personality like its owner, and becomes the major powerhouse on Green's team. it also provided a quick route of aerial transport by withdrawing its limbs into its shell, and blasting water out from its cannons to propel itself forward. Green lent Blasty to Red to assist his journey on Mt. Silver. Blasty inherited the ultimate water attack, Hydro Cannon, directly from Kimberly, without requiring the Jump Path, Catch Path, and Battle Path to master the skills.

Reception

IGN's Pokémon Chick called it "quite popular".





Death Battle Pokemon Battle Royal

