[[Houston]]

CATEGORIES: Houston, Texas, Capitals of former nations, Cities in Fort Bend County, Texas, Cities in Harris County, Texas, Cities in Montgomery County, Texas, Cities in Texas, County seats in Texas, Populated coastal places in Texas, Populated places established in 1836, Port cities and towns of the United States Gulf Coast

Houston (
Houston was founded in 1836 on land near the banks of Buffalo Bayou (now known as Allen's Landing)
Houston's economy has a broad industrial base in energy, manufacturing, aeronautics, and transportation. It is also leading in health care sectors and building oilfield equipment; only New York City is home to more Fortune 500 headquarters.", Greater Houston Partnership. Retrieved on 2009-03-21.

History

In August 1836, two real estate entrepreneurs—Augustus Chapman Allen and John Kirby Allen—from New York, purchased  The Allen brothers decided to name the city after Sam Houston, the popular general at the Battle of San Jacinto, who was elected President of Texas in September 1836.
Houston was granted incorporation on June 5, 1837, with James S. Holman becoming its first mayor. Handbook of Texas Online. Retrieved on 2007-01-10. In the same year, Houston became the county seat of Harrisburg County (now Harris County) and the temporary capital of the Republic of Texas.[ref]
</ref> In 1840, the community established a chamber of commerce in part to promote shipping and waterborne business at the newly created port on Buffalo Bayou.<ref>[ John Perry, City Savvy Online Edition. Published Summer 2006. Retrieved on 2007-02-06.</ref>
By 1860, Houston had emerged as a commercial and railroad hub for the export of cotton. Railroad spurs from the Texas inland converged in Houston, where they met rail lines to the ports of Galveston and Beaumont. During the American Civil War, Houston served as a headquarters for General John Bankhead Magruder, who used the city as an organization point for the Battle of Galveston. After the Civil War, Houston businessmen initiated efforts to widen the city's extensive system of bayous so the city could accept more commerce between downtown and the nearby port of Galveston. By 1890, Houston was the railroad center of Texas.
In 1900, after Galveston was struck by a devastating hurricane, efforts to make Houston into a viable deep-water port were accelerated.J.H.W. Stele to Sayers, September 11–12, 1900. Texas State Library & Archives Commission, Retrieved on August 31, 2007 The following year, oil discovered at the Spindletop oil field near Beaumont prompted the development of the Texas petroleum industry.
President Woodrow Wilson opened the deep-water Port of Houston in 1914, seven years after digging began. By 1930, Houston had become Texas' most populous city and Harris the most populous county.[ref]
</ref> In 1940, the Census Bureau reported Houston's population as 77.5% white and 22.4% black.<ref name="census1"/>
When World War II started, tonnage levels at the port decreased and shipping activities were suspended; however, the war did provide economic benefits for the city. Petrochemical refineries and manufacturing plants were constructed along the ship channel because of the demand for petroleum and synthetic rubber products during the war.[ref]
