[[Chicory]]

CATEGORIES: Belgian inventions, Food additives, Dietary supplements, Prebiotics, Leaf vegetables, Spices, Coffee substitutes, Flora of Michigan, Cichorieae, Plants described in 1753

Common chicory, Cichorium intybus,
"Chicory" is also the common name in the United States for curly endive (Cichorium endivia); these two closely related species are often confused.

Names

Common chicory is also known as blue daisy, blue dandelion, blue sailors, blue weed, bunk, coffeeweed, cornflower, hendibeh, horseweed, ragged sailors, succory, wild bachelor's buttons, and wild endive. (Note: "Cornflower", is more commonly applied to Centaurea cyanus.)  Common names for varieties of var. foliosum include endive, radicchio, Belgian endive, French endive, red endive, sugarloaf and witloof (or witlof).

Description

When flowering, chicory has a tough, grooved, and more or less hairy stem, from  tall.
The leaves are stalked, lanceolate and unlobed.
The flower heads are  wide, and usually bright blue, rarely white or pink.  There are two rows of involucral bracts; the inner are longer and erect, the outer are shorter and spreading. It flowers from July until October.
The achenes have no pappus (feathery hairs), but do have toothed scales on top.

Leaf chicory

Wild

Wild chicory leaves are usually bitter. Their bitterness is appreciated in certain cuisines, such as in the Liguria and Puglia regions of Italy and also in Catalonia (Spain), in Greece and in Turkey. in Albania the leaves are used as a spinach substitute, mainly served simmered and marinated in olive oil, or as ingredient for fillings of byrek.
By cooking and discarding the water the bitterness is reduced, after which the chicory leaves may be sautéed with garlic, anchovies and other ingredients. In this form the resulting greens might be combined with pasta or accompany meat dishes. Llomillo fregit amb xicoires

Cultivated

Chicory may be cultivated for its leaves, usually eaten raw as salad leaves. Cultivated chicory is generally divided into three types, of which there are many varieties:
The Catalogna chicory (also known as puntarelle) includes a whole subfamily (some varieties from Belgian endive and some from radicchio) of chicory and used throughout Italy.
Although leaf chicory is often called "endive", true endive (Cichorium endivia) is a different species in the genus and shouldn't be confused with Belgian endive.

Root chicory

Root chicory (Cichorium intybus var. sativum) has been cultivated in Europe as a coffee substitute. The roots are baked, ground, and used as a coffee substitute and additive, especially in the Mediterranean region (where the plant is native). As a coffee additive, it is also mixed in Indian filter coffee, and in parts of Southeast Asia, South Africa and southern United States, particularly in New Orleans. It has been more widely used during economic crises such as the Great Depression in the 1930s and during World War II in Continental Europe. Chicory, with sugar beet and rye, was used as an ingredient of the East German Mischkaffee (mixed coffee), introduced during the "East German coffee crisis" of 1976-79.
Some beer brewers use roasted chicory to add flavor to stouts. Others have added it to strong blond Belgian-style ales, to augment the hops, making a "witlofbier", from the Dutch name for the plant.
Around 1970 it was found that the root contains up to 20% inulin, a polysaccharide similar to starch. Inulin is mainly found in the plant family Asteraceae as a storage carbohydrate (for example Jerusalem artichoke, dahlia, yacon etc.). It is used as a sweetener in the food industry with a sweetening power  and is sometimes added to yogurts as a prebiotic. Inulin is also gaining popularity as a source of soluble dietary fiber and functional food. Sangronis E. "Inulin and derivates as key ingredients in functional foods. Review" Spanish  Archivos Latinoamericanos de Nutricion. 57(4):387-96, 2007 Dec.
Chicory root extract is a dietary supplement or food additive produced by mixing dried, ground chicory root with water, and removing the insoluble fraction by filtration and centrifugation.   Other methods may be used to remove pigments and sugars. It is used as a source of soluble fiber.  Fresh chicory root typically contains, by dry weight, 68% inulin, 14% sucrose, 5% cellulose, 6% protein, 4% ash, and 3% other compounds.  Dried chicory root extract contains, by weight, approximately 98% inulin and 2% other compounds.
Fresh chicory root may contain between 13 and 23% inulin, by total weight.

Agents responsible for bitterness

The bitter substances are primarily the two sesquiterpene lactones Lactucin and Lactucopicrin. Other ingredients are Aesculetin, Aesculin, Cichoriin, Umbelliferone, Scopoletin and 6.7-Dihydrocoumarin and further sesquiterpene lactones and their glycosides. Journal of the Science of Food and Agriculture, 81, 467-484 (online)

Medicinal use

Root chicory contains volatile oils similar to those found in plants in the related genus Tanacetum which includes Tansy, and is similarly effective at eliminating intestinal worms. All parts of the plant contain these volatile oils, with the majority of the toxic components concentrated in the plant's root. Tilford, ISBN 0-87842-359-1
Chicory is well known for its toxicity to internal parasites. Studies indicate that ingestion of chicory by farm animals results in reduction of worm burdens,[ref]
</ref><ref>
</ref><ref>
</ref> which has prompted its widespread use as a forage supplement.  Only a few major companies are active in research, development, and production of chicory varieties and selections, most in New Zealand.
Chicory (especially the flower), used as a folk medicine in Germany, is recorded in many books as an ancient German treatment for everyday ailments. It is variously used as a tonic and as a treatment for gallstones, gastro-enteritis, sinus problems and cuts and bruises. (Howard M. 1987). Chicory contains inulin,  In rats, it may increase calcium absorption and bone mineral density.
Chicory has demonstrated antihepatotoxic potential in animal studies., Qazi M.A., Shah A., Shah M.Y. "Curative potential of Kashni (Cichorium intybus Linn.) extract against carbon tetrachloride induced hepatocellular damage in rats"  Pharmacologyonline 2010 2 (971-978)Hassan HA. Yousef MI. "Ameliorating effect of chicory (Cichorium intybus L.)-supplemented diet against nitrosamine precursors-induced liver injury and oxidative stress in male rats."Food & Chemical Toxicology. 48(8-9):2163-9, 2010 Aug-Sep. Khan S. Masood MH. Siddique AH."Anti-hepatotoxic activity of cichotyboside, a sesquiterpene glycoside from the seeds of Cichorium intybus." Journal of Asian Natural Products Research. 10(3-4):223-31, 2008 Mar-Apr.L. Zafar R. Mujahid Ali S."Anti-hepatotoxic effects of root and root callus extracts of Cichorium intybus"  Journal of Ethnopharmacology. 63(3):227-31, 1998 Dec.

Alternative medicine

Chicory has been listed as one of the 38 plants that are used to prepare Bach flower remedies, a kind of alternative medicine. However according to Cancer Research UK, "there is no scientific evidence to prove that flower remedies can control, cure or prevent any type of disease, including cancer".

Forage

Chicory is highly digestible for ruminants and has a low fiber concentration. Molan AL. Lopez-Villalobos N. Barry TN. McNabb WC."Effects of grazing undrenched weaner deer on chicory or perennial ryegrass/white clover pasture on the viability of gastrointestinal nematodes and lungworms."  Veterinary Record. 151(12):348-53, 2002 Sep 21. Houdijk JG. Athanasiadou S. Tolkamp BJ. Kyriazakis I."Effects of maternal protein nutrition and subsequent grazing on chicory (Cichorium intybus) on parasitism and performance of lambs." Journal of Animal Science. 88(4):1513-21, 2010 Apr. Schreurs NM. Molan AL. Lopez-Villalobos N. Barry TN. McNabb WC. Veterinary Record. 151(12):348-53, 2002 Sep 21. Large quantities of tannins bind with and precipitate proteins, resulting in low digestibility and nutrient reduction.
Although chicory might have originated in France, Italy, and India,

Forage chicory varieties

History

The chicory plant is one of the earliest cited in recorded literature. Horace mentions it in reference to his own diet, which he describes as very simple: "Me pascunt olivae, me cichorea, me malvae" ("As for me, olives, endives, and mallows provide sustenance"). By 1795 there were 22 to 24 factories of this type in Brunswick. Lord Monboddo describes the plant in 1779Letter from Monboddo to John Hope, 29 April 1779; reprinted by William Knight 1900 ISBN 1-85506-207-0 as the "chicoree", which the French cultivate it as a pot herb. In Napoleonic Era France chicory frequently appeared as either an adulterant in coffee, or a coffee substitute. Chicory was also adopted as a coffee substitute by Confederate soldiers during the American Civil War, and has become common in the United States. It was also used in the United Kingdom during the Second World War, where Camp Coffee, a coffee and chicory essence, has been on sale since 1885.
The cultivated chicory plant has a history reaching back to ancient Egyptian time. Medieval monks raised the plants and when coffee was introduced to Europe, the Dutch thought that chicory made a lively addition to the bean drink.
In the United States chicory root has long been used as a substitute for coffee in prisons.(a) Delaney, John H. "New York (State). Dept. of Efficiency and Economy Annual Report". Albany New York, 1915, p. 673. Accessed via Google Books. (b) "Prison Talk" website; Kentucky section:  By the 1840s, the port of New Orleans was the second largest importer of coffee (after New York). Louisianans began to add chicory root to their coffee when Union naval blockades during the American Civil War cut off the port of New Orleans, thereby creating a long-standing tradition.
A common meal in Rome, puntarelle, is made with chicory sprouts. The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) reports that Chicory is a native plant of western Asia, North Africa, and Europe.
Chicory is also mentioned in certain sericulture (silk-growing) texts. It is said that the primary caretaker of the silkworms, the "silkworm mother", should not eat or even touch it.
The chicory flower is often seen as inspiration for the Romantic concept of the Blue Flower (e. g. in German language 'Blauwarte' ≈ 'blue lookout by the wayside'). It could open locked doors, according to European folklore. Traditional Folk Remedies (Century, 1987), p.120.






