[[Frontier Airlines]]

CATEGORIES: Airlines established in 1994, Airlines of the United States, Companies based in Denver, Colorado, Companies that have filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy, Republic Airways, 1994 establishments in Colorado

Frontier Airlines is a United States ultra low-cost airline headquartered in Denver, Colorado, USA. The carrier, which is a subsidiary and operating brand of Indigo Partners, LLC, operates flights to 77 destinations throughout the United States, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Jamaica, and Mexico."Routes & Schedules." Frontier Airlines. The airline maintains a hub at Denver International Airport with focus cities at Cleveland-Hopkins International Airport in Cleveland, Ohio, at Trenton-Mercer Airport near Trenton, New Jersey and at Wilmington-Philadelphia Regional Airport in Wilmington, Delaware. Through a code-share agreement with Great Lakes Airlines the airline connects passengers to surrounding Rocky Mountain States.

History

1990s

Frontier Airlines was incorporated on February 8, 1994, by a group that included executives of a previous incarnation of Frontier Airlines in response to the void left by Continental Airlines 1993 shutdown of its Denver (Stapleton) hub. Like the original, Frontier flew out of Denver and for the first 9 years used the slogan "The Spirit of the West" which was displayed above the windows and just behind the cursive letters "Frontier" on the fuselage of their aircraft. In 1999, Frontier signed agreements to begin purchasing and leasing Airbus A318 and A319 jet aircraft to expand its fleet.

2000s

Frontier took delivery of its first Airbus aircraft (an A319) in 2001 and simultaneously launched with it DirecTV in-flight television along with a new company livery.  Frontier Airlines was the launch customerA318 is certificated as newest and smallest Airbus aircraft of the Airbus A318 in 2003. In mid-April 2005, Frontier officially became an all-Airbus fleet, retiring its last Boeing 737.
As part of its plan to stay competitive in reaction to the entry of Southwest Airlines into Denver, the company underwent a reorganization early in 2006. On April 3, 2006, Frontier created Frontier Airlines Holdings, Inc. (FRNT), a holding company incorporated in Delaware to take advantage of favorable tax laws in that state. The corporate headquarters did not leave Colorado.
On January 11, 2007, Frontier Airlines announced it had signed an 11-year service agreement with Republic Airlines. Under the agreement, Republic was to operate 17, 76-seat Embraer 170 aircraft for the former Frontier JetExpress operations. At the time the contract was canceled in April 2008, Republic Airlines operated 11 aircraft for Frontier Airlines, with the remaining six aircraft expected to join the fleet by December 2008. With the integration of Republic aircraft, the 'JetExpress' denotation was removed. Subsequent to the cessation of Horizon's services for Frontier in December 2007, all flights operated by Republic were sold and marketed as "Frontier Airlines, operated by Republic Airlines." The first market created specifically for the Embraer 170 was Louisville, Kentucky, which began on April 1, 2007. Service to Louisville was suspended in August 2008 but restarted in April 2010.
On January 24, 2007, Frontier was designated as a major carrier by the United States Department of Transportation.
Flights operated by Republic Airlines offered in-flight snack and beverage services similar to Frontier's mainline flights. Unlike Frontier's aircraft and due to the nature of contracting with regional carriers, these Embraer 170 aircraft were not fitted with LiveTV.

=Bankruptcy and acquisition by Republic=

On April 10, 2008, Frontier announced that it filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in reaction to the intent of its credit card processor, First Data, to withhold significant proceeds from ticket sales. First Data decided that it would withhold 100% of the carrier's proceeds from ticket sales beginning May 1. According to Frontier's press release, "This change in practice would have represented a material change to our cash forecasts and business plan. Unchecked, it would have put severe restraints on Frontier's liquidity..." Its operation continues uninterrupted, though, as Chapter 11 bankruptcy protects the corporation's assets and allows restructuring to ensure long-term viability.
After months of losses, Frontier Airlines reported that they made their first profit during the month of November 2008. Frontier Airlines reported $2.9 million in net income during the month of November.
On June 22, 2009, Frontier Airlines announced that pending bankruptcy court approval, Republic Airways Holdings, the Indianapolis based parent company of Republic Airlines, would acquire all assets of Frontier Airlines for the amount of $108 million. Thus, Frontier Airlines would become a wholly owned subsidiary of Republic.
During a bankruptcy auction on August 13, 2009, Republic Airways Holdings acquired Frontier Airlines and its regional airline, Lynx Aviation, as wholly owned subsidiaries.
In late 2009 Republic began to consolidate administrative positions and moved 140 jobs from the Frontier Airlines Denver headquarters to Indianapolis, Indiana. "More Frontier Airlines jobs leaving Denver." Denver Business Journal. Tuesday December 8, 2009.  Shortly after that, in January 2010, Republic Airways announced that it will move all of its executives to Indianapolis. "Republic Airways Moving Execs to Indianapolis." Associated Press at ABC News. January 14, 2010. 1. In February the Denver Business Journal stated that the headquarters would be moved "soon."Harden, Mark. "DIA fare wars: Frontier Airlines offers summer discounts to 7 new destinations." Denver Business Journal. Monday February 15, 2010. "Frontier is a unit of Republic Airways Holdings Co., based in Indianapolis. Frontier's headquarters will be moving soon to that city." Despite this, according to the Denver Business Journal, Frontier Airlines will still maintain a local headquarters in Denver to house Training, Marketing, Customer Reservations, and Scheduling & Planning teams after extending its lease on the building through 2020.
In 2010, Frontier's past CEO Bryan Bedford took part in the TV show Undercover Boss.

=Merger with Midwest Airlines=

As Republic Airways Holdings was in the process of bidding to acquire Frontier in 2009, it was also in the process of acquiring Milwaukee-based Midwest Airlines.  Through the fall and winter of 2009, Republic operated its two new acquisitions as separate brands.  However, to improve efficiency by better matching aircraft capacity to route demand, Republic began to intermix the fleets of the two airlines, swapping a portion of its higher-capacity planes from Frontier with its smaller-capacity planes from Midwest and vice versa.  However, the move caused some confusion amongst the public, as the two brands did not offer the same amenities and did not match the amenities mentioned on the airfare.  As a result, in the Spring of 2010 it was announced that the Frontier and Midwest Airlines brands would merge.  On April 13, Republic announced that the Frontier Airlines name would be kept, and employees were issued new Frontier uniforms. This was a merger of brands only—no Midwest Airlines aircraft was ever operated by Frontier, as by this time, all Midwest Airlines flights were operated on its behalf by other Republic Airways Holdings subsidiaries.
On April 13, 2011, Frontier announced the formation of a new subsidiary, Frontier Express, that was planned to operate the airline's smaller aircraft with different services than those available on full-size aircraft.

2010s

=Closing Milwaukee Hub=

After merging with Midwest Airlines, Frontier announced it was cutting 11 out of its 18 flights leaving a total of just 7 from MKE to Denver, Orlando, Rhinelander and Washington-National.jsonline.
On September 9, 2011, Frontier notified the public of a 40% reduction of arriving and departing flights from MKE. Along with this reduction of flights, the company laid off approximately 140 employees from the MKE station. This includes but is not limited to: maintenance, grooming services, flight-line and gate.
In February 2012, Frontier Airlines cut five nonstop routes from Milwaukee. This move "reduced Frontier's daily departing flights out of Mitchell International from 32 to 18," or 56%. Frontier announced further layoffs in conjunction with this route change: up to 446 Milwaukee-area employees were affected by the job cuts that occurred between April 15 and April 30, 2012.

=Republic Airways spinoff of Frontier=

In an effort to focus on regional contract flights for major carriers, Republic Airways announced in January 2012 its intention to sell or spin off Frontier. On January 26, 2012, Republic Airways announced that it had appointed former US Airways and Gate Gourmet CEO David Siegel as President and CEO of Frontier Airlines. Republic also announced the addition of new senior officers for Frontier's finance and commercial team, among other changes in the executive leadership team. Siegel and other Frontier executives moved to Denver where Frontier is now headquartered in order to facilitate management of all aspects of Frontier during its separation process from Republic and continue its transformation into an ultra-low-cost carrier.  

=Opening Trenton and Wilmington bases=

In November 2012, Frontier started low-frequency service between Orlando International Airport and Trenton-Mercer Airport near Trenton, New Jersey,Frontier's Trenton – Orlando Service Takes Flight | Frontier Airlines Newroom. News.com (2012-11-16). Retrieved on 2013-08-16. which, at the time, had no commercial service. Frontier later expanded service twice from Trenton, once in January 2013 to four additional destinationsFrontier's Service from Trenton Takes Flight | Frontier Airlines Newroom. News.com (2013-01-31). Retrieved on 2013-08-16. and a second time in April 2013 Now Boarding on Frontier Airlines! Fly to Five New Cities from Trenton Mercer-Airport | Frontier Airlines Newroom. News.com (2013-04-08). Retrieved on 2013-08-16. to five more, for a total of ten. Frontier currently bases two aircraft in Trenton. Trenton Mercer Airport lies roughly equidistant between Philadelphia International Airport and Newark Liberty International Airport.
In July 2013, Frontier started service from Wilmington-Philadelphia Regional Airport near Wilmington, Delaware to five destinations,Frontier Airlines Service from Wilmington/Philadelphia Takes Flight | Frontier Airlines Newsroom. News.com (2013-07-01). Retrieved on 2013-08-16. which Frontier markets as Wilmington/Philadelphia. Again, this airport had no commercial service prior to Frontier's entry. New Castle Airport lies roughly 30 miles southwest of Philadelphia International Airport and 75 miles northeast of Baltimore-Washington International Airport.
Frontier markets both Trenton-Mercer and Wilmington-Philadelphia airports as low-cost, low-hassle alternatives to the existing nearby commercial airports. Frontier remains the only commercial carrier at these two airports.
On February 28, 2014 Frontier Airlines announced it will be opening a crew base for flight attendants at Trenton-Mercer Airport in early June 2014.                              | Frontier Airlines Newsroom. News.com (2014-2-28). Retrieved on 2014-03-01

=Acquisition by Indigo Partners=

In October 2013, Republic Airways Holdings entered into an agreement with private equity firm Indigo Partners to sell Frontier Airlines for approximately $145 million. According to Indigo, the transaction would further Frontier's evolution into an ultra-low-cost carrier. In December 2013, Indigo Partners LLC, through an affiliate, completed the purchase of the Frontier Airline from Republic Airways Holdings. The airline's headquarters will remain in Denver. Republic Airways Holdings subsidiary Republic Airlines no longer continues to fly Embraer 190 aircraft on behalf of Frontier, ended on January 1, 2014.

Former Regional Carriers

Frontier Express

Chautauqua Airlines operated up to 12 Embraer 135 and 145 jets out of Milwaukee. Frontier began branding these flights as Frontier Express in the spring of 2011.  With the pull-down of the Milwaukee hub, the only route that continued to operate with a Frontier Express ERJ-145 jet was Milwaukee to Rhinelander.  However, Frontier service to Rhinelander ended on January 3, 2013, and Chautauqua is transitioning the remaining aircraft to flying for other partners.

Frontier JetExpress

In February 2002, the airline launched its first regional product, Frontier JetExpress, initially operated by Mesa Airlines using CRJ-200 regional jets. Similar to "express" operations of other carriers, Frontier JetExpress is targeted for markets to and from Denver that do not generate traffic sufficient to support Frontier's smallest mainline jet, the Airbus A318, but can still offer lucrative business with a smaller jet. The operation's head office was in the Hughes Center in Clark County, Nevada. Flight International. March 23–29, 2004. 78.
The initial JetExpress partnership with Mesa ended in January 2004, when Horizon Air was selected to operate the routes. Horizon utilized slightly larger CRJ-700 aircraft on these routes. In August 2006, Frontier and Horizon announced that their partnership would end. The last of the CRJ-700's was returned to the Horizon Air fleet on November 30, 2007.

Lynx Aviation

On September 6, 2006, Frontier announced that a new division of the holding company known as Lynx Aviation, would operate Bombardier Q400 aircraft beginning in May 2007. On December 5, 2007, Lynx Aviation received its operating certificate from the FAA. Lynx began passenger operations on the morning of December 6, 2007.
Since commencing operations, Lynx Aviation has added service to 12 regional destinations: Albuquerque, Aspen, Billings, Bozeman, Colorado Springs, Durango, Fargo, Jackson Hole (Seasonal), Oklahoma City, Rapid City, Tulsa, and Wichita. Two additional cities, Omaha and Salt Lake City, are served by Lynx Aviation along with Frontier Airlines mainline service.
On 19 August 2010, Frontier announced that Lynx would continue operations between Denver and three Colorado cities—Aspen, Durango and Colorado Springs—using three Bombardier Q400 aircraft,
In 2012, the Lynx Aviation operation was folded into Republic Airways subsidiary Republic Airlines.  The remaining Q400 aircraft were withdrawn from Frontier service and placed in service for United Airlines.

Destinations

Frontier Airlines currently flies to 78 destinations throughout Costa Rica, Mexico, the Dominican Republic and the United States. As of January 2014, Frontier operates 10 international destinations.

Codeshare agreement

Frontier Airlines has a codeshare agreement with Great Lakes Airlines, connecting flights through Denver and Phoenix. Flyfrontier. Retrieved on 2013-08-16.

Fleet

As of March 2014, the Frontier Airlines fleet consists of the following aircraft:

Frontier Airlines was the launch customer of the Airbus A318 but has removed them from their fleet as of August 2013. During the 2011 Paris air show, Republic Airways announced it had ordered 60 A320neo aircraft and 20 A319neo aircraft.

Livery

Until 2013, Frontier Airlines livery consisted of an all-white fuselage with  "FRONTIER" titles on the sides of the aircraft, and the company's former slogan "A Whole Different Animal". Frontier used wildlife photography on the vertical stabilizers and winglets of the aircraft to produce a distinctive look.Animal Tales
In April 2013, Frontier introduced a new livery,Frontier Airlines | FlyFrontier. Flyfrontier. Retrieved on 2013-08-16. keeping the iconic animals on aircraft tails, but dropping its former slogan and replacing "FRONTIER" with "FLYFRONTIER.com. Aircraft in the old livery now feature "FLYFRONTIER.
Animal concepts used in the livery extend into Frontier's marketing as well. Each animal has a specific name. Flyfrontier. Retrieved on 2013-08-16. Animal aircraft used in their radio and television commercials include Jack the rabbit, Grizwald the bear, Foxy the fox (for whom Jack has a crush), Flip the dolphin (who always gets stuck going to Chicago rather than the warmer climates the others are going to), Larry the lynx, Hector the sea otter, and Sal the cougar. New additions are Penguins Jim, Joe, Jay, and Gary, a barbershop-style quartet, singing the praises of EarlyReturns to an audience of Frontier's well-known characters from the "a whole different animal" campaign, and Hector the otter, advertising Frontier's expanding service to Mexico.

Frequent flyer program

The airline has a frequent-flyer program called EarlyReturns. It does not partner with any other airlines for cross-crediting of frequent flyer mileage credits.

Incidents and accidents






