[[Ford Park Cemetery]]

CATEGORIES: Cemeteries in England, Plymouth, Devon, Winners of the Queen's Award for Voluntary Service

Ford Park Cemetery is a  although it is now seldom referred to by that title.
The cemetery was originally . The older burial records have been deposited with the Plymouth and West Devon Record Office.
Among the more famous graves is that of the Reverend Robert Stephen Hawker, the author of The Song of the Western Men. There are 752 war graves from the First World War, over 200 of which are in a dedicated naval plot; and 198 war graves of the Second World War (including an unidentified airman) are scattered throughout the site. A Victoria Cross recipient of the Crimean War, Captain Andrew Henry, Royal Artillery, is buried here.homeusers.co.htm Burial Locations VC Holders, Devonshire.
The Victorian chapel building designed by J.R. Hamilton and James Medland is Grade II listed,
During the 1970s and 80s, poor management, a loss of revenue because few people were paying for the maintenance of plots, and the popularity of cremation, all led to the dilapidation of the site. After the original cemetery company went into liquidation and after much public debate, in 2000 a trust was set up which reopened the cemetery, made dangerous structures safe, cleared the undergrowth, obtained renovation grants and created a walking trail around some of the graves of notable people. The older of the two chapels which is shown above right in a photograph of its unrestored state has now been fully restored and refurbished as a setting for all varieties of religious or secular funeral or memorial services and is also used for concerts and other events.
The cemetery is a member of the Association of Significant Cemeteries in Europe and the trust was awarded the Queen's Award for Voluntary Service in 2005. (Archived here.) and provision of a memorial to the civilian dead of World War Two. It is estimated there are over 10,000 usable grave spaces remaining in the cemetery. The cemetery has rapidly become popular again as an attractive convenient and semi-rural setting close to the city centre and the densely populated but fashionable Victorian and Edwardian suburbs.
The City of Plymouth has two large early twentieth century municipal cemeteries at Weston Mill and Efford, each with chapels and now crematoria and the Drake Memorial Garden is near Elburton.






