[[John Stamos]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, 20th-century American male actors, 20th-century American musicians, 21st-century American male actors, 21st-century American musicians, Actors of Greek descent, American drummers, American male film actors, American male singers, American male soap opera actors, American male stage actors, American male television actors, American multi-instrumentalists, American people of English descent, American people of Greek descent, Living people, Male actors from Orange County, California, Musicians from Orange County, California, People from Cypress, California, Singers from California, Television producers from California

John Phillip Stamos ( From 2006 to 2009, Stamos had a starring role on the NBC medical drama ER as Dr. Tony Gates. In September 2009, he began playing the role of Albert in the Broadway revival of Bye Bye Birdie. In 2013, he assumed a recurring role in season three of the USA Network television series Necessary Roughness, which stars Callie Thorne.

Early life

Stamos was born in Cypress, California. He attended John F. Kennedy High School.) but his paternal grandparents shortened the name to Stamos when they moved to the United States from Greece. ('-poulos' -πουλος is a common Greek suffix in surnames, meaning "son of"; 'Stamat-' is the root, which is derived from the name Stamat-ios Σταμάτ-ιος --> Stamat-is Σταμάτ-ης, with the -o- in between being an addition for easier pronunciation).

Early career

Stamos began his acting career with the role of Blackie Parrish on the soap opera General Hospital in late January 1982, for which he was nominated for a Daytime Emmy Award in 1984. His stint on the show got him noticed by daytime viewers. Stamos decided to move on in April 1984, when he auditioned for and got the lead role in a short-lived CBS sitcom called Dreams, in which he played an aspiring musician in a band of the same name.
Later, he played a role in the sitcom You Again? (1986) with Jack Klugman.

Full House

In the late 1980s, ABC's Full House gradually became a hit, and the show solidified Stamos's career. In the first season, his character's full name was credited as Jesse Cochran. During the second season he then changed his character's last name to Katsopolis to highlight his Greek heritage, according to Jeff Franklin. He played one of the show's protagonists, Jesse, who lives with his brother in-law, whose deceased wife was Jesse's older sister. Danny's best friend, Joey, also lives in the house with them. The three help each other raise three young girls. Jesse is known to be the "bad boy" at first, until he falls in love with and marries Rebecca Donaldson and has twin boys, Nicky and Alex. In 1995, after eight seasons, the series came to an end. Stamos has since maintained close relationships with co-stars Bob Saget, Dave Coulier, Lori Loughlin, Jodie Sweetin, Mary-Kate and Ashley Olsen, and Candace Cameron Bure. As of 2014, the show airs in syndication on TBS and Nick at Nite.

Post-Full House

Since the show's end, Stamos has appeared in numerous made-for-television films, stage productions, television series and commercials. He had starring roles in the television series Thieves (2001) and Jake in Progress (2005). Both shows ran for several episodes before cancellation. In 2003, Stamos guest-starred in Friends, appearing in the episode The One with the Donor, playing a man who went to Chandler and Monica's apartment for dinner, not knowing he was actually being interviewed to be a sperm donor.
Stamos was a guest star in a first-season episode of MTV's, The Andy Milonakis Show (2005), playing himself. He took part in only one skit, which featured him in a tree, having rabies, and being put down by another character.
In the A&E television movie Wedding Wars (2006), he starred as Shel, a gay wedding planner. He stated that his performance reflected his support for same-sex marriages. "John Stamos Plays Gay On 'Wedding Wars, After Elton, December 11, 2006. Retrieved June 10, 2008.
He has made several voice acting appearances such as in the MTV animated series Clone High in the episode, "Changes: The Big Prom: The Sex Romp: The Season Finale", where he played himself, and as the What's Global Warming Penguin in Bob Saget's parody film Farce of the Penguins.
In 2006, Stamos guest starred in two episodes in season 12 of ER as paramedic-turned-intern Tony Gates. In 2006, at the start of ER's thirteenth season, he joined the cast of ER as a series regular. Executive producer John Wells said that he wanted him earlier the season before but Stamos was contracted with Jake in Progress. Shortly after that show was canceled, Stamos was brought aboard as a series regular.
In February 2008, Stamos appeared in the television adaptation of A Raisin in the Sun. In August 2008, Stamos was the roast master for Comedy Central Roast Of Bob Saget.
On June 8, 2010, it was announced that Stamos would portray Carl Howell, a new love interest for Emma Pillsbury (Jayma Mays), in season two of the popular television show Glee.
In 2011, Stamos guest starred on Law & Order: Special Victims Unit. and was featured in a CollegeHumor video with Bob Saget.collegehumor.
Since 2011, Stamos has appeared in a series of commercials for Dannon's Greek yogurt brand Oikos; including his first Super Bowl commercial which was aired during Super Bowl 2012.youtube.com/watch?v=y59VUQxX3Dk
In February 2012, it was reported that Stamos would take on one of the lead roles on the new Fox drama Little Brother. The series was created by Everybody Loves Raymond writer Mike Royce, and centers around a man who finds out that he has a long-lost half brother.
In March 2013, Stamos signed on in a recurring role on the USA Network drama Necessary Roughness, during season three. He will be playing Connor McClane, the head of a sports and entertainment management company that is interested in hiring Dani.

Music and theatre

Stamos started learning drums when he was four, and started his own band called Destiny. They had paying concerts at some amusement parks and parties.starpulse.com/Actors/Stamos,_John/Biography/

Independently

Stamos performed on an independently released 1994 album entitled Shades of Blue along with Lanny Cordola, Gary Griffin, Sandra Stephens, Tony Guerrero, and David Enos. Shades of Blue was re-released digitally through iTunes and other channels in 2010 after being long out-of-print.
Stamos appeared on Broadway as the emcee in Cabaret, and also in Nine and How To Succeed In Business Without Really Trying.
Stamos performed the Billy Joel song "Lullabye (Goodnight, My Angel)" on the 2006 charity album Unexpected Dreams – Songs From the Stars. He also performed the role of Emcee in the Broadway production of Cabaret.
Stamos performed on a Marianas Trench song, recorded on the album Masterpiece Theatre.
On March 30, 2009, he announced that he would participate in the Broadway revival of Bye Bye Birdie. Broadway World, January 22, 2010
Stamos was awarded a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on November 16, 2009. The star is located at 7021 Hollywood Blvd.
Stamos performed with John Fogerty on April 24, 2010 during one of the Tampa Bay Rays Post-Game Concerts. Stamos rotated between the tambourine, drums, & bass guitar throughout the concert.
In August 2011, Stamos performed in Hairspray at the Hollywood Bowl as Corny Collins, alongside an all-star cast.
On July 10, 2012, Stamos began performances on Broadway in Gore Vidal's The Best Man as Senator Joseph Cantwell.
On July 19, 2013, Stamos reprised his role as Jesse Katsopolis for a "Jesse and the Rippers" reunion on Late Night with Jimmy Fallon. Played straight by host Fallon (who introduced the band as being from San Francisco and having a number one song in Japan), Stamos performed a medley of songs featured on Full House including Forever and the series' theme song Everywhere You Look. Bob Saget and Lori Loughlin also made cameos.

The Beach Boys

Stamos, who plays the drums, keyboards, guitar, bass and various percussion instruments, has occasionally performed with The Beach Boys, dating back to 1985. In 1988, he appeared in their video for "Kokomo", in which he played both the conga drums and the steel drums. In 1990, he played drums for them on the title track of the comedy Problem Child.
In 1992, he sang lead vocals on a new version of "Forever" for their album Summer in Paradise. The song was originally written and sung by Beach Boy Dennis Wilson and released in 1970. The song was also featured twice on Full House. The first was a recording sung at his character's wedding, while the second was a recording sung for his character's twin sons. The 1992 music video, titled "Forever by Jesse and the Rippers", featured Stamos predominantly. Three of The Beach Boys members are however briefly shown singing harmonies with Stamos: Carl Wilson, Bruce Johnston, and Mike Love.
Since the 1990s, Stamos has regularly performed with The Beach Boys during their summer tours, playing drums and guitar, and singing some of their hit songs such as "Forever".
On the March 30, 2010 episode of ABC's Dancing with the Stars, Stamos appeared with them again, playing drums, congas, and guitar.
Stamos toured with The Beach Boys in the spring of 2010, including an appearance at Fort Myers, Florida.
In June 2011, Stamos performed with The Beach Boys at a benefit concert for the Terri Schiavo Life & Hope Network.Actor John Stamos To Perform With The Beach Boys 
On January 13, 2012, Stamos announced that he will also be performing with the Beach Boys for their 50th Anniversary Tour. However he only ended up appearing at several shows on the tour.
On May 26, 2013, Stamos performed with The Beach Boys during a postgame concert at Great American Ballpark in Cincinnati, Ohio.John Stamos added to The Beach Boys postgame concert on May 26 at GABP

Personal life

In 1994, he met Rebecca Romijn at a Victoria's Secret fashion show, where she was modeling. Two months later, the pair began dating. Divorce for John, Rebecca Romijn-Stamos, People, August 23, 2004. Retrieved June 10, 2008. On September 19, 1998, the couple married. They separated in April 2004, and divorced on March 1, 2005.
Stamos has a lifetime pass to Disneyland. In 2000, he purchased a sign at the entrance of Disneyland on eBay for $30,700.about.htm

Filmography

Television

Film

Awards and nominations

Wins

Nominations






