[[Smoky Hill River]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Colorado, Rivers of Kansas, Tributaries of the Kansas River, Geography of Cheyenne County, Colorado, Geography of Logan County, Kansas, Geography of Saline County, Kansas, Geography of Dickinson County, Kansas, Geography of Geary County, Kansas, Geography of Ellsworth County, Kansas, Geography of McPherson County, Kansas, Geography of Ellis County, Kansas

The Smoky Hill River (Pawnee: Aahkáwirarahkata ) is a  river in the central Great Plains of North America, running through the U.S. states of Colorado and Kansas. (2009). In Encyclopædia Britannica. Retrieved July 22, 2009, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online: 

Names

The Smoky Hill gets its name from the Smoky Hills region of north-central Kansas through which it flows. American Indians living along the Smoky Hill considered it and the Kansas River to be the same river, and their names for it included Chetolah and Okesee-sebo.  Early maps of European explorers called the river (also in combination with the Kansas River) the River of the Padoucas as its source is located in what was then Padouca (Comanche) territory.
The USGS lists a number of other variant names for the Smoky Hill River, including Chitolah River, Fork of the Hill Buckaneuse, La Fourche de la Cote Boucaniere, La Touche de la Cote Bucanieus, Manoiyohe, Pe P'a, Sand River, Shallow River, Smoky Creek, Branche de la Montagne a la Fumee, Ka-i-urs-kuta, Oke-see-sebo River, and Rahota katit hibaru, among others.

Geography

The Smoky Hill River originates in the High Plains of eastern Colorado and flows east. Both the main course of the river and the North Fork Smoky Hill River rise in northern Cheyenne County, Colorado. The Smoky Hill joins the Republican River at Junction City, Kansas to form the Kansas River.
The Smoky Hill River directly drains an area of  Via the Kansas and Missouri Rivers, the Smoky Hill is part of the Mississippi River watershed.
The Smoky Hill feeds two reservoirs: Cedar Bluff Reservoir in Trego County and Kanopolis Lake in Ellsworth County.
The largest city along the Smoky Hill River is Salina. Besides Junction City, other Kansas towns along the river are Ellsworth, Marquette. Lindsborg, Kansas, and Abilene.

History

The earliest known reference to the river was on a 1732 map by French cartographer d'Anville who labeled it the River of the Padoucas. A 1758 map referred to it as the Padoucas River. An early reference to the river as the Smoky Hill was by American explorer Zebulon Pike during his 1806 expedition to visit the Pawnee. The Kansas-Nebraska Act of 1854 established Kansas Territory, which included the entire length of the Smoky Hill River. 
With the onset of the Pike's Peak Gold Rush in 1858, an ancient Native American trail along the Smoky Hill River provided the shortest, fastest route west across Kansas, becoming known as the Smoky Hill Trail.
In 1948, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers finished construction of a dam on the Smoky Hill for flood control in southeastern Ellsworth County, Kansas, creating Kanopolis Lake.






