[[Venusaur]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional reptilians, Pokémon species, Video game characters introduced in 1996, Fictional dinosaurs, Plant characters, Fictional characters with plant abilities

Venusaur, known in Japan as , is a Grass/Poison type Pokémon species in Nintendo and Game Freak's Pokémon franchise. Created by Ken Sugimori, Venusaur first appeared in the video games Pokémon Red and Blue and subsequent sequels, later appearing in various merchandise, spinoff titles and animated and printed adaptations of the franchise.

Concept and characteristics

Venusaur was one of several different designs conceived by Game Freak's character development team and finalized by Ken Sugimori for the first generation of Pocket Monsters games Red and Green, which were localized outside of Japan as Pokémon Red and Blue. As a result it was renamed Venusaur, which IGN wrote is a combination of "venus" from the plant venus flytrap and "saur" from dinosaur.Pokemon Blue Guide & Walkthrough - Game Boy - IGN
Venusaur, known as the Seed Pokémon, is the final stage in Bulbasaur evolution. The seed finally bloomed into a huge flower, vaguely resembling a Rafflesia. The flower constantly draws in sunlight for nutrition, characterized by vivid colors and a soothing aroma, and power, which is much more substantial in the summer. As a result, it is more powerful in the summertime. 

Appearances

In the video games

Venusaur first appeared in the video games Pokémon Red and Blue and in its remakes Pokémon Yellow and Pokémon FireRed and LeafGreen. It served as the mascot for both LeafGreen and the Japanese exclusive version of Red and Blue titled Pocket Monsters Green. It evolves from Ivysaur which evolves from Bulbasaur, one of the three starting Pokémon available to players in most of the above mentioned games; in Yellow, Bulbasaur was available at a later point in the game. It has since appeared in every main Pokémon title since. Outside of the main series, Venusaur appears in Pokémon Pinball, Pokémon Trozei!, the Pokémon Mystery Dungeon titles, the Pokémon Ranger titles, Pokémon Rumble, and PokéPark Wii: Pikachu's Adventure. In Super Smash Bros., it appears in the Saffron City stage and attacks anyone that comes within range of it. In Super Smash Bros. Melee, Venusaur appears as a Pokémon that can be summoned from a Poké Ball to attack opponents as well as a collectible trophy. Venusaur is one of several Pokémon in Pokémon X and Y that will able to use the new Mega Evolution mechanic, becoming Mega Venusaur.

In other media

Venusaur has appeared several times in the anime. In Bulbasaur's Mysterious Garden, a wild one was leading an evolution ceremony for Bulbasaur in Kanto. Another Venusaur was the ruler of a forest in Hoenn where grass Pokémon lived. May also had a Bulbasaur that evolved into a Venusaur. Besides, Venusaur has been owned by Drake of the Orange Crew, an artist called Gan Gogh, Noland the Factory Head and Spencer the Palace Maven of the Battle Frontier and a business man/guitarist called Jeremy. May used her Venusaur in Pokémon contests. In the Pokémon Adventures manga, the character Red receives a Bulbasaur from Professor Oak, which he nicknames Saur. Pokémon Adventures, Volume 1: Desperado Pikachu, VIZ Media LLC, 2000-07-06. ISBN 1-56931-507-8. It ultimately evolves into an Ivysaur,Kusaka, Hidenori, & Mato. Pokémon Adventures: Legendary Pokémon, Vol. 2; Chapter 33, Chapter 15, "Wartortle Wars", (pg 7–20) VIZ Media LLC, 2001-12-06. ISBN 1-56931-508-6. and In Chapter 33, "The Winged Legends", Red's Ivysaur evolves into a Venusaur to team up with Blue's Charizard and Green's Blastoise, to defeat Sabrina's Zapmolcuno (a merged form of Zapdos, Moltres and Articuno) and destroy Team Rocket's control on Saffron City, splitting the three birds in the process. Pokémon Adventures, Volume 3: Saffron City Siege; Chapter 33, "The Winged Legends" (pp 77–95) VIZ Media LLC, 2001-08-05. ISBN 1-56931-560-4

Reception

Venusaur received fairly positive reception. Complex's Elijah Watson commented, "most of us grew up" with Venusaur.






