[[J. Wellington Wimpy]]

CATEGORIES: Comic book sidekicks, Fictional con artists, Popeye characters

J. Wellington Wimpy, generally referred to as Wimpy,In Italian, Wimpy is known as "Poldo Sbaffini"; his surname is a reference to his scrounging habits. The Italian name was also adopted in the Greek editions as Πόλντο. In Spanish, Wimpy is "Pilón", Spanish for "pestle", which may refer to the character's body shape. In Sweden Wimpy is called Frasse and, unlike in the American version where he eats hamburgers, he instead eats parisare, a similar Swedish dish. is one of the characters in the long-running comic strip Popeye, created by E. C. Segar and originally called Thimble Theatre, and in the Popeye cartoons based upon the strip. Wimpy was one of the dominant characters in the newspaper strip, but when Popeye was adapted as an animated cartoon series by Fleischer Studios, Wimpy became a minor character; Dave Fleischer said that the character in the Segar strip was "too intellectual" to be used in film cartoons.  Wimpy did appear in Robert Altman's 1980 live-action musical film Popeye, played by veteran character actor Paul Dooley.

Inspiration

The character seems to be inspired by someone whom Segar encountered during his career. According to fellow cartoonist Bill Mauldin, the name was suggested by that of Wellington J. Reynolds, one of Segar's instructors at the Chicago Art Institute.W. Norton & Co., 1972 His personality was based upon that of William Schuchert, the manager of the Chester Opera House where Segar was first employed.  "Windy Bill", as he was known, was a pleasant, friendly man, fond of tall tales and hamburgers.
In a brief 1935 interview in The Daily Oklahoman, H. Hillard Wimpee of Atlanta indicated that he worked with Segar at the Chicago Herald-Examiner in 1917. It became a custom in the office that whoever accepted an invitation for a hamburger would pay the bill. According to Wimpee, he wrote Segar in 1922 about Wimpy, "afraid of being connected with what Segar was doing with character." He said Segar replied "'You haven't seen anything yet.'"

Character

Wimpy is Popeye's friend. In the cartoons he mainly plays the role of the "straight man" to Popeye's outbursts and wild antics. Wimpy is soft-spoken, very intelligent, and well educated, but also cowardly, very lazy, overly parsimonious and utterly gluttonous. He is also something of a scam artist and, especially in the newspaper strip, can be notoriously underhanded at times.
Hamburgers are Wimpy's all-time favorite dish, and he is usually seen carrying or eating one or more at a time – e.g. in Popeye the Sailor Meets Sindbad the Sailor he is seen grinding meat or eating burgers almost the entire time – however, he is usually too cheap to pay for them himself.  A recurring joke involves Wimpy's attempts to con other patrons of the diner into buying his meal for him.  His best-known catchphrase started in 1931 as "Cook me up a hamburger. I'll pay you Thursday."  In 1932, this then became the famous "I'll gladly pay you Tuesday for a hamburger today". and still appears in modern comedies such as The Drew Carey Show and The Office.  The initial part of the phrase was even the title of season 4's episode 6 of Cheers, 'I'll Gladly Pay You Tuesday'.
Wimpy had other frequently used lines in the original comic strip. On some occasions, Wimpy tries to placate someone by saying "I'd like to invite you over to my house for a duck dinner."  He then moves away quickly to a safe distance and yells, "You bring the ducks!"  Another such line was, "Jones is my name...I'm one of the Jones boys" – an attempt to defuse a hostile situation with a mistaken identity.  To deflect an enemy's wrath, he would sometimes indicate a third party and say "Let's you and him fight", starting a brawl from which he quickly withdrew.

In popular culture

|url=
|title=The Walter Lantz Cartune Encyclopedia: 1933
|accessdate=2011-06-03
|publisher=The Walter Lantz Cartune Encyclopedia
}}[/ref]








