[[Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em]]

CATEGORIES: BBC television sitcoms, 1970s British television series, 1973 British television programme debuts, 1978 British television programme endings, English-language television programming

Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em is a BBC television sitcom, written by Raymond Allen and starring Michael Crawford and Michele Dotrice. It was first broadcast in 1973 and ran for three series, ending in 1978.
The series follows the accident-prone Frank Spencer and his tolerant, if accident-prone wife, Betty, through Frank's various attempts to hold down a job, which frequently end in disaster.
Noted for its stuntwork, performed by Michael Crawford himself as well as featuring various well-remembered catchphrases, the series was voted #22 in the BBC's poll "Britain's Best Sitcom".

The character of Frank

The wimpish, smiling Frank, sporting his trademark beret and trench coat, is married to  (apparently normal) Betty (Michele Dotrice) and in later series they have a baby daughter, Jessica, which offered scope for even more slapstick humour. Frank was a gift for impersonators, and for a time it became a cliché that every half-decent impersonator was doing an impression of him, particularly his main catchphrase, "Ooh Betty", which is only ever said in one episode: series 2, episode 2.
"Ooh Betty.." is not Frank's only catchphrase of the series. Others include a quavering "Oooh...", usually uttered with his forefinger to his mouth as he stands amidst the chaos of some disaster he has just caused (and which he himself has invariably escaped unscathed). He also sometimes complains about being "ha-RASSed!", or occasionally, "I've had a lot of ha-RASSments lately" (originally an American pronunciation). Other recurring catchphrases include references to "a bit of trouble", which usually implies some sort of undisclosed digestive disorder, and to the cat having done a "whoopsie" (on one occasion in Spencer's beret). If Frank is pleased (or confused) about something, he will often use the catchphrase "mmmm — nice!" or "awww — nice!"
Despite his unfailing ability to infuriate people, Frank is essentially a very sympathetic character, who inspires as much affection from his audience as from his ever-loving and patient wife, Betty. The ability to convey this lovable aspect of his character — which meant that, crucially, the audience is always on Frank's 'side' — was a notable achievement of the writer and main actors. For all his extraordinary faults, the viewer never doubts that Frank adores Betty and would do anything for her, and in their own way they are blissfully happy together. He also venerates the memory of his late mother and worships his daughter.
For the final series, made five years after the previous one (although there had been two Christmas specials in between), Frank's character changes markedly. He becomes more self-aware, and keen to make himself appear more educated and well-spoken. He develops an air of pomposity which is always best demonstrated when someone would approach and enquire "Mr Spencer?" to which he would always reply, "I am he." He also becomes more self-assured, and much more willing to argue back when criticised, and often win arguments by leaving his opponents dumbfounded by the bizarreness of what he would say.
Acknowledging the show's success in Australia, the final series saw him begin talk of having relations there, and contemplating emigrating.
Crawford himself has talked of how he based many of Frank's reactions on those of a young child.  Crawford also found it difficult to break out of the public association with the role, despite his later career as a hugely successful musical performer on the West End and Broadway stage, in popular shows such as Barnum and The Phantom of the Opera.

Casting

Ronnie Barker and Norman Wisdom were the BBC's first and second choices for the role of Frank. However the casting of Crawford proved effective, as many of Frank's mannerisms and turns of phrase were invented by the actor, and his stunt-performing and singing skills were undoubtedly useful.
In addition to Frank and Betty, most episodes would introduce at least one other character (a doctor, a neighbour, an employer, etc.) who would be seen to gradually suffer the inevitably chaotic consequences of Frank's fleeting presence in their lives. These characters were often played by some of the great recognisable character actors of the 1970s British sit-com era, and indeed spotting these famous faces — and enjoying their reactions to the torture of Frank's hapless influence — is one of the joys of watching the series. Examples of actors appearing in one episode only included George Baker, Christopher Biggins,  Peter Jeffrey, Richard Wilson, Fulton Mackay, Bernard Hepton, Christopher Timothy and Elisabeth Sladen (who, in her autobiography, mentions that she was considered for the role of Betty). A pre-Minder Glynn Edwards appeared in more than two episodes as Frank and Betty's irascible new neighbour, Mr Lewis, while a pre-Bread Jean Boht appeared in two episodes as Mrs Lewis. One regular character in the early series was Frank's local priest, Father O'Hara, who was played by Cyril Luckham. Dick Bentley appeared in three of the last four episodes broadcast, as Frank's Australian grandad.

Theme tune

The theme tune by Ronnie Hazlehurst features a piccolo spelling out the title in Morse code, excluding the apostrophes.
 ••• ――― ―― • ―― ――― ― •••• • •―• ••• ―•• ――― •― •••― • • ―― •―•―•― 
  S   o   m e/ m  o  t  h   e  r   s / d   o / a  v   e/e m (full stop)

Episodes

Series One (1973)

Series Two (1973)

1974 and 1975 Christmas specials

Series Three (1978)

1978 Christmas special

Repeats

The BBC has repeated Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em several times since the series was produced in the 1970s. The programme has been shown in Catalan public television, Nigeria on the NTA in the 1980s and 1990s and in Australia on the Seven Network's Great Comedy Classics Franchise in 2006-2007, GO! from 2009-2010 until the sitcom now screens on 7TWO. British channels Gold, BBC Two and BBC Prime took over repeats of the programme in 2007.

Home video releases

In the United Kingdom six episodes from Series 1 and various selected episodes of Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em were originally released by BBC Video on VHS in the 1990s. Series 1 and Series 2 were released on VHS and DVD on 21 October 2002. Series 3 and the Christmas Specials were released on VHS and DVD on 19 May 2003. The Complete Series was released on VHS and DVD on 6 October 2003, by Second Sight available in Region 2. On 1 November 2010, 2 entertain reissued  Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em – The Complete Christmas Specials. On 14 February 2011 Some Mothers Do 'Ave 'Em – The Complete Series and Christmas Specials was reissued by 2 entertain with new packaging.
In Australia Series 1-3 and the Christmas Specials were released in 2003 and 2004. The complete boxset was released in 2004 on DVD in region 4.
In the United States 13 selected episodes were released on VHS in 1998,and reissued on DVD region 1 in 2001.

In popular culture






