[[Free State Project]]

CATEGORIES: Politically motivated migrations, Politics of New Hampshire, Anarchist organizations in the United States, Libertarian organizations based in the United States, 2001 establishments in the United States, Anarchism in the United States, Libertarianism in the United States

The Free State Project (FSP) is a political migration, founded in 2001, to recruit at least 20,000 libertarians to move to a single low-population state (New Hampshire, selected in 2003) in order to make the state a stronghold for libertarian ideas. The project seeks to overcome the historical ineffectiveness of limited-government activism which they believe was caused by the small number and diffuse population of libertarian activists across the 50 United States and around the world.
Participants sign a statement of intent declaring that they intend to move to New Hampshire within five years of the drive reaching 20,000 participants. , over 15,300 people have signed this statement of intent and more than 1,560 people are listed as "early movers" to New Hampshire on the FSP website, saying they have made their move prior to the 20,000-participant trigger.Live Free or Move
People aligned with the Free State Project have been elected to two-year terms in the 400-member New Hampshire House of Representatives since 2006.
The Free State Project is a social movement generally based upon decentralized decision making. The group hosts various events, but most of FSP's activities depend upon volunteers, and no formal plan dictates to participants or movers what their actions should be in New Hampshire.

History

Origins

The Free State Project was founded in 2001 by Jason Sorens, then a Ph.D. student at Yale University.
The organization began without a specific state in mind.  A systematic review started by narrowing potential states to those with a population of less than 1.5 million, and those where the combined spending in 2000 by the Democratic and Republican parties was less than $5.2 million, the total national spending by the Libertarian Party in that year.  Hawaii and Rhode Island were eliminated from this list because of their propensity for centralized government. 5, No. 1.

State selection

In September 2003 the state vote was held.  Participants voted using the Condorcet method to choose the state.  New Hampshire was the winner, with Wyoming coming in second by a 57% to 43% margin. Alaska, Delaware, Idaho, Maine, Montana, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Vermont were also on the list.
New Hampshire was chosen because the perceived individualist culture of New Hampshire was thought to resonate well with libertarian ideals.  The Free State Project, however, has drawn criticism from some New Hampshire residents concerned about population pressure and opposition to increased taxation.  Some Republicans,Meredith Goldstein, "Free State Project pushes limits of liberty in N.H.", Boston Globe, October 19, 2003. on the other hand, have responded more favorably to the project, because of their espoused agreement on small government.

Intent

The FSP mission statement, adopted in 2005, states:
"Life, liberty, and property" are rights that were enumerated in the October 1774 Declaration and Resolves of the First Continental Congress and in Article 12 of the New Hampshire state constitution.NH.gov constitution
To become a participant of the Free State Project, a person is asked to agree to the Statement of Intent (SOI):

Eligibility

The FSP is open to people with a minimum age of 18. U.S. citizenship is not required. People who promote violence, racial hatred, or bigotry are not welcome in the FSP.FSP Standard Disclaimer

Recent events

In December 2012, state representative Cynthia Chase (D-Keene) said "Free Staters are the single biggest threat the state is facing today."
In 2012, the Concord Police Department applied for $258,000 in federal government funding to buy a Lenco BearCat armored vehicle for protection against terrorist attacks, riots, or shooting incidents. The application said, "Groups such as the Sovereign Citizens, Free Staters and Occupy New Hampshire are active and present daily challenges." The grant from the US Department of Homeland Security was successful and the Concord City Council unanimously approved of the grant, after having revised the application to remove references to those political movements. 

Political positions

The Free State Project aligns itself with no political party, takes no official political positions, supports no candidates in elections, and neither supports nor opposes any particular legislation.Introduction to the Free State Project
The Free State Project receives its funding from individual donors interested in moving as part of the FSP or attending one of the annual events.pdfTotal income donations FSPFY2009Actuals.pdf
Several early movers have been elected to the New Hampshire legislature. In 2006 one of its participants, Joel Winters, was elected to the state legislature, running as a Democrat. In 2010, 12 Republican Free Staters were elected to the New Hampshire House of Representatives.
On December 5, 2012, Free Stater and self-described anarchist Tim O'Flaherty was elected to the New Hampshire House of Representatives under the Democratic Party ticket, representing Manchester Ward 5.
In 2012, elected participants wrote and passed House Bill 418 which requires state agencies to consider open source software and data formats when making acquisitions. Seth Cohn

Annual events

The Free State Project is the official organizer of two annual events in New Hampshire:

NH House of Representatives

In 2006, Democrat Joel Winters became the first known free stater to become elected to the 400-member New Hampshire House of Representatives. In 2008, four Free Staters were elected to the New Hampshire House of Representatives, including Winters, according to group participants. In 2010, 12 Free Staters were elected. In 2012, eleven were elected, including self-described anarchist and Democrat Tim O'Flaherty.

Currently elected free staters

Formerly elected free staters

Responses

On February 17, 2006, economist Walter Block publicly expressed his support for the FSP. He is quoted as saying,
Jeffrey Tucker reflected about his experiences at the New Hampshire Liberty Forum in Nashua, saying in part

The project has been endorsed by Ron Paul
In 2010, Lew Rockwell from the Mises Institute endorsed the project. He referred to the city of Keene, New Hampshire as "The northern capital of libertarianism".
In 2011, Peter Schiff said he had considered moving at one point.
Critics argue that the Free State Project is "radical",
The Free State Project was the centerpiece of the 2011 documentary film Libertopia.








