[[Crimea]]

CATEGORIES: Crimea, Peninsulas of Europe, Peninsulas of Russia, Peninsulas of Ukraine

The Crimean Peninsula (), also known simply as Crimea, is a major land mass on the northern coast of the Black Sea that is almost completely surrounded by water. The peninsula is located just south of the Ukrainian mainland and west of the Russian region of Kuban. It is surrounded by two seas: the Black Sea and the smaller Sea of Azov to the east. It is connected with the Ukrainian mainland by the Isthmus of Perekop and is separated from Kuban by the Strait of Kerch. The Arabat Spit is located to the northeast; a narrow strip of land that separates a system of lagoons named Sivash from the Sea of Azov.
Crimea—or the Tauric Peninsula, as it was formerly known—has historically been at the boundary between the classical world and the steppe. Its southern fringe was colonised by the ancient Greeks, the ancient Romans, the Byzantine Empire, and the Ottoman Empire, while at the same time its interior was occupied by a changing cast of invading steppe nomads, such as the Cimmerians, Scythians, Goths, Bulgars, Huns, Khazars, Kipchaks, and the Golden Horde.
Crimea and adjacent territories were united in the Crimean Khanate during the 15th to 18th century before falling to the Russian Empire and being organised as its Taurida Oblast in 1783. In 1954, the Soviet Crimean Oblast was transferred from Russia to Ukraine. It became the Autonomous Republic of Crimea within newly independent Ukraine in 1991, with Sevastopol having its own administration within Ukraine but outside of the Autonomous Republic.
Sovereignty and control of the peninsula became the subject of the ongoing 2014 Crimean crisis, a territorial dispute between Russia and Ukraine.

Name

The classical name Tauris or Taurica is from the Greek  Ταυρική, after the peninsula's Scytho-Cimmerian  inhabitants, the Tauri. Strabo and Ptolemy refer to the Strait of Kerch as the Bosporus Cimmerius, and to Cimmerium as the capital of the Taurida, whence the peninsula, or its easternmost part, was also named Promontorium Cimmerium. 9 (1779), p. 127.
In English, the Crimean Khanate is referred to as Crim Tartary in the early modern period. "the peninsula of Crim Tartary, known to the ancients under the name of Chersonesus Taurica"; ibid. Volume 10 (1788), p. 211: "The modern reader must not confound this old Cherson of the Tauric or Crimean peninsula  with a new city of the same name".
see also John Millhouse, English-Italian (1859), p. 597[/ref] 
The  Italian[ref]la Crimea since at least the 17th century. Maiolino Bisaccioni, Giacomo Pecini, Historia delle guerre ciuili di questi vltimi tempi, cioe, d'Inghilterra, Catalogna, Portogallo, Palermo, Napoli, Fermo, Moldauia, Polonia, Suizzeri, Francia, Turco. per Francesco Storti. Alla Fortezza, sotto il portico de'Berettari, 1655, p. 349: "dalla fortuna de Cosacchi dipendeva la sicurazza della Crimea".
Nicolò Beregani, Historia delle guerre d'Europa, Volume 2 (1683), p. 251.[/ref]  form Crimea (and "Crimean peninsula") also becomes current during the 18th century,J. Dodsley, The annual register or a view of the history, politics, and literature for the year 1783 (1785), p. 364.
gradually replacing the classical name of Tauric peninsula in the course of the 19th century. 
The omission of the definite article in English ("Crimea" rather than "the Crimea") becomes common during the later 20th century.
The name "Crimea" ultimately, via Italian, takes its origin with the name of  Qırım (today's Stary Krym) which served as a capital of the Crimean province of the Golden Horde. 
The name of the capital was extended to the entire peninsula at some point during Ottoman suzerainty.W. Radloff, Versuch eines Wörterbuches der Türk-Dialecte (1888), ii. 745
The origin of the name Qırım  itself is uncertain. It is mostly explained as:
Alexander MacBean, Samuel Johnson, Cimmerium in A Dictionary of Ancient Geography (1773).[/ref]
The classical name was revived in the name of the Russian Taurida Governorate. 176:
"it was indeed at some point between the 1730s and the 1770s that the dream of recreating ancient 'Taurida' in the southern Crimea was conceived. Catherine's plan was to create a paradisiacal imperial 'garden' there, and her Greek archbishop Eugenios Voulgaris obliged by inventing a new etymology for the old name of Tauris, deriving it from taphros, which (he claimed) was the ancient Greek for a ditch dug by human hands." 
[/ref]
While it was abandoned in the Soviet Union, and has had no official status since 1921, it is still used by some institutions in Crimea, such as the  Taurida National University, or the  Tavriya Simferopol football club.

History

In ancient times, it was the home of Cimmerians and Scythians, as well as the site of Greek colonies. The most important city was Chersonesos at the edge of today's Sevastopol.
Later occupiers included the Romans, Goths, Huns, Bulgars, Khazars, the state of Kievan Rus', the Byzantine Empire, the Kipchaks, and the Golden Horde. In the 13th century, portions were controlled by the Republic of Venice and by the Republic of Genoa.
In the 9th century, Byzantium established the Cherson theme to fend against incursions by the Rus' Khaganate, and the Crimean peninsula from this time was contested between Byzantium, Rus' and Khazaria. The area remained the site of overlapping interests and contact between the early medieval Slavic, Turkic and Greek spheres, and became a center of slave trade in particular, the word slave itself deriving from the ethnonym of the Slavs who were sold to the Muslim world and Byzantium during this period. 
In the 1230s, this status quo was swept away by the Mongol invasions, and Crimea was incorporated into the territory of the Golden Horde throughout the 14th century.
The Crimean Khanate, a vassal state of the Ottoman Empire, succeeded the Golden Horde and lasted from 1449 to 1779. The Khanate was conquered by the Russian Empire under Catherine the Great in 1783. From 1853 to 1856, the peninsula was the site of the principal engagements of the Crimean War, a conflict fought between the Russian Empire and an alliance of France, Britain, the Ottoman Empire, and Sardinia.
During the Russian Civil War, Crimea was controlled by the White Army. After they were defeated by the Red Army, Crimea became part of the Soviet Union in 1921 as Crimean Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic. In the Second World War the peninsula was occupied by Nazi Germany from July 1942-May 1944.
In 1954, it was transferred to the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic within the Soviet Union."Ukraine and the west: hot air and hypocrisy". The Guardian. March 10, 2014. In 1991, it became part of independent Ukraine as the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. As a result of the 2014 Crimean crisis, the accompanying Russian military intervention and the Crimean status referendum, 2014, the sovereignty over the peninsula is currently disputed between Ukraine and the Russian Federation. The peninsula is de facto controlled by the Russian Federation, in the form of two federal subjects: the Republic of Crimea and the federal city of Sevastopol.

Geography

Crimea is located on the northern coast of the Black Sea and on the western coast of the Sea of Azov, bordering Ukraine's Kherson Oblast from the north.
The natural border between the Crimean Peninsula and the Ukrainian mainland is formed by the Sivash or "Rotten Sea", a large system of shallow lagoons. The peninsula is connected to the Kherson Oblast's Henichesk Raion, and thus the European mainland, via the  Isthmus of Perekop, a strip of land about  .
Geographically, the peninsula is generally divided into three zones: steppe, mountains and southern coast.

Coastline

The Crimean peninsula comprises many smaller peninsulas, such as the mentioned Kerch peninsula, Heracles Peninsula, Tarhankut Peninsula and many others. Crimea also possesses lots of headlands such as Cape Priboiny,  Cape Tarkhankut, Sarych,   Cape Fonar,   Kazantyp, Cape Akburun, and many others.
The Crimean coastline is broken by several bays and harbors. These harbors lie west of the Isthmus of Perekop by the Bay of Karkinit; on the southwest by the open Bay of Kalamita between the port cities of Eupatoria and Sevastopol.
The Kerch Peninsula is attached to  the Crimean mainland by Isthmus of Yenikale, delimited by the    Bay of Arabat to the north (interrputed by the incoming Arabat Spit),  and the Bay of Caffa to the south (arching eastward from the port of Feodosiya).

Crimean Mountains

The southeast coast is flanked at a distance of  from the sea by a parallel range of mountains, the Crimean Mountains. These mountains are backed by secondary parallel ranges.
The main range of these mountains shoots up with extraordinary abruptness from the deep floor of the Black Sea to an altitude of , beginning at the southwest point of the peninsula, called Cape Fiolente.  It was believed that this cape was supposedly crowned with the temple of Artemis, where Iphigeneia is said to have officiated as priestess.
Uchan-su waterfall on the south slope of the mountains is the highest  in Ukraine.

Steppe

Seventy-five percent of the remaining area of Crimea consists of semiarid prairie lands, a southward continuation of the Pontic steppes, which slope gently to the northwest from the foot of the Crimean Mountains. 
Numerous kurgans, or burial mounds, of the ancient Scythians are scattered across the Crimean steppes.

Crimean Riviera

The terrain that lies beyond the sheltering Crimean Mountain range is of an altogether different character. Here, the narrow strip of coast and the slopes of the mountains are smothered with greenery. This "riviera" stretches along the southeast coast from capes Fiolente and Aya, in the south, to Feodosiya, and is studded with summer sea-bathing resorts such as Alupka, Yalta, Gurzuf, Alushta, Sudak, and Feodosiya. During the years of Soviet rule, the resorts and dachas of this coast served as the prime perquisites of the politically loyal. Fishing, mining, and the production of essential oils are also important. Numerous Crimean Tatar villages, mosques, monasteries, and palaces of the Russian imperial family and nobles are found here, as well as picturesque ancient Greek and medieval castles.

Climate

Most of Crimea has a temperate continental climate, except for the south coast where it experiences a humid subtropical climate Because of its climate, the southern Crimean coast is a popular beach and sun resort for Ukrainian and Russian tourists.

Strategic value

The Black Sea ports of Crimea provide quick access to the Eastern Mediterranean, Balkans and Middle East. Historically, possession of the southern coast of Crimea was sought after by most empires of the greater region since antiquity (Roman, Byzantine, Ottoman, Russian, British and French, Nazi German, Soviet).
The Dnieper River is a major waterway and transportation route that crosses the European continent from north to south and ultimately links the Black Sea with the Baltic Sea, of strategic importance since the historical trade route from the Varangians to the Greeks. The Black Sea serves as an economic thoroughfare connecting the Caucasus region and the Caspian Sea to central and Eastern Europe.
According to the International Transport Workers' Federation, in 2013 there were at least 12 operating merchant seaports in Crimea.
Within 200 nautical miles of the Crimean shoreline there's an estimated 45 trillion cubic meters of gas reserves.

Economy

The main branches of the Crimean economy are tourism and agriculture. Industrial plants are situated for the most part in the northern regions of the republic. Important industrial cities include Dzhankoy, housing a major railway connection, Krasnoperekopsk and Armyansk, among others.
The most important industries in Crimea include food production, chemical fields, mechanical engineering and metal working, and fuel production industries. Sixty percent of the industry market belongs to food production. There are a total of 291 large industrial enterprises and 1002 small business enterprises.
Agriculture in the region includes cereals, vegetable-growing, gardening, and wine-making, particularly in the Yalta and Massandra regions. Livestock production includes cattle breeding, poultry keeping, and sheep breeding.

Energy

Crimea also possesses several natural gas fields both onshore and offshore, all connected to Ukraine's pipeline system and were starting to be drilled by western oil and gas companies before annexation.
The republic also possesses two oil fields: one onshore, the Serebryankse oil field in Rozdolne, and one offshore, the Subbotina oil field in the Black Sea.

Infrastructure

Almost every settlement in Crimea is connected with another settlement with bus lines. Crimea contains the longest (96 km or 59 mi) trolleybus route in the world, stretching from Simferopol to Yalta. The trolleybus line starts near Simferopol's Railway Station through the mountains to Alushta and on to Yalta. The length of line is about 90 km. It was founded in 1959.
Railroad lines running through Crimea include Armyansk—Kerch (with a link to Feodosiya), and Melitopol—Sevastopol (with a link to Yevpatoria), connecting Crimea to the Ukrainian mainland.
The cities of Yalta, Feodosiya, Kerch, Sevastopol, Chornomorske and Yevpatoria are connected to one another by sea routes. In the cities of Yevpatoria and nearby townlet Molochnoye are tram systems.

Tourism

The development of Crimea as a holiday destination began in the second half of the 19th century. The development of the transport networks brought masses of tourists from central parts of the Russian Empire.
At the beginning of the 20th century, a major development of palaces, villas, and dachas began—most of which remain. These are some of the main attractions of Crimea as a tourist destination. There are many Crimean legends about famous touristic places, which attract the attention of tourists.
A new phase of tourist development began when the Soviet government realized the potential of the healing quality of the local air, lakes and therapeutic muds. It became a "health" destination for Soviet workers, and hundreds of thousands of Soviet tourists visited Crimea.
Artek is a  former Young Pioneer camp  on the Black Sea in the town of Hurzuf, near Ayu-Dag, established in 1925.   In 1969 it had an area of 3.2 km². The camp consisted of 150 buildings Unlike most of the young pioneer camps, Artek was an all-year camp, due to the warm climate. Artek was considered to be a privilege for Soviet children during its existence, as well as for children from other communist countries. During its heyday, 27,000 children a year vacationed at Artek. Between 1925 and 1969 the camp hosted 300,000 children., Entry on Artek After the breaking up of the Young Pioneers in 1991 its prestige declined, though it remained a popular vacation destination.The International Children Center Artek - Ukrainian tours
In the 1990s, Crimea became more of a get-away destination than a "health-improvement" destination. The most visited areas are the south shore of Crimea with cities of Yalta and Alushta, the western shore - Eupatoria and Saki, and the south-eastern shore - Feodosia and Sudak.
According to National Geographic, Crimea was among the top 20 travel destinations in 2013.Best Trips 2013 Crimea, National Geographic Society
Crimea possesses significant historical and natural resources and is a region where it is possible to find practically any type of landscape; mountain ranges and plateaus, grasslands, caves. Furthermore, Saki poses unique therapeutic mud and Eupatoria has vast empty beaches with the purest quartz sand.
Places of interest include

Demographics

As of 2007, the estimate of the total population of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Sevastopol was at 2.352 million people,Autonomous Republic of Crimea: 1,973,185, Sevastopol: 379,200 just
slightly down from the count of the  2001 Ukrainian Census at 2.376 million.[ref]
Autonomous Republic of Crimea: 2,033,700, Sevastopol: 342,451. [/ref]
The ethnic makeup of the population is comprised the following self-reported groups (2001 census):
According to the 2001 census, 77% of Crimean inhabitants named Russian as their native language; 11.4% – Crimean Tatar; and 10.1% – Ukrainian.
Ethnic composition of Crimea's population has changed dramatically since the early 20th century. The 1879 Russian Empire Census for the Taurida Governorate
reported: 194,294 (35.55%) Crimean Tatars, 180,963 (33.11%) Russians  and  64,703 (11.84%) Ukrainians.
Crimean Tatars, a predominantly Muslim ethnic minority who in 2001 made up 12.1% of the population,About number and composition population of AUTONOMOUS REPUBLIC OF CRIMEA by data All-Ukrainian population census', Ukrainian Census (2001) formed in Crimea in the late Middle Ages, after the Crimean Khanate had come into existence. The Crimean Tatars were forcibly expelled to Central Asia by Joseph Stalin's government as a form of collective punishment, on the grounds that they had formed pro-German Tatar Legions. After the fall of the Soviet Union, Crimean Tatars began to return to the region. Otto. The Stalinist Penal System: A Statistical History of Soviet Repression and Terror. Mc Farland & Company, Inc, Publishers. 1997. 23. According to the 2001 Ukrainian population census 58% of the population of Crimea are ethnic Russians and 24% are ethnic Ukrainians.
Jews in Crimea were historically Krymchaks and Karaites (the latter a small group centered at Yevpatoria). The 1879 census for the Taurida Governorate reported  a Jewish population of 4.20%, not including a Karaite population of 0.43%.
The Krymchaks (but not the Karaites) were targeted for annihilation during Nazi occupation.
The number of Crimea Germans was 60,000 in 1939. During WWII, they were forcibly deported on the orders of Stalin, as they were regarded as a potential "fifth column"."The Deportation and Destruction of the German Minority in the USSR" (PDF)"On Germans Living on the Territory of the Ukrainian SSR""NKVD Arrest List" (PDF) This was part of the 800,000 Germans in Russia who were relocated within the Soviet Union during Stalinist times."A People on the Move: Germans in Russia and in the Former Soviet Union: 1763 – 1997. North Dakota State University Libraries. The 2001 Ukrainian census reports just 2,500 ethnic Germans (0.1% of population) in Crimea.
Besides the Crimean Germans, Stalin in 1944 also deported 70,000 Greeks and 14,000 Bulgarians."The Persecution of Pontic Greeks in the Soviet Union" (PDF)

Culture

thumb|170px|Alexander Pushkin in Bakhchisaray Palace.  Painting of Grigory ChernetsovIvan Aivazovsky, the 19th century marine painter of Armenian origin, who is considered one of the major artists of his era was born in Feodosia and lived there for the most part of his life. Many of his paintings depict the Black Sea. He also created battle paintings during the Crimean War.
Almost 100 broadcasters and around 1,200 publications are registered in Crimea, although no more than a few dozen operate or publish regularly. Crimea's first Tatar-owned, Tatar-language TV launched in 2006.
Crimea was the background for Adam Mickiewicz's seminal work, The Crimean Sonnets. A series of 18 sonnets constitute an artistic telling of a journey through the Crimea, they feature romantic descriptions of the oriental nature and culture of the East which show the despair of an exile longing for the homeland, driven from his home by a violent enemy.

People at KaZantip.
File:Ivan Constantinovich Aivazovsky - The Russian Squadron on the Sebastopol Roads (detail).JPG|Painting of the Russian squadron in Sevastopol by Ivan Aivazovsky (1846)
File:Могила поета і художника М. О. Волошина.JPG|The grave of Russian poet and artist Maximilian Voloshin

Gallery

File:Hansaray1.jpg|Bakhchisaray Palace
File:Dulber Palace.JPG|Dulber Palace in Koreiz
File:Комплекс споруд Воронцовського палацу.jpg|Vorontsov Palace
File:Yalta-catholic church.jpg|Catholic church in Yalta
File:St. Volodymyr's Cathedral, Chersones. Vladimir's Cathedral, dedicated to the Heroes of Sevastopol (Crimean War).






