[[Rovaniemi]]

CATEGORIES: People from Rovaniemi, Rovaniemi, Cities and towns in Finland, Municipalities of Lapland (Finland)

Rovaniemi (.

Name

The rova part in the name Rovaniemi has often been considered to be of Saamic origin, as " The niemi part of the name means "cape".

History

There has probably been continuous settlement in the Rovaniemi area since the Stone Age. 
It is first mentioned by name in official documents in 1453, existing effectively as a set of small villages whose inhabitants earned their living mainly in agriculture and animal husbandry - with fishing and hunting the most important offshoots. 
The exploitation of Lapland's natural resources in the 1800s boosted Rovaniemi's growth. Extensive logging sites and gold fever attracted thousands of people to Lapland. As the mining of natural resources was increased, Rovaniemi became the business center of the province of Lapland.
During the Second World War, Finland signed the Moscow Armistice and found itself involved in the Lapland War with its former German ally. Retreating German forces utilized scorched earth tactics, and though initially German General Lothar Rendulic ordered only the public buildings in Rovaniemi to be destroyed, on 13 October 1944 the German army received orders to destroy all the buildings in Rovaniemi, only excluding hospitals and houses where inhabitants were present. The German troops suffered many casualties, mainly from glass splinters. A Finnish commando unit claimed to have blown up the ammunition train and may well have been the primary cause of the town's ruin. The cause was then unknown and generally assumed to be the deliberate intent of Rendulic.wikipedia.Kallioniemi 1989, s. 196–209 There is a German cemetery 19k from Rovaniemi where soldiers killed fighting in Lapland during the war are entombed.

Rovaniemi today

Because of the unspoiled nature and numerous recreational opportunities, tourism is an important industry in Rovaniemi. The city has a number of hotels and restaurants located both in the center and on the outskirts of the town.
Since Rovaniemi represents the capital of the Province of Lapland, many government institutions have their offices there. About 10,000 of the inhabitants are students. Rovaniemi is home to not only the University of Lapland but also the Rovaniemi University of Applied Sciences (formerly known as the Rovaniemi Polytechnic), which comprises institutes of information and traditional technology, business, health and social care, culinary studies, forestry, rural studies and sports.
Local newspapers include the Lapin Kansa, Uusi Rovaniemi and Lappilainen.
Rovaniemi's most prominent landmarks include the Jätkänkynttilä bridge with its eternal flame over the Kemijoki river, the Arktikum House which rises out of the bank of the Ounasjoki river, the Rovaniemi Town Hall, the Lappia House which serves as a theatre, concert hall and congress centre, and the library. The last three mentioned buildings are by the famous Finnish architect Alvar Aalto. Official home town of Santa Claus,History of Santa ClausSanta Claus' Village on the Arctic Circle in Rovaniemi in Lapland in FinlandJoulupukin Kammari – Santa Claus Office – Joulupkki, Lapland, Finland, Rovaniemi Santa Claus Village and Santapark, is located  north of the centre. The folklore home of Santa is in eastern Lapland.
Directly across the river from the town is the Ounasvaara ski center. The top of the Ounasvaara hill bears the site of some of the earliest known human settlements in the area.
A phenomenon also attracting numerous tourists is the Aurora Borealis or Northern Lights. In Finnish  Lapland the number of auroral displays can be as high as 200 a year whereas in southern Finland the number is usually fewer than 20. Visitors can learn how to predict Northern Lights forecasts during their visit although there is no guarantee auroras will be seen. Some of the best places to view auroras in Rovaniemi are within walking distance from visitor accommodation. 
The educational department takes part in Lifelong Learning Programme 2007–2013 in Finland.

Transport

VR Group, the Finnish state railway system, operates direct daytime and overnight passenger trains from Rovaniemi Station to Oulu, Tampere, Helsinki and Turku. Diesel-powered passenger trains operated north-east of Rovaniemi to Kemijärvi until March 2014, when electrification to Kemijärvi was completed. Rovaniemi Airport is located about  north of the Rovaniemi city centre.

Twin cities

Climate

Due to its location on the Arctic Circle, Rovaniemi has a subarctic climate (Köppen Dfc) with short, relatively mild summers and very cold, long and snowy winters. The city lies just south of the  mean annual isotherm, but freezing in the soil is very limited even during the winter by heavy snow cover.

Famous inhabitants

Popular Culture

1998 Spanish romantic film Lovers of the Arctic Circle (Los amantes del Círculo Polar), by director Julio Medem, partly takes place in Rovaniemi.
Rovaniemi appears in the video game Tom Clancy's EndWar as a possible battlefield. In the game, Rovaniemi houses military facilities critical to a missile shield for a European Federation.
Rovaniemi is a central scene in a documentary film Reindeerspotting.
TV-Star Bam Margera and his friends travelled to Rovaniemi in their movie Bam Margera Presents: Where the ♯$&% Is Santa? in order to find Santa Claus who is assumed to live in Rovaniemi.
A version of the music video for Lordi's song "Hard Rock Hallelujah" was filmed near Rovaniemi.
The video for the Nightwish single "The Islander" was filmed in Rovaniemi by Stobe Harju.





Notes

Further reading






