[[University of Western Ontario]]

CATEGORIES: University of Western Ontario, Educational institutions established in 1878, Buildings and structures in London, Ontario



The University of Western Ontario, which is commonly referred to among Canadian universities as Western, is a public research university located in London, Ontario, Canada. The university's main campus covers 
The university was founded on 7 March 1878 by Bishop Isaac Hellmuth of the Anglican Diocese of Huron as "The Western University of London Ontario." It incorporated Huron University College, which had been founded in 1863. The first four faculties were Arts, Divinity, Law and Medicine. The Western University of London was eventually made non-denominational in 1908.
According to the 2012 Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) rankings, the university ranked 201–300 in the world and top 10 in Canada. The 2011 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 157th in the world, making it seventh in Canada. Several of Western's programs were also ranked in individual rankings. Social sciences at Western was ranked 96th in the world in the 2010 QS World University Rankings. In 2012, the ARWU similarly ranked social science at Western 76–100 in the world. Western Law School was also ranked ninth nationally in Maclean's 2012 rankings for common law schools in Canada. Western's Ivey Business School has also ranked well internationally.
The University of Western Ontario is located in the city of London. During the term a significant portion of city's population is either a staff member or student of the university. Western's Co-educational Student body of over 24,000 represents 107 countries around the world and Western scholars have established research and education collaborations and partnerships on every continent. There are more than 306,000 alumni who are active internationally, living and working around the globe. Notable alumni include government officials, academics, business leaders, 2 Nobel Laureates, Rhodes Scholars, and distinguished fellows. Western's varsity teams, known as the Western Mustangs, compete in the Ontario University Athletics conference of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport.

History

The university was founded on 7 March 1878 by Bishop Isaac Hellmuth (1817–1901) of the Anglican Diocese of Huron as "The Western University of London Ontario." The first of these students graduated in 1883. The Western University of London was eventually made non-denominational in 1908.
In 1916, the current site of the university was purchased from the Kingsmill family. There are two World War I Memorial plaques on the Physics and Astronomy Building: The first lists the names of 19 students and graduates of the University of Western Ontario who lost their lives; the second honours the men from Middlesex County who fell.cmp-cpm.gc.asp?PID=8329World War I memorial
In 1923, the university was renamed The University of Western Ontario. The first two buildings constructed at the new site were the Arts Building (now University College) and the Natural Science Building (now the Physics and Astronomy Building). Classes on the present site of the school began in 1924. The University College tower, one of the most distinctive features of the University, was named the Middlesex Memorial Tower in honour of the men from Middlesex County who had fought in World War I. Western later became affiliated with St. Peter's College seminary of London, Ontario in 1939, and it eventually became King's College, an arts faculty.
Two World War II memorial honour rolls are hung on the Physics and Astronomy Building: the first lists the names of the UWO students and graduates who served in the Second World War, and the second lists those who served with the No. 10 Canadian General hospital during WWII, the unit was raised and equipped by UWO.cmp-cpm.gc.asp?PID=8233 World War II memorial honour rolls
Although enrollment was relatively small for many years, the university began to increase greatly in size after World War II. The university saw the addition of a number of new faculties in the post-war period, such as the Faculty of Graduate Studies (1947), the School of Business Administration (now the Ivey Business School) (1949), the Faculty of Engineering Science (now the Faculty of Engineering) (1957), the Faculty of Law (1959), and Althouse College for education students (now the Faculty of Education) (1963)
In 2012, the university rebranded itself as "Western University". The legal name of the university, however, remains The University of Western Ontario.

Campus

The University of Western Ontario is situated in the city of London, Ontario, located in the southwestern end of the Quebec City – Windsor Corridor. The majority of the campus is surrounded by residential neighbourhoods, with the Thames River bisecting the eastern portion of the campus. Western Road is the major transportation artery of the university, going north to south. While the campus covers 

Sustainability

Campus sustainability at Western is managed by the President's Advisory Committee on Environment & Sustainability. The committee's mandate includes incorporating sustainability into the academic programming, engaging in research across the disciplines into issues of environmental sustainability, utilizing ecological landscaping methods and preserving green space and building and renovating facilities in accordance with energy efficiency and sustainability principles

Administration

The governance of the university is conducted through the Board of Governors and the Senate. The Senate was the university's first governing body, created in the university's founding document, An Act to Incorporate the Western University of London, Ontario, 1878.
The Senate is responsible for the university's academic policies.
The president and vice-chancellor acts as the chief executive officer of the university who is accountable to the Board of Governors and the Senate, and supervises and directs the academic and administrative work of the university and of its teaching and non-teaching staff.

Academic profile

Western is a publicly funded research university, and a member of the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada.
Admission requirements at Western differs depending upon the education system in which the applicant has originated from, due to the lack of uniformity in marking schemes.

Reputation

left|thumb|Conron HallThe University of Western Ontario has ranked as one of Canada's top universities. According to the 2012 Academic Ranking of World Universities (ARWU) rankings, the university ranked 201–300 in the world and 8–17 in Canada. The 2011 QS World University Rankings ranked the university 157th in the world, making it seventh in Canada
Several of Western's programs were also ranked in individual rankings. Social sciences at Western was ranked 96th in the world in the 2010 QS World University Rankings. In 2012, the ARWU similarly ranked social science at Western 76–100 in the world. Western Law School was also ranked ninth nationally in Maclean's 2012 rankings for common law schools in Canada.
Western is also renowned for educating many of Canada's top achievers. In 2010, Western ranked first amongst Canadian universities for earning the most Top 40 Under 40 Awards, in both the undergraduate and MBA categories.

Research

Western has four primary fields of research in which it currently operates: life sciences and the human condition, culture analysis and values, the human and physical environments, and social trends, public policy, and economic activity.
Research regarding the human brain has also become a major focus at the university. The Brain and Mind Institute was created to provide a focus for research in cognitive neuroscience at Western.

Faculties

The University is divided into 12 faculties and schools, including Althouse College of Education, Don Wright Faculty of Music, Faculty of Information and Media Studies, Richard Ivey School of Business, Schulich School of Medicine & Dentistry and Western Law School. The university is also affiliated with three University Colleges, Brescia University College, Huron University College and King's University College.
The Faculty of Social Science is Western's largest faculty and is one of Canada's largest social science faculties. It consists of 6400 undergraduates, 550 graduates and 239 faculty members. It has been ranked as one of the top 100 social science faculties in the world over the last four years by the Higher Education Evaluation and Accreditation Council, the QS Corporation, and the Academic Rankings of World Universities. It is home to several programs including the DAN Management and Organizational Studies, Anthropology, Sociology, Psychology, History, Geography, Political Science, and Economics.

Archives and Gallery

The McIntosh Gallery, established in 1942, hosts permanent and temporary exhibitions of the works of students, faculty, Canadian and international artists. The McIntosh Gallery has a collection of over 3,500 objects, with a focus on 18th-20th-century Canadian paintings, sculpture, drawings, photographs and prints; and 18th-20th-century British, French, Italian and American paintings, drawings and prints. The Gallery archives house official records of, or relating to, or people/activities connected with local artists.McIntosh Gallery

Student life

The two main student unions on administrative and policy issues is the University Students' Council for all undergraduate students and the Society of Graduate Students for graduate students.  These facilities can all be found in the University Community Centre.
The main campus at UWO has a number of student residences: Ontario Hall; Alumni House; Elgin Hall; Delaware Hall; London Hall; Essex Hall; Medway-Sydenham Hall; Perth Hall and Saugeen-Maitland Hall.
Huron College has the following residences: Benson House; Cronyn House; Hellmuth Hall; Henderson House; O'Neil-Ridley Hall; Southwest Residence; Young House and Yellow Cottage. Brescia College has one residence: Clare Hall.
There are a number of fraternities and sororities existing throughout the student community. There are currently five international sororities at Western, Alpha Gamma Delta, Alpha Omicron Pi, Alpha Phi, Kappa Alpha Theta & Pi Beta Phi.

Leadership Education Program

The Leadership Education Program is designed to provide students with the knowledge of how to become an effective leader, both individually and in teams. This program is split into three tiers: individual leadership, group leadership, and community leadership.  To successfully complete a tier an individual must complete at least five of seven modules in that specific tier.Leadership Education program
Upon completion, students will receive a Letter of Accomplishment signed by the dean of the university indicating which module was completed.

Performances

The Don Wright Faculty of Music offers almost 400 performances, masterclasses and recitals each year, most of which are open to the public. The Western University Symphony Orchestra and the Western University Chamber Orchestra perform regularly under conductor Alain Trudel. UWOpera, under the direction of Theodore Baerg, performs a wide variety of repertoire ranging from operetta to full operatic works in the Paul Davenport Theatre (refurbished and renamed in 2009 from Talbot Theatre).uwo.pl?Op=ShowIt&CalendarName=MusicEventsCalendar
Theatre Western produces a season that includes an annual musical revue of modern and classic Broadway, Purple Shorts (Western's One-Act Play Festival,) and a major musical production each spring. Recent productions include Xanadu, Legally Blonde, West Side Story, Cabaret, Gypsy, Sweeney Todd, and The 25th Annual Putnam County Spelling Bee.

Media

The university's student population operates a number of media outlets throughout the campus environment. The Gazette is a student newspaper which has been in publication since 1906.

Athletics

Athletics at Western is managed by Sports & Recreation Services, a division of the Faculty of Health Sciences.
The university has a number of athletic facilities open to both their varsity teams as well as to their students. The Western Student Recreation Centre is a state-of-the-art facility, which opened in January 2009 and is home to Western's group fitness, drop in recreation, registered massage therapy, sport psychology, drop in recreation, intramural sports and clubs.
Better known as the WSRC or the Rec Center, this facility has an 8-lane, 50-metre pool facility. This concrete pool with ceramic tile line is a chlorine gas, sediment base filter pool. Overlooking the pool is a 3-tiered concrete viewing area. A 1-metre diving board is also available in the facility.
The pool has an accessibility lift, barrier free locker room entrance, exit for the women's and men's locker rooms, and a gallery that includes seating space for wheelchair users. There is over 19,000 square feet of weight, cardio, and stretching space within the WSRC. Closest to the main entrance of the WSRC  (which is actually the third floor) is the two-level weight and cardio space. There is also over 200 pieces of weight and cardio fitness equipment are available for members. Another amazing feature of the WSRC are the five gymnasia. There are three gyms on the first floor, and two more on the upper level. The three lower level gyms are an engineered sprung hardwood floor, 30×57 metres or 18,400 sq ft, while the two upper gyms are a poured athletic resilient floor for a greater multi-purpose use. Outside the lower gyms is the 1st floor games and activity lounge for table tennis, while outside of the upper gym spaces is additional cardio space as well as the destination for spin bike programming. Also located on the 4th are two large studio spaces where the drop in fitness, clubs and dance courses take place.westernmustangs.aspx?path=wsrc 
TD Waterhouse Stadium has been the main stadium of the university since it opened in 2000, with a seating capacity for over 8,000 spectators. The stadium is home to the university's varsity football team, and has hosted a number of events including the World Lacrosse Championships and the Canada Games.
Intramural sport leagues and tournaments have a high level of participation at Western.

Notable people

As of November 2007, the University of Western Ontario has over 220,000 alumni residing in over 100 countries.
Many former students have gained local and national prominence for serving in government, such as James Bartleman, who served as Lieutenant Governor of Ontario from 2002 to 2007.
A significant number of prominent business leaders have also studied at Western. Examples include Thomas H. Bailey, founder and former chairman of Janus Capital Group,





Further reading




