[[Balboa (dance)]]

CATEGORIES: Swing dances

Balboa today is commonly used both as a term to describe a fusion of dances that originated in Southern California during the 1920s and 1930s, and also referring to a specific dance from that era that was the original Balboa (sometimes also referred to as Pure-Bal). 
The original Balboa dance is a form of swing dance that started as early as 1915 and gained in popularity in the 1930s and 1940s. It is danced primarily in close embrace, and is led with a full body connection. The art of Balboa is in the subtle communication between the lead and follow, including weight shifts, which most viewers cannot see. As a result, Balboa is considered more of a "dancer's dance" than a "spectator's dance". Its exact origins are obscure, especially as most of the original Balboa dancers have since died.
Balboa is danced to a wide variety of tempos. Because the basic step takes up such a small space, Balboa can be danced to fast music (over 300 beats per minute). Balboa is also danced to slow music (under 100 beats per minute), which allows more time for intricate footwork and variations.

Forms

Designed to take up only a small space, Balboa involves chaining two-step movements together into groups of eight count patterns with two sets of four steps each while shuffling the feet on the floor.
The dance was originally a response to overcrowded ballrooms where the swing-out or breakaway (a move popular in Lindy Hop at the time) was often difficult, if not actually banned by the venue.  Balboa is often perceived as a restrained or introverted dance, with most movement occurring below the knees; however, part of its appeal is its variations on turns and twirls that allow the lead to show off his partner's legs—an effect that is heightened when the follow is wearing an effective skirt and high heels.
Modern Balboa dancers sometimes distinguish between two types of Balboa, "Pure Balboa" and "Bal-Swing." In Pure Balboa, dancers stay in close embrace for almost the entire time, their torsos touching, doing variations based on footwork, turning as a couple and moving as a couple. Bal-Swing, in contrast, incorporates movements in which there is more space between the partners and thus more latitude for dynamic movements, including turns for one or both  partners, and so forth.
Bal-Swing was originally known as just "Swing", or sometimes "Randy Swing" in newspaper articles of the time. Unlike Pure Balboa, Bal-Swing allows for improvisation. The Bal-Swing dance style came from Charleston, and its earliest known use was a contest in Venice Beach in 1932. Heaton described two Bal-Swing figures in 1967. Alma Heaton. 1967. Brigham Young University Press. pages 75, 76

History

Balboa came from Southern California during the 1920s and increased in popularity until World War II. Balboa is named for the Balboa Peninsula in Newport Beach, California, where the dance was invented.balboapavilion.html
Alma Heaton included two pages on Balboa in his 1954 book "Ballroom Dance Rhythms",Ballroom Dance Rhythms. Alma Heaton. 1954. Brigham Young University Press. pages 35, 36 and a page of instruction in "Techniques of Teaching Ballroom Dance". Alma Heaton. 1965. Brigham Young University Press. Third Edition. pages 161,162
A small, active Balboa community has always existed in the Los Angeles area.  Today, Balboa is resurging worldwide due in part to the efforts of Jonathan Bixby and Sylvia Sykes.
Some original Balboa dancers' quotes:

Comparisons to Lindy Hop

Balboa is a contemporary of Lindy Hop, so comparisons are hard to avoid.

Description

Body position

Communication through subtle weight shifts and body language is essential. The 
dancers stand close, touching upper  front outer sides of torsos along outer 
edge of pectoral muscle and ribcage. Sometimes the connection extends down to 
knees, depending on the degree of room needed for specific variations within 
pure balboa. Height difference between partners can cause the connection to 
vary considerably. They are offset by about 1/4 of their body width, creating a 
slight "V" between their torsos and allowing the feet and legs to offset to a 
greater degree than in ballroom styles. The balboa follower often dances in 
heels to get the proper "forward" connection. This can be misinterpreted 
however. The follower still has  her own weight. Foot balance is neutral with 
slightly more pressure on the ball of the feet for the follow, but generally 
across the entire foot for the lead.

Body lead

There are many variations on how dancers move during the Basic step. Each variation looks different. Each variation communicates movement to the follower differently. Dancers can do all of the following (from the lead's point of view):
Regardless of basic variation, the "Basic" is done in place without any traveling on the floor.

Basic footwork

The Maxie Basic is performed to 8 counts of the music, with typical footwork as follows (assuming both dancers shift forward and back between two positions on the floor 4 to 8 inches or 10 to 20 cm apart):
Lead:
Follow:
Note that the lead and follow footwork is identical, although offset by four beats. That is, both perform the same footwork when moving backwards and forwards.
In the Original Balboa the dancers do the same or similar footwork utilizing the same rhythm, however it's done in place. To do so easily, the dancers shuffle their feet and avoid stepping,or bouncing.
Also note that some people might argue that the Balboa basic is just "step-step" and any "upholds" (the slide-slide is an uphold variation) are already variations to change direction and/or feet. Not getting too attached to this 8-count basic pattern helps when learning Ad-libs (aka "one-steps") and moves that don't fit into the 8-count scheme, since it's then more natural how to sync back to the music. The follower must be aware that this pattern is just the most common pattern, and needs to feel the lead leading her into doing the upholds.

Footwork variations

Dancers vary their footwork, to respond to the music or their partner.
Many footwork variations can be done independently of the partner. The three most common footwork variations are single, double, and triple time.
Some footwork patterns require cooperation with the partner.

Main variations

Five loose categories of variations are pure, throwouts, lollies, crossovers, and fancy. Variations done in closed position are called "Pure Balboa", and moves done in open position are called "Bal-Swing". Bal-swing also borrows moves from other dances, especially Charleston and features moves in open position.
Most of the following moves would be done strictly in Bal-Swing. However, these moves can be seen sometimes in Balboa if they are done very small, with feet on floor and no travelling.
Transitions between moves are often made on the slow (3-4 or 7-8) counts, but many moves can begin on 1 or be longer than 8 beats.








