[[Falafel]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with inconsistent citation formats, Legume dishes, Middle Eastern cuisine, National dishes, Vegan cuisine, Street food, Deep fried foods, Arab cuisine, Israeli cuisine, Iranian cuisine

Falafel () is a deep-fried ball or patty made from ground chickpeas, fava beans, or both. Falafel is a traditional Middle Eastern food, usually served in a pita, which acts as a pocket, or wrapped in a flatbread known as lafa; "falafel" also frequently refers to a wrapped sandwich that is prepared in this way. The falafel balls are topped with salads, pickled vegetables, hot sauce, and drizzled with tahini-based sauces. Falafel balls may also be eaten alone as a snack or served as part of a meze (appetizers).
Falafel is a common dish eaten throughout the Middle East. The fritters are now found around the world as a replacement for meat and as a form of street food.

Etymology

The word falafel can refer to the fritters themselves or to sandwiches filled with them.
Some sources trace the name to the Arabic word ), meaning "pepper", and that the Arabic word is preceded by:American Heritage Dictionary, 5th edition (2011), s.v. falafel 
and/or
A Coptic origin has recently been proposed via the unattested phrase*pha la phel (
The Arabic word falāfil has been borrowed into many other languages and spread around the rest of the world as the general name for this food. In English, it is first attested in 1941.v. 'felafel' has a 1951 quote
Falafel is known as taʿamiya (

History

The origin of falafel is unknown and controversial.

Middle East

Falafel grew to become a common form of street food or fast food in the Middle East. Falafel is still popular with the Copts, who cook large volumes during religious holidays.
Debates over the origin of falafel have sometimes devolved into political discussions about the relationship between Arabs and Israelis. In modern times, falafel has been considered a national dish of Egypt,Claudia Roden A Book of Middle Eastern Food (Penguin, 1970) pp. 60–61. the Palestine,
Falafel plays an iconic role in Israeli cuisine and is widely considered to be the national dish of the country. While falafel is not a specifically Jewish dish, it was eaten by Mizrahi Jews in their countries of origin. Later, it was adopted by early Jewish immigrants to Palestine. Due to its being entirely plant based, it is considered parve under Jewish dietary laws and gained acceptance with Jews because it could be eaten with meat or dairy meals.

North America

In North America, prior to the 1970s, falafel was found only in Middle Eastern and Jewish neighborhoods and restaurants.

Vegetarianism

Falafel has become popular among vegetarians and vegans, as an alternative to meat-laden street foods,
Today, falafel is eaten all over the world.

Preparation and variations

Falafel is made from fava beans or chickpeas, or a combination of the two. The use of chickpeas is predominant in most Middle Eastern countries. This version is the most popular in the West. The Egyptian variety uses fava beans.
When chickpeas are used, they are not cooked prior to use (cooking the chickpeas will cause the falafel to fall apart, requiring adding some flour to use as a binder). Instead they are soaked (sometimes with baking soda) overnight, then ground together with various ingredients such as parsley, scallions, and garlic. Spices such as cumin and coriander are often added to the beans for added flavor. The mixture is shaped into balls or patties. This can be done by hand or with a tool called an aleb falafel (falafel mould). The mixture is usually deep fried, or it can be oven baked.
When not served alone, falafel is often served with unleavened bread Tomatoes, lettuce, cucumbers, and other garnishes can be added. Falafel is commonly accompanied by tahini.
Falafel is typically ball-shaped, but is sometimes made in other shapes, particularly donut-shaped. The inside of falafel may be green (from green herbs such as parsley or green onion), or tan.

Nutrition

When made with chickpeas, falafel is high in protein, complex carbohydrates, and fiber.
Falafel can be baked to reduce the high fat content associated with frying.

World records

Largest falafel ball

The current record, 74.75 kg (164.4 lb), was set on 28 July 2012 in Amman, Jordan.

Largest serving of falafel

The record, 5,173 kg (11,404 lb 8 oz), was set by Chef Ramzi Choueiri and the students of Al-Kafaat University (Lebanon) in Beirut on 9 May 2010.






