[[...And Justice for All (album)]]

CATEGORIES: Metallica albums, 1988 albums, Elektra Records albums, Vertigo Records albums, English-language albums, Albums produced by Flemming Rasmussen, Albums certified multi-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America, Thrash metal albums

... It was their first album to feature bassist Jason Newsted, following the death of Cliff Burton in 1986. ... It was noted for its dry, sterile production, which producer Flemming Rasmussen attributed to his absence during the album's mixing process. The songs' dark lyrics have themes of political and legal injustice, as seen through the prism of war, censored speech, and nuclear brinkmanship.
The front cover depicts a statue of Lady Justice cracked, blindfolded, and bound by ropes with her breasts exposed and both of her scales filled with dollars. The words "…And Justice for All" are written in graffiti-like lettering to the right. The cover art was created by Stephen Gorman, based on a concept developed by James Hetfield and Lars Ulrich. The album was initially released on one vinyl disc, but soon after re-released (without additional tracks) as a double-album.
... It was included in The Village Voices annual Pazz & Jop critics poll of the year's best albums, while the single "One" earned Metallica their first Grammy Award for Best Metal Performance in 1990. It was also their best-selling album at that point and became the first underground metal album to achieve chart success in the United States. The album was certified 8× platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) on June 9, 2003, having shipped eight million copies in the US.

Background

... However, Newsted had previously appeared on Metallica's The $5.98 E.P.: Garage Days Re-Revisited, an extended play released in 1987. The band intended to record the album earlier, but the process was interrupted with a substantial number of festival dates scheduled for the summer of 1987. Another reason that prevented them from entering the studio was frontman James Hetfield's arm injury that occurred in a skateboarding accident.
The band's previous studio album Master of Puppets marked the end of the licensing deal the group had with record label Music for Nations. Metallica's manager Peter Mensch wanted the band to sign with the British record distributor Phonogram Records, and Phonogram's chairman Martin Hooker was keen to renew the band's contract. To persuade the group to choose his label over Q Prime, who were also interested in making an agreement with the band, Hooker offered them a bigger deal, saying "worth well over £1 million, which at that time was the biggest deal we'd ever offered anyone." Hooker explained his decision by saying that "the final figure for combined British and European sales of all three Metallica albums on MFN was then in excess of 1.5 million, or about 500,000 each".

Production and recording

... Metallica produced the album with Flemming Rasmussen. Rasmussen was initially unavailable for Metallica's planned start date at January 1, 1988, and so the band brought in Mike Clink, who had caught their attention as the producer of Guns N' Roses' album Appetite for Destruction (1987). But things did not work out as planned, and three weeks later Rasmussen became available after drummer Lars Ulrich gave him a call. Rasmussen heard Clink's demos for the album on his flight to Los Angeles on February 14, and upon his arrival Clink was fired. James Hetfield explained that the recording process with Mike Clink "didn't work out so well, so we got Flemming to come over and save our asses". However, Clink is credited with engineering the drums on two of the album's tracks – "The Shortest Straw" and "Harvester of Sorrow". While waiting for him to arrive, the band recorded two cover tunes – "Breadfan" and "The Prince" – to "fine‑tune the sound while they got into the studio vibe". Both tunes were later released as B-sides of the "Harvester of Sorrow" CD single, with them also separately being B-sides for "Eye of the Beholder" and "One" respectively, as well as included on the compilation album Garage Inc. in 1998.
Rasmussen's first providence was to adjust and arrange the guitar sound, which the band had not been satisfied with. Both a guide track for the tempos and a click track for Ulrich's drumming were employed. The band would perform in a live room, with the instruments being recorded separately. Each song used three reels, one for drums, one for the bass and guitars, and one for anything else. Hetfield wrote the lyrics during the recording session, at times not having them finished as the song started recording, which Rasmussen attributed to Hetfield "wasn't really interested in singing" in lieu of "wanting that hard vibe". The recording routine was strange to newcomer Jason Newsted, who complained about not having bigger impact to the overall sound, nor having any discussion between him and the rest of the working team. He had a different experience during his tenure in his previous band Flotsam and Jetsam, describing their style of playing as "basically everybody playing the same thing like a sonic wall". On ... He also noted that his bass parts ended up at the same frequency as Hetfield's guitar parts, creating a "battle for the same frequency".

Music

 
  "We took the Ride the Lightning and Master of Puppets concept as far as we could take it. There was no place else to go with the progressive, nutty, sideways side of Metallica, and I'm so proud of the fact that, in some way, that album is kind of the epitome of that progressive side of us up through the '80s."  —Lars Ulrich, on the band's direction for the album 

 "This is completely sublimated rock, on a quest for a purity of form, light years beyond raunch or blues rock. Metallica turn heavy metal's melodrama into algebra. This isn't thrash, but thresh: mechanized mayhem. There's no blur, no mess, not even at peak velocity, but a rigorous grid of incisions and contusions."  —Simon Reynolds, on the album's music 

...
BBC Music's Eamonn Stack felt that ...
The album was noted for its dry, sterile production. Rasmussen said it was not his intention, as he attempted to get a sound filled with ambience like in the previous two albums, and he was not present for the album's mixing, for which Steve Thompson and Michael Barbiero had been hired beforehand. Rasmussen felt that, in his absence from the mixing process, Thompson and Barbiero ended up using only the close microphones on the mix and none of the room microphones, thus causing the "clicking", thin drum sound. Popoff noted that due to the strange production, the bass guitar was nearly inaudible, while the guitars sounded "strangled mechanistic". He saw the "synthetic" percussion as another reason for the compressed, "difficult cyborgian" sound of the album.
The sound has nearly-inaudible bass guitar, which Rasmussen claims was ordered by Hetfield and Ulrich after hearing the initial mixes, resulting in his belief that "Jason Newsted, engineer Toby Wright and I are probably the only people who know what the bass parts actually sounded like on that album". In their defence, Hetfield and Ulrich said that most of Newsted's bass lines closely followed the rhythm guitar lines to the point of being indiscernible from each other. Newsted was quoted as saying "The Justice album wasn't something that really felt good for me, because you really can't hear the bass". Eagle Rock, 2001.

Lyrics

... The majority of the songs raise issues that differ from the violent retaliation of their previous releases. Editor Tom King wrote that "the lyrics, for the first time dealt with political and environmental issues". He named fellow contemporaries Nuclear Assault as the only other band who "applied ecological lyrics to thrash metal songs" rather than singing about Satan and Egyptian plagues. Music biographer Joel McIver noted that the band's main lyricist, James Hetfield, wrote about topics that he has not addressed before, like his revolt towards The Establishment.
Lars Ulrich described the songwriting process as "our CNN years", with him and James Hetfield watching the channel in search for song subjects – "I'd read about the blacklisting thing, we'd get a title, 'The Shortest Straw,' and a song would come out of that."
Cliff Burton receives co-writers credit on "To Live Is to Die" as the bass line was a medley of unused bass recordings Burton had performed prior to his death. While the original recordings are not used on the track, the compositions are credited as written by Burton and are played by Metallica's bassist at the time, Jason Newsted. The spoken word at the end of the song ("when a man lies, he murders some part of the world. These are the pale deaths which men miscall their lives...") was written by German poet Paul Gerhardt, but is erroneously attributed to Burton in the liner notes. Still, the second half of the speech ("All this I cannot bear to witness any longer. Cannot the kingdom of salvation take me home?") was written by Burton.

Critical reception

Released on August 25, 1988, by Elektra Records,
In a retrospective review, Greg Kot of the Chicago Tribune said that ... AllMusic's Steve Huey noted that Metallica followed the blueprint of their previous two albums, with more sophisticated songs and "apocalyptic" lyrics that envisioned a society in decay. Music journalist Mick Wall was critical of the progressive elements on the album and felt that, apart from "One" and "Dyers Eve", most of the album sounded clumsy. Colin Larkin, writing in the Encyclopedia of Popular Music (2006), wrote that, apart from the praiseworthy "One", the album diminished the band's creativity by concentrating the songs with too many riffs. Lars Ulrich said in retrospect that the album has improved with time and that it is well-revered among a lot of their colleagues.

Accolades

In The Village Voice
After years of resisting pressure to release music videos, Metallica released its first, for "One".

Commercial performance

Though Metallica's music was considered unappealing for mainstream radio, .....
... It peaked within the top 5 on the charts in Germany, Sweden, and the United Kingdom, where it remained on the UK chart for six weeks. The album managed to peak in the top 10 on the Finnish, Norwegian and Swiss album charts. It was less successful in Spain, Mexico and France, where it peaked at number 92 on the former chart, number 130 on the latter and at number 64 in Spain. It eventually received a three times platinum certification from Canadian Music Association for shipping 300,000 copies and a platinum certification from IFPI Finland for having a shipment of little over 50,000 records. ... ...

Live performances

Hammett noted the length of the songs being problematic for fans and the band. "Touring behind it, we realized that the general consensus was that songs were too fucking long," he said. "One day after we played 'Justice' and got off the stage one of us said, 'we're never fucking playing that song again.'"
In spite of this, "One" quickly gained a permanent fixture in the band's live setlist since the release of the album.
In June 2007, Metallica played the title track for the first time since October 1989, in Lisbon, on the first show of their Sick of the Studio '07 tour, and made it a set-fixture for the remainder of that touring.

Track listing

Personnel

Credits are adapted from the album's liner notes.

Metallica

Production

Packaging

Charts

Certification











