[[The Atomic Cafe]]

CATEGORIES: 1982 films, 1980s documentary films, American films, American documentary films, Cold War films, Collage film, Documentary films about nuclear war and weapons, English-language films, Independent films, Nuclear warfare, Compilation films

The Atomic Cafe is a 1982 American documentary film produced and directed by Jayne Loader, Kevin Rafferty, and Pierce Rafferty..

Synopsis

The film covers the beginnings of the era of nuclear warfare, created from a broad range of archival film from the 1940s, 1950s and early 1960s - including newsreel clips, television news footage, U.S. government-produced films (including military training films), advertisements, television and radio programs. News footage reflected the prevailing understandings of the media and public.
Though the topic of atomic holocaust is a grave matter, the film approaches it with black humor. Much of the humor derives from the modern audience's reaction to the old training films, such as the Duck and Cover film shown in schools.  A quote to illustrate what can be perceived as black humor culled from the archives:

Historical context

Atomic Café was released at the height of nostalgia and cynicism in America. By 1982, Americans lost much of their faith in their government following the Vietnam War, the Watergate scandal, and the seemingly never-ending arms race with the Soviet Union. "Film Quarterly", film review, Spring 1983. Last accessed: November 27, 2012. Atomic Café reflects and reinforces this idea as it exposes how the atomic bomb's dangers were both downplayed and how the government manipulated films, such as when President Truman calls the atomic bomb a gift from God.
Atomic Café was also released during the Reagan Administration's forced civil defense revival. The Atomic Cafe, Jayne Loader Interview.  Last accessed: November 26, 2012. Barry Rosen and Stephen Van Evera explained this revival in their article "Defense Policy and the Reagan Administration: Departure from Containment" published in International Security. "The Reagan Administration has proposed the biggest military buildup since the Korean War."Rosen, R. Barry "Defense Policy and the Reagan Administration: Departure from Containment", Journal article. Last accessed: November 27, 2012. This increase in military was for the "strategy of containment and the four essential military missions that follow from it."Rosen, R. Barry "Defense Policy and the Reagan Administration: Departure from Containment", Journal article. Last accessed: November 27, 2012 Two of the four are particularly relevant to "Atomic Café". The first is "American strategic nuclear forces must be able to deter a Soviet nuclear attack on the United States by being able to inflict unacceptable damage on the Soviet Union even after a Soviet nuclear first strike against U.S. forces."Rosen, R. Barry "Defense Policy and the Reagan Administration: Departure from Containment", Journal article. Last accessed: November 27, 2012 The second was "American forces must be strong enough to halt a Soviet invasion of Western Europe for several weeks, conventional, chemical or tactical nuclear."Rosen, R. Barry "Defense Policy and the Reagan Administration: Departure from Containment", Journal article. Last accessed: November 27, 2012 Bob Mielke in his article "Rhetoric and Ideology in the Nuclear Test Documentary" for Film Quarterly discussed the ideal release of "Atomic Café", "This satire feature was released at the height of the nuclear freeze movement (which was in turn responding to the Reagan administration's surreal handling of the arms race.)"Mielke Bob. "Film Quarterly", film review, Spring 2005. Last Accessed: November 27, 2012.

Production

The film was produced over a five-year period through the collaborative efforts of three directors: Jayne Loader and brothers Kevin and Pierce Rafferty. For this film, the Rafferty brothers and Loader formed the production company "Archives Project Inc." The filmmakers opted not to use narration, and instead they deployed carefully constructed sequences of film clips to make their points. Jayne Loader has referred to The Atomic Cafe as a compilation verite, meaning that it is a compilation film with no "Voice of God" narration and no new footage added by the filmmakers. The Atomic Cafe, Jayne Loader Interview.  Last accessed: February 20, 2011. The soundtrack utilizes atomic-themed songs from the Cold War era to underscore the themes of the film.  The New York Times, film review, March 17, 1982.  Last accessed: February 20, 2011.
The film cost $300,000 to make. The group did receive some financial support from outside sources, including the Film Fund; a Washington, D.C. based non-profit. "Cinema Verties." The Washington Post 6 Nov. 1981, C3 sec. Grants comprised a nominal amount of the team's budget, and the film was largely funded by the filmmakers themselves. Jayne Loader stated in an interview, "Had we relied on grants, we would have starved"  Last accessed: November 14, 2011. Pierce Rafferty helped to support the team and the film financially by working as a consultant and researcher on several other documentary films including El Salvador—Another Vietnam, With Babies and Banners, and The Life and Times of Rosie the Riveter. "Blast from the Past: 'Atomic Cafe': A Stunning Cold War Collage." The Washington Post 14 May 1982, C1 sec. The Rafferty brothers had also received an inheritance that they used to support the team during the five years it took to make the film  Last accessed: November 14, 2011. About 75% of the film is made up of government materials that were in the public domain. Though they could use those public domain materials for free, they had to make copies of the film at their own expense. This along with the newsreel and commercial stock footage that comprises the other 25% of the film (along with the music royalties) represents the bulk of the trio's expenditures. "Blast from the Past: 'Atomic Cafe': A Stunning Cold War Collage." The Washington Post 14 May 1982, C1 sec.

Release

The film was released on March 17, 1982 in New York City, New York.  In August 1982, a tie-in companion book of the same name, written by Kevin Rafferty, was released by Bantam Books, ISBN 0-553-01462-5.com

Home media

20th Anniversary Edition of the film was released in DVD format in Region 1 on March 26, 2002 by New Video Group.com
In 1995, an adult educational CD-ROM companion to The Atomic Cafe with many of the clips and other materials from the film, plus additional clips from declassified films, audio, photographs, and text files that archive the history, technology, and culture of the Nuclear Age, was released by Public Shelter; a web site based company Jayne Loader and her husband Eric Schwaab began. The Public Shelter CD-ROM release only sold 500 copies and failed to find a publisher.  Dallas Observer, "GROUND ZERO: Atomic Cafe filmmaker Jayne Loader has won raves for her CD-ROM Public Shelter, but calls the 'new medium' a dud," June 27, 1996.  Last accessed: February 20, 2011.

Reception

Critical response

When the film was released, film critic Roger Ebert discussed the style and methods the filmmakers used, writing, "The makers of The Atomic Cafe sifted through thousands of feet of Army films, newsreels, government propaganda films and old television broadcasts to come up with the material in their film, which is presented without any narration, as a record of some of the ways in which the bomb entered American folklore. There are songs, speeches politicians, and frightening documentary footage of guinea-pig American troops shielding themselves from an atomic blast and then exposing themselves to radiation neither they nor their officers understood."Ebert, Roger.  Chicago Sun-Times, film review, January 1, 1982.  Last accessed: February 20, 2011.
Critic Vincent Canby praised the film, calling the film "a devastating collage-film that examines official and unofficial United States attitudes toward the atomic age" and a film that "deserves national attention."Canby, Vincent.  The New York Times, film review, March 17, 1982.  Last accessed: February 20, 2011.
More recently, critic Glenn Erickson discussed the editorial message of the film's producers: "The makers of The Atomic Cafe clearly have a message to get across, and to achieve that goal they use the inherent absurdity of their source material in creative ways. But they're careful to make sure they leave them essentially untransformed. When we see Nixon and J. Edgar Hoover posing with a strip of microfilm, we know we're watching a newsreel. The content isn't cheated. Except in wrapup montages, narration from one source isn't used over another. When raw footage is available, candid moments are seen of speechmakers (including President Truman) when they don't know the cameras are rolling. Caught laughing incongruously before a solemn report on an atom threat, Truman comes off not as callous, but human."
The review aggregator Rotten Tomatoes reported that 100% of critics gave the film a positive review, based on 14 reviews."The Atomic Cafe at Rotten Tomatoes.  Last accessed: February 20, 2011.
Deirdre Boyle, an Associate Professor and Academic Coordinator of the Graduate Certificate in Documentary Media Studies at The New School and an author of Subject to Change: Guerrilla Television Revisited, claimed that "By compiling propaganda or fictions denying 'nuclear-truth', The Atomic Cafe reveals the American public's lack of resistance to the fear generated by the government propaganda films and the misinformation they generated. Whether Americans of the time lacked the ability to resist or reject this misinformation about the atomic bomb is a debatable truth."
Boyle, Deirdre, "The Atomic Cafe", Cineaste 12.2, 1982, p. 39.

Accolades

Soundtrack

A vinyl LP record of the film's soundtrack was released in 1982 by Rounder Records.  Some of the credits for the record, include: co-produced by Charles Wolfe, The Archives Project (Jayne Loader, Kevin Rafferty and Pierce Rafferty),  album cover artwork by Dennis Pohl, cover design by Mel Green, and booklet text by Charles Wolfe. Last accessed: February 20, 2011.

Track listing

The Internet Movie Data Base (IMDB) lists the following additional songs on the soundtrack of The Atomic Cafe:









