[[Arthur (1981 film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 films, 1980s comedy-drama films, 1980s romantic comedy films, American films, American comedy-drama films, American romantic comedy films, Best Musical or Comedy Picture Golden Globe winners, Films that won the Best Original Song Academy Award, Directorial debut films, English-language films, Films about alcoholism, Films featuring a Best Supporting Actor Academy Award winning performance, Films set in New York City, Orion Pictures films, Warner Bros. films

Arthur  is a 1981 comedy film written and directed by Steve Gordon. The film stars Dudley Moore as the eponymous Arthur Bach, a drunken New York City millionaire who is on the brink of an arranged marriage to a wealthy heiress, but ends up falling for a common working-class girl from Queens. It was the first and only film directed by Gordon, who died in 1982 of a heart attack at age 44.
Arthur earned nearly $96 million domestically, making it the fourth highest grossing film of 1981. It was notable for its title song, "Arthur's Theme (Best That You Can Do)", co-written by Christopher Cross, Burt Bacharach, Carole Bayer Sager and Peter Allen, and performed by Christopher Cross. The film was nominated for a total of four Academy Awards. Sir John Gielgud won Best Supporting Actor and the theme song won Best Original Song. 
Arthur was followed by a 1988 sequel, Arthur 2: On the Rocks, which was enough of a failure for star Dudley Moore to disown it. A poorly received remake starring Russell Brand was released in April 2011.

Plot

Arthur Bach (Dudley Moore) is a spoiled alcoholic from New York City who likes to be driven in his chauffeured Rolls-Royce through Central Park. He is heir to his father Stanford's (Thomas Barbour) $750 million fortune, which he is told will only be his if he marries the upper class Susan Johnson (Jill Eikenberry). He does not love Susan, but his family feels she will make him finally grow up. Arthur reluctantly agrees to the arranged marriage, but he meets a working-class Queens waitress, Linda Marolla (Liza Minnelli), and despite her being a shoplifter, is attracted to her.
Arthur struggles with his promise to marry Susan. While visiting his grandmother Martha (Geraldine Fitzgerald), Arthur shares his feelings for Linda, but is warned again that he will be disowned. His valet, Hobson (John Gielgud), who has been more like a father to him than Arthur's real father, realizes that Arthur is beginning to grow up and secretly encourages Linda to attend Arthur's engagement party (where Moore, an accomplished pianist, entertains guests) telling Linda he recognizes when a young man is in love. Hobson is hospitalized and Arthur rushes to his side. After several weeks, Hobson dies and then Arthur, who has been sober that whole time, goes on a drinking binge. On his wedding day, he visits the diner where Linda works and proposes to her. At the church, he jilts Susan, resulting in her abusive father, Burt Johnson (Stephen Elliott), attempting to stab Arthur with a cheese knife, though he is prevented by Martha.
A wounded Arthur announces in the church that there will be no wedding and passes out. Linda attends to his wounds and they discuss living a life of poverty. A horrified Martha tells Arthur that he can have his fortune because no Bach has ever been working class. Arthur declines, but at the last minute, talks privately to Martha. When he returns to Linda's side, he tells her that he declined again – Martha's dinner invitation, he means, but he did take the money. Arthur's pleased chauffeur Bitterman (Ted Ross) drives the couple through Central Park.

Cast

Production

For the role of Arthur, Steve Gordon had originally considered George Segal; however, after the success of 10, Segal was replaced with Dudley Moore, who had also stepped in when Segal withdrew from the lead role of 10. Conversely, Barbra Streisand replaced Moore with Segal while filming The Mirror Has Two Faces.
Bud Cort reportedly accepted the role of Arthur at one point, but he dropped out before production began. Sylvester Stallone was briefly considered.

Reception

The film received critical acclaim upon its release. It currently holds a 90% "Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes.

Remake

It was first reported in 2008 that Arthur was to be remade by Warner Bros. with the British actor/comedian Russell Brand in the lead role. Garner plays the heiress while Nolte is her ruthless father. Greta Gerwig stars as a charismatic tour guide with whom Arthur falls in love. Jason Winer directed the remake and Peter Baynham penned the script. Filming began in July 2010. It was released in the U.S. on April 8, 2011. The remake was a critical and financial failure. 
This film was also remade in India twice, as the Hindi language film Sharaabi starring Amitabh Bachchan in the lead role and in Kannada as Nee Thanda Kanike.

Awards and nominations

Academy Awards

Honors

The film is #10 on Bravo's "100 Funniest Movies," and #53 on the American Film Institute's 100 Years... 100 Laughs.
American Film Institute lists






