[[John Hurt]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, Living people, BAFTA winners (people), Best Actor BAFTA Award winners, Best Supporting Actor BAFTA Award winners, Best Supporting Actor Golden Globe (film) winners, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, English expatriates in Ireland, English male film actors, English male stage actors, English Anglicans, English male television actors, English male voice actors, Male actors from Lincolnshire, People from Shirebrook, Alumni of Saint Martin's School of Art, Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, People educated at St Michael's Preparatory School, Otford, 20th-century English male actors, 21st-century English male actors, People associated with Norwich University of the Arts, People from Cromer, Norfolk, Male actors from Kent, People from Chesterfield

John Vincent Hurt, CBE (born 22 January 1940) is an English actor. Among other honours, he has received two Academy Award nominations, a Golden Globe Award, and four BAFTA Awards, with the fourth being a Lifetime Achievement recognition.
Hurt is known for his leading roles as John Merrick in The Elephant Man, Winston Smith in Nineteen Eighty-Four, Mr. Braddock in The Hit, Stephen Ward in Scandal, Quentin Crisp in The Naked Civil Servant and An Englishman in New York, and Caligula in I, Claudius. Recognisable for his distinctive rich voice,
Hurt initially came to prominence for his role as Richard Rich in the 1966 film A Man for All Seasons, and has since appeared in films such as Alien, Midnight Express, Rob Roy, V for Vendetta, Indiana Jones and the Kingdom of the Crystal Skull, the Harry Potter film series, the Hellboy films, and Tinker Tailor Soldier Spy. Hurt is one of Britain's best-known, most prolific and sought-after actors, and has had a versatile film career spanning six decades. His character's final scene in Alien is consistently named as one of the most memorable in cinematic history.

Early life

Hurt was born in Chesterfield, Derbyshire, the son of Phyllis (née Massey), an amateur actress and engineer, and Arnould Herbert Hurt, a mathematician who became an Anglican clergyman and served as vicar of Shirebrook. Hurt's father was also a vicar at St John's Church in Sunderland. In 1937, he moved his family to Derbyshire, where he became Perpetual Curate of Holy Trinity Church. When Hurt was five, his father became the vicar of St. Stephen's Church in Woodville, Derbyshire, and remained there until 1952.
In 1945, Hurt's father founded 1st Woodville (St. Stephen's) Scout Group, which is still going today.
At the age of eight, Hurt was sent to the Anglican St Michael's Preparatory School in Otford, Kent, where he eventually developed his passion for acting. He decided he wanted to become an actor, and his first role was that of a girl in a school production of The Bluebird (L'Oiseau Bleu) by Maurice Maeterlinck. While he was a pupil at the school, he was abused by Donald Cormack (now deceased), then Senior Master of the school and later Head Teacher (until his retirement in 1981).
Hurt's father moved to Old Clee Church in Grimsby, North East Lincolnshire. Hurt (then aged 12) became a boarder at Christ's Hospital School (then a grammar school) in Lincoln, because he had failed the entrance exam for admission to his brother's school. Hurt often accompanied his mother to Cleethorpes Repertory Theatre, but his parents disliked his acting ambitions and encouraged him to become an art teacher instead. His headmaster, Mr. Franklin, laughed when Hurt told him he wanted to be an actor, telling him that he "wouldn't stand a chance in the profession". Aged 17, Hurt enrolled in Grimsby Art School (now the East Coast School of Art & Design), where he studied art. In 1959, Hurt won a scholarship allowing him to study for an Art Teacher's Diploma (ATD) at Saint Martin's School of Art in London. Central Saint Martins: The art and soul of Britain. The Independent. Retrieved July 2013. Despite the scholarship, paying for his studies was financially difficult, so he persuaded some of his friends to pose nude and sold the portraits. In 1960, he won a scholarship to RADA, where he trained for two years. He was then cast in small roles on television.

Career

Hurt's first film was The Wild and the Willing (1962), but his first major role was as Richard Rich in A Man for All Seasons (1966). In 1971 he played Timothy Evans, who was hanged for murders probably committed by his landlord John Christie, in 10 Rillington Place, earning him his first BAFTA nomination for Best Supporting Actor. His portrayal of Quentin Crisp in the 1975 TV play The Naked Civil Servant gave him prominence and earned him the British Academy Television Award for Best Actor. The following year, Hurt played the Roman emperor Caligula in the BBC drama serial, I, Claudius. In 1978 he appeared in Midnight Express, for which he won a Golden Globe and a BAFTA and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor (the latter of which he lost to Christopher Walken for his performance in The Deer Hunter). Hurt voiced Hazel, the heroic rabbit leader of his warren in the film adaptation of Watership Down and later played the major villain, General Woundwort, in the animated television series version.
His roles at the end of the 1970s and the beginning of the 1980s included Kane, the memorable first victim of the title creature in the film Alien (a role which he reprised as a parody in Spaceballs); would-be art school radical Scrawdyke in Little Malcolm; and "John" Merrick in the Joseph Merrick biography The Elephant Man, for which he won another BAFTA and was nominated for a Golden Globe and an Academy Award for Best Actor. In 1978 he lent his voice to Ralph Bakshi's animated film adaptation of Lord of the Rings, playing the role of Aragorn. He also had a starring role in Sam Peckinpah's critically panned but moderately successful final film, The Osterman Weekend (1983). Also in 1983 he starred as the Fool opposite Laurence Olivier's King in King Lear. Hurt also appeared as Raskolnikov in the 1979 BBC TV mini-series adaptation of Crime and Punishment.Crime and Punishment at IMDb
Hurt played Winston Smith in the 1984 adaptation of the novel Nineteen Eighty-Four. In 1985 he starred in Disney's The Black Cauldron, voicing the film's main antagonist, the Horned King. In 1986, Hurt provided the voiceover for AIDS: Iceberg / Tombstone,
In 2008, 33 years after The Naked Civil Servant, Hurt reprised the role of Quentin Crisp in An Englishman in New York. This film depicts Crisp's later years in New York.
In June 2009, Hurt played the on-screen Big Brother for Paper Zoo Theatre Company's production of Orwell's Nineteen Eighty-Four. The theatre production premiered at the National Media Museum, in Bradford and will be touring during early 2010. Hurt said, "I think Paper Zoo thought it would be quite ironic to have the person who played Winston having risen in the party. From the Chestnut Tree Cafe, he's managed to get his wits together again, now understanding that 2 and 2 make 5, and becomes Big Brother. So it tickled my fancy, and of course I looked up Paper Zoo, and they seem to me to be the sort of company that's essential in the country as we know it, and doing a lot of really good stuff."
At the 65th British Academy Film Awards Hurt won the award for Outstanding British Contribution to Cinema.
In 2013 Hurt appeared in the Doctor Who 50th anniversary episode "The Day of the Doctor", as a 'forgotten' incarnation of the Doctor, known as the War Doctor.
Hurt is due to appear alongside Ben Kingsley in a film entitled Broken Dream, to be directed by Neil Jordan.

Personal life

Hurt has an older brother, Br. Anselm (born Michael), a Roman Catholic convert who became a monk and writer at Glenstal Abbey; Hurt has contributed to his brother's books. Hurt's mother died in 1975, and his father died in 1999 at the age of 95. In September 1984, Hurt married his old friend, Texas actress Donna Peacock, at a local Register Office. The couple moved to Kenya, but divorced in January 1990.
On 24 January 1990, Hurt married American production assistant Joan Dalton,Gisele Scanlon, "Bondings - Lifestyle - Independent.ie, 21 April 2002. Retrieved 18 September 2012. whom he had met while filming Scandal. With her he had two sons: Sasha John Vincent Hurt (born 6 February 1990) and Nick Hurt (born 5 February 1993), who are currently residing in County Waterford, Ireland. Nick has gone to acting school in England and wishes to follow in his father's footsteps.
In 2004, Hurt was made a Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE).
In January 2002, Hurt received an honorary degree from the University of Derby and in January 2006 he received an honorary degree of Doctor of Letters from the University of Hull.
In 2007 Hurt took part in the BBC genealogical television series Who Do You Think You Are?, which investigated part of his family history. Prior to participating in the programme, Hurt had harboured a love of Ireland and was enamoured of a 'deeply beguiling' family legend that suggested his great-grandmother had been the illegitimate daughter of Irish nobleman the Marquess of Sligo. The genealogical evidence uncovered seemed to contradict the family legend, rendering the 'suggestion' doubtful. Coincidentally the search revealed that his great-grandmother had previously lived in Grimsby at a location within a mile of the art college at which Hurt had once enrolled.
Since 2006, John Hurt has been a patron of Project Harar, a UK-based charity working in Ethiopia for children with facial disfigurements.
Since 2009 he has been patron of QUAD, an arts centre in Derby. On 25 September 2009 Hurt visited QUAD and took part in a Q&A directly preceding a screening of the film The Night Train as part of the festivities, celebrating QUAD's first birthday (it opened on 26 September 2008). The following day he was guest of honour at Derby County vs Bristol City and went onto the pitch at Pride Park at half-time to oversee a prize draw. 
In 2012 he was appointed the first Chancellor of Norwich University of the Arts.
On 23 January 2013 he was made an Honorary Doctor of Arts by the University of Lincoln, England at Lincoln Cathedral."John Hurt CBE joins honoraries at January graduation", University of Lincoln, 21 January 2013. Retrieved 21 March 2013. Hurt has been announced as patron of Norwich Cinema City in March 2013.EDP news report Retrieved 29 April 2013

Filmography

Films

Television

Video games

Other projects and contributions






