[[Foreign relations of Papua New Guinea]]

CATEGORIES: Foreign relations of Papua New Guinea, Papua New Guinea and the Commonwealth of Nations

Papua New Guinea's foreign policy reflects close ties with Australia and other traditional allies and cooperative relations with neighboring countries. Its views on international political and economic issues are generally moderate. Papua New Guinea has diplomatic relations with 56 countries.
Papua New Guinea belongs to a variety of regional organizations, including the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum; the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) (Papua New Guinea is an observer member of the ASEAN); the South Pacific Commission; the Pacific Islands Forum; the Melanesian Spearhead Group and the South Pacific Regional Environmental Program (SPREP).

Relations by country

Australia

See Australia–Papua New Guinea relations
Relations with Australia were strained in 2006 when Prime Minister Michael Somare was accused of having facilitated Julian Moti's escape to the Solomon Islands.

Cuba

In the late 2000s (decade), Papua New Guinea began to strengthen its relations with Cuba. Cuba provides medical aid to the country. In September 2008, a PNG government representative attended the first Cuba-Pacific Islands ministerial meeting in Havana, aimed at "strengthening cooperation" between Cuba and Pacific Island countries, notably in coping with the effects of climate change."Cuba-Pacific ministerial meeting underway in Havana", ABC Radio Australia, 17 September 2008

Fiji

Date started: 1976
As of November 2005, relations with Pacific neighbor Fiji have been strained by revelations that a number of Fijian mercenaries have been operating illegally on the island of Bougainville, arming and training a rebel militia.

France

Official diplomatic relations were established in 1976. Papua New Guinea is a member of the United Nations' Special Committee on Decolonization. The French government has noted what it calls Port Moresby's "moderate" attitude on the issue of the decolonisation of New Caledonia - which, like Papua New Guinea, is located in Melanesia. The French National Assembly maintains a Friendship Group with Papua New Guinea.

Indonesia

Western New Guinea (which consists of two Indonesian provinces: Papua and West Papua) and Papua New Guinea share a  border that has raised tensions and ongoing diplomatic issues over many decades.us/indonesia/100.

People's Republic of China

The Independent State of Papua New Guinea and the People's Republic of China (PRC) established official diplomatic relations in 1976, soon after Papua New Guinea became independent. The two countries currently maintain diplomatic, economic and, to a lesser degree, military relations. Relations are cordial; China is a significant provider of both investments and development aid to Papua New Guinea.

Philippines

On March 2009, The Philippines and Papua New Guinea entered into a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) that would enhance the cooperation between the two countries on the development of fisheries. The MoU will facilitate technology transfer in aquaculture development, promotion of shipping ventures, investments, technical training, joint research, and "strategic complementation" of each country's plans in the "Coral Triangle" – or the waters between the Philippines, Indonesia, and the Pacific Islands. In the same year, Papua New Guinea asked the Philippines for help it its pursuit of membership to ASEAN.Papua New Guinea asks RP support for Asean membership bid Retrieved 8 July 2009Somare seeks PGMA's support for PNG's ASEAN membership bid Retrieved 8 July 2009

United Kingdom

See Papua New Guinea–United Kingdom relations
Papua New Guinea and the United Kingdom share Queen Elizabeth II as their head of state. They have had relations since 1975 when Papua New Guinea gained independence from Australia.

United States

See Papua New Guinea–United States relations
The U.S. and Papua New Guinea are signatories to the U.S.-Pacific Islands Multilateral Tuna Fisheries Treaty, under which the U.S. grants $18 million per year to Pacific Island parties and the latter provide access for U.S. fishing vessels.  The U.S. also supports Papua New Guinea's efforts to protect biodiversity; the International Coral Reef Initiative is aimed at protecting reefs in tropical nations such as Papua New Guinea.

Papua New Guinea and the Commonwealth of Nations

Papua New Guinea has been a member state of the Commonwealth of Nations since 1975, when it gained independence from Australia.






