[[Herman Hollerith]]

CATEGORIES: American statisticians, American inventors, 1860 births, 1929 deaths, People from Buffalo, New York, City College of New York alumni, Columbia University alumni, Columbia School of Engineering and Applied Science alumni, Elliott Cresson Medal recipients, Burials at Oak Hill Cemetery, American people of German descent

Herman Hollerith (February 29, 1860 – November 17, 1929) was an American statistician and inventor who developed a mechanical tabulator based on punched cards to rapidly tabulate statistics from millions of pieces of data. He was the founder of the Tabulating Machine Company that later merged to become IBM. Hollerith is widely regarded as the father of modern machine data processing. With his invention of the punched card evaluating machine the beginning of the era of automatic data processing systems was marked. His draft of this concept dominated the computing landscape for nearly a century.

Personal life

Herman Hollerith was born the son of German immigrant Prof. Georg Hollerith from Großfischlingen (near Neustadt an der Weinstraße) in Buffalo, New York, where he spent his early childhood.  He eventually moved to Washington, D.C., living in Georgetown, with a home on 29th Street and a factory for manufacturing his tabulating machines at 31st Street and the C&O Canal, where today there is a commemorative plaque installed by IBM. He died in Washington D.C. of a heart attack.

Electrical tabulation of data

At the urging of John Shaw Billings, claim 2 of which reads:
 
 The herein-described method of compiling statistics, which consists in recording separate statistical items pertaining to the individual by holes or combinations of holes punched in sheets of electrically non-conducting material, and bearing a specific relation to each other and to a standard, and then counting or tallying such statistical items separately or in combination by means of mechanical counters operated by electro-magnets the circuits through which are controlled by the perforated sheets, substantially as and for the purpose set forth.

Inventions and businesses

Hollerith had left teaching and begun working for the United States Census Bureau in the year he filed his first patent application. Titled "Art of Compiling Statistics", it was filed on September 23, 1884; U.S. Patent 395,782 was granted on January 8, 1889.The Invention and Development of the Hollerith Punched Card 
Hollerith built machines under contract for the Census Office, which used them to tabulate the 1890 census in only one year. 1895 from the American Memory archives of the Library of Congress The previous 1880 census had taken eight years. In 1896 Hollerith started his own business when he founded the Tabulating Machine Company. Many major census bureaus around the world leased his equipment and purchased his cards, as did major insurance companies. Hollerith's machines were used for censuses in England, Italy, Germany,IBM and the Holocaust the Strategic Alliance, Black Russia, Austria, Canada, France, Norway, Puerto Rico, Cuba, and the Philippines, and again in the 1900 census. To make his system work, he invented the first automatic card-feed mechanism and the first keypunch (that is, a punch operated by a keyboard); a skilled operator could punch 200–300 cards per hour. He also invented a tabulator. The 1890 Tabulator was hardwired to operate only on 1890 Census cards. A plugboard control panel in his 1906 Type I Tabulator allowed it to do different jobs without being rebuilt (the first step towards programming). These inventions were among the foundations of the modern information processing industry and Hollerith's punchcards (though later adapted to encode computer programs) continued in use for almost a century.
In 1911 four corporations, including Hollerith's firm, merged to form the Computing Tabulating Recording Company (CTR). Some accounts of the merger forming CTR state that three corporations were merged. This reference notes that only three of the four merged corporations are represented in the CTR name. That may be the reason for the differing accounts. Under the presidency of Thomas J. Watson, it was renamed International Business Machines Corporation (IBM) in 1924.

Death and Legacy

Hollerith is buried at Oak Hill Cemetery in the Georgetown neighborhood of Washington, D.C., (1892-1991).
Hollerith cards were named after the elder Herman Hollerith, as were Hollerith constants (also sometimes called Hollerith strings), an early type of string constant declaration (in computer programming).
His great-grandson, Rt. Herman Hollerith IV is the Episcopal bishop of the Diocese of Southern Virginia, and another grandson, Randolph Marshall Hollerith, is an Episcopal priest in Richmond, Virginia.com/2009/02/new-epsicopal-bishop-face-tough-challenges

Notes

Further reading

  | last = Austrian
  | first =  G.D.
  | title =  Herman Hollerith: The Forgotten Giant of Information Processing
  | publisher = Columbia
  | year = 1982
  | isbn = 0-231-05146-8
 }}
  | last = Heide
  | first =  Lars
  | title =  Punched-Card Systems and the Early Information Explosion, 1880-1945
  | publisher = Johns Hopkins
  | year = 2009
  | isbn = 0-8018-9143-4
 }}
  | last = Hollerith
  | first = Herman
  | title = In connection with the electric tabulation system which has been adopted by U.S. government for the work of the census bureau (Ph.D. dissertation)
