[[H. J. Heinz Company]]

CATEGORIES: Brand name soups, Companies based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, Companies established in 1869, Companies formerly listed on the New York Stock Exchange, Food production companies of the United States, H. J. Heinz Company, Historic American Engineering Record in Pennsylvania, Household brands, Industrial buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Pennsylvania, Multinational food companies, Pasta companies, American brands, Brand name condiments

The H. J. Heinz Company, also known as the Heinz Company and commonly known as Heinz and famous for its "57 Varieties" slogan and its ketchup, is a United States food processing company with world headquarters in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The H. J. Heinz Company manufactures thousands of food products in plants on six continents, and markets these products in more than 200 countries and territories. The company claims to have 150 number-one or number two-brands worldwide.
On February 14, 2013, Heinz agreed to be purchased by Berkshire Hathaway and 3G Capital for $23 Billion.

History

19th-century origins

Founder Henry J. Heinz began packing foodstuffs on a small scale at Sharpsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1869. There he founded Heinz Noble & Company with a friend, L. Clarence Noble, and began marketing horseradish. The company went bankrupt in 1875, but the following year Heinz founded another company, F & J Heinz, with his brother John Heinz and a cousin Frederick Heinz. One of this company's first products was tomato ketchup.
The company continued to grow, and in 1888 Heinz bought out his other two partners and reorganized the company as the H. J. Heinz Company. Its slogan, "57 varieties", was introduced by Heinz in 1896. Inspired by an advertisement he saw while riding an elevated train in New York City (a shoe store boasting "21 styles"), Heinz picked the number more or less at random because he liked the sound of it, selecting 7 specifically because, as he put it, of the "psychological influence of that figure and of its enduring significance to people of all ages."

20th century

H. J. Heinz was incorporated in 1905, and Heinz served as its first president, remaining in the position for the rest of his life. Under his leadership, the company pioneered processes for sanitary food preparation, leading a successful lobbying effort in favor of the Pure Food and Drug Act in 1906. During World War I, he worked with the Food Administration.
In 1969, Tony O'Reilly joined the company's UK subsidiary, soon becoming its managing director; he 
moved to Pittsburgh in 1971 when he was promoted to Senior Vice President for the North America and Pacific region, and by 1973, R. Burt Gookin and Jack Heinz made him COO and President. succeeding Jack and becoming the first non-family member to hold that post. 
Between 1981 and 1991, Heinz returned 28% annually, doubling the Standard & Poor's average annual return for those years.  By 2000, the consolidation of grocery store chains, the spread of retailers like Walmart, and growth of private-label brands caused  competition for shelf space, and put price pressure on the company's products.  The decline was also attributed to an inadequate response to broad demographic changes in the United States, particularly the growth in population among Hispanic Americans and African Americans.
Tony O'Reilly left Heinz in 1998 after issues with the company's performance, and challenges from corporate governance groups and pension funds including CalPERS. Johnson. 

21st century

Billionaire Nelson Peltz initiated a proxy battle during 2006, culminating in a vote to place Peltz's nominees on the Board, which, depending on how many seats the dissident group received after the final vote tally, would displace some of the current board members. After the final vote, 2 out of the 5 nominees joined the Heinz Board. The new members of the board were Nelson Peltz and Matthew Craig Walsh.
In June 2008, Heinz began an advertising campaign in the UK for their new 'New York Deli Mayo' products. The advertisement featured a family with the mother replaced by a male New York deli worker. The advert ended with the father and the 'mother' kissing. This drew 200 complaints to the Advertising Standards Authority.
Withdrawing the advert caused further controversy with Heinz being accused of homophobia.
On February 14, 2013, it was announced that Heinz would be purchased by Berkshire Hathaway and 3G Capital for $23 billion.
On August 13, 2013, Heinz announced it was cutting 600 jobs in North America.
On October 25, 2013, fast-food chain McDonalds announced it would end its 40-year relationship with Heinz, after CEO Hees took office. Investment company 3G Capital which at the time partially owns Heinz also owns a portion of McDonald's competitor, Burger King.

Brands

International presence

United States

The company's world headquarters are in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, where the company has been located since 1890, and the company's "keystone" logo is based on that of Pennsylvania, the "keystone state". A majority of its ketchup is produced in Fremont, Ohio. Heinz Field was named after the Heinz company in 2001.  Heinz opened a pickle factory in Holland, Michigan, in 1897, and it is the largest such facility in the world.
Heinz has factories in the following locations:
Arizona (Phoenix),
California (Chatsworth, Escalon, Irvine, San Diego),
Jacksonville, Florida,
Pocatello, Idaho,
Iowa (Cedar Rapids, Muscatine),
Fort Myers, Florida,
Newburyport, Massachusetts,
Ohio (Mason, Massillon),
Ontario, Oregon, and
Florence, South Carolina.
In 2000, seven retailers—including Walmart, Albertsons, and Safeway comprised half of the company's sales by volume.

Australia

Heinz Australia's head office is located in Melbourne.[ref]
