[[Dickinson College]]

CATEGORIES: Carlisle, Pennsylvania, Universities and colleges in Pennsylvania, Educational institutions established in the 1780s, 1783 establishments in the United States, Dickinson College, Liberal arts colleges, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, Middle States Association of Colleges and Schools, Universities and colleges in Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, Members of the Annapolis Group

Dickinson College is a private, residential liberal arts college in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, United States. Founded in 1773 as Carlisle Grammar School, Dickinson was chartered September 9, 1783,Dickinson Facts six days after the signing of the Treaty of Paris, making it the first college to be founded after formation of the United States. Dickinson was founded by Benjamin Rush, a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and originally named "John and Mary's College" in honor of a signer of the Constitution, John Dickinson, who was later the President of Pennsylvania and his wife, Mary Norris Dickinson, who donated much of her extensive personal library, combined with John Dickinson's library, to the school. Dickinson College is America's 16th oldest college.
With over 240 full-time faculty members and an enrollment of nearly 2,400 students, Dickinson has been recognized for its innovative curriculum and international education programs. For example, Dickinson sponsors 12 study centers in other countries and its approach to global education has received national recognition from the American Council on Education and NAFSA: Association of International Educators. NAFSA - Internationalizing the Campus Report 2003 In 2010, Dickinson received The Climate Leadership Award from the organization Second Nature for "innovative and advanced leadership in education for sustainability…."Second NatureClimate Leadership Award  Each year, Dickinson receives approximately 6,000 applications for its 600 spaces — putting it among the top liberal arts colleges in the nation. In 2013 Dickinson's endowment stood at $388 million — it is estimated it will top $400 million in early 2014.
In addition to offering either a bachelor of arts or bachelor of science degree in 22 disciplinary majors and 20 interdisciplinary majors, Dickinson offers an engineering option through its 3:2 program, which consists of three years at Dickinson and two years at an engineering school - either Columbia University, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, or Case Western Reserve University. Upon successful completion of both portions of the program, students receive the B.S. degree from Dickinson in their chosen field and the B.S. in engineering from the engineering school.Engineering option
Dickinson College is not to be confused with the Dickinson School of Law, which abuts the campus but is no longer affiliated with the college.

History

The Carlisle Grammar School was founded in 1773 as a frontier Latin school for the young men in western Pennsylvania. Within years Carlisle's elite, especially James Wilson and John Montgomery, were pushing for an expansion of the school into a college. In 1782 Benjamin Rush, a revolutionary leader and the preeminent physician in the new nation, met in Philadelphia with Montgomery on the porch of prominent businessman and politician William Bingham to discuss the founding of a frontier college in the town. It was in this conversation that the idea for the college was formed, and "Bingham's Porch" was long a rallying cry at Dickinson.
Dickinson College was chartered by the Pennsylvania legislature on September 9, 1783, six days after the signing of the Treaty of Paris (1783) ending the American Revolution, making it the first college founded in the newly recognized nation. Rush intended to name the institution after the President of Pennsylvania John Dickinson and his wife Mary Norris Dickinson, originally calling it "John and Mary's College." John and Mary Norris Dickinson had given the new university an extensive library they jointly owned, one of the largest libraries in the colonies. The name Dickinson College was chosen instead. At the time of its founding its location west of the Susquehanna River made it the westernmost college in America. For the first meeting of the trustees, held in April 1784, Rush made his first journey to Carlisle. The trustees selected Dr. Charles Nisbet D.D. a Scottish minister and scholar, to serve as the College's first president. He arrived and began to serve on July 4, 1785 and served faithfully until his unexpected death in 1804.Charles Nisbet, First President of Dickinson College
A combination of financial troubles and faculty dissension led to a college closing from 1816-1821. In 1832, when the trustees were unable to resolve a faculty curriculum dispute, they ordered Dickinson's temporary closure a second time.dickinson.html Retrieved 2009-10-08.
The law school dates back to 1833, and became a separate school within Dickinson in 1890. The Law School separated from Dickinson in 1919. It is now affiliated with Penn State.
Among the 18th century graduates of Dickinson were two U.S. Supreme Court justices, Robert Cooper Grier and Roger Brooke Taney, who served together on the Court for 18 years.
During the 19th century two famous Dickinson College alumni were important participants in issues which led to the Civil War. These were James Buchanan, the 15th President of the United States, and Roger Brooke Taney, Chief Justice of the United States. It was under Taney's leadership that the Supreme Court issued the Dred Scott v. Sandford decision, which held that Congress could not prohibit slavery in federal territories. Buchanan threw the full prestige of his administration behind congressional approval of the Lecompton Constitution in Kansas. The campus and the town of Carlisle were twice occupied by Confederate forces in 1863.
When George Metzger, class of 1798, died in 1879 he left his land and $25,000 to the town of Carlisle for the purpose of opening a college for women. In 1881, the Metzger Institute, a College for Young Ladies, opened. The college existed separately until 1913, when its building was leased to Dickinson College for the education of women, and the building served as a women's dorm until 1963.dickinson.html Retrieved 2009-10-08/
Henry Clarke, alumnus who developed the Klondike bar into a national brand, founded the Clarke Forum for Contemporary Issues at Dickinson College.
Carlisle was also home to the Carlisle Indian Industrial School, less than two miles from the campus. Dickinson College and the Carlisle Indian School collaboration began when Dr. James Andrew McCauley, President of Dickinson College, led the first worship service at the Indian School in 1879. The collaborative effort between Dickinson College and the Carlisle Indian School lasted almost four decades, from the opening day to the closing of the school in 1918. Dickinson College professors served as chaplains and special faculty to the to the Indian School. . Professor Charles Francis Himes, Dr. George Edward Reed, Stephen Baird and Joshua Lippincott fostered the relationship between the institutions through religious services, advisory meetings, lectures and commencement speeches.  presence of Native Americans on campus generated great interest among Dickinson students. Dickinson students enjoyed visiting the Indian School to offer their talents and services. Indeed, the October 24, 1896 Dickinsonian "On the Campus" section tells of the new volunteer Sunday School teachers from the college chapter of the YMCA. It further declares that those who have Indian boys "enjoy a rare privilege. The work is doubly interesting because one can be studying the characteristics of his scholars, at the same time learning many valuable lessons in methods of teaching." In addition, at the time of the Indian School commencement, it was traditional for a half day holiday to be given so Dickinson students could attend the "very interesting exercises." Dickinson College also provided Carlisle Indian School students with access to the Dickinson Preparatory School ("Conway Hall") and college level education. Frank Mount Pleasant was the first Native American to graduate from Dickinson College in 1910.

Campus

Dickinson College sits on a quiet campus two blocks from the main square in the historic small town of Carlisle, the county seat of Cumberland County, Pennsylvania, and the site of the nation's second oldest military base, Carlisle Barracks, now the home of the U.S. Army War College. The campus is heavily wooded and characterized by limestone-clad buildings.
The grammar school which would become Dickinson College in 1783 was founded in 1773 and housed in a small, two-room brick building on Liberty Avenue, near Bedford Street and Pomfret Street. Upon the College's founding the building was expanded and was Dickinson's first home. On June 20 of that year the cornerstone was laid by John Montgomery, a founding trustee of the college, for a building on the new land.
Within weeks of the fire, a national fundraising campaign was launched, enticing donations from President Thomas Jefferson, Secretary of State James Madison, and Chief Justice John Marshall and many others. Benjamin Latrobe, already famous for his work on the Bank of Pennsylvania and Princeton University's Nassau Hall, and soon-to-be Architect of the Capitol, was chosen to design the new structure. Latrobe's design for the building, now known as "West College," or more fondly as "Old West," featured monumental and classical elements within a simple and subdued academic style. The building was to be capped with a classically inspired cupola graced by a figure of Triton, but the local craftsman instead created a mermaid, which has ever since been a symbol of the college. Latrobe, who donated his services to the college, visited the building for the first time in 1813. The total cost of West College topped $22,000 and, although classes began in 1805, work was not finished until 1822. More than 200 years after its doors opened for the first time, Old West is today the ceremonial heart of the college, as all students march through the open doors during convocation at the beginning of their freshman year, and march out the same doors to receive their degrees and graduate. Old West also houses the college administration, several classrooms, a computer lab, and the college chapel.
Throughout the 19th century Dickinson expanded across what has now become its main academic quadrangle, known formally as the John Dickinson Campus. Dickinson expanded across College Street to build the Holland Union Building and Waidner-Spahr Library, which along with several dormitories, makes up the Benjamin Rush Campus. Across High Street (U.S. Route 11) lies the Charles Nisbet Campus, home to the largest grouping of dormitories. The Dickinson School of Law, part of Penn State, lies directly to the south of the Nisbet Campus. Together these three grass-covered units compose the vast majority of the College's campus, though several outlying buildings surround these main areas. In addition, the College owns playing fields and a large organic farm, both of which are only a short distance from the main campus.
Buildings of note include:

Recent developments

Since 2000, Dickinson's acceptance rate has dropped by 20%, SAT scores have risen by 100 points, and the institutional endowment has more than doubled.Institutional Research
In 2000 Dickinson opened a new science building, Tome Hall, a state-of-the-art interdisciplinary facility to host astronomy, computer science, math, and physics. Tome hosts Dickinson's innovative "Workshop Physics" program and was the first step of a new science complex. Featuring  of state-of-the-art laboratories, classrooms and research facilities, it houses the departments of biology, chemistry, psychology and interdisciplinary programs in biochemistry & molecular biology and neuroscience. Courses in the emerging fields of bioinformatics—a blend of biology and computer science—and nanotechnology—the applied study of particles the size of molecules—also are taught there. The new science complex was designed to afford learning opportunities outside of the classrooms and labs, and even outside of the building's walls on the site of the new complex. Dickinson College's Center for Sustainable Living student residence, known as the "Treehouse," also achieved a Gold rating from the U.S. Green Building Council's Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) program. The college is the first in Pennsylvania to receive a Gold rating for a student residence.
On January 22, 2013 Dickinson announced that it has agreed to acquire Allison United Methodist Church as the college continues its efforts to expand and improve facilities for academics, athletics and student life. A longtime landmark in Carlisle, Allison's limestone building and property is contiguous with the Benjamin Rush campus of Dickinson. The building, located at 99 Mooreland Avenue, will provide more than 33,000 additional square feet of space for the college's use. Plans for the building include using the space for events, guest speakers, student presentations, meetings, ecumenical worship and additional offices.Allison Church Announcement
Dickinson is also at the forefront of campus environmental sustainability. In the Sustainable Endowments Institute's 2010 green report card Dickinson was one of only 15 schools to receive an A-, the highest grade possible. Dickinson also was named a Sierra magazine "Cool" School" in its Comprehensive Guide to the Most Eco-Enlightened U.S. Colleges: Live (Green) and Learn. The College buys 100% of its energy from wind power,Dickinson College - Sustainability has solar panels on campus,Dickinson College - News and Events - Trash on the Plaza - March 23, 2007 owns and operates an organic garden and farm,Dickinson College - News and Events - Dickinson Farm - September, 2007 and has signed the American Colleges & Universities Presidents Climate Commitment.
"Why Sustainability Is Now the Key Driver of Innovation" Harvard Business Review, September 2009 by Ram Nidumolu, C.K. Prahalad, and M.R. Rangaswami."The Sustainability Imperative" Harvard Business Review, May 2010 by David A. Lubin and Daniel C. Esty."Teaching sustainability to business students: shifting mindsets" International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education, Vol. 9 Iss: 3, pp.206 – 221 (2008) by Wendy Stubbs, Chris Cocklin.
Dickinson is a perennial producer of Fulbright Scholars, and was a top producer for the 2013-2014 cycle.Peace Corps Top Colleges 2014

Student life

Dickinson has a rich and varied student life with a variety of organizations involved in many different causes and interests. Its programs are geared only toward traditional students of typical college age. There are over a hundred organizations representing different facets of the college.Dickinson College - For Students

Athletics

The Dickinson Red Devils participate in the NCAA Division III Centennial Conference.com. The Red Devils sport uniforms of red, white, and black.
Dickinson has 23 varsity sports teams, including baseball and softball, men's and women's golf, men's and women's soccer, football, men's and women's tennis, men's and women's track, men's and women's basketball, men's and women's lacrosse, men's and women's swimming, men's and women's cross country, men's and women's riding, women's volleyball, and women's field hockey. The College also has a cheerleading squad and dozens of intramural and club sports including ice hockey, men's volleyball, lacrosse, soccer, and ultimate frisbee.
The current football and men's golf coach at Dickinson is Darwin Breaux, who has held the position since 1993.Centennial Conference "2008 Centennial Conference Football Prospectus"
Arguably Dickinson's most notable football victory is the 1931 defeat of Penn State 10-6 under head coach Joseph McCormick."The History of Football at Dickinson College, 1885-1969." Gobrecht, Wilbur J., Chambersburg, PA: Kerr Printing Co., 1971.
Without a doubt, Dickinson's ultimate athletic achievement is the 1958 Men's Lacrosse Team national title and Roy Taylor Division championship, also defeating Penn State in its final game to clinch the title. 
The Dickinson lacrosse tradition continues today under Men's Lacrosse Coach Dave Webster '88 whose squad posted a compiled record of 65-10 over the 2010, 2011, 2012 and 2013 seasons.  The team won three consecutive Centennial Conference Championships (2011, 2012, 2013) and went to the NCAA tournament four consecutive years (2010, 2011, 2012, 2013).  Prior to the 2010 season, Dickinson had never been in the NCAA tournament.  Among the many great players who played during those years, Brandon Palladino '13 will likely go down as the greatest player in program history.  In 2013, Palladino was named the NCAA Division III  Outstanding Player of the Year: Iroquois Nationals Award.  Palladino was also the first player in Centennial Conference history to earn first-team all-conference honors all four years of his career.
From 1963 to 1994 Dickinson College hosted the summer training camp for Washington Redskins NFL football team . From ESPN.The Carlisle Blitz: Redskins Fans Ready to Bump and Run By Frank Ahrens. From The Washington Post.

Music

Approximately 300 students are deeply engaged in studying music at Dickinson every year. All music courses, performance studies and ensembles are open to all Dickinson students regardless of major.
Music ensembles, which are open to all students by audition, include The Dickinson College Choir, The Dickinson College Collegium, The Dickinson College Jazz Ensemble, The Dickinson Orchestra, The Dickinson Improvisation and Collaboration Ensemble, and The Dickinson Chamber Ensembles. In addition, there is a vibrant music scene of student led groups, which is supported by Dickinson by way of "The Band Aid," a college sponsored practice space for student led bands that is available to all students.dickinson.
The Music House, a music-themed special interest housing option, and the Dickinson College Student Music Society sponsor many activities throughout the year, including music field trips to metropolitan areas such as New York City and Washington DC, an annual Children's concert, and music outreach programs to local schools.

Greek organizations

Dickinson College has three recognized fraternities and five recognized sororities.

The Dickinsonian

The Dickinsonian is an award-winning, student-run newspaper published by students, first published in 1872.

Hat Societies

Dickinson College has three senior "Hat Societies" on its campus. This name is given by the distinctive hats members wear on campus. To gain admittance into a Hat Society, one is "tapped" as a junior by current senior members to then serve as a member during his or her senior year. The induction ceremony is known as a Tapping Ceremony. While membership criteria differ amongst the organizations, overall character and general campus leadership are major requirements for membership in any of the three organizations.
The three Hat Societies at Dickinson College are:

Alumni

Notable alumni of Dickinson College include Chief Justice of the United States Roger B. Taney (1795), President of the United States James Buchanan (1809), and Baseball Hall of Fame pitcher Chief Bender (1902), and baseball executive Andy MacPhail (1976).

School songs

The College's musical tradition dates back to at least 1858 when the Medal of Honor recipient and author, alumnus Horatio Collins King, wrote the Alma Mater, "Noble Dickinsonia" to the tune of "O Christmas Tree". In 1937 the College published a book titled Songs of Dickinson, which contains over 70 works from Dickinson's past. In 1953 the Men's Glee Club recorded an album of college songs. In 2005-2006, The Octals, Dickinson's all-male a cappella group, recorded a similar CD.

Rankings and awards






