[[Cosworth]]

CATEGORIES: Companies based in Northamptonshire, Ford of Europe, Formula One engine manufacturers, Formula One constructors, Indy Racing League engine manufacturers, Companies established in 1958, Formula One cars, 1958 establishments in England

Cosworth is a high-performance engineering company founded in London in 1958, specialising in engines and electronics for automobile racing (motorsport) and mainstream automotive industries. Cosworth is based in Northampton, England, with North American facilities in Torrance, Indianapolis and Mooresville, North Carolina.
Cosworth has collected 176 wins in Formula One as engine supplier, ranking second with most wins behind Ferrari.

Corporate history

The company was founded as a British racing internal combustion engine maker in 1958 by Mike Costin and Keith Duckworth (COStin and duckWORTH).
Both of the co-founders being former employees of Lotus Engineering Ltd., Cosworth initially maintained a strong relationship with Colin Chapman and the initial revenues of the company came almost exclusively from Lotus.  When the company was founded in 1958, Duckworth left Lotus, leaving Costin (who had signed a term-employment contract with Chapman) at the company. Until 1962, Costin worked on Cosworth projects in his private time, while being active as a key Lotus engineer on the development of Lotus 15 through 26 (Elan), as well as leading the Team Lotus contingent at foreign races as evidenced by the 1962 Le Mans Lotus scandal.
Initial series production engines (Mk.V, Mk.XIV) were sold to Lotus exclusively, and many of the other racing engines up to Mk. The success of Formula Junior engines (Mk.XIII, a pure racing engine based on Lotus TwinCam, through its domination of the class. This newly found security enabled the company to distance itself from the Lotus Mk.
The first Cosworth-designed cylinder head was for SCA series with a SOHC reverse-flow configuration similar to the Coventry Climax FWE engine.  A real success was achieved with the next gear-driven DOHC four valve FVA in 1966, which, with a help from Chapman, convinced Ford to purchase the rights to the design and sign a development contract including an eight cylinder version.  This resulted in the DFV, which dominated Formula One for many years.
From this time on, Cosworth was supported by Ford for many years, and many of the Cosworth designs were owned by Ford and named as Ford engines under similar contracts. Another success by the BD series in the 1970s put Cosworth on a growing track.
The company went through a number of ownership changes.  After Duckworth decided he didn't want to be involved with the day-to-day business of running a growing company, he sold out the ownership to United Engineering Industries (UEI) in 1980, retaining his life presidency and day-to-day technical involvement with Cosworth, and becoming a UEI board director; UEI was a group of small to medium-sized technology companies which was taken over by Carlton Communications in 1988 - Carlton was primarily interested in some of the audio-visual companies in the UEI portfolio and Cosworth was a poor fit with these; a new buyer for the company in the engineering/automotive sector was sought and the traditional engineering company Vickers plc bought Cosworth in 1990. In 1998, Vickers sold Cosworth and Pi Research to Ford. In September, 2004 Ford announced that it was selling Cosworth and Pi Research, along with Cosworth Racing Ltd and its Jaguar Formula One team. On 15 November 2004, the sale of Cosworth was completed, to Champ Car World Series owners Gerald Forsythe and Kevin Kalkhoven, the current Cosworth Group.
The road car engine aspect of the business was split from the racing division following the sale of the engineering division of Cosworth to VW/Audi in September 1998 and renamed Cosworth Technology, before being acquired by Mahle GmbH in 2005. Cosworth Technology was then renamed as MAHLE Powertrain on 1 July 2005.
Since 2006, Cosworth has diversified to provide engineering consultancy, high performance electronics and component manufacture services outside of its classic motorsport customer base. Current publicised projects range from an  diesel engine for unmanned aerial vehicles, through to an engineering partnership on one of the world's most powerful normally aspirated road car engines.
Cosworth supplied engines to one F1 team in 2013, the Marussia F1 Team.

Engines



Early types

The following is the list of initial products with cylinder heads modified, but not originally designed by Cosworth, on Ford Kent blocks.  The exceptions were Mk.
In addition to the above, Cosworth designed and provided the assembly work for Lotus Elan Special Equipment optional road engines with special camshafts and high compression pistons.
The final model of the above initial series was the MAE in 1965, when new rules were introduced in Formula 3 allowing up to  engines with 36mm intake restrictor plate.  MAE used one barrel of a two barrel Weber IDA downdraft carburetor with the other barrel blanked off.  The domination of this engine was absolute as long as these regulations lasted until 1968. As Cosworth had a serious difficulty meeting the demand, the MAE was mainly sold as a kit.  This experience led to the later FVA/DFV contract to be drawn where the responsibility of development rested with Cosworth, and the manufacturing right and responsibility rested with Ford.  There also were some specially cast iron heads with similar dimensions to these brazed heads with Titanium alloy valve spring retainers called the 'Screamer Head' for MAE in later years.

The SCA series

A year before the introduction of the MAE, the single overhead cam two valve SCA was introduced. It was a 997 cc engine based on Ford Cortina 116E block that was designed for Formula 2, and featured the first totally Cosworth-designed head, Laystall forged crankshaft, steel main bearing caps and pistons with only one compression ring and one oil scraper ring each.  Cylinder head to block sealing was by a head gasket incorporating Cooper Rings.  The basic configuration was quite similar to Coventry Climax FWE on Lotus Elite including its SOHC reverse-flow design, except for a series of 7 spur gears (1 on crank, 2 intermediary gears on 2 fixed shafts mounted on the front cover back plate, 1 on the 116E camshaft used as a jackshaft, 2 on a common fixed shaft in the head, 1 on the camshaft) driving a 5 bearing camshaft and the Ford 5 main bearing iron block.  The intake ports and the oil scavenge pickup for dry sump lubrication were canted 25 degrees, so they faced straight up and down, respectively, when the engine is mounted 25 degrees from vertical to the right for a lower center of gravity.
The SCA initially had two 40DCM2 Weber twin-choke downdraft sand-cast carburetors mounted on top to produce 115 hp, which was replaced by Lucas fuel injection in 1966, eventually reaching 140 hp.
Longer stroke SCB was built to compare against 1498 cc Mk.  It was the results of this four valve development work that formed the basis for many of the Cosworth engines that followed.
A larger 85 mm bore SCC with the same short-stroke 5 bearing crankshaft as the SCA was built and sold for SCCA 1.1 Litre sports car class.

The FVA series

The Cortina Crossflow block was also the basis for the FVA, an F2 engine introduced in 1966, and developed under the same contract as the DFV, for the new 1.6-litre engine rules. This engine featured 16 valves operated by twin overhead camshafts driven by a train of 9 gears.  The metering unit for the Lucas mechanical fuel injection was rotated by a toothed belt from the gear-driven inlet cam, while the exhaust cam directly drove an alternator on the rear of the head.  It produced  at 9000 rpm.  This engine dominated the category until 1971, and was also used in sports car racing in 1.8 Litre form as the FVC.
The cylinder head on the FVA pioneered many of Duckworth's ideas that would be used on the DFV and a mule for the 8 cylinder engine development, FVB, was built.  However, the distance between the two camshafts and the valve inclination angle were larger than on DFV for the series.
The larger displacement FVD was designed and released for endurance racing in 1975, that displaced  that other twin-cam four cylinders such as the Hart 420S produced but was more reliable.  One was campaigned in the CanAm series in 1978 in the Osprey SR-1, built and driven by Dan Hartill.

The DFV (Double Four Valve)

In 1966, Colin Chapman (Lotus Cars founder and principal of Team Lotus) persuaded Ford to bankroll Keith Duckworth's design for a new lightweight  Formula One engine. Cosworth received the order along with the £100,000 that Ford felt it adequate to spend on such an objective.  The contract stipulated that a four-cylinder Ford-based F2 engine would be developed as proof of concept (see the FVA above) and that a pure Cosworth V8 would be built based on this.
The DFV design used a similar cylinder head to the one Duckworth had prototyped on the four-cylinder FVB unit on a custom Cosworth cylinder block and crankcase, forming a single 90° V8 engine, thus creating a legend in its own right, the DFV - literally meaning "Double Four Valve".  This engine, and its derivatives were used for a quarter of a century, and it was the most successful in the history of Formula One / Grand Prix motor racing.  Winning 167 races in a career lasting over 20 years, it was the product that put Cosworth Engineering on the map.  Although originally designed for Formula One, the engine has been modified to be used in a range of categories.
The DFV won on its first outing, at the 1967 Dutch Grand Prix in the hands of Jim Clark, fitted to a Lotus 49, and from 1968 was available for purchase to any F1 team that wished it.  During the 1970s, it was common for almost the entire field (with the notable exception of Ferrari) to use one of these engines - this at a time when independent wealthy individuals could buy exactly the same engine off the shelf that was also being used by McLaren et al.  Most teams just built a tub around a Cosworth DFV and a Hewland gearbox.  It won a record 155 World Championship races, the last being Detroit in 1983, powering a Tyrrell driven by Michele Alboreto.
Although the DFV (bore:  at 9,000 rpm did not produce as much power as some of its rival 12-cylinder engines, it was lighter, resulting in a better power to weight ratio.  In addition to being lighter, it was also made a structural part of the car itself, by placing load bearing arms to stress the block.  These design aspects appealed tremendously to the genius of Colin Chapman who used them to the fullest extent.
The DFY, introduced in 1982 was a further evolution of the DFV for Formula One, with a shorter stroke and a DFL bore (bore:  at 11,200 rpm.
In Formula One, a new DFV-based design was introduced for the new  normally aspirated rules in 1987.  The DFZ was produced as an interim model, but in 1988 Cosworth created the DFV's final evolution, the DFR, which soldiered on in F1 with smaller teams until 1991, scoring its last points - including a pair of second places by Jean Alesi - with Tyrrell in 1990.
The DFV has recently been given a new lease of life thanks to the interest in Classic F1 racing, which was given a World Championship status by the FIA in 2004.


=DFV variants=

The DFV spawned a number of derivations.  In 1968; Cosworth created the DFV's first derivation, a  version for the Tasman Series, the DFW.  DFV to DFW conversion simply involved substitution of a short-stroke crank and longer connecting rods.
One of the most successful and longest-lived projects of Cosworth has been its CART / Champ Car engine program.  In 1975; Cosworth developed the DFX, by destroking the engine to  and adding a turbocharger, the DFX became the standard engine to run in IndyCar racing, ending the reign of the Offenhauser, and maintaining that position until the late 1980s.  Ford backed Cosworth with creating a new interim design for IndyCar racing in the late 1980s, the DFS, which merged DFR technology into the ageing DFX design, but it was eventually rendered obsolete by advancing technology.
While designed as an F1 engine, the DFV was also used as in endurance racing, although its flat-plane design led to destructive vibrations putting stress on devices surrounding the engine, especially the exhaust system.  The first sports car to use a DFV, the Ford P68, failed to finish a single race because of repeated mechanical and electrical failures.  Despite this handicap the DFV won the 24 hours of Le Mans twice in its original 3.0 Litre form for Mirage and Rondeau (although the Mirage win in 1975 was with a significantly de-tuned unit).  
The DFL for endurance racing was developed for the 1983 season.  It came in two versions: one with  for Group C (C1 Class).  Whilst the former version soon became known for its reliability and efficiency, proving itself for the class intended for smaller 2 Litre engines, the latter version was a step too far and is largely remembered as a failure.

The BDA series

Cosworth solidified its association with Ford in 1969, by developing a double overhead camshaft (DOHC) 16-valve inline four-cylinder engine for road use in the Ford Escort.  As Keith Duckworth was busy designing and developing the DFV, the project was assigned to Mike Hall, who created the 1601 cc BDA on the Kent block for homologation purposes.  The camshafts were driven by a toothed belt developed for Fiat 124, hence the name BDA, literally meaning "Belt Drive, A type".  It was designed for FIA Group 2 and Group 4 on either rallying or touring car racing purpose.  The nominal homologation at 1601 cc capacity meant that BDA-engined cars competed in what was usually the top class (1600 cc and up) so were eligible for overall victories rather than class wins.
In 1970, the 1701 cc BDB was created for the Escort RS1600, and this engine received fuel injection for the first time in the series as 1701 cc BDC.  Two years later, the BDA series was adopted for Formula 2; first came the 1790 cc BDE, then the 1927 cc BDF eventually reaching a maximum of 1975 cc BDG in 1973.  As the bore size reached ever closer to the bore center distance, leaving little space in between cylinders, the all three types had brazed-in cylinder liners to the block. As a departure from the Ford iron block, the BDG received a newly designed aluminium block soon after, and this cylinder block was used as a replacement part in rebuilding many other BD series engines as well as some Mk.
The iron block was also used for smaller displacements; starting with the very successful 1599 cc Formula Atlantic BDD in 1970, followed by the 1098 cc BDJ and 1300 cc BDH variants for SCCA Formula C and sports car racing, respectively. There was even a one-off 785 cc version built by Cosworth employees Paul Squires and Phil Kidsley; fitted with a Lysholm supercharger it was installed in a Brabham BT28 Formula 3 chassis and competed in the British Hill Climb Championship as the Brabham-Lysholm.
In 1975, 1599 cc big valve BDM (225 bhp) was developed with fuel injection for Formula Atlantic, and a 'sealed engine' version BDN (1599 cc, 210 bhp) followed in 1977 for Canadian Formula Atlantic series.
The turbo charged 1778 cc BDT was created in 1981, which powered the never-raced RWD Escort RS1700T. In 1984, 4WD Ford RS200 debuted with a 1803 cc version of BDT, which was created for Group B rallying.  Later in 1986, a 2137 cc version was created by Brian Hart using a bespoke aluminium block and a large intercooler for RS200 Evolution, just as Group B was cancelled by the FIA.  This BDT-E ('E' for Evolution) produced over  on a lower but sustainable boost.
In 1983, the BD series saw its second road engine incarnation (the first being the original BDA and BDB), the BDR, which was a BDA or BDB sold in kit form for the Caterham Super Seven in 1601 cc (120 bhp) and in 1701 cc (130 bhp) formats.
The 1599 cc BDD engine won a number of championships around the world in Formula Atlantic and Formula Pacific during the 1980s, including powering drivers such as Alain Prost and Roberto Moreno to wins in the Australian Grand Prix in the immediate years before the race became part of the Formula One World Championship in 1985.
In 1970, Ford asked Weslake and Co of Rye to build the BDD for them, and by the end of 1970, the production line was installed at Rye and production was under way.  These engines were often called the 'BDA', but were 1599 cc BDDs eligible for under 1.6 Litre class.
The Hart 420R and the Zakspeed F1 engines owe much to the BDA series, being essentially an aluminium-block derivative using similar heads.


The GA V6

A fuel-injected belt-driven DOHC GA (also called the GAA) was based on the 60 degree V6 block of Ford Essex, and was used for the Ford Capris raced in Group 2 in the early 1970s. This had a capacity of , and was highly competitive against the BMW straight-sixes. The GA was also used in the later years of Formula 5000 in Europe.


The FBA and FBC V6

The FBA and FBC engines were found in the Ford Granada and Ford Scorpio Ultima.  The FBA came first in 1991 also known as the 'BOA', it was based on the Ford Cologne V6 used in the Ford Sierra and Ford Capri and other models and was a twin overhead camshaft 24valve conversion for more power, producing  and better idle quality.
In 1995, with a new version of the Scorpio, it was upgraded with a wider torque spread and higher power - to , from a variable intake system and reprofiled cams.  The NVH was improved with a change from a single chain to drive all four camshafts - to one chain to drive one bank of cams and a second for the other bank, this engine was known as the 'BOB'.
A racing version was also available for a short time - FBE - with individual throttle butterflies for each cylinder.
FBB and FBD engines did exist as development engines but these were never released.
The two production engines were always mated to an automatic gearbox but have become popular in the custom car scene where they have been mated to the 4x4 manual transmission and the rear-wheel-drive manual transmission from the Ford Sierra XR4 and XR4x4. There are also companies that offer twin and single turbo conversions, and other modifications to increase power to usually around 

The YB series

The YB series of  in full racing trim. The RS500 came to dominate touring car racing in its heyday from 1987 to 1992, winning multiple championships and major races in Europe, Japan and Australia. This included wins in the three major races, the Spa 24 Hours held at Spa-Francorchamps in Belgium, the Bathurst 1000 at Mount Panorama in Australia, and the InterTEC 500 at Fuji in Japan.
The various colour cam covers that distinguished each version were as follows: Red: YBB (Sierra Cosworth 2wd, both 3-door and Sapphire), YBD (Sierra RS500), YBJ (Sierra Sapphire 4wd, non cat); Green: YBG (catalyst equipped 4x4 Sierra Sapphire Cosworth); Blue: YBT (large-turbo Escort Cosworth); Silver: YBP (small-turbo Escort Cosworth).
Further evolutions of the YB included a reduced-emissions road version, as well as the block used in the Escort RS Cosworth (which used the Sierra floorpan).  The engine stopped being used on new cars in 1997, with the Focus WRC and road-going Focus RS relying on Zetec designs.

The GBA V6

Cosworth experimented with turbocharged BD derivatives, before settling on an all-new turbocharged  with the Benetton team. The development of the GBA engine at Cosworth became the subject of a British TV documentary in Channel Four's Equinox series, broadcast in 1986.
The GBA was designed by Keith Duckworth who originally chose to try and develop a modified 4 cylinder sports car engine as he believed 4 cylinder engines were more compact and economical than a V6. However, after numerous failures of the test engines which were eventually traced to an incurable vibration at the crankshaft, Duckworth designed an all new 120° V6 engine instead, the same configuration as the Ferrari V6 turbo engine. As time had been lost in trying to get the 4 cylinder engine to work, Ford and Cosworth's plan for the engine to debut with Haas Lola in  was pushed back to the 1986 season.
The engine made its Formula One debut with  World Champion Alan Jones driving Haas Lola's new car, the Lola THL2 at the 1986 San Marino Grand Prix. Jones qualified in 21st place and retired after 28 of the races 60 laps due to overheating. Jones also recorded the engine's first finish when he placed 11th in the Belgian Grand Prix. Jones and team mate Patrick Tambay captured the Ford V6 turbo's first ever points when they finished 4th and 5th respectively in the Austrian Grand Prix, with Jones backing up in the next race in Italy with a 6th placed finish, the final points the engine would gain in 1986.
Producing approximately . The turbo engine would be more successful with Benetton in 1987, with Teo Fabi taking the engine's first podium with third in Austria, followed by its last podium when Thierry Boutsen also scored third in the last race of the season in Australia.

The HB V8

DFV/DFZ/DFR replacement was designed by Geoff Goddard to result in  saw the customer deal extended to McLaren, who won five Grands Prix with Ayrton Senna that year.
A Jaguar-badged version of the HB was developed by Tom Walkinshaw Racing to the tune of 650 bhp at 11,500 rpm for sports car racing, fitted to the extremely successful Jaguar XJR-14.


The EC, ECA, ED, EDM and ED 2/4 V8

The HB was developed into . This was the last Ford powered F1 title.
For the 1995 season, the F1 engine regulation changed to 3 Liters, and the EC's bore and stroke were changed to 94mm x 53.9mm, resulting in  ECA, which was introduced at about 600 bhp, and developed to 610 to 630 bhp at 14,000rpm.
Customer unit Cosworth ED (not badged as Ford Zetec-R) for non-works teams was also made for 1995 with about 580bhp for Minardi, Simtek (called the EDB), Pacific Racing (EDC) and Forti (EDD) teams.  Minardi realised the power deficiency before the season and asked Magneti Marelli to develop a replacement engine management system, with which the engine was called the EDM.  Cosworth later updated the ED to ED 2/4 for Tyrrell and Lola with  season.


The JD, VJ and VJM V10

In order to produce a higher power at higher rpm, a completely new  (89mm x 48.1mm) JD 72° V10 was designed for 1996, which produced about 670 bhp at 15,800rpm, and used by Sauber Formula One team.  This engine was further developed into VJ and VJM with the same V-angle, bore and stroke, reaching 720 bhp for racing, 730 bhp for qualifying, at 16,500rpm.  All three of these engines were badged as Ford Zetec-R as well, and used by several teams.

Other Formula One engines

The Stewart Grand Prix team effectively became the Ford works team, and used Cosworth CR-1 engines from its first season in 1997, which was a much lighter version of VJM, ultimately reaching 770 bhp at 16,500rpm by 2001.  Over the next few years Ford had increased its involvement with the Stewart team, and finally bought the team, renaming it Jaguar Racing for 2000.  Jaguar pulled out of F1 at the end of 2004, but the team (renamed Red Bull Racing) continued to use Cosworth V10 engines until switching to a Ferrari V8 for 2006.  Minardi also used re-badged Cosworth engines until 2005.
Williams began testing the new CA2006 2.4-litre V8 in November 2005, and used the Cosworth V8 engines for the 2006 season.  In the same year, Scuderia Toro Rosso used detuned V10 engines based on the 2005 units.
In 2007, however, the company was left without a partner when Williams chose to switch to Toyota power, and Scuderia Toro Rosso made the switch to Ferrari engines  (as used in 2006 by their mother team Red Bull Racing).
In Max Mosley's letter following the withdrawal of Honda from Formula One in December 2008, it was announced that Cosworth had won the tender to provide a standard engine to any interested participants.  The new engine would become the standard design and manufacturers could opt to use whole units, construct their own from designs provided by Cosworth, or produce their own engine with the caveat that it be limited to the same power as the new "standard" engine.
In 2010 Cosworth returned as the engine supplier for Williams and three new teams; Hispania Racing, Lotus F1 Racing and Virgin Racing. The CA2010 is the same 2.4-litre V8 base of the CA2006 used by Williams, but has been re-tuned for the current 18,000 rpm limit required on all engines, down from its original 20,000 rpm implementation.


Other IndyCar and Champ Car engines

Cosworth designed a series of replacements for the DFS to be used in IndyCar and Champ Car racing: the X-series, beginning in 1992 with the XB.  The XF was developed for the 2000 season to replace the XD, and was chosen as the spec engine for the Champ Car World Series in 2003.  The most recent derivative of the XF, the .
In 2007, the Ford name was removed from the engine
There is evidence that Cosworth was working on a  along the lines of the Ilmor/Mercedes 500I to exploit the peculiar loophole in the Indianapolis 500 rules on the definition of the word "pushrod engine", permitting such engines with extremely short pushrods higher turbocharger boost - this was assigned a project code CD but seemingly never completed.
In mid-2003, Cosworth provided the 3.5 L V8 XG badged as a Chevrolet Gen 4 engine to IRL IndyCar Series teams after the proprietary Chevrolet Gen 3 engine proved inadequate against rival Hondas and Toyotas during the 2003 season.  While many teams left Chevrolet after the 2003 season, those that stayed saw a significant improvement in performance with the new "Chevworth" engine compared to their previous units. The XG finished second in its first race at Michigan on July 27, 2003.  Sam Hornish, Jr. went on to win 3 races that season with the new XG.  The XG was reduced in size to 3 L for 2004 season and it won one race in 2005 during Chevrolet's final season in IRL.

Other Formula Atlantic engines

Currently these are  version, targeting club racers, is sold to the consumer market.  This engine retains the standard crankshaft, and has a different cylinder head.  Both engines are built by Cosworth in Torrance, California, under the guidance of newly appointed technical designer Wayne Merry (formerly of Cosworth in Worcester UK).


Other road engines

Best known in Europe for its relationship with Ford - in particular because of the COSWORTH name in the vehicle title on the high-performance Ford Sierra RS Cosworth and Ford Escort RS Cosworth, but also in the creation of other Ford models; the Escort RS1600, Escort RS1800, RS200, and Scorpio 2.9i 24V.
In the US, the name has also appeared in the title of a road car (well before it did in Europe) as the Cosworth version of the Chevrolet Vega. Only 3,508 1975 and 1976 Cosworth Vegas were produced from March 1975 through 1976. The engine features the Vega sleeveless, aluminium-alloy block fitted with forged components. The twin-cam, 16-valve, aluminium cylinder head design was assisted by Cosworth, but Chevrolet did the development work. The engine features electronic ignition, Bendix electronic fuel injection, and stainless steel headers.1975 Chevrolet Cosworth Vega Shop manual supplement-engine description The final US emissions standardised version produces 110 bhp. Cosworth's EA racing version was not successful due to engine block structural failures. Chevrolet later produced a heavy-duty 'off-road' block with thicker walls to better withstand the racing application, but by that time Cosworth had moved on. Projected first year sales of the Cosworth Vega had been 5,000. With only 3,508 cars produced and many unsold, the car was discontinued. 1,500 hand-built Cosworth Vega engines were simply scrapped for lack of demand. Chevrolet's Vega
Other published projects for Adam Opel AG include the Opel Ascona 400 / Manta 400 rally cars and the 2.0L 16V engines in the Opel Kadett, Opel Astra GSi, Opel Vectra and Opel Calibra turbo.
Other companies known to have benefitted from the Cosworth engineering input are Mercedes-Benz (with the 190 E 2.3-16), Rolls-Royce, and Audi (notably their RS cars).
Cosworth's involvement with Mercedes-Benz came with moves in the mid-1980s from the German manufacturer to re-enter motorsport after retiring from direct factory participation after the tragic 1955 Le Mans crash which killed 80 spectators. Mercedes-Benz was looking to create a Group B rally car out of its new W201 Chassis (190E Model) and turned to the expertise of Cosworth to shorten the development time for this project.
The request was a huge surprise for Cosworth, and the original brief for a 320 bhp engine based on the 136 bhp Mercedes M102 2.3-litre SOHC 4-cylinder engine was duly passed to Mike Hall, who "drew the famed DFV and BDA engine"."Flying the Flag", Autocar 7 August 1985, pp32-33 Designed around the existing M102 head bolt pattern, the new twin cam, 16-valve, pentroof head, had its valves set at 45° included angle, rather than the 40° angle of the BDA.  The valves were the biggest that could be fitted into the combustion chamber. Flat top pistons delivered the 10.5:1 compression ratio. The new Cosworth WAA engine also was Cosworth's first one-piece head, i.e. the camshaft carrier was cast integral with the head itself. Again the constraints of the existing head-bolt pattern meant that Hall had to shift the camshaft bearings from outside each pair of camlobes as in the BDA to in between each cylinder's pair of cam lobes. The upside being that this configuration made for less flex at high rpm.
The advent of the AWD turbo Audi Quattro gave the rear-wheel-drive, normally aspirated 190E rally car no chance of being successful and the competition car was stillborn. Instead Mercedes-Benz decided to recoup its development cost by selling the car as a road going sports-sedan. Hall detuned the WAA race engine to 185 bhp by reducing the port diameters and a more restrictive fuel injection and induction was substituted for the race items to complete the detune. All WAA 2.3-16 engines were built in the Cosworth factory with the heads being produced by the Coscast method.
Cosworth assisted with the later 2.5-16 engine (WAB), and the short-stroke 2.5-16 Evo engines (WAC) although these were all manufactured in house by Mercedes-Benz. The 190E 2.3-16 became the basis for privateer Mercedes entries into the DTM from 1988. The short-stroke 2.5-16 190E EVO II was race-developed to 375+ bhp, gaining the 1992 DTM crown with Klaus Ludwig at the wheel.
A  V10 designated WDA was also built and tested in a Volvo S80 in 1997, but this did not see production.

Cosworth F1 car

Cosworth made an attempt at designing a full Formula One Grand Prix car in 1969. The car, designed by Robin Herd, used an original 4WD transmission designed by Keith Duckworth (different from the Ferguson used by all other 4WD F1 cars of the 1960s) and powered by a magnesium version of the DFV unit.  The car was planned to drive at the 1969 British Grand Prix, but it was silently withdrawn.  When Herd left to form March Engineering, the project was cancelled. The external design of the car was a product of Herd's use of Mallite sheeting (a wood-aluminium laminate composite) for the principal structural monocoque sections, a technique he pioneered on the first McLaren single-seat cars, including the McLaren M2B of 1966.

Complete Formula One World Championship results

(key) (Races in bold indicate pole position) (Races in italics indicate fastest lap)

Summary of F1 engine use





Further reading




