[[Elizabeth Stuart, Queen of Bohemia]]

CATEGORIES: Heirs to the Scottish throne, Heirs to the English throne, Scottish princesses, English princesses, Bohemian queens consort, House of Stuart, Electresses Palatine, Burials at Westminster Abbey, People from Fife, 1596 births, 1662 deaths, People of the Stuart period, 1596 in Scotland, Scottish people of Danish descent, Scottish people of German descent, Scottish people of French descent, Scottish people of Polish descent



Elizabeth Stuart (19 August 1596 – 13 February 1662) was, as the wife of Frederick V, Elector Palatine, Electress Palatine and briefly Queen of Bohemia. Because her husband's reign in Bohemia lasted for just one winter, Elizabeth is often referred to as The Winter Queen. She was the second child and eldest daughter of James VI and I, King of Scots, England and Ireland, and his wife Anne of Denmark.
With the demise of the Stuart dynasty in 1714, her grandson succeeded to the British throne as George I of Great Britain, initiating the House of Hanover line of succession. The reigning British monarch, Elizabeth II, is Elizabeth Stuart's direct descendant of the eleventh generation.

Early life

Elizabeth was born at Dunfermline Palace, Fife, on the 19 August 1596 at 2 o'clock in the morning. At the time of her birth, her father was King of Scots only. Named in honour of Queen Elizabeth I of England, the young Elizabeth was christened on 28 November 1596 in the Chapel Royal at Holyroodhouse. During her early life in Scotland, Elizabeth was brought up at Linlithgow Palace, "one of the grandest of Scotland's royal residences",

Move to England

When the Queen of England died in 1603, Elizabeth's father James succeeded to the thrones of both England and Ireland. Along with her elder brother Henry,Charles remained in Scotland for the time being, Margaret had died in spring 1600 and Robert in May 1602. Elizabeth made the journey South towards England with her mother "in a triumphal progress of perpetual entertainment".
Elizabeth remained at court for a few weeks but "there is no evidence that she was present at her parents' coronation" on 25 July 1603.
Under the care of Lord Harrington at Coombe Abbey Elizabeth met Anne Dudley with whom she was to strike up a lifelong friendship.

Gunpowder Plot

Part of the intent of the Gunpowder Plot of 1605 was to assassinate Elizabeth's father and the Protestant aristocracy, kidnap the nine-year-old Elizabeth from Coombe Abbey, and place her on the throne of England–and presumably the thrones of Ireland and Scotland–as a Catholic monarch. The conspirators chose Elizabeth after considering the other available options. Prince Henry, it was believed, would perish alongside his father, Charles was seen as too feeble (having only just learnt to walk) and Mary too young. Elizabeth on the other hand had already attended formal functions and the conspirators knew that "she could fulfil a ceremonial role despite her comparative youth".
They aimed to cause an uprising in the Midlands to coincide with the explosion in London and at this point secure Elizabeth's accession as a puppet queen. She would then be brought up as a Catholic and later married to a Catholic bridegroom.

Education

Elizabeth was given a comprehensive education for a princess at that time. This education included instruction in natural history, geography, theology, languages, writing, history, music and dancing. She was denied instruction in the classics as her father believed that "Latin had the unfortunate effect of making women more cunning".

Courtship and Marriage

Suitors

As the daughter of a reigning monarch the hand of the young Elizabeth was seen as a very desirable prize. Suitors came from across the continent and were many and varied. They included:
Each suitor brought to the proposed marriage the prospect of power and greatness for the young Elizabeth. The marriage would also cost Elizabeth her father and her father's kingdom. When James had succeeded to the English throne in 1603, England had acquired a new role in European affairs. Unlike the childless Elizabeth I, James by simply "having children, could play an important role in dynastic politics". The selection of Elizabeth's spouse had therefore little to do with her personal preference and a great deal more to do with the benefits the match could bring.
Most of her suitors were quickly rejected for a variety of reasons. Some were simply not of high enough birth, had no real prospects to offer or in the case of Gustavus Adolphus, who on all other grounds seemed like a perfect match, because "his country was at war with Queen Anne's native Denmark". Furthermore England could not face another religious revolution and therefore the religious pre-requisite was paramount.
The man chosen was Frederick V, Count Palatine of the Rhine. Frederick was of undeniably high lineage. His ancestors included the kings of Aragon and Sicily, the landgraves of Hesse, the dukes of Brabant and Saxony and the counts of Nassau and Leuven. He and Elizabeth also shared a common ancestor in Henry II of England. He was "a senior Prince of the Empire" and a staunch defender of the Protestant faith.

Courtship

Frederick arrived in England on 16 October 1612 and the match seemed to please them both from the beginning. Their contemporaries noted how Frederick seemed to "delight in nothing but her company and conversation". The only person seemingly unhappy with the match was Queen Anne. As the daughter of a king, the sister of a king, and the wife of a king, she expected to be the mother of a queen. She is said to have been somewhat fond of Frederick's mild manner and generous nature, but simply felt that he was of low stock.
On 6 November 1612 Henry, Prince of Wales, died. His death took its toll emotionally on Elizabeth and her new position as second in line to the throne made her an even more desirable match. Queen Anne and those like-minded who had "always considered the Palsgrave to be an unworthy match for her, were emboldened in their opposition".

Marriage to Frederick V

The wedding took place on 14 February 1613 at the royal chapel at the Palace of Whitehall and was a grand occasion that saw more royalty than ever visit that court of England.
It was celebrated with lavish and sophisticated festivities both in London and Heidelberg including mass feats and lavish furnishings which cost nearly £50,000 and near enough bankrupted King James. Among many celebratory writings of the events was John Donne's "Epithalamion, Or Marriage Song on the Lady Elizabeth, and Count Palatine being married on St Valentines Day". A contemporary author viewed the whole marriage as a prestigious event that saw England "lend her rarest gem, to enrich the Rhine".

Electress Palatine

After an almost two-month stay in London for continued celebrations, the couple began their journey to join the Electoral court in Heidelberg. The journey was filled with meeting people, sampling foods and wines and being entertained by a wide variety of performers and companies. At each place the young couple stopped Elizabeth was expected to distribute presents. The cash to allow her to do so was not readily available, so she had to use one of her own jewels as collateral so that a jeweller would "provide her with suitable presents on credit".
Her arrival in Heidelberg was seen as "the crowning achievement of a policy which tried to give the Palatinate a central place in international politics" and was long anticipated and welcomed.
Although Elizabeth and Frederick were considered to be genuinely in love and remained a romantic couple throughout the course of their marriage, problems had already begun to arise.
Elizabeth gave birth to three children in Heidelberg: Frederick Henry, Hereditary Prince of the Palatinate (sometimes called Henry Frederick) was born in 1614, Charles in 1617, and Elisabeth in 1619.
Queen of Bohemia== 
In 1619 Elizabeth's husband Frederick was one of those offered the throne of Bohemia.
Bohemia was "an aristocratic republic in all but name", whose nobles elected the monarch.  It was one of the few successful pluralist states.
Frederick, though doubtful, was persuaded to accept. Elizabeth "appealed to his honour as a prince and a cavalier, and to his humanity as a Christian", aligning herself with him completely. Frederick was officially crowned on 4 November 1619, followed by Elizabeth's coronation as Queen of Bohemia three days later.
thumb|left|Frederick and Elizabeth as king and queen of BohemiaThe royal couple's third son, Prince Rupert, was born in Prague one month after the coronation, to great popular rejoicing. Frederick's reign in Bohemia had thus begun well, but only lasted one year. The Bohemian crown 'had always been a corner-stone of Habsburg policy' and the heir Ferdinand, now Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand II, would not yield. Frederick's reign ended with his defeat by Ferdinand at the Battle of White Mountain (the trigger-event of the Thirty Years' War) on 8 November 1620.
Elizabeth is remembered as the "Winter Queen" (zimní královna in Czech), and Frederick as the "Winter King", in reference to the brevity of their reign and to the season of the battle.

Exile

Fearing the worst, by the time of the defeat at White Mountain Elizabeth had already left Prague and was awaiting the birth of her fifth child at the Castle of Custrin, about fifty miles outside of Berlin. It was here on 6 January 1621 that she 'in an easy labour lasting little more than an hour' was delivered of a healthy son, Maurice.
The defeat, however, meant that there was no longer a prospect of a returning to Prague and the whole family were forced to flee. They could no longer return to the Palatinate as, despite the assistance of Elizabeth's father, it was occupied by the Catholic league and a Spanish contingent. So after a courteous invitation from the Prince of Orange was extended their way, they made their move towards The Hague. The Stuart princess turned electress was now a queen in exile.
Elizabeth arrived in The Hague in the spring of 1621 with only a small nucleus court, and it would be here that Elizabeth would remain for the rest of her life. Exile in The Hague, although relatively safe and comfortable, was not a particularly friendly or pleasant place to be and consequently Elizabeth's heart was never really in it. Despite this Elizabeth's sense of duty to assist her husband out of the political mess they had found themselves in meant that 'she became much more an equal, if not the stronger, partner in the marriage'.
Whilst in exile Elizabeth produced a further eight children, four boys and four girls. The last, Gustavus, was born on 2 January 1632 and baptised in the Cloister Church where the two children who had died young, Louis and Charlotte, were buried. Later that same month Frederick said farewell to Elizabeth and set out on a journey to join the King of Sweden on the battle field. Things for Frederick did not go as planned and, after declining conditions set out by King Gustavus Adolphus that would have seen the Swedish King assist in his restoration, the pair parted with Frederick heading back towards The Hague. Unfortunately he never returned, as since the beginning of October 1632 he had been suffering from an infection, and died on the morning of 29 November 1632.
When Elizabeth received the news of Frederick's death she became senseless with grief and for three days did not eat, drink or sleep. When Charles I heard of Elizabeth's state he invited her to return to England. But no matter how much she must have longed to return, she refused. The rights of her son and Frederick's 'heir Charles Louis remained to be fought for'. From this point on the headstrong Elizabeth fought for her son's rights, but even after he regained the Electorate of the Palatinate in 1648, Elizabeth remained in exile in The Hague.
Elizabeth filled the remainder of her time with copious letter writing and making marriage matches for her children. Her life after Frederick, however, seems to have been fraught with heartache. Between his death in 1632 and her own death 30 years later she would see the death of a further four children, Gustavus in 1641, Philip in 1650,

Death

Elizabeth arrived in England on 26 May 1661 and made her way to London to visit her nephew Charles II. By July she was no longer planning on returning home and made plans for the remainder of her furniture, clothing and other property to be sent to her. She then proceeded to move to Drury House where she established a small but impressive and welcoming household. She made a further move to Leicester House on 29 January 1662 but by this time was quite unwell. Elizabeth was suffering from pneumonia and on 10 February 1662 she haemorrhaged from the lungs and died soon after midnight on 13 February 1662.
Her death caused little public stir as by then her "chief, if not only, claim to fame was as the mother of Rupert of the Rhine, the legendary Cavalier general". There in the chapel of Henry VII, "a survivor of an earlier age, isolated and without a country she could really call her own" was laid to rest among her ancestors and close to her elder brother Henry, Prince of Wales.
Josephine Ross notes how in his 1612 Epithalamium, or Marriage Song, John Donne likened Elizabeth Stuart to a phoenix.

Issue

Elizabeth and Frederick had 13 children:

Ancestry

Legacy

Under the English Act of Settlement 1701 the succession to the English and Scottish crowns (later British crown) was settled on Elizabeth's youngest daughter Sophia of Hanover and her issue. In August 1714, Sophia's son (and Elizabeth's grandson) George I ascended to the throne, with the future Royal family all descendants of him, and hence also descendants of Elizabeth.
The Elizabeth River in Southeastern Virginia was named in honour of the princess, as was Cape Elizabeth a peninsula, and today, a town in the U.S. state of Maine. John Smith explored and mapped New England and gave names to places mainly based on the names used by Native Americans. When Smith presented his map to Charles I, he suggested that the king should feel free to change the "barbarous names" for "English" ones. The king made many such changes, but only four survive today, one of which is Cape Elizabeth.
According to legend, William Craven, 1st Earl of Craven, built Ashdown House in Berkshire, England, in honour of Elizabeth, although she died before the house was completed.

Fiction



Bibliography

  | title = The Stuart Princesses | origyear = 1996 | year = 2003
  | isbn = 0-7509-3238-4 | publisher = Sutton Publishing | location = Gloucestershire}}
  | title = The Winter Queen: A Novel | year = 2002
  | isbn = 0-618-14912-0 | publisher=Houghton Mifflin | location = Boston}} (alternative ISBN 0-618-38267-4)
  | title = Elizabeth, the Winter Queen | year = 1977 | isbn = 0-200-72472-X | publisher=Abelard | location = London }}
  | title = The Rosicrucian Enlightenment  | publisher=Routledge and Kegan Paul
  | year = 1972  | place = London | isbn = 0-7100-7380-1}}, devotes its early chapters to describing her 1613 wedding and the reputation she and her husband had in Europe at the time.





|-


