[[Smilodon]]

CATEGORIES: Pleistocene extinctions, Pleistocene carnivorans, Prehistoric mammals of North America, Neogene Megafauna of North America, Prehistoric mammals of South America, Megafauna of South America, Smilodon, Mammal genera



Smilodon , is an extinct genus of machairodont felid. It is perhaps the best known saber-toothed cat  and lived in North America during the Pleistocene epoch (2.5  mya–10,000 years ago). Several fossils have been found with one of the largest collections taken from the La Brea Tar Pits. Three species of the genus are known and they vary in size and build.
Overall, Smilodon was more robustly built than any modern cat, with particularly well-developed forelimbs and exceptionally long upper canines. Its jaw had a bigger gape than modern cats and its upper canines were slender and fragile, being adapted for precision killing. These attributes made Smilodon a specialized hunter of large herbivores like bison and camels.
Smilodon likely lived in closed habitats like forests and bush which would have provided cover for ambushing prey. Its reliance on large animals may have been the cause of its extinction. Scientists debate over whether Smilodon was a social animal. Comparison of predator responses to distress calls and the prevalence of healed injuries suggest it was social, while its small brain size and vegetated habitat suggest it was more solitary. Some fossils show signs of ankylosing spondylitis, trauma and arthritis. Smilodon went extinct 10,000 years ago.

Etymology

The nickname "saber-tooth" refers to the extreme length of their maxillary canines. Despite the colloquial name "saber-toothed tiger", Smilodon is not closely related to the tiger (or any other living felid); the latter belongs to subfamily Pantherinae, whereas Smilodon belongs to subfamily Machairodontinae. The name Smilodon comes from Greek: , odóntos).ὀδoύς, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus

Classification

The genus Smilodon was named and described by the Danish naturalist and palaeontologist Peter Wilhelm Lund in 1842. He found the fossils of Smilodon populator in caves near the small town of Lagoa Santa, in Minas Gerais, Brazil.

Species

A number of Smilodon species have been described, but today usually only three are recognized.[ref]
</ref>
