[[Sexual ritual]]

CATEGORIES: Sexuality and society, Sexuality and religion, Religious behaviour and experience, Marriage

Sexual rituals fall into two categories: culture-created, and natural behaviour, the human animal having developed sex rituals from evolutionary instincts for reproduction, which are then integrated into society, and elaborated to include aspects such as marriage rites, dances, etc. Arguably indeed, 'sex in its more ritualized and symbolic varieties...Desmond Morris, The Naked Ape Trilogy (London 1994) p. 246 and p. 34
Sometimes sexual rituals are highly formalized and/or part of religious activity, as in the cases of Hieros gamos, the hierodule and the OTO. Contemporary sacred sexual rituals have been tagged as 'structured, symbolic, manifestation, ceremonies, tradition, everyday, habit, grounding, magic, solemn'."Sacred Sexual Rituals" p. 3

Rites of passage

Part of the rites of passage of growing up are what have been termed 'rites of separation from the asexual world...Arnold van Gennep, The Rites of Passage (1977) p. 67 These may be formal or semi-formal - 'for some students, going to college is partly a sexual ritual, like the ceremonial dances of the whooping crane'Northrop Frue et al, Northrop Frye's Writing on Education (2000) p. 92 - or take the form of a more private induction: 'formal and artificial...Antony Powell, A Buyer's Market (1981 )p. 267-8
Freud was particularly interested in Ethnological accounts of 'the "ceremonial" (purely formal, ritual, or official) coitus, which takes place' in connection with 'the taboo of virginity'. 268-9

Wedding as orgy

Freud also noted that in 'numerous examples of marriage ceremonies there can be no doubt that people other than the bridegroom, for example his assistants and companions (our traditional "groomsmen"),  granted full sexual access to the bride'. 269n To his followers, 'the wedding as orgy, with the bride taking on all the men present, is the clear historical reality behind the modern jokes...G. Legman, The Rationale of the Dirty Joke Vol II (1973) p. 90-2 
In such a view, 'other examples of sacred or permitted public coitus of all women with all men do survive, in similarly modified "kissing" form', as under the mistletoe 'to revive the dying sun at the winter solstice, when the strongest human "life-magic", namely ritual intercourse, is to be deployed'. 90

Interaction ritual

To the sociologist looking upon 'sexual intercourse as interaction ritual...Randall Collins, Interaction Ritual Chains (Princeton 2004) p. 235 In similar fashion, Margot Anand has pointed out that 'rituals pervade our daily life and give it a sense of ceremony and celebration(...)a ritual, through your own unique symbolic gestures...Margo Anand, The Art of Sexual Ecstasy (1990) p. 71
Erving Goffman has noted however 'the considerable informational delicacy of this form of interaction', and how 'individuals may use darkness to ensure strategic ambiguity'. 235

Compulsions

In perversion, sexual rituals may emerge as a necessary part of sexual activity. For the criminologist, 'sexual ritual involves repeatedly engaging in an act or series of acts in a certain manner because of a sexual need'.J. E. Douglas et al, Crime Classification Manual (2006) p. 296 Within a relationship, 'the Compulsive libido type takes advantages of opportunities to use the specific sexual ritual that causes intense arousal, and in its stronger form, the Compulsive lover can only arouse using the sexual object or ritual. 8
In any relationship however, 'a sexual habit that becomes routine or stylised..... Anderson/B. K. Weinhold, Connective Bargaining (1981) p. 53 and p. 58 as a wife might say, '"Same old technique, same old Lewis. It's you all right, I'd know that old routine anywhere'. 98 Thus one's sex life may all 'be about rituals: the ritual of sex in the morning, or the ritual of sex at night; and the ritual of sex at anniversaries, and the ritual of sex at Christmas'. 47

Tibetan art

In the Buddhist art of India, Bhutan, Nepal and Tibet, yab-yum is the male deity in sexual union with his female consort. The symbolism is associated with Anuttarayoga tantra where the male figure is usually linked to compassion () and skillful means (upāya-kauśalya), and the female partner to 'insight' (prajñā). (2003). A Dictionary of Buddhism,  p. 338. Oxford University Press. ISBN 0-19-860560-9. 
The symbolism of union and sexual polarity is a central teaching in Tantric Buddhism, especially in Tibet. The union is realised by the practitioner as a mystical experience within one's own body. "Yab Yum Iconography and the Role of Women in Tibetan Tantric Buddhism." The Tibet Journal. Vol. XXII, No. 1. Spring 1997, pp. 12-34. Yab-yum is generally understood to represent the primordial (or mystical) union of wisdom and compassion.The Marriage of Wisdom and Method By Marco Pallis
Tantric Buddhism is itself an outcrop of Tantrism, advanced techniques of which included 'the ritual sex act (Maithuna) which was a feature of Tantric yoga'. 19 Given that 'sex is holy to a Tantric...K. Devi, in Margo Anand, The Art of Sexual Ecstasy (1990) p. 39

Private worship

A sex organ 'makes an admirable fertility symbol, and has been worshipped as such privately from time to time, or even publicly...Berne, p. 78-80 Such "worship" may only become more common in late modernity, as 'in our secular culture sexuality often replaces religion as a means of pursuing the meaning of life'. 328-9 
Alan Watts maintains that 'when you are in love with someone, you do indeed see them as a divine being...Watts, in Anand, p. 62 A woman may 'want someone who adores me...Kate Cann, Sea Change (London 2007) p. 48 and p. 297 A man (more ambivalently) may muse on 'the white breasts he worships; adores; is scared of; detests'. 230 For Shakespeare, 'this is the liver-vein, which makes flesh a deity, a green goose a goddess; pure, pure idolatry'.G. Blakemore Evans ed., The Riverside Shakespeare (1997) p. 229
In the further reaches of chick lit, ' the male organ.....a Pillar of Hercules, sustaining heaven'Amanda Hemingway, Soulfire (London 1994) p. 277 and p. 437 - evidence perhaps that 'the phallic religious tendency is alive in the modern and the civilized...a compulsive fascination'C. R. Aldrich, The Primitive Mind and Modern Civilization (1999) p. 153 and p. 146 with what Jung termed 'the phallus as the quintessence of life and fruitfulness'.C. G. Jung, Psychology of the Unconscious 9London 1944) p. 57 Correspondingly, the Western adept may borrow, in the quest 'to create a Sacred Space...Anand, p. 72 and p. 215

Literature

In the Satyricon, the hero is throughout 'hounded by the mighty rage of Priapus of Hellespont' - almost certainly because early on he 'has offended Priapus...Petronius, The Satyricon (Penguin 1986) p. 157 and p. 17





Further reading


