[[Lauri Törni]]

CATEGORIES: 1919 births, 1965 deaths, American military personnel killed in the Vietnam War, Burials at Arlington National Cemetery, Finnish expatriates in the United States, Finnish military personnel of World War II, Finnish soldiers, Knights of the Mannerheim Cross, People from Vyborg, Recipients of Finnish presidential pardons, Recipients of the Bronze Star Medal, Recipients of the Distinguished Flying Cross (United States), Recipients of the Iron Cross, 2nd class, Recipients of the Purple Heart medal, United States Army officers, Victims of helicopter accidents or incidents, Waffen-SS foreign volunteers and conscripts

Lauri Allan Törni (28 May 1919 – 18 October 1965), later known as Larry Thorne, was a Finnish Army captain who led an infantry company in the Finnish Winter and Continuation Wars and moved to the United States after World War II. He is known as the soldier who fought under three flags: Finnish, German (when he fought the Soviets in World War II), and American (where he was known as Larry Thorne) when he served in U.S. Army Special Forces in the Vietnam War.

Early life and military service

Christened Lauri Allan Törni, he was born in Viipuri, Viipuri Province (Karelia historical province),  (Karelia), Finland, to ship captain Jalmari (Ilmari) and Rosa (née Kosonen) Törni; his sisters were Salme Lesley (b. 1920) and Kaija Iris (b. 1922).

Career

World War II

During the battles at Lake Ladoga, Törni took part in the annihilation of the encircled Russian divisions in Lemetti.
Most of Törni's reputation was based on his successful feats in the Continuation War (1941–44) between the Soviet Union and Finland. In 1943 a famous unit informally named Detachment Törni was created under his command. This was an infantry unit that penetrated deep behind enemy lines and soon enjoyed a reputation on both sides of the front for its combat effectiveness. One of Törni's men was future President of Finland, Mauno Koivisto. The two served together during the Battle of Ilomantsi, which was the final Finnish-Soviet engagement of the Continuation War during July and August 1944. Koivisto participated in the battle as a soldier assigned to a reconnaissance company under the command of Captain Törni.
Törni's unit inflicted such heavy casualties on Russian units that the Soviet Army placed a bounty on his head (3 million Finnish Marks, equivalent to 650,000 USD). He was reputedly the only Finnish officer to have had a bounty. He was decorated with the Mannerheim Cross on 9 July 1944.
Törni was dissatisfied with the terms of the Finnish peace treaty with the Soviets, which required Finland to take up arms against Germany in the Lapland War. The Finnish government believed he had fought enough and discharged him. In 1945, he was recruited by a pro-German resistance movement in Finland and left for saboteur training in Germany, and to organize resistance in case Finland was occupied by the Soviet Union. He surrendered to British troops in the last stages of World War II and eventually returned to Finland in June 1945 after escaping a British POW camp.
Törni was arrested by ValPo, the Finnish national security agency, in April 1946 and tried for treason for having joined the German army. After a trial from October to November, he received a 6 year sentence in January 1947. Imprisoned at the Turku provincial prison, Törni escaped in June, but was recaptured. Finnish President Juho Paasikivi granted him a pardon in December 1948.

United States

In 1949 Törni, accompanied by his wartime executive officer Holger Pitkänen, traveled to Sweden, crossing the border from Tornio to Haparanda (Haaparanta), where many inhabitants were of ethnic Finnish origin. From Haparanda Törni traveled by railroad to Stockholm where he stayed with Baroness von Essen, who harbored many fugitive Finnish officers following the war. Pitkänen was arrested and repatriated to Finland.  Remaining in Sweden, Törni fell in love with a Swedish Finn, Marja Kops, and was soon engaged to be married. Hoping to establish a career before the marriage, Törni traveled under an alias as a Swedish seaman aboard the SS Bolivia, destined for Caracas, Venezuela. In Caracas, Törni met one of his Winter War commanders, Finnish colonel Matti Aarnio, who was in exile having settled in Venezuela after the war. From Caracas, Törni hired on to a Swedish cargo ship, the MS Skagen, destined for the United States in 1950. While in the Gulf of Mexico, near Mobile, Alabama, Törni jumped overboard and swam to shore. Now a political refugee, Törni traveled to New York City where he was helped by the Finnish-American community living in the Sunset Park, Brooklyn "Finntown." There he worked as a carpenter and cleaner. In 1953, Törni was granted a residence permit through an Act of Congress that was shepherded by the law firm of "Wild Bill" Donovan, the former head of the OSS, America's wartime covert military organization.
Törni joined the U.S. Army in 1954 under the provisions of the Lodge-Philbin Act and adopted the name Larry Thorne. While in the US Army, he was befriended by a group of Finnish-American officers who came to be known as "Marttinen's Men."Named after Colonel Alpo K. Marttinen, this group of Finnish wartime officers had immigrated to the United States and were inducted into the US Army under the Lodge Act. Several were brought into the U.S. Special Forces at its inception. With their support, Private Thorne was soon on his way into the Special Forces. While in the Special Forces, he taught skiing, survival, mountaineering, and guerrilla tactics. In turn he attended airborne school, and advanced in rank, attaining a reserve commission as a 2nd lieutenant in 1957. He later received a regular commission and a promotion to captain in 1960. From 1958 to 1962 he served in the 10th Special Forces Group in West Germany at Bad Tölz. While there he was second in command of a search and recovery mission high in the Zagros mountains of Iran, which gained him a notable reputation.
In 1962 Thorne is shown as a lieutenant with the 10th Special Forces Group in a United States Army The Big Picture episode."Phantom Fighters. USA Special Forces Training." (TV-448) 1962 via LiveLeak.
In November 1963 Thorne joined Special Forces unit A-734 in Vietnam and fought in the Mekong Delta, where he was twice decorated.
In 1965, Thorne transferred to Military Assistance Command, Vietnam – Studies and Observations Group (MACV–SOG), a classified U.S. special operations unit focusing on unconventional warfare in Vietnam, as a military advisor. On 18 October 1965, he was supervising a clandestine mission during which his helicopter crashed in a mountainous area of Vietnam, 25 miles (40 km) from Da Nang. A dispatched rescue team were unable to locate the crash site.
Shortly after his disappearance, Thorne was promoted to the rank of major.
Thorne's remains were found in 1999 and formally identified in 2003. On 26 June 2003, he was buried at Arlington National Cemetery, section 60, tombstone 8136,

Details of service

Legacy

In the 1990s, Törni's name became more and more well-known as a martial war hero, with numerous books being written about him.
In Finland, the survivors, friends, and families of Detachment Törni formed the Lauri Törni Tradition Guild.Remember the Military Museum in Helsinki during your summer holiday. 14 June 2012
Thorne's U.S. memorial is the Larry Thorne Headquarters Building, 10th SFG(A), Fort Carson, Colorado. 10th Group honors him yearly by presenting the Larry Thorne Award to the best Operational Detachment-Alpha in the command.
In the book The Green Berets by Robin Moore, the "Sven Kornie" (or Captain Steve Kornie) main character in the first chapter was based on Thorne. 
In their 2013 book Tuntematon Lauri Törni Lauri Törni'', authors Juha Pohjonen and Oula Silvennoinen argue that Törni's conviction for treason was justified because the SS training he received at the end of World War II was provided to help achieve a National Socialist coup in Finland.



Notes



Further reading

 | title = Törni – Sotilaan Tarina
 | trans_title =The Story of Larry Thorne
 | medium = DVD (58 minutes)
 |language= Finnish (with subtitles)
