[[Hahn–Banach theorem]]

CATEGORIES: Functional analysis, Theorems in functional analysis

In mathematics, the Hahn–Banach Theorem is a central tool in functional analysis. It allows the extension of bounded linear functionals defined on a subspace of some vector space to the whole space, and it also shows that there are "enough" continuous linear functionals defined on every normed vector space to make the study of the dual space "interesting". Another version of Hahn–Banach theorem is known as Hahn–Banach separation theorem or the separating hyperplane theorem, and has numerous uses in convex geometry. It is named for Hans Hahn and Stefan Banach who proved this theorem independently in the late 1920s, although a special case for the space , the argument was known to Riesz already in 1918.

Formulation

The most general formulation of the theorem needs some preparation. Given a real vector space  is called sublinear if 
Every seminorm on ) is sublinear.  Other sublinear functions can be useful as well, especially Minkowski functionals of convex sets.
Hahn–Banach Theorem , i.e.
then there exists a linear extension  such that
Hahn–Banach Theorem (Alternate Version). Set  in absolute value, 
then there exists a linear extension  such that
In the complex case of the alternate version, the . 
The extension  uses Zorn's lemma or, equivalently, the axiom of choice. It is now known (see section 4.0) that the ultrafilter lemma, which is slightly weaker than the axiom of choice, is actually strong enough.
It is possible to relax slightly the sublinearity condition on , requiring only that (Reed and Simon, 1980):
This reveals the intimate connection between the Hahn–Banach theorem and convexity.
The Mizar project has completely formalized and automatically checked the proof of the Hahn–Banach theorem in the HAHNBAN file.

Important Consequences

The theorem has several important consequences, some of which are also sometimes called "Hahn–Banach theorem":

Hahn–Banach Separation Theorem

Another version of Hahn–Banach theorem is known as the Hahn–Banach separation theorem. The separation theorem is derived from the original form of the theorem.
Theorem. Set , then:

Geometric Hahn–Banach theorem

One form of Hahn-Banach theorem is known as the Geometric Hahn-Banach Theorem, or Mazur's Theorem. (1969), Optimization by vector space methods, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., ISBN 0471-18117-X
Theorem. Let  and {{math| This can be generalized to an arbitrary topological vector space, which need not be localy convex or even Hausdorff, as:Treves, p. 184
Theorem. Let .

Relation to Axiom of Choice

As mentioned earlier, the axiom of choice implies the Hahn–Banach theorem. The converse is not true. One way to see that is by noting that the ultrafilter lemma (or equivalently, the Boolean prime ideal theorem), which is strictly weaker than the axiom of choice, can be used to show the Hahn–Banach theorem, although the converse is not the case.  
The Hahn–Banach theorem is equivalent to the following: 
(The Boolean prime ideal theorem is easily seen to be equivalent to the statement that there are always probability charges which take only the values 0 and 1.) 
In ZF, one can show that the Hahn–Banach theorem is enough to derive the existence of a non-Lebesgue measurable set.  
For separable Banach spaces, D. K. Brown and S. G. Simpson proved that the Hahn–Banach theorem follows from WKL0, a weak subsystem of second-order arithmetic that takes König's Lemma as an axiom. In fact, they prove that under a weak set of assumptions, the two are equivalent, an example of Reverse mathematics. Source of citation. Simpson, Stephen G. (2009), Subsystems of second order arithmetic, Perspectives in Logic (2nd ed.), Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-88439-6, MR2517689 

Consequences

Topological Vector Spaces

If  with this weak topology becomes Hausdorff. This sometimes allows some results from locally convex topological vector spaces to be applied to non-Hausdorff and non-locally convex spaces.

The dual space 

We have the following consequence of the Hahn–Banach theorem.
Proposition. Let {{math|−∞ for all .



Notes




