[[Bobby Fuller]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, 1966 deaths, American rock guitarists, American male singers, Burials at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Hollywood Hills), Norton Records artists, People from El Paso, Texas, Deaths from asphyxiation, University of North Texas alumni, Liberty Records artists, People from Baytown, Texas, Music of Denton, Texas

Robert Gaston "Bobby" Fuller (October 22, 1942 – July 18, 1966) was an American rock singer, songwriter, and guitar player best known for his singles "I Fought the Law" and "Love's Made a Fool of You," recorded with his mid-1960s group, the Bobby Fuller Four.

Life and career

Born in Baytown, Texas, Fuller moved as a small child to Salt Lake City, Utah, where he remained until 1956, when he and his family moved to El Paso, Texas. Rockabilly: A Forty-Year Journey. Milwaukee: Hal Leonard Corporation, 1998: 146. ISBN 0-7935-9142-2.  His father got a job at El Paso Natural Gas at that time.  It was the same year that Elvis Presley became popular, and Bobby Fuller, then 12 going on 13, became mesmerized by the new rock and roll sound.  He idolized fellow West Texan Buddy Holly (a native of  Lubbock), and pursued his own music career as a vocalist and guitarist. During the early 1960s, he played in clubs and bars in El Paso, and he recorded on independent record labels in Texas with a constantly changing line-up. The only constant band members were Fuller and his younger brother, Randy Fuller (born on January 29, 1944, in Hobbs, New Mexico) on bass. Most of these independent releases (except two songs recorded at the studio of Norman Petty in Clovis), and an excursion to Yucca Records, also in New Mexico, were recorded in the Fullers' own home studio, with Fuller acting as the producer. He even built a primitive echo chamber in the back yard. The quality of the recordings, using a couple of microphones and a mixing board purchased from a local radio station, was so impressive that he offered the use of his 'studio' to local acts for free so he could hone his production skills.
Fuller moved to Los Angeles in 1964 with his band The Bobby Fuller Four, and was signed to Mustang Records by producer Bob Keane, who was noted for discovering Ritchie Valens and producing many surf music groups. By this time, the group consisted of Fuller and his brother Randy on vocals/guitar and bass respectively, Jim Reese on guitar and DeWayne Quirico on drums.
At a time when the British Invasion and folk rock were the dominant genres in rock, Fuller stuck to Buddy Holly's style of classic rock and roll with Tex Mex flourishes. His recordings, both covers and originals, also reveal the influences of Eddie Cochran, The Beatles, Elvis Presley, Little Richard, and the Everly Brothers, as well as  surf guitar. Less well known was Fuller's ability to emulate the reverb-laden surf guitar of Dick Dale and The Ventures. His first Top 40 hit, though not on the Hot 100, was the self-penned "Let Her Dance".
The Bobby Fuller Four appeared in the 1966 movie The Ghost in the Invisible Bikini, apparently backing up Nancy Sinatra on the song "Geronimo" and continuing to play during a pool-party scene.

Death

Within months of "I Fought The Law" becoming a top 10 hit, Fuller was found dead in an automobile parked outside his Hollywood apartment. The Los Angeles deputy medical examiner, Jerry Nelson, performed the autopsy. According to Dean Kuipers:Spin, Apr 1991, p42,  He found no bruises, no broken bones, no cuts. No evidence of beating."  Kuipers further explains that boxes for "accident" and "suicide" were ticked, but next to the boxes were question marks.  Despite the official cause of death, some commentators believe Fuller was murdered. Gary Patterson, p30,

Erik Greene, a relative of Sam Cooke, has cited similarities in the deaths of Cooke and Fuller. Fuller bandmate, Jim Reese, suspected that Charles Manson may have had something to do with Fuller's death but never provided credible evidence. A sensationalist crime website has speculated that the LAPD may have been involved because of Bobby's connection to a Mafia-related woman.

Fuller is buried in the Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Los Angeles. The Tombstone Tourist: Musicians. Simon and Schuster. pp. 85. ISBN 0-7434-6330-7, 
After his brother's death, Randy Fuller took over lead vocal duties and named the band after himself, but the band broke up within months of Bobby's death. Randy Fuller recorded a couple of solo singles, then in spring 1969 joined Dewey Martin's New Buffalo (Springfield), which evolved into Blue Mountain Eagle in July 1969. He appeared on the band's lone LP for Atco Records in early 1970 before briefly joining Dewey Martin and Medicine Ball.
Bobby Fuller's recordings have been reissued by Norton Records, Del-Fi Records, Rhino Records and Munster Records.

Compositions

Bobby Fuller's compositions included "Let Her Dance", "Another Sad and Lonely Night", "She's My Girl", "Take My Word", "Phantom Dragster", "King of the Wheels", "Fool of Love", "Never to be Forgotten", "My True Love", "Only When I Dream", "Little Annie Lou", "A New Shade of Blue", "Saturday Night", "You Kiss Me", and "Don't Ever Let Me Know".

References in popular culture

Discography

Original US singles

Original US albums

Compilations and reissues

1 Released as by Bobby Fuller / Guitarist Jim Reese And The Embers, Vocal. Issued twice with the same catalog number, but with completely different versions of both tracks. 
2 Released as by Bobby Fuller. 
3 Released as by Bobby Fuller And The Fanatics. 
4 Released as by The Shindigs. 
5 Released as by The Bobby Fuller Four






