[[Destiny's Child]]

CATEGORIES: Destiny's Child, Beyoncé, World Music Awards winners, Grammy Award-winning artists, Brit Award winners, Musical trios, American pop music groups, American rhythm and blues musical groups, American girl groups, African-American musical groups, Musical groups from Houston, Texas, Musical groups established in 1997, Musical groups disestablished in 2006, Musical groups reestablished in 2012, Gold Star Records artists, Vocal trios

{{Infobox musical artist
| name            = Destiny's Child
| image           = Destiny's Child (Beyonce, Kelly, Michelle).png
| caption         = Beyoncé Knowles, Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams (From left to right)
| landscape       = yes
| alias           = Girl's Tyme (predebut)
| background      = group_or_band
| origin          = 
| genre           = {{flatlist|
| years_active    = 
| label           = 

Destiny's Child was an American R&B girl group whose final, and perhaps most recognizable, line-up comprised Beyoncé Knowles, Kelly Rowland and Michelle Williams. Formed in 1990 in Houston, Texas, Destiny's Child members began their musical endeavors as Girl's Tyme comprising, among others,Destiny's Child's Long Road To Fame (The Song Isn't Called 'Survivor' For Nothing) – Music, Celebrity, Artist News | MTV. After years of limited success, they were signed in 1996 to Columbia Records as Destiny's Child. Destiny's Child was launched into mainstream recognition following the 1999 release of their best-selling second album, The Writing's on the Wall, which contained the number-one singles "Bills, Bills, Bills" and "Say My Name". Despite critical and commercial success, the group was plagued by internal conflict and legal turmoil, as Roberson and Luckett attempted to split from the group's manager Mathew Knowles, citing favoritism of Knowles and Rowland.
Both Roberson and Luckett were soon replaced with Williams and Farrah Franklin; however, in 2000, Franklin was dismissed, leaving the group as a trio. Their third album, Survivor, which contains themes the public interpreted as a channel to the group's experience, contains the worldwide hits "Independent Women", "Survivor" and "Bootylicious". In 2002, they announced a hiatus and re-united two years later for the release of their fourth and final studio album, Destiny Fulfilled (2004). Destiny's Child has sold more than 60 million records worldwide to date.

Recording history

1990–97: Early beginnings and Girl's Tyme

In 1990, Beyoncé Knowles met rapper LaTavia Roberson while auditioning for a girl group. they were actually rapping instead of singing.
Because of the group's defeat, Knowles's father, Mathew, voluntarily dedicated his time to manage them. After rigorous training, they began performing as opening acts for established R&B groups of that time such as SWV, Dru Hill and Immature. Tina Knowles designed the group's attire for their performances.
Over the course of the early years in their career, Girl's Tyme changed their name to Something Fresh, Cliché, the Dolls, and to Destiny.

1998–2000: Breakthrough and lineup changes

Destiny's Child released their self-titled debut album in the United States on February 17, 1998, featuring productions by Tim & Bob, Rob Fusari, Jermaine Dupri, Wyclef Jean, Dwayne Wiggins and Corey Rooney. Destiny's Child peaked at number sixty-seven on the Billboard 200 and number fourteen on the Billboard Top R&B/Hip-Hop Albums.
After the success of their debut album, Destiny's Child re-entered the studio quickly, bringing in a new lineup of producers, including Kevin "She'kspere" Briggs and Rodney Jerkins. Coming up with The Writing's on the Wall, they released it on July 27, 1999 and it eventually became their breakthrough album. The Writing's on the Wall peaked at number five on the Billboard 200 and number two on R&B chart in early 2000. "Bills, Bills, Bills" was released in 1999 as the album's lead single and reached the top spot of the Billboard Hot 100, becoming their first US number-one single. The Writing's on the Wall has been credited as Destiny's Child's breakthrough album, spurring their career and introducing them to a wider audience.
In December 1999, Luckett and Roberson attempted to split with their manager, claiming that he kept a disproportionate share of the group's profits and unfairly favored Knowles and Rowland. While they never intended to leave the group, when the video for "Say My Name" surfaced in February 2000, Roberson and Luckett found out that two new members were joining Knowles and Rowland. Prior to the video premiere, Knowles announced on TRL that original members Luckett and Roberson had left the group. They were replaced by Michelle Williams, a former backup singer to Monica, and Farrah Franklin, an aspiring singer-actress. Shortly after her stint with Monica, Williams was introduced to Destiny's Child by choreographer Braden Larson aka "Peanut Orlando", and was flown to Houston where she stayed with the Knowles family.
In March 2000, Roberson and Luckett filed a lawsuit against Mathew Knowles and their former bandmates for breach of partnership and fiduciary duties. Following the suit, both sides were disparaging towards each other in the media. Five months after joining, Franklin left the group. The remaining members claimed that this was due to missed promotional appearances and concerts. According to Williams, Franklin could not handle stress. Franklin, however, disclosed that she left because of the negativity surrounding the strife and her inability to assert any control in the decision making. Her departure was seen as less controversial. Williams, on the other hand, shared that her inclusion into the group resulted in "battling insecurity": "I was comparing myself to the other members, and the pressure was on me."
Towards the end of 2000, Roberson and Luckett dropped the portion of their lawsuit aimed at Rowland and Knowles in exchange for a settlement, though they retained one against their manager. As part of the agreement, both sides were prohibited from speaking about each other publicly. Roberson and Luckett formed another girl group named Anjel but also left it due to record company issues. Although affected by the turmoil, Destiny's Child's success continued. The following years of their career were seen as the group's most successful stretch, becoming a pop culture phenomenon. "Say My Name" became their second number-one and biggest single to date. The fourth single from The Writing's on the Wall, "Jumpin', Jumpin'", also became a top-ten hit. During this time, Destiny's Child began performing as an opening act at the concerts of pop singers Britney Spears and Christina Aguilera.
With Williams in the new lineup, Destiny's Child recorded a theme song for the soundtrack to the film version of Charlie's Angels. Released as a single in October 2000, "Independent Women Part 1" spent eleven consecutive weeks atop the Billboard Hot 100 from November 2000 to January 2001, the longest-running number-one single of Destiny's Child's career and of that year in the United States. The successful release of the single boosted the sales of the soundtrack album to Charlie's Angels to 1.5 million by 2001. In 2000, Destiny's Child won Soul Train's Sammy Davis Jr. Entertainer of the Year award.

2001–03: Survivor, subsequent releases, hiatus and side projects

At the 2001 Billboard Music Awards, Destiny's Child won several accolades, including Artist of the Year and Duo/Group of the Year,
In the wake of the September 11 attacks, Destiny's Child canceled a European tour and performed in a concert benefit for the survivors. In October 2001, Destiny's Child released a holiday album, 8 Days of Christmas, which contained updated versions of several Christmas songs. The remix album reached number 29 in the United States. The lead single and Grammy-winning song "Survivor" was by some interpreted as a response to the strife between the band members, although Knowles claimed it was not directed at anybody. Seeing it as a breach of the agreement that barred each party from public disparagement, Roberson and Luckett once again filed a lawsuit against Destiny's Child and Sony Music, shortly following the release of This Is the Remix. In June 2002, remaining cases were settled in court.
In late 2000, Destiny's Child announced to embark on individual side projects, including releases of solo albums, an idea by their manager.
As an upshot from the success of "Dilemma", Knowles' debut album, Dangerously in Love, was postponed many times until June 2003. In November 2003, Williams appeared as Aida on Broadway. In January 2004, she released her second gospel album, Do You Know.
Dwayne Wiggins, who had produced their first recordings as Destiny's Child, filed suit in 2002 against his former counsel (Bloom, Hergott, Diemer & Cook LLP) seeking $15 million in damages for lessening his contractual agreement with the group without his consent, effectively nullifying his original contract that offered Sony Music/Columbia Destiny's Child's exclusive recording services for an initial seven years, in exchange for "certain royalties", instead of royalties only from the first three albums. The case was settled for an undisclosed amount."Tony Toni Tone Member Sues Attorney For Letting Destiny's Child Off Easy", Yahoo Music News. Retrieved 2009-12-26 In June 2003, Mathew Knowles announced that Destiny's Child would expand back to a quartet, revealing Knowles' younger sister, Solange, as the latest addition to the group.

2004–05: Destiny Fulfilled and #1's

Three years after the hiatus, members of Destiny's Child reunited to record their fourth and final studio album, Destiny Fulfilled. The album introduces the trio to a harder, "urban" sound, and songs featured are conceptually interrelated. Destiny Fulfilled saw equality in the trio: each member contributed to writing on the majority songs, Certified three-time platinum in the United States, it was still one of the best-selling albums of 2005, selling over eight million copies worldwide; it pushed the group back into the position of the best-selling female group and American group of the year. Four singles were released from the album: the lead "Lose My Breath", "Soldier", "Cater 2 U" and "Girl"; the first two reached number three in the United States. "Soldier" "Cater 2 U" were certified platinum by the RIAA in 2006.
To promote the album, Destiny's Child embarked on their worldwide concert tour, Destiny Fulfilled... and Lovin' It Tour. On June 11, 2005, while at the Palau Sant Jordi in Barcelona, Spain, the group announced before 16,000 people their official breakup. Destiny's Child claimed, however, that naming it Destiny Fulfilled was not a coincidence of sort. Right in the making of the album, they planned to part ways after their fourteen-year career as a group to facilitate their continued pursuit in individual aspirations. Knowles stated that their destinies were already fulfilled. The group exclusively sent a letter to MTV about the decision:
 
 We have been working together as Destiny's Child since we were 9, and touring together since we were 14. After a lot of discussion and some deep soul searching, we realized that our current tour has given us the opportunity to leave Destiny's Child on a high note, united in our friendship and filled with an overwhelming gratitude for our music, our fans, and each other. After all these wonderful years working together, we realized that now is the time to pursue our personal goals and solo efforts in earnest... We want to thank all of our fans for their incredible love and support and hope to see you all again as we continue fulfilling our destinies. 
—Destiny's Child, MTV

Destiny's Child released their greatest hits album, #1's, on October 25, 2005. The compilation includes their number-one hits including "Independent Woman Part 1", "Say My Name" and "Bootylicious". Three new tracks were recorded for the compilation including "Stand Up for Love", which was recorded for the theme song to the World Children's Day, and "Check on It", a song Knowles recorded for The Pink Panther's soundtrack.

Disbandment and aftermath

Destiny's Child reunited for a farewell performance at the 2006 NBA All-Star Game on February 19 in Houston, Texas; however, Knowles commented, "It's the last album, but it's not the last show."
After their formal disbandment, all members continued on their solo projects including LeToya Luckett, who released her debut solo album, LeToya, in July 2006, peaking at number-one on the Billboard 200.
In 2007, Rowland released her second solo album, Ms. Kelly. On June 26, 2007, the group made a mini-reunion at the 2007 BET Awards. Knowles performed "Get Me Bodied" with special guests Williams, Solange Knowles, and Mo'Nique. After her performance, Knowles introduced Rowland who performed her single "Like This" with Eve. in October 2008, with several of the tracks boasting an uptempo Euro-dance flavour. Bluesandsoul. Retrieved on 2012-01-01. The following month, Knowles released her third studio solo album, I Am... Sasha Fierce. LeToya Luckett released her sophomore album, Lady Love, in the summer of 2009. Also, that summer Williams made history by becoming the first African-American actress to play murderous chorus-girl Roxie Hart in the London West End run of the stage musical Chicago. Bluesandsoul. Retrieved on 2012-01-01. In June 2010, Rowland released "Commander", the first single from her third album Here I Am. Bluesandsoul. Retrieved on 2012-01-01.
The Associated Press reported in October 2012 that Destiny's Child was a potential collaborator during Beyoncé's performance at Super Bowl XLVII, set to take place February 3, 2013,Fekadu, Mesfin (October 16, 2012). AP source: Beyonce set for Super Bowl halftime. Associated Press. Retrieved October 16, 2012. following the release of the group's second compilation album Playlist: The Very Best of Destiny's Child. It was essentially a re-release of their first with a difference of four songs and an updated track-listing. On January 10, 2013, Beyoncé announced that the group would release its third compilation album titled Love Songs later that month on January 29. The Destiny's Child Video Anthology is the group's third release through Legacy Recordings and will feature 16 Music Videos.destinyschild.com/news/destinys-child-video-anthology-be-released-june-4th

Artistry

Style and themes

Destiny's Child recorded R&B songs with styles that encompasses urban, contemporary, and dance-pop. Knowles, however, completely led songs like "Brown Eyes" and "Dangerously in Love". The group explored their lyrics to man-to-woman relationship, and sisterhood and female empowerment anthems.
Survivor contains themes interpreted by the public as a reference to the group's internal conflict. The title track, "Survivor", which set the theme used throughout the album, features the lyrics "I'm not gonna blast you on the radio ... I'm not gonna lie on you or your family ... I'm not gonna hate you in the magazine" caused LaTavia and LeToya Luckett to file a lawsuit against the group; the lyrics were perceived to be a violation over their agreement following a settlement in court. In an interview, Knowles commented: "The lyrics to the single 'Survivor' are Destiny's Child's story, because we've been through a lot, ... We went through our drama with the members ... Any complications we've had in our 10-year period of time have made us closer and tighter and better." In another song called "Fancy", which contains the lyrics "You always tried to compete with me, girl ... find your own identity", was interpreted by critic David Browne, in his review of the album for Entertainment Weekly magazine, as a response to the lawsuit. Despite the albums receiving critical praise, Knowles' close involvement has occasionally generated criticism. Knowles wrote and co-produced the bulk of Survivor. Browne suggested that her help made Survivor a "premature, but inevitable, growing pains album".

Public image

Destiny's Child were compared to The Supremes, a 1960's American female singing group, with Knowles being compared to Supremes frontwoman Diana Ross; Knowles, however, has dismissed the notion. Coincidentally, Knowles starred in the film adaptation of the 1981 Broadway musical Dreamgirls as Deena Jones, the front woman of the Dreams, a female singing group based on the Supremes. With Knowles' wide role assumed in the production of Survivor, Gil Kaufman of MTV noted that "it became clear that Beyoncé was emerging as DC's unequivocal musical leader and public face". Her dominance to the creative input in the album made the album "very much her work". For Lola Ogunnaike of The New York Times, "It's been a long-held belief in the music industry that Destiny's Child was little more than a launching pad for Beyoncé Knowles's inevitable solo career."
In the wake of Knowles' Dangerously in Love, rumors spread about a possible split of Destiny's Child after each member had experienced success and had ongoing projects.
Whilst Knowles was compared to Ross, Kelly Rowland perhaps considered to be Destiny's Child deputy leader has been equated to Mary Wilson, the Supremes's second lead singer. Wilson declared about their second lead singer -position in the groups as "Same as our situation...." and about the possibility to emerge as solo artist, she says "It's very difficult, but it can be done. You've got to really want to give that and that way it will work.".Mary Wilson Of The Supremes On 'Dreamgirls,' 'Sparkle,' Diana Ross And Kelly Rowland | Hip-Hop Media Training (NEW) – Yahoo! Music
Rowland performed live with Wilson and Cindy Birdsong of The Supremes at the Motown 45th anniversary, in 2004... After the international success of her worldwide hit singles "Dilemma" and "Stole" and of her debut album Simply Deep, music critics wrote of Rowland as an emancipated and different artist from Beyoncé, that has established herself as a solo singer and songwriter.
In the first three albums of the group, Rowland sang her solo verses and bridges in a lot of songs (like in the hit singles "Bills, Bills, Bills", "Independent Woman", "Survivor" and "Bootylicious"), led choruses ("Say My Name") and harmonized Knowles ("No, No, No" and "Jumpin' Jumpin'"), but in  Destiny Fulfilled  she conquered more space in all songs of the album.

Discography








