[[Alejandra Guzmán]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 births, Living people, Singers from Mexico City, Mexican people of Venezuelan descent, Mexican female singers, Rock en Español musicians, Latin Grammy Award winners, Actresses from Mexico City, Mexican actresses, The Voice (TV series) judges

Gabriela Alejandra Guzmán Pinal (born February 9, 1968 in Mexico City), better known as Alejandra Guzmán, is a Mexican singer-songwriter, actress, musician, designer, painter, mother and Latin America's #1 female rock artist
During her 20 years of artistic career, with more than 10 million albums sold, 16 released albums and 30 singles in radio's Top 10 hits, Alejandra Guzmán has earned the title of La Reina del Rock (The Queen of Rock). She is the daughter of two Latin entertainment legends: Movie icon Silvia Pinal and Rock and Roll legend Enrique Guzman, from whom she inherits her talent and passion for arts, music, dance and constant spiritual growth. 
Throughout her career, she has performed with legendary acts like James Brown (1997, Hard Rock Live Cancun) opened for Rolling Stones (2006, Monterrey, Mexico), acted as spokesperson of the campaign, "Your Rock is to Vote" promoting the right to vote among young people (2006) and participated in publicity campaigns for internationally renowned brands such as Miller Light, Jeep, Kraft and MAC Cosmetics.
"La Guzmán" as she is also known, has contributed to social programs and campaigns like Aids Health Foundation, The Mexican Aid Associations for Children with Cancer, and the CIE Foundation. In 2006 Alejandra also began to raise funds destined to finance alcohol and drugs rehabilitation programs and in May 2008, Alejandra acted as spokesperson for the SER campaign (SPTI) to promote breast cancer awareness. 
In 2011, Alejandra Guzmán celebrated 20 years of success with the release of her live album Alejandra Guzmán, 20 Años de Éxitos en Vivo con Moderatto (CD/DVD). The album includes "Día de Suerte", theme song for the soundtrack of the Mexican Televisa soap opera Una Familia con Suerte, in which Alejandra appeared as guest star in several episodes and granted her several number ones on the radio charts.
The album was recorded live in early 2011 at Mexico City's grand Palacio de los Deportes (Sports Palace), featuring a unique audiovisual experience on stage and includes musical collaborations by artists like rap star, Vico-C, who joined Alejandra to perform a new version of her classic "Mala Hierba" and the late "Diva de la Banda", Jenni Rivera in a new interpretation of Alejandra's longtime hit "Eternamente Bella". 
Alejandra Guzmán, 20 Años de Éxitos en Vivo con Moderatto (CD/DVD) successfully toured throughout Mexico, the United States, Central and South America. 
In 2013, Sony Music presents "La Guzmán – En Primera Fila", a live album including her hits and new tracks. Recorded live at Estudios Churubusco, Mexico City this album includes duos with Beatriz Luengo, Draco, Fonseca, Danny Martin and a special appearance by Mario Domm.
Its first single "MI PEOR ERROR" was released to radio on October 7, 2013. This brand-new song was written by Pablo Preciado and is forceful, intimate and riveting ballad. 
"La Guzmán – En Primera Fila" will be released December 2013.

Discography

Studio albums

Compilation albums

Live albums

Singles

Awards Won

Latin Grammy 2002: "Best Rock Solo Album" (Soy)
Winner of ASCAP Latin Award: Pop Balad:  "Volverte a Amar" (2006) /  "Soy sólo un Secreto" (2009) / "Día de Suerte' (2012) 
"La Luna" Del Auditorio Nacional" Award: Best Live Latin Rock Performance
Premio Oye! 2006: " Album of the Year" and "Best Female Artist"
Premios Juventud 2010: Best Rock Artist 
Premios Juventud 2012: Mejor Tema Novelero "Día de Suerte"

Honorary Award

2013 PADRES Contra el Cancer (I Am Hope) 

Nominations

Grammy Awards
1991 "Best Latin Pop Album" for the album "Flor de papel"; 2004 "Latin Rock / Alternative album" for "Lipstick"
'''
Latin Grammy Awards'''
2000 "Best Female Rock Vocal Performance" for the song "Algo Natural"; 2005 "Best Rock Solo album" for "Lipstick" and "Best Rock song" for "Lipstick"; 2006 "Best Rock Vocal album" for "Indeleble" and "Best Rock Song" for "Volverte a Amar"; 2008 "Best Female Pop Vocal Album" for "Fuerza"; 2011 "Record of the Year"/ "Best Short Form Music Video" for Tan Solo Tu (A Duo with Franco de Vita)
Billboard Latin Music Awards; 2005 "Latin Rock / Alternative album of the year" for "Lipstick"
Premio Lo Nuestro
2007 "Artist of the year" / "Album of the year" for "Indeleble" / "Song of the year" for "Volverte a amar"; 2008 /"Female Artist of the Year" / "Album of the Year" for "Fuerza", "Song of the Year" for "Soy solo un Secreto"; 2012 "Rock Album of the Year" for "20 Años de Éxitos en Vivo con Moderatto"/ "Rock Artist of the Year"/ "Rock Song of the Year" for "Día de Suerte"/ "Collaboration of the Year" for "Día de Suerte" with Moderatto; 2013  "Artist of the year" 
Premios Juventud
2011 "My Rock Artist"






