[[PJ Harvey]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, 20th-century English singers, 21st-century English singers, Living people, English singer-songwriters, English female singers, English multi-instrumentalists, Female rock singers, English rock musicians, English rock guitarists, People from Beaminster, People from Bridport, People from Dorset, English female guitarists, Alternative rock pianists, British alternative rock musicians, Autoharp players, Alternative rock guitarists, Alumni of Central Saint Martins, Island Records artists, Vagrant Records artists, NME Awards winners, Ivor Novello Award winners, Members of the Order of the British Empire

Polly Jean Harvey MBE (born 9 October 1969) is an English musician, singer-songwriter, writer, poet, composer and occasional artist.
Harvey began her career in 1988 when she joined local band Automatic Dlamini as a vocalist, guitarist, and saxophone player. The band's frontman, John Parish, would become her long-term collaborator. In 1991, she formed an eponymous trio and subsequently began her professional career. The trio released two studio albums, Dry (1992) and Rid of Me (1993) before disbanding, after which Harvey continued as a solo artist. Since 1995, she has released a further six studio albums with collaborations from various musicians including John Parish, former bandmate Rob Ellis, Mick Harvey, and Eric Drew Feldman and has also worked extensively with record producer Flood.
Among the accolades she has received are the 2001 and 2011 Mercury Prize for Stories from the City, Stories from the Sea (2000)

Early life

Harvey was born in Bridport, Dorset, on 9 October 1969 as the second child to Ray and Eva Harvey, During her childhood, she attended school in nearby Beaminster and her parents introduced her to music that would later influence her work, including blues music, Captain Beefheart and Bob Dylan.
As a teenager, Harvey began learning saxophone and joined an eight-piece instrumental group Bologne, based in Dorset. She was also a guitarist with folk duo The Polekats, with whom she wrote some of her earliest material. After finishing school, Harvey attended Yeovil College and studied a visual arts foundation course. "I always painted and have always drawn. I initially came from the visual arts background before I even began music." Extract from a transcription of an interview with Miranda Sawyer on The Culture Show. Broadcast on BBC Two on 10 February 2011.

Music career

Automatic Dlamini: 1988–1991

In July 1988, Harvey became a member of Automatic Dlamini, a band based in Bristol with whom she gained extensive ensemble-playing experience. Formed by John Parish in 1983, the band consisted of a rotating line-up that at various times included Rob Ellis and Ian Oliver,. Additionally, Parish's girlfriend in the late 1980s was photographer Maria Mochnacz. She and Harvey became close friends and Mochnacz went on to shoot and design most of Harvey's album artwork and music videos, contributing significantly to her public image.
Harvey said of her time with Automatic Dlamini: "I ended up not singing very much but I was just happy to learn how to play the guitar. I wrote a lot during the time I was with them but my first songs were crap. I was listening to a lot of Irish folk music at the time, so the songs were folky and full of penny whistles and stuff. It was ages before I felt ready to perform my own songs in front of other people," and she also credits Parish for teaching her how to perform in front of audiences, saying "after the experience with John's band and seeing him perform I found it was enormously helpful to me as a performer to engage with people in the audience, and I probably did learn that from him, amongst other things."

PJ Harvey Trio: 1991–1993

In January 1991, following her departure from Automatic Dlamini, Harvey formed her own band with former bandmates Rob Ellis and Ian Oliver. Harvey decided to name the trio PJ Harvey after rejecting other names as "nothing felt right at all or just suggested the wrong type of sound"Harvey, PJ. "We were playing around with other names but nothing felt right at all or just suggested the wrong type of sound or just wasn't right. And I also felt I am the songwriter in the band and I know that I'm going to be wanting to write songs and continue making music for quite a while but I can't guarantee that Rob and Steve will want to." Extracts from a transcription of an interview with PJ Harvey on 120 Minutes. Broadcast on MTV on 20 June 1993. and also to allow her to continue music as a solo artist. The trio consisted of Harvey on vocals and guitars, Ellis on drums and backing vocals, and Oliver on bass. Oliver later departed to rejoin the still-active Automatic Dlamini. He was subsequently replaced with Steve Vaughan. The trio's "disastrous" debut performance was held at a skittle alley in Charmouth Village Hall in April 1991. Harvey later recounted the event saying: "we started playing and I suppose there was about fifty people there, and during the first song we cleared the hall. There was only about two people left. And a woman came up to us, came up to my drummer, it was only a three piece, while we were playing and shouted at him 'Don't you realize nobody likes you! We'll pay you, you can stop playing, we'll still pay you!'"N.B. User must click "Listen" or "Download" to access MP3 stream.

The band relocated to London in June 1991 when Harvey applied to study sculpture at Central Saint Martins College of Art & Design, still undecided as to her future career. During this time, the band recorded a set of demo recordings and distributed them to record labels. Independent label Too Pure agreed to release the band's debut single "Dress" in October 1991 and later signed PJ Harvey. "Dress" received mass critical acclaim upon its release and was voted Single of the Week in Melody Maker by guest reviewer John Peel, who admired "the way Polly Jean seems crushed by the weight of her own songs and arrangements, as if the air is literally being sucked out of them ... admirable if not always enjoyable."
The following February, the trio released "Sheela-Na-Gig" as their equally-acclaimed second single and their debut studio album, Dry (1992), followed in March. Like the singles preceding it, Dry received an overwhelming international critical response. The album was cited by Kurt Cobain of Nirvana as his sixteenth favourite album ever in his posthumously-published Journals.
Island Records signed the trio amid a major label bidding war in mid-1992 and in December 1992, the trio travelled to Cannon Falls, Minnesota in the United States to record the follow-up to Dry with producer Steve Albini. Prior to recording with Albini, the band recorded a second session with John Peel on 22 September and recorded a version of Bob Dylan's "Highway 61 Revisited," and two new songs "Me Jane" and "Ecstasy." The band's final tour was to support U2 in August 1993, after which the trio officially disbanded. In her final appearance on American television in September 1993, on The Tonight Show with Jay Leno, Harvey performed a solo version of "Rid of Me." As Rid of Me sold substantially more copies than Dry, 4-Track Demos, a compilation album of demos for the album was released in October and inaugurated her career as a solo artist. In early 1994, it was announced that U2's manager, Paul McGuinness, had become her manager.

Solo career: 1993–present

=To Bring You My Love and Is This Desire?: 1993–1999=

As Harvey embarked on her solo career, she explored collaborations with other musicians. In 1995, she released her third studio album, To Bring You My Love, featuring former bandmate John Parish, Bad Seeds multi-instrumentalist Mick Harvey and French drummer Jean-Marc Butty; all of whom would continue to perform and record with Harvey throughout her career. The album was also her first material to be produced by Flood. behind Nirvana's Nevermind (1991) and Public Enemy's Fear of a Black Planet (1990).
In 1996, following the international success of To Bring You My Love and other collaborations, Harvey began composing material that would end up on her fourth studio album, during what she referred to as "an incredibly low patch." her most successful single to date.

=Stories from the City, Stories from the Sea and Uh Huh Her: 2000–2006=

In early 2000, Harvey began work on her fifth studio album, Stories from the City, Stories from the Sea with Rob Ellis and Mick Harvey. Written in her native Dorset, Paris and New York, the album showcased a more mainstream indie rock and pop rock sound to her previous albums and the lyrics followed on themes of love that tied into Harvey's affection for New York City. The same year, Harvey also topped a readers' poll conducted by Q Magazine of the 100 Greatest Women in Rock Music.
During three years of various collaborations with other artists, Harvey was also working on her sixth studio album, Uh Huh Her, which was released in May 2004. For the first time since 4-Track Demos (1993), Harvey played every instrument—with the exception drums provided by Rob Ellis—and was the sole producer.

=White Chalk and Let England Shake: 2007–present=

During her first performance since the Uh Huh Her tour, at the Hay Festival of Literature & Arts on 26 May 2006, Harvey revealed that her next studio album would be almost entirely piano-based which continues to be her primary instrument after guitar and influenced her material after White Chalk.
In April 2010, Harvey appeared on The Andrew Marr Show performing a new song titled "Let England Shake." In a pre-performance interview with Marr, she stated that new material she had written had been "formed out of the landscape that I've grown up in and the history of this nation" and as "a human being affected by politics."Harvey, PJ. "I know that the music that I make is definitely formed out of the landscape that I've grown up in and the history of this nation" and "I sing as a human being affected by politics and that for me is a more successful way in song." Extracts from a transcription of an interview with PJ Harvey on The Andrew Marr Show. Broadcast on BBC One on 18 April 2010. Her eighth studio album, Let England Shake, was released in February 2011, and received universal critical acclaim
On 3 August 2013 Harvey released a single Shaker Aamer in support of the Guantanamo Bay detention camp detainee by the same name who is the last British citizen held there. The song describes in detail what Aamer endured during his four month hunger strike.PJ Harvey Releases New Track 'Shaker Aamer' for Guantanamo Detainee Rolling Stone 4 August 2013

Collaborations and projects

thumb|left|John Parish and Harvey performing live in 2009. Parish – who Harvey describes as her "musical soulmate" – has been working with Harvey for over 20 years. In 1995, she recorded a duet of American folk song "Henry Lee" with partner Nick Cave and was also featured on the Bob Dylan cover "Death is Not the End," both released on Nick Cave and the Bad Seeds' Murder Ballads (1996)
Harvey has also recorded two studio albums with long-time collaborator John Parish. Dance Hall at Louse Point (1996) was written collectively with Parish with the exception of the song "Is That All There Is?", written by Jerry Leiber and Mike Stoller. The album also listed her as Polly Jean Harvey, which in part affected the album's sales. Harvey has also reflected on how the album was "an enormous turning point" and "lyrically, it moved me into areas I'd never been to before."
Aside from collaborations, Harvey has also embarked on a number of projects as a composer. In January 2009, a new stage production of Henrik Ibsen's Hedda Gabler opened on Broadway. Directed by Ian Rickson and starring Mary-Louise Parker in the title role, the play featured an original score of incidental music written by Harvey.

Non-musical endeavours

Outside her better-known music career, Harvey is also an occasional artist and actress. In 1998, she appeared in Hal Hartley's film The Book of Life The issue featured Harvey's paintings and drawings alongside short stories by Woody Allen. Speaking of her artistic contributions to the magazine in 2011, Harvey said: "the first opportunity I ever had to show any work was in this magazine. They were drawn while I was writing and recording the record (Let England Shake). It does relate to the record in the way the cycle keeps happening."Harvey, PJ. "The first opportunity I ever had to show any work was in this magazine. They were drawn while I was writing and recording the record (Let England Shake). It does relate to the record in the way the cycle keeps happening." Extracts from a transcription of an interview with PJ Harvey on The Culture Show. Broadcast on BBC Two on 12 February 2011.
In December 2013, Harvey gave her debut public poetry reading at the British Library.
On 2 January 2014 PJ Harvey guest-edited BBC Radio 4's Today programme.

Musical style and influences

Harvey has been noted to dislike repeating herself in her music, resulting in very different-sounding albums. In an interview with Rolling Stone in October 2004, she said: "when I'm working on a new record, the most important thing is to not repeat myself ... that's always my aim: to try and cover new ground and really to challenge myself. Because I'm in this for learning." She denied the influence of drag, Kabuki or performance art on her new image, a look she affectionately dubbed "Joan Crawford on acid" in an interview with Spin in 1996, but admitted that "it's that combination of being quite elegant and funny and revolting, all at the same time, that appeals to me. I actually find wearing make-up like that, sort of smeared around, as extremely beautiful. Maybe that's just my twisted sense of beauty." However, she later told Dazed & Confused magazine, "that was kind of a mask. It was much more of a mask than I've ever had. I was very lost as a person, at that point. I had no sense of self left at all", and has never repeated the overt theatricality of the To Bring You My Love tour.
At an early age, she was introduced by her parents to blues music, jazz and art rock, which, she told Rolling Stone in 1995, would later influence her: "I was brought up listening to John Lee Hooker, to Howlin' Wolf, to Robert Johnson, and a lot of Jimi Hendrix and Captain Beefheart. So I was exposed to all these very compassionate musicians at a very young age, and that's always remained in me and seems to surface more as I get older. I think the way we are as we get older is a result of what we knew when we were children." classical composers like Arvo Pärt, Samuel Barber

| last = Stieven-Taylor
| first = Alison
| title = Rock Chicks: The Hottest Female Rockers from the 1960s to Now
| publisher = Rockpool Publishing
| year =2007
| location = Sydney
| isbn = 978-1-921295-06-5}}
| last = Strauss
| first = Neil
| title = PJ Harvey
| work = Rolling Stone
| pages = 68–79, 144–145
| issue = 0663
| date =28 December 1995
| url =
}}
| last = Udovitch
| first = Mim
| title = PJ Harvey
| work = Rolling Stone
| page = 51
| issue = 0663
| date =14 December 2000
| url =
}}




