[[Bounce (Bon Jovi album)]]

CATEGORIES: Bon Jovi albums, Island Records albums, 2002 albums, Music about the September 11 attacks, Albums produced by Richie Sambora, Albums produced by Luke Ebbin

Bounce is the eighth studio album by American rock band Bon Jovi, released on October 8, 2002 through Island Records. Produced by Luke Ebbin, Jon Bon Jovi and Richie Sambora, the album was recorded at Sanctuary II Studio in New Jersey.
Bounce was heavily influenced by the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, owing in part to Jon Bon Jovi's proximity to New York. The title "Bounce" was a reference to New York City's and the United States' ability to bounce back from the World Trade Center attacks as a nation. The cover image for the album includes a stylized image of a radio telescope dish at the Very Large Array.
The album debuted at #2 on the Billboard 200, making it Bon Jovi's highest debut in the band's history at that time.

Background

At the end of July 2001, the band were finishing the One Wild Night Tour.  After takin only three weeks off after the tour, the writing process began in Los Angeles. Shortly thereafter, Jon Bon Jovi and Richie Sambora were back in New Jersey and by September 11, they were well into the writing process, which lasted into May 2002.

Recording and production

The album produced by Luke Ebbin, represented a return to Bon Jovi's "roots" with Richie Sambora playing heavily distorted guitars, gravelly vocals by Jon Bon Jovi, keyboard effects and piano's by David Bryan and booming drums by Tico Torres.
Jon Bon Jovi states that:
Interview with Jon Bon Jovi & Richie Sambora in the context of the release of the album Bounce
The lead single, "Everyday" was written as a response to how the band felt about how to move on after September 11. "Undivided" speaks more specifically of the aftermath of September 11. The song "Open All Night" was written in response to how Jon Bon Jovi felt about the ending of the TV series Ally McBeal. He portrayed the boyfriend of star Calista Flockhart in the final series, and was upset that his character was written out in the way it was. The producers of the show allegedly asked Jon to stay on for a few extra episodes, so that his character, Victor, could marry Ally. Jon Bon Jovi refused on the grounds that his wife was heavily pregnant with their son, Jake, and so Victor had to be written out quicker than was hoped. Jon Bon Jovi wrote "Open All Night" as his way of expressing how he wished the character had ended. The title track, "Bounce", was dedicated to NFL Head Coach Bill Belichick of the New England Patriots and close friend of Bon Jovi. The song alludes to the various hardships Belichick experienced before finally winning a Super Bowl. Alternatively, many also felt the song spoke of the nation's rebound following September 11.
Regarding the album's lyrical content, Jon Bon Jovi noted:

Release and reception

Bounce was released internationally on September 23, 2002. The album debuted at number two in both the UK and Germany and number three in Japan. The album was released on October 8, 2002 in the United States, selling over 160,000 copies in the first week and debuted at #2 on the Billboard 200, making it Bon Jovi's highest debut in the band's history at that time. The lead single, "Everyday" was the most successful song from Bounce. The song did not have as much success in the US while reaching #1 in Canada and Spain, and made the top five in Japan, The UK, Australia and made the top ten in many other countries, including Switzerland, Sweden, Italy and Germany. "All About Lovin' You" as the third single was released only in Europe, peaking at number nine on the UK Singles Chart. International Federation of the Phonographic Industry certified the album platinum, for selling one million in Europe.

Track listing

Personnel

The following people contributed to Bounce:Bounce liner notes

Band

Additional musicians

Recording personnel

Artwork

Certifications





Charts

Peak positions

Year-end charts






