[[Cucumber]]

CATEGORIES: Cucurbitaceae, Fruit vegetables, Plants and pollinators, Plants described in 1753, Plants with sequenced genomes



Cucumber (Cucumis sativus) is a widely cultivated plant in the gourd family Cucurbitaceae. It is a creeping vine that bears cylindrical fruits that are used as culinary vegetables. There are three main varieties of cucumber: slicing, pickling, and burpless. Within these varieties, several different cultivars have emerged. The cucumber is originally from Southern Asia, but now grows on most continents. Many different varieties are traded on the global market.

Description

The cucumber is a creeping vine that roots in the ground and grows up trellises or other supporting frames, wrapping around supports with thin, spiraling tendrils.  The plant has large leaves that form a canopy over the fruit. The fruit of the cucumber is roughly cylindrical, elongated with tapered ends, and may be as large as  in diameter. Having an enclosed seed and developing from a flower, botanically speaking, cucumbers are classified as accessory fruits. Much like tomatoes and squash they are often also perceived, prepared and eaten as vegetables. Cucumbers are usually more than 90% water.

Flowering and pollination

A few cultivars of cucumber are parthenocarpic, the blossoms creating seedless fruit without pollination. Pollination for these cultivars degrades the quality. In the United States, these are usually grown in greenhouses, where bees are excluded. In Europe, they are grown outdoors in some regions, and bees are excluded from these areas.
Most cucumber cultivars, however, are seeded and require pollination. Thousands of hives of honey bees are annually carried to cucumber fields just before bloom for this purpose. Cucumbers may also be pollinated by bumblebees and several other bee species. Most cucumbers that require pollination are self-incompatible, so pollen from a different plant is required to form seeds and fruit. Some self-compatible cultivars exist that are related to the 'Lemon' cultivar. Symptoms of inadequate pollination include fruit abortion and misshapen fruit. Partially pollinated flowers may develop fruit that are green and develop normally near the stem end, but are pale yellow and withered at the blossom end.
Traditional cultivars produce male blossoms first, then female, in about equivalent numbers. Newer gynoecious hybrid cultivars produce almost all female blossoms. They may have a pollenizer cultivar interplanted, and the number of beehives per unit area is increased, but temperature changes induce male flowers even on these plants, which may be sufficient for pollination to occur.
Insecticide applications for insect pests must be done very carefully to avoid killing off the insect pollinators.
thumb|left|400px|Cucumber, whole and in longitudinal section

Genome

In 2009, an international team of researchers announced they had sequenced the cucumber genome.

Production

According to the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, China produced at least 60% of the global output of cucumbers in 2005, followed at a distance by Turkey, Russia, Iran and the United States.

Cultivation

History

The cucumber originated in India, where a great many varieties have been observed,Doijode, S. D. (2001). Seed storage of horticultural crops. Haworth Press. ISBN 1-56022-901-2 p. 281[ref]
[/ref]Cucumis hystrix. Newstrackindia. Retrieved on 2012-11-25. from Cucumis hystrix. It has been cultivated for at least 3,000 years, and was probably introduced to other parts of Europe by the Greeks or Romans. Records of cucumber cultivation appear in France in the 9th century, England in the 14th century, and in North America by the mid-16th century.

=Earliest cultivation=

The cucumber is listed among the foods of ancient Ur, and the legend of Gilgamesh describes people eating cucumbers.  Some sources also state it was produced in ancient Thrace, and it is certainly part of modern cuisine in Bulgaria and Turkey, parts of which make up that ancient state. Cucumbers are mentioned in the Bible as one of the foods eaten by the Israelites in Egypt.
Robert Daniel, in discussing an ostracon dated to the second half of the third century AD, has suggested identifying an otherwise unknown word, ολγιττα, with the Arabic al-qitta', the common word for cucumber. Robert W. Daniel, "From Work on the Petra Papyri: Arabic on a Greek Ostracon from Roman Egypt and the Name of the Church Father Sozomen", Zeitschrift für Papyrologie und Epigraphik, 131 (2000), pp. 173-176
According to Pliny the Elder (The Natural History, Book XIX, Chapter 23), the Ancient Greeks grew cucumbers, and there were different varieties in Italy, Africa, and Moesia.

=Roman Empire=

According to Pliny, the Emperor Tiberius had the cucumber on his table daily during summer and winter.  The Romans reportedly used artificial methods (similar to the greenhouse system) of growing to have it available for his table every day of the year.  "Indeed, he was never without it; for he had raised beds made in frames upon wheels, by means of which the cucumbers were moved and exposed to the full heat of the sun; while, in winter, they were withdrawn, and placed under the protection of frames glazed with mirrorstone."Pliny, N.H., 19, 23
Reportedly, they were also cultivated in cucumber houses glazed with oiled cloth known as "specularia".
Pliny the Elder describes the Italian fruit as very small, probably like a gherkin, describing it as a wild cucumber considerably smaller than the cultivated one.  Pliny also describes the preparation of a medication known as elaterium, though some scholars

=Middle Ages=

Charlemagne had cucumbers grown in his gardens in the 8th/9th century.  They were reportedly introduced into England in the early 14th century, lost, then reintroduced approximately 250 years later.
The Spaniards (through the Italian Christopher Columbus) brought cucumbers to Haiti in 1494. In 1535, Jacques Cartier, a French explorer, found "very great cucumbers" grown on the site of what is now Montreal.

=Post-enlightenment=

Throughout the 16th century, European trappers, traders, bison hunters, and explorers bartered for the products of American Indian agriculture.  The tribes of the Great Plains and the Rocky Mountains learned from the Spanish how to grow European crops.  The best farmers on the Great Plains were the Mandan Indians in what is now North and South Dakota.  They obtained cucumbers and watermelons from the Spanish, and added them to the crops they were already growing, including several varieties of corn and beans, pumpkins, squash, and gourd plants.  The Iroquois were also growing them when the first Europeans visited them.
In 1630, the Reverend Francis Higginson produced a book called New England's Plantation in which, describing a garden on Conant's Island in Boston Harbor known as The Governor's Garden, he states: "The countrie aboundeth naturally with store of roots of great varietie and good to eat.  Our turnips, parsnips, and carrots are here both bigger and sweeter than is ordinary to be found in England.  Here are store of pompions, cowcumbers, and other things of that nature which I know not..."
William Wood also published in 1633's New England Prospect (published in England) observations he made in 1629 in America: "The ground affords very good kitchin gardens, for Turneps, Parsnips, Carrots, Radishes, and Pompions, Muskmillons, Isquoter-squashes, coucumbars, Onyons, and whatever grows well in England grows as well there, many things being better and larger."
In the later 17th century, a prejudice developed against uncooked vegetables and fruits.  A number of articles in contemporary health publications stated that uncooked plants brought on summer diseases and should be forbidden to children.  The cucumber kept this vile reputation for an inordinate period of time:  "fit only for consumption by cows," which some believe is why it gained the name, cowcumber.
A copper etching made by Maddalena Bouchard between 1772 and 1793 shows this plant to have smaller, almost bean-shaped fruits, and small yellow flowers. The small form of the cucumber is figured in Herbals of the 16th century, but states, "If hung in a tube while in blossom, the Cucumber will grow to a most surprising length."
Samuel Pepys wrote in his diary on August 22, 1663:Saturday 22 August 1663 (Pepys' Diary). Pepysdiary. Retrieved on 2012-11-25.  "this day Sir W. Batten tells me that Mr. Newburne is dead of eating cowcumbers, of which the other day I heard of another, I think." In "The Greenstone Door", William Satchell notes that "Te Moanaroa was dead – of a surfeit of cucumbers...", having eaten four of the "prickly" melons. (Chapter XX, The Storm Cloud).

Varieties

In human cultivation, the varieties of cucumbers are classified into three main varieties: "slicing", "pickling", and "burpless".

Slicing

Cucumbers grown to eat fresh are called slicing cucumbers. They are mainly eaten in the unripe green form, since the ripe yellow form normally becomes bitter and sour. Slicers grown commercially for the North American market are generally longer, smoother, more uniform in color, and have a much tougher skin. Slicers in other countries are smaller and have a thinner, more delicate skin.  Smaller slicing cucumbers can also be pickled.

Pickling

Cucumbers can be pickled for flavor and longer shelf-life. Although any cucumber can be pickled, commercial pickles are made from cucumbers specially bred for uniformity of length-to-diameter ratio and lack of voids in the flesh. Those cucumbers intended for pickling, called picklers, grow to about  Pickled cucumbers are soaked in brine or a combination of vinegar and brine, although not vinegar alone, often along with various spices. Pickled cucumbers are called "pickles" in the US or "gherkins" or "wallies" in the UK, the latter name being more common in the north of England, where it refers to the large vinegar-pickled cucumbers commonly sold in fish and chip shops. (Although the gherkin is of the same species as the cucumber, it is of a completely different cultivar.)

Burpless

Burpless cucumbers are sweeter and have a thinner skin than other varieties of cucumber, and are reputed to be easy to digest and to have a pleasant taste.  They can grow as long as 
Several varietals exist and are sold commercially:

Armenian

Taste

The human olfactory response to cucumbers appear to vary. Most people report a mild, almost watery flavor or a light melon taste, while a small but vocal minority report a highly repugnant taste—some say almost perfume-like. Cucumbers vary in bitterness, even from the same plant. This bitter taste is attributed to the chemical compound Cucurbitacin C. Cucurbitacin is poisonous to livestock, especially sheep.nlm.gov

In the news

In May 2011, cucumbers infected with E. coli were claimed to have caused the deaths of at least ten people, leading to some retailers withdrawing cucumbers from sale in Germany, Austria and the Czech Republic.
After the outbreak, the World Health Organization stated that it was a completely new strain of the bacteria involved.

Gallery

Image:Cucumber vine in New Jersey.
Image:Cucumbers growing on a string lattice structure.
Image:Cucumber plants growing.
Image:Komkommer plant.
Image:Sliced_cucumbers_and_tomatoes.
Image:Cucumber - 2 weeks old.jpg|Cucumber seedling, two weeks old, started indoors





Further reading

 
 




