[[Armistead Maupin]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, Living people, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, American LGBT military personnel, American male novelists, American military personnel of the Vietnam War, American screenwriters, Gay writers, LGBT novelists, LGBT people from California, LGBT people from North Carolina, LGBT writers from the United States, People from Raleigh, North Carolina, United States Navy officers, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni, Writers from North Carolina, Writers from San Francisco, California

Armistead Jones Maupin, Jr. is an American writer, best known for his Tales of the City series of novels, set in San Francisco.

Early life

Maupin was born to Diana Maupin and Armistead Jones Maupin, in Washington, D.C.. Soon afterwards, his family moved to North Carolina, where he was raised.'Growing up Gay in old Raleigh – in The Independent of Raleigh, North Carolina, June 1988 – autobiographical memoir He says he has had storytelling instincts since he was eight years old. He attended the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where he became involved in journalism through writing for The Daily Tar Heel.A Conversation with Author Armistead Maupin – on KUOW-FM radio, 2007-06-19 After earning his undergraduate degree, Maupin enrolled in law school, but later resigned from it.

Career

Maupin worked at WRAL-TV (Channel 5) in Raleigh, a station then managed by future U.S. Senator Jesse Helms. Helms nominated Maupin for a patriotic award, which he won. Maupin says he was a typical conservative and even a segregationist at this time and admired Helms, a family friend, as a "hero figure." He later changed his opinions dramatically — "I've changed and he hasn't" — and condemned Helms at a gay pride parade on the steps of the North Carolina State Capitol. Maupin is a veteran of the United States Navy; he served several tours of duty including one in Vietnam during the Vietnam War.
Maupin's work on a Charleston newspaper was followed with an offer of a position at the San Francisco bureau of the Associated Press in 1971. Maupin recalls his first experiences of San Francisco."  (in the New York Times interview) He says he had known he was gay since childhood, but didn't have sex until he was 26 and only decided to come out in 1974 when he was about 30. Louis Post-Dispatch. He agreed to be identified as a homosexual in a "Ten Most Eligible Bachelors" article in San Francisco magazine. Maupin used the letter to serve the same purpose for his own parents, who followed the Tales serial. The same year, he began what would become the Tales of the City series as a serial in a Marin County-based newspaper, the Pacific Sun, moving to the San Francisco Chronicle after the Sun San Francisco edition folded.

Works

Tales of the City

Tales of the City is a series of novels, the first portions of which were published initially as a newspaper serial starting on August 8, 1974, in a Marin County newspaper, The Pacific Sun, picked up in 1976 by the San Francisco Chronicle, and later reworked into the series of books published by HarperCollins (then Harper and Row). The first of Maupin's novels, entitled Tales of the City, was published in 1978. Five more followed in the 1980s, ending with the last book, Sure of You, in 1989. In Babycakes, published in 1983, Maupin was one of the first writers to address the subject of AIDS. Of the autobiographical nature of the characters, he says "I've always been all of the characters in one way or another."
The Tales of the City books have been translated into ten languages, and there are more than six million copies in print.

=Television miniseries=

The first three books in the series have also been adapted into three television miniseries starring Olympia Dukakis and Laura Linney. The first airing was on the American publicly funded television network PBS; subsequent miniseries appeared on the American cable television channel Showtime.A Tale of the Seventies TV Guide, January 1994. Article by Maupin about the difficult process of getting the Tales series into TV production.

=Musical projects=

He collaborated on Anna Madrigal Remembers, a musical work written by Jake Heggie and performed by choir Chanticleer and mezzo-soprano Frederica von Stade on August 6, 1999, for which Maupin provided a new libretto. He also participated in a concert series with the Seattle Men's Chorus entitled Tunes From Tales (Music for Mouse), which included readings from his books and music from the era.
In April 2010, it was announced that a theatrical musical version of Tales of the City would debut in May 2011. The musical has a score and lyrics by Jake Shears and John Garden of the rock band Scissor Sisters, and a book by Jeff Whitty. It will be directed by Jason Moore.

Maybe the Moon and The Night Listener

Maupin has written two novels, Maybe The Moon and The Night Listener, which are not part of the Tales canon, though both books occasionally glance in that direction.
Maybe The Moon is a story Maupin describes as 'partly autobiographical', despite the main character being a female heterosexual Jewish dwarf. The character was also based on his friend Tamara De Treaux, who played the title character in the 1982 film E.T. the Extra-TerrestrialBehind the scenes: THE OUTSIDER – San Francisco Focus Magazine], October 1992. Interview with Maupin about his friendship with Tamara De Treaux.
The Night Listener is a roman à clef, inspired by Maupin's experiences concerning the Anthony Godby Johnson hoax. The issues he addresses include the ending of his relationship with his long-term partner and his relationship with his father. The book very lightly references the Tales world via Gabriel Noone's assistant, who is one of DeDe Halcyon-Day's twins from Tales. It was serialized on the internet, on Salon. The Night Listener has been adapted into a movie that was screened at the Sundance Film Festival in late January 2006 and released by Miramax the following August.

Michael Tolliver Lives

Prior to the 2007 release of Michael Tolliver Lives, Maupin had been quoted on his website as saying that another Tales of the City novel was unlikely.
The novel is written from the first-person perspective of Tales character Michael 'Mouse' Tolliver, now in his fifties and living as an HIV-positive man."Armistead Maupin talks!" – Advocate."Sex and the city" – Interview in The Observer Maupin said: "I was interested in pursuing the life of an aging gay man, and Michael was the perfect vehicle ... However, as soon as I started writing, I found that, one by one, all the other characters stepped forward and asked to be present. It felt natural, so I went with it.""Tolliver's Travels" – Entertainment Weekly, June 7, 2007 He calls it "a smaller, more personal novel than I've written in the past." The book was released on June 12, 2007, declared 'Michael Tolliver Day' by the mayor of San Francisco."Reader, he married him" – Review in The Guardian
His next project is another Tales volume: "Whatever I have to offer seems to come through those characters ... And I see no reason to abandon them."
Mary Ann in Autumn was published November 12, 2010 by Harper/HarperCollins, continuing the series.  It was reviewed by Joseph Salvatore in the New York Times Sunday Book Reviews on November 14.
In December 2011 Maupin confirmed that he was working on a further Tales of the City novel, The Days of Anna Madrigal

Personal life

Maupin's former life partner of 12 years, Terry Anderson, was once a gay rights activist (Maupin himself has done much of that sort of work),Remarks for the Closing Ceremonies of the Gay Games IV, Yankee Stadium, June 25, 1994Armistead Maupin at the National AIDS Memorial Grove, located in San Francisco's Golden Gate Park and co-authored the screenplay for The Night Listener. He lived with Anderson in San Francisco and New Zealand.
Maupin is married to Christopher Turner, a website producer and photographer whom he saw on a dating website. He then "chased him down Castro Street, saying, 'Didn't I see you on Daddyhunt.com?'"
He enjoys doing public readings of his own works and has recorded them all as audiobooks.
In 2012 Maupin purchased the home of shoe designers Lynne and Dennis Comeau in Tesuque, New Mexico."Santa Fe New Mexican", October 14, 2012. 

On being a 'gay writer'

Bibliography

 
 
Tales of the City

Other novels

Awards

[/ref]



Further reading

 
 




