[[Psittacus]]

CATEGORIES: Parrots, Psittacini, Animals described in 1758, Animal intelligence, Birds of Africa, Talking birds, Birds of Cameroon

Psittacus is a genus of African parrots in the subfamily Psittacinae. It contains the two species; the Congo African Grey Parrot (Psittacus erithacus) and the Timneh African Grey Parrot (Psittacus timneh).
For many years, the Congo African Grey Parrot and Timneh African Grey Parrot were classified as subspecies; the former as the nominate the latter as P. e. timneh. However in 2012 the taxa were recognized as separate species by BirdLife International on the basis of genetic, morphological, plumage and vocal differences.
These parrots are found in the primary and secondary rainforest of West and Central Africa. They are one of the most intelligent birds in the world. They feed primarily on palm nuts, seeds, fruits, and leafy matter, but have also been observed eating snails. Their inclination and ability to mimic speech and other sounds have made them popular pets.

Taxonomy and systematics

Two species are accepted:
Some aviculturalists recognize third and fourth subspecies, but these are not distinguishable in scientific studies.

Illness and Disease

The African Grey Parrot (Psittacus erithacus erithacus) has been known at times to contract a non-infectious inflammatory lung disease called Lipid Pneumonia. Lipid Pneumonia can be classified as exogenous or endogenous depending on whether or not the animal inhaled outside material.  A necropsy shows that the lungs of a Grey Parrot with Endogenous Lipid Pneumonia (EnLP) are firm with a diffuse grey discoloration.  EnLP is a common illness in other animals as well.
Another ailment that African Grey Parrots commonly suffer from is Hypocalcemic-induced seizure activity. Birds between 2–15 years of age contract it centers around a lack of calcium. A symptom of the syndrome can be unsteadiness while standing or falling off a perch along with neurological anomalies or problems.

Behavior and ecology

Breeding

The African Grey Parrots are monogamous breeders which nests in tree cavities. The hen lays 3-5 eggs, which she incubates for 30 days while being fed by her mate. Young leave the nest at the age of 12 weeks. Little is known about the courtship behaviour of this species in the wild.

Longevity

Like many large parrots, African Greys are long-lived birds. The Animal Ageing and Longevity Database states the longest reliably recorded longevity for the species in captivity as 49.7 years. Also acknowledged are claims of captive African Grey parrots reaching the ages of 73 and 93,

Intelligence

Unlike other parrots, wild African Greys have been documented imitating the calls of several other species.
Irene Pepperberg's research with captive African Greys, most notably with a bird named Alex, has scientifically demonstrated that African Greys possess the ability to associate simple human words with meanings, and to intelligently apply the abstract concepts of shape, colour, number, zero-sense, etc. According to Pepperberg and other ornithologists, they perform many cognitive tasks at the level of dolphins, chimpanzees, and even human toddlers.
Pet Congo African Greys may learn to speak within their first year, but many don't say their first word until 12–18 months old. One notable African Grey is N'kisi, which in 2004 was said to have a vocabulary of over 950 words and, like Pepperberg's Alex, was noted for creative use of language.
A study published in 2011, led by Dalila Bovet of Paris West University Nanterre La Défense, demonstrated African Grey parrots were able to coordinate and collaborate with each other to an extent. They were able to solve problems set by scientists—for example, two birds could pull strings at the same time to obtain food. In another example, one bird stood on a perch to release a food-laden tray, while the other pulled the tray out from the test apparatus. Both would then feed. The birds in question were observed waiting for their partners to perform the necessary actions so their behaviour could be synchronized. The parrots appeared to express individual preferences as to which of the other test birds they would work with.
In an experiment about local enhancement in Grey Parrots, food was visibly hidden under two separate cups. The experimenter then lifted the first cup and either removed what was under it or put it back. This was then done again in several different combinations, the cups were lifted in a different order and the food was removed or put back in a different order. Instead of remembering which cup had the food, the birds would show preference to the one that was touched last.

Another series of experiments further tested African Grey Parrots' cognitive abilities. In general, most animals cannot associate sounds with objects, such as food, placed into a cup. While originally only the great apes and young human children were known to make this association with ease, it was found that African Grey Parrots, under most conditions, can also associate sounds with the presence of an object. For the most part, Grey Parrots performed more successfully if the cup was shaken horizontally before it is given the choice of selecting which contained food, however, further experimentation indicated that it is not a requirement and proved that Grey Parrots have very high cognitive abilities.

Noises

Wild African Grey Parrots often whistle, click, or make other sounds. An African Grey's owner should expect to hear regular renditions of microwaves, telephones, alarm clocks, video games, and other electronic sounds, as well as dripping water, wild birds, and any other sound often heard by the parrot. African Greys have even been known to repeat the profanity they heard from an owner even after they no longer live with that owner. African Greys also have the ability to mimic, and distinguish between, the different voices they hear.  The African Grey parrots use different alarm calls for different predators coming their way.left|shrieking and clicking of the African Grey Parrot
In an experiment to test the vocalizations of Grey Parrots, 4 bred in captivity were placed in an aviary. Throughout the day they spent time in a room with toys and came into fairly regular contact with the humans taking care of them. The noises that these parrots could hear consisted of the calls of canaries in the laboratory, people cleaning, doors squeaking, etc. In the next 3 years, the parrots made over 50,000 vocalisations. What was interesting was that, although they were bred in captivity, the sounds they made were not only ones of their immediate surroundings. They also made calls similar to those of other captive grey parrots in different locations and even wild grey parrots.

Status and conservation

More rare than previously believed, the Congo African Grey was uplisted from a species of Least Concern to Near Threatened in the 2007 IUCN Red List. b). A recent analysis suggests up to 21% of the global population may be taken from the wild annually, primarily for the pet trade. In 2012, the species was further uplisted to Vulnerable. As they are good in talking
The species is endemic to primary and secondary rainforests of West and Central Africa. and M. Parr. 1998. Parrots: A Guide to Parrots of the World. Yale University Press, New Haven and London. Grey parrots depend on large, old trees for the natural hollows they use for nesting. Studies in Guinea and Guinea-Bissau have found that African Greys' preferred species of nesting trees are also species preferred for timber.R. 2003. Status Survey of the African Grey Parrot (Psittacus erithacus timneh) and Development of a Management Program in Guinea and Guinea-Bissau. CITES, Geneva, Switzerland. The relationship between the status of the species and the status of primary forest is positive:Dändliker, G. 1992. The Grey Parrot in Ghana: A population survey, a contribution to the biology of the species, a study of its commercial exploitation and management recommendations. CITES, Lausanne, Switzerland. where the forests are declining, so too are populations of grey parrots.
The African Grey Parrot is listed on Appendix II of the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). This requires both that exports be accompanied by a permit issued by a national authority and that a finding be made that the export is not detrimental to the species in the wild. With exports totalling more than 350,000 specimens from 1994–2003,See UNEP-WCMC CITES Trade Database. the grey parrot is one of the most heavily traded CITES-listed bird species. In response to continuing population declines, exceeded quotas, and unsustainable and illegal trade (including among range states), CITES included the grey parrot in Phase VI of the CITES Review of Significant Trade in 2004. This review has resulted in recommended zero export quotas for several range states and a CITES decision to develop regional management plans for the species.
In the United States, importation of wild-caught grey parrots is prohibited under the US Wild Bird Conservation Act of 1992. In the European Union, an EU Directive of 2007 prevents importation of this and any other wild-caught birds for the pet trade.

Relationship with humans

Aviculture

These intelligent mimics can make interesting pets and companion parrots. They have a devoted following among parrot owners. However, the same qualities mean they require a special commitment by their owners to provide frequent one-on-one interaction and supervised time out of their cages. They must be kept stimulated and busy by people and toys or they may become stressed and develop self-destructive behaviors. African Greys require large cages, varied diets that include fresh foods, and plenty of safe and chewable toys. If not provided with these items, these parrots can quickly develop unpleasant behaviours and may eventually develop health problems (such as feather-plucking) that are difficult to remedy.
Even the healthiest, happiest pet parrot will generate a fair amount of mess and noise. Like most parrots, they are not domesticated, and even a well-socialized, hand-raised, aviary-bred bird is usually only one or two generations removed from its wild predecessor. Despite this, there is a long history of these parrots being kept at pets by the ancient Greeks, wealthy Roman families, King Henry VIII, Portuguese sailors, and others.

Cultural depictions





Footnotes

Sources




