[[Ethan Hawke]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, 20th-century American male actors, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American male actors, 21st-century American novelists, American film directors, American male child actors, American male film actors, American male novelists, American male stage actors, American male television actors, American screenwriters, American theatre directors, Carnegie Mellon University alumni, Film directors from New York City, Film directors from Texas, Hun School of Princeton alumni, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Living people, Male actors from Austin, Texas, Male actors from New Jersey, Male actors from New York City, New York Democrats, New York University alumni, Obie Award recipients, People from Manhattan, People from West Windsor Township, New Jersey, Writers from Austin, Texas, Writers from New Jersey

Ethan Green Hawke (born November 6, 1970) is an American actor, writer and director. He has been nominated for the Academy Awards both as an actor and a writer. He also received a Tony Award nomination for his theater work.
Hawke made his film debut in 1985 with the science-fiction feature Explorers, before making a breakthrough appearance in the 1989 drama Dead Poets Society. He then appeared in such films as White Fang (1991), A Midnight Clear (1992), and Alive (1993) before taking a role in the 1994 Generation X drama Reality Bites, for which he received critical praise. In 1995 he starred in the romantic drama Before Sunrise, and later in its sequels Before Sunset (2004) and Before Midnight (2013).
In 2001, Hawke played a young police officer in Training Day, for which he received the Screen Actors Guild and Academy Award nominations in the Best Supporting Actor category. He also garnered two screenwriting Oscar nominations for co-writing the screenplays of Before Sunset and Before Midnight. Other films have included the science-fiction drama Gattaca (1997), the contemporary adaptation of Hamlet (2000), the action thriller Assault on Precinct 13 (2005), the crime drama Before the Devil Knows You're Dead (2007), and the horror film Sinister (2012).
Hawke has appeared in many theater productions including The Seagull, Henry IV, Hurlyburly, The Cherry Orchard, The Winter's Tale and The Coast of Utopia, for which he earned a Tony Award nomination for Best Featured Actor. Aside from acting, Hawke has directed two feature films and three Off-Broadway plays. He also wrote the novels The Hottest State (1996) and Ash Wednesday (2002). Between 1998 to 2005 Hawke was married to actress Uma Thurman, with whom he has two children. Since 2008 he has been married to Ryan Hawke (née Shawhughes), and they have two daughters.

Early life

On November 6, 1970,
After the separation, Hawke was raised by his mother. The two relocated several times, before settling in New York, where Hawke attended the Packer Collegiate Institute in Brooklyn Heights.
In high school, Hawke aspired to be a writer, but developed an interest in acting. He made his stage debut at age 13, in a school production of George Bernard Shaw's Saint Joan, He twice enrolled in New York University's English program, but dropped out both times to pursue acting roles.

Career

1985–1993: Early acting work

Hawke obtained his mother's permission to attend his first casting call at age 14. but had poor box office revenues, a failure which Hawke has admitted caused him to quit acting for a brief period after the film's release. Hawke later described the disappointment as difficult to bear at such a young age, adding "I would never recommend that a kid act." His next film appearance was not until 1989's comedy drama Dad, where he played Ted Danson's son and Jack Lemmon's grandson.
In 1989, Hawke made his breakthrough appearance, playing a shy student opposite Robin Williams's inspirational English teacher in Dead Poets Society. The film was critically well-received; Hawke later described the opportunities he was offered as a result of the film's success as critical to his decision to continue acting: "I didn't want to be an actor and I went back to college. But then the film's success was so monumental that I was getting offers to be in such interesting movies and be in such interesting places, and it seemed silly to pursue anything else."
Hawke's next film, 1991's White Fang, brought his first leading role. The film, an adaptation of Jack London's novel of the same name, featured Hawke as Jack Conroy, a Yukon gold hunter who befriends a wolfdog. According to The Oregonian, "Hawke does a good job as young Jack ... He makes Jack's passion for White Fang real and keeps it from being ridiculous or overly sentimental."

1994–2000: Critical success

Hawke's next role, in the Generation X drama Reality Bites (1994) as Troy, a slacker who mocks the ambitions of his love interest (played by Winona Ryder), received critical praise. Film critic Roger Ebert called Hawke's performance convincing and noteworthy: "Hawke captures all the right notes as the boorish Troy."
The following year Hawke again received critical acclaim, this time for his performance in Richard Linklater's 1995 drama Before Sunrise. The film follows a young American (Hawke) and a young French woman (Julie Delpy), who meet on a train and disembark in Vienna, spending the night exploring the city and getting to know one another.
Apart from acting, Hawke directed the music video for the 1994 song "Stay (I Missed You)" by singer-songwriter Lisa Loeb.
In Andrew Niccol's science fiction film Gattaca (1997), "one of the more interesting scripts" Hawke said he had read in "a number of years",
Hawke's next film role was in Michael Almereyda's 2000 film Hamlet, in which he played the title character. The film transposed the famous William Shakespeare play to contemporary New York City, a technique Hawke felt made the play more "accessible and vital".

2001–2006: Training Day

Hawke's next role, and one for which he received substantial critical acclaim, came in Training Day (2001). Hawke played rookie cop Jake Hoyt, alongside Denzel Washington, as one of a pair of narcotics detectives from the Los Angeles Police Department spending 24 hours in the gang neighborhoods of South Los Angeles. The film was a box office hit, taking $104 million worldwide, and garnered generally favorable reviews.
Hawke pursued a number of projects away from acting throughout the early 2000s. He made his directorial debut with Chelsea Walls (2002), an independent drama about five struggling artists living in the famed Chelsea Hotel in New York City.
In 2004 Hawke returned to film, starring in two features, Taking Lives and Before Sunset. Upon release, Taking Lives received broadly negative reviews,
2005 saw Hawke star in the action thriller Assault on Precinct 13, a loose remake of John Carpenter's 1976 film of the same title, with an updated plot. The film received reasonable reviews; some critics praised the dark swift feel of the film, while others compared it unfavorably to John Carpenter's original.

2007–present

In 2007, Hawke starred alongside Philip Seymour Hoffman, Marisa Tomei, and Albert Finney in the crime drama Before the Devil Knows You're Dead.
In 2010, Hawke starred as a vampire researcher in the science fiction horror film Daybreakers.
2013 was a busy year for Hawke, starring in three wildly different films. Before Midnight, the third entry to the Before series, reunited Hawke with Julie Delpy and director Richard Linklater.
Summer 2014 will bring Linklater's Boyhood, a film shot over the course of 12 years.

Stage career

Hawke has described theater as his "first love",
Hawke returned to Broadway in Jack O'Brien's 2003 production of Henry IV, playing Henry Percy (Hotspur).
From November 2006 to May 2007, Hawke starred as Mikhail Bakunin in Tom Stoppard's trilogy play The Coast of Utopia, an eight-hour long production at the Lincoln Center Theater in New York. The play has four characters played by Paul Dano, Peter Dinklage, Josh Hamilton, and Zoe Kazan. New York magazine praised Hawke's "understated direction", particularly his ability to "steer a gifted cast away from the histrionics".
The following year Hawke received the Michael Mendelson Award for Outstanding Commitment to the Theater. to go is people's giving, and last on that list of things people give to is the arts because they feel it's not essential. I guess I'm here to remind people that the arts are essential to our mental health as a country."
In 2009, Hawke appeared in two plays under British director Sam Mendes: as Trofimov in Chekhov's The Cherry Orchard and as Autolycus in Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale.
In January 2010, Hawke directed his second play, A Lie of the Mind, by Sam Shepard on the New York stage.
Hawke next starred in the Off-Broadway premiere of a new play, Tommy Nohilly's Blood from a Stone, from December 2010 to February 2011. The play was not a critical success,

Personal life

On May 1, 1998, Hawke married actress Uma Thurman,
Hawke married for a second time in June 2008, wedding Ryan Hawke (née Shawhughes),
Hawke is a long-time supporter of the Doe Fund which helps homeless people obtain housing and employment.
Hawke lives in Boerum Hill, a Brooklyn neighborhood in New York City,

Filmography

Writings






