[[States of India]]

CATEGORIES: States and territories of India, Subdivisions of India, Lists of subdivisions of India, Country subdivisions of Asia, First-level administrative country subdivisions, India-related lists

India is a federal union of states comprising twenty-eight states and seven union territories. The states and union territories are further subdivided into districts and so on.

List of states and territories

Map

States

Responsibilities and authorities

The Constitution of India distributes the sovereign powers exercisable with respect to the territory of any State between the Union and that State. "Article 73 broadly stated, provides that the executive power of the Union shall extend to the matters with respect to which Parliament has power to make laws. Article 162 similarly provides that the executive power of a State shall extend to the matters with respect to which the Legislature of a State has power to make laws. The Supreme Court has reiterated this position when it ruled in the Ramanaiah case that the executive power of the Union or of the State broadly speaking, is coextensive and coterminous with its respective legislative power." (italics in original)[ref]
Territoriality of executive powers of states in India, Balwant Singh Malik, Constitutional Law, 1998.[/ref]

History

Pre-1956

The Indian Subcontinent has been ruled by many different ethnic groups throughout its history, each instituting their own policies of administrative division in the region. During the British Raj, the original administrative structure was mostly kept, and India was divided into provinces that were directly governed by the British and princely states which were nominally controlled by a local prince or raja loyal to the British Empire, who held de facto sovereignty (suzerainty) over the princely states.

After 1956

The States Reorganisation Act of 1956 abandoned the British system of provinces and princely states. In its place, new states were drawn based on ethnicity and language. 
The former French and Portuguese colonies in India were incorporated into the  Republic as the union territories of Puducherry (Pondicherry), Dadra and Nagar Haveli, Goa, Daman and Diu in 1962. 
Several new states and union territories have been created out of existing states since 1956. Bombay State was split into the linguistic states of Gujarat and Maharashtra on 1 May 1960J.C. Aggarwal and S.P. Agrawal, editors, Uttarakhand: Past, Present, and Future (New Delhi: Concept Publishing, 1995), p89-90 by the Bombay Reorganisation Act. Nagaland was made a state on 1 December 1963.gov.in  The Punjab Reorganisation Act of 1966 divided the Punjab along linguistic lines, creating a new Hindi-speaking state of Haryana on 1 November,The Punjab Reorganisation Act 1966 
Statehood was conferred upon Himachal Pradesh  In 1987, Arunachal Pradesh and Mizoram became states on 20 February, followed by Goa on 30 May, while Goa's northern exclaves of Daman and Diu became a separate union territory.Goa Chronology
In 2000 three new states were created; Chhattisgarh (1 November 2000) was created out of eastern Madhya Pradesh,  

Proposals

Ahead of the 2009 General Elections in India, all the major parties in Andhra Pradesh supported statehood for Telangana.  
As a result of this unilateral decision by the Government of India, several members of Andhra Pradesh's legislature submitted their resignations to protest the creation of the new state owing to the pressure from the people in their constituencies.
Due to the unexpected turn of events, after the parties which promised support to the Telangana state formation on 7 December 2009 in a unanimous all-party meeting at the State level, presided by CM, Rosaiah, and later the party members of these parties made a U-turn on their support bowing to the pressure from the people in their constituency following the 9 December statement (in support of Telangana state process initiation), the federal government made another statement on 23 December to clarify its intention on the process that it would consult with all groups, political and non-political, before moving forward. It then formed the Justice Sri Krishna committee which has been touring the state consulting with different sections of the society. A report recommending a solution suitable to all constituents is expected to be submitted before 31 December 2010.
In November 2011 Mayawati, the chief minister of Uttar Pradesh, proposed dividing it into four states, Avadh Pradesh, Bundelkhand, Paschim Pradesh, and Purvanchal. On 21 November this movement was backed through a "voice vote" by the state assembly, despite criticism from the opposition and claims that the move was made to gain support for the next state election. It must gain the approval of the federal government, however this may be difficult due to the opposition to the creation of Telangana.








