[[Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem]]

CATEGORIES: Theorems in the foundations of mathematics, Cardinal numbers, Articles containing proofs

In set theory, the Cantor–Bernstein–Schroeder theorem, named after Georg Cantor, Felix Bernstein, and Ernst Schröder, states that, if there exist injective functions . In terms of the cardinality of the two sets, this means that if |A| ≤ |B| and |B| ≤ |A|, then |A| = |B|; that is, A and B are equipollent. This is a useful feature in the ordering of cardinal numbers.
The theorem is also known as the Schroeder–Bernstein theorem,  the Cantor–Bernstein theorem, or the Cantor–Schroeder–Bernstein theorem. 
An important feature of this theorem is that it does not rely on the axiom of choice. However, its various proofs are non-constructive, as they depend on the law of excluded middle, and therefore rejected by intuitionists.

Proof

The following proof is attributed to Julius König.
Call a sequence an A-stopper if it stops at an element of A, or a B-stopper if it stops at an element of B. Otherwise, call it doubly infinite if all the elements are distinct or cyclic if it repeats. See the picture for examples.

Another proof

Below follows an alternative proof.
Idea of the proof: Redefine f in certain points to make it surjective. At first, redefine it on the image of g for it to be the inverse function of g. However, this might destroy injectivity, so correct this problem iteratively, by making the amount of points redefined smaller, up to a minimum possible, shifting the problem "to infinity" and therefore out of sight.
More precisely, this means to leave f unchanged initially on C0 := A \ gB. However, then every element of fC0 has two preimages, one under f and one under g –1. Therefore, leave f unchanged on the union of   C0 and  C1 := gfC0. However, then every element of  fC1 has two preimages, correct this by leaving f unchanged on the union of C0,  C1, and  C2 := gfC1 and so on. Leaving f unchanged on the countable union C of C0 and all these Cn+1 = gfCn solves the problem, because gfC is a subset of C and no additional union is necessary.
In the alternate proof, Cn can be interpreted as the set of n-th elements of A-stoppers (starting from 0).
The bijection h is defined as f on C and g−1 everywhere else, which means f on A-stoppers and g−1 everywhere else, consistently with the proof below.
Proof: Define
and
Then, for every a ∈ A define
If a is not in C, then, in particular, a is not in C0. Hence a ∈ gB by the definition of C0. Since g is injective, its preimage g –1(a) is therefore well defined.
It remains to check the following properties of the map h : A → B to verify that it is the desired bijection:
Note that the above definition of h is nonconstructive, in the sense that there exists no general method to decide in a finite number of steps, for any given sets A and B and injections f and g, whether an element a of A does not lie in C. For special sets and maps this might, of course, be possible.

Original proof

An earlier proof by Cantor relied, in effect, on the axiom of choice by inferring the result as a corollary of the well-ordering theorem.[ref] 
[/ref] Both arguments given above show that the result can be proved without using the axiom of choice.
Furthermore, there is a simple proof which uses Tarski's fixed point theorem.R. Uhl, "Tarski's Fixed Point Theorem", from MathWorld–a Wolfram Web Resource, created by Eric W. Weisstein. (Example 3)

History

The traditional name "Schröder-Bernstein" is based on two proofs published independently in 1898.
Cantor is often added because he first stated the theorem in 1895,
while Schröder's name is often omitted because his proof turned out to be flawed
while the name of Richard Dedekind, who first proved it, is not connected with the theorem.
According to Bernstein, Cantor had suggested the name equivalence theorem (Äquivalenzsatz). - Original edition (1914)
Both proofs of Dedekind are based on his famous memoir Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? and derive it as a corollary of a proposition equivalent to statement C in Cantor's paper, which reads A ⊆ B ⊆ C and |A|=|C| implies |A|=|B|=|C|. Cantor observed this property as early as 1882/83 during his studies in set theory and transfinite numbers and therefore (implicitly) relying on the Axiom of Choice.



Notes



 Peter Schmitt contributed the History section to Citizendium which TakuyaMurata copied into this article.




