[[Oliver Sacks]]

CATEGORIES: 1933 births, Living people, English Jews, People from London, Alumni of The Queen's College, Oxford, Fellows of The Queen's College, Oxford, British neurologists, British neuroscientists, English expatriates in the United States, Members of the American Academy of Arts and Letters, University of California, Los Angeles fellows, Yeshiva University faculty, Columbia University faculty, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, People with prosopagnosia, Jewish atheists, British atheists, Music researchers, Guggenheim Fellows

Oliver Wolf Sacks, CBE (born 9 July 1933) is a British-American neurologist, writer, and amateur chemist who is Professor of Neurology at New York University School of Medicine. Between 2007 and 2012, he was professor of neurology and psychiatry at Columbia University, where he also held the position of "Columbia Artist". Before that, he spent many years on the clinical faculty of Yeshiva University's Albert Einstein College of Medicine.  He also holds the position of visiting professor at the United Kingdom's  University of Warwick."NYU Langone Medical Center Welcomes Neurologist and Author Oliver Sacks, MD". newswise. September 13, 2012.
Sacks is the author of numerous best-selling books, including several collections of case studies of people with neurological disorders. His 1973 book Awakenings was adapted into an Academy Award-nominated film of the same name in 1990 starring Robin Williams and Robert De Niro. He and his book Musicophilia: Tales of Music and the Brain were the subject of "Musical Minds", an episode of the PBS series Nova.

Early life

Sacks was the youngest of four children born to a North London Jewish couple: Samuel Sacks, a physician (died June 1990),An Anthropoligist on Mars (Knopf, 1995), p. 70 and Muriel Elsie Landau, one of the first female surgeons in England. Sacks has a large extended family, and his first cousins include Israeli statesman Abba Eban, writer and director Jonathan Lynn, and economist Robert Aumann.
When Sacks was six years old, he and his brother Michael were evacuated from London to escape the Blitz, retreating to a boarding school in the Midlands where he remained until 1943. Unbeknownst to his family, at the school, he and his brother Michael ".. subsisted on meager rations of turnips and beetroot and suffered cruel punishments at the hands of a sadistic headmaster."Nadine Epstein, (2008), Uncle Xenon: The Element of Oliver Sacks Moment Magazine He attended St Paul's School in London. During his youth he was a keen amateur chemist, as recalled in his memoir Uncle Tungsten.

Career

After converting his British qualifications to American recognition (i.e., an MD as opposed to BM BCh), Sacks moved to New York, where he has lived and practised neurology since 1965.
Sacks began consulting at chronic care facility Beth Abraham Hospital (now Beth Abraham Health Services, a member of CenterLight Health System) in the Bronx, in 1966. At Beth Abraham, Sacks worked with a group of survivors of the 1920s sleeping sickness, encephalitis lethargica, who had been unable to move on their own for decades. These patients and his treatment of them were the basis of Sacks' book Awakenings.
Sacks served as an instructor and later clinical professor of neurology at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine from 1966 to 2007, and also held an appointment at the New York University School of Medicine from 1992 to 2007. In July 2007 he joined the faculty of Columbia University Medical Center as a professor of neurology and psychiatry. At the same time, he was appointed Columbia University's first "Columbia University Artist" at the University's Morningside Heights campus, recognising the role of his work in bridging the arts and sciences.
Since 1966 Sacks has served as a neurological consultant to various New York City nursing homes that are run by the Little Sisters of the Poor, and from 1966 to 1991 was a consulting neurologist at Bronx Psychiatric Center. Sacks returned to New York University School of Medicine in 2012, serving as both a professor of neurology and consulting neurologist in the center's epilepsy center.
Sacks' work at Beth Abraham helped provide the foundation on which the Institute for Music and Neurologic Function (IMNF) is built; Sacks is currently an honorary medical advisor.
Sacks remains a consultant neurologist to the Little Sisters of the Poor, and maintains a practice in New York City. He serves on the boards of the The Neurosciences Institute and the New York Botanical Garden.

Writing

Beginning in 1970, Sacks wrote of his experience with neurological patients. His books have been translated into over 25 languages. In addition to his books, Sacks is a regular contributor to The New Yorker and The New York Review of Books, as well as other medical, scientific, and general publications.
Sacks' work has been featured in a "broader range of media than those of any other contemporary medical author" His descriptions of people coping with and adapting to neurological conditions or injuries often illuminate the ways in which the normal brain deals with perception, memory and individuality.
Sacks considers that his literary style grows out of the tradition of 19th-century "clinical anecdotes," a literary style that included detailed narrative case histories. He also counts among his inspirations the case histories of the Russian neuropsychologist A. R. Luria.
Sacks describes his cases with a wealth of narrative detail, concentrating on the experiences of the patient (in the case of his A Leg to Stand On, the patient was himself). The patients he describes are often able to adapt to their situation in different ways despite the fact that their neurological conditions are usually considered incurable. His most famous book, Awakenings, upon which the 1990 feature film of the same name is based, describes his experiences using the new drug L-Dopa on Beth Abraham post-encephalitic patients. Awakenings was also the subject of the first documentary made (in 1974) for the British television series Discovery.
In his other books, he describes cases of Tourette syndrome and various effects of Parkinson's disease. The title article of The Man Who Mistook His Wife for a Hat is about a man with visual agnosia  and was the subject of a 1986 opera by Michael Nyman. The title article of An Anthropologist on Mars, which won a Polk Award for magazine reporting, is about Temple Grandin, a professor with high-functioning autism. Seeing Voices, Sacks' 1989 book, covers a variety of topics in deaf studies.
In his book The Island of the Colorblind Sacks writes about an island where many people have achromatopsia (total colorblindness, very low visual acuity and high photophobia), and describes the Chamorro people of Guam, who have a high incidence of a neurodegenerative disease known as Lytico-Bodig disease (a devastating combination of ALS, dementia, and parkinsonism). Along with Paul Alan Cox, Sacks has published papers suggesting a possible environmental cause for the cluster, namely the toxin beta-methylamino L-alanine (BMAA) from the cycad nut accumulating by biomagnification in the flying fox bat.
In November 2012 Oliver Sacks released his latest book, Hallucinations. In this work Sacks takes a look into why ordinary people can sometimes experience hallucinations and removes the stigma placed behind the word. He explains, "Hallucinations don't belong wholly to the insane. Much more commonly, they are linked to sensory deprivation, intoxication, illness or injury.".
Sacks has sometimes faced criticism in the medical and disability studies communities. During the 1970s and 1980s, his book and articles on the "Awakenings" patients were criticized or ignored by much of the medical establishment, on the grounds that his work was not based on the quantitative, double-blind study model. His account of abilities of autistic savants has been questioned by the researcher Makoto Yamaguchi,—referring to Sacks' celebrity status and that his literary publications received greater publicity than Shapiro's medical publications, said he is "a much better writer than he is a clinician". A Cursing Brain?: The Histories of Tourette Syndrome. Harvard University Press, 2000, p. 205. ISBN 0-674-00386-1 Howard Kushner's A Cursing Brain?: The Histories of Tourette Syndrome, says Shapiro "contrasted his own careful clinical work with Sacks' idiosyncratic and anecdotal approach to a clinical investigation". 204
More sustained has been the critique of his political and ethical positions. Although many characterise Sacks as a "compassionate" writer and doctor,

Honors

Since 1996 Sacks has been a member of The American Academy of Arts and Letters (Literature).
Sacks has been awarded honorary doctorates from the Georgetown University (1990), and Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory (2008).
Oxford University awarded him an honorary Doctor of Civil Law degree in June 2005.
Sacks received the position "Columbia Artist" from Columbia University in 2007, a post that was created specifically for him. In this capacity he gains unconstrained access to the University, regardless of department or discipline. 2009. accessed 10 October 2011
Sacks was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2008 Queen's Birthday Honours.
84928 Oliversacks, a 
In February 2010 Sacks was named to the Freedom From Religion Foundation's Honorary Board of distinguished achievers.

Personal life

Throughout his life, Sacks has suffered from a condition known as prosopagnosia or face blindness. In a December 2010 interview Sacks discussed how he had also lost his stereoscopic vision the previous year due to a malignant tumor in his right eye. He now has no vision in his right eye. His loss of stereo vision was recounted in his book The Mind's Eye, published in October 2010. "Eye to Eye with Dr. Oliver Sacks", Review of Optometry, 9 December 2010 Sacks discussed his struggles with prosopagnosia in an interview with Lesley Stahl on 18 March 2012 episode of 60 Minutes.
Sacks has never married or lived with anyone and says that he is celibate. In a December 2001 interview he stated that he had not had a relationship in many years and has described his shyness as "a disease". "The Fully Immersive Mind of Oliver Sacks" Wired. Sacks swims almost every day and has done so for decades, especially when he lived in the City Island section of the Bronx.  He discussed his work and his personal health problems in the 28 June 2011 BBC documentary Imagine."The Man Who Forgot How to Read and Other Stories", BBC accessed 30 June 2011
Sacks has also written about a near-fatal accident he had at age 41, a year after the publication of Awakenings, when he fell and broke his leg "while mountaineering alone."
During his time at UCLA, Sacks experimented heavily with various drugs. He described his experiences in an article published in 2012 by The New Yorker and his 2012 book Hallucinations. Sacks describes a transformative incident he had after taking a massive dose of amphetamine, then reading a book by the 19th century migraine physician Edward Liveing (father of George Downing Liveing). Sacks claimed this experience convinced him to chronicle and publish his observations of neurological diseases and oddities, becoming the "Liveing of our Time".

Publications

As main author

As contributor








