[[Tracy Chapman]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Living people, African-American female singer-songwriters, American folk guitarists, American folk rock musicians, American folk singers, Atlantic Records artists, Elektra Records artists, Brit Award winners, Fast Folk artists, Grammy Award-winning artists, Musicians from Cleveland, Ohio, Tufts University alumni, Feminist musicians, Tracy Chapman, Buskers, American feminists, African-American guitarists, African-American women, American female guitarists

Tracy Chapman (born March 30, 1964) is an American singer-songwriter, known for her smash hits "Fast Car" and "Give Me One Reason", along with other successful singles "Talkin' 'bout a Revolution", "Baby Can I Hold You", "Crossroads", "New Beginning" and "Telling Stories". She is a multi-platinum and four-time Grammy Award-winning artist.com
Chapman burst onto the scene in 1988 when Elektra released her critically acclaimed, multi-million selling debut album, which garnered Chapman six Grammy nominations, including Album of the Year, three of which she won, including Best Female Pop Vocal Performance for her single Fast Car. Since then, Chapman has furthered her success with seven more studio albums, which includes her also multi-million selling forth album New Beginning, which garnered her a forth Grammy award, for Best Rock Song, for "Give Me One Reason". Chapman's latest release is 2008's Our Bright Future.

Early life

Chapman was born in Cleveland, Ohio. She was raised by her mother, who recognized Tracy's love of music and, despite not having much money, bought her a ukulele when she was just three. She says that she may have been first inspired to play the guitar by the television show Hee Haw.Martin, Michael "Without Further Ado, Songster Tracy Chapman Returns" National Public Radio, August 20, 2009
Raised Baptist, Chapman attended an Episcopal high school. She was accepted into the program "A Better Chance", which helps minority students attend private schools.  She graduated from Wooster School in Connecticut, then attended Tufts University.A. degree in anthropology and African studies.Erlewine, Stephen Thomas Tracy Chapman All Music Guide

Career

During college, Chapman began busking in Harvard Square and playing guitar in Club Passim, the Nameless Coffeehouse, and other coffeehouses in Cambridge, Massachusetts. Another Tufts student, Brian Koppelman, heard Chapman playing and brought her to the attention of his father, Charles Koppelman. Koppelman, who ran SBK Publishing, signed Chapman in 1986. After Chapman graduated from Tufts in 1987, he helped her to sign a contract with Elektra Records.
At Elektra, she released Tracy Chapman (1988). The album was critically acclaimed, and she began touring and building a fanbase. "Fast Car" began its rise on the US charts soon after she performed it at the televised Nelson Mandela 70th Birthday Tribute concert in June 1988; it became a number 6 pop hit on the Billboard Hot 100 for the week ending August 27, 1988. Rolling Stone ranked the song number 167 on their 2010 list of "The 500 Greatest Songs of All Time". It is the highest-ranking song both written and performed by a female performer. "Talkin' 'bout a Revolution", the follow-up, charted at number 75 and was followed by "Baby Can I Hold You", which peaked at number 48. The album sold well, going multi-platinum and winning three Grammy Awards, including an honor for Chapman as Best New Artist. Later in 1988, Chapman was a featured performer on the worldwide Amnesty International Human Rights Now! Tour. According to the VH1 website, "Her album helped usher in the era of political correctness—along with 10,000 Maniacs and R.E.M., Chapman's liberal politics proved enormously influential on American college campuses in the late '80s.""Tracy Chapman" VH1.com
Her follow-up album Crossroads (1989) was less commercially successful, but still achieved platinum status. By 1992's Matters of the Heart, Chapman was playing to a small and devoted audience. Her fourth album New Beginning (1995) proved successful, selling over three million copies in the U.S. The album included the hit single "Give Me One Reason", which won the 1997 Grammy for Best Rock Song and became Chapman's most successful single to date, peaking at Number 3 on the Billboard Hot 100. Following a four-year hiatus, her fifth album, Telling Stories, was released in 2000. Its hit single, "Telling Stories", received heavy airplay on European radio stations and on Adult Alternative and Hot AC stations in the United States. Chapman toured Europe and the US in 2003 in support of her sixth album, Let It Rain (2002).
To support her seventh studio album, Where You Live (2005), Chapman toured major US cities in October and throughout Europe over the remainder of the year. The "Where You Live" tour was extended into 2006; the 28-date European tour featured summer concerts in Germany, Italy, France, Sweden, Finland, Norway, the UK, Russia and more. On June 5, 2006, she performed at the 5th Gala of Jazz in Lincoln Center, New York, and in a session at the 2007 TED (Technology Entertainment Design) conference in Monterey, California.
Chapman was commissioned by the American Conservatory Theater to compose music for its production of Athol Fugard's Blood Knot, a play on apartheid in South Africa, staged in early 2008.
Atlantic Records released Chapman's eighth studio album, Our Bright Future (2008). Chapman made a 26-date solo tour of Europe. She returned to tour Europe and selected North American cities during the summer of 2009. She was backed by Joe Gore on guitars, Patrick Warren on keyboards, and Dawn Richardson on percussion.Tracy Chapman European / US Tour Dates 2009 All About Tracy Chapman, December 22, 2008
Chapman was appointed a member of the 2014 Sundance Film Festival U.S. Documentary jury.

Social activism

Chapman is widely regarded as a politically and socially active musician. In a 2009 interview with American radio network NPR, she is quoted as saying: "I'm approached by lots of organizations and lots of people who want me to support their various charitable efforts in some way. And I look at those requests and I basically try to do what I can. And I have certain interests of my own, generally an interest in human rights." This interest in human rights can be seen lyrically in her music. Songs such as 1988's "Talkin' 'Bout a Revolution" highlight the importance of speaking up against injustice:
Chapman's song "Fast Car" also brings awareness to the struggles of poverty, with lyrics such as:
Chapman's activism extends further than her lyrics. She has performed at numerous socially aware events, and continues to do so. In 1988, she performed in London as part of a worldwide concert tour to commemorate the 40th anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights with Amnesty International.
Chapman has also been involved with Cleveland's elementary schools. A music video produced by Chapman that highlights significant achievements in African-American history has become an important teaching tool in Cleveland Public Schools. Chapman also agreed to sponsor a "Crossroads in Black History" essay contest for high school students in Cleveland and other cities.
In 2004, Chapman was given an honorary doctorate in Fine Arts by her alma mater, Tufts University, recognizing her commitment to social activism.

Chapman often performs at and attends charity events such as Make Poverty History, amfAR and AIDS/LifeCycle, to support social causes. She identifies as a feminist.

Personal life

Although Chapman has never disclosed her sexual orientation, in the mid-1990s she dated writer Alice Walker. "I have a public life that's my work life and I have my personal life," she said. "In some ways, the decision to keep the two things separate relates to the work I do."2002 – Tracy Chapman still introspective? All About Tracy Chapman, October 2002

Discography

Contributions

Duet songs:
Covered songs:

Awards and nominations






