[[University of Missouri–Kansas City]]

CATEGORIES: University of Missouri–Kansas City, Universities and colleges in Kansas City, Missouri, University of Missouri System, Association of Public and Land-Grant Universities, Urban 13 universities, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Educational institutions established in 1933, Coalition of Urban and Metropolitan Universities, 1933 establishments in Missouri

The University of Missouri–Kansas City (often referred to as UMKC) is a public research university located in Kansas City, Missouri, USA. It is a part of the University of Missouri System. Its main campus is in Kansas City's Rockhill neighborhood east of the Country Club Plaza. The university's enrollment is 15,754 in 2013. The University of Missouri - Kansas City was ranked 201st in the 2014 U.S. News & World Report among the National Universities Rankings.

History

Lincoln and Lee University

The school has its roots in the Lincoln and Lee University movement first put forth by the Methodist Church and its Bishop Ernest Lynn Waldorf in the 1920s. The proposed university (which was to honor Abraham Lincoln and Robert E. Lee) was to be built on the Missouri-Kansas border at 75th and State Line Road, where the Battle of Westport (the largest battle west of the Mississippi River during the American Civil War) took place. The centerpiece of the school was to be a National Memorial marking the tomb of an unknown Union soldier and unknown Confederate soldier. Proponents of the school said it would be a location "where North met South and East met West." The Methodist interest reflected the church's important role in the development of the Kansas City area through the Shawnee Methodist Mission which was the second capital of Kansas.
As the Methodists started having problems piecing together the necessary property, other civic leaders including J.C. Nichols began pushing to create a cultural center on either side of Brush Creek, just east of the Country Club Plaza. According to this plan the Nelson-Atkins Museum of Art and Kansas City Art Institute would be built north of Brush Creek around the estate of The Kansas City Star publisher William Rockhill Nelson and a private nonsectarian University of Kansas City (initially proposed as a junior college) would be built south of the creek. In addition, a hospital would be constructed around the estate of Kansas City Journal-Post publisher Walter S. Dickey. The hospital was never built.
In 1930, after the Methodists had brought the Kansas City Dental School into their fold, the two plans were merged. The new school was to be called "Lincoln and Lee, the University of Kansas City."Link Names for Schools - The Kansas City Star - December 16, 1930 - Page 1 and plans were underway to develop it into a four-year school.
The university was built on a  plot, southeast of the Nelson mansion. William Volker had purchased and donated this land for the University of Kansas City. The original Volker purchase did not include the Dickey mansion itself. Dickey died unexpectedly in 1931 and Volker acquired it to be the first building.

University of Kansas City

The two groups were to squabble back and forth, with Ernest H. Newcomb attempting to mediate. The Church did not maintain its ties and the Lincoln and Lee name was abandoned.
The school announced that it would start if 125 students enrolled. Classes began in October 1933 with a faculty of 17 and a student enrollment of 264.
The campus (now expanded to ) is called the Volker Campus. The Dickey mansion is now Scofield Hall. The second building on the campus, the library, was named for Newcomb. A Carl Milles fountain on Brush Creek opposite the Nelson Gallery is called the Volker Fountain.
The University of Kansas City grew quickly, and soon incorporated other existing local private institutions of higher learning. The Kansas City School of Law, which was founded in the 1890s and located in downtown Kansas City, merged into the university in 1938. The Kansas City-Western Dental College followed in 1941 and the Kansas City College of Pharmacy merged in 1943. This was followed by the Kansas City Conservatory of Music in 1959. During this period, the university also established the School of Administration in 1953, the School of Education in 1954, and the Division for Continuing Education in 1958.

University of Missouri-Kansas City

On July 25, 1963, at the urging of alumnus Hilary A. Bush,The Kansas City Star - May 22, 1992 the university became part of the University of Missouri System and $20 million of assets including 23 buildings were transferred to the University of Missouri. At the time of the acquisition the UKC had 3,300 students (2,000 full-time) and 175 full-time faculty.K.C.U., M.U. Plan a Merger - Kansas City Times - February 26, 1963
At the same time, the University of Missouri acquired the Normandy Residence Center in St. Louis to form the University of Missouri-St. Louis. The acquisitions of the two schools were different in that the privately owned University of Kansas City could be donated to Missouri while the University of Missouri had to buy the St. Louis campus (although for a nominal $60,000) because the St. Louis campus had been purchased for a junior college in a bond election by the public Normandy, Missouri School District.
At the time of acquisition Missouri already owned the campuses in Columbia and Rolla. Accordingly, the university's name was changed to the University of Missouri–Kansas City.
After this, UMKC established the School of Graduate Studies in 1964, the School of Medicine in 1970, the School of Nursing in 1980, the School of Basic Life Sciences in 1985 (which was renamed the School of Biological Sciences in the mid-1990s), and the School of Computing and Engineering in 2001.
In 2012, the school conducted studies on whether to rename the school back to the University of Kansas City (but still remaining in the University of Missouri system). In November 2012, the school decided against the change noting at the time, "while prospective students and the community at large had strong interest in the name change, several other important groups — current students, faculty/staff, and alumni — do not favor a name change at this time."

Chancellors

Presidents (when the school was independent)/Chancellors (when the school became part of the University of Missouri system) of the school are:
 
  Ernest H. Newcomb, executive secretary, 1933-1936
  John Duncan Spaeth, president, 1936-1938
  Clarence Decker, president, 1938-1953
  Earl J. McGrath, president, 1953-1956
  Richard M. Drake, president (initially interim), 1956-1961
  Carleton F. Scofield, president/chancellor, 1961-1965 (becomes part of University of Missouri System)
  Randall M. Whaley, chancellor, 1965-1967
  James C. Olson, chancellor, 1968-1976
  George A. Russell, chancellor, 1977-1992
  Eleanor Schwartz, chancellor, 1992-1999
  Martha Gilliland, chancellor, April 1, 2000-January 1, 2005
  Guy Bailey, chancellor, January 2006-July 2008
  Leo Morton, chancellor (initially interim) August 2008 – present
 

Academic Organization

Academic units

Today, the academic divisions of UMKC are the College of Arts and Sciences, the School of Education, the School of Nursing, the School of Management, the School of Medicine (one of six in Missouri), the School of Law (also one of only four in Missouri), the School of Computing and Engineering, the School of Biological Sciences, the Conservatory of Music and Dance, the School of Dentistry, the School of Graduate Studies, and the School of Pharmacy.
The School of Medicine is regionally known for its six-year post-secondary program, wherein a student spends only six years obtaining both a Bachelor of Arts and Doctor of Medicine degree. The school is located away from the main campus on "Hospital Hill," where it is connected to Truman Medical Center, a large research hospital.
The School of Law is one of four law schools in Missouri (St. Louis University School of Law, University of Missouri School of Law, Washington University School of Law are the others). It is one of only seven American law schools to have educated both a President of the United States (Harry S. Truman) and a Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States (Charles Evans Whittaker). Truman attended but did not graduate from the law school and never practiced law. The schools that actually have had President-Supreme Court graduates who practiced law are Yale Law School, Harvard Law School, Columbia Law School, the University of Virginia School of Law, the William & Mary Law School and the University of Cincinnati College of Law.lsac.pdf

Volker Campus

UMKC has two campuses in Kansas City. Most of UMKC's main campus (Volker campus) is inside a square formed by Volker Boulevard (north), Oak Street (west), 53rd Street (south) and Troost (east). The "Hospital Hill" campus houses the health sciences academic departments.
Directly across Troost from UMKC is Rockhurst University, a Jesuit college.

Hospital Hill Campus

The hospital hill campus houses the School of Nursing, the School of Medicine, the School of Dentistry, and the School of Pharmacy.

Other Departments

The University is the home of New Letters, a preeminent literary magazine, as well as the nationally syndicated public radio program New Letters on the Air.
In 2004, the Fungal Genetics Stock Center moved to UMKC where it is in the School of Biological Sciences. The FGSC was founded in 1960 and is supported by the US National Science Foundation. The FGSC distributes research materials around the world and is part of the World Federation for Culture Collections. Collaborators include researchers at the Broad Institute and the US Department of Energy Joint Genome Institute.
UMKC Theatre is considered to have one of the stronger M.F.A. programs in acting in the country.
The University is the site where the Supplemental Instruction program was established and developed. L. (1996). Supplemental Instruction: An interview with Deanna Martin. Journal of Developmental Education, 20(1), 22-24, 26

Rankings

In 2014, the Princeton Review named the University of Missouri-Kansas City a "Best Value" public university, for the third consecutive year. The University of Missouri-Kansas City is ranked 201st

Buildings

Cockefair Hall

Cockefair, (pronounced coke-fair), is located on Rockhill across from Flarsheim Hall. It was built in 1950 and is named for former faculty member Carolyn Cockefair who was a humanities professor at UMKC. The building currently houses the departments of History, English, and Philosophy.

Biological Sciences Building

Built in 1972, the Biological Sciences Building is located north of the Spencer Chemistry Building and east of Katz Hall. The building houses offices, classrooms, and research laboratories of the School of Biological Sciences. The school offers undergrad, grad, and doctoral degrees in the life sciences.

Spencer Chemistry Building

The building, located at 51st & Rockhill, was built in 1972 using funds donated by Helen Spencer. The purpose of the building was to nurture scientific advancement at UMKC. It currently houses the main office of the Chemistry Department as well as several chemistry laboratories and classrooms.

The Quad

The majority of UMKC's students regularly attend classes in buildings on the Quad. These buildings are Newcomb Hall, Manheim Hall, Royall Hall, Haag Hall, Flarsheim Hall and Scofield Hall.

=Newcomb Hall=

Newcomb Hall (built in 1936) was named after the first manager of the University, Ernest H. Newcomb. Originally designed to house the library, Newcomb Hall is now home to offices, the University Archives, the Western Historical Manuscript Collection and the Edgar Snow Collections. Newcomb Hall is located on the extreme west edge of the quad.Newcomb Hall

=Manheim Hall=

Manheim Hall, along with Newcomb Hall were the first two buildings originally built for the University. It is named for Ernest Manheim, a professor of sociology, who taught at the university and founded its sociology program. Currently, Manheim Hall houses offices. It is connected to Royall Hall by a second-floor walkway. Manheim is located on the southwest corner of the Quad.Manheim Hall

=Royall Hall=

Royall Hall was built in 1968 and is almost exclusively classrooms. Two large lecture halls are on the ground floor, and an astronomical observatory is on the roof. Also on the ground floor is a lounge area with an Einstein Bros. Bagels. Royall Hall is connected to both Manheim and Haag Halls, and to a five-level parking structure across the street. Royall Hall is located on the south end of the Quad. 

=Haag Hall=

Haag Hall (pronounced Hāg), built in 1937, contains offices and classrooms including the departments of mathematics and communication studies. Its most recognizable features are the large murals stretching along the main stairwell. Haag Hall is connected to both Royall and Flarsheim Halls. Haag Hall is located on the southeast corner of the Quad. 

=Flarsheim Hall=

Flarsheim Hall was built in 1999, and is the largest building on UMKC's campus. The Chemistry, Physics and Geosciences departments, as well as the School of Computing and Engineering, are located in Flarsheim Hall. The hall was named after Robert H. Flarsheim, who left a $9 million endowment to the University in his estate. Flarsheim Hall is located on the northeast corner of the Quad. 

=Scofield Hall=

Scofield Hall was built in 1912, and was originally a private residence. In 1931, William Volker acquired it and donated it to the University. It was named after Carleton Scofield, who was chancellor of the University when it merged with the University of Missouri System. The Arts & Sciences advising office as well as the Language Resource Center and the Department of Foreign Languages & Literatures are located in Scofield Hall. Scofield Hall is located on the north end of the Quad.Scofield Hall

=Katz Hall=

Completed in 1965, Katz Hall is named in honor of Isaac and Michael Katz, founders of a major Kansas City drug store chain. The building currently houses the Department of Architecture, Urban Planning + Design's offices and classrooms and was once the location for the School of Pharmacy. The Pharmacy School has now moved to the Health Sciences Building on UMKC's Hospital Hill campus, approximately four miles north of the Volker Campus. 

=University Center / University Breezeway=

==University Center/ Atterbury Student Success Center==

The University Center (known to students and alumni as the "U-Center") was built in 1961. The student dining hall is located here, as is Pierson Auditorium, an often used site for career fairs or luncheons. In 2012, the University Center underwent renovations and was rededicated as the Atterbury Student Success Center. It was specifically designed to promote student academic success.

==Swinney Recreation Center==

Swinney Recreation Center was built in 1941, and was gifted to the University by E. F. Swinney. There are five basketball courts, an Olympic-sized swimming pool, raquetball and squash courts, weight-training center, soccer field, and indoor and outdoor tracks at the recreation center. Along with the Kansas City Club and the Pembroke Hill School, Swinney is one of only three locations in Kansas City containing squash courts.Swinney Recreation Center

==Fine Arts Building==

The Fine Arts Building was built in 1942 and remodeled in 1975. Currently, the Art and Art History departments use the building. Student works are often displayed in the building's UMKC Gallery of Art.Fine Arts Building

=Epperson House=

Epperson House is located south of 52nd St. between Oak and Cherry. The Tudor-Gothic structure was completed in 1923 at a cost of $450,000. Originally built as a private residence, Epperson House contained 48 rooms, six bathrooms, elevators, a swimming pool, and a billiard room, spread throughout it four floors. The residence was built by Uriah S. Epperson, who was a banker, industrialist, and philanthropist who amassed significant wealth from insurance and meat-packing industries. The building was donated to the university in 1942 for use as a men's dormitory until 1956. Epperson is well known for its apparent hauntings, which earned it a spot on Unsolved Mysteries as one of the top five haunted houses in the United States.kansascity.swf

=James C. Olson Center for the Performing Arts=

Known on campus simply as the PAC (Performing Arts Center), this building partially houses the Conservatory of Music and Dance and the Department of Theatre, as well as the Kansas City Repertory Theatre. The PAC, designed by Kivett and Myers, opened in 1979 and contains White Recital Hall, Helen F. Spencer Theatre, and a black box theatre space, Studio 116.

=Proposed new downtown arts campus=

A proposal for a new downtown arts campus got a funding boost on June 26, 2013, with a $20 million challenge grant from the Muriel McBrien Kauffman Foundation, but an additional $70 mil. needs to be raised. The backers say a new campus will increase the profile of the university's arts programs and the new performing arts facility. The first phase involves moving the university's Conservatory of Music and Dance to a location in the Crossroads District. Other programs would be moved in subsequent phases.

Housing

Cherry Hall

Begun in 1955, Cherry Street Hall, located at 5030 Cherry Street, was a more traditional-style dormitory on the UMKC Volker campus. It housed approximately 300 students in 168 single, double and triple rooms with each floor being separated by gender and sharing a communal bathroom. Cherry Street Hall was often regarded by students as having better opportunities for social interaction than Oak Street. In August 2009 Cherry Street Hall was closed as a student residence. In May 2011 the Psychology Department moved into the newly renovated Cherry Hall.

Twin Oaks Apartments

Formerly located at 5000 Oak Street, Twin Oaks Apartments was acquired by the University in 1998 to house students who desired more independent living than the dormitory could provide. In the years since, however, the buildings had begun to show their ages. In 2002, the University decided it would be more cost-effective to demolish Twin Oaks and build a new residence hall in its place. UMKC stopped offering new contracts to prospective residents in 2005, but allowed current residents an additional year as a grace period to find other arrangements. The buildings were completely vacant by July 2006. In September 2006, the Kansas City Fire Department used Twin Oaks to train firefighters. Demolition by wrecking ball began in November 2006 and was completed in early 2007.

Oak Street Hall

Completed in 2004, Oak Street Hall is located at 5051 Oak Street. The five-story building houses approximately 559 students in suite-style single and double rooms. The ground level is a large common lobby with a kitchen, laundry facility, music practice rooms, pool tables and a widescreen television set. On floors 2-5, kitchenettes, vending machines, quiet study rooms and social lounges comprise the common areas. At the time of its completion in 2004 Oak Hall was set as a standard for buildings to come in the 30-year Master Plan set forth by UMKC.

Oak Place Apartments

The Oak Place Apartments are located at 5050 Oak Street on land once occupied by the Twin Oaks Apartments. After demolition of the Twin Oaks construction on Oak Place was started in 2007 and Oak Place was opened to students in August 2008. Oak Place consists of two four story apartment complexes separated by an above ground parking structure. Oak Place houses around 500 students in 1, 2, and 4 bedroom suite style apartments complete with kitchen. Common areas include lounge areas, an academic room, and 1 computer lab in each building.

Herman and Dorothy Johnson Hall

Herman and Dorothy Johnson Hall is the newest residence hall on the UMKC Volker Campus and is located to the immediate north of Oak Place Apartments. Construction was started in June 2008 and the hall opened in August 2009. The four story hall houses up to 328 students in a more traditional dormitory style with suites of single and double occupancy rooms that share a common bathroom. Each floor of Johnson Hall has separate wings for male and female students. Common areas include music practice rooms, a computer lab, laundry rooms, and outdoor green space. The building was designed by Mackey Mitchell Architects out of St. Louis, MO.

Student activities

Greek Life

Greek Life at the University of Missouri–Kansas City is administered by the Office of Student Involvement's Fraternity and Sorority Affairs. UMKC is home to 26 Greek Letter Organizations (8 social fraternities, 8 social sororities, and 10 professional fraternities). Although the Greek population is relatively small (4.5% of the overall student population), it maintains proud heritage, and several chapters have received awards from their organization's international offices.
Greek Life at UMKC traces its origins to 1936, with the establishment of the Bounders Fraternity. The Bounders was the first social organization recognized by the University of Kansas City, and the fraternity originated many of UMKC's school traditions. The Bounders even led the push for the removal of university president Clarence Decker. Decker's resignation in 1953 opened the door for both intercollegiate athletics and national Greek organizations on campus. In 1956, the Bounders petitioned Delta Chi and received a charter. Delta Chi became the first national fraternity to charter on the UMKC campus. The Delta Rho Chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha was founded four years earlier, in 1952; however, it was originally chartered at nearby Rockhurst University and did not submit its charter for official recognition by UMKC until 1963.umkc.cfm?id=20

Athletics

UMKC's mascot is Kasey Kangaroo (originally drawn by Walt Disney) and its teams go by the nickname the Roos. The school's colors are old gold and royal blue. It is a member of the NCAA's Division I The Summit League, and officially joined the Western Athletic Conference on July 1, 2013. The men's and women's basketball teams play at Swinney Recreation Center. UMKC sponsors 16 sports for both men and women at the intercollegiate level.
The department sponsors: men's basketball, women's basketball, men's soccer, women's soccer, softball, men's tennis, women's tennis, women's golf, men's golf, volleyball, men's indoor and outdoor track & field, women's indoor and outdoor track & field, men's cross country and women's cross country.
On April, 2007, it was announced that the school will be dropping its Co-Ed Rifle Program in order to add women's soccer and men's baseball. Women's soccer was added to the institution for the 2009-2010 school year.

Traditions

=Hobo Day/Bum Friday=

One of the best known traditions in the history of UMKC was Hobo Day, later known as Bum Friday. The campus-wide event was created as Hobo Day, and it first occurred on May 8, 1935, to celebrate the end of the spring semester. Students dressed as hobos throughout the day, and various events and competitions took place. The day started with the Hobo parade, and then everyone gathered in the quad where university president Clarence Decker would read a proclamation that he was cancelling classes and turning the university over to the students. President Decker was an appropriate master of ceremonies for the day, as he had lived the life of a hobo during a portion of his younger years. Events throughout the day included beard growing contests, pie eating contests, glee club performances, skits satirizing campus life, car rallies, talent shows, and athletic contests. The Bum Friday Queen and the Most Fascinating Man were crowned, and the day ended with a dance in which students switched out their bum attire for formal wear. Awards for the daytime activities were presented at the dance. A bonfire closed out the evening. In 1951, Hobo Day was renamed Bum Friday, although the activities essentially remained the same. In 1982, the Student Life Office put a stop to Bum Friday and replaced it with "Roo Fest," which lacked many of the activities and traditions of Bum Friday and it's predecessor, Hobo Day.umkc.umkc.edu/perspectives/campus-news/2606/

=The Bounder Bells=

Alumni members of the former Bounders Fraternity raised nearly $30,000 in donations for the purchase of a Van Bergen 49-bell carillon. The Bounder Bells was dedicated on the UMKC campus in May 1989. The carillon is located in the tower of the Swinney Recreation Center. The bells controlled by an electronic keyboard, and they ring on the hour. The bells can also can be programmed to play melodies.umkc.cfm?id=20

Notable alumni and faculty








