[[The Cosby Show]]

CATEGORIES: The Cosby Show, 1984 American television series debuts, 1992 American television series endings, 1980s American television series, 1990s American television series, American television sitcoms, Best Musical or Comedy Series Golden Globe winners, Black sitcoms, Dyslexia in fiction, English-language television programming, NBC network shows, Nielsen ratings winners, Peabody Award winning television programs, Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Comedy Series winners, Television series by Carsey-Werner Productions, Television shows set in New York City, Television series created by Ed. Weinberger, Television series created by Bill Cosby

The Cosby Show is an American television sitcom starring Bill Cosby, which aired for eight seasons on NBC from September 20, 1984 until April 30, 1992. The show focuses on the Huxtable family, an upper middle-class African-American family living in Brooklyn, New York.
According to TV Guide, the show "was TV's biggest hit in the 1980s, and almost single-handedly revived the sitcom genre and NBC's ratings fortunes".
The Cosby Show was based on comedy routines in Cosby's stand-up act, which in turn were based on his family life. The show helped inspire a number of later sitcoms starring a stand-up comedian and based around that comedian's onstage persona, including highly successful series such as Roseanne, Seinfeld, Home Improvement and Everybody Loves Raymond. The show spawned the spin-off A Different World, which ran for six seasons from 1987 to 1993.

Premise

The show focuses on the Huxtable family, an upper middle-class African-American family living in a brownstone in Brooklyn Heights, New York, at 10 Stigwood Avenue.

Episodes

=Pilot=

The Cosby Show pilot episode uses the same title sequence as the rest of the first season, and is widely regarded as the 'first episode'. However, it is notable for a number of differences from the remainder of the series.
In the pilot, the Huxtables have only four children. 
Bill Cosby's character is called "Clifford" in the early episodes of the first season (as evidenced by his name plate on the exterior of the Huxtable home). His name was later switched to "Heathcliff". Additionally, Vanessa refers to Theo as "Teddy" twice in the dining room scene.
The interior of the Huxtables' home features an entirely different living room from subsequent episodes, and different color schemes in the dining room and the master bedroom. Throughout the remainder of the series, the dining room is reserved for more formal occasions.

Background and production

Conception and development

In the early 1980s, Marcy Carsey and Tom Werner, two former executives at ABC, left the network to start their own production company. At ABC, they had overseen sitcoms such as Mork & Mindy, Three's Company and Welcome Back, Kotter. The two decided in order to get a sitcom to sell for their fledgling company, they needed a big name behind it. Bill Cosby, who during the 1970s starred in two failed sitcoms, produced award-winning stand-up comedy albums, and had roles in several different films, was relatively quiet during the early 1980s.
Outside of his work on his cartoon series Fat Albert and the Cosby Kids, Cosby was doing little in film or television, but Carsey and Warner were fans of Cosby's stand-up comedy and thought it would be the perfect material for a family sitcom.
Cosby originally proposed that the couple should both have blue-collar jobs, with the father a limousine driver,
Cosby wanted the program to be educational, reflecting his own background in education.

Production notes

The earliest episodes of the series were videotaped at NBC's Brooklyn studios (now owned by JC Studios).
During its original run at NBC, it was one of five successful sitcoms on the network that featured predominately African-American casts. The other sitcoms were 227 (1985–1990), Amen (1986–1991), Cosby Show spin-off A Different World (1987–1993), and The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air (1990–1996).
Although the cast and characters were predominately African American,
The series finale (filmed on March 6, 1992)

Theme song and opening sequence

The show's theme music, "Kiss Me", was composed by Stu Gardner and Bill Cosby.
Due to legal complications regarding the background mural, the opening for season seven was replaced with the one from the previous season. The original season seven opening, with slight modifications, was also used in season eight.

Cast and characters

*Phylicia Rashād was credited as "Phylicia Ayers-Allen" during season one and the first fourteen episodes of season two.
†Prior to joining the cast as a regular, Joseph C. Phillips appears as Daryl, a potential boyfriend for Sondra in season two (episode: "Cliff in Love").

Reception

The show's portrayal of a successful, stable black family was praised by some for breaking racial stereotypes and showing another part of the African-American experience.

Broadcast history and ratings

The Cosby Show aired on Thursdays at 8:00pm for all eight seasons.
The Cosby Show is one of three television programs (All in the Family and American Idol being the others) that was #1 in the Nielsen ratings for 5 consecutive seasons.

Syndication

Carsey-Werner Distribution handles domestic and international distribution of the series, and has done so since 1997. In the United States, The Cosby Show began its television syndication run in September 1988 in broadcast syndication, shortly before the show's fifth season premiere, and was at the time distributed by Viacom; many stations that carried the series were Big Three network affiliates, though since the mid-1990s, the show has largely begun airing on independent stations and minor network affiliates.
Dallas-based KTVT (now a CBS owned-and-operated station), carried the series during the early 1990s, until that station dropped its status as an independent station and regional cable superstation in 1995. TBS, then a national cable superstation at the time it debuted on the channel, began carrying the series in 1999 and ran it for almost a decade. Fellow superstation WGN America began carrying the series shortly after, and continued to until September 2010. Nick at Nite began airing reruns of the series in March 2002. Sister network TV Land began airing reruns in 2004, however, unlike most series that have aired on sister channel Nick at Nite before moving to TV Land in the past and since then, up until September 2010, The Cosby Show was carried on both Nick at Nite and TV Land. As of September 2012 TV Land has resumed broadcasting the series.
As of September 27, 2010, Centric airs the series. Malaysia's national TV broadcast channel RTM TV2 also airs the series, as does Canada's Crossroads Television System. In 2011, Netflix added the entire series to instant stream, before removing it in 2012. It's now available on Hulu Plus.

Spin-off

The Cosby Show's producers created a spin-off series called A Different World that was built around the "Denise" character (portrayed by actress Lisa Bonet), the second of the Huxtables' four daughters. Initially, the new program dealt with Denise's life at Hillman College, the fictional historically black college from which her father, mother, and paternal grandfather had graduated. Denise was written out of A Different World after its inaugural season, due to Bonet's pregnancy, and the following season was revamped, with the addition of director Debbie Allen and new characters. Denise later became a recurring character on The Cosby Show for seasons four and five, and a regular again in seasons six and seven.

Awards and honors

Awards won

Emmy Awards
Golden Globe Awards
NAACP Image Awards
Peabody Award (1986)
People's Choice Awards

Nominations

Emmy Awards
Golden Globe Awards

Other honors

Albums

Two albums were produced that included various theme and background music from the show. The albums were presented by longtime Cosby collaborator Stu Gardner. They were:

In popular culture

DVD releases

All eight seasons of The Cosby Show have been released on DVD in Region 1. Seasons one and two were released by UrbanWorks which was subsequently acquired by First Look Studios, who then released the remaining six seasons. Seasons one and two contain special features including the 90-minute retrospective documentary entitled "The Cosby Show: A Look Back" which aired on NBC in 2002. It contains interviews with cast members, bloopers, deleted scenes and audition footage. In 2010, First Look Studios filed bankruptcy and all its assets were subsequently acquired by Millennium Entertainment who also took over distribution of The Cosby Show DVD releases.  As of 2013, these releases have been discontinued and are now out of print.
On November 5, 2013, it was announced that Mill Creek Entertainment had acquired the rights to the series.  They subsequently re-released the first two seasons on January 21, 2014.'Seasons 3 & 4' from Mill Creek: Package Pics, Date Change
In Region 4, Magna Pacific has released all eight seasons on DVD in Australia and New Zealand. The first two seasons have similar artwork to the North American copies, although season two is red rather than blue. Each Australian cover also features the tagline "In a house full of love, there is always room for more".
Universal Pictures UK has released seasons 1–4 in Region 2 (UK).
Note: The Millennium Entertainment release of season one contains the edited versions of the episodes aired in syndication. However, all subsequent DVD releases (including the complete series set) contain the original, uncut broadcast versions. In 2011, Millennium Entertainment quietly released season one uncut in Region 1 and it featured the special features from the complete series set.







