[[Paula Yates]]

CATEGORIES: 1959 births, 2000 deaths, Accidental deaths in England, Deaths by heroin overdose in England, People educated at Rydal Penrhos, People from Colwyn Bay, Welsh television presenters, Welsh women writers, People educated at Ysgol Aberconwy, Welsh people of Scottish descent, Welsh people of Canadian descent, Michael Hutchence

Paula Elizabeth Yates (24 April 1959BFI biodata "Checked birth at the Family Records Centre, London. Born in 1959 in the Aled, Wales registration district." – 17 September 2000) was a British television presenter and writer, best known for her work on two television programmes, The Tube and The Big Breakfast.

Early life

Born in Colwyn Bay, Wales, she was brought up in a show business family. Her mother was Elaine Smith, a former showgirl, actress and writer of erotic novels, who used the stage names Helene Thornton and Heller Torren. Until late in her life, Yates believed her biological father to be Jess Yates, who was known as "the Bishop" and hosted the ITV religious programme Stars on Sunday. Jess Yates and Elaine Smith were married from 1958 to 1975. Jess Yates was sixteen years older than his wife, and their marriage was unconventional. Jess Yates was sacked as the Stars on Sunday presenter in 1974 because of newspaper stories about his private life.
In an unsettled childhood, Paula attended school at Rowen Primary School, Penrhos College, Ysgol Aberconwy. The Yates family ran the Deganwy Castle Hotel for a time, before moving to a large house in Rowen, Conwy. After the break-up of her parents' marriage in 1975, Paula lived mostly with her mother, including periods in Malta and Mallorca where she was a pupil at Bellver International College, before returning to Britain.

Career

In 1979, Yates began her career as a music journalist with a column called "Natural Blonde" in the Record Mirror, shortly after posing for Penthouse magazine. She first came to prominence in the 1980s, as co-presenter (with Jools Holland) of the Channel 4 pop music programme The Tube. She also appeared alongside friend Jennifer Saunders in 1987 for a spoof 'mockumentary' on Bananarama.
In 1982, she released a version of the Nancy Sinatra hit song "These Boots Are Made for Walkin'".
After the birth of her daughters, Yates wrote two books on motherhood.
Yates continued with her rock journalism, in addition to being presenter of the cutting-edge music show The Tube. She became most notorious for her "on the bed" interviews on the show The Big Breakfast, produced by her husband, Bob Geldof. 
On 27 October 1995, Yates appeared on the quiz programme Have I Got News for You and had witty banter with Ian Hislop, and the two jokingly clashed. Yates referred to Hislop as "the sperm of the devil", to which Hislop replied, "Even your insults emanate from the genitals!"

Personal life

Yates met Geldof in the early days of The Boomtown Rats. They became a couple in 1976 when she flew to Paris to surprise him while the band was playing there. Their first daughter, Fifi Trixibelle, was born on 31 March 1983,Fifi Trixibelle Geldof IMDb listing named Fifi after Bob's aunt Fifi and Trixibelle because Paula wanted a belle in the family. on 13 March 1989, and Pixie Geldof on 17 September 1990.
Yates first met Michael Hutchence in a 1985 interview on Channel 4's rock magazine programme The Tube.
During this appearance on The Tube, Yates was reportedly asked to leave Hutchence alone by the road manager of INXS when Paula walked up to him and said, "I'm going to have that boy." "Paula was unmoved and began to show up at INXS gigs everywhere for the next few years..."Bozza, Anthony and INXS.London. Bantam.2005.228.  Yates maintained an irregular contact during the intervening nine years and their affair had been under way long before the Big Breakfast interview. In February 1995, Yates left Geldof.
Geldof and Yates divorced in May 1996. Yates's daughter with Hutchence, Heavenly Hiraani Tiger Lily Hutchence (known as 'Tiger') was born on 22 July 1996.Bob Geldof at Astrodatabank
On 22 November 1997, Hutchence was found dead in a hotel room in Sydney. Paula Yates wrote in her police statement that Michael Hutchence was "frightened and couldn't stand a minute more without his baby." During their phone conversations on the morning of his suicide he had said, "I don't know how I'll live without Tiger." Yates also wrote that Geldof had threatened them repeatedly with, "Don't forget, I am above the law". She eventually sought psychiatric treatment.
In June 1998, Geldof won full custody of the couple's three daughters after Yates attempted suicide.
While Yates was fighting for custody of Tiger, it was reported in the media that Jess Yates had not been Yates's natural father. A paternity test proved that the talent show host Hughie Green, who died six months before Hutchence, had been her father.

Death

On 17 September 2000, on Pixie's 10th birthday, Yates, 41, was found dead at her home in London of a heroin overdose. The coroner ruled that it was not a suicide, but a result of "foolish and incautious" behaviour.
A friend disclosed during the inquest, that Yates hadn't taken illegal drugs for nearly two years, and the coroner, Paul Knapman, concluded that though the amount Yates had taken would not have killed an addict, as "an unsophisticated taker of heroin" Yates had no tolerance to the drug. 
Soon after her death, Geldof assumed foster custody of Tiger Lily with the willing consent of Hutchence's parents, so that she could be brought up with her three older half-sisters, Fifi, Peaches and Pixie. Her aunt, Tina Hutchence, the sister of Michael Hutchence, was denied permission by the judge to apply for Tiger Lily to live with her in California.
In 2007, Geldof applied to a British court for and was granted formal adoption of Tiger Lily and a change of her surname to Geldof, despite opposition from Hutchence's mother and sister. Since January 2008 her legal full name has been Heavenly Hiraani Tiger Lily Hutchence Geldof.

Books

Paula Yates was the author of several books, including:






