[[Margarita]]

CATEGORIES: Cocktails with tequila, Cocktails with triple sec or curaçao, Frozen beverages, Mexican alcoholic beverages, Sour cocktails

The margarita is a cocktail consisting of tequila, triple sec (such as Cointreau) and lime or lemon juice, often served with salt on the glass's rim. It is the most common tequila-based cocktail in the United States. The drink is served shaken with ice (on the rocks), blended with ice (frozen margarita), or without ice (straight up).

Variations

The IBA (IBA Official list of Cocktails) standard is 7:4:3, that is, 50% tequila, 29% Cointreau, 21% fresh lime juice.

Flavored liqueurs

Besides Cointreau, other orange-flavored liqueurs that might be used include Grand Marnier, Gran Gala, other brands of triple sec, or blue curaçao (yielding the blue margarita). In the Grenadines, some bars use Union Jake's Starfruit Liqueur instead of triple sec.unionjakes.php When sweeter fruit juices or freshly puréed fruits are added to the margarita, the amount of orange-flavored liqueur is often reduced or eliminated entirely. In addition to orange-flavored liqueurs, secondary liqueurs may occasionally be added to a cocktail, including melon-flavored or black raspberry-flavored.

Fresh lime juice

Freshly squeezed lime juice is the key ingredient. The most common lime in the United States is the thick-skinned Persian lime. However, margaritas in Mexico are generally made with Mexican limes (Key limes). These are small, thin-skinned limes and have more tart and an often bitter flavor compared to Persian limes.

Frozen margarita

A variation of the margarita as a blended ice drink.

Other fruits

Alternate fruits and juice mixtures can also be used in a margarita. Fruits like mango, peach, strawberry banana, melon, or raspberry are suitable for creating this drink. Many recipes call for a splash of orange juice. Nowadays, margarita can be prepared in many different ways. When the word "margarita" is used by itself, it typically refers to the lime or lemon juice margarita, but when other juices are used, the fruits are typically added as adjectives in the name; with lime juice or lemon juice added to give it a characteristic margarita flavor (a wedge of lime is often added to the glass). Other varieties of margarita include: fruit margarita, top-shelf margarita and virgin margarita.

History

Origin

The exact origin and inventor of the margarita is unknown.
One of the earliest stories is of the margarita being invented in 1938 by Carlos "Danny" Herrera at his restaurant Rancho La Gloria, halfway between Tijuana and Rosarito, Mexico, created for customer and former Ziegfeld dancer Marjorie King, who was allergic to many spirits, but not to tequila.
Hussong's Cantina in Ensenada, Mexico, has also been cited as the place where the margarita was created, in October 1941, by bartender Don Carlos Orozco. Institute de Investigaciones Historicas UABC; Hazard, Ann (2002), Agave Sunsets, Treasured Tales of Baja, Renegade Enterprises, pp 157-160. He concocted a mixture of equal parts tequila, Damiana (Cointreau is used now) and lime, served over ice in a salt-rimmed glass for Margarita Henkel, daughter of the German Ambassador to Mexico.
There are also claims that the margarita was first mixed in the El Paso-Juárez area at Tommy's Place Bar on July 4, 1942 by Francisco "Pancho" Morales. Morales later left bartending in Mexico to become a US citizen, where he worked as a milkman for 25 years. Mexico's official news agency Notimex and many experts have said Morales has the strongest claim to having invented the margarita."Francisco Morales; Credited With Inventing Margarita," Los Angeles Times, January 8, 1997.
Others say the inventor was Dallas socialite Margarita Sames, when she concocted the drink for her guests at her Acapulco vacation home in 1948. Tommy Hilton reportedly attended, bringing the drink back to the Hilton chain of hotels. However, Jose Cuervo was already running ad campaigns for the margarita three years earlier, in 1945, with the slogan, "Margarita: It's more than a girl's name." According to Jose Cuervo, the cocktail was invented in 1938 by a bartender in honor of Mexican showgirl Rita de la Rosa.Stacy Finz, "Mastering the margarita: Tequila aside, even experts can't agree on what goes into the legendary cocktail," San Francisco Chronicle, July 25, 2008.
Another common origin tale begins the cocktail's history at the legendary Balinese Room in Galveston, Texas where, in 1948, head bartender Santos Cruz created the margarita for singer Peggy (Margaret) Lee. He supposedly named it after the Spanish version of her name, Margarita, and it's been a hit ever since. .
The first known publication of a margarita recipe was in the December 1953 issue of Esquire, with a recipe calling for an ounce of tequila, a dash of triple sec and the juice of half a lime or lemon. A recipe for a tequila-based cocktail first appeared in the 1930 book My New Cocktail Book by G.F. Steele. Without noting a specific recipe or inventor, a drink called the Tequila Daisy was mentioned in the Syracuse Herald as early as 1936. Margarita is Spanish for Daisy, which is a nickname for Margaret."Once upon a time in Mexico," Imbibe, March/April 2010.
A later story is that the margarita was invented in October 1961, at a party in Houston, Texas, by party goer Robert James "Rusty" Thomson while acting as bartender. He concocted a mixture of equal parts tequila, orange liqueur, lime, and crushed ice in a salt-rimmed glass. However, Thomson's recipe was made with Damiana Liqueur, not Cointreau orange liqueur. It is said that the idea was an experiment after running out of rum while making frozen daiquiris.
Another explanation, however, is that the margarita is merely a popular American drink, the Daisy, remade with tequila instead of brandy, which became popular during Prohibition as people drifted over the border for alcohol. There is an account from 1936 of Iowa newspaper editor James Graham finding such a cocktail in Tijuana, years before any of the other Margarita "creation myths".

Image:Blended Margarita.jpg|A blended margarita
File:Margarita.

Glass

Margaritas may be served in a variety of glasses, most notably the stereotypical margarita glass, a variant of the classic Champagne coupe; this is particularly associated with blended fruit margaritas, and the glass is also used for dishes such as guacamole or shrimp cocktails. In formal settings margaritas are often served in a standard cocktail glass, while in informal settings, particularly with ice, margaritas may be served in an old-fashioned glass.

Popularity

The margarita cocktail was the "Drink of the Month" in Esquire magazine, December 1953, pg. 76:
It was further popularized by the Jimmy Buffett song "Margaritaville".








