[[Eleanor Hibbert]]

CATEGORIES: 1906 births, 1993 deaths, 20th-century English writers, British novelists, British romantic fiction writers, English historical novelists, Writers of historical fiction set in the Middle Ages, Writers of historical romances, Writers from London

Eleanor Hibbert (1 September 1906 – 18 January 1993) was an English author who combined imagination with facts to bring history alive through novels of fiction and romance. She was a prolific writer who published several books a year in different literary genres, each genre under a different pen name: Jean Plaidy for fictionalized history of European royalty; Victoria Holt for gothic romances, and Philippa Carr for a multi-generational family saga. She also wrote light romances, crime novels, murder mysteries and thrillers under the names Eleanor Burford, Elbur Ford, Kathleen Kellow, Anna Percival, and Ellalice Tate.
In 1989, the Romance Writers of America gave her the Golden Treasure award in recognition of her significant contributions to the romance genre.

Biography

Personal life

Hibbert was born Eleanor Alice Burford on 1 September 1906 in Canning Town, now part of the London borough of Newham... In: Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004), citing a source that quotes the birth certificate. Earlier reports that she was born in Kennington or Kensington are unexplained. Retrieved 10 October 2010. She inherited a love of reading from her father, Joseph Burford, a dock labourer.
Hibbert left school at the age of 16 and went to a business college, where she studied shorthand, typewriting, and languages. She then worked for a jeweller in Hatton Garden, where she weighed gems and typed. She also worked as a language interpreter in a cafe.
In her early twenties she married George Percival Hibbert (ca. 1886–1960s), a wholesale leather merchant about twenty years older than herself, who shared her love of books and reading...
Eleanor Hibbert died on 18 January 1993 on a cruise ship somewhere between Greece and Port Said, Egypt and was buried at sea. A memorial service was later held on 6 March 1993, at St Peter's Anglican Church, Kensington Park Road, London...

Writing career

At first Eleanor tried to emulate her literary heroes – the Brontës, George Eliot, Charles Dickens, Victor Hugo, and Leo Tolstoy – and during the 1930s she completed nine long novels, all of them serious psychological studies of contemporary life. However, none of these were accepted for publication. Determined to succeed, she tried her hand at short stories for newspapers such as the Daily Mail and Evening News. Some also appeared in The Star, Woman's Realm and Ladies' Home Journal. The literary editor of the Daily Mail was credited with steering her writing in the right direction; he told her, "You're barking up the wrong tree: you must write something which is saleable, and the easiest way is to write romantic fiction."
She published her first novel in 1941 under the name of Eleanor Burford, her maiden name, which she used for her contemporary novels. By 1961 she had published 32 novels under this name, including ten romance novels for Mills & Boon.
In 1950, she chose the pseudonym Jean Plaidy for her historical novels about the crowned heads of Europe. The name was inspired by Plaidy Beach near the Hibberts' home in Looe, Cornwall during World War II.
From 1950 to 1953 she wrote four novels as Elbur Ford, a pen name derived from her maiden name, Eleanor Burford. Between 1952 to 1960 she used the pseudonym Kathleen Kellow to write eight novels that were mostly crime and mystery fiction. From 1956 to 1961 she wrote five novels as Ellalice Tate, a pseudonym inspired by her mother's name, Alice Tate.
In 1960, at the suggestion of her agent, Patricia Schartle Myrer, she wrote her first Gothic romance, The Mistress of Mellyn, under the name Victoria Holt. Published by Doubleday in the United States, it became an instant international bestseller. Hibbert wrote a further 31 novels as Victoria Holt, the last of which, The Black Opal, was published after her death. These novels were primarily historical fiction set in the late 19th century.
Hibbert wrote just one novel under the name Anna Percival, a pseudonym inspired by her husband's middle name, Percival.
She created her last pseudonym, Philippa Carr, in 1972 at the suggestion of her publisher, William Collins, to create a new series showing successive generations of English gentlewomen involved in important historical events starting with the Reformation and ending with World War II.
Hibbert was a profilic writer, churning out multiple books in a year under different pseduonyms, chiefly Jean Plaidy, Victoria Holt and Philippa Carr.
By the time of her death in 1993, she had sold 75 million books translated in 20 languages under the name Victoria Holt, 14 million under the name Jean Plaidy and 3 million under the name Philippa Carr.

Eleanor Burford

Single novels

Daughters of England Series

The Mary Stuart Queen of Scots Series

Jean Plaidy

Many Jean Plaidy books were published under different titles in the United States. Her trilogies were also later republished as single books, often under different titles than those shown.

Single novels

Omnibus

The Tudor Saga

The Catherine De Medici Trilogy

The Mary Stuart, Queen of Scots Series

The Stuart Saga

The French Revolution Series

The Lucrezia Borgia Series

The Isabella and Ferdinand Trilogy

The Georgian Saga

The Queen Victoria Series

The Norman Trilogy

The Plantagenet Saga

The Queens of England Series

Children's novels

The Spanish Inquisition Series (non-fiction)

Historical non-fiction

Three Rivers Press editions

In the Spring of 2003 Three Rivers Press, an imprint of U.S.A. publisher Crown Publishing Group, started republishing Jean Plaidy's stories. Three Rivers Press published some of the books with new titles which are listed here:

Elbur Ford

Single novels

Kathleen Kellow

Some of these novels were re-published under the Jean Plaidy name.

Single novels

Ellalice Tate

All these novels were later re-published under the Jean Plaidy name.

Single novels

Anna Percival

Single novels

Victoria Holt

Single novels

Omnibus

Anthologies in collaboration

Philippa Carr

Daughters of England Series

Single novels






