[[Smegma]]

CATEGORIES: Exocrine system, Excretion, Circumcision debate, Mammal female reproductive system, Mammal male reproductive system

Smegma (Greek smēgma, "soap") is a combination of exfoliated (shed) epithelial cells, transudated skin oils, and moisture. It occurs in both female and male mammalian genitalia.

Human smegma

Both sexes can produce smegma. In males, smegma is produced and can collect under the foreskin; in females, it collects around the clitoris and in the folds of the labia minora.

Females

The accumulation of sebum combined with dead skin cells forms smegma.  Smegma clitoridis is defined as the secretion of the apocrine glands of the clitoris, in combination with desquamating epithelial cells. Glands that are located around the clitoris and the vulva majoris secrete sebum.  Contaminated, and retained smegma (smegmaliths) usually disappear when the cause is removed.C.F. McDonald, M.D.  "Circumcision of the Female"

Males

In males, smegma helps keep the glans moist and facilitates sexual intercourse by acting as a lubricant.

Smegma was originally thought to be produced by sebaceous glands near the frenulum called Tyson's glands; however, subsequent studies have failed to find these glands. Wright states that smegma is produced from minute microscopic protrusions of the mucosal surface of the foreskin and that living cells constantly grow towards the surface, undergo fatty degeneration, separate off, and form smegma. Parkash et al. found that smegma contains 26.6% fats and 13.3% proteins, which they judged to be consistent with necrotic epithelial debris. Newly produced smegma has a smooth, moist texture. It is thought to be rich in squalene
According to Wright, little smegma is produced during childhood, although the foreskin may contain sebaceous glands. She also says that production of smegma increases from adolescence until sexual maturity when the function of smegma for lubrication assumes its full value, and from middle-age production starts to decline and in old age virtually no smegma is produced. Øster reported that the incidence of smegma increased from 1% among 6-7 and 8-9 year olds to 8% among 14-15 and 16-17 year olds (an overall incidence of 5%).

=Smegma and penile cancer=

Some studies have suggested a link between smegma and penile cancer, and in the past some experts were concerned that smegma may also contain compounds that can cause cancer. There is no evidence that smegma causes penile cancer, but its presence over a long period of time may irritate and inflame the penis, which may increase the risk of cancer. It may also make it harder to see very early cancers. Smegma is harmless. Excessive washing of the penis with soap may cause non-specific dermatitis and should be avoided.

Other mammals

In healthy animals, smegma helps clean and lubricate the genitals. In veterinary medicine, analysis of this smegma is sometimes used for detection of urogenital tract pathogens, such as Tritrichomonas foetus. Accumulation of smegma in the equine preputial folds and the urethral fossa and urethral diverticulum can form large "beans" and promote the carriage of Taylorella equigenitalis, the causative agent of contagious equine metritis. Disease strategy: Contagious equine metritis (Version 1.0). In: Australian Veterinary Emergency Plan (AUSVETPLAN), Edition 3, PIMCANZ, Canberra, ACT. Some equine veterinarians have recommended periodic cleaning of male genitals to improve the health of the animal. "A Clean Sheath Is A Healthy Sheath". Horse City.



Notes


