[[Maundy Thursday]]

CATEGORIES: Thursday, Eastern Orthodox liturgical days, Christian festivals and holy days, Holy Week, Moveable holidays (Easter date based)

Maundy Thursday (also known as Holy Thursday, Covenant Thursday, Great and Holy Thursday, Sheer Thursday and Thursday of Mysteries) is the Christian feast, or holy day, falling on the Thursday before Easter. It commemorates the Maundy and Last Supper of Jesus Christ with the Apostles as described in the Canonical gospels.
The date is always between 19 March and 22 April inclusive, but these dates fall on different days depending on whether the Gregorian or Julian calendar is used liturgically. Eastern churches generally use the Julian calendar, and so celebrate this feast throughout the 21st century between 1 April and 5 May in the more commonly used Gregorian calendar. The liturgy held on the evening of Maundy Thursday initiates the Easter Triduum, the period which commemorates the passion, death, and resurrection of Christ; this period includes Good Friday, Holy Saturday, and ends on the evening of Easter.

Names in English

Use of the names "Maundy Thursday", "Holy Thursday", and the others is not evenly distributed. What is considered the normal name for the day varies according to geographical area and religious allegiance.  Thus, although in England "Maundy Thursday" is the normal term, the term is rarely used in Ireland or Scotland in religious contexts.  People may use one term in a religious context and another in the context of the civil calendar of the country in which they live.
The Anglican Church uses the name "Maundy Thursday" in the Book of Common Prayer,
The Roman Catholic Church, even in countries where "Maundy Thursday" is the name in civil legislation, uses the name "Holy Thursday" in its official English-language liturgical books.
The United Methodist Church uses the name "Holy Thursday" in its UM Book of Worship,
Both names are used by other Christian denominations as well, including the Lutheran Church
In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the name for the holy day is, in the Byzantine Rite, "Great and Holy Thursday"
In the Maronite ChurchLiturgical Notes: Thursday of Mysteries the name is "Thursday of Mysteries".
"Maundy Thursday" is the official name in the civil legislation of England
The day has also been known in English as Shere Thursday (also spelled Sheer Thursday), from the word shere (meaning "clean" or "bright"). or for a combination of reasons."The old English name for Maundy Thursday was 'Sheer Thursday', when the penitents obtained absolution, trimmed their hair and beards, and washed in preparation for Easter" (Hungarian Saints). This name is a cognate to the word still used throughout Scandinavia, such as Swedish "Skärtorsdag", Danish "Skærtorsdag", Norwegian "Skjærtorsdag", Faroese "Skírhósdagur" and "Skírisdagur" and Icelandic "Skírdagur". Skär in Swedish is also an archaic word for wash.

Derivation of the name "Maundy"

Most scholars agree that the English word Maundy in that name for the day is derived through Middle English and Old French mandé, from the Latin mandatum, the first word of the phrase "Mandatum novum do vobis ut diligatis invicem sicut dilexi vos" ("A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you"), the statement by Jesus in the Gospel of  by which Jesus explained to the Apostles the significance of his action of washing their feet. The phrase is used as the antiphon sung in the Roman Rite during the "Mandatum" ceremony of the washing of the feet, which may be held during Mass or at another time as a separate event, during which a priest or bishop (representing Christ) ceremonially washes the feet of others, typically 12 persons chosen as a cross-section of the community.
Others theorize that the English name "Maundy Thursday" arose from "maundsor baskets" or "maundy purses" of alms which the king of England distributed to certain poor at Whitehall before attending Mass on that day.  Thus, "maund" is connected to the Latin mendicare, and French mendier, to beg.Shepherd of the Springs, Lutheran Church-Missouri Synod

Services

Western Christianity

Holy Thursday is notable for being the day on which the Chrism Mass is celebrated in each diocese.  Usually held in the diocese's cathedral, in this Mass the holy oils are blessed by the bishop, consisting of the chrism, oil of the sick, and oil of catechumens.  The oil of the catechumens and chrism are to be used on the coming Holy Saturday at the Easter Vigil, for the baptism and confirmation of those entering the church.
The Washing of the Feet is a traditional component of the celebration in many Christian churches, including the Armenian,

Eastern Christianity

In the Eastern Orthodox Church, the Lenten character of the services is for the most part set aside. The liturgical colours are changed from the somber Lenten hues to more festive colours, white being common. On this day alone during Holy Week, the fast is relaxed to permit consumption of wine and oil.
The primary service of this day is Vespers combined with the Liturgy of St. Basil the Great at which is read the first Passion Gospel (), known as the "Gospel of the Testament", and many of the normal hymns of the Divine Liturgy are substituted with the following troparion:
 Of Thy Mystical Supper, O Son of God, accept me today as a communicant; for I will not speak of Thy Mystery to Thine enemies, neither will I give Thee a kiss like Judas. But like the Thief will I confess Thee: Remember me, O Lord, in Thy Kingdom. 
When necessary to replenish the sacrament for communing the sick at a time not following a divine liturgy, an additional Lamb (Host) is consecrated on this day, intincted, covered, and left to dry until Holy Saturday when it is divided, completely dried with a candle flame, and the pieces placed in the artophorion.
In cathedrals and monasteries the ceremony of the Washing of Feet is normally performed.
When there is need to consecrate more chrism, that is performed by patriarchs and other the heads of the various autocephalous churches.
In the evening, after the Liturgy, all of the hangings and vestments are changed to black or some other Lenten colour, to signify the beginning of the Passion.
Beginning on Holy and Great Thursday, the memorial service for the dead is forbidden until after Thomas Sunday.

=Local customs=

Customs and names from around the world

Public holiday

Maundy Thursday is a public holiday in Denmark, Iceland, Norway, Spain,except in the regions of Catalonia and Valencia Paraguay,  Mexico, Colombia, Costa Rica, Venezuela and The Philippines.
Certain German states declare a public holiday for public sector employees.

Seven Churches Visitation

The tradition of visiting seven churches on Holy Thursday is an ancient practice, probably originating in Rome.



References and footnotes




