[[Heather Graham]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, American child actresses, American film actresses, American people of Irish descent, American television actresses, Living people, Actresses from Milwaukee, Wisconsin, University of California, Los Angeles alumni, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Transcendental Meditation practitioners

Heather Joan Graham (born January 29, 1970) is an American actress. After starring in various commercials, her first starring role came in 1988 with the teen comedy License to Drive, followed by her breakout role in Gus Van Sant's critically acclaimed 1989 film Drugstore Cowboy. In 1999, she co-starred in Bowfinger and Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me.
In the 2000s, Graham starred in a number of movies ranging from studio films to major films like Committed (2000), Say It Isn't So (2001), Anger Management (2003), Mary (2005), Gray Matters (2007), The Hangover (2009) and The Hangover Part III (2013). She also had a role in the TV series Scrubs in 2004, before starring as the title character in the short-lived (one episode) Emily's Reasons Why Not in 2006. Widely regarded as a sex symbol, she often appears in magazines' lists of "Most Beautiful" and "Sexiest" women. 
Graham is also a public advocate for Children International, and supported the climate change campaign Global Cool in 2007.

Early life

Heather Graham was born in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, the older of two children. Her family is "three-quarters Irish", with her father's side from County Cork. She was introduced to acting during a school production of The Wizard of Oz.
After high school, Graham enrolled in extension classes at the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA) and studied English for two years. After two years, Graham withdrew from UCLA to pursue acting full-time, despite her parents' objections.

Career

Early work (1984–88)

Graham's first film appearance was an uncredited cameo in Mrs. Soffel (1984).

Breakthrough (1989–1996)

In 1989, Graham was featured in Gus Van Sant's Drugstore Cowboy as Nadine, a young drug-addicted friend of the two main characters (played by Matt Dillon and Kelly Lynch). The performance earned her a nomination for the Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting Actress. She also rejected a steady role in a TV soap opera and a three-picture deal with a major studio because she thought it would be too restrictive. After Drugstore Cowboy she appeared in Lawrence Kasdan's dark comedy I Love You to Death (1990), alongside William Hurt and Keanu Reeves and the rock-and-roll coming-of-age film Shout (1991), for which she received a nomination for the Young Artist Award for Best Actress Starring in a Motion Picture.
After co-starring with Benicio Del Toro in a Calvin Klein commercial directed by David Lynch, the director cast her as former nun Annie Blackburn in his television series Twin Peaks. Following the cancellation of the series, Graham reprised the role of Blackburn in the 1992 prequel film Twin Peaks: Fire Walk with Me. Regarding her casting process she said: "He's just one of those people — he doesn't really make you audition. He just meets you, and he just thinks you're interesting, and he just sticks you in there ... I remember him telling me that he was doing this art project in his backyard. And that he was putting turkey, and laying it out and having ants crawling on it, and then he was going to, like, I don't know, I think take pictures of it", and stated she was "very excited" to work with Lynch.
She was also cast in Scorchers (1991), but was fired. The same year she co-starred as Mary Kennedy Parker in Mrs. Parker and the Vicious Circle. In 1995 she starred as Jackie in the poorly received Desert Winds and guest-starred in an episode of the television series Fallen Angels. She had a small but important role in Swingers (1996), where she played Lorraine, Jon Favreau's love interest. A popular rumor is that Graham received the role of Lorraine after Favreau took her swing dancing.
Graham also auditioned for the Sarah Jessica Parker role in L.A. Story (1991) and the Angelina Jolie role in Hackers (1995). She was also considered by Gus Van Sant for the Nicole Kidman role in ''To Die For.

Wider industry and public recognition (1997–2003)

Graham's popularity significantly increased after she appeared as a young porn star named Brandi, nicknamed Rollergirl because she never takes her rollerskates off, in Paul Thomas Anderson's critically acclaimed, award-winning
She starred as Felicity Shagwell in the 1999 sequel Austin Powers: The Spy Who Shagged Me, which was a box-office hit. Shagwell is one of her best-known roles and became a fan favorite.
The 2000 film Committed was her first starring vehicle. She played Joline, devoted-beyond-reason young wife looking for the husband who left her. While the film itself received mixed-to-negative reviews, critics felt that "Graham shows she can play a central character" but noted "she's not enough to make Committed successful".  In 2009, the site also rated it #12 on the countdown of the worst films over the last 10 years.
Graham's other appearances in mainstream roles include playing Mary Kelly in the 2001 film From Hell, based on the story of Jack the Ripper, Anger Management (2003), opposite Adam Sandler and Jack Nicholson, the Farrelly Brothers comedy Say It Isn't So (2001), opposite Sally Field,  (2002), opposite Jimi Mistry and Hope Springs (2003) opposite Colin Firth.
She had to turn down the role of the female lead in Rounders (1998), which went to Gretchen Mol, due to scheduling conflicts. She also turned down the Teri Polo role in Meet the Parents (2000) and the Shannon Elizabeth role in Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back(2001). She was attached to the Kim Dickens role in Things Behind The Sun, but ultimately backed out. She was also considered for the Cameron Diaz role in Gangs of New York and the Renée Zellweger role in Chicago (both 2002).

Independent films and television (2004–08)

During this period, Graham starred in the independent films Gray Matters, Broken, Adrift in Manhattan (all 2007) and Miss Conception (2008), which received negative-to-mixed reviews and most of them went mostly unnoticed at the box-office. 
Her 2005 film Mary holds a 63% fresh rating on Rotten Tomatoes, the first since Bowfinger. The film premiered at the 2005 Venice Film Festival where it won the Special Jury Prize as well as three smaller awards. The film also played at the 2005 Toronto Film Festival, Deauville Film Festival and San Sebastián International Film Festival and co-starred Juliette Binoche, Forest Whitaker, Marion Cotillard and Matthew Modine. In 2006 she co-starred in Bobby as Angela, and the cast was nominated for a Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture.
During this period Graham also spoke about developing a comedy film titled The Accidental Virgin which would've focused on "female sexual confusion", telling the story of a woman who hasn't had sex in a year. The film has not been made. She also stated she would be interested in directing in the future if there is "something that, its burning in my mind that I need to do".
On television, Graham played herself on one episode of the TV series Sex and the City. She was given special guest-star status on nine episodes of NBC-TV's Scrubs during its fourth season (2004–2005), and also appeared as George Michael Bluth's ethics teacher in an episode of Fox's television series, Arrested Development in 2004. She played Emily Sanders in Emily's Reasons Why Not, however, the sitcom was canceled after airing only one episode.
Graham was considered for the role of opportunistic trophy wife Kendall Casablancas in the cult television series Veronica Mars, but since she was already busy working on Emily, Charisma Carpenter was cast instead.

The Hangover and after (2009–present)

In 2009, Graham played the stripper with a heart of gold (technically an escort), Jade, in The Hangover, which was released to critical and box office success. She won the role after Lindsay Lohan turned it down.
Graham voiced the character of Antonia Bayle in the online role-playing game EverQuest 2.
She played Meredith Crown in At Any Price, which stars Dennis Quaid and Zac Efron and was selected to compete for the Golden Lion at the 69th Venice International Film Festival, and later screened as an official selection at both the Telluride Film Festival and Toronto Film Festival. Upcoming roles include mob lawyer Annette Stratton-Osborne in Behaving Badly and short story writer Mary Bellanova in My Dead Boyfriend (both 2014). She wrote a comedy screenplay called Half Magic, which she stated she wants to direct. She said the story focuses on "these female friends and sexuality and about people having a sense of shame about sexuality and learning how to have a healthier attitude about it ... It also deals with male/female relationships and sexism".
In 2012 she was a member of the jury of the 15th Shanghai International Film Festival.
In 2014, she will star in the second adaption of V. C. Andrews novel Flowers in the Attic on the Lifetime network; she will play the character of Corrine Dollanganger.

Activism

Besides her acting work, Graham is also an activist who serves as a public advocate for Children International. She stated that what she likes about Children International is that "you are helping a child have a better life. It's great for that child to know that someone who lives in another country cares about them".

In the media

Graham is considered a sex symbol: she was ranked at number 40 in FHM's 100 Sexiest Women in the World list in 2000, number 95 in 2001 list, number 97 in the 2002 list, number #74 in the 2005 list and at number #98 in 2006 list. In 2001 she was named one of the 50 Most Beautiful People by People. In 2003, she also posed for a photoshoot by photographer Sam Jones, during which she was levitated several feet into the air by a magician, who later also sawed her in half.
Graham is often cast in sexual roles including those of Felicity Shagwell (Austin Powers: The Spy who Shagged Me), porn stars Rollergirl (Boogie Nights) and Sharonna (The Guru), prostitute Mary Kelly (From Hell), porn director Margaret (About Cherry) and stripper Jade (The Hangover and The Hangover, Part III). She stated she finds these types of roles and the issue of sexuality fascinating, and believes that "our culture sends out mixed messages to women about sex. Are women supposed to be sexually alive people, or are we supposed to be 'good' mothers who would never do those things?" and that she likes "the fact some of my roles maybe help people open their minds about the way they think about sex". Due to her portrayals of sexual characters and nudity in films she has been described as "completely up for it".
In 2005, Graham became the spokeswoman and TV model for the Garnier brand of hair care products.

Personal life

Graham has dated UK musician/actor Adam Ant, actors James Woods, whom she first met while studying at UCLA, Kyle McLachlan and Heath Ledger, whom she met in Prague while filming From Hell, and directors Stephen Hopkins, Edward Burns and Yaniv Raz.
Graham is estranged from her family. Regarding the media's perception of her relationship with her family, she stated: "I don't really like to talk about my parents. Because I just feel that it gets misinterpreted in the press, and stuff...".
She stated she enjoys playing poker and going to yoga retreats in Mexico. She has been practicing transcendental meditation since 1991 after being introduced to it by David Lynch. She also expressed dislike towards reality television, stating in a 2007 interview: "I think some of it, it seems strange – why do we all want to watch people be so miserable?  Other people's pain and misery – it seems kind of sad".
On September 11, 2001 Graham was due to move into an apartment she had bought in Manhattan. Speaking about that day she said: "I was flying into New York that morning from the Toronto Film Festival. I'd bought an apartment in Manhattan and I was due to move in that day. We were flying towards New York when I could see this huge black cloud over the city. The first plane had hit the Twin Towers but nobody knew what was happening at that stage. We landed and I was in the baggage-claim area when the second plane hit the towers. There was general panic. After going through something like that, you never take anything for granted again."

Filmography






