[[Scottish Green Party]]

CATEGORIES: Scottish Green Party, Political parties established in 1990, 1990 establishments in Scotland, Organisations based in Edinburgh, Global Greens member parties, Republicanism in Scotland, Republicanism in the United Kingdom, Scottish independence movement

The Scottish Green Party () is a green party in Scotland. It has two MSPs in the devolved Scottish Parliament: Alison Johnstone, representing Lothian; and Patrick Harvie, representing Glasgow.
It is the only party other than the Scottish National Party to both support Scottish independence and have representation in Scottish Parliament.

Organisation

The Scottish Green Party is fully independent, but works closely with the other green parties of the United Kingdom and Ireland: the Green Party of England and Wales, the Green Party in Northern Ireland and the Green Party of Ireland. It is a full member of the European Green Party. The party currently has two MSPs and fourteen councillors. At the 2005 Westminster election, the party contested 19 seats and polled 25,760 votes, they returned no MPs. Its highest share of the vote was 7.7% of the vote in Glasgow North. In the European Parliament election of 2004, it polled 6.8% of the vote and did no return any MEPs. The party lost five of their seven seats in the 2007 Scottish Parliament election.
According to accounts filed with the Electoral Commission for the year ending December 31, 2009, the party had an income of about £90,230 that year, an expenditure of £61,165 and a membership of 1,072.The Scottish Green Party Statement of Accounts For The Year Ended 31 December 2009, Electoral Commission website, retrieved 10 May 2011

History

The Scottish Green Party was a constituent part of the former UK Green Party until 1990, when the Scottish Green Party became a separate entity. The separation was entirely amicable, as part of the green commitment to decentralisation: the Scottish Green Party supports a referendum on Scottish independence. The Scottish Green Party benefits from the fact that the British government created a Scottish Parliament, which  is elected using the additional member system of proportional representation. In the first election to this Parliament, in 1999, the Scottish Green Party got one Member of the Scottish Parliament (MSP) elected by proportional representation, Robin Harper, the UK's first Green Parliamentarian.  On 1 May 2003 the Scottish Greens added six new MSPs to their previous total.
In the 2007 elections, the Party lost five seats in Holyrood. However in the council elections, taking place under the new Single Transferable Vote voting system, they gained three Councillors on the City of Edinburgh Council and five Councillors on Glasgow City Council. On 11 May, the Greens signed an agreementSNP and Greens sign working deal, BBC News website, 11 May 2007, accessed 6 January 2010   Text of Scottish National Party and Scottish Green Party Cooperation Agreement (60Kb pdf), accessed 6 January 2010 with the Scottish National Party, which meant that the Greens voted for Alex Salmond as First Minister and supported his initial Ministerial appointments. In return, the Nationalists backed a climate change bill as an early measure and promised to legislate against ship-to-ship oil transfers in the Firth of Forth. The SNP also agreed to nominate Patrick Harvie, one of the Green MSPs, to convene one of the Holyrood committees: Transport, Infrastructure and Climate Change.
On 28 January 2009, the two Green MSPs were instrumental in the defeat of the Government's budget,Scottish budget rejected by MSPs BBC News, 28 January 2009 though a slightly amended version was passed easily the following week. On 31 May, Cllr Martin Ford, formerly a Liberal Democrat, joined the Scottish Green Party in protest against the plans by Donald Trump to develop on an important environmental site at Menie. Councillor Debra Storr stood down at the 2012 Scottish local elections to concentrate on her professional career. Councillor Martin Ford was successfully re-elected, this time standing as a Scottish Green Party candidate.
After the Scottish Government announced the upcoming referendum on Scottish independence, a campaign group called Yes Scotland was established to promote a vote for independence. Leading members of the Scottish Green Party have actively supported and become involved with the campaign since its foundation, with Patrick Harvie among the members of Yes Scotland's Advisory Board.

Policy

According to the party's website, current policy is guided by the party's 2005 Westminster election, 2007 Holyrood election, and 2009 European election manifestos.Policy Overview, party website, accessed 28 December 2009
According to the same website, the party is committed to forming a sustainable society,The expression sustainable society appears also in the title Manifesto for a Sustainable Society, which is still the principle policy-reference document of the Green Party of England and Wales  See The Green Party of England & Wales Policy and Manifesto for a Sustainable Society, Green Party of England and Wales policy website, accessed 28 December 2009 and is guided by four interconnected principles:
The party claims that, taken together, these principles give the party a holistic view that is in common with all Green parties around the world.The Principles of the Scottish Green Party, party website, accessed 28 December 2009

MSPs

All of the Scottish Green Party's Members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs) have been elected under the list or "top-up" system of representation in the Parliament.The Green MSPs' blog

Current MSPs

Previous MSPs

Councillors

The party made its first major breakthroughs at council level in the 2007 local elections, electing 8 councillors. In the 2012 local elections this was increased to 14. To date, no Scottish Green Party councillor has lost their seat.

Aberdeenshire Council

City of Edinburgh Council

Glasgow City Council

Midlothian Council

Stirling Council

Previous councillors

Prior to the 2007 elections, the Party had only ever elected one councillor at local level: in May 1990, Roger (aka Rory) Winter, representing the Highland Green Party (Uainich na Gàidhealtachd), was elected in Nairn as Scotland's first Green regional councillor to the then Highland Regional Council. Cllr Winter broke away from the Greens in 1991 and continued his four-year term as an Independent Green Highlander.

Electoral performance



Footnotes




