[[The Dam Busters (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 1955 films, World War II aviation films, British films, British war films, British aviation films, World War II films based on actual events, Royal Air Force media, Elstree Studios films, Films set in England, Films set in Lincolnshire, Films set in Germany, Films based on works by Australian writers, Films directed by Michael Anderson, Films based on multiple works

The Dam Busters (1955) is a British Second World War war film starring Michael Redgrave and Richard Todd and directed by Michael Anderson. The film recreates the true story of Operation Chastise when in 1943 the RAF's 617 Squadron attacked the Möhne, Eder and Sorpe dams in Germany with Barnes Wallis's "bouncing bomb".
The film was based on the books The Dam Busters (1951) by Paul Brickhill and Enemy Coast Ahead (1946) by Guy Gibson. The film's reflective last minutes convey the poignant mix of emotions felt by the characters – triumph over striking a successful blow against the enemy's industrial base is greatly tempered by the sobering knowledge that many died in the process of delivering it.

Plot

In the early years of the Second World War, aeronautical engineer Barnes Wallis is struggling to develop a means of attacking Germany's dams in the hope of crippling German heavy industry. Working for the Ministry of Aircraft Production, as well as doing his own job at Vickers, he works feverishly to make practical his theory of a bouncing bomb which would skip over the water to avoid protective torpedo nets. When it came into contact with the dam, it would sink before exploding, making it much more destructive. Wallis calculates that the aircraft will have to fly extremely low () to enable the bombs to skip over the water correctly, but when he takes his conclusions to the Ministry, he is told that lack of production capacity means they cannot go ahead with his proposals.
Angry and frustrated, Wallis secures an interview with Sir Arthur "Bomber" Harris (played by Basil Sydney), the head of RAF Bomber Command, who at first is reluctant to take the idea seriously. Eventually, however, he is convinced and takes the idea to the Prime Minister, who authorises the project.
Bomber Command forms a special squadron of Lancaster bombers, 617 Squadron, to be commanded by Wing Commander Guy Gibson, and tasked to fly the mission. He recruits experienced crews, especially those with low-altitude flight experience. While they train for the mission, Wallis continues his development of the bomb but has problems, such as the bomb breaking apart upon hitting the water. This requires the drop altitude to be reduced to . With only a few weeks to go, he succeeds in fixing the problems and the mission can go ahead.
The bombers attack the dams. Several Lancasters and their crews are lost, but the overall mission succeeds and two dams are breached.

Cast

In credits order.

Production

The flight sequences of the film were shot using real Avro Lancaster bombers supplied by the RAF. The aircraft, four of the final production B. A number of Avro Lincoln bombers were also used as "set dressing."Garbettt and Goulding 1971, pp. 142–143. (An American cut was made more dramatic by depicting an aircraft flying into a hill and exploding. This version used stock footage from Warner Brothers of a Boeing B-17 Flying Fortress, not a Lancaster.)
The Upper Derwent Valley in Derbyshire (the test area for the real raids) doubled as the Ruhr valley for the film. The scene where the Dutch coast is crossed was filmed between Boston, Lincolnshire and King's Lynn, Norfolk, and other coastal scenes near Skegness. Additional aerial footage was shot above Windermere, in the Lake District.
While RAF Scampton, where the real raid launched, was used for some scenes, the principal airfield used for ground location shooting was RAF Hemswell, a few miles north and still an operational RAF station at the time of filming. Guy Gibson had been based at Hemswell in his final posting and the airfield had been an operational Avro Lancaster base during the war. At the time filming took place it was then home to No. 109 Squadron and No. 139 Squadron RAF, who were both operating English Electric Canberras on electronic counter measures and nuclear air sampling missions over hydrogen bomb test sites in the Pacific and Australia. However, part of the RAF's fleet of ageing Avro Lincolns had been mothballed at Hemswell prior to being broken up and several of these static aircraft appeared in background shots during filming, doubling for additional No 617 Squadron Lancasters. The station headquarters building still stands on what is now an industrial estate and is named Gibson House. The four wartime hangars also still stand, little changed in external appearance since the war.
Serving RAF pilots from both squadrons based at Hemswell took turns flying the Lancasters during filming and found the close formation and low level flying around Derwentwater and Windermere exhilarating and a welcome change from their normal high level solo Canberra sorties.
Three of the four Lancaster bombers used in the film had also appeared in the Dirk Bogarde film Appointment in London two years earlier." 'Appointment in London' (film)". imdb. Retrieved: 4 December 2009.

Historical accuracy

The film is accurate historically with only a few minor exceptions - theatrical adaptation -  mostly derived from Paul Brickhill's book, which itself was written when much detail about the raid was not yet in the public domain:

The Dambusters March

The main theme music, the Dambusters March by Eric Coates, is for many synonymous with the film, as well as with the exploit itself. As a reminder of British success, it remains a favourite military band item at flypasts and can be heard at football games during England matches. One version released featured dialogue extracts from the film (specifically, the bombing run scene).

Reception

The film was the most popular film at the British box office in 1955."'The Dam Busters'." Times England, 29 December 1955, p. 12 via The Times Digital Archive. Retrieved: 11 July 2012. As of 2013, The Dam Busters currently holds 100% maximum  approval rating on Rotten Tomatoes, indicating universal acclaim. At the same time, the film holds a four and a half star rating (7.2/10) on IMDb.

Remake

Work on a remake of The Dam Busters, produced by Peter Jackson and directed by first time director Christian Rivers, began in 2008. Jackson said in the mid-1990s that he became interested in remaking the 1954 film, but found that the rights had been bought by Mel Gibson. In 2004, Jackson was contacted by his agent, who said Gibson had dropped the rights. The rights were purchased by David Frost, from the Brickhill family in 2005. "Frost clears Dam Busters for take-off." guardian.co. Retrieved: 4 December 2009. Stephen Fry is writing the script of the film. "Fry denies 'Doctor Who' rumours." Digital Spy, 15 March 2007. Retrieved: 21 March 2007. It will be distributed by Universal Pictures and StudioCanal."Who you gonna call? The Dam Busters." W Weta Holics. Retrieved: 21 March 2007. Filming was planned to commence in early 2009, on a budget of USD 40 million,Cardy, Tom and Andrew Kelly. "Dambusters filming set for next year." The Dominion Post, 1 January 2008. Retrieved: 30 June 2008. although no project-specific filming had begun as of May 2009. "Takeoff Looms For Dam Film." The Dominion Post, 5 May 2009. Retrieved: 4 December 2009. The project has been delayed because Jackson decided to make The Hobbit.
Weta Workshop was making the models and special effects for the film and had made 10 life size Lancaster bombers."Weta Workshop Vehicles." wetanz. Retrieved: 4 December 2009. Gibson's dog "Nigger" will be called "Digger" in the remakeCardy, Tom. "Dambusters dog bone of contention." stuff.co. Retrieved: 20 May 2013.
The last living pilot of the strike team, Les Munro, joined the production crew in Masterton as technical adviser. Jackson was also to use newly declassified War Office documents to ensure the authenticity of the film. "Stars bow to hero of missions impossible." nzherald.co. Retrieved: 4 December 2009.

Influence



Notes

Citations

Bibliography




