[[Agatha Christie's Poirot]]

CATEGORIES: 1989 British television programme debuts, 2013 British television programme endings, 1980s British television series, 1990s British television series, 2000s British television series, 2010s British television series, A&E shows, British crime television series, Detective television series, Edgar Award winning works, Hercule Poirot, ITV television dramas, London Weekend Television programmes, Mystery!, Television programs based on novels, Television series by ITV Studios, Adaptations of works by Agatha Christie, Television series by Pinewood Studios, English-language television programming

Agatha Christie's Poirot  is a British television drama that aired on ITV from 8 January 1989 to 13 November 2013. David Suchet stars as the eponymous detective, Agatha Christie's fictional Hercule Poirot. Initially produced by LWT, the series was later produced by ITV Studios. In the United States, PBS and A&E have aired it as Poirot. 
At the programme's conclusion, which finished with Curtain, based on the final Poirot novel,

Episodes

Production

Clive Exton in partnership with producer Brian Eastman adapted the pilot. Together, they wrote and produced Series 1-8, respectively. Exton and Eastman left Poirot after 2001, when they began work on Rosemary & Thyme. Michele Buck and Damien Timmer, who both went on to form Mammoth Screen, were behind the revamping of the series.
Series 9-12 lack Hugh Fraser, Phillip Jackson, and Pauline Moran, who had appeared in the previous series (excepting series 4, where Moran is absent). Series 10 (2006) introduced Zoë Wanamaker as the eccentric crime novelist Ariadne Oliver and David Yelland as Poirot's dependable valet, George - a character that had been introduced in the early Poirot novels, but was left out of the early adaptations in order to develop the character of Miss Lemon. The introduction of Wanamaker and Yelland's characters and the absence of the other characters is generally consistent with the stories on which the scripts were based. Hugh Fraser returned for two episodes of the final series: (The Big Four and Curtain), with Phillip Jackson, Pauline Moran and David Yelland returning for the adaptation of The Big Four. Zoe Wanamaker also returned for the adaptations of Elephants Can Remember and Dead Man's Folly.
Clive Exton adapted seven novels and fourteen short stories for the series, including The ABC Murders and, more controversially, The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, as have Peter Flannery and Kevin Elyot. Ian Hallard, who co-wrote the screenplay for The Big Four with his partner Mark Gatiss, appears in the episode and also Hallowe'en Party, which was scripted by Mark Gatiss alone.
Florin Court in Charterhouse Square, London, was used as Poirot's fictional London residence, Whitehaven Mansions.

Regular cast

Casting

Suchet was recommended for the part by Christie's family, who had seen him appear as Blott in the TV adaptation of Tom Sharpe's Blott on the Landscape. During the filming of the first series, Suchet almost left the production during an argument with a director, insisting that Poirot's odd mannerisms (in this case, putting a handkerchief down before sitting on a park bench) be featured.mirror.co. 29 October 2013.
According to many critics and enthusiasts, Suchet's characterisation is considered to be the most accurate interpretation of all the actors who have played Poirot, and the closest to the character in the books. In 2013, Suchet revealed that Christie's daughter Rosalind Hicks had told him she was sure Christie would have approved of his performance.Curtain: Press Packet
In 2007, Suchet spoke of his desire to film the remaining stories in the canon and hoped to achieve this before his 65th birthday in May 2011. The remaining books were finally adapted in 2013 into 5 episodes, from which, Curtain, was aired last in 13 November 2013.

Development

Actors

Alongside recurring characters, the early series featured actors who later achieved greater fame, including Joely Richardson, (The Dream, 1989), Polly Walker (Peril at End House, 1990), Samantha Bond, (The Adventure of the Cheap Flat, 1990), Christopher Eccleston (One, Two, Buckle My Shoe, 1992), Hermione Norris (Jewel Robbery at The Grand Metropolitan, 1993), Damian Lewis (Hickory Dickory Dock, 1995), Jamie Bamber (The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, 2000), Russell Tovey (Evil Under the Sun, 2001), Emily Blunt (Death on the Nile, 2004), Alice Eve (The Mystery of the Blue Train, 2005), Michael Fassbender (After the Funeral, 2006) and Jessica Chastain (Murder on the Orient Express, 2010).
Two Academy Award nominees have appeared in the series: Sarah Miles and Barbara Hershey. Additionally, Jessica Chastain received her first Academy Award nomination the year after her performance in Poirot; Michael Fassbender received his first nomination approximately eight years after appearing on the show.  Several members of British thespian families appeared in episodes throughout the course of the series. James Fox appeared as Colonel Race in Death on the Nile, and his older brother Edward Fox appeared as Gudgeon in The Hollow. Three of the Cusack sisters each appeared in an episode: Niamh Cusack in The King of Clubs, Sorcha Cusack in Jewel Robbery at The Grand Metropolitan, and Sinéad Cusack in Dead Man's Folly.

=Multiple roles=

Seventeen actors have played multiple characters:

Reception

Agatha Christie's grandson Mathew has commented: "Personally, I regret very much that she (Agatha Christie) never saw David Suchet. I think that visually he is much the most convincing and perhaps he manages to convey to the viewer just enough of the irritation that we always associate with the perfectionist, to be convincing!"
More recently, the series has been described by some critics as going "off piste",

DVD and Blu-ray releases

In the UK, ITV Studios Home Entertainment owns the home media rights.
In Region 1, Acorn Media has the rights to series 1-6 and 11-12. Series 7-10 are distributed by A&E, a co-producers on several of them. In North America, series 1–6 are available on Netflix and Amazon Prime Instant Streaming service. In Region 4, Acorn Media (distributed by Reel DVD) has begun releasing the series on DVD in Australia in complete season sets. To date, they have released the first 8 series of the show. Series 1-9 and 12 are available in Spain (Region 2) on Blu-ray with Spanish and English audio tracks. Dutch FilmWorks were reported to be the first company to release series 12, in 2010.
Beginning in 2011, Acorn began issuing the series on Blu-ray discs. As of late 2013, series 1 through 10 have all been issued on Blu-ray by Acorn. The A&E DVD releases of series 7 through 10 corresponded to the A&E versions broadcast in America which were missing sections of the original video as originally broadcast in the United Kingdom. The Acorn releases of series 7 though 10 restore the missing video.

Being Poirot

Being Poirot is a 50-minute television programme in which David Suchet attempts to unravel the mysterious appeal of Hercule Poirot and how he  portrayed him. It was broadcast in the United Kingdom on the same evening as the final episode Curtain.
Suchet visited Greenway, Agatha Christie's summer home, recollecting how he met her daughter Rosylyn and her husband Anthony Hicks for their approval before he began filming. He now meets Christie's grandson Matthew Pritchard who recounts how his grandmother found the character amongst Belgian refugees in Torquay. A visit to the permanent Poirot exhibition at Torquay Museum to which he presented the cane he used in the television series.
Suchet acknowledged the first stage and film adaptations of the books with actors such as Charles Laughton on the London stage in Alibi, an adaptation of The Murder of Roger Ackroyd, in 1928. Alibi was filmed in 1931 with Austin Trevor but is now lost. The oldest surviving film portrayal from 1934 was Lord Edgware Dies again with Austin Trevor portraying Poirot. Suchet notes a conscious decision was made by the film company to portray Poirot without a moustache. Films featuring Albert Finney and Peter Ustinov were also featured and Suchet reveals he read the books and wrote down 93 notes of the character that he would use in his portrayal and for him it was discovering the voice he would use and the rapid mincing gait featured in the books.
Suchet also goes to Florin Court, a place that the production company found to represent his home Whitehaven Mansions. There he meets first producer Brian Eastman, with whom he discusses the set that was built based on the flats and Eastman's decision to fix the stories in 1936. Suchet also visits composer Christopher Gunning who had composed four themes for Eastman, the first being Gunning's favourite. Eastman chose the fourth after having Gunning darken the tone.
Suchet travels to Brussels, where he is feted by the police chief and mayor. He then goes to Ellezelles which claims to be the birthplace of Poirot and is shown a birth certificate as proof.  It says the date was April 1, "fools day" (no year mentioned). Finally, Suchet travels on the Orient Express and recounts filming the episode "Dead Man's Folly" last at Greenway to finish on a high note.






