[[Sarah Miles]]

CATEGORIES: 1941 births, Living people, Alumni of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art, English film actresses, English stage actresses, People educated at Roedean School, England, People from Essex

Sarah Miles (born 31 December 1941) is an English theatre and film actress. Her best known films include The Servant (1963), Blowup (1966), Ryan's Daughter (1970) and Hope and Glory (1987).

Life and career

Sarah Miles was born in the small town of Ingatestone, Essex, in South East England; her brother is film director, producer and screenwriter Christopher Miles. Miles's parents were Clarice Vera Remnant and Frank Remnant. Through her maternal grandfather Francis Remnant, Miles claims to be the great-granddaughter of Prince Francis of Teck (1870–1910) and thus a second cousin once removed of Elizabeth II. 20: "Clarice ... the eldest child of Francis (Frank) Remnant, bastard son of Prince Francis of Teck, Queen Mary's brother. Sexy old Frank, as he was known, came over when Mary married Prince George, who became George V, and had a cuddle with the seamstress in the White Lodge at Richmond."Rhoda Koenig, BOOK REVIEW Confessions of a wilful Pusscat: 'A Right Royal Bastard' dated Sunday 12 December 1993 at independent.co.uk, accessed 2 December 2011
Unable to speak until the age of nine because of a stammerBarry Egan "I can't wait to get off this planet", The Independent (Ireland), 16 September 2007 and dyslexia,Lynn Barber "Interview: Out to lunch with Sarah", The Independent, 12 July 1992 she attended Roedean, and three other schools, but was expelled from all of them. Miles enrolled at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art (RADA) at the age of 15. Shortly after finishing at RADA, Miles debuted as Shirley Taylor, a "husky wide-eyed nymphet"David Thomson A New Biographical Dictionary of Film, London: Little Brown, 2002, p.594  in Term of Trial (1962), which featured Laurence Olivier; she was nominated for the BAFTA Award for Best Newcomer. Soon afterwards, Miles had a role as "Vera from Manchester" in Joseph Losey's The Servant (1963), and "thrust sexual appetite into British films" according to David Thomson. She gained another BAFTA nomination, this time  as Best Actress. She had a "peripheral" part in Michelangelo Antonioni's Blowup (1966). a director she thought (at his death in 2007) was "a rogue and a tyrant and a brilliant man"."Blow-Up director Antonioni dies", BBC News, 31 July 2007
After acting in a several plays from 1966 to 1969, Miles was cast as Rosy in the leading title role of David Lean's Ryan's Daughter (1970). It was critically savaged, which discouraged Lean from making a film for some years, despite Miles' performance gaining her an Oscar nomination and an Oscar win for John Mills, and the film making a substantial profit. In Terence Pettigrew's biography of Trevor Howard, Miles describes the filming of Ryan's Daughter in Ireland in 1969. She recalls, "My main memory is of sitting on a hilltop in a caravan at six in the morning in the rain. There was no other actor or member of the crew around me. I would sit there getting mad, waiting for either the rain to stop or someone to arrive. Film-acting is so horrifically belittling."Terence Pettigrew Trevor Howard: A Personal Biography, London: Peter Owen, 2001, p.149
On 11 February 1973, while filming The Man Who Loved Cat Dancing, David Whiting, briefly one of her lovers,Christopher Hastings "Sarah Miles: Sex, spooks and Steven Spielberg", Sunday Telegraph, 7 September 2008 was found dead in her motel room. She was charged and acquitted of culpability in his death. Murder? Suicide? Murder! Suicide! Murder! Suicide! And, gradually, the truth came out, which I'm not going to speak about, but it certainly wasn't me. I had actually saved the man from three suicide attempts so why would I want to murder him? I really can't imagine."
Her performance as Anne Osborne in The Sailor Who Fell from Grace with the Sea (1976) was nominated for a Golden Globe. Interviewer Lynn Barber wrote of Miles' appearances in Hope and Glory, White Mischief and her two earliest films that she "has that Vanessa Redgrave quality of seeming to have one skin fewer than normal people, so that the emotion comes over unmuffled and bare."
Filming White Mischief on location in Kenya in 1987, Miles worked for the second and last time with Trevor Howard, who had a supporting role but was by then seriously ill with a drink problem. The company wanted to fire him, but Miles was determined that Howard's distinguished film career wouldn't end on a sour note. In an interview with Terence Pettigrew for his biography of Howard, she describes how she gave an ultimatum to the executives, threatening to quit the production if they got rid of him. The gamble worked. Howard was kept on. It was to be his last major film. He died the following January.
She most recently appeared in Well at the Trafalgar Studios and the Apollo Theatre opposite Natalie Casey.

Personal life and family

Miles was married twice to the British playwright Robert Bolt, 1967–1975 and 1988–1995. He wrote and directed the film Lady Caroline Lamb, in which Miles played the eponymous heroine. After his stroke, the couple reunited and Miles cared for him. "I would be dead without her", Bolt said in 1987, "When she's away, my life takes a nosedive. When she returns, my life soars."John Stark "Sarah Miles Stars in An Incredible Story of Scandal and Love—and No, It's Not Her New Film, Hope and Glory, It's Her Life", People, 28:21, 23 November 1987 The couple had a son Tom, who is now a watch dealer.carolinephillips.html
Miles drinks a small cup of her own urine every day."Interview with Sarah Miles", Sussex Life, 28 October 2012 She has followed the tradition for more than thirty years, saying that it has kept her healthy and vigorous.Maxine Firth "Urine: The body's own health drink?", The Independent, 21 February 2006Nione Meakin "Interview: Miles is one of a kind", The Argus, 20 August 2012

Filmography

Television

Books

Sarah Miles has written the following books:






