[[Hezekiah]]

CATEGORIES: 687 BC deaths, Kings of ancient Judah, Christian saints from the Old Testament, 7th-century BC biblical rulers, 8th-century BC biblical rulers, Year of birth unknown

Hezekiah ; also transliterated as Ḥizkiyyahu or Ḥizkiyyah) was the son of Ahaz and the 13th king of Judah., Understanding the Bible. Palo Alto: Mayfield. 1985. "Glossary" p. 367-432 Archaeologist Edwin Thiele has concluded that his reign was between c. 715 and 686 BC.; New York: Macmillan, 1951;  2d ed.; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1965; 3rd ed.; Grand Rapids: Zondervan/Kregel, 1983). ISBN 0-8254-3825-X, 9780825438257, 217. He is also one of the most prominent kings of Judah mentioned in the Hebrew Bible and is one of the kings mentioned in the genealogy of Jesus in the Gospel of Matthew.
According to the Hebrew Bible, Hezekiah witnessed the destruction of the northern Kingdom of Israel by Sargon's Assyrians in c. 720 BC and was king of Judah during the invasion and siege of Jerusalem by Sennacherib in 701 BC."Hezekiah." Encyclopædia Britannica. 2009. Encyclopædia Britannica Online. 12 Nov 2009 Read online  Hezekiah enacted sweeping religious reforms, during which he removed the worship of foreign deities from the Temple in Jerusalem, and restored the worship of Yahweh, God of Israel, in accordance with the Torah. Isaiah and Micah prophesied during his reign.

Etymology

Hezekiah, more properly transliterated as Ḥizkiyyahu (and sometimes as Ezekias) (Hebrew: חזק, a verb stem that can mean -
It also spawns a number of nouns, including
as well as the adjectives
Accordingly,  Ḥizkiyyahu can be said to mean something like "Strengthened by Yahweh".yuku.html Professor Mordochai ben Tzyyion, Hebrew University, Jerusalem, Israel

Biblical sources

The main account of Hezekiah's reign is found in  mentions that it is a collection of King Solomon's proverbs that were "copied" "by the officials of King Hezekiah of Judah". His reign is also referred to in the books of the prophets Jeremiah, Hosea, and Micah. The books of Hosea and Micah record that their prophecies were made during Hezekiah's reign.

Reign over Judah

According to the Hebrew Bible, Hezekiah assumed the throne of Judah at the age of 25 (). Some writers have proposed that Hezekiah served as coregent with his father Ahaz for about 14 years in 729 BC. His sole reign is dated by Albright as 715 – 687 BC, and by Thiele as 716 – 687 BC (the last ten years being a co-regency with his son Manasseh). Albright for the former and for the latter Edwin R. Thiele's, The Mysterious Numbers of the Hebrew Kings (3rd ed.; Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan/Kregel, 1983) 217. But Gershon Galil dates his reign to 697–642 BC.
Among Hezekiah's first acts was the repair of the Temple, which had been closed during the reign of Ahaz. He reorganized the services of the priests and Levites, purged the Temple and its vessels, and opened it with imposing sacrifices (), which became an object of idolatrous worship. In place of this, he centralized the worship of God at the Jerusalem Temple. Hezekiah also resumed the Passover pilgrimage and the tradition of inviting the scattered tribes of Israel to take part in a Passover festival. He also sent messengers to Ephraim and Manasseh inviting them to Jerusalem for the celebration of the Passover. The messengers, however, were not only not listened to, but were even laughed at; only a few men of Asher, Manasseh, and Zebulun came to Jerusalem. Nevertheless the Passover was celebrated with great solemnity and such rejoicing as had not been in Jerusalem since the days of Solomon.
Hezekiah is portrayed by the Hebrew Bible as a great and good king. He is one of the few kings praised so highly as to have "trusted in the Lord the God of Israel; so that there was no one like him among all the kings of Judah after him, or among those who were before him" ().

Family and life

Hezekiah was the son of King Ahaz and Abijah ().

Political moves and Assyrian invasion

Between the death of the Assyrian king Sargon II, and the succession of his son Sennacherib, Hezekiah sought to throw off his subservience to the Assyrian kings. He ceased to pay the tribute imposed on his father, Ahaz, and "rebelled against the king of Assyria, and served him not," but entered into a league with Egypt ( records that during the siege the Angel of the Lord killed 185,000 Assyrian soldiers in a single night.
Hezekiah initially paid tribute to Assyria, but then rebelled. Leithart, 1 & 2 Kings, Brazos Theological Commentary on the Bible, p255-256, Baker Publishing Group, Grand Rapids, MI (2006) The Assyrians recorded that Sennacherib lifted his siege of Jerusalem after Hezekiah acknowledged Sennacherib as his overlord and paid him tribute. () Sennacherib besieged Jerusalem and sent his Rabshakeh to the walls as a messenger.  
The Rabshakeh addressed the soldiers manning the city wall in Hebrew (Yĕhuwdiyth), asking them to distrust Yahweh and Hezekiah, pointing to Hezekiah's righteous reforms (destroying the High Places) as a sign that the people should not trust their king ().  
The fundamental law in  prohibits sacrifice at every place except the Temple in Jerusalem.
 records that Hezekiah went to the Temple and there he prayed, the first king of Judah to do so in about 250 years, since the time of Solomon.

Hezekiah's construction

Hezekiah made at least two major preparations that would help Jerusalem to resist conquest: the construction of Hezekiah's Tunnel (also known as the Siloam Tunnel), and construction of the Broad Wall.
 "When 
