[[Lou Grant]]

CATEGORIES: Drama television characters, Mary Tyler Moore Show characters, Fictional characters from California, Fictional newspaper editors, Fictional characters introduced in 1970

Louis "Lou" Grant is a fictional character played by Edward Asner in two television series produced by MTM Enterprises for CBS.  The first was The Mary Tyler Moore Show (1970–1977), a half-hour light-hearted situation comedy in which the character was the news director at fictional television station WJM-TV.  A spinoff series, entitled Lou Grant (1977–1982), was an hour-long serious dramatic series which frequently engaged in social commentary, featuring the character as city editor of the fictional Los Angeles Tribune. Although spin-offs are common on American television, Lou Grant remains the only character to have a leading role on both a popular comedy and a popular dramatic series.

Fictional biography

Pre-WJM-TV

Although the setting of The Mary Tyler Moore Show might have implied that he was a native Minnesotan, Lou Grant in fact established that he was born in the fictional town of Goshen, Michigan.  Soon after high school, he married Edie MacKenzie (Priscilla Morrill), at an age young enough to have four grandchildren before he turned 50.
After marriage he became a combatant in World War II.  He served in both the Pacific and European Theatres.  At one point, he was a sergeant in the Pacific-based 2nd Marine Division.
He attended college, likely after the war.

WJM-TV

At some point in his late 30s he made the transition to broadcast journalism, and by the time of the 1966 elections he was working on a radio news show, as he explained to Mary Richards on the occasion of her producing her first news show all by herself at WJM-TV. He eventually became the head of the WJM news department.  He worked in that capacity for 11 years.  For most of that period, Mary Richards served as his associate producer (later producer with he having the title of executive producer, though she reported to him), Ted Baxter as his news anchor and Murray Slaughter as his head writer.
Of these relationships, the one with Richards was likely the closest.  When he first interviewed Mary he liked her because she had spunk, even though he hated spunk.  He offered her the job of associate producer, which paid less than the secretarial position for which she'd initially interviewed, but more than what he said was the going rate for full producers.  She accepted, saying that she could only "afford" to be an associate producer.  At the same time Mary discovered that Lou was a heavy drinker, with a penchant for hiding whole bottles of scotch in his desk drawers. Except for one abortive attempt at romance, his general attitude towards her was paternalistic.  A typical display of his affection for Richards came when his nephew, Allen, tried to put the moves on Mary.  Lou became infuriated and said  "Listen you, let me remind you of something, and remember this forever. I think of this girl here as if she were my own daughter and that means she is your cousin, you get my drift?"
Lou's personality was outwardly that of a tough loner and a workaholic man's man, with little subtlety. The real Lou Grant was somewhat more complicated. He was quick to anger and had a violent streak, at times threatening the barely competent Ted Baxter and once causing him physical injury. However, those who understood him best, like Mary Richards, knew he was also painfully shy, with a particular awkwardness around women. With those few people he trusted, again like Mary Richards, Lou was protective and could at times confide his emotional vulnerability.
Lou's marriage began to slide as he and Edie both adjusted to life after parenthood.  They briefly separated for the first time almost immediately after their youngest daughter got married and left the house.   tentatively began to date again.   He went out with a woman named Charlene (Sheree North; Janis Paige in "Menage-a-Lou" of Season 6) in particularly Season 5; Mary's best friend Rhoda Morgenstern in Season 4; Mary's next-door neighbor, Paula Kovacks (Penny Marshall) in Season 6; Mary's Aunt Flo (Eileen Heckart) in Seasons 6 and 7; and even with Mary herself in the penultimate episode. He and Sue Ann Nivens almost had a relationship as well.
Though he never talked about his religious background, several comments by those around him during his time at WJM suggest he might have been Jewish: Phyllis Lindstrom was the first to suggest that he would get along well with Rhoda since, in her strained words, they were "both...
Professionally, his career with WJM-TV ended in the final episode.  Lou, along with Mary, Murray, and Sue Ann Nivens were fired due to low ratings.  Ironically, Lou's sometime-nemesis, the vacuous Ted Baxter—the real cause for the ratings slide—was retained.

Los Angeles Tribune

Soon thereafter, he was asked by his former co-worker, Charlie Hume, to relocate to Los Angeles, to help work with him at the fictitious Los Angeles Tribune, as the paper's City Editor, returning him to newspaper work.  His subordinates at that time included staff reporters Joe Rossi (Robert Walden); Billie Newman (Linda Kelsey); her predecessor, Carla Mardigian (Rebecca Balding); and photographer Dennis "Animal" Price (Daryl Anderson).  His assistant was Art Donovan (Jack Bannon). Charlie Hume was now his boss, who ultimately reported to publisher Margaret Jones Pynchon (Nancy Marchand).  They, like those in his prior work at WJM, became his family as well.

Unofficial appearances

In a 1984 episode of Saturday Night Live, Lou hired a team of mercenaries to "rescue" Mary Richards after she got stuck in the '70s in syndicated reruns. But Mary refused rescue on the grounds that she never ages and never gains weight, and that people still like her.
In 1996 the character appeared on "Call Waiting", an episode of Roseanne, in a dream sequence experienced by the show's lead. Roseanne (Roseanne Barr) was Mary and Dan (John Goodman) was Lou, and the two got into a heated argument. Lou stomped out, but quickly returned and was then played by Asner. (He commented about not feeling like himself.) Asner was uncredited.
In 1998, Asner appeared in a cameo role as an Associated Press editor in the miniseries More Tales of the City (based on the series of Armistead Maupin. novels). Though not Lou Grant, per se, the character's demeanor was similar to that of the character.
In 2004, Asner unofficially reprised the role in a series of ads promoting Twin Cities station KSTP-TV, a real channel in the same market as the fictional WJM-TV.
Additionally in 2013, Asner again reprised the role for a series of promos for The Mary Tyler Moore Show airing on MeTV.

Reception

Asner won five Primetime Emmy Awards for his portrayal of Lou, with three of these awards for The Mary Tyler Moore Show and two for Lou Grant. Bravo ranked Lou 35th on their list of the 100 greatest TV characters.




