[[New Found Glory]]

CATEGORIES: Musical groups established in 1997, Musical quintets, Musical groups from Florida, People from Coral Springs, Florida, American rock music groups, American pop punk musical groups, Alternative rock groups from Florida, Melodic hardcore groups, Epitaph Records artists, Bridge 9 Records artists, Geffen Records artists, MCA Records artists, Eulogy Records artists, Fiddler Records artists, Rock Sound Hall of Fame inductees

New Found Glory (formerly  A New Found Glory) During their lengthy recording career, the band have released seven studio albums, one live album, three EPs, and three cover albums.
Emerging as part of the second wave of pop punk in the late 1990s, the band has garnered a cult following since their inception.

History

Formation and debut releases: 1997–1999

The origins of the band date back to 1997 when Jordan Pundik (vocals) and Ian Grushka (bass) played together in the band "Inner City Kids" and later "Flip 60".  After disbanding "Flip 60", they recruited Stephen Klein (guitar), who Pundik met at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School and had previously played with him in the band "Fallview". The threesome began to jam together. Practicing in Grushka's garage, they later invited Joe "Taco Joe" Marino to play drums. Shortly thereafter, Chad Gilbert (lead guitar), former vocalist of Shai Hulud, joined to complete the quintet.
Pundik later stated the band name was created while he and Klein were working at Red Lobster together; "We came up with A New Found Glory, we wrote it on a napkin. I think we pulled some of it from "A Newfound Interest in Massachusetts" by the Get Up Kids". 
The band recorded their debut EP, It's All About the Girls (1997) in a friend's apartment, and the EP was distributed by local independent label Fiddler Records.  Soon after, Marino was replaced by current drummer Cyrus Bolooki after two rehearsal sessions. The band went on to tour up and down the East Coast and quickly sold out the entire pressing of the EP. The band's underground success soon caught the attention of Eulogy Recordings and the quintet subsequently signed shortly afterwards in order to increase distribution of their music.
Following the success of their EP, the band recorded their debut full length album, Nothing Gold Can Stay (1999), initially selling one-page insert copies at their shows supporting NOFX. Richard Reines, co-founder of Drive-Thru Records had also noted their devout following and held talks with the band. Drive-Thru subsequently signed the five-piece and paid Eulogy $5,000 to licence Nothing Gold Can Stay, which went on to sell more than 300,000 copies.

Rise in popularity and stardom: 2000–2005

The five-piece signed their first proper record deal with Drive-Thru Records,
Between 2002 and 2004, the band experienced the height of their popularity with headline slots on the Warped Tour with Blink-182 and a supporting tour with Green Day. Third album and major label debut, Sticks and Stones was released on June 11, 2002 and peaked at number four on the Billboard 200 chart. The record spawned two popular singles; "My Friends Over You" and "Head on Collision". Following the success of the album, the band headlined the 2002 Warped Tour and later saw the album certified gold by the RIAA.
The lead single for their fourth album, "All Downhill from Here" reached number eleven in the Rock Chart before Catalyst (2004) was released. The album received positive reviews and peaked at a career-high number three on the Billboard 200, selling 146,000 copies in its first week. and "At Least I'm Known for Something" was featured in EA's Burnout 3: Takedown. This became the band's third record to be certified gold by the RIAA.

Maturity into later albums: 2006–2009

Demos for the next album were tracked with long term friend and studio engineer Paul Miner, before the band worked with Thom Panunzio (Tom Petty, Bruce Springsteen, Ozzy Osbourne) having moved into a house together in Malibu, California called the Morning View Mansion to write and record. Gilbert took into the studio a book containing over 40 riff ideas that were written during the previous tour.
From the Screen to Your Stereo Part II, the band's follow-up to From the Screen to Your Stereo – a full-length album, containing 11 songs plus one bonus track for the Japanese edition and iTunes – was released on September 18, 2007 via Drive-Thru Records. The CD also included an extra disc from The International Superheroes of Hardcore, named Takin' It Ova!.

Their sixth studio album, Not Without a Fight,
The video for second single "Don't Let Her Pull You Down" premiered on October 15, thumb|right|150px|Chad Gilbert performs in Oklahoma City on 11 September 2010

Radiosurgery and departure of Klein: 2010–2014

A special edition re-release to celebrate the tenth anniversary of their self-titled album
New Found Glory began the new year by participating in the 2011 Soundwave Festival,
On December 10, 2011, New Found Glory performed a live set for "Guitar Center Sessions" on DirecTV. The episode included an interview with program host, Nic Harcourt.
They returned to the studio in April to record their seventh album, titled Radiosurgery In March 2012, New Found Glory had announced via their website that they would be a part of the Vans Warped Tour lineup. New Found Glory will celebrate the 10th anniversary of Sticks And Stones by going on a small club tour in the fall, all around the country.
In November Pundik said that the band will take a break and won't release a new album until 2014. The band recorded 3 new songs which are on their upcoming live album Kill It Live released in October 8. Also announced in this era was the departure of founding member and guitarist Steve Klein. The band noted that there had been some disparity in the intended direction progressing forward, and that Steve and the remaining members had experienced insurmountable differences "over the years".facebook.com/newfoundglory
On the 25th of February 2014, the band announced a 11 date UK tour with main support by The Story So Far, stopping in cities around the country including London, Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Cardiff and Leeds.

Side projects and collaborations

The International Superheroes of Hardcore is a side project of all members of the band and features Gilbert on vocals and Pundik on guitar, with the remaining members playing the same instruments they play in New Found Glory. All the members use pseudonyms for their "characters" in the band (e.g. Gilbert is known as "Captain Straightedge"). The band also recorded an internet-only music video for "Dig My Own Grave" with director Joseph Pattisall.
In April 2008 a compilation from the Punk Goes... series, called Punk Goes Crunk, was released, and features New Found Glory covering "Tennessee", originally by Arrested Development. New Found Glory had previously released another cover song, "Heaven", on Punk Goes Metal.
During "Not Without a Fight" tour, a split EP with Shai Hulud titled Not Without a Heart Once Nourished by Sticks and Stones Within Blood Ill-Tempered Misanthropy Pure Gold Can Stay was exclusively released. There were two colors limited to a total of only 500 copies and only for sale from either Shai Hulud or New Found Glory at these shows.
Dashboard Confessional were to be main support for New Found Glory's  headline American tour in 2010.

Style and influences

New Found Glory are widely recognized for their fast and energetic pop punk music.
Critics have praised the band for their ability to write infectious hooks and the sincerity of their lyrics, often about growing up and relationships.
In recent years the band have been cited for their long lasting influence on contemporary pop punk music. Josh Martin, bassist for band The Wonder Years, has claimed that "Influentially, when you think about the top three pop-punk bands of all time... At least in my brain, they're on that level eternally." Likewise, Jason Heller of The A.V. Club reflected how their debut "snuck beneath the radar to become a massive influence on the new millennium's eruption of pop-punk."

Members

Discography






