[[Ultimate Fighting Championship]]

CATEGORIES: Ultimate Fighting Championship, 1993 establishments in the United States, Mixed martial arts organizations, Mixed martial arts television programs, Organizations established in 1993

The Ultimate Fighting Championship (UFC) is the largest mixed martial arts  promotion company in the world,
[/ref]
The first UFC event was held on November 12, 1993 in Denver, Colorado.  The purpose of the event was to identify the most effective martial art in a real fight between competitors of different fighting disciplines, including Boxing, Brazilian Jiu-Jitsu, Sambo, Wrestling, Muay Thai, Karate, Judo, and other styles.  In subsequent competitions, fighters began adopting effective techniques from more than one discipline, which indirectly helped create an entirely separate style of fighting known as present-day mixed martial arts.
With a TV deal and expansion into Canada, Europe, Australia
The UFC has also bought and absorbed rival promotions Pride, World Extreme Cagefighting and Strikeforce.

History

Early competition – early 1990s

Art Davie proposed to John Milius and Rorion Gracie an eight-man single-elimination tournament called "War of the Worlds". The tournament was inspired by the Gracies in Action video-series produced by the Gracie family of Brazil which featured Gracie Jiu-Jitsu students defeating martial-arts masters of various disciplines such as karate, kung fu and kickboxing. The tournament would feature martial artists from different disciplines facing each other in no-holds-barred combat to determine the best martial art and would aim to replicate the excitement of the matches Davie had seen on the videos.[ref]
Gentry III, Clyde, No Holds Barred: Ultimate Fighting and the Martial Arts Revolution, Milo Books, 2003, paperback edition, ISBN 1-903854-30-X, pp. 38–39.[/ref] John Milius, a noted film director and screenwriter, as well as a Gracie student, agreed to act as the event's creative director. Davie drafted the business plan and twenty-eight investors contributed the initial capital to start WOW Promotions with the intent to develop the tournament into a television franchise.[ref]
Gentry III, Clyde, No Holds Barred: Evolution, Archon Publishing, 2001, 1st ed., ISBN 0-9711479-0-6, pages 24–29.[/ref]
In 1993 WOW Promotions sought a television partner and approached pay-per-view producers TVKO (HBO), SET (Showtime) and Campbell McLaren at the Semaphore Entertainment Group (SEG). Both TVKO and SET declined, but SEG–a pioneer in pay-per-view television which had produced such off-beat events as a gender tennis-match between Jimmy Connors and Martina Navratilova–became WOW's partner in May 1993.[ref]
is illegal in canada
Gentry III, Clyde, No Holds Barred: rEvolution, Archon Publishing, 2001, 1st ed., ISBN 0-9711479-0-6, page 41
[/ref]
SEG contacted video and film art-director Jason Cusson to design the trademarked "Octagon", a signature piece for the event. Cusson remained the Production Designer through UFC 27. SEG devised the name for the show as The Ultimate Fighting Championship.[ref]
Gentry III, Clyde, No Holds Barred: Evolution, Archon Publishing, 2001, 1st Edition, ISBN 0-9711479-0-6, page 29[/ref]
WOW Promotions and SEG produced the first event, later called UFC 1, at McNichols Sports Arena in Denver, Colorado on November 12, 1993. Art Davie functioned as the show's booker and matchmaker.[ref]
Newport, John Paul, "Blood Sport", Details, March 1995, pages 70–72.
[/ref] The show proposed to find an answer for sports fans' questions such as: "Can a wrestler beat a boxer?"[ref]
Willoughby, David P., The Super Athletes, A.S. Barnes & Co., Inc., 1970, ISBN 0-498-06651-7, page 380.
[/ref] As with most martial arts at the time, fighters typically had skills in just one discipline and had little experience against opponents with different skills.[ref]
Gentry, Clyde, No Holds Barred: Ultimate Fighting and the Martial Arts Revolution, (Milo Books: Preston, 2005), p.73
[/ref]
The television broadcast featured kickboxers Patrick Smith and Kevin Rosier, savate fighter Gerard Gordeau, karate expert Zane Frazier, shootfighter Ken Shamrock, sumo wrestler Teila Tuli, boxer Art Jimmerson and  after submitting Jimmerson, Shamrock and Gordeau in succession.  The show proved extremely successful with 86,592 television subscribers on pay-per-view.
However, the promoters did not intend for the event to become a precursor to a series. "That show was only supposed to be a one-off", eventual UFC president Dana White said. "It did so well on pay-per-view they decided to do another, and another. Never in a million years did these guys think they were creating a sport."[ref]
[/ref]
With no weight classes, fighters often faced significantly larger or taller opponents. Keith "The Giant Killer" Hackney faced Emmanuel Yarborough at UFC 3 with a  weight disadvantage.[ref]
Fight card for UFC 3, Sherdog. Fighter profile for Keith Hackney, Sherdog. Fighter profile for Emmanuel Yarborough, Sherdog. Last retrieved December 5, 2006
[/ref] Many martial artists believed that technique could overcome these size disadvantages, and that a skilled fighter could use an opponent's size and strength against him. With the  Royce Gracie winning three of the first four events, the UFC quickly proved that size does not always determine the outcome of the fight.
During this early part of the organization, the UFC would showcase a bevy of different styles and fighters. Aside from the aforementioned Royce Gracie, Ken Shamrock and Patrick Smith, the competitions also featured competitors such as Hall of Famer Dan Severn, Marco Ruas, Gary Goodridge, Don Frye, Kimo Leopoldo, Oleg Taktarov and Tank Abbott. Although the first events were dominated by jiu-jitsu, other fighting styles became successful: first wrestling, then ground and pound, kickboxing, boxing, and dirty boxing, which eventually melded into modern mixed martial arts.
In April 1995, following UFC 5 in Charlotte, North Carolina, Davie and Gracie sold their interest in the franchise to SEG and disbanded WOW Promotions. Davie continued with SEG as the show's booker and matchmaker, as well as the commissioner of Ultimate Fighting, until December 1997.

=Emergence of stricter rules=

Although UFC used the tagline "There are no rules!" in the early 1990s, the UFC did in fact operate with limited rules. It banned biting and eye-gouging, and frowned on (but allowed) techniques such as hair pulling, headbutting, groin strikes and fish-hooking.
In fact, in a UFC 4 qualifying match, competitors Jason Fairn and Guy Mezger agreed not to pull hair—as they both wore pony tails tied back for the match. Additionally, that same event saw a matchup between Keith Hackney and Joe Son in which Hackney unleashed a series of groin shots against Son while on the ground.
The UFC had a reputation, especially in the early days, as an extremely violent event, as evidenced by a disclaimer in the beginning of the UFC 5 broadcast which warned audiences of the violent nature of the sport.
UFC 5 also introduced the first singles match, a rematch from the inaugural UFC featuring three-time champion Royce Gracie and Ken Shamrock, called "The Superfight". This proved an important development, because singles matches would feature fighters who suffered no prior damage from a previous fight in the same event, unlike tournament matches. Singles matches would become a staple in the UFC for years to come.
"The Superfight" began as a non-tournament match that would determine the first reigning UFC Champion for tournament winners to face;[ref]
[/ref] it later evolved into a match that could feature either title matches or non-title matches. The "Superfight" would eventually completely phase out tournament matches; by UFC Brazil, the UFC abandoned the tournament format for an entire card of singles matches (aside from a one-time UFC Japan tournament featuring Japanese fighters). UFC 6 was the first event to feature the crowning of the first non-tournament UFC Champion, Ken Shamrock.

Controversy and reform – late 1990s

The violent nature of the burgeoning sport quickly drew the attention of the U.S. authorities.
thumb|200px|left|Before reform, Senator John McCain prominently opposed the UFC. Senator John McCain (R-AZ) saw a tape of the first UFC events and immediately found it abhorrent. McCain himself led a campaign to ban UFC, calling it "human cockfighting," and sending letters to the governors of all fifty US states asking them to ban the event.
Thirty-six states enacted laws that banned "no-hold-barred" fighting, including New York, which enacted the ban on the eve of UFC 12, forcing a relocation of the event to Dothan, Alabama.
In response to the criticism, the UFC increased cooperation with state athletic commissions and redesigned its rules to remove the less palatable elements of fights while retaining the core elements of striking and grappling. UFC 12 saw the introduction of weight classes and the banning of fish-hooking. For UFC 14 gloves became mandatory, while kicks to the head of a downed opponent were banned. UFC 15 saw limitations on hair pulling, and the banning of strikes to the back of the neck and head, headbutting, small-joint manipulations, and groin strikes. With five-minute rounds introduced at UFC 21, the UFC gradually re-branded itself as a sport rather than a spectacle.
Led by UFC commissioner Jeff Blatnick and referee John McCarthy, the UFC continued to work with state athletic commissions. Blatnick, McCarthy and matchmaker Joe Silva created a manual of policies, procedures, codes of conduct and rules to help in getting the UFC sanctioned by the athletic commissions, many of which exist to this day. Blatnick and McCarthy traveled around the country, educating regulators and changing perceptions about a sport that was thought to be bloodthirsty and inhumane. By April 2000, their movement had clearly made an impact. California was set to become the first state in the U.S. to sign off on a set of codified rules that governed MMA. Soon after, New Jersey adopted the language.
As the UFC continued to work with the athletic commissions, events took place in smaller U.S. markets, including Iowa, Mississippi, Louisiana, Wyoming and Alabama. SEG could not secure home-video releases for UFC 23 through UFC 29. With other mixed martial arts promotions working towards U.S. sanctioning, the International Fighting Championships (IFC) secured the first U.S. sanctioned mixed-martial-arts event, which occurred in New Jersey on September 30, 2000. Just two months later, the UFC held its first sanctioned event, UFC 28, under the New Jersey State Athletic Control Board's "Unified Rules". New Jersey Commission Corrects Mainstream UFC Stories. Ivan's Blog.
As the UFC's rules started to evolve, so too did its field of competitors. Notable UFC fighters to emerge in this era include Hall of Famers Mark Coleman, Randy Couture, Chuck Liddell, Matt Hughes and Tito Ortiz, as well as notables Vitor Belfort, Mark Kerr, Pedro Rizzo, Murilo Bustamante, Pat Miletich, Frank Shamrock, Mikey Burnett, Jeremy Horn, Pete Williams, Jens Pulver, Evan Tanner, Andrei Arlovski and Wanderlei Silva, among others.

The Zuffa era – early 2000s

Zuffa LLC bought UFC in 2000.
After the long battle to secure sanctioning, SEG stood on the brink of bankruptcy when Station Casinos executives Frank and Lorenzo Fertitta and their business partner Dana White approached them in 2000, with an offer to purchase the UFC. A month later, in January 2001, the Fertittas bought the UFC for $2 million and created Zuffa, LLC as the parent entity controlling the UFC.
"I had my attorneys tell me that I was crazy because I wasn't buying anything. I was paying $2 million and they were saying 'What are you getting?
With ties to the Nevada State Athletic Commission (Lorenzo Fertitta was a former member of the NSAC), Zuffa secured sanctioning in Nevada in 2001. Shortly thereafter, the UFC returned to pay-per-view cable television with UFC 33 featuring three championship bouts.

=Struggle for survival and turnaround=

The UFC slowly, but steadily, rose in popularity after the Zuffa purchase, due partly to greater advertising,UFC Retrospective Series Part 3: The New Ownership corporate sponsorship, the return to cable pay-per-view and subsequent home video and DVD releases.
With larger live gates at casino venues like the Trump Taj Mahal and the MGM Grand Garden Arena, the UFC secured its first television deal with Fox Sports Net. The Best Damn Sports Show Period aired the first mixed martial arts match on American cable television in June 2002, as well as the main event showcasing Chuck Liddell vs. Vitor Belfort at UFC 37.5. Later, FSN would air highlight shows from the UFC, featuring one-hour blocks of the UFC's greatest bouts.
thumb|150px|right|Hall of Famer Ken Shamrock was instrumental in the UFC's turnaround into a mainstream sport. UFC 40 proved to be the most critical event to date in the Zuffa era. The event sold out the MGM Grand Arena and sold 150,000 pay per view buys, a rate over three times larger than the previous Zuffa events. The event featured a card headlined by a highly anticipated championship grudge match between then-current UFC Light Heavyweight Champion Tito Ortiz and former UFC Superfight Champion Ken Shamrock, who had previously defected to professional wrestling in the WWE before returning to MMA. It was the first time the UFC hit such a high mark since being forced "underground" in 1997.
Despite the success of UFC 40, the UFC was still experiencing financial deficits. By 2004, Zuffa had $34 million of losses since they purchased the UFC. Fighters who came into prominence after Zuffa's takeover include Anderson Silva, Georges St-Pierre, Rich Franklin, B.J. Penn, Sean Sherk, Matt Serra, Ricco Rodriguez, Robbie Lawler, Frank Mir, Karo Parisyan and Nick Diaz.

=The Ultimate Fighter and mainstream emergence=

Faced with the prospect of folding, the UFC stepped outside the bounds of pay-per-view and made a foray into television. After being featured in a reality television series, American Casino, and seeing how well the series worked as a promotion vehicle, the Fertitta brothers developed the idea of the UFC having its own reality series.
thumb|200px|right|Logo of The Ultimate FighterTheir idea, The Ultimate Fighter (TUF)–a reality television show featuring up-and-coming MMA fighters in competition for a six-figure UFC contract, with fighters eliminated from competition via exhibition mixed martial arts matches–was pitched to several networks, each one rejecting the idea outright. Not until they approached Spike TV, with an offer to pay the $10 million production costs themselves, did they find an outlet.
In January 2005, Spike TV launched TUF in the timeslot following WWE Raw. The show became an instant success, culminating with a notable season finale brawl featuring finalists Forrest Griffin and Stephan Bonnar going toe-to-toe for the right to earn the six-figure contract, an event that Dana White credits for saving the UFC.
On the heels of the Griffin/Bonnar finale, a second season of The Ultimate Fighter launched in August 2005, and two more seasons appeared in 2006. Spike and the UFC continued to create and air new seasons until the show moved to FX in 2012. UFC. March 22, 2006.ew.com/2011/08/18/ultimate-fighter-canceled/
Following the success of The Ultimate Fighter, Spike also picked up UFC Unleashed, an hour-long weekly show featuring select fights from previous events. Spike also signed on to broadcast live UFC Fight Night, a series of fight events debuting in August 2005, and Countdown specials to promote upcoming UFC pay-per-view cards.
After a very successful run on Spike and with the upcoming announcement of the UFC's new relationship with Fox, Spike officials made a statement regarding the end of their partnership with the UFC, "The Ultimate Fighter season 14 in September will be our last... Our 6-year partnership with the UFC has been incredibly beneficial in building both our brands, and we wish them all the best in the future."
With the announcement of UFC's partnership with Fox in August 2011, The Ultimate Fighter which entered its 14th season in that September, has moved to the FX network and air on Friday nights starting with season 15 in the Spring of 2012. The new format took the show in a completely different direction, which included fighters being on the 'Ultimate Fighter' for 13 weeks total, with each elimination fight airing live on FX on Friday nights.

Surging popularity and growth – mid-2000s

thumb|200px|left|New York City Times Square ad for UFC 88: Breakthrough featuring Chuck Liddell vs. Rashad Evans With increased visibility, the UFC's pay-per-view buy numbers exploded. UFC 52, the first event after the first season of The Ultimate Fighter featuring eventual-UFC Hall of Famer Chuck "The Iceman" Liddell avenging his defeat to fellow eventual-Hall of Famer Randy Couture, drew a pay-per-view audience of 300,000, doubling its previous benchmark of 150,000 set at UFC 40. Following the second season of The Ultimate Fighter, the UFC's much-hyped rubber match between Liddell and Couture drew an estimated 410,000 pay-per-view buys at UFC 57.
For the rest of 2006, pay-per-view buy rates continued to skyrocket, with 620,000 buys for UFC 60: Hughes vs. Gracie—featuring Royce Gracie's first UFC fight in 11 years—and 775,000 buys for UFC 61 featuring the highly anticipated rematch between Ken Shamrock and Tito Ortiz, the coaches of The Ultimate Fighter 3.
The surge in popularity prompted the UFC to beef up its executive team. In March 2006, the UFC announced that it had hired Marc Ratner, former Executive Director of the Nevada Athletic Commission, as Vice President of Regulatory Affairs. Ratner, once an ally of Senator McCain's campaign against no holds barred fighting, became a catalyst for the emergence of sanctioned mixed martial arts in the United States. Ratner continues to educate numerous athletic commissions to help raise the UFC's media profile in an attempt to legalize mixed martial arts in jurisdictions inside and outside the United States that have yet to sanction the sport.
In December 2006, Zuffa acquired the northern California-based promotion World Extreme Cagefighting (WEC) in order to stop the International Fight League (IFL) from making a deal with Versus (now NBC Sports Network). At the time, the UFC had an exclusive deal with Spike, so the purchase of the WEC allowed Zuffa to block the IFL from Versus without violating their contract. Notable WEC fighters included Urijah Faber, Jamie Varner, Carlos Condit, Ben Henderson, Donald Cerrone, Anthony Pettis, Eddie Wineland, Miguel Angel Torres, Mike Thomas Brown, Leonard Garcia, Brian Bowles, Dominick Cruz and José Aldo.
In December 2006, Zuffa also acquired their cross-town, Las Vegas rival World Fighting Alliance (WFA). In acquiring the WFA, they acquired the contracts of notable fighters including Quinton Jackson, Lyoto Machida and Martin Kampmann.
The sport's popularity was also noticed by the sports betting community as BodogLife. In fact, the UFC had already broken the pay-per-view industry's all-time records for a single year of business, generating over $222,766,000 in revenue in 2006, surpassing both WWE and boxing.[ref]
Sun Discusses Company Milestones and Provides Year End Summary[/ref]
The UFC continued its rapid rise from near obscurity with Roger Huerta gracing the cover of Sports Illustrated and Chuck Liddell on the front of ESPN The Magazine in May 2007.[ref]
[/ref]

=Pride acquisition and integration=

thumb|left|A fight between Fedor Emelianenko and Mark Coleman in the Japanese, ring-based Pride organization.The Hot List, ESPNews, air date March 27, 2007.
Initial intentions were for both organizations to be run separately but aligned together with plans to co-promote cards featuring the champions and top contenders from both organizations. However, after purchasing Pride, Dana White felt that the Pride model was not sustainable
On June 18, 2008, Lorenzo Fertitta accommodated the UFC's growth by announcing his resignation from Station Casinos in order to devote his energies to the international business development of Zuffa, particularly the UFC. The move proved to be pivotal, as Fertitta helped strike TV deals in China, France, Mexico and Germany as well as open alternative revenue streams with a new UFC video game and UFC action figures, among other projects.
Fighters exposed to the UFC audience—or who became prominent—in the post-Pride era include Anderson Silva, Jon Fitch, Lyoto Machida, Cain Velasquez and Jon Jones, among others.

UFC 100 – late 2000s-present

Popularity took another major surge in 2009 with UFC 100 and the 10 events preceding it including UFC 90, 91, 92, 94 and 98. UFC 100 was a massive success garnering 1.7 million buys under the drawing power of former NCAA wrestling champion and current WWE superstar Brock Lesnar and his rematch with former UFC Heavyweight Champion Frank Mir, Canadian superstar Georges St-Pierre going head-to-head with Brazilian knockout artist Thiago Alves, and Pride legend Dan Henderson opposing British middleweight Michael Bisping; rival coaches on The Ultimate Fighter: United States vs. United Kingdom.
UFC 100 was unique in that it drew significant interest from ESPN, which provided extensive coverage of the event in the days preceding and following it.
The buzz from UFC 100 was hampered significantly in the second half of 2009 after a rash of injuries and other health-related issues—forcing the organization to continuously scramble and reshuffle its lineup for several events.
However, the momentum gradually began to pick up in the first quarter of 2010 after victories from defending champions Georges St-Pierre and Anderson Silva, as well as Lyoto Machida's first career defeat to "Shogun" Rua for the UFC Light Heavyweight title. These fights segued into a very popular clash between former UFC Champions and rivals Rashad Evans and Quinton Jackson—rival coaches on The Ultimate Fighter 10: Heavyweights—at UFC 114, featuring the UFC's first main event headlined by African-American fighters. as Evans secured a unanimous decision victory.
thumb|200px|right|UFC 129 shattered previous North American gate and attendance records.25 million PPV viewers.15–1.25 Million. Fightofthenight. Retrieved on 2011-05-03. Lesnar survived an early barrage of Carwin's punches in a contest that was nearly stopped by referee Josh Rosenthal. MMAmania. Retrieved on 2011-05-03. However, Lesnar recovered in the second round to submit Carwin via arm triangle choke to retain the undisputed UFC Heavyweight Championship. The event as a whole was critically acclaimed in the media for living up to the hype with a number of exciting fights that were featured on the televised card.
After a dramatic fifth round, last minute victory by UFC Middleweight Champion Anderson Silva over Chael Sonnen at UFC 117, Lesnar finally surrendered his belt to the undefeated Cain Velasquez via 1st round TKO at UFC 121. The fight produced Velasquez's eighth knockout or technical knockout in his first nine MMA fights. Sherdog. Retrieved on 2011-05-03.
UFC 129 featured Georges St-Pierre vs. Jake Shields at the Rogers Centre in Toronto, Ontario, Canada and is currently the largest UFC event in North American history, shattering previous MMA attendance and gate records in North America.

=TRT=

On February 27, 2014 the Nevada State Athletic Commission banned the use of Testosterone Replacement Therapy (TRT).  The UFC followed suit and banned the use of TRT for any of their events, including international markets where the UFC oversees regulatory efforts.

=WEC merger=

Zuffa, the parent company of the UFC, purchased World Extreme Cagefighting in late 2006 and held the first WEC event under new ownership on January 20, 2007.
On October 28, 2010, Zuffa announced that its sister promotion, WEC would merge with the UFC. The WEC held its final card on December 16, 2010. As a result of the merger, the UFC absorbed WEC's bantamweight, featherweight and lightweight weight divisions and their respective fighters. The UFC also made the last WEC Featherweight and Bantamweight Champions, José Aldo and Dominic Cruz respectively, the inaugural UFC Champions of their new weight divisions. (October 28, 2010) Dana White To Announce UFC Merger With the WEC. Bloody Elbow. Retrieved on 2011-05-03.
Reed Harris, who started World Extreme Cagefighting with Scott Adams, had mixed emotions on the merger.  "It's kind of like when your kid goes off to college: at first you're not happy, but after you think about it for a while, you're really happy," Harris told MMAWeekly. "At the end of the day, I never imagined this thing would be where we're at today. I'm extremely proud and happy that I was involved with something that will now be part of what may be, some day, the largest sports organization in the world."

=Strikeforce purchase=

On March 12, 2011, Dana White revealed that Zuffa had purchased Strikeforce. Following the purchase, the UFC signed many of Strikeforce's top stars and champions, such as Andrew Fox, Jason Miller, Nick Diaz, Dan Henderson, Alistair Overeem, and Cung Le. Under Zuffa's ownership, Strikeforce made minor changes, including adopting the Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts in full, closing the promotion's men's weight classes below lightweight, and ceasing promotion of amateur undercard bouts. After an extension was reached to continue Strikeforce through 2012, the promotion's heavyweight division (sans Heavyweight Grand Prix finalists) was merged into the UFC, and the promotion's Challengers series was ended.
The final Strikeforce show was Strikeforce: Marquardt vs. Saffiedine on January 12, 2013, after which the promotion was dissolved and all fighter contracts were either ended or absorbed into the UFC.

=Fox partnership=

On August 18, 2011, The Ultimate Fighting Championship and Fox announced a seven-year broadcast deal through the Fox Sports subsidiary, effectively ending the UFC's Spike TV and Versus (now NBC Sports Network) partnership.  The deal includes four events on the main Fox network, 32 live Friday night fights per year on their cable network FX, 24 events following The Ultimate Fighter reality show and six separate Fight Night events.
The promotion's first broadcast television event – UFC on Fox: Velasquez vs. Dos Santos – broke form by showcasing only one fight to television viewers.  In the main event, Junior dos Santos abruptly dethroned then-undefeated UFC heavyweight champion Cain Velasquez by knock-out at 1:04 in the first round.  The telecast peaked with 8.8 million viewers tuning into the fight with an average audience of 5.7 million, making it by far the most watched MMA event of all-time and the most watched combat sports event since 2003's HBO bout between Lennox Lewis and Vitaly Klitschko.
The Ultimate Fighter changed formats and now be live and air on Friday nights on FX, followed by a live fight card. Many of the preliminary fights before UFC pay-per-views and UFC Unleashed programming will be on Fuel TV.  Additional programming begins in January, including live fights, pre-shows and post-shows, Countdown shows, UFC Ultimate Insider, UFC Unleashed, UFC Primetime, UFC Knockout series, Best of Pride and weigh-in specials.
One of the other programming opportunities that is already in motion is a weekly UFC magazine-style show. When asked about the potential for a weekly magazine-style series, UFC CEO Lorenzo Fertitta responded, "Not only weekly, but, potentially, multiple times per week you'll have a UFC magazine (show)." The UFC will maintain production control of its product, including the use of its broadcast team of Mike Goldberg and Joe Rogan. Fox Sports will produce the pre- and post-shows.

=Women's MMA=

On November 16, 2012, the eve of UFC 154: St. Pierre vs. Condit, Dana White confirmed with Jim Rome the UFC will feature women's MMA with the signing of its first female fighter, Strikeforce bantamweight champion Ronda Rousey. She subsequently became the first female UFC champion, the first olympic medallist with a UFC title, and the first woman to defend a UFC title.
On December 11, 2013 the UFC picked up the contracts of 11 female fighters to fill up their 115-pound division. The Strawweight's will take part in the 20th season of The Ultimate Fighter, the season winner will be the first UFC women's strawweight champion. Some of the fighters include Felice Herrig, Claudia Gadelha, Tecia Torres, Bec Hyatt, Joanne Calderwood, and even Invicta FC's Strawweight Champion Carla Esparza and many more.

International expansion

In addition to the UFC PPV and The Ultimate Fighter events in the United States. UFC events have been held in 12 other countries. Puerto Rico, a United States territory, host UFC 6 in 1995.
UFC Japan: Ultimate Japan was held in 1997, followed by UFC 23: Ultimate Japan 2 in 1999, UFC 25: Ultimate Japan 3 and UFC 29 in 2000. The promotion returned in 2012 with UFC 144, followed by UFC on Fuel TV: Silva vs. Stann in 2013.
UFC Brazil: Ultimate Brazil was held in São Paulo in 1998. The promotion returned to Brazil in 2011 for UFC 134, and has hosted a total 12 events.
UFC 38 was held in London, United Kingdom in 2002. UFC returned to the United Kingdom in 2007 with UFC 70, and has held a total 14 events there. UFC 93 was held in Ireland in 2009 as well.
UFC has visited Canada 14 times, starting with UFC 83 in 2008. Five UFC events have been held in Australia, beginning with UFC 110 in 2010.
UFC 99 was held in Germany in 2009 and UFC 122 in 2010. UFC on Fuel TV: Gustafsson vs. Silva was held in Sweden in 2012, featuring local fighter Alexander Gustafsson, and UFC on Fuel TV: Mousasi vs. Latifi in 2013.
UFC 112 was held in the United Arab Emirates in 2010, UFC on Fuel TV: Franklin vs. Le in China in 2012, and UFC Fight Night: Saffiedine vs. Lim in Singapore in 2014. Most Recently, UFC Fight Night: Kim vs Hathaway was held in Macau, China in 2014.
The Ultimate Fighter has had international editions as well: Brazil since 2012, China since 2013, and Canada vs. Australia in 2014.
On September 16, 2012, CEO Lorenzo Fertitta announced that the UFC would be expanding the Ultimate Fighter to India, furthering international expansion. Because of mixed martial arts' relatively unknown status within India, and its population of 1.2 billion, Fertitta claimed that India would be a viable market to expand the UFC brand, however challenging. The UFC struck a deal with Sony SIX to produce the episodes and subsequently air them as well. Currently, filming is set to begin during the summer of 2013, and air later that fall.
Additional events are planned for Brazil, Australia, China, Europe and the Middle East from 2014.Next step in UFC expansion: Market-specific live events - MMA Fighting, 25 October 2012UFC in 2014 - boldly going where no sports corporation has gone before - The Independent, 6 January 2014

Rules

The current rules for the Ultimate Fighting Championship were originally established by the New Jersey Athletic Control Board. Retrieved April 3, 2006. The set of "Unified Rules of Mixed Martial Arts" that New Jersey established has been adopted in other states that regulate mixed martial arts, including Nevada, Louisiana, and California. These rules are also used by many other promotions within the United States, becoming mandatory for those states that have adopted the rules, and so have become the standard de facto set of rules for professional mixed martial arts across the country.

Rounds

UFC matches vary in maximum length, depending on whether the match is for a Championship title, or is a fight card's "main event" fight. In all fights, each round can be no longer than five minutes.  Championship fights last for a maximum of five rounds. Beginning with UFC 138 on November 5, 2011, non-championship "main event" fights (i.e. the final fight on the card) will also last for a maximum of five rounds. Non-main event bouts last for a maximum of three rounds. UFC on FX: Alves vs. Kampmann featured the organization's first two flyweight fights as part of its first flyweight tournament, which consists of bouts that, in the event of a draw, go to a fourth "sudden victory" round held to determine the winner, who advances. There is a one-minute rest period between rounds.

Weight divisions

The UFC currently uses eight different weight classes:
Female

UFC Hall of Fame

Media

Music

Video games

In January 2007, Zuffa and video game developer/publisher THQ announced a license agreement giving THQ worldwide rights to develop titles under the UFC brand. The agreement gives THQ exclusive rights to current and next-generation consoles as well as to PC and handheld titles. Also included are "certain wireless rights" which were not detailed. The licensing agreement was set to expire in 2011, although it appeared to have been extended to 2017. On June 6, 2012, during the E3 Exhibition, THQ had announced that they will be giving the license of UFC Undisputed to EA. The move came about months after UFC Undisputed 3's release, which THQ felt did not make a profit for the company. UFC 4 will feature fighters from Strikeforce.

Action figures

Round 5

The first UFC action figure collectibles were released by Round 5 Corporation in May 2008. Round5mma. Retrieved on 2011-05-03. Series one of their figures includes Quinton "Rampage" Jackson, Matt Hughes, Tito Ortiz, and Randy Couture. Series two (released on November 10, 2008) includes Wanderlei Silva, Sean Sherk, Rich Franklin, and Anderson Silva.
In July 2009, Round 5 acquired the UFC license through Jakks Pacific and subsequently released 5 more series under the UFC and Pride brands. 2 packs were released in August 2010 and includes a UFC Octagon cage and Pride ring display stand. Limited edition versions include fabric walk out tees or paint variations and are limited in number with foil and holographic packaging variances. Special edition and exclusive versions have been released at various UFC Fan Expo events.
Jakks Pacific

On June 10, 2008, it was announced that UFC had signed an exclusive four-year contract with Jakks Pacific to create action figures for UFC. 
Jakks Pacific UFC Deluxe Figure Lineups:
Series 0:
Royce Gracie (Legends Packaging),
Brock Lesnar,
Frank Mir,
Rashad Evans,
Keith Jardine,
Houston Alexander,
Kendall Grove, and
Miguel Angel Torres (WEC Packaging)
Series 1:
Chuck Liddell,
Anderson Silva,
Forrest Griffin,
Michael Bisping,
Evan Tanner (Legends Packaging),
Kevin Randleman (PRIDE Packaging),
Cheick Kongo, and
Mike Swick
Series 2:
Nate Marquardt,
Antônio Rodrigo Nogueira,
Mike Thomas Brown (WEC Packaging),
Bas Rutten (Unreleased in this series, moved to series 6),
Georges St-Pierre (Unreleased in this series, moved to series 6),
Lyoto Machida (Unreleased in this series, moved to series 5),
Quinton Jackson (Unreleased in this series, moved to series 8), and
Thiago Alves (Unreleased in this series, moved to series 6)
Series 3:
Chuck Liddell (Legends Packaging),
Karo Parisyan,
B.J. Penn,
Jon Fitch,
Mark Coleman (Legends Packaging),
Thiago Silva, and
Maurício Rua (PRIDE Packaging)
Series 4:
Wanderlei Silva,
Sean Sherk,
Rich Franklin,
Matt Hughes,
Kimbo Slice,
Jamie Varner (WEC Packaging),
Don Frye (Legends Packaging), and
Andrei Arlovski (Unreleased in this series, later released in series 7)
Series 5:
Lyoto Machida (1 of 100 inserts were also released randomly and contained a special die cast version of the UFC belt),
Quinton Jackson (PRIDE Packaging),
Matt Hamill,
Dan Severn (Legends),
Kenny Florian,
Matt Serra, and
Series 6:
Thiago Alves,
Randy Couture (Unreleased, was originally supposed to be a 1 of 100 inserts that was to be released randomly and contain a special die cast version of the UFC belt),
Georges St-Pierre,
Clay Guida,
Frank Mir,
Tito Ortiz,
Jens Pulver (WEC Packaging), and
Bas Rutten (Legends)
Series 7 (If bought at Target, each of them, except for Nogueira, also came with a replica UFC event mini-poster):
B.J. Penn (Legends Packaging),
Anderson Silva,
Andrei Arlovski,
Forrest Griffin (Legends Packaging),
Diego Sanchez, and
Antônio Rodrigo Nogueira (PRIDE Packaging, 1 of 100 inserts were also released randomly and contained a special die cast version of the PRIDE belt)
Series 8:
Matt Hughes (Legends Packaging),
Chuck Liddell (PRIDE Packaging),
Frankie Edgar (1 of 100 inserts were also released randomly and contained a special die cast version of the UFC belt),
Nate Diaz, and
Jakks Pacific UFC Deluxe 2 Packs Figures Lineups:
Series 1:
Chuck Liddell vs. Wanderlei Silva,
Frank Mir vs. Brock Lesnar,
Anderson Silva vs. Rich Franklin
Series 2:
Lyoto Machida vs. Shogun Rua,
Georges St-Pierre vs. Matt Hughes,
Randy Couture vs. Chuck Liddell (Was supposed to be canceled due to copyright issues, however only 1,000 packs managed to make it to several K-Mart stores)
Series 3:
Chuck Liddell vs. Tito Ortiz,
B.J. Penn vs. Kenny Florian,
Dan Severn vs Royce Gracie (Legends Packaging)
Expos Exclusives:
Georges St-Pierre (Boston Expo 2010, 1 of 500)
Ringside Collectibles Internet Exclusives:
Forrest Griffin vs. Stephan Bonnar: The Ultimate Fighter Season 1 Final,
Dana White,
Quinton Rampage Jackson 1 of 1000

DVD

Every pay-per-view UFC event has been released onto DVD. UFC 23 through UFC 29 were not released in the US on home video or DVD by SEG. They have since been released onto boxsets which feature around 10 events each set, in chronological order.

Xbox Live

UFC on Xbox Live launched on December 20, 2011. Xbox Live subscribers are able to view pay-per-view events in high definition (720p), access a library of live and on-demand video content, connect with friends to predict fight results and have the ability to compare fighter statistics and records. Other functions are also available. Free fights have recently been streamed for a limited time.








