[[Grain (unit)]]

CATEGORIES: Units of mass, Imperial units, Customary units of measurement in the United States, Ammunition

A grain is a unit of measurement of mass equal to 64.79891 milligrams. It is nominally based upon the mass of a single seed of a cereal. From the Bronze Age into the Renaissance the average masses of wheat and barley grains were part of the legal definition of units of mass. However, there is no evidence of any country ever having used actual seeds or cereal grains. Rather, expressions such as "thirty-two grains of wheat, taken from the middle of the ear" appear to have been ritualistic formulas, essentially the premodern equivalent of legal boilerplate.
The grain was the legal foundation of traditional English weight systems,
Since the implementation of the international yard and pound agreement of 1 July 1959, the grain or troy grain (Symbol: gr) measure has been defined in terms of units of mass in the International System of Units as precisely .
In both British Imperial and U.S. customary units, there are precisely 7,000 grains per avoirdupois pound, and 5,760 grains per troy pound or apothecaries pound.

Current usage

The grain is commonly used to measure the mass of bullets and gun propellants.
In dentistry, gold foil, used as a material to restore teeth,
In North America, the hardness of water is often measured in grains per US gallon (gpg) of calcium carbonate equivalents. Soft water contains 1–4 gpg of calcium carbonate equivalents, while hard water contains 11–20 gpg.
Though no longer recommended, grains are still used occasionally in medicine as part of the apothecaries' system, especially in prescriptions for older medicines such as aspirin or phenobarbital. The apothecaries' system has gradually been replaced by the metric system, and the use of the grain in prescriptions is now rare.
Particulate emission levels, used to monitor and regulate pollution, are commonly measured in grains per cubic foot.

History

At least since antiquity, grains of wheat or barley were used by Mediterranean traders to define units of mass; along with other seeds, especially those of the carob tree. According to a longstanding tradition, 1 carat (the mass of a carob seed) was equivalent to the weight of 4 wheat grains or 3 barleycorns.
The history of the modern British grain can be traced back to a royal decree in 13th century England, re-iterating decrees that go back as far as King Offa (eighth century).   The tower pound was one of many monetary pounds of 240 silver pennies.

The pound in question is the Tower pound. The Tower pound, abolished in 1527, consisted of 12 ounces like the troy pound, but was 
The troy pound was only "the pound of Pence, Spices, Confections, as of Electuaries", as such goods might be measured by a troi or small balance.  The old troy standard was set by King Offa's currency reform, was in full use in 1284 (Assize of Weights and Measures, King Edward I), but was restricted to currency (the pound of pennies) until it was abolished in 1527.  This pound was progressively replaced by a new pound, based on the weight of 120 gold dirhems of 48 grains.  The new pound used a barley-corn grain, rather than the wheat grain.
Avoirdupois (goods of weight) refers to those things measured by the lesser but quicker balances: the bismar or uncel, the Roman balance, and the steelyard.  The original mercantile pound of 25 shillings or 15 (tower) ounces was displaced by variously the pound of the Hanseatic League (16 tower ounces) and by the pound of the then-important wool trade (16 ounces of 437 grains).  A new pound of 7680 grains was inadvertently created by as 16 troy ounces, referring to the new troy rather than the old troy.  Eventually, the wool pound won out.
The avoirdupois pound was defined in prototype, rated as 6992 to 7004 grains.  In the Imperial Weights and Measures Act of 1824, the avoirdupois pound was defined as 7000 grains exactly.  The act of 1855 that authorised Miller's new standards to replace those lost in the fire that destroyed the Houses of Parliament.  The standard was an avoirdupoise pound, the grain being defined as 1/7000 of it.
The division of the carat into four grains, survives in both senses well into the early twentieth century.  For pearls and diamonds, weight is quoted in carats, divided into four grains.  The carat was eventually set to 205 milligrams (1877), and later 200 milligrams. For touch or fineness of gold, the fraction of gold was given as a weight, the total being a solidus of 24 carats or 96 grains.



Notes




