[[Ash Wednesday]]

CATEGORIES: Wednesday, Christian festivals and holy days, Moveable holidays (Easter date based)

Ash Wednesday, a day of fasting, is the first day of Lent in Western Christianity. It therefore occurs 46 days before Easter and can fall as early as February 4 or as late as March 10. Ash Wednesday is observed by many Christian denominations, including Catholics, Lutherans, Methodists, Anglicans, and Presbyterians.
According to the canonical gospels of Matthew, Mark and Luke, Jesus Christ spent 40 days fasting in the desert, where he endured temptation by Satan. Lent originated as a mirroring of this, fasting 40 days as preparation for Easter. Every Sunday was seen as a commemoration of the Sunday of Christ's resurrection and so as a feast day on which fasting was inappropriate. Accordingly, Christians fasted from Monday to Saturday (6 days) during 6 weeks and from Wednesday to Saturday (4 days) in the preceding week, thus making up the number of 40 days. Richert: How Are the 40 Days of Lent Calculated? Why Sundays don't count during Lent
Ash Wednesday derives its name from the practice of blessing ashes made from palm branches blessed on the previous year Palm Sunday, and placing them on the heads of participants to the accompaniment of the words "Repent, and believe in the Gospel" or "Remember that you are dust, and to dust you shall return".Roman Missal: Ash Wednesday

Observances

Ashes

Ashes are ceremonially placed on the heads of Christians on Ash Wednesday, either by being sprinkled over their heads or, more often, by being marked on their foreheads as a visible cross.
The words used traditionally to accompany this gesture are:

In the 1969 revision of the Roman Rite, an alternative formula was introduced and given first place:

The old formula, based on the words spoken to Adam and Eve after their sin,The biblical text does not have the words "remember that", nor the vocative noun "homo" (human being) that is included in the original Latin version of the formula. reminds worshippers of their sinfulness and mortality and thus, implicitly, of their need to repent in time. Bucher, "The History and Meaning of Ash Wednesday" The newer formula makes explicit what was only implicit in the old.
Various manners of placing the ashes on worshippers' heads are in use within the Catholic Church, the two most common being to use the ashes to make a cross on the forehead and sprinkling the ashes over the crown of the head. Other methods may also be used, since no rules have been laid down. Although the account of Ælfric of Eynsham shows that in about the year 1000 the ashes were "strewn" on the head, the marking of the forehead is the method that now prevails in English-speaking countries and is the only one envisaged in the Occasional Offices of the Anglican Church of Papua New Guinea, a publication described as "noticeably Anglo-Catholic in character". In its ritual of "Blessing of Ashes", this states that "the ashes are blessed at the beginning of the Eucharist; and after they have been blessed they are placed on the forehead of the clergy and people." The Ash Wednesday ritual of the Church of England speaks generically of "The Imposition of Ashes", without speciifying the manner of applying them, and says nothing of blessing them. 230 On Ash Wednesday, the Pope, the Bishop of Rome, traditionally takes part in a penitential procession from the Church of Saint Anselm to the Basilica of Santa Sabina, where, in accordance with the custom in Italy and many other countries, ashes are sprinkled on his head, not smudged on his forehead, and he places ashes on the heads of  others in the same way.Order of Preachers, "Ash Wednesday: Pope Francis Celebrates at Santa Sabina"
The Papua New Guinea Anglican ritual states that, after the blessing of the ashes, "the priest marks his own forehead and then the foreheads of the servers and congregation who come and kneel, or stand, where they normally receive the Blessed Sacrament." The corresponding Catholic ritual for celebration within Mass, given in the Roman Missal, merely states: "Then the Priest places ashes on the head  of those present who come to him, and says to each one ..." Pre-1970 editions had much more elaborate instructions about the order in which the participants were to receive the ashes, but again without any indication of the form of placing the ashes on the head.Tridentine Roman Missal, "Feria IV  Cinerum"
The 1969 revision of the Roman Rite inserted into the Mass the solemn ceremony of blessing ashes and placing them on heads, but also explicitly envisaged a similar solemn ceremony outside of Mass. While the solemn rite would normally be carried out within a church building, the simple rite could appropriately be used almost anywhere. While only a priest or deacon may bless the ashes, laypeople may do the placing of the ashes on a person's head. Even in the solemn rite, lay men or women may assist the priest in distributing the ashes. In addition, laypeople take blessed ashes left over after the collective ceremony and place them on the head of the sick or of others who are unable to attend the blessing.)
In addition, those who attend such Catholic services, whether in a church or elsewhere, traditionally take blessed ashes home with them to place on the heads of other members of the family,Ash Wednesday in Ireland and it is recommended to have envelopes available to facilitate this practice. At home the ashes are then placed with little or no ceremony.
Unlike its discipline regarding sacraments, the Catholic Church does not exclude from receiving sacramentals, such as the placing of ashes on the head, those who are not Catholics and perhaps not even baptized.
Ashes are distributed outside of church buildings also. Suggested venues for such Catholic celebrations include shopping centres, nursing homes, factories. Such celebrations presume preparation of an appropriate area and include readings from Scripture (at least one) and prayers, and are somewhat shorter if the ashes are already blessed.Order for the Blessing and Distribution of Ashes
Since 2007, members of major Christian denominations in the United States, including Anglicans, Baptists, and Methodists, have participated in the Ashes to Go programme, in which clergy go outside of their churches to public places, such as downtowns, sidewalks and train stations, to impose ashes on passersby, However, in 2014, only one church outside the United States was reported as participating, while in the United States itself 34 states and the District of Columbia had at least one church taking part. Most of these churches (parishes) were Episcopal, but there were also several Methodist churches, fewer Presbyterian and Independent Catholic Churches and the Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence.Sites offering Ashes to Go on March 5, Ash Wednesday 2014
The Catholic Church and the Methodist Church say that the ashes should be those of palm branches blessed at the previous Palm Sunday service,
Where ashes are placed on the head by smudging the forehead with a sign of the cross, many Christians choose to keep the mark visible throughout the day. The churches have not imposed this as an obligatory rule, and the ashes may even be wiped off immediately after receiving them;Scott P. Richert, "Should Catholics Keep Their Ashes on All Day on Ash Wednesday?"

Anglican Commination Office

Robin Knowles Wallace states that the traditional Ash Wednesday church service includes Psalm 51 (the Miserere), prayers of confession and the sign of ashes. contains the first two elements, but not the third. On the other hand, the Catholic Church's traditional service has the blessing and distribution of ashes but, while prayers of confession and recitation of Psalm 51 (the first psalm at Lauds on all penitential days, including Ash Wednesday) are a part of its general traditional Ash Wednesday liturgy, they are not associated specifically with the rite of blessing the ashes. The rite of blessing has acquired an untraditional weak association with that particular psalm only since 1970, when it was inserted into the celebration of Mass, at which a few verses of Psalm 51 are used as a responsorial psalm. Coincidentally, it was only about the same time that in some areas Anglicanism resumed the rite of ashes.
In the mid-16th century, the first Book of Common Prayer removed the ceremony of the ashes from the liturgy of the Church of England and replaced it with what would later be called the Commination Office. 584 In that 1549 edition, the rite was headed: "The First Day of Lent: Commonly Called Ash-Wednesday". The Anglican Church's Ash Wednesday liturgy, he wrote, also traditionally included the Miserere, which, along with "what follows" in the rest of the service  (lesser Litany, Lord's Prayer, three prayers for pardon and final blessing), "was taken from the Sarum services for Ash Wednesday". From the Sarum Rite practice in England the service took Psalm 51 and some prayers that in the Sarum Missal accompanied the blessing and distribution of ashes. Sweeney, An Ecofeminist Perspective on Ash Wednesday and Lent (Peter Lang 2010 ISBN 978-1-43310739-9), pp. 107-110Bernard Reynolds, Handbook to the Book of Common Prayer (Рипол Классик ISBN 978-58-7386158-3), p. 431 In the Sarum Rite, the Miserere psalm was simply one of the seven penitential psalms that were recited at the beginning of the ceremony, while of the much more numerous prayers in that rite only three were imitated in the Commination text, stripped of all reference to ashes. 52-27  These three prayers were kept when the Episcopal Church USA decided to omit the Commination Office.

Low church ceremonies

In some of the low church traditions, other practices are sometimes added or substituted, as other ways of symbolizing the confession and penitence of the day. For example, in one common variation, small cards are distributed to the congregation on which people are invited to write a sin they wish to confess. These small cards are brought forth to the altar table where they are burned.

Biblical significance of ashes

Ashes were used in ancient times to express grief. When Tamar was raped by her half-brother, "she sprinkled ashes on her head, tore her robe, and with her face buried in her hands went away crying" (, Job says to God: "I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye seeth thee. Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes." The prophet Jeremiah calls for repentance by saying: "O daughter of my people, gird on sackcloth, roll in the ashes" (Jer 6:26). The prophet Daniel recounted pleading to God: "I turned to the Lord God, pleading in earnest prayer, with fasting, sackcloth and ashes" (Daniel 9:3). Just prior to the New Testament period, the rebels fighting for Jewish independence, the Maccabees, prepared for battle using ashes: "That day they fasted and wore sackcloth; they sprinkled ashes on their heads and tore their clothes" (1 Maccabees 3:47; see also 4:39).
Examples of the practice among Jews are found in several other books of the Bible, including Numbers : "If the mighty works done in you had been done in Tyre and Sidon, they would have repented long ago (sitting) in sackcloth and ashes."

Christian use of ashes

Christians continued the practice of using ashes as an external sign of repentance. Tertullian (c. 160 – c. 225) said that confession of sin should be accompanied by lying in sackcloth and ashes. 260/265 – 339/340) recounts how a repentant apostate covered himself with ashes when begging Pope Zephyrinus to readmit him to communion.Church History, book 5, chapter 28:12
John W Fenton writes that "by the end of the 10th century, it was customary in Western Europe (but not yet in Rome) for all the faithful to receive ashes on the first day of the Lenten fast. In 1091, this custom was then ordered by Pope Urban II at the council of Benevento to be extended to the church in Rome. Not long after that, the name of the day was referred to in the liturgical books as "Feria Quarta Cinerum" (i.e., Ash Wednesday)."
The public penance that grave sinners underwent before being admitted to Holy Communion just before Easter lasted throughout Lent, on the first day of which they were sprinkled with ashes and dressed in sackcloth. When, towards the end of the first millennium, the discipline of public penance was dropped, the beginning of Lent, seen as a general penitential season, was marked by sprinkling ashes on the heads of all.Fr Saunders, "What do the ashes mean?" About two centuries later, Ælfric of Eynsham, an Anglo-Saxon abbot, wrote of the rite of strewing ashes on heads at the start of Lent.''The Lives of the Saints: "We read in the books both in the Old Law and in the New that the men who repented of their sins bestrewed themselves with ashes and clothed their bodies with sackcloth. Now let us do this little at the beginning of our Lent that we strew ashes upon our heads to signify that we ought to repent of our sins during the Lenten fast."The Lives of the Saints: 
The article on Ash Wednesday in the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica says that, after the Protestant Reformation, the ashes ceremony was not forbidden in the Church of England, a statement that may explain the claim by Blair Meeks that the Anglican tradition "never lapsed in this observance". In at least some editions, it avoided any suggestion of blessing the ashes, by for instance radically reworking the Sarum prayers of blessing. Sweeney, An Ecofeminist Perspective on Ash Wednesday and Lent (Peter Lang 2010 ISBN 978-1-43310739-9), p. 130
Recent writers Monte Canfield and Blair Meeks say that, after the Protestant Reformation some Lutherans kept the rite, and that many Protestant denominations that did not keep it encouraged its use "during and after the ecumenical era that resulted in the Vatican II proclamations". Edward Traill Horn wrote: "The ceremony of the distribution of the ashes was not retained by the reformers, whether Lutheran, Anglican or Reformed."Edward Traill Horn, The Christian Year (Muhlenberg Press 1957), p. 106 An article on the 1963 The Northwestern Lutheran declared: "In the Lutheran Church Ash Wednesday has no further significance than that it is the first day of Lent, usually the day on which the midweek Lenten services begin. At the time of the Reformation the ceremonial distribution of the ashes that had been blessed was not retained." Northwestern Lutheran, volumes 50-51, p. 40] In 1973, a Lutheran publication stated: "Many people won't even known that it is Ash Wednesday until they see the mark of the ashes on the foreheads of Roman Catholics at the office or school. Many non-Catholics will view this with amused tolerance."The Lutheran, vol. 11, Issues 1-12, p. 6 However, soon afterwards, Lutherans themselves began to resume the practice: "The use of ashes on Ash Wednesday is a more recent custom among most LCMS congregations, although some have done it for decades."Immanuel Lutheran Church, "Ash Wednesday Communion Service" "Today the Catholic church has been joined by the Episcopal as well as the Lutheran church in observing application of ashes on 'Ash Wednesday'. In the Lutheran church, use of ashes is still considered optional, i.e., one may attend the worship service and choose not to come forward for the imposition of ashes."Prince of Peace Lutheran Church, "The History of Using Ashes on Ash Wednesday" 
As part of the liturgical revival ushered in by the ecumenical movement, the practice was encouraged in Protestant churches, including the Methodist Church." It has also been adopted by Anabaptist and Reformed churches and some less liturgical denominations.
The Eastern Orthodox churches generally do not observe Ash Wednesday,

Lent

Ash Wednesday marks the start of a 40-day period which is an allusion to the separation of Jesus in the desert to fast and pray. During this time he was tempted.  While not specifically instituted in the Bible text, the 40-day period of repentance is also analogous to the 40 days during which Moses repented and fasted in response to the making of the Golden calf. (Jews today follow a 40-day period of repenting in preparation for and during the High Holy Days from Rosh Chodesh Elul to Yom Kippur.)

Fast and abstinence

In the Catholic Church, Ash Wednesday is observed by fasting, abstinence from meat, and repentance—a day of contemplating one's transgressions. The Anglican Book of Common Prayer also designates Ash Wednesday as a day of fasting. In the medieval period, Ash Wednesday was the required annual day of penitential confession occurring after fasting and the remittance of the tithe. In other Christian denominations these practices are optional, with the main focus being on repentance. On Ash Wednesday and Good Friday, Catholics between the ages of 18 and 59 (whose health enables them to do so) are permitted to consume only one full meal, which may be supplemented by two smaller meals, which together should not equal the full meal. Some Catholics will go beyond the minimum obligations demanded by the Church and undertake a complete fast or a bread and water fast. Ash Wednesday and Good Friday are also days of abstinence from meat (mammals and fowl), as are all Fridays during Lent.1983 Code of Canon Law, canon 1251 Some Catholics continue fasting throughout Lent, as was the Church's traditional requirement,''1917 Code of Canon Law, canon 1252 §§2–3 concluding only after the celebration of the Easter Vigil.
As the first day of Lent, Ash Wednesday comes the day after Shrove Tuesday or Mardi Gras (Fat Tuesday), the last day of the Carnival season. Dutch tradition holds the custom to eat salted herring on Ash Wednesday to conclude the carnival in the Netherlands.

Dates

Ash Wednesday is a moveable fast, occurring 46 days before Easter. In future years Ash Wednesday will occur on these dates:
{{#ifexpr: 
The earliest date Ash Wednesday can occur is February 4 (in a common year with Easter on March 22), which happened in 1573, 1668, 1761 and 1818 and will next occur in 2285. The latest date is March 10 (when Easter Day falls on April 25) which occurred in 1546, 1641, 1736, 1886 and 1943 and will next occur in 2038. Ash Wednesday has never occurred on Leap Year Day (February 29), and it will not occur as such until 2096. The only other years of the third millennium that will have Ash Wednesday on February 29 are 2468, 2688, 2840 and 2992. (Ash Wednesday falls on February 29 only if Easter is on April 15 in a leap year.)

Observing denominations

These Christian denominations are among those that mark Ash Wednesday with a particular liturgy or church service.
The Eastern Orthodox Church does not, in general, observe Ash Wednesday; instead, Orthodox Great Lent begins on Clean Monday. There are, however, a relatively small number of Orthodox Christians who follow the Western Rite; these do observe Ash Wednesday, although often on a different day from the previously mentioned denominations, as its date is determined from the Orthodox calculation of Pascha, which may be as much as a month later than the Western observance of Easter.

National No Smoking Day

In the Republic of Ireland, Ash Wednesday is National No Smoking Day.[ref]
Written Answers. – Cigarette Smoking. Dáil Éireann – Volume 475 – 18 February 1997
[/ref][ref]
Chronic long-term costs of COPD, Dr Jarlath Healy, Irish Medical Times, 2008
[/ref] The date was chosen because quitting smoking ties in with giving up luxury for Lent.[ref]
Ban on smoking in cars gets Minister's support Alison Healy, The Irish Times, 2009
[/ref][ref]
20% of smokers light up around their children every day Claire O'Sullivan, Irish Examiner, 2006
[/ref] In the United Kingdom, No Smoking Day was held for the first time on Ash Wednesday 1984,[ref]
The History of No Smoking Day, No Smoking Day website
[/ref] but is now fixed as the second Wednesday in March.[ref]
FAQ: When is No Smoking Day 2010?, No Smoking Day website[/ref]

Victorian England

In Victorian England, theatres refrained from presenting costumed shows on Ash Wednesday, so they provided other entertainments, as mandated by the Anglican Church.








