[[Sonia Gandhi]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, 13th Lok Sabha members, 14th Lok Sabha members, 15th Lok Sabha members, Italian emigrants to India, Indian National Congress politicians, Indian women in politics, Living people, Members of National Advisory Council, India, Nehru–Gandhi family, People from the Province of Vicenza, People with acquired Indian citizenship, Presidents of the Indian National Congress, Spouses of Prime Ministers of India, Recipients of the Order of Leopold (Belgium), Lok Sabha members from Uttar Pradesh, Members of Parliament from Uttar Pradesh, Leaders of the Opposition (India), Lok Sabha members from Karnataka, United Progressive Alliance candidates in the Indian general election, 2014



Sonia Gandhi ( 9 December 1946)Lok Sabha. Retrieved on 9 December 2011. Archives.in. Retrieved on 9 December 2011. is an Italian-born Indian politician, who has served as President of the Indian National Congress party since 1998. She is the widow of former Prime Minister of India, Rajiv Gandhi who belonged to the Nehru–Gandhi family. After her husband's assassination in 1991, she was invited by Congress leaders to take over the government;Profile Sonia Gandhi, Congress, Politicians Profile, Lok Sabha Elections 2009, India Elections 2009, General Elections, Election Manifesto, India Election News, India Election... but she refused and publicly stayed away from politics amidst constant prodding from the party. She finally agreed to join politics in 1997; in 1998, she was elected President of the Congress.
She has served as the Chairperson of the ruling United Progressive Alliance in the Lok Sabha since 2004. In September 2010, on being re-elected for the fourth time, she became the longest serving president in the 125-year history of the Congress party. Timesofindia.com (4 September 2010). Retrieved on 9 December 2011. Her foreign birth has been a subject of much debate and controversy.

Early life

She was born to Stefano and Paola Maino in Contrada Màini ("Maini quarter/district"), at Lusiana,Pictures from the book-biography "The Red sari" by Javier Moro. Radiopopolare.it. Retrieved on 9 December 2011.net – Edvige Antonia Albina Maino a little village 30 km from Vicenza in Veneto,Sonia Gandhi, dalla piccola Lusiana all'India ecco il romanzo di una donna speciale Il Giornale de Vicenza. 05/10/2009  Italy, where families with the family name "Màino" have been living for many generations.Sonia Gandy. Il Giornale di Vicenza. 2004 (with picture of her native house)Lusiana: parish church, townhall square, landscape. Youreporter.it. Retrieved on 9 December 2011. She spent her adolescence in Orbassano, Sonia Maino Gandhi from Lusiana to Orbassano, pages 22–27. a town near Turin, being raised in a traditional Roman Catholic family and attending a Catholic school. Her father, Stefano Maino, was a building mason, who owned a small construction business in Orbassano. Retrieved 19 July 2013. Stefano fought against the Soviet military alongside Hitler's Wehrmacht on the eastern front in World War II, he called himself a loyal supporter of Benito Mussolini and Italy's National Fascist Party. He died in 1983. Retrieved 23 March 2007. Her mother and two sisters still live around Orbassano. BBC. 14 May 2004. Retrieved 18 July 2007.
In 1964, she went to study English at the Bell Educational Trust's language school in the city of Cambridge.. Retrieved 18 July 2007.
The couple had two children, Rahul Gandhi (born 1970) and Priyanka Vadra (born 1972). Despite belonging to the influential Nehru family, Sonia and Rajiv avoided all involvement in politics. Rajiv worked as an airline pilot while Sonia took care of her family. When Indira was ousted from office in 1977 in the aftermath of the Indian Emergency, the Rajiv family moved abroad for a short time.

Political career

Wife of the Prime Minister

Sonia Gandhi's involvement with Indian public life began after the assassination of her mother-in-law and her husband's election as Prime Minister. As the Prime Minister's wife she acted as his official hostess and also accompanied him on a number of state visits.
Former senior Congress leader and the currently the President of India Pranab Mukherjee said that she surrendered her Italian passport to the Italian Embassy on 27 April 1983. Italian nationality law did not permit dual nationality until 1992. So, by acquiring Indian citizenship in 1983, she would automatically have lost Italian citizenship.

Congress President

After the assassination of Rajiv Gandhi and her refusal to become Prime Minister, the party settled on the choice of P. V. Narasimha Rao who became leader and subsequently Prime Minister. Over the next few years, however, the Congress fortunes continued to dwindle and it lost the 1996 elections. Several senior leaders such as Madhavrao Sindhia, Rajesh Pilot, Narayan Dutt Tiwari, Arjun Singh, Mamata Banerjee, G. K. Moopanar, P. Chidambaram and Jayanthi Natarajan were in open revolt against incumbent President Sitaram Kesri and quit the party, splitting the Congress into many factions.
In an effort to revive the party's sagging fortunes, she joined the Congress Party as a primary member in the Calcutta Plenary Session in 1997 and became party leader in 1998.Sonia Gandhi, Indian National Congress Party Chairman
In May 1999, three senior leaders of the party (Sharad Pawar, P. A. Sangma, and Tariq Anwar) challenged her right to try to become India's Prime Minister because of her foreign origins. In response, she offered to resign as party leader, resulting in an outpouring of support and the expulsion from the party of the three rebels who went on to form the Nationalist Congress Party.
Within 62 days of joining as a primary member, she was offered the party President post which she accepted.

Leader of the Opposition

She was elected the Leader of the Opposition of the 13th Lok Sabha in 1999.
When the BJP-led NDA formed a government under Atal Bihari Vajpayee, she took the office of the Leader of Opposition. As Leader of Opposition, she called a no-confidence motion against the NDA government led by Vajpayee in 2003.
She holds the record of having served as Congress President for 10 years consecutively.Sonia Gandhi completes 15 years as Congress president - Livemint

2004 elections and aftermath

In the 2004 general elections, Gandhi launched a nationwide campaign, criss-crossing the country on the Aam Aadmi (ordinary man) slogan in contrast to the 'India Shining' slogan of the BJP-led National Democratic Alliance (NDA) alliance. She countered the BJP asking "Who is India Shining for?". In the election, she won by a large margin in the Rae Bareilly constituency. Following the unexpected defeat of the NDA, she was widely expected to be the next Prime Minister of India. On 16 May, she was unanimously chosen to lead a 15-party coalition government with the support of the left, which was subsequently named the United Progressive Alliance (UPA).
The defeated NDA protested once again her 'foreign origin' and senior NDA leader Sushma Swaraj threatened to shave her head and "sleep on the ground", among other things, should Sonia become prime minister. Religion. Retrieved on 9 December 2011. The NDA also claimed that there were legal reasons that barred her from the Prime Minister's post. They pointed, in particular, to Section 5 of the Indian Citizenship Act of 1955, which they claimed implied 'reciprocity'. This was contested by others and eventually the suits were dismissed by the Supreme Court of India.
A few days after the election, Gandhi appointed Manmohan Singh as prime minister. Her supporters compared it to the old Indian tradition of renunciation, while her opponents attacked it as a political stunt.

UPA Chairperson

On 23 March 2006, Gandhi announced her resignation from the Lok Sabha and also as chairperson of the National Advisory Council under the office-of-profit controversy and the speculation that the government was planning to bring an ordinance to exempt the post of chairperson of National Advisory Council from the purview of office of profit. She was re-elected from her constituency Rae Bareilly in May 2006 by a margin of over 400,000 votes.
As chairperson of the National Advisory Committee and the UPA, she played an important role in making the National Rural Employment Guarantee Scheme and the Right to Information Act into law. Retrieved 13 July 2007. Retrieved 13 July 2007.
She addressed the United Nations on 2 October 2007, Mahatma Gandhi's birth anniversary which is observed as the international day of non-violence after a UN resolution passed on 15 July 2007.
Under her leadership, India returned the Congress-led-UPA to a near majority in the 2009 general elections with Manmohan Singh as the Prime Minister. The Congress itself won 206 Lok Sabha seats, which was the highest total by any party since 1991.

Personal life

Sonia is the widow of late Rajiv Gandhi, elder son of Indira Gandhi. Sonia has two children, Rahul and Priyanka Gandhi.
In August 2011, she underwent a successful surgery for an unspecified ailment in the United States. It has been widely speculated in the media that the surgery took place at Memorial Sloan–Kettering Cancer Center in New York. Newspapers reported that she returnedSonia returns after surgery. Indian Express (9 September 2011). Retrieved on 9 December 2011. to India on 9 September after her treatment.
Speaking on 18 July 2012, about her son taking a larger role in the party, she said that it is for Rahul to decide.
Sonia was listed as one of the fifty best-dressed over 50s by the Guardian in March 2013.
She follows the style quote " Simple is Stylish" and looks no further than mother-in-law Indira Gandhi's "innate sense of fashion".
According to an affidavit filed during the Indian general election, 2014, Sonia had declared assets worth Rs 9.28 crore - Rs 2.81 crore in movable and Rs 6.47 crore in immovable properties. This is an almost six-fold increase since her declaration in the last election.

Honours and recognition

Gandhi was named the third most powerful woman in the world by Forbes Magazine in the year 2004Sonia Gandhi 3rd most powerful woman

Books featuring Sonia Gandhi





Further reading



|-
|-
|-
|-
|-
|-


