[[Lisa Kudrow]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from California, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, American film actresses, American people of Belarusian-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American screenwriters, American television actresses, American voice actresses, The Groundlings, Jewish American actresses, Jewish American writers, Jewish women writers, Outstanding Performance by a Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series Primetime Emmy Award winners, Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Comedy Series Screen Actors Guild Award winners, People from the San Fernando Valley, People from the San Gabriel Valley, Primetime Emmy Award winners, Vassar College alumni, Women screenwriters, Writers from Los Angeles, California

Lisa Valerie Kudrow (born July 30, 1963)Family Tree Legends According to the State of California. California Birth Index, 1905–1995. Center for Health Statistics, California Department of Health Services, Sacramento, California is an American actress, writer, comedian and producer. She gained worldwide recognition for her ten-season run as Phoebe Buffay in the television sitcom Friends, for which she received many accolades, including an Emmy Award and two Screen Actors Guild Awards.
She went on to produce, write and star in the short-lived HBO series The Comeback, and is currently starring in Web Therapy which is in its third season on Showtime. She was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Special Class – Short-Format Live-Action Entertainment Program for the show in 2012. She is also one of the executive producers of the NBC reality program Who Do You Think You Are. She was nominated for an Emmy Award for Outstanding Reality-Program for the series in 2012.
Away from television, Kudrow has also appeared in many films, including Romy and Michele's High School Reunion (1997), The Opposite of Sex (1998), Analyze This (1999) and its sequel Analyze That (2002), Dr. Dolittle 2 (2001), Wonderland (2003), Happy Endings (2005), P.S. I Love You (2007), Bandslam (2008), Hotel for Dogs (2009), and Easy A (2010).
Throughout her career she has received nine Emmy Award nominations, twelve Screen Actors Guild Award nominations, and a Golden Globe Award nomination.

Early life

Lisa Kudrow was born in Los Angeles, California, the daughter of Nedra S. (née Stern), a travel agent, and Dr. Lee N. Kudrow (born 1933), a headache specialist and physician.
Kudrow attended Portola Middle School in Tarzana, California. In 1979, at the age of 16, she underwent rhinoplasty to reduce the size of her nose. (2002-10-23) Gary Susman, "On the Job", Entertainment Weekly, October 23, 2002. ("In the November issue of Allure magazine, Kudrow reveals a secret she's kept for 23 years: When she was 16, she had a nose job. 'I had a hook nose, and now it's certainly smaller,' she says. 'But I'm not even sure I love how that turned out. I think plastic surgery looks weird – like plastic surgery.'"). Ew. Retrieved on 2012-07-25. She graduated from Taft High School in Woodland Hills, Los Angeles. She received her BSc in Biology from Vassar College, intending to follow in her father's footsteps and research headaches. Kudrow worked on her father's staff for eight years while breaking into acting, earning a research credit on his study on the comparative likelihood of left-handed individuals developing cluster headaches.

Career

At the urging of her brother's childhood friend, comedian Jon Lovitz, Kudrow began her comedic career as a member of The Groundlings. Briefly, Kudrow joined with Conan O'Brien and director Tim Hillman in the short-lived improv troupe Unexpected Company.com She was also the only regular female member of the Transformers Comedy Troupe.com
She played a role in an episode of the NBC sitcom Cheers. (Kudrow appeared as "Emily.") She tried out for Saturday Night Live in 1990, but the show chose Julia Sweeney instead. She had a recurring role as Kathy Fleisher in three episodes of season one of the Bob Newhart sitcom Bob (CBS, 1992–1993), a role she played after taking part in the memorable series finale of Newhart's previous series Newhart. Prior to Friends, she appeared in at least two produced network pilots: NBC's Just Temporary (also known as Temporarily Yours) in 1989, playing Nicole; and CBS' Close Encounters (also known as Matchmaker) in 1990, playing a Valley girl.
Kudrow was cast to play the role of Roz Doyle in Frasier, but the role was re-cast with Peri Gilpin during the filming of the pilot episode. Kudrow said in 2000 that when rehearsals started, "I knew it wasn't working. I could feel it all slipping away, and I was panicking, which only made things worse". Her first recurring television role was Ursula Buffay, the eccentric waitress on the NBC sitcom Mad About You. Kudrow would reprise the character on the NBC sitcom Friends, in which Kudrow co-starred as massage therapist Phoebe Buffay, Ursula's twin sister.
For her starring role as Phoebe on Friends (NBC, 1994–2004) Kudrow won the 1998 Emmy AwardLisa Kudrow Emmy Nominated. Emmys. Retrieved on 2012-07-25. for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Comedy Series. According to the Guinness Book of World Records (2005), Kudrow and co-stars Jennifer Aniston and Courteney Cox became the highest paid TV actresses of all time, earning $1 million per episode for the ninth and tenth seasons of Friends.
Her film credits include comedic roles in Romy and Michele's High School Reunion, Hanging Up, Marci X, Analyze This and its sequel Analyze That. Kudrow has also starred in dramatic roles, including the biographical Wonderland about the late porn star John Holmes. She had dramatic roles for writer-director Don Roos in the films The Opposite of Sex and Happy Endings. In 2008, she acted in Hotel for Dogs alongside Emma Roberts and Jake T. Austin.
She has been a vocal performer on episodes of animated television series, including as Aphrodite on Hercules: The Animated Series, and as Springfield Elementary School student Alexandra Whitney on The Simpsons. She was the voice of the female grizzly bear Ava in the live action movie Dr. Dolittle 2. She also voiced the Ghost of Christmas Past in the American Dad Christmas Special: The Best Christmas Story Never Told. Kudrow starred as protagonist Valerie Cherish on the single-season HBO series The Comeback (premiered June 5, 2005), about a has-been sitcom star trying for a comeback. She also served as co-creator, writer, and executive producer. Kudrow received an Emmy nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Comedy Series for her work on The Comeback. as well as in the Nintendo DS commercial for Professor Layton and the Curious Village with Lynn Brown Kogen.
Kudrow served as the executive producer for the American version of the UK television series Who Do You Think You Are? for NBC, in which celebrities trace their family trees. The subjects of the first series included Kudrow herself, in which it was discovered her great-grandmother died in the Holocaust."LISA KUDROW, SARAH JESSICA PARKER AND SUSAN SARANDON STAR IN NBC'S 'WHO DO YOU THINK YOU ARE?' PREMIERING APRIL 20" January 28, 2009, NBC.Who Do You Think You Are – NBC Site. Nbc. Retrieved on 2012-07-25.
Kudrow co-created an improvised comedy web series, Web Therapy on Lstudio. The improv series, which launched online in 2008, has earned several Webby nominations and one Outstanding Comedic Performance Webby for Kudrow, who plays therapist of unspecified credentials Fiona Wallice. She offers her patients three-minute sessions over iChat. In July 2011, a reformatted, half-hour version of the show premiered on Showtime.
Lisa Kudrow and Courteney Cox reunited on Cougar Town in 2009. Kudrow played an accomplished dermatologist whose services become addictive to Jules (Cox), despite the doctor's impatient temperament. Kudrow's episode was aired during November sweeps.

Personal life

On May 27, 1995, Kudrow married Michel Stern, a French advertising executive. Kudrow's pregnancy was written into Friends (seasons 4 and 5), with her character Phoebe having triplets as a surrogate mother for her brother and his wife because they were not able to have children.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations






