[[Chitin]]

CATEGORIES: Acetamides, Biomolecules, Biopesticides, Polysaccharides

Chitin (C8H13O5N)n (

Etymology

The English word "chitin" comes from the French word chitine, which first appeared in 1821 and derived from the Greek word χιτών (chiton), meaning covering.  From page 35:  "… la Chitine (c'est ainsi que je nomme cette substance de chiton, χιτον, enveloppe) …"  (… chitine (it is thus that I name this substance from chiton, χιτον, covering) …)
A similar word, "chiton", refers to a marine animal with a protective shell (also known as a "sea cradle").

Chemistry, physical properties and biological function

The structure of chitin was solved by Albert Hofmann in 1929.  See:
Chitin is a modified polysaccharide that contains nitrogen; it is synthesized from units of N-acetylglucosamine (to be precise, 2-(acetylamino)-2-deoxy-D-glucose). These units form covalent β-1,4 linkages (similar to the linkages between glucose units forming cellulose). Therefore, chitin may be described as cellulose with one hydroxyl group on each monomer replaced with an acetyl amine group. This allows for increased hydrogen bonding between adjacent polymers, giving the chitin-polymer matrix increased strength.
In its unmodified form, chitin is translucent, pliable, resilient, and quite tough. In arthropods, however, it is often modified, becoming embedded in sclerotin, a tanned proteinaceous matrix, which forms much of the exoskeleton. In its pure form, chitin is leathery, but in most invertebrates it occurs largely as a component of composite materials. Combined with  calcium carbonate, as in the shells of Crustacea and molluscs, chitin produces a much stronger composite. This composite material is much harder and more stiff than pure chitin, and is tougher and less brittle than calcium carbonate. A. (1996) Biology (4th edition) Benjamin Cummings, New Work. p.69 ISBN 0-8053-1957-3 Another difference between pure and composite forms can be seen by comparing the flexible body wall between the segments of a caterpillar (mainly chitin) to the stiff, light elytron of a beetle (containing a large proportion of sclerotin).

Fossil record

Chitin was probably present in the exoskeletons of Cambrian arthropods such as trilobites. The oldest preserved chitin dates to the Oligocene,  about , comprising a scorpion encased in amber.

Uses

Agriculture

Most recent studies point out that chitin is a good inducer of defense mechanisms in plants.
The EPA regulates chitin for agricultural use within the USA. Chitosan is prepared from chitin by deacetylation.

Industrial

Chitin is used in industry in many processes. Examples of the potential uses of chemically modified chitin in food processing include the formation edible films and as an additive to thicken and stabilize foodsShahidi,F., Arachchi, J.K.V. and Jeon, Y.-J. (1999) Food applications of chitin and chitosans. Trends in Food Science & Technology, 10 37-51 and pharmaceuticals. It also acts as a binder in dyes, fabrics, and adhesives.

Medicine

Chitin's properties as a flexible and strong material make it favorable as surgical thread. Its biodegradibility means it wears away with time as the wound heals. Moreover, chitin has been reported to have some unusual properties that accelerate healing of wounds in humans.
Occupations associated with high environmental chitin levels, such as shellfish processors, are prone to high incidences of asthma.  Recent studies have suggested that chitin may play a role in a possible pathway in human allergic disease.  To be specific, mice treated with chitin develop an allergic response, characterized by a build-up of interleukin-4-expressing innate immune cells.  In these treated mice, additional treatment with a chitinase enzyme abolishes the response.

Biomedical research

Chitin may be employed for affinity purification of recombinant protein.  A chitin binding domain is genetically fused to a protein of interest and then contacted to beads coated with chitin.  The immobilized protein is purified and released from the beads by cleaving off the chitin binding domain.








