[[EuroAirport Basel–Mulhouse–Freiburg]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in France, Buildings and structures in Haut-Rhin, Mulhouse, Freiburg im Breisgau, France–Switzerland border crossings, Transport in Alsace, Airports established in 1946

EuroAirport Basel–Mulhouse–Freiburg  south of Freiburg im Breisgau (Germany). It is located in France, on the administrative territory of the commune of Saint-Louis near the Swiss and German borders.

International status

EuroAirport is one of the few airports in the world operated jointly by two countries, in this case France and Switzerland. It is governed by a 1949 international convention. The headquarters of the airport's operations are located in Blotzheim, France."General conditions of use." EuroAirport. Retrieved on 24 September 2009. "The Site is published by Basel–Mulhouse Airport, a Franco-Swiss public enterprise governed by the international convention of 4 July 1949 concerning its construction and operation and the headquarters of which are situated at 68730 Blotzheim, France." The airport is located completely on French soil; the airport has a Swiss customs area connected to Basel by a border road."Mulhouse – Practical Information." Airlinair. Retrieved on 1 July 2010. The airport is operated via an agreement established in 1946 wherein the two countries (Switzerland and France) are granted access to the airport without any customs or other border restrictions. The airport's board has 8 members each from France and Switzerland and two advisers from Germany.
The airport building is split into two separate sections – Swiss and French. With Switzerland joining the Schengen Treaty in March 2009, the air side was rearranged to include a Schengen and non-Schengen zone.
Due to its international status, EuroAirport has three IATA airport codes: BSL (Basel) is the Swiss code,BSL – Basel/Mulhouse-EuroAirport Swiss. Aviation Safety Network. Retrieved 2007-09-05. MLH (Mulhouse) is the French code,MLH – Mulhouse, France/Basel-EuroAirport. Aviation Safety Network. Retrieved 2007-09-05. and EAP (EuroAirport) is the international code. Its ICAO airport code is LFSB. Geneva International Airport has a similar international status (though without the multiple IATA codes).

History

Plans for the construction of a joint Swiss-French airport started in the 1930s, but were halted by the Second World War.
In 1946 talks resumed and it was agreed that an airport would be built  runway was officially opened on 8 May.
Between autumn 1951 and spring 1953, the east–west runway was extended to  and the "Zollfreistrasse" (customs-free road) was constructed, allowing access from Basel to the departure terminal without passing through French border controls.
The first enlargement project was approved by referendum in Basel in 1960 and, over the following decades, the terminals and runways were continually extended. The north–south runway was extended further to  in 1972. In 1984, an annual total of 1 million passengers was reached.
In 1987, the trademark name EuroAirport Basel–Mulhouse–Freiburg was introduced.euroairport.html In 1992 a total of 2 million passengers were served; by 1998, 3 million. A decision was made to enlarge the terminals again with a new "Y-finger" dock. The first phase was completed in 2002 and the second phase in 2005.
Crossair was based at Basel and was its largest airline. Following the Swissair liquidation in 2001, the subsequent ending of services in early 2002, and the transformation of Crossair into Swiss International Air Lines, the number of flights from Basel fell and the new terminal was initially underused. In 2004 the low cost carrier EasyJet opened a base at Basel and the passenger totals rose again, reaching 4 million in 2006.
From 2007 until 2009, Ryanair also flew to the airport. However as result of a dispute over landing fees, the airline closed all 8 routes.ch/wirtschaft/unternehmen-und-konjunktur/Ryanair-verlaesst-den-EuroAiport/story/10645880 More recently Ryanair announced it would return in April 2014, with the resumption of Basel - Dublin as well as the new route Basel - London-Stansted.

Airlines and destinations

Passenger

Cargo

Ground transport

Car

The airport is connected to motorway A3 which leads from Basel to the southeast of Switzerland passing Zürich. 

Bus

There are several bus connections to and from the EuroAirport to all three countries around it:

Other facilities

Swiss International Air Lines is headquartered on the grounds of EuroAirport Basel–Mulhouse–Freiburg in the Swiss section of the airport; even though the airport is within France, the Swiss head office is only accessible from Switzerland."Facts and figures." Swiss International Air Lines. Retrieved on 13 June 2009."Swiss International Air Lines Basel." Swiss International Air Lines. Retrieved on 24 September 2009. The Swiss division Swiss Aviation Software has its head office there,"CONTACT." Swiss Aviation Software. Retrieved on 17 September 2011. "Swiss AviationSoftware Ltd. BSLSAS/MA P.O. Hello, a now defunct Swiss airline, had its head office in the General Aviation area of EuroAirport."Hello Location." (Direct image link) Hello. Retrieved on 1 July 2010.
Prior to the formation of Swiss International Air Lines, the regional airline Crossair was headquartered on the grounds of EuroAirport."Location." Crossair. Retrieved on 13 June 2009. Prior to its dissolution, Crossair Europe was headquartered on the grounds of EuroAirport. Flight International. March 23–29, 2004. 58. The airline Farnair Switzerland formerly had its head office at EuroAirport. As in the case of the Swiss head office, the area with the former Farnair head office may only be accessed from Switzerland."How to find us." Farnair Europe. Retrieved on 8 December 2010. The head office moved to its current location, the Villa Guggenheim in Allschwil, in proximity to EuroAirport, on 1 October 2011."Contact Us." (Archive) Farnair Switzerland. Retrieved on 19 February 2012.








