[[Root of unity]]

CATEGORIES: Algebraic numbers, Cyclotomic fields, Polynomials, One, Complex numbers

In mathematics, a root of unity, occasionally called a de Moivre number, is any  complex number that gives 1 when raised to some integer power . Roots of unity are used in many branches of mathematics, and are especially important in number theory, the theory of group characters, and the discrete Fourier transform.
In field theory and ring theory the notion of root of unity also applies to any ring with a multiplicative identity element. Any algebraically closed field has exactly  is not divisible by the characteristic of the field.

General definition

An 
Traditionally, . Interesting cases are finite fields and modular arithmetics, for which the article root of unity modulo n contains some information.
An :

Elementary facts

Every th term in the sequence.
If . But then,
Therefore, given a power . This is often convenient.
Any integer power of an th root of unity:
Here th root of unity:
Let th roots of unity.
From the preceding facts it follows that if th root of unity:
If  is not primitive there is only one implication:
An example showing that the converse implication is false is given by:
Let , by the formula:
i.e.
Therefore, th root of unity where
Thus, if  is a prime number, all the roots except +1 are primitive).
In other words, if :
where the notation means that .
Since the cardinality of , this  demonstrates the classical formula

Examples

De Moivre's formula, which is valid for all real , is
Setting th root of unity:
but for ,
This formula shows that on the complex plane the  on the right.) This geometric fact accounts for the term "cyclotomic" in such phrases as cyclotomic field and cyclotomic polynomial; it is from the Greek roots "cyclo" (circle) plus "tomos" (cut, divide).
which is valid for all real th roots of unity into the form
It follows from the discussion in the previous section that this is a primitive  are coprime.
The roots of unity are, by definition, the roots of a polynomial equation and are thus algebraic numbers. In fact, Galois theory can be used to show that they may be expressed as expressions involving integers and the operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, division, and the extraction of roots. (There are more details later in this article at Cyclotomic fields.)
The equation  obviously has only one solution, +1, which is therefore the only primitive first root of unity. It is a nonprimitive 2nd, 3rd, 4th, ... root of unity.
The equation  has two solutions, +1 and −1. +1 is the primitive first root of unity, leaving −1 as the only primitive second (square) root of unity. It is a nonprimitive 4th, 6th, 8th, ...
The only real roots of unity are ±1; all the others are non-real complex numbers, as can be seen from de Moivre's formula or the figures.
The third (cube) roots satisfy the equation . Therefore, the primitive cube roots of unity are the roots of a quadratic equation. (See Cyclotomic polynomial, below.)
The two primitive fourth roots of unity are the two square roots of the primitive square root of unity, −1
The four primitive fifth roots of unity are
The two primitive sixth roots of unity are the negatives (and also the square roots) of the two primitive cube roots:
Gauss observed that if a primitive -gon using only ruler and compass, and that if the root of unity requires third or fourth or higher radicals the regular polygon cannot be constructed. The 7th roots of unity are the first that require cube roots. Note that the real part and imaginary part are both real numbers, but complex numbers are buried in the expressions. They cannot be removed. See casus irreducibilis for details.
One of the primitive seventh roots of unity is
where .
The four primitive eighth roots of unity are ± the square roots of the primitive fourth roots, . One of them is:
See heptadecagon for the real part of a 17th root of unity.

Periodicity

If th root of unity, then the sequence of powers
is  sequences of powers
for -periodic sequence of complex numbers
can be expressed as a linear combination of powers of a primitive th root of unity:
for some complex numbers .
This is a form of Fourier analysis. If  is a complex amplitude.
Choosing for the primitive th root of unity
allows :
This is a discrete Fourier transform.

Summation

Let th roots of unity, primitive or not. Then
For , and their sum is given by the formula for a geometric series:
Let th roots of unity. Then
where  is the Möbius function.
In the section Elementary facts, it was shown that if :
This implies
Applying the Möbius inversion formula gives
In this formula, if 
 (). For two pairs of non-real 5th roots of unity these sums are inverse golden ratio and minus golden ratio.
For ).



Notes




