[[Stocking]]

CATEGORIES: History of clothing, Hosiery, Lingerie

A stocking (also known as hose, especially in a historical context) is a close-fitting, variously elastic garment covering the foot and lower part of the leg. Stockings vary in color, design and transparency. By analogy, the term is also used to describe a type of horse marking in which the white coloring extends from the horse's hoof to just above the knee.
Today, stockings are primarily worn by women for fashion and aesthetics, usually in association with mid-length skirts.

History

Historically, even though the word sock is at least as ancient in origin, what men normally wore were often referred to as stockings, probably especially when referring to longer hose at times when they were the fashion for men.  (See Hose.)
Before the 1590s, stockings were made of woven cloth. The first knitting machines were for making stockings.google.au/books?id=tlH7xI1M4GwC&pg=PA49&lpg=PA49&dq=elizabethan+knitting+machine+stockings&source=bl&ots=b2EbJPwDbh&sig=1-Mp8rtMcDf59jEIaKjMXdv6FTU&hl=en&ei=ZXTmTN2cFc_Xcf-L3YcL&sa=X&oi=book_result&ct=result&resnum=3&ved=0CCEQ6AEwAg#v=onepage&q&f=false ISBN 978-0-8160-5946-1 The stockings themselves were made of cotton, linen, wool or silk. A polished cotton called lisle was common, as were those made in the town of Balbriggan.
Before the 1920s, women's stockings, if worn, were worn for warmth. In the 1920s, as hemlines of women's dresses rose, women began to wear stockings to cover the exposed legs. These stockings were sheer, first made of silk or rayon (then known as "artificial silk"), and after 1940 of nylon.
The introduction of nylon in the 1939 by chemical company, DuPont, began a high demand for stockings in the United States with up to 4 million pairs being purchased in one day.  Nylon stockings were cheap, durable, and sheer compared to their cotton and silk counterparts.  When America entered World War II on February 11, 1942, DuPont ceased production of nylon stockings and retooled their factories to produce parachutes, airplane cords, and rope.  This led to a mass shortage and creation of a black market for stockings.  At the end of the war DuPont announced that the company would return to producing stockings but could not meet demand.  This led to a series of disturbances in American stores labeled the nylon riots until DuPont was able to ramp up production.
The first pantyhose made an appearance in the 1940s and 1950s, when film and theater productions had stockings sewn to the briefs of actresses and dancers, according to actress-dancer Ann Miller Beginning in 1987, sales of pantyhose started a slight decline due to the newly invented hold-ups, but still remain the most sold kind of hosiery.

Benefits and drawbacks


Stockings are sometimes preferred to pantyhose for a number of reasons. These may include the perception that stockings, and the associated use of garters, lace, high fashion, appliqué and the exposure of the thigh, are more aesthetically pleasing, or sexually attractive, than pantyhose. They are also regarded as cleaner and healthier, while pantyhose tends to create a humid and warm environment in the crotch area, increasing perspiration and potentially promoting fungal and bacterial growth. Stockings, on the other hand, provide ventilation in the crotch, resulting in a reduction of fungal and bacterial growth.
However, stockings have a drawback in colder weather, because more skin is exposed to the cold compared to pantyhose. Also, pantyhose does not require garters and garter belts, does not need to be adjusted as much, and leaves a smoother line under form-fitting clothing.

Support


Stockings can be held up in one of three ways:

Terminology


In modern usage, stocking specifically refers to the form of women's hosiery configured as two pieces, one for each leg (except for American and Australian English, where the term can also be a synonym pantyhose). The term hold-ups and thigh highs refers to stockings that stay up by the use of built-in elastic, while the word stockings is the general term or refers to the kind of stockings that need a suspender belt (garter belt, in American English), and are quite distinct from tights or pantyhose (American English).
Other terms used with stockings include:





Further reading




