[[Yuppie]]

CATEGORIES: Social groups, Pejorative terms for people, Social class subcultures, Age-related stereotypes

Yuppie (short for "young urban professional" or "young upwardly-mobile professional") It first came into use in the early 1980s.

Characteristics

Cornell University economist Robert H. Frank, author of Luxury Fever, has remarked, "When people were denouncing yuppies, they had considerably lower incomes than yuppies, so the things yuppies spent their money on seemed frivolous and unnecessary from their vantage point." Pro-skateboarder and businessman Tony Hawk has said that yuppies give "us visions of bright V-neck sweaters with collars underneath, and all that was vile in the eighties", and he has also remarked that a "bitchin' tattoo cannot hide your inner desire to be Donald Trump."
Author and political commentator Victor Davis Hanson has written:


History

Although the term yuppies had not appeared until the early 1980s, there was discussion about young urban professionals as early as 1968.
 Critics believe that the demand for "instant executives" has led some young climbers to confuse change with growth. One New York consultant comments, "Many executives in their 20s and 30s have been so busy job-hopping that they've never developed their skills. They're apt to suffer a sudden loss of career impetus and go into a power stall." 
Joseph Epstein was credited for coining the term in 1982, Newsweek magazine declared 1984 "The Year of the Yuppie", characterizing the salary range, occupations, and politics of yuppies as "demographically hazy".  The alternative acronym yumpie, for young upwardly mobile professional, was also current in the 1980s but failed to catch on.Here Comes the Yumpies, Time, March 26, 1984
In a 1985 issue of The Wall Street Journal, Theressa Kersten at SRI International described a "yuppie backlash" by people who fit the demographic profile yet express resentment of the label: "You're talking about a class of people who put off having families so they can make payments on the SAABs ... To be a Yuppie is to be a loathsome undesirable creature". Leo Shapiro, a market researcher in Chicago, responded, "Stereotyping always winds up being derogatory. It doesn't matter whether you are trying to advertise to farmers, Hispanics or Yuppies, no one likes to be neatly lumped into some group".
Later, the word lost most of its political connotations and, particularly after the 1987 stock market crash, gained the negative socio-economic connotations that it sports today. On April 8, 1991, Time magazine proclaimed the death of the yuppie in a mock obituary.
In the 1990s, most yuppies made a transition to the middle class but they maintain an upper-middle level lifestyle, as they age well to their 30's and 40's the "yuppie" generation often got married and settled down to have children. The economic boom at the time have transformed some yuppies or higher-income couples into Bobos or the "bohemian bourgeois". 
The term has experienced a resurgence in usage during the 2000s and 2010s. In October 2000, David Brooks remarked in a Weekly Standard article that Benjamin Franklin- due to his extreme wealth, cosmopolitanism, and adventurous social life- is "Our Founding Yuppie". Victor Davis Hanson also recently wrote in National Review very critically of yuppies.

Usage outside of the United States

A September 2010 article in The Standard described the items on a typical Hong Kong resident's "yuppie wish list" based on a survey of 28 to 35 year olds. About 58% wanted to own their own home, 40% wanted to professionally invest, and 28% wanted to become a boss.
In Mexico, the term "yupi" is a neologism for high class young people usually from the largest cities and  known for having a modern white-collar economy. Yuppification has occurred in economic booming nations of China, India, Southeast Asia, the Middle East and South Africa in the late 1990s and 2000s.

In popular culture

Related terms

 | publisher = Cornell University Press | location = Ithaca, NY | isbn = 978-0-8014-8952-5}}</ref>





Further reading




