[[Memory Stick]]

CATEGORIES: Solid-state computer storage media, Sony products

Memory Stick is a removable flash memory card format, launched by Sony in October 1998, SanDisk and Lexar are among few third-party MS producers. Kingston offers universal microSD to Memory Stick Pro Duo adapters, though it's not official way.

History

The original Memory Stick was launched in October 1998, was available in sizes up to 128 MB, and a sub-version, Memory Stick Select allowed two banks of 128 MB selectable by a slider switch, essentially two cards squeezed into one. The largest capacity Memory Stick currently available is 64 GB. According to Sony, the Memory Stick PRO has a maximum theoretical size of 2 TB.


Applications

Typically, Memory Sticks are used as storage media for a portable device, in a form that can easily be removed for access by a personal computer. For example, Sony digital compact cameras use Memory Stick for storing image files. With a Memory Stick-capable Memory card reader a user can copy the pictures taken with the Sony digital camera to a computer. Sony typically includes Memory Stick reader hardware in its first party consumer electronics, such as digital cameras, digital music players, PDAs, cellular phones, the VAIO line of laptop computers, and the PlayStation Portable.
A special Memory Stick can be inserted in the hindquarters of Sony's AIBO robot pet, to enable the use of Aiboware—software intended for use on AIBOs. The Sticks include a copy protection mechanism used by the robot, allowing users to write programs. These are referred to as programmable or programming. Only 8 MB and 16 MB versions are available.

Formats and form factors

Memory Sticks include a wide range of actual formats, including three different form factors.

Memory Stick

The original Memory Stick is approximately the size and thickness of a stick of chewing gum. It was available in sizes from 4 MB to 128 MB. The original Memory Stick is no longer manufactured.

Memory Stick Select

thumbnail|right|Lexar 256 MB Memory Stick Select with memory switch. The Memory Stick Select was two separate 128 MB partitions which the user could switch between using a (physical) switch on the card. This solution was fairly unpopular, but it did give users of older Memory Stick devices more capacity. Its size was still the same as the original Memory Stick.

Memory Stick PRO

The Memory Stick PRO, introduced in 2003 as a joint effort between Sony and SanDisk, would be the longer-lasting solution to the space problem. Most devices that use the original Memory Sticks support both the original and PRO sticks since both formats have identical form factors. Some readers that were not compatible could be upgraded to Memory Stick PRO support via a firmware update. Memory Stick PROs have a marginally higher transfer speed and a maximum theoretical capacity of 32 GB, although it appears capacities higher than 4 GB are only available in the PRO Duo form factor. High Speed Memory Stick PROs are available, and newer devices support this high speed mode, allowing for faster file transfers. All Memory Stick PROs larger than 1 GB support this High Speed mode, and High Speed Memory Stick Pros are backwards-compatible with devices that don't support the High Speed mode. High capacity memory Sticks such as the 4 GB versions are expensive compared to other types of flash memory such as SD cards and CompactFlash.

Memory Stick Duo

The Memory Stick Duo was developed in response to Sony's need for a smaller flash memory card for pocket-sized digital cameras, cell phones and the PlayStation Portable. It is slightly smaller than the competing Secure Digital (SD) format and roughly two thirds the length of the standard Memory Stick form factor, but costs more. Memory Stick Duos are available with the same features as the larger standard Memory Stick, available with and without high speed mode, and with and without MagicGate support. The Memory Stick PRO Duo has replaced the Memory Stick Duo due to its 128 MB size limitation, but has kept the same form factor as the Duo.
thumbnail|right|Memory Stick Duo Adaptor and Memory Stick PRO Duo.A simple adapter allows Memory Stick Duo to be used in devices designed to accept the original Memory Stick form factor.

Memory Stick PRO Duo

The Memory Stick PRO Duo (MSPD) quickly replaced the Memory Stick Duo due to the Duo's size limitation of 128 MB and slow transfer speed. Memory Stick PRO Duos are available in all the same variants as the larger Memory Stick PRO, with and without High Speed mode, and with and without MagicGate support.
Sony has released two different versions of Memory Stick PRO Duo. One is a 16 GB version on March 2008 and other is a 32 GB version on August 21, 2009.

Memory Stick PRO-HG Duo

On December 11, 2006, Sony, together with SanDisk, announced the Memory Stick PRO-HG Duo. While only serial and 4-bit parallel interfaces are supported in the Memory Stick PRO format, an 8-bit parallel interface was added to the Memory Stick PRO-HG format. Also, the maximum interface clock frequency was increased from 40 MHz to 60 MHz. With these enhancements, a theoretical transfer rate of 480 Mbit/s (60 Mbyte/s) is achieved, which is three times faster than the Memory Stick PRO format.

Memory Stick Micro (M2)

In a joint venture with SanDisk, Sony released a new Memory Stick format on February 6, 2006.  The Memory Stick Micro (M2) measures 15 × 12.5 × 1.2 mm (roughly one-quarter the size of the Duo) with 64 MB, 128 MB, 256 MB, 512 MB, 1 GB, 2 GB, 4 GB, 8 GB, and 16 GB capacities available. The format has a theoretical limit of 32 GB and maximum transfer speed of 160 Mbit/s. However, as with the PRO Duo format, it has been expanded through the XC series as Memory Stick XC Micro and Memory Stick XC-HG Micro, both with the theoretical maximum capacity of 2 TB.
The M2 comes with an adapter, much like the Duo Sticks, to ensure physical compatibility with Memory Stick PRO devices. However, not all devices with a PRO slot are compatible with the M2/Adapter combination, as the firmware of older devices don't support the higher capacity of some M2 cards. One example is certain Sony CLIÉ PDAs which don't support cards larger than 2 GB.
Sony announced on June 1, 2009 that M2 support in Sony Ericsson phones would be dropped in favor of microSD.

Memory Stick XC

On January 7, 2009, SanDisk and Sony announced the Memory Stick XC format (tentatively named "Memory Stick Format Series for Extended High Capacity" at the time).


Memory Stick PRO-HG Duo HX

Sony announced the release of the Memory Stick PRO-HG Duo HX on May 17th, 2011 which was considered the fastest card ever made by the manufacturer. It measures 20 x 31 x 1.6 mm, with 8 GB, 16 GB or 32 GB versions available. Also, the format offers a maximum transfer speed of 50 MB per second. 

Mark 2 Certification

As of early 2008, Mark 2-certified versions of the Memory Stick PRO Duo became available. The Mark 2 designation indicates the Memory Stick is suitable for use with AVCHD recording products or other faster Memory Stick enabled devices by providing appropriate minimum write performance.








