[[Hasmonean dynasty]]

CATEGORIES: Ancient Jewish Greek history, Former monarchies of Asia, Hasmoneans, History of Hanukkah, History of Israel, History of Syria, History of Lebanon, History of Jordan, History of Palestine, Jewish royalty, Seleucid Empire successor states

The Hasmonean dynastyFrom Late Latin Asmonaeus from Ancient Greek Ἀσαμωναῖος (Asamōnaios) from Hebrew Ḥashmona'i. BC, the dynasty ruled semi-autonomously from the Seleucids in the region of Judea. From 110 BC, with the Seleucid empire disintegrating, the dynasty became fully independent, expanded into the neighbouring regions of Galilee, Iturea, Perea, Idumea and Samaria, and took the title "basileus". Some modern scholars refer to this period as an independent kingdom of Israel. The Kingdom had survived for 103 years before yielding to the Herodian Dynasty in 37 BC. Even then, Herod the Great tried to bolster the legitimacy of his reign by marrying a Hasmonean princess, Mariamne, and planning to drown the last male Hasmonean heir at his Jericho palace.
The dynasty was established under the leadership of Simon Maccabaeus, two decades after his brother Judas the Maccabee ( יהדה המכבי "Hammer") defeated the Seleucid army during the Maccabean Revolt. According to historical sources, including 1 Maccabees and 2 Maccabees and the first book of The Jewish War by Jewish historian Flavius Josephus (AD 37– BC was later exploited by the Romans themselves.  Hyrcanus II and Aristobulus II, Simon's great-grandsons, became pawns in a proxy war between Julius Caesar and Pompey the Great. The deaths of Pompey (48 BC), Caesar (44 BC), and the related Roman civil wars temporarily relaxed Rome's grip on Israel, allowing a very brief Hasmonean resurgence backed by the Parthian Empire.  This short independence was rapidly crushed by the Romans under Mark Antony and Octavian. The installation of Herod the Great (an Idumean) as king in 37 BC made Israel a Roman client state and marked the end of the Hasmonean dynasty. In AD 6, Rome joined Judea proper, Samaria and Idumea (biblical Edom) into the Roman province of Iudaea. In AD 44, Rome installed the rule of a Roman procurator side by side with the rule of the Herodian kings (specifically Agrippa I 41–44 and Agrippa II 50–100).

Etymology

The family name of the Hasmonean dynasty originates with the ancestor of the house, Ἀσαμωναῖος Asamoneus or Asmoneus (see Josephus Flavius),Jewish Antiquities 12:263    who is said to have been the great-grandfather of Mattathias, but about whom nothing more is known. An alternative view posits that the Hebrew, Hashmona'i, is linked with the village of Heshbon, mentioned in Joshua 15:27.OzTorah: Judah Maccabee

Background

The lands of the former Kingdom of Israel and Kingdom of Judah (  World Civilizations Learning Modules.  Washington State University, 1999.[/ref]
Under Antiochus III the Seleucids wrested control of Israel from the Ptolemies for the final time, defeating Ptolemy V Epiphanes at the Battle of Panium in 198 BC.  Seleucid rule over the Jewish parts of the region then resulted in the rise of Hellenistic cultural and religious practices:  "In addition to the turmoil of war, there arose in the Jewish nation pro-Seleucid and pro-Ptolemaic parties; and the schism exercised great influence upon the Judaism of the time. It was in Antioch that the Jews first made the acquaintance of Hellenism and of the more corrupt sides of Greek culture; and it was from Antioch that Judea henceforth was ruled."Ginzberg, Lewis.   Jewish Encyclopedia.

Historical sources

The origin of the Hasmonean dynasty is recorded in the books 1 Maccabees and 2 Maccabees, covering the period from 175 to 134 BC during which time the Hasmonean dynasty became semi-independent from the Seleucid empire but had not yet expanded far outside of Judea. The books are considered part of the Biblical canon by the Catholic and Eastern Orthodox churches and apocryphal by most Protestant Christians; but are not a part of the Hebrew Bible. The books are written from the point of view that the salvation of the Jewish people in a crisis which came from God through the family of Mattathias, particularly his sons Judas Maccabeus, Jonathan Apphus, and Simon Thassi, and his grandson John Hyrcanus. The books include historical and religious material from the Septuagint that was codified by Catholics and Eastern Orthodox Christians.
The other primary source for the Hasmonean dynasty is the first book of The Wars of the Jews by the Jewish historian Josephus, (37–shortly after AD 100). Josephus' account is the only primary source covering the history of the Hasmonean dynasty during the period of its expansion and independence between 110 to 63 BC. Notably, Josephus, a Roman citizen and former general in the Galilee, who survived the Roman-Jewish wars of the 1st century, was a Jew who was captured and cooperated with the Romans; writing his books in Rome; leaving some to question his impartiality and credibility as a historian.    Philadelphia:Jewish Publication Society of America, 1914:  "He was not a loyal general, and he was not a faithful chronicler of the struggle with Rome; but he had the merit of writing a number of books on the Jews and Judaism." Preface.
The books of Maccabees use the names "Judea" and "Israel" (or cognates) as geographical descriptors throughout for both the land and people over whom the Hasmoneans would rule. The Talmud includes one of the Hasmonean kings under the description "Kings of Israel". Scholars refer to the state as the Hasmonean Kingdom to distinguish it from the previous kingdoms of Israel. The name "Judaea" has also been used to describe the Hasmonean Kingdom although this name reflects the later designation of the region under the Romans at the time of Josephus' writings in the late 1st century.

Seleucid rule over Israel

Hellenization

The Hellenization of the Jews in the pre-Hasmonean period was not universally resisted.  Generally, the Jews accepted foreign rule when they were only required to pay tribute, and otherwise allowed to govern themselves internally. Nevertheless, Jews were divided between those favoring Hellenization and those opposing it, and were divided over allegiance to the Ptolemies or Seleucids.  When the High Priest Simon II died in 175 BC, conflict broke out between supporters of his son Onias III (who opposed Hellenization, and favored the Ptolemies) and his son Jason (who favored Hellenization, and favored the Seleucids).  A period of political intrigue followed, with priests such as Menelaus bribing the king to win the High Priesthood, and accusations of murder of competing contenders for the title. The result was a brief civil war. The Tobiads, a philo-Hellenistic party, succeeded in placing Jason into the powerful position of High Priest.  He established an arena for public games close by the Temple. 

Antiochus IV against Jerusalem

The Hellenistic trends in Jewish society were, however, inadequate protection against Antiochus.  In 168 BC, after successfully invading the Ptolemaic kingdom of Egypt (apparently without Jewish support), Antiochus IV was pressured by the Roman Republic to withdraw.  According to Livy, "Popilius.....'"Livy, Ab Urbe Condita, xlv.12.  Returning toward Antioch, the troops of Antiochus sacked Jerusalem and removed the sacred objects from the Jerusalem Temple, slaughtering an unknown, but large, number of Jews: "And after that Antiochus had smitten Egypt, he returned again in the hundred forty and third year, and went up against Israel  and Jerusalem with a great multitude, And entered proudly into the sanctuary, and took away the golden altar, and the candlestick of light, and all the vessels thereof... And when he had taken all away, he went into his own land, having made a great massacre, and spoken very proudly. Therefore there was a great mourning in Israel, in every place where they were."(1 Maccabees 1:20–25)  
He then imposed a tax and established a fortress in Jerusalem. Antiochus tried to suppress public observance of Jewish laws, apparently in an attempt to secure control over the Jews. His government set up an idol of Zeus on the Temple Mount, which Jews considered to be desecration of the Mount; it also forbade both circumcision and possession of Jewish scriptures, on pain of death.  According to Josephus, "Now Antiochus was not satisfied either with his unexpected taking the city, or with its pillage, or with the great slaughter he had made there; but being overcome with his violent passions, and remembering what he had suffered during the siege, he compelled the Jews to dissolve the laws of their country, and to keep their infants uncircumcised, and to sacrifice swine's flesh upon the altar."William Whiston translation of The Wars of the Jews   He also outlawed observance of the Sabbath and the offering of sacrifices at the Jerusalem Temple and required Jewish leaders to sacrifice to idols; punitive executions were also instituted.  Possession of Jewish scriptures was made a capital offence.  The motives of Antiochus are unclear.  He may have been incensed at the overthrow of his appointee, Menelaus,Oesterley, W.O.E., A History of Israel, Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1939 he may have been responding to a Jewish revolt that had drawn on the Temple and the Torah for its strength, or he may have been encouraged by a group of radical Hellenizers among the Jews.), The Illustrated History of the Jewish People, London, Aurum Press, 1997, ISBN 1-85410-530-2
See also Antinomianism in the Books of the Maccabees.

Maccabean Revolt

The author of the First Book of Maccabees regarded the Maccabean revolt as a rising of pious Jews against the Seleucid king who had tried to eradicate their religion and against the Jews who supported  him.  The author of the Second Book of Maccabees presented the conflict as a struggle between "Judaism" and "Hellenism", words that he was the first to use. Modern scholarship tends to the second view.
Most modern scholars argue that the king was intervening in a civil war between traditionalist Jews in the countryside and Hellenized Jews in Jerusalem. As the conflict escalated, Antiochus prohibited the practices of the traditionalists, thereby, in a departure from usual Seleucid practice, banning the religion of an entire people. Other scholars argue that while the rising began as a religious rebellion, it was gradually transformed into a war of national liberation. Feldman, Meyer Reinhold,  Fortress Press, 1996, p. 147
The two most prominent 20th century scholars of the Maccabean revolt, Elias Bickermann and Victor Tcherikover, each have very different views for the cause of the revolt, focused on the policies of the Jewish leaders and not Antiochus IV:  "Bickermann saw the origin of the problem in the attempt of "Hellenized" Jews to reform the "antiquated" and "outdated" religion practiced in Jerusalem, and to rid it of superstitious elements. They were the ones who egged on Antiochus IV and instituted the religious reform in Jerusalem. One suspects that Bickermann may have been influenced in his view by an antipathy to Reform Judaism in 19th- and 20th-century Germany. Tcherikover, perhaps influenced by socialist concerns, saw the uprising as one of the rural peasants against the rich elite. 
 The National Interest, 2006, via The Free Library by Farlex.[/ref]
According to I and II Maccabees, the priestly family of Mattathias (Mattisyahu/Mattitiyahu in Hebrew), which came to be known as the MaccabeesThe name may be related to the Aramaic word for "hammer", or may be derived from an acronym of the Jewish battle cry "Mi Kamocha B'elim, YHWH" ("Who is like you among the heavenly powers, GOD!" (Exodus 15:11), "MKBY" (Mem, Kaf, Bet and Yud). called the people forth to holy war against the Seleucids.  Mattathias' sons Judah (Yehuda), Jonathan (Yonoson/ Yonatan), and Simon (Shimon) began a military campaign, initially with disastrous results: one thousand Jewish men, women, and children were killed by Seleucid troops because they refused to fight, even in self-defense, on the Sabbath. Other Jews then reasoned that they must fight when attacked, even on the Sabbath. The institution of guerrilla warfare practices by Judah over several years led to victory against the Seleucids:  "It was now, in the fall of 165, that Judah's successes began to disturb the central government. He appears to have controlled the road from Jaffa to Jerusalem, and thus to have cut off the royal party in Acra from direct communication with the sea and thus with the government. It is significant that this time the Syrian troops, under the leadership of the governor-general Lysias, took the southerly route, by way of Idumea."Bickerman, Elias J. Ezra to the Last of the Maccabees. Schocken, 1962. Via  
In 164 BC, Judah captured Jerusalem and the Temple in Jerusalem was freed and reconsecrated: "After having recovered Jerusalem, Judah ordered the Temple to be cleansed, a new altar to be built in place of the Desecrated one, and new holy vessels to be made.", which also lasts for eight days and which was observed in a similar fashion during the time of the Second Temple. (Suk. 5:2–4).
Antiochus IV died that same year, and was ultimately succeeded by Demetrius I Soter, the nephew whose throne he had usurped.  Demetrius sent the general Bacchides to Israel with a large army, in order to install Alcimus with the office of high priest.

From revolt to independence

Judah and Jonathan

After five years of war and raids, Judah sought an alliance with the Roman Republic to remove the Greeks: "In the year 161 BC he sent Eupolemus the son of Johanan and Jason the son of Eleazar, 'to make a league of amity and confederacy with the Romans.'", via Bentwich, Norman. Josephus, The Jewish Publication Society of America. Philadelphia, 1914.
A Seleucid army under General Nicanor was defeated by Judah (ib. 7:26–50) at the Battle of Adasa, with Nicanor himself killed in action.  Next, Bacchides was sent with Alcimus and an army of twenty thousand infantry and two thousand cavalry, and met Judah at the Battle of Elasa (Laisa), where this time it was the Hasmonean commander who was killed. (161/160 BC).  Bacchides now established the Hellenes as rulers in Israel; and upon Judah's death, the persecuted patriots, under Jonathan, brother of Judah, fled beyond the Jordan River.(ib. 9:25–27)  They set camp near a morass by the name of Asphar, and remained, after several engagements with the Seleucids, in the swamp in the country east of the Jordan.
Following the death of his puppet governor Alcimus, High Priest of Jerusalem, Bacchides felt secure enough to leave the country, but two years after the departure of Bacchides from Israel, the City of Acre felt sufficiently threatened by Maccabee incursions to contact Demetrius and request the return of Bacchides to their territory.  Jonathan and Simeon, now more experienced in guerilla warfare, thought it well to retreat farther, and accordingly fortified in the desert a place called Beth-hogla;("Bet Ḥoglah" for Βηϑαλαγά in Josephus; 1 Macc. has Βαιδβασὶ, perhaps = Bet Bosem or Bet Bassim "spice-house", near Jericho) there they were besieged several days by Bacchides.  Jonathan offered the rival general a peace treaty and exchange of prisoners of war. Bacchides readily consented and even took an oath of nevermore making war upon Jonathan. He and his forces then vacated Israel. The victorious Jonathan now took up his residence in the old city of Michmash. From there he endeavored to clear the land of "the godless and the apostate".; Josephus, l.c. xiii. 1, §§ 5–6). The chief source, 1 Maccabees, says that with this "the sword ceased in Israel", and in fact nothing is reported for the five following years (158–153 BC).

Seleucid civil conflict

 
 
ImageSize  = width:300 height:1000
PlotArea   = left:50 right:0 bottom:10 top:10
DateFormat = yyyy
Period     = from:35 till:175
TimeAxis   = orientation:vertical
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:10 start:35
ScaleMinor = unit:year increment:5 start:35
PlotData=
  Color:yellow mark:(line,blue) align:left fontsize:S
  shift:(15,-3) # shift text to right side of bar
  # there is no automatic collision detection, fontsize:XS
  # so shift texts up or down manually to avoid overlap shift:(25,-10)
