[[Transrapid]]

CATEGORIES: High-speed trains in Germany, Siemens products, Magnetic levitation, Magnetic propulsion devices, Monorails, Experimental and prototype high-speed trains

Transrapid is a German high-speed monorail train using magnetic levitation based on a 1934 patent. Planning for the Transrapid system started in 1969 with a test facility for the system in Emsland, Germany completed in 1987.  In 1991, technical readiness for application was approved by the Deutsche Bundesbahn in cooperation with renowned universities.Promotional Video in German with that statement at the endTranslation
The current application-ready version, the Transrapid 09, is designed for a cruising speed of .
In 2004, the first commercial implementation was completed: the Shanghai Maglev Train, which connects the city's rapid transit network  to Shanghai Pudong International Airport.  The Transrapid system has not yet been deployed on a long-distance intercity line.
The system is developed and marketed by Transrapid International, a joint venture of Siemens and ThyssenKrupp.
At the end of 2011, the operating license for the Emsland test track expired, and it closed down. In early 2012, demolition and reconversion of the entire Emsland site including the factory was approved.Transrapid-Teststrecke vor dem Abriss, NDR (in German)

Technology

Levitation

The super-speed Transrapid maglev system has no wheels, no axles, no gear transmissions, no steel rails, and no overhead electrical pantographs. The maglev vehicles do not roll on wheels; rather, they hover above the track guideway, using the attractive magnetic force between two linear arrays of electromagnetic coils—one side of the coil on the vehicle, the other side in the track guideway, which function together as a magnetic dipole. During levitation and travelling operation, the Transrapid maglev vehicle floats on a frictionless magnetic cushion with no physical contact whatsoever with the track guideway. On-board vehicle electronic systems measure the dipole gap distance 100,000 times per second to guarantee the clearance between the coils attached to the underside of the guideway and the magnetic portion of the vehicle wrapped around the guideway edges. With this precise, constantly updated electronic control, the dipole gap remains nominally constant at  of clearance above the guideway surface.
The Transrapid maglev vehicle requires less power to hover than it needs to run its on-board air conditioning equipment.
In Transrapid vehicle versions TR08 and earlier, when travelling at speeds below , all on-board power was supplied by recovered harmonic oscillation of the magnetic fields created from the track's linear stator (since these oscillations are parasitic, they cannot be used for vehicle propulsion). A new energy transmission system, version TR09, has since been developed for Transrapid, in which maglev vehicles now require no physical contact with the track guideway for their on-board power needs, regardless of the maglev vehicle speed. This feature helps to reduce on-going maintenance and operational costs.
In case of power failure of the track's propulsion system, the maglev vehicle can use on-board backup batteries to temporarily power the vehicle's levitation system.

Propulsion

The Transrapid maglev system uses a synchronous longstator linear motor for both propulsion and braking. It works like a rotating electric motor whose stator is "unrolled" along the underside of the guideway, so that instead of producing torque (rotation) it produces a linear force along its length. The electromagnets in the maglev vehicle that lift it also work as the equivalent of the excitation portion (rotor) of this linear electric motor. Since the magnetic travelling field only works in one direction, if there were to be several maglev trains on a given track section, they would all travel in the same direction thereby reducing the possibility of collision between moving trains.

Energy requirements

The normal energy consumption of the Transrapid is approximately  cruising speed, given by the following formula:
Power consumption compares favourably with other high-speed rail systems. With an efficiency of 0.85, the power required is about . Energy consumption for levitation and guidance purposes equates to approximately 1.7 kW/t. As the propulsion system is also capable of functioning in reverse, energy is transferred back into the electricity network during braking. An exception to this is when an emergency stop is performed using the emergency landing skids beneath the vehicle, although this method of bringing the vehicle to a stop is intended only as a last resort should it be impossible or undesirable to keep the vehicle levitating on back-up power to a natural halt.

Market segment, ecological impact and historical parallels

Compared to classical railway lines, Transrapid allows higher speeds and gradients with lower wear and tear and even lower energy consumption and maintenance needs. The Transrapid track is more flexible, and therefore more easily adapted to specific geographical circumstances than a classical train system. Cargo is restricted to a maximum payload of ). The magnetic field generator, an important part of the engine being a part of the track, limits the system capacity.
From a competition standpoint, the Transrapid is a proprietary solution. The track being a part of the engine, only the single-source Transrapid vehicles and infrastructure can be operated. There is no multisourcing foreseen concerning vehicles or the highly complicated crossings and switches. Unlike classical railways or other infrastructure networks (as jointly administrated by the Bundesnetzagentur in Germany) a Transrapid system does not allow any direct competition.

Ecological impact

The Transrapid itself is an electrically driven, clean, high-speed, high-capacity means of transport able to build up point-to-point passenger connections in geographically challenged surroundings. This has to be set in comparison with the impact on heritage and or landscape protection areas (compare Waldschlößchenbrücke). Any impact of emissions has to take into account the source of electrical energy. The reduced expense, noise and vibration of a people-only Transrapid sytem versus a cargo train track is not directly comparable. The reuse of existing tracks and the interfacing with existing networks is limited. The Transrapid indirectly competes for resources, space and tracks in urban and city surroundings with classical urban transport systems and high speed trains.

Comparative costs

=Track construction cost=

The fully elevated Shanghai Maglev was built at a cost of $US1.33 billion over a length of  including trains and stations. Thus the cost per km for dual track was $US43.6 million per km including trains and stations. This was the first ever commercial use of the technology. Since then conventional fast rail track has been mass-produced in China for between $US4.6 and $US30.8 million per km—mostly in rural areas. (See High-speed rail in China).
In 2008 Transrapid Australia quoted the Victoria (Australia) State Government A$34 million per km for dual track
. In comparison the  Regional Rail Link to be built in Victoria will cost A$5 billion, or A$105 million per km including two stations.
From the above it is not possible to say whether Transrapid or Conventional fast rail track would be cheaper for a particular application.
In comparing costs it should be noted that the higher operating speed of the maglev system will result in more passengers being delivered over the same distance in a set time. The ability of the Transrapid system to handle tighter turns and higher gradients could heavily influence a cost comparison for a particular project.

=Train purchase cost=

In 2008 Transrapid Australia quoted the Victoria (Australia) State Government between A$16.5 million (commuter) and A$20 million (luxury) per trains section or carriage
. Due to the . This works out at between A$179,000 and A$217,000 per square meter.
In comparison InterCityExpress which are also built by Siemens cost about A$6 million per carriage. Due to the . This works out at about A$83,000 per square meter.
This shows Transrapid train sets are likely to cost over twice as much as ICE 3 conventional fast rail train sets at this time. However each Transrapid train set is more than twice as efficient due to their faster operating speed and acceleration according to UK Ultraspeed. In their case study only 44% as many Transrapid train sets are needed to deliver the same amount of passengers as conventional high-speed trains.

=Operational cost=

Transrapid claims Transrapid Website - Economic Efficiency their system has very low maintenance costs compared to conventional high speed rail systems due to the non-contact nature of their system.
Because there is no contact between the track and the magnets, there is essentially no need to replace worn parts, as the train has a lifespan longer than that of a maglev company.

Critics

Critical voices, such as Rod EddingtonEddington Study refer to recent developments of railway and other competing technologies and draw parallels between Transrapid and previous high technology hypes without broad market impact outside niche applications.

Implementations

China

The only commercial implementation so far was in the year 2000, when the Chinese government ordered a Transrapid track to be built connecting Shanghai to its Pudong International Airport.
It was inaugurated in 2002 and regular daily trips started in March 2004. The travel speed is , track only allows the cruising speed to be maintained for a short time before deceleration must begin. The average number of riders per day (14 hours of operation) is about 7,500, while the maximum seating capacity per train is 440. A second class ticket price of about 50 RMB ( Renminbi) (about 6 Euro) is four times the price of the Airport Bus and ten times more expensive than a comparable Underground ticket.
The project was sponsored by the German Hermes loans with DM 200 million. The total cost is believed to be $1.33 billion.
A planned extension of the line to Shanghai Hongqiao Airport () has been repeatedly delayed.  Originally planned to be ready for Expo 2010, final approval was granted on 18 August 2008, and construction was scheduled to start in 2010 for completion in 2014.china.cn/china/national/2008-08/18/content_16258686.

Germany

To date, the Emsland test facility remains the only existing Transrapid track in Germany.

Planned systems

Iran

In 2007 Iran and a German company reached an agreement on using maglev trains to link the cities of Tehran and Mashhad. The agreement was signed at the Mashhad International Fair site between Iranian Ministry of Roads and Transportation and the German company. Maglev trains can reduce the  travel time between Tehran and Mashhad to about 2.5 hours.presstv.aspx?id=6163&sectionid=351020102 Munich-based Schlegel Consulting Engineers said they had signed the contract with the Iranian ministry of transport and the governor of Mashad. "We have been mandated to lead a German consortium in this project," a spokesman said. "We are in a preparatory phase." The next step will be to assemble a consortium, a process that is expected to take place "in the coming months," the spokesman said. The project could be worth between 10 billion and 12 billion euros, the Schlegel spokesman said. Siemens and ThyssenKrupp, the developers of a high-speed maglev train, called the Transrapid, both said they were unaware of the proposal. The Schlegel spokesman said Siemens and ThyssenKrupp were currently "not involved" in the consortium.alibaba.html

Switzerland

SwissRapide AG in co-operation with the SwissRapide Consortium is developing and promoting an above-ground magnetic levitation (Maglev) monorail system, based on the Transrapid technology. The first projects planned are the lines Bern – Zurich, Lausanne – Geneva as well as Zurich – Winterthur.

Colorado I-70

Transrapid is one of a number of companies seeking to build a 
There have been several other evaluations conducted in the USA including Washington DC to Baltimore, Los Angeles to Las Vegas, Chattanooga to Atlanta and Pittsburg to Philadelphia. So far no actual project has been started.See List of maglev train proposals:United States

Rejected systems

Germany

=High-speed competition=

The Transrapid originated as one of several competing concepts for new land-based high-speed public transportation developed in Germany. In this competition, the Transrapid primarily competed with the InterCityExpress (ICE), a high-speed rail system based on "traditional" railway technology. The ICE "won" in that it was adopted nationwide in Germany, however Transrapid development continued. A number of studies for possible Transrapid lines were conducted after the ICE had entered service, including a long-distance line from Hamburg to Berlin.

=Munich link=

The most recent

United Kingdom

The Transrapid was rejected in 2007

Incidents

September 2006 accident

On 22 September 2006, a Transrapid train collided with a maintenance vehicle at  The accident was caused by human error with the first train being allowed to leave the station before the maintenance vehicle had moved off the track. This situation could be avoided in a production environment by installing an automatic collision avoidance system.

SMT fire accident

On 11 August 2006, a Transrapid train running on Shanghai Maglev Line caught fire. The fire was quickly put out by Shanghai's firemen. It was reported that the vehicle's on-board batteries may have caused the fire.

Alleged theft of Transrapid technology

In April 2006, new announcements by Chinese officials planning to cut maglev rail costs by a third stirred some strong comments by various German officials and more diplomatic statements of concern from Transrapid officials. Deutsche Welle reported that the China Daily had quoted the State Council encouraging engineers to "learn and absorb foreign advanced technologies while making further innovations."
The China Aviation Industry Corporation said in its defence that the new Zhui Feng maglev train is not based or dependent on foreign technology. It claims it is not only a much lighter train, but also has a much more advanced design.

Development history and versions








