[[Agricultural subsidy]]

CATEGORIES: Agricultural subsidies

An agricultural subsidy is a governmental subsidy paid to farmers and agribusinesses to supplement their income, manage the supply of agricultural commodities, and influence the cost and supply of such commodities. Examples of such commodities include; wheat, feed grains (grain used as fodder, such as maize or corn, sorghum, barley, and oats), cotton, milk, rice, peanuts, sugar, tobacco, oilseeds such as soybeans, and meat products such as beef, pork, and lamb and mutton. Such subsidies are extremely controversial, both because of their complex effects and because of their political origins, which involve heavy lobbying from groups representing the interests of agribusiness." Economic and Political Weekly , Vol. 31, No. 13 (Mar. 30, 1996), pp. 818-820. (Available at 

Agricultural subsidies by region

European Union

In 2010, the EU spent €57 billion on agricultural development, of which €39 billion was spent on direct subsidies. Since 1992 (and especially since 2005), the EU's Common Agricultural Policy has undergone significant change as subsidies have mostly been decoupled from production. The largest subsidy is the Single Farm Payment.

Africa

Increases in food and fertilizer prices have underlined the vulnerability of poor urban and rural households in many developing countries, especially in Africa, renewing policymakers' focus on the need to increase staple food crop productivity.
A study by the Overseas Development Institute evaluates the benefits of the Malawi Government Agricultural Inputs Subsidy Programme, which was implemented in 2006/2007 to promote access to and use of fertilizers in both maize and tobacco production to increase agricultural productivity and food security. The subsidy was implemented by means of a coupon system which could be redeemed by the recipients for fertilizer types at approximately one-third of the normal cash price. According to policy conclusions of the Overseas Development Institute the voucher for coupon system can be an effective way of rationing and targeting subsidy access to maximize production and economic and social gains. Many practical and political challenges remain in the program design and implementation required to increase efficiency, control costs, and limit patronage and fraud.

New Zealand

New Zealand is reputed to have the most open agricultural markets in the world after radical reforms started in 1984 by the Fourth Labour Government stopped all subsidies.
 
 "In 1984 New Zealand's Labor government took the dramatic step of ending all farm subsidies, which then consisted of 30 separate production payments and export incentives. This was a truly striking policy action, because New Zealand's economy is roughly five times more dependent on farming than is the U.S. economy, measured by either output or employment. Subsidies in New Zealand accounted for more than 30 percent of the value of production before reform, somewhat higher than U.S. subsidies today. And New Zealand farming was marred by the same problems caused by U.S. subsidies, including overproduction, environmental degradation and inflated land prices."

As the country is a large agricultural exporter, continued subsidies by other countries are a long-standing bone of contention, with New Zealand being a founding member of the 19-member Cairns Group fighting to improve market access for exported agricultural goods.

United States

The United States currently pays around $20 billion per year to farmers in direct subsidies as "farm income stabilization" via U.S. farm bills. These bills pre-date  the economic turmoil of the Great Depression with the 1922 Grain Futures Act, the 1929 Agricultural Marketing Act and the 1933 Agricultural Adjustment Act creating a tradition of government support.
The beneficiaries of the subsidies have changed as agriculture in the United States has changed.  In the 1930s, about 25% of the country's population resided on the nation's 6,000,000 small farms.  By 1997, 157,000 large farms accounted for 72% of farm sales, with only 2% of the U.S. population residing on small farms.  In 2006, the top 3 states receiving subsidies were Texas (10.4%), Iowa (9.0%), and Illinois (7.6%).  The Total USDA Subsidies from farms in Iowa totaled $1,212,000,000 in 2006.
"Direct payment subsidies are provided without regard to the economic need of the recipients or the financial condition of the farm economy.  Established in 1996, direct payments were originally meant to wean farmers off traditional subsidies that are triggered during periods of low prices for corn, wheat, soybeans, cotton, rice, and other crops."
Top states for direct payments were Iowa ($501 million), Illinois ($454 million), and Texas ($397 million).  Direct payments  of subsidies are limited to $40,000 per person or $80,000 per couple.
The subsidy programs give farmers extra money for their crops and guarantee a price floor.  For instance in the 2002 Farm Bill, for every bushel of wheat sold, farmers were paid an extra 52 cents and guaranteed a price of 3.86 from 2002–03 and 3.92 from 2004–2007.  That is, if the price of wheat in 2002 was $3.80, farmers would get an extra 58¢ per bushel (52¢ plus the 6¢ price difference).
Corn is the top crop for subsidy payments. The Energy Policy Act of 2005 mandates that billions of gallons of ethanol be blended into vehicle fuel each year, guaranteeing demand, but US corn ethanol subsidies are between $5.5 billion and $7.3 billion per year. Producers also benefitted from a federal subsidy of 51 cents per gallon, additional state subsidies, and federal crop subsidies that can bring the total to 85 cents per gallon or more.  However, the federal ethanol subsidy expired December 31, 2011. "Corn-o-Copia."  IEEE Spectrum.  January 2007 (US corn-ethanol producers were shielded from competition from cheaper Brazilian sugarcane-ethanol by a 54-cent-per-gallon tariff, however that tariff also expired December 31, 2011.)

Asia

Farm subsidies in Asia remain a point of contention in global trade talks.
In 2009, Japan paid USD$46.5 billion in subsidies to its farmers,
South Korea has made attempts to reform its agricultural sector, despite resistance from vested interests.

Impact of subsidies

Farm subsidies have the direct effect of transferring income from the general tax payers to farm owners.  The justification for this transfer and its effects are complex and often controversial.

Global food prices and international trade

Although some critics and proponents of the World Trade Organization have noted that export subsidies, by driving down the price of commodities, can provide cheap food for consumers in developing countries,[ref]
</ref><ref>
