[[Juvenile (rapper)]]

CATEGORIES: 1975 births, Living people, African-American male actors, African-American male rappers, African-American songwriters, American male film actors, American people convicted of drug offenses, Atlantic Records artists, Cash Money Records artists, Male actors from New Orleans, Louisiana, Rap-a-Lot Records artists, Rappers from New Orleans, Louisiana, Songwriters from Louisiana, Southern hip hop musicians

Terius Gray (born March 25, 1975), better known by his stage name Juvenile, is an American rapper, actor, and songwriter. He is also a former member of hip-hop group the Hot Boys. At the age of 19, he began recording raps, releasing his debut album Being Myself in 1995. He became popular when his 1999 single "Back That Thang Up" was released. 
In 2003, he returned to Cash Money to record Juve the Great, spawning the number-one hit "Slow Motion". Following this album he again left Cash Money, and in 2006 he was signed to Atlantic Records. He released Reality Check under that label.

Music career

Beginnings

Juvenile released the song "Back That Thang Up", which was a big hit in the early 2000s. He first began recording his raps in the early 1990s. One of his early recordings was featured on DJ Jimi's 1991 release, "It's Jimi". The song "Bounce For the Juvenile" was a minor local hit and helped popularize "bounce music," a new rap style emerging out of New Orleans. In his smash hit, "Back That Thang Up," Juvenile included dogs barking as part of the beat for the song.

1994-95: Being Myself

Juvenile's debut album, Being Myself, was released in 1995 after signing with Warlock Records. The album did not gain much national attention and did not chart, but did fairly well on a local level.

1997: Solja Rags

After the regional success of his debut Juvenile signed to the larger Cash Money Records.  In 1997 Solja Rags, Juvenile's debut album with Cash Money Records, was released. It became popular among local rap audiences, and also saw some national success as it charted on the Billboard Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.  It was the first time he worked with Cash Money in-house producer Mannie Fresh, who would go on to produce all of Juvenile's albums on Cash Money in their entirety except Juve the Great.  Also in 1997 Juvenile joined the group the Hot Boys with fellow Cash Money rappers B.G., Turk, and Lil Wayne. They released their debut album as a group, titled Get It How U Live!

1998: 400 Degreez

Juvenile's next album, titled 400 Degreez was released in 1998. It was his breakout to the national rap scene.   The Cash Money label now had joint distribution by Universal Records, which gave the music much more national promotion.  This along with much more critically praised music made Juvenile a mainstream star.  The album's first single "Ha" and later "Back That Azz Up", both became very successful songs charting on the Billboard Hot 100 and the Hot R&B/Hip-Hop Songs chart.

1999-2002: Tha G-Code & Project English

In 1998, capitalizing off Juvenile's popularity off 400 Degreez, a remixed version of Being Myself and reissue of Solja Rags were released. The second Hot Boys group album, Guerrilla Warfare also came out and was successful, being certified Platinum. Over the next few years Juvenile released two more solo albums for Cash Money Tha G-Code in 1999 being certified Double Platinum, and Project English in 2001 being certified Platinum.  These albums each were very successful as they both reached the top 10 of the Billboard Hot 200, but they did not match the success of 400 Degreez. UTP Records had promised an album titled 600 Degreez but it never materialized.

2003-04: Juve the Great & UTP

Juvenile's manager Aubrey Francis and Cash Money's Baby met and worked out a deal for Juve and CMR to partner for another album. Juvenile returned to Cash Money Records in 2003, releasing Juve the Great. Juve The Great was certified Platinum, it featured the♙number-one hit "Slow Motion" featuring Soulja Slim.  It was the only number-one hit for Juvenile and Slim before Slim died in November 2003. The last Hot Boys album, Let 'Em Burn came out in 2003.
In 2005 Juvenile signed a new deal with Atlantic Records for himself, and also a separate label deal for his UTP Records imprint. UTP Records is the label that was started by Juve along with his long time manager Aubrey "Pied Piper" Francis, and older brother Corey. The group called "UTP" (Juve, Skip, and Wacko) released the hit song "Nolia Clap" as part of UTP Records first album release. It was produced by Juve along with producer XL Robertson. Atlantic Records. Juvenile also performed the song "Booty Language". It was part of the soundtrack for the movie Hustle And Flow. Juve performed alongside fellow Atlantic artist at the movies premier party in West Hollywood, California.

2006: Reality Check

Reality Check, Juvenile's 2006 album, debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 chart, being his first number-one album.

2009-2010: Cocky & Confident & Beast Mode

In a 2009 interview with Allhiphop." He also revealed that he decided to work only with fresh, young producers on the album and discussed his respect for younger artists like Soulja Boy.
Cocky & Confident was released in December 2009.  It peaked at #49 on the Billboard 200.  It was Juvenile's lowest charting album since 1997.  It featured one charting single, "Gotta Get It", which peaked at #53 on the Billboard R&B/Hip-Hop Singles chart. Following this album's release Juvenile began work on his next album, Beast Mode. This album was released in July 2010. Its first single is titled "Drop That Thang".

2011-present: Rejuvenation

Juvenile released his tenth studio album Rejuvenation on June 19, 2012, which was distributed by Rap-A-Lot Records. The first single from the album is "Power" featuring Rick Ross. Juvenile collaborated with Lil Wayne, DJ Khaled, and Drake for the album.

Personal life

Juvenile had a daughter, Jelani, with Joy Deleston. On February 29, 2008, Juvenile's 4-year-old daughter Jelani was shot and killed in her home, along with mother Deleston and older half sister. It was reported that Deleston's oldest child, 17-year-old son Anthony Tyrone Terrell Jr., returned to the home after police arrived and implicated himself in the murder of his mother and siblings. Terrell was charged with three counts of murder and three counts of aggravated assault. Due to his age, he cannot be held to the death penalty in Georgia, and has since been held in the DeKalb County jail. Though Juvenile received some criticism for not attending the funeral for his daughter and her mother, several statements were released that the rapper was "shocked and devastated" by the event, and also "was extremely saddened to hear the reports. As a private matter he has no further comment." Anthony Tyrone Terrell Jr. was sentenced to two consecutive life sentences after he pleaded guilty to killing Joy Deleston, 39, and her daughters, Micaiah, 11, and Jelani. However, Porter said Terrell won't be eligible for parole for at least 30 years.

Legal troubles

In the summer of 2002, Juvenile was arrested for assaulting his barber over charges that the barber was bootlegging his music.
In January 2003, Juvenile was arrested in New Orleans on drug charges.
Juvenile was involved in a legal dispute regarding failure to pay child support for his daughter Jelani with Joy Deleston, a deputy sheriff in Gwinnett County, Georgia. A paternity lawsuit was issued by Deleston in 2004, resulting in a DNA test and both parties agreeing that Juvenile was the father of the child. Attorney Randy Kessler represented Juvenile in the case, and stated that the case was resolved peacefully by consent order in 2006.
On February 25, 2010, Juvenile was arrested in Arabi, Louisiana. While Juvenile was recording music at a house there, a neighbor called police to report smelling marijuana smoke. He was cited on a misdemeanor charge of marijuana possession and later released on bond. For that charge, he pled guilty in August 2010 and received a suspended three-month jail sentence and six months of probation and paid a $250 fine and court costs.
On February 26, 2011, Juvenile was arrested in Sterlington, Louisiana for simple possession and speeding. He is due to appear in court in Ouachita Parish in April.
According to local media outlets and documents obtained by TMZ, the rap star hasn't been paying child support for over five years.
A judge has ruled he can avoid arrest and potential jail time if Juvenile, real name Terius Gray, pays $50,000 immediately.

Discography

Studio albums

Collaboration albums

Filmography






