[[Yellowman]]

CATEGORIES: People with albinism, Dancehall musicians, Jamaican male singers, Jamaican songwriters, 1956 births, Living people, People from Westmoreland Parish, Jamaican reggae singers, Skin cancer survivors, Cancer survivors, Columbia Records artists

Yellowman (born Winston Foster, 15 January 1956, Kingston, Jamaica) is a Jamaican reggae (rub-a-dub) and dancehall deejay, widely known as King Yellowman. He was popular in Jamaica in the 1980s, coming to prominence with a series of singles that established his reputation.

Career

Winston Foster grew up in a Catholic orphanage called Alpha Boys School in Kingston, and was shunned due to having albinism, which was usually not socially accepted in Jamaica. Alpha Boys School was known for its musical alumni. Like many Jamaican deejays, he honed his talents by frequently performing at outdoor sound-system dances. "Dancehall", in The Vibe History of Hip-hop, ed. Alan Light, 350-7. 1999 In 1981, after becoming significantly popular throughout Jamaica, Yellowman became the first dancehall artist to be signed to a major American label (Columbia Records).
His first album release was in 1982 entitled Mister Yellowman followed by Zungguzungguguzungguzeng in 1983 earning instant success. Yellowman's sexually explicit lyrics in popular songs such as "Them a Mad Over Me" boasted of his sexual prowess, like those of other reggae singers/deejays, earned Yellowman criticism in the mid-1980s. Yellowman appeared in Jamaican Dancehall Volcano Hi-power 1983 which featured other major dancehall musicians such as Massive Dread, Josey Wales, Burro Banton and Eek-A-Mouse. 
Yellowman has had a substantial influence on the world of hip hop. He is widely credited for leading the way for the succession of reggae artists that were embraced by the growing hip-hop community in America during the 1980s. Eazy-E used a sample of his voice from his recording "Nobody Move, Nobody Get Hurt", which also became a major hit by Eazy-E with the same title. The basic rhythm of his hit "Zungguzungguguzungguzeng" can be traced throughout the hip hop scene as it was reused by such hip hop giants as KRS-One, Sublime, Notorious B.I.G., Tupac Shakur, and Blackstar, formed by Mos Def and Talib Kweli. 
Yellowman proclaimed, "I never know why they call it slackness.  I talk about sex, but it's just what happens behind closed doors.  What I talk is reality".
By the mid-1990s however, Yellowman released socially-conscious material, rising to international fame along with singers such as Buju Banton. Yellowman became the island's most popular deejay despite being albino. During the early 1980s, Yellowman had over 40 singles and produced up to five albums per year.
In 1982, Yellowman was diagnosed with skin cancer and was initially told that he only had three more years to live. However, this prognosis proved to be inaccurate, and after several surgeries Yellowman was able to continue his career.
Yellowman's song 'Nobody Move, Nobody Get Hurt' is used on Grand Theft Auto V and appears on Blue Ark FM.

Philosophy

He has spoken against violence, in the Montreal Mirror in 2005 he said, "Now it's not your entertainment or teaching. If you notice the hip hop and dancehall artists today, all they do they sing about drugs, clothes, car, house—when they can't get it, they start get violent. ... I know what violence is like and what it contain and what it can do. I'm glad that the roots is coming back."   The slackness style which Yellowman is associated sometimes has homophobic lyrics.  However, in the same Montreal Mirror article he spoke against it. "Everybody listen to me ... I don't do songs against gay people, I don't do violent lyric against gay people. If you don't like a person or you don't like a thing, you don't talk about it. You don't come on stage and say kill them or burn them because everybody have a right to live."

"Zungguzungguguzungguzeng"

The melody for Yellowman's 1982 "Zungguzungguguzungguzeng", the "Diseases" riddim by "Junjo" Lawes, has been sampled and imitated repeatedly since its original release in 1967. Coxsone Dodd had already released two dub cuts, "Talking Dub" and "Lusaka", plus a 1980 cut by Jennifer Lara, "Hurt So Good", while Sly and Robbie's "Johnny Dollar" by Roland Burrell was also voiced by Yellowman as "Soldier Take Over".
Timeline:

Albums

Video releases






