[[Rubber bullet]]

CATEGORIES: Projectiles, Non-lethal projectiles, Riot control weapons

Rubber bullets (also called rubber baton rounds) are rubber or rubber-coated projectiles that can be fired from either standard firearms or dedicated riot guns. They are intended to be a non-lethal alternative to metal projectiles.  Like other similar projectiles made from plastic, wax, and wood, rubber bullets may be used for short range practice and animal control, but are most commonly associated with use in riot control and to disperse protests. These types of projectiles are sometimes called baton rounds.67 Rubber projectiles have largely been replaced by other materials as rubber tends to bounce uncontrollably.
Such "kinetic impact munitions" are meant to cause pain but not serious injury. They are expected to produce contusions, abrasions, and hematomas. However, they may cause bone fractures, injuries to internal organs, or death. In a study of injuries in 90 patients injured by rubber bullets, one died, 17 suffered permanent disabilities or deformities and 41 required hospital treatment after being fired upon with rubber bullets.
Rubber bullets were invented by the British Ministry of Defence for use against rioters in Northern Ireland during The Troubles. p.292 They were first used in 1970 in Northern Ireland.A Chronology of the Conflict - August 1970. Conflict Archive on the Internet (CAIN).

Riot control use

|thumb|right|Two rounds of Fiocchi 12 gauge rubber buckshotThe rubber riot control bullet is part of a long line of development of non-lethal riot control cartridges that dates back to the use of short sections of broom handle fired at rioters in Singapore in the 1880s. The Hong Kong police developed wooden baton rounds but they were liable to splinter and cause wounds. The British developed rubber rounds—the "Round, Anti-Riot, 1.5in Baton"—in 1970 for use against rioters in Northern Ireland.210Hogg (1985) p87 A low power propelling charge gave them a muzzle velocity of about 
Israeli rubber bullets are produced in two main types.  The older type, the standard rubber bullet, is a steel sphere coated in a thin layer of rubber, weighing 14 grams, while the new improved rubber bullet, introduced in 1989, is a rubber coated metal cylinder 1.7 cm in diameter, weighing 15.4 grams. Of the lethal injuries from this projectile, most are suffered to the head.
Smaller rubber bullets are used in riot shotguns, and are available in a variety of types.  One company, for example, makes both rubber buckshot rounds, containing 15 8.3mm diameter rubber balls per cartridge, and rubber baton rounds, containing a single 4.75 gram projectile.

Self-defence use

In some countries non-lethal guns firing rubber projectiles may be used by civilians for self-defence.

Recreational use

Rubber bullets, powered only by a primer, are usually used for short-range indoor target practice or training, generally with handguns.  They are intended only for target shooting, unlike paintballs or airsoft pellets, which are intended for use on suitably protected live targets.  Rubber bullets, if used with a suitable backstop, can be recovered undamaged after firing, and reused numerous times.[ref]
[/ref]






