[[Kōwhai]]

CATEGORIES: Sophora, Trees of New Zealand, Poisonous plants, Plants used in traditional Māori medicine, National symbols of New Zealand, Plant common names

Kōwhai are small, woody legume trees in the genus Sophora native to New Zealand. There are eight species, Sophora microphylla and S. tetraptera being the most recognised as large trees. Their natural habitat is beside streams and on the edges of forest, in lowland or mountain open areas.  Kōwhai trees grow throughout the country and are a common feature in New Zealand gardens. Outside of New Zealand, kōwhai tend to be restricted to mild temperate maritime climates. 
The name kōwhai comes from the Māori word for yellow—a reference to the colour of the flower. It is also called kōhai in some areas. Usually the name is spelled as kōwhai (frequently without the macron).
Despite having no official status as such,"Nationhood and identity", in Te Ara Encyclopedia of New Zealand. the blooms of the kōwhai are widely regarded as being New Zealand's national flower."Kowhai" in New Zealand A to Z.

Species

The 8 species of the kōwhai are: 

Description and ecology

Most species of kōwhai grow to around 8 m high and have fairly smooth bark with small leaves. S. microphylla has smaller leaves (5–7 mm long by 3–4 mm wide) and flowers (2.5-3.5 cm long) than S. tetraptera which has leaves of 1–2 cm long and flowers that are 3 cm-5 cm long.
The very distinctive, almost segmented pods, which appear after flowering each contain six or more smooth, hard, yellow seeds. These seeds can be very numerous and the presence of many hundreds of these distinctively yellow seeds on the ground quickly identifies the presence of a nearby kōwhai tree. Many species of kōwhai are semi-deciduous and lose most of their leaves immediately after flowering in October or November, but quickly produce new leaves. Flowering of kōwhai is staggered from July through to November, meaning each tree will get attention from birds such as tui, wood pigeon and bellbird. Tui are very attracted to kōwhai and will fly long distances to get a sip of its nectar.
The wood of kōwhai is dense and strong and has been used in the past for tools and machinery. 
Sophora is one of the four genera of native legumes in New Zealand; the other three are Carmichaelia, Clianthus, and Montigena.

Cultivation

Kōwhai can be grown from seed or tip cuttings in spring and autumn.
If grown from seed kōwhai can take many years to flower, the number of years varies depending on the species.
S. prostrata, sometimes called "Little Baby", is used as a Bonsai tree. It grows up to two metres high, has zigzaging stems, and sparse smallish leaves.

Dangers

All parts of the kōwhai, but particularly the seeds, are poisonous to humans.

Traditional Māori use

Traditionally the Māori used the flexible branches as a construction material in their houses and to snare birds. The kōwhai flowers were a source of yellow dye. 
Māori would also use the kōwhai tree as medicine. The bark was heated in a calabash with hot stones, and made into a poultice to treat wounds or rubbed on a sore back If someone was bitten by a seal, an infusion (wai kōwhai) was prepared from kōwhai and applied to the wounds and the patient was said to recover within days.




