[[Lactic acid]]

CATEGORIES: Food acidity regulators, Hydroxy acids, Exercise physiology, Preservatives

Lactic acid is a chemical compound that plays a role in various biochemical processes and was first isolated in 1780 by the Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele. Lactic acid is a carboxylic acid with the chemical formula C3H6O3. It has a hydroxyl group adjacent to the carboxyl group, making it an alpha hydroxy acid (AHA).
In solution, it can lose a proton from the carboxyl group, producing the lactate ion CH3CH(OH)COO−. Compared to acetic acid, its pKa is 1 unit less, meaning lactic acid deprotonates ten times more easily than acetic acid does. This higher acidity is the consequence of the intramolecular hydrogen bridge between the α-hydroxyl and the carboxylate group, making the latter less capable of strongly attracting its proton.
Lactic acid is miscible with water and with ethanol, and is hygroscopic.
Lactic acid is chiral and has two optical isomers. One is known as L-(+)-lactic acid or (S)-lactic acid and the other, its mirror image, is D-(−)-lactic acid or (R)-lactic acid.
In animals, L-lactate is constantly produced from pyruvate via the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in a process of fermentation during normal metabolism and exercise. It does not increase in concentration until the rate of lactate production exceeds the rate of lactate removal, which is governed by a number of factors, including monocarboxylate transporters, concentration and isoform of LDH, and oxidative capacity of tissues. The concentration of blood lactate is usually 
In industry, lactic acid fermentation is performed by lactic acid bacteria, which convert glucose and sucrose to lactic acid. These bacteria can also grow in the mouth; the acid they produce is responsible for the tooth decay known as caries.
In medicine, lactate is one of the main components of lactated Ringer's solution and Hartmann's solution. These intravenous fluids consist of sodium and potassium cations along with lactate and chloride anions in solution with distilled water, generally in concentrations isotonic with human blood. It is most commonly used for fluid resuscitation after blood loss due to trauma, surgery, or burn injury.

History

Lactic acid was refined for the first time by the Swedish chemist Carl Wilhelm Scheele in 1780 from sour milk. In 1808, Jöns Jacob Berzelius discovered that lactic acid (actually L-lactate) also is produced in muscles during exertion. Its structure was established by Johannes Wislicenus in 1873.
In 1856, Louis Pasteur discovered Lactobacillus and its role in the making of lactic acid. Lactic acid started to be produced commercially by the German pharmacy Boehringer Ingelheim in 1895.
In 2006, global production of lactic acid reached 275,000 tonnes with an average annual growth of 10%.NNFCC Renewable Chemicals Factsheet: Lactic Acid

Exercise and lactate

During power exercises such as sprinting, when the rate of demand for energy is high, glucose is broken down and oxidized to pyruvate, and lactate is produced from the pyruvate faster than the tissues can remove it, so lactate concentration begins to rise. The production of lactate is a beneficial process because it regenerates NAD+, which is used up in oxidation of 3-phosphoglyceraldehyde during creation of pyruvate from glucose, and this ensures that energy production is maintained and exercise can continue. (During intense exercise, the respiratory chain cannot keep up with the amount of hydrogen atoms that join to form NADH, and cannot regenerate NAD+ quickly enough)
The increased lactate produced can be removed in two ways:
However, lactate is continually formed even at rest and during moderate exercise. This occurs due to metabolism in red blood cells that lack mitochondria, and limitations resulting from the enzyme activity that occurs in muscle fibers having a high glycolytic capacity.
Strenuous anaerobic exercise causes a lowering of pH and soreness, called acidosis.
The effect of lactate production on acidosis has been the topic of many recent conferences in the field of exercise physiology. Robergs et al. have discussed the creation of H+ during exercise, claimed that Robergs et al. ignored the causative factors of the increase in H+. The production of lactate- from a neutral molecule would increase H+ to maintain electroneutrality. However, lactate- is produced from pyruvate-, which has the same charge: "Lactate− production is not associated with a stoichiometrically equivalent net production of protons (H+)".
It is pyruvate- production from neutral glucose that generates H+: C6H12O6 + 2 NAD+ + 2 ADP−3 + 2 HPO4−2 → 2 CH3COCOO− + 2 H+ + 2 NADH + 2 ATP−4 + 2 H2O
Subsequent lactate- production absorbs these protons: 4 CH3COCOO− + 2 H+ + 2 NADH + 2 ATP−4 + 2 H2O → 2 CH3CHOHCOO− + 2 NAD+ + 2 ATP−4 + 2 H2O
Overall: 
Although the reaction glucose → 2 lactate- + 2 H+ releases two H+ when viewed on its own, the H+ are absorbed in the creation of ATP. The absorbed acidity is released during subsequent hydrolysis of ATP: ATP−4 + H2O → ADP−3 + HPO4−2 + H+. Overall, H+ does increase.
The creation of CO2 during respiration also causes an increase in H+.

Brain metabolism

Although glucose is usually assumed to be the main energy source for living tissues, there are some indications that it is lactate, and not glucose, that is preferentially metabolized by neurons in the brain of several mammals species (the notable ones being mice, rats, and humans).
Brain tumors prefer both lactates and ketones because it allows tumors to survive in an oxygen free hypoxic environment that promotes tumor growth. This type of metabolism also produces high levels of oxidative stress and is a common feature of many different kinds of proliferating cancer cells.
The role of lactate for brain metabolism seems to be even more important at early stages of development (prenatal and early postnatal), with lactate at these stages having higher concentrations in body liquids, and being utilized by the brain even more preferentially over glucose. It was also hypothesized that lactate may exert a strong action over GABAergic networks in the developing brain, making them more inhibitory than it was previously assumed,
A more recent paper by Zilberter's group looked directly at the energy metabolism features in brain slices of mice and showed that beta-hydroxybutyrate, lactate, and pyruvate acted as oxidative energy substrates, causing an increase in the NAD(P)H oxidation phase, that glucose was insufficient as an energy carrier during intense synaptic activity and, finally, that lactate can be an efficient energy substrate capable of sustaining and enhancing brain aerobic energy metabolism in vitro.

Blood testing

Blood tests for lactate are performed to determine the status of the acid base homeostasis in the body. Blood sampling for this purpose is often by arterial blood sampling (even if it is more difficult than venipuncture), because lactate differs substantially between arterial and venous levels, and the arterial level is more representative for this purpose.

