[[Advocacy]]

CATEGORIES: Advocacy groups, Activism by type

Advocacy is a political process by an individual or group which aims to influence public-policy and resource allocation decisions within political, economic, and social systems and institutions. Advocacy can include many activities that a person or organization undertakes including media campaigns, public speaking, commissioning and publishing research or  conducting exit poll or the filing of an amicus brief. Lobbying (often by lobby groups) is a form of advocacy where a direct approach is made to legislators on an issue which plays a significant role in modern politics.  are using social media to facilitate civic engagement and collective action.

Forms of advocacy

There are several forms of advocacy, each representing a different approach in a way to initiate changes in the society. One of the most popular forms is social justice advocacy.
Although it is true, the initial definition does not encompass the notions of power relations, people's participation and a vision of a just society as promoted by social justice advocates. For them, advocacy represents the series of actions taken and issues highlighted to change the "what is" into a "what should be", considering that this "what should be" is a more decent and a more just society (ib., 2001.). They:
Some of the other forms of advocacy include:
   See 
Different contexts in which advocacy is used:

Advocacy groups

Transnational advocacy

Advocates and advocacy groups represent a wide range of categories and support several issues as listed on WorldAdvocacy.  The Advocacy Institute,Advocacyinstitute.
The phenomenon of globalization draws a special attention to advocacy beyond countries' borders. The core existence of networks such as World Advocacy or the Advocacy Institute demonstrates the increasing importance of transnational advocacy and international advocacy. Transnational advocacy networks are more likely to emerge around issues where external influence is necessary to ease the communication between internal groups and their own government. Groups of advocates willing to further their mission also tend to promote networks and to meet with their internal counterparts to exchange ideas.
Advocacy in all its forms seeks to ensure that people, particularly those who are most vulnerable in society, are able to:
Have their voice heard on issues that are important to them.
Defend and safeguard their rights.
Have their views and wishes genuinely considered when decisions are being made about their lives.
Advocacy is a process of supporting and enabling people to:
Express their views and concerns.
Access information and services.
Defend and promote their rights and responsibilities.
Explore choices and options
An advocate is someone who provides advocacy support when you need it. An advocate might help you access information you need or go with you to meetings or interviews, in a supportive role. You may want your advocate to write letters on your behalf, or speak for you in situations where you don't feel able to speak for yourself.
Our advocates will spend time with you to get to know your views and wishes.
Advocacy can be helpful in all kinds of situations where you:
Find it difficult to make your views known.
Need other people listen to you and take your views into account.

Advocacy and the Internet

For more than ten years, groups involved in advocacy work have been using the Internet to accomplish organizational goals. It has been argued that the Internet helps to increase the speed, reach and effectiveness of advocacy-related communication as well as mobilization efforts, so that it could get positive impact on the advocacy community.





Further reading




