[[Linda McCartney]]

CATEGORIES: 1941 births, 1998 deaths, American expatriates in the United Kingdom, American photographers, Deaths from breast cancer, McCartney family, Rock keyboardists, People from New York City, People from Scarsdale, New York, Portrait photographers, Wings (band) members, American people of German-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, Jewish American musicians, University of Arizona alumni, Musicians from Arizona, Cancer deaths in Arizona, Animal rights advocates, American cookbook writers, Linda McCartney, James McCartney, American women photographers

Linda Louise, Lady McCartney (née Eastman; formerly See; September 24, 1941 – April 17, 1998) was an American musician, photographer, animal rights activist, and was married to Paul McCartney, a founding member of The Beatles.
In 1969, Paul McCartney married Linda Eastman, and their marriage was blessed at St. John's Wood Church. Later, they formed McCartney's band, Wings. In the same year Paul adopted  Heather Louise, Linda's daughter from her first marriage to Joseph Melville See. The McCartneys had three children: Mary Anna, Stella Nina, and James Louis.
She wrote several vegetarian cookbooks, became a business entrepreneur (starting the Linda McCartney Foods company with her husband), and was a professional photographer, publishing Linda McCartney's Sixties: Portrait of an Era.  Linda McCartney's Sixties: Portrait of an Era.  Bullfinch Press. 1992. McCartney was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1995, and died at the age of 56 on April 17, 1998 in Tucson, Arizona, where the McCartneys had a ranch.

Early years

Linda Louise McCartney, the second-eldest of four children, was born Linda Louise Eastman in New York City. She had one older brother, John (July 10, 1939), and two younger sisters, Laura (born 1947), and Louise Jr. (born 1950). She grew up in the Scarsdale area of Westchester County, New York, and she graduated from Scarsdale High School in 1959.
McCartney's mother, Louise Sara (Lindner) Eastman, was from a German Jewish family.

Photography

McCartney started work as a receptionist for Town & Country magazine, and was the only unofficial photographer on board the SS Sea Panther yacht on the Hudson River who was allowed to take photographs of The Rolling Stones during a record promotion party. McCartney photographed artists such as Aretha Franklin, Grace Slick, Jimi Hendrix, Bob Dylan, Janis Joplin, Eric Clapton, Simon & Garfunkel, The Who, The Doors, The Animals, John Lennon and Neil Young. She photographed Young in 1967, and the picture was used for the front cover of Sugar Mountain – Live at Canterbury House 1968 in 2008.
She photographed Clapton for Rolling Stone magazine, becoming the first woman to have a photograph featured on the front cover (May 11, 1968). She and husband Paul also appeared on the cover of Rolling Stone on January 31, 1974, making her the only person to have taken a photograph, and to have been photographed, for the front cover of the magazine. Her photographs were later exhibited in more than 50 galleries internationally, as well as at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London. A collection of photographs from that time, Linda McCartney's Sixties: Portrait of an Era, was published in 1993.

Music career

After the breakup of The Beatles in 1970, Paul taught Linda to play keyboards and recorded an album with her, Ram, as a duo. Afterwards, he included her in the lineup of his subsequent group, Wings. She later admitted that the early accusations about her singing out of tune in the early days with Wings were true.
In 1977, a reggae-inspired single entitled "Seaside Woman" was released by an obscure band called Suzy and the Red Stripes on Epic Records in the United States. In reality, Suzy and the Red Stripes were Wings, with Linda (who also wrote the song) on lead vocals. The lawsuit, which alleged that Linda's co-writing credits were inauthentic and that she was not a real songwriter, was "amicably settled," according to an ATV spokesman, in June 1972.
The McCartneys shared an Oscar nomination for the co-composition of the song "Live and Let Die". Linda's album Wide Prairie, which included "Seaside Woman," was released posthumously in 1998.

McCartney and children

On May 15, 1967, the then-Linda Eastman met McCartney at a Georgie Fame concert at the Bag O'Nails club in London.
After giving birth to Mary McCartney (born in London August 28, 1969), Stella McCartney (born September 13, 1971) and James McCartney (born September 12, 1977 in London), Linda said that four children was enough. She became Lady McCartney when her husband was knighted in 1997. Her brother, entertainment lawyer John Eastman, has represented McCartney since the breakup of The Beatles.

Lifestyle

Vegetarianism

McCartney introduced her husband to vegetarianism in 1975, and promoted a vegetarian diet through her cookbooks: Linda McCartney's Home Cooking (with author Peter Cox, 1989),

Animal rights

The McCartneys became outspoken vegetarians and animal rights activists. In 1991, she introduced a line of frozen vegetarian meals under the Linda McCartney Foods name, which made her wealthy independently of her husband. The H. J. Heinz Company acquired the company in March 2000, and the Hain Celestial Group bought it in 2007.
As a strong advocate for animal rights, Linda lent her support to many organizations such as People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA), The Council for the Protection of Rural England and Friends of the Earth. She was also a patron of the League Against Cruel Sports. She narrated a TV advertisement for PETA, in which she said: "Have you ever seen a fish gasping for breath when you take it out of the water? They're saying, 'Thanks a lot for killing me. It feels great, you know.' No! It hurts!"

Lifestyle

In 1984, she was arrested in Barbados for possession of marijuana; her husband had been arrested in Los Angeles for possession of marijuana in 1975.

Death

McCartney was diagnosed with breast cancer in 1995, and her condition soon grew worse as it spread to her liver.
Talking later about the medication used to treat her breast cancer, Paul McCartney said: "If a drug has got to be used on humans then legally it has to be finally tested on an animal ... This was difficult for Linda when she was undergoing her treatment."
Wide Prairie, a six-minute cartoon fantasy film by Linda McCartney and director Oscar Grillo, premiered at the Edinburgh International Film Festival on August 19, 1998. It was shown before the British premiere of The Horse Whisperer, starring Robert Redford.

Portrayals on screen

Linda McCartney and husband Paul appeared as themselves on an episode of Bread in 1988, and an episode of The Simpsons, called "Lisa the Vegetarian", in 1995. After her death, The Simpsons 200th episode "Trash of the Titans", which aired on April 26, 1998, and Paul McCartney's Tuesday" from 2000 (directed by Geoff Dunbar) was dedicated both to her memory.
Elizabeth Mitchell and Gary Bakewell played the McCartneys in the 2000 TV movie The Linda McCartney Story.

Discography

Notes






