[[Machine vision]]

CATEGORIES: Applications of computer vision, Computer vision, Machine vision

Machine vision (MV) is the technology and methods used to provide imaging-based automatic inspection and analysis for such applications as automatic inspection,  process control, and robot guidance in industry.  MV is related to, though distinct from, computer vision.

Applications

The primary uses for machine vision are automatic inspection and industrial robot guidance. Common machine vision applications include quality assurance, sorting, material handling, robot guidance, and optical gauging.

Methods

Machine vision methods are defined as both the process of defining and creating an MV solution,

Imaging

While conventional (2D visible light) imaging is most commonly used in MV, alternatives include imaging various infrared bands,  Key divisions within MV 2D visible light imaging are monochromatic vs. color, resolution, and whether or not the imaging process is simultaneous over the entire image, making it suitable for moving processes. Other 3D methods used for machine vision are time of flight, grid based and stereoscopic.
The imaging device (e.g. camera) can either be separate from the main image processing unit or combined with it in which case the combination is generally called a smart camera or smart sensor.
Though the vast majority of machine vision applications are solved using two-dimensional imaging, machine vision applications utilizing 3D imaging are growing niche within the industry. One method is grid array based systems using pseudorandom structured light system as employed by the Microsoft Kinect system circa 2012.microsoft.pdf  HYBRID STRUCTURED LIGHT FOR SCALABLE DEPTH SENSING Yueyi Zhang, Zhiwei Xiong, Feng Wu University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China Microsoft Research Asia, Beijing, ChinaR.Ozturk,R.Dubin,S.Nissano, "Structured light using pseudorandom codes",IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 20 (3)(1998)322–327  Another method of generating a 3D image is to use laser triangulation, where a laser is projected onto the surfaces of an object and the deviation of the line is used to calculate the shape.  In machine vision this is accomplished with a scanning motion, either by moving the workpiece, or by moving the camera & laser imaging system. Stereoscopic vision is used in special cases involving unique features present in both views of a pair of cameras.  3-D Imaging: A practical Overview for Machine Vision By Fred Turek & Kim Jackson   Quality Magazine, March 2014 issue, Volume 53/Number 3  Pages 6-8

Image processing

After an image is acquired, it is processed.

Outputs

A common output from machine vision systems is pass/fail decisions. These decisions may in turn trigger mechanisms that reject failed items or sound an alarm. Other common outputs include object position and orientation information from robot guidance systems.  Additionally, output types include numerical measurement data, data read from codes and characters, displays of the process or results, stored images, alarms from automated space monitoring MV systems, and process control signals.West, Perry  A Roadmap For Building A Machine Vision System  Pages 1-35

Market

As recently as 2006, one industry consultant reported that MV represented a $1.5 billion market in North America.
As of 2006, experts estimated that MV had been employed in less than 20% of the applications for which it is potentially useful.








