[[Adam Buxton]]

CATEGORIES: 1969 births, English male comedians, English male film actors, English male television actors, British people of Chilean descent, Living people, People educated at Westminster School, London, Alumni of the University of Warwick

Adam Offord Buxton (born 7 June 1969) is an English comedian and actor. With Joe Cornish, he forms one half of the duo Adam and Joe. The pair presented Adam and Joe on BBC Radio 6 Music, whilst Buxton also presents his own show on 6 Music on Sundays, called Adam Buxton's Big Mix Tape, currently on hiatus. In November 2012, Buxton started presenting a new radio show for BBC 6 Music, co-presenting with Edith Bowman.

Biography

Major work

His first television appearance was in an episode of Channel 4's Takeover TV as a man called "Louise" dressed as a Klingon, complaining about Star Trek: The Next Generation being taken off the air. In 1995, he hosted the show itself, and following this he and Joe Cornish, along with World of Wonder, created The Adam and Joe Show for the same channel, which ran for four series. In 1999, The Adam and Joe Book, a spin-off book written by Buxton and Cornish, was published.
Buxton co-wrote and acted in the Channel 4 mini-series The Last Chancers (broadcast in December 2004). In 2005, he moved from screen to stage, performing character-driven stand-up comedy at the 2005 Edinburgh Festival, with a show entitled "I, Pavel", for which he grew a large beard.2005 Fringe Festival reviews He continues to work as a stand-up comedian, appearing primarily at London venues.
His work with Cornish has extended beyond their Channel 4 series, with the pair presenting radio shows on Xfm and later BBC Radio 6 Music. Expanded extracts from the Xfm radio shows have been released as podcasts, which were placed in the UK's top 10 most downloaded. In 2007, Buxton portrayed the ill-fated journalist Tim Messenger in Edgar Wright's action-comedy film Hot Fuzz. Buxton also appeared in the BBC Three comedy sketch show Rush Hour, which premièred on 19 March 2007. Buxton plays many different characters throughout the show.
In November 2007, Buxton recorded the video for "Jigsaw Falling Into Place" for British band Radiohead, which was the first single from their album In Rainbows. The concept of the video involved each member of the band wearing bicycle helmets with cameras attached, shooting video of the band members' faces.
In January 2010, he appeared in the BBC2 comedy The Persuasionists.
In July 2012 he appeared in a TV version of his popular tour "Bug" on 'Sky Atlantic, entitled "Adam Buxton's BUG" 

Other appearances

Buxton has made appearances on Have I Got News for You, Never Mind the Buzzcocks, The IT Crowd, Don't Watch That, Watch This and Look Around You. He appeared as a future version of himself in the BBC Two comedy series Time Trumpet, which began a six-part series in August 2006.
He also appeared in the Doctor Who audio drama The One Doctor by Big Finish Productions, and has taken other comedy roles on productions for BBC Radio 4.
He has taken part in a number of major films, including his aforementioned performance in Hot Fuzz, as well as appearing in the film Stardust, deputizing for Noel Fielding, who was ill at the time of production. He featured in the film Son of Rambow as a teacher. He has released a number of popular videos on YouTube, and was commissioned to produce a pilot programme for the BBC based around work of this kind. This was broadcast as MeeBOX on BBC Three in June 2008, but a full series was not commissioned.
He narrated "Francis and Bunty", a short story used to front the 2009 "Best Writer in the Universe" short story competition, on The Story of Egmo podcast.
Buxton is also the narrator of some of the titles available on the Ladybird Classic Me Books iPad app, including Goldilocks and the Three Bears and Three Little Pigs. Buxton has since narrated several other titles on the Me Books app such as The Great Explorer, The Brave Beast and The Lonely Beast by children's illustrator and author Chris Judge.
He was a panelist with Jonathan Ross for the Big Fat Quiz of the '80's.
He also guest starred in the 2011 film "The External World" by David O'Reilly. 
On 24 January 2014, Buxton appeared on an episode of the comedic (mash-up) version of Countdown, hosted by the panelists of the comedy television game show, 8 Out of 10 Cats.

Personal life

Buxton was born in London, and spent some of his childhood in Wales. His father is Nigel Buxton, known as a travel writer and wine critic and later to appear on The Adam and Joe Show as "Baaad Dad". His mother is Chilean.
Buxton lives in Norwich with his wife, Sarah, and their three children: sons Frank and Natty, and daughter Hope.






