[[Leelee Sobieski]]

CATEGORIES: 1983 births, Actresses from New York City, American child actresses, American film actresses, American people of French descent, American people of Polish descent, American people of Swiss descent, American people of Jewish descent, American television actresses, Brown University alumni, Living people, People from Manhattan, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses

Liliane Rudabet Gloria Elsveta Sobieski (born June 10, 1983), known professionally as Leelee Sobieski, is an American film and television actress. Sobieski achieved recognition in her mid-teens for her performance in the 1998 film Deep Impact and as the daughter of a costume store owner in Eyes Wide Shut (1999). She received an Emmy nomination for the 1999 TV movie Joan of Arc, and two Golden Globe nominations for Joan of Arc and the 2001 TV movie Uprising.

Early life and education

Sobieski was born in New York City. Her mother, Elizabeth Sobieski (née Salomon), is an American film producer and screenwriter who also works as Sobieski's manager, and her father, Jean Sobieski, is a French painter and former actor. Sobieski has a younger brother, Robert.
Sobieski's first name, "Liliane", was the name of her paternal grandmother. One of her middle names, "Elsveta", is derived from "Elżbieta", which is the Polish equivalent of "Elizabeth". and studied literature and fine art at Brown University.

Career

Sobieski was spotted by a talent scout who noticed her while he was scouting the cafeteria of a New York City private school. After that encounter, she became a candidate for the role of Claudia in Interview with the Vampire (1994), which she eventually lost out to Kirsten Dunst. She portrayed the character of Anna Yates in the 1994 TV movie Reunion, which starred Marlo Thomas. Next, she played a lead role in A Horse for Danny, a made-for-television film which was released in 1995. Later, she had a major role in the comedy feature film Jungle 2 Jungle, with Tim Allen. In the film, she played the daughter of Martin Short's character.
She rose to fame in her mid-teens with her appearance in the movie Deep Impact (1998). The film also garnered her a Young Artist Award nomination, as well as a nomination by the Chicago Film Critics Association.
In 1999, she was cast as a supporting role in the teen comedy feature Never Been Kissed, which was starring Drew Barrymore. Sobieski also played a modern Lolita in Stanley Kubrick's Eyes Wide Shut. The film opened to generally positive reviews, but it generated several censorship controversies due to the explicit nature of its sex scenes. Recalling acting alongside Tom Cruise, she said he was "very kind and considerate with me," and says her most vivid recollection of Stanley Kubrick was that he "genuinely seemed to hold something magic". She received a second nomination for a Golden Globe for her portrayal of Tosia Altman in the 2001 TV film Uprising. In 2000, Sobieski was a part of the cast of the film Here on Earth, for which she received a Teen Choice Award nomination.
In 2001, Sobieski played the lead role in the road horror film Joy Ride with Paul Walker and Steve Zahn. The film received several favorable reviews.
Sobieski landed a starring role in the independent film L'Idole (2002), which opened at the Toronto International Film Festival. She then starred alongside John Cusack in the drama feature Max. She portrayed the character of Cecile in the miniseries Les Liaisons dangereuses (2003) with Catherine Deneuve and Rupert Everett, an adaptation of Laclos's classic novel of sexual intrigue made use of her fluency in French. She portrayed the role of Deianira in Hercules, a television miniseries which was premiered on May 15, 2005.
In May 2006, the experimental-indie film Lying, in which Sobieski starred alongside Chloë Sevigny and Jena Malone, was released.
The independent comedy film Walk All Over Me, starring Sobieski, had a range of screening dates at several film festivals – starting with the 2007 Toronto International Film Festival. The film is about a woman who becomes a dominatrix. Her next film in wide release, the thriller 88 Minutes co-starring Al Pacino and Alicia Witt, opened on April 18, 2008 in the United States, having already been released in various other countries in 2007.
In January 2008, she appeared in In the Name of the King: A Dungeon Siege Tale, a fantasy film inspired by the Dungeon Siege video game series. For her performances in both 88 Minutes and A Dungeon Siege Tale, she received a Razzie Award nomination for Worst Supporting Actress. Sobieski then starred in the direct-to-video film Night Train, with her Joy Ride co-star Steve Zahn. In the film, she played the role of Chloe, a potentially lethal med student. Night Train is about three strangers that meet aboard a Polar Express-like train on one fateful night.
In 2009, she had a small role in the biographical crime drama Public Enemies, and starred with Denise Richards and Jamie Kennedy in the 2010 film Finding Bliss, a romantic comedy about a straight-laced aspiring filmmaker who is forced to go to work for a producer of adult films. The film was released between April and May 2010.
She also joined the cast of a comedy-drama entitled The Last Film Festival, co-starring Dennis Hopper, Jacqueline Bisset, and Chris Kattan. Filming took place in Queens in 2009. As of October 2012 the film has not yet been released.
Sobieski guest-starred in an episode of The Good Wife which aired in January 2011; her role was the girlfriend of one of Lockhart-Gardner-Bond's most influential clients. In the show, Sobieski's character is accused of using prescription stimulants.
Sobieski starred in CBS' drama NYC 22 as a rookie New York City police officer. "CBS Orders Robert De Niro-Produced Cop Drama 'The 2-2,' 'Unforgettable' and 'How to be a Gentleman'". AOL TV. May 16, 2011"Leelee Sobieski Keeps Daughter Away From Modern Technology". Starpulse. June 2, 2011
Sobieski landed the role of Abby Gibbons in the movie Branded which was released in 2012.

Personal life

thumb|Sobieski pregnant in 2009 at the opening night of the Metropolitan OperaSobieski speaks fluent French, which she learned from her father, who currently lives in France. TV Guide; 1999-05-15; Pages 38 - 42
In January 2009, Sobieski began dating fashion designer Adam Kimmel. Kimmel is the son of American real estate developer Martin Kimmel and grandson of American boat racer and designer Donald Aronow. They were engaged on May 28, 2009 but chose to keep the news private. It was made public June 23, 2009, when fans at the premiere of Public Enemies spotted that Sobieski was wearing an engagement ring. The couple officially announced their engagement on July 17, 2009.
Sobieski revealed that she remained a virgin until marrying Kimmel in 2009, saying "I guess 26 is kind of old to lose your virginity, but it was important to me that I remained a virgin until after I was married. It wasn't for any religious reasons or anything like that, but simply because, to me, my virginity was the most precious gift that I could ever give to a man, and I wanted to be sure I was giving it to the right man". 
During an interview, Sobieski spoke about her views on having happiness and a positive attitude: "I think that happiness is a very strange thing. And we really feel that we have a right to this happiness. But I feel like it's constantly fluctuating, and that you can make yourself happy. I think it's an outlook. Having a positive attitude probably sounds like a corny thing to say, but a positive attitude really helps, and respecting your job really helps, and having the support of your family and friends really helps."
Sobieski, in a 2001 interview with IGN, spoke about her thoughts on if the movies she was doing were escapist or that they had a message for society: "Joy Ride isn't a film you would make a statement with. It's a fun, jump out of life film. That's great. I love those films. Those films are great in times like these too. You can make a point with a film and help society or not. Take a film like Bulworth, a fantastic film. There are certain films like that, that can appeal to everybody and have a message in it and that's really great."

Filmography






