[[Lush (band)]]

CATEGORIES: 4AD artists, Dream pop musical groups, Musical groups from London, Musical groups established in 1988, Musical groups disestablished in 1996, Shoegazing musical groups, Musical quartets, Britpop groups

Lush were an English alternative rock band, formed in 1987 and disbanded in 1998. They were one of the first bands to attract the "shoegazing" label. Later, their sound progressed toward Britpop.

History

The band formed in 1987, initially named The Baby Machines, with a line-up of Meriel Barham (vocals), Emma Anderson (guitar, vocals), Miki Berenyi (guitar, vocals), Steve Rippon (bass), and Chris Acland (drums). 478-9 Anderson and Berenyi had been schoolfriends, having known each other since the early 1980s. They published the Alphabet Soup fanzine together  and in 1986 Anderson joined The Rover Girls as bassist and Berenyi joined The Bugs also as bass player. Neither band lasted long and in 1987 they joined Barham and Acland in The Baby Machines. Rippon joined shortly thereafter, and the band members decided on a change of name to Lush, making their live debut at the Camden Falcon on 6 March 1988. Barham left the band and later joined Pale Saints. Berenyi then took on lead vocal duties.
Emma Anderson said of the band's beginnings: "We were kind of punk rock in one way. We did think 'Well, if they can do it, why the fuck can't we?' Basically, our idea was to have extremely loud guitars with much weaker vocals. And, really, the vocals were weaker due to nervousness – we'd always be going 'Turn them down! Turn them down!'" Miki Berenyi said, "We started by writing crappy riot grrl anthems... which was probably charming in a juvenile way. But there was a very rapid shift from the minute we started to write for records. The music, the lyrics became much more thoughtful and expressive, more important, really. I remember that change beginning when Emma wrote "Thoughtforms," it certainly made me think I needed to get my act together."
In 1989, the band signed to 4AD and released Scar, a 6-track mini-album. Critical praise for Scar and a wildly popular live show established Lush as one of the most written about groups of the early 1990s UK indie scene. Anderson told Everett True in Melody Maker, "I remember when I couldn't play, I wasn't in a band, didn't know anyone else who could play, and now we've got a record out on 4AD. I sometimes find it impossible to come to terms with what's happening."
Not long after, the British music press tagged them with the "shoegazing" label. The following year, the EP Mad Love (produced by Robin Guthrie of Cocteau Twins) and the single "Sweetness and Light" (produced by Tim Friese-Greene) were released. All three releases were eventually combined into the Gala compilation album which was produced mainly for the US and Japanese markets. The band recorded a live session for John Peel's BBC Radio 1 show in 1990 and contributed a cover version of "Chirpy Chirpy Cheep Cheep" to the anti-poll tax album Alvin Lives.
The band's profile was raised by extensive touring, including an appearance at the Glastonbury Festival and tours of Japan and the United States (with Ride). Lush's first full-length album of completely new material was Spooky, released in January 1992. Again produced by Guthrie, Spooky featured a sound very similar to Guthrie's band Cocteau Twins, with walls of sound and a great deal of guitar effects. Reviews were mixed and critics of the album hold that Guthrie's production brought the sound away from the band's original creative vision; although the album sold well, reaching number 7 in the UK Albums Chart. The album was preceded by the band's first UK top 40 single, "For Love." Rippon left the band during the final mixing of the album to concentrate on writing, though his book Cold Turkey Sandwich—a fictionalised chronicle of his time touring—was rejected by publishers. He was replaced by Phil King. Also in 1992, Lush toured America as part of the Lollapalooza festival. Lush was eagerly added to the 2nd Lollapalooza roster in 1992 by its organiser, Perry Farrell, the Jane's Addiction/Porno for Pyros frontman, who personally requested Lush for his new tour program.
Lush approached Bob Mould to produce their second album. The band stated that Mould was too busy to produce them, but Mould said in a Spin Magazine article that he backed out because "I kept picking the wrong girl's songs... I had to get out before I broke up the band!" Split, produced by the band with Mike Hedges and mixed by Alan Moulder, was released in June 1994 and featured a more stripped-down sound. though neither single broke into the UK Top 40. The band concentrated on the American market, under the advice of their management, but failed to make a breakthrough there; they suffered further setbacks when tours of Japan and the UK were cancelled. They decided to break from their management and begin work on a new album. 1996's Lovelife, the band's final album, became the biggest seller of their career, Produced by Pete Bartlett, the bands live engineer, it was released on the heels of the Britpop craze, and possibly due to a more upbeat production style than their earlier releases. Lovelife included the hit singles "Single Girl", "Ladykillers" and "500 (Shake Baby Shake)" and also featured a guest appearance by Jarvis Cocker of Pulp, in a duet with Miki Berenyi on the song "Ciao!",
In October 1996, tragedy struck the band when drummer Chris Acland committed suicide by hanging himself at his parents' house. After a long period of grieving, the band continued for a time but officially announced that they had split up on 23 February 1998.

Post break-up

Miki Berenyi went on to work as a production editor at two major magazine publishers. In 1998, Emma Anderson formed a new group, Sing-Sing, with singer Lisa O'Neill. Sing-Sing released two full-length albums but in January 2008, announced they were disbanding. Emma Anderson currently resides in Hastings and has had various jobs in the music business in management, PR, accountancy and at a booking agency. Bassist Phil King played bass for The Jesus and Mary Chain but now works on a music magazine as a picture researcher.
Lush's cover of The Rubinoos song, "I Wanna Be Your Boyfriend," (retitled "I Wanna Be Your Girlfriend" for Lush's authorised version) was cited in a 2007 lawsuit filed by the Rubinoos against Avril Lavigne, whose song "Girlfriend" bore similarities to the Lush cover of the Rubinoos song. A settlement in the case has since been reached.

Discography

Studio albums

Compilations

Singles and EPs

1 The two CD releases for Single Girl, Ladykillers and 500 (Shake Baby Shake) had different b-sides on each format (see below)
   LIST OF NON-ALBUM TRACKS INCLUDED ON SINGLES AND EPS:
   Mad Love EP: De-Luxe	3:26 / Leaves Me Cold	2:55 / Downer	2:39 / Thoughtforms	2:43
   Sweetness and Light Sunbathing 2.47 / Breathe 3.09
   Black Spring EP: Nothing Natural 5:58 / Fallin' In Love	2:44 / God's Gift 4:13 / Monochrome 5:08]
   For Love Starlust	4:21 / Outdoor Miner 2:46 / Astronaut 2:37
   Hypocrite [b/w Love At First Sight 5:12 / Cat's Chorus 3:23 / Undertow (Spooky Remix)	9:13
   Desire Lines [b/w White Wood 4:14 / Girl's World 4:56 / Lovelife (Suga Bullit Remix) 8:15
   Single Girl CD1 Tinkerbell 3:06 / Outside World 4:05 / Cul De Sac 3:39
   Single Girl CD2 Pudding 3:56 / Demystification 3:39 / Shut Up 3:46
   Ladykillers CD1 Matador 3.01 / Ex 3.14 / Dear Me (Miki's 8-track Home Demo) 3.06
   Ladykillers CD2 Heavenly 2:53 / Carmen 3:19 / Plums And Oranges 6:19
   500 (Shake Baby Shake) CD1 I Have The Moon 3:52 / Piledriver 3:07 / Olympia (Acoustic Version) 3:16
   500 (Shake Baby Shake) CD2 I'd Like To Walk Around In Your Mind 2:19 / Kiss Chase (Acoustic Version) 2:54 / Last Night (Hexadecimal Dub Mix) 6:31
 Strong, Martin C. (2003) The Great Indie Discography, Canongate, ISBN 1-84195-335-0, p.849

Other appearances

Band images

Image:Miki Lush.jpeg|Miki Berenyi
Image:Emma_Lush.jpg|Emma Anderson
File:Phil Lush.jpeg|Phil King
File:Chris Lush.jpeg|Chris Acland
Image:Lush_pale_saint_2Mo.jpg|Live in Rennes (France), April 1990
Image:Lush011.jpg|Miki Berenyi, April 1990, Rennes (France) 






