[[Hawaiian language]]

CATEGORIES: Hawaiian language, Endangered Austronesian languages, Languages of the United States, Verb–subject–object languages

The Hawaiian language (Hawaiian: i, the largest island in the tropical North Pacific archipelago where it developed. Hawaiian, along with English, is an official language of the state of Hawaii. King Kamehameha III established the first Hawaiian-language constitution in 1839 and 1840.
For various reasons, including Territorial legislation establishing English as the official language in schools, the number of native speakers of Hawaiian gradually decreased during the period from the 1830s to the 1950s. Hawaiian was essentially displaced by English on six of seven inhabited islands. As of 2001, native speakers of Hawaiian amounted to under 0.1% of the statewide population. Linguists are worried about the fate of this and other endangered languages.g. The 1897 Petition Against the Annexation of Hawaii
Nevertheless, from about 1949 to the present, there has been a gradual increase in attention to, and promotion of, the language. Public Hawaiian-language immersion preschools called Pūnana Leo were started in 1984; other immersion schools followed soon after. The first students to start in immersion preschool have now graduated from college and many are fluent Hawaiian speakers. The federal government acknowledged this development. For example the Hawaiian National Park Language Correction Act of 2000 changed the names of several national parks in Hawaii observing the Hawaiian spelling.939)
A pidgin or creole language spoken in Hawaii is Hawaiian Pidgin (or Hawaii Creole English, HCE). It should not be mistaken for the Hawaiian language nor for a dialect of English.
The Hawaiian alphabet has 13 letters, five vowels (long and short) and eight consonants, one of them being a glottal stop (called okina in Hawaiian).

Name

The Hawaiian language takes its name from the  largest island, Hawaii (Hawai
The initial "O" in the name is a reflection of the fact that unique identity is predicated in Hawaiian by using a copula form, o, immediately before a proper noun.
The spelling "why" in the name reflects the 
Putting the parts together, O-why-hee reflects .
American missionaries bound for Hawai
In Hawaiian, 

Family and origin

Hawaiian is a Polynesian member of the Austronesian language family. It is closely related to other Polynesian languages, such as Marquesan, Tahitian, Māori, Rapa Nui (the language of Easter Island), and less closely to Samoan and  Tongan.
According to Schütz (1994), the Marquesans colonized the archipelago in roughly 300 AD

Methods of proving Hawaiian's family relationships

The genetic history of the Hawaiian language is demonstrated primarily through the application of lexicostatistics,which involves quantitative comparison of lexical cognates, and the comparative method.
Lexicostatistics is a way of quantifying an approximate evaluation of the degree to which any given languages are genetically related to one another. citing Elbert
The comparative method is a technique developed by linguists to determine if two or more languages are genetically related, and if they are, the historical nature of the relationships.
Linguists observe:
In this method, the definition of "identical" is reasonably clear, but those of "similar" and "dissimilar" are based on phonological criteria which may require professional training to fully understand and which can vary in the contexts of different languages. Basically, a sound's manner and place of articulation, and its phonological features, are the main factors considered in investigating its status as "similar" or "dissimilar" to other sounds in a particular context. For example, /b/ and /m/ are both voiced labial sounds, but one is a stop and the other a nasal.  When linguists find in compared languages that compared words of the same or similar meaning contain sounds which correspond to one another, and find that these same sound correspondences recur regularly in most, or in many, of the comparable words of the languages, then the usual conclusion is that the languages are genetically related.
In both methods, it is very important to exclude adopted words from the analysis, if they can be determined.
The following table, Decimal Numbers, provides a limited data set for ten meanings. The Proto-Austronesian (PAN) forms are from . In the table, the year date of the modern forms is rounded off to CE 2000 to emphasize the 6000-year time lapse since the PAN era.
Note 1. For the number "10", the Tongan form in the table is part of the word , a different root.
Application of the lexicostatistical method to the data in the table will show the four languages to be related to one another, with Tagalog having 100% cognacy with PAN, while Hawaiian and Tongan have 100% cognacy with each other, but 90% with Tagalog and PAN. This is because the forms for each number are cognates, except the Hawaiian and Tongan words for the number "1", which are cognate with each other, but not with Tagalog and PAN. When the full set of 200 meanings is used, the percentages will be much lower. For example, Elbert found Hawaiian and Tongan to have 49% (98 ÷ 200) shared cognacy. This points out the importance of data-set size for this method – less data, cruder result; more data, better result.
Application of the comparative method will show partly different genetic relationships. It will point out sound changes, such as:
This method will recognize sound change #1 as a shared innovation of Hawaiian and Tongan. It will also take the Hawaiian and Tongan cognates for "1" as another shared innovation. Due to these exclusively shared features, Hawaiian and Tongan are found to be more closely related to one another than either is to Tagalog or PAN.
The forms in the table show that the Austronesian vowels tend to be relatively stable, while the consonants are relatively volatile. It is also apparent that the Hawaiian words for "3", "5" and "8" have remained essentially unchanged for 6000 years.

History

For Hawaiian language history before 1778, see Family and origin above.

First European Contact

In 1778, British explorer James Cook made the first reported European contact with Hawai
The early explorers and merchants who first brought European languages to the Hawai

Written Hawaiian

In 1820, Protestant missionaries from New England arrived in Hawai
Adelbert von Chamisso might have consulted with a native speaker of Hawai example 138, quoting McGuire
In 1834, the first Hawai
The increase in travel to and from Hawai
As the status of Hawaiian in schools,Mary Kawena Pukui, Nana i ke Kumu, Vol. 2, p. 61–62 and the number of native speakers of Hawaiian diminished from 37,000 at the turn of the twentieth century to 1,000 today; half of these remaining are now in their seventies or eighties (see Ethnologue report below for citations).
There has been some controversy over the reasons for this decline. One school of thought claims that the most important cause for the decline of the Hawaiian language was its voluntary abandonment by the majority of its native speakers. According to Mary Kawena Pukui, they wanted their own children to speak English, as a way to promote their success in a rapidly changing modern environment, so they refrained from using Hawaiian with their own children. 2 p. 60–61 The Hawaiian language schools disappeared as their enrollments dropped: parents preferred English language schools. Another school of thought emphasizes the importance of other factors that discouraged the use of the language, such as the fact that the English language was made the only medium of instruction in all schools in 1896 and the fact that schools punished the use of Hawaiian (see "Banning" of Hawaiian below.) General prejudice against ethnic Hawaiians (kanaka) has also been blamed for the decline of the language.
A new dictionary was published in 1957, a new grammar in 1979, and new second-language textbooks in 1951, 1965, 1977, and 1989. Master's theses and doctoral dissertations on specific facets of Hawaiian appeared in 1951, 1975, 1976, and 1996.

Kaona or Hidden meaning

According to Mary Kawena Pukui and Samuel Elbert in the definitive Dictionary, kaona (kao-na)a also means orgasm."
Understanding the kaona of the language requires a comprehensive knowledge of Hawaiian legends, history and cosmology.

"Banning" of Hawaiian

The law cited as banning the Hawaiian language is identified as Act 57, sec. 30 of the 1896 Laws of the Republic of Hawaii:
 The English Language shall be the medium and basis of instruction in all public and private schools, provided that where it is desired that another language shall be taught in addition to the English language, such instruction may be authorized by the Department, either by its rules, the curriculum of the school, or by direct order in any particular instance. Any schools that shall not conform to the provisions of this section shall not be recognized by the Department. signed June 8, 1896 Sanford B. Dole, President of the Republic of Hawaii  
This law established English as the medium of instruction for the government-recognized schools both "public and private". While it did not ban or make illegal the Hawaiian language in other contexts, the implementation of it in the schools it had far reaching affects. Those who had been pushing for English only schools took this law as licence to extinguish the native language at the early education level. While the law stopped short of making Hawaiian illegal (which was still the dominant language spoken at the time), many children who spoke Hawaiian at school, including on the playground, were disciplined. This included corporal punishment and going to the home of the offending child to strongly advise them to stop speaking it their language at home. Moreover, the law specifically provided for teaching languages "in addition to the English language," rendering Hawaiian the status of a foreign language, subject to approval by the Department. Hawaiian was not taught initially in any school, including the all-Hawaiian Kamehameha Schools. This is largely due to the fact that when these schools were founded, like Kamehameha Schools which was founded in 1887 (nine years before this law), Hawaiian was being spoken in the home. Once this law was enacted, individuals at these institutions took it upon themselves to take it a step further by enforcing a ban on Hawaiian language. Beginning in 1900, Mary Kawena Pukui, who was later the co-author of the Hawaiian–English Dictionary, was punished for speaking Hawaiian by being rapped on the forehead, allowed to eat only bread and water for lunch, and denied home visits on holidays. 2 p. 61–62 Winona Beamer was expelled from Kamehameha Schools in 1937 for chanting Hawaiian.M. J. Harden, Voices of Wisdom: Hawaiian Elders Speak, p. 99
Hawaiian-language newspapers were published for over a hundred years, through the period of the suppression. Very few pro-Hawaiian papers made it through the period of the overthrow of the kingdom and the subsequent Act 57. Most papers that survived that period had a distinctly pro-U.S.  list fourteen Hawaiian newspapers. According to them, the newspapers entitled Ka Lama Hawaii and Ke Kumu Hawaii began publishing in 1834, and the one called Ka Hoku o Hawaii ceased publication in 1948. The longest run was that of Ka Nupepa Kuokoa: about 66 years, from 1861 to 1927.

1949 to present

In 1949, the legislature of the Territory of Hawai Pukui and Elbert took a middle course, using what they could from the Andrews dictionary, but making certain improvements and additions that were more significant than a minor revision. The dictionary they produced, in 1957, introduced an era of gradual increase in attention to the language (and culture).
Efforts to promote the language have increased in recent decades. Hawaiian-language "immersion" schools are now open to children whose families want to introduce Hawaiian language for future generations. Additionally, the Sunday editions of the Honolulu Star-Advertiser, the largest newspaper in Hawaii, features a brief article called Kauakukalahale written entirely in Hawaiian by teachers, students, and community members.
Today, on six of the seven permanently inhabited islands, Hawaiian is largely displaced by English, and the number of native speakers of Hawaiian is under 0.1% of the state-wide population. Native speakers of Hawaiian who live on the island named Ni

Niihau

 Niihau is the only area in the world where Hawaiian is the first language and English is a foreign language. Because of many sufficiently marked variations, Niihau people, when visiting or living in Honolulu, substitute the Oahu dialect  
The isolated island of Niihau, located off the southwest coast of Kauai, is the one island where Hawaiian is still spoken as the language of daily life. Children are taught Hawaiian as a first language, and learn English at about age eight. Reasons for the language's predominance on this island include:
Native speakers of Niihau Hawaiian have three distinct modes of speaking Hawaiian:
The last mode of speaking may be further restricted to a certain subset of Niihauans, and is rarely even overheard by non-Niihauans. In addition to being able to speak Hawaiian in different ways, most Niihauans can speak English as well.
. (See below, Processes, under Phonology.)

Orthography

Hawaiians had no written language prior to western contact, except for petroglyph symbols.
The modern Hawaiian alphabet, ka pī as in the following chart.

Origin

This writing system was developed by American Protestant missionaries during 1820–1826. Plate 7.1
In 1826, the developers voted to eliminate some of the letters which represented functionally redundant allophones (called "interchangeable letters"), enabling the Hawaiian alphabet to approach the ideal state of one-symbol-one-phoneme, and thereby optimizing the ease with which people could teach and learn the reading and writing of Hawaiian. For example, instead of spelling one and the same word as pule, bule, pure, and bure (because of interchangeable p/b and l/r), the word is spelled only as pule.
However, hundreds of words were very rapidly borrowed into Hawaiian from English, Greek, Hebrew, Latin, Syrian, and Chaldean. were represented in the original alphabet, so the letters (b, r, and t) for the latter are not truly "non-Hawaiian" or "foreign", even though their post-1826 use in published matter generally marked words of foreign origin.

Glottal stop


ʻOkina ().
For examples of the . Note that the latter two are essentially identical in sound.

=History=

As early as 1823, the missionaries made some limited use of the apostrophe to represent the glottal stop,

=Electronic encoding=

The okina is written in various ways for electronic uses:
Because many people who want to write the ʻokina are not familiar with these specific characters and/or do not have access to the appropriate fonts and input and display systems, it is sometimes written with more familiar and readily available characters:

Macron

A modern Hawaiian name for the macron symbol is kahakō (kaha 'mark' + kō 'long').
As early as 1821, at least one of the missionaries, Hiram Bingham, was using macrons (and breves) in making handwritten transcriptions of Hawaiian vowels. The missionaries specifically requested their sponsor in Boston to send them some type (fonts) with accented vowel characters, including vowels with macrons, but the sponsor made only one response and sent the wrong font size (pica instead of small pica). Thus, they could not print ā, ē, ī, ō, nor ū (at the right size), even though they wanted to.

Pronunciation

Due to extensive allophony, Hawaiian has more than 13 phones. Although vowel length is phonemic, long vowels are not always pronounced as such, even though under the rules for assigning stress in Hawaiian, a long vowel will always receive stress.

Phonology

Consonants

Hawaiian is known for having very few consonant phonemes – eight: 

Vowels

Hawaiian has five vowels.

=Monophthongs=

Hawaiian has five short and five long vowels, plus diphthongs. The short vowels are  (a y sound), which is never written.

=Diphthongs=

The short-vowel diphthongs are .
There are only a limited number of vowels which may follow long vowels, and some authors treat these as diphthongs as well: .

Phonotactics

Hawaiian syllable structure is (C)V. All CV syllables occur except for wū;)

Grammar

Hawaiian is an analytic language and a verb–subject–object language. While there is no use of inflection for verbs, in Hawaiian, like other Austronesian personal pronouns,  declension is found in the differentiation between a- and o-class genitive case personal pronouns in order to indicate inalienable possession in a binary possessive class system. Also like many Austronesian languages, Hawaiian pronouns employ separate words for inclusive and exclusive we, and distinguish singular, dual, and plural. The grammatical function of verbs is marked by adjacent particles (short words) and their relative positions to indicate tense–aspect–mood.
Some examples verb phrase patterns:
Nouns can be marked with articles:
ka and ke are singular definite articles. ke is used before words beginning with a-, e-, o- and k-, and with some words beginning - and p-. ka is used in all other cases. nā is the plural definite article.
To show part of a group, the word kekahi is used. To show a bigger part, you would insert mau to pluralize the subject
Examples:



Notes



  | url=
  | title=A Vocabulary of Words in the Hawaiian Language
  | first=Lorrin |last=Andrews |authorlink=Lorrin Andrews |year=1836
