[[Menachem Mendel Schneersohn]]

CATEGORIES: 1789 births, 1866 deaths, People from Liozna Raion, Belarusian Orthodox rabbis, Hasidic rabbis in Europe, Kabbalists, Rebbes of Lubavitch, Jewish philosophers, Schneersohn family

Menachem Mendel Schneersohn (September 9, 1789 – March 17, 1866 OS) also known as the Tzemach Tzedek was an Orthodox rabbi, leading 19th century posek, and the third Rebbe (spiritual leader) of the Chabad Lubavitch chasidic movement.

Biography

The Tzemach Tzedek was born in Liozna, on 29 Elul 5549.  His mother Devorah Leah died just three years later, and her father Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi raised him as his own son.  He married his first cousin Chaya Mushka Schneersohn, daughter of Rabbi Dovber Schneuri.  After his father-in-law/uncle's death, and a three-year interregnum during which he tried to persuade the hasidim to accept his brother-in-law Menachem-Nachum Schneuri or his uncle Chaim-Avraham as their leader, he assumed the leadership of Lubavitch on the eve of Shavuot 5591 (May 5, 1831 OS).
He was known as the Tzemach Tzedek ("Righteous Sprout" or "Righteous Scion"), after the title of a voluminous compendium of halakha (Jewish law) that he authored."Tzemach" (צמח) has the same gematria as "Menachem" (מנחם), and "Tzedek" (צדק) has the same as "Mendel" (מענדל).  The original responsa Tzemach Tzedek were those of Menachem Mendel Krochmal.  Schneersohn's responsa are known as Shu"t Tzemach Tzedek Hachadashot, "the new Tzemach Tzedek responsa".  Rabbi Menachem Mendil Hager, the first Viznhitzer Rebbe, called his commentary on the Torah Tzemach Tzadik (צמח צדיק), because he spelled his name with an extra yod (מענדיל). He also authored Derech Mitzvotecha ("Way of Your Commandments"), a mystical exposition of the Mitzvos. He compiled major works of Rabbi Shneur Zalman of Liadi for publication, including the Siddur L'Kol Ha'Shanah (commonly known as Siddur Im Dach), Likutei Torah and Torah Ohr. He also authored a philosophical text entitled "Sefer Chakira: Derech Emuna" (Book of Philosophy: The way of Faith).
The Tzemach Tzedek enjoyed  close ties with other Jewish leaders. In the course of his battle against the Haskalah in Russia, he forged a close alliance with Rabbi Yitzchak of Valozhyn, a major leader of the misnagdim, which led to warmer relations between them and the hasidim.
According to Baruch Epstein, his father Rabbi Yechiel Michel Epstein spent six months under the Tzemach Tzedek's tutelage, and learned most of his mystical knowledge during that time.  This story is disputed by hassidic historian Yehoshua Mondshein.  But see Mekor Baruch - Mekor Hakzavim by Yehoshua Mondshein.
His close friendship with professor J Berstenson, the Czar's court physician often helped the delicate negotiations relating to the welfare of the community. Naftali Lowenthal. Aronson, London 1996. ISBN 1-56821-123-6
He set up an organisation called Hevras Techiyas Hameisim to assist Jewish boy-soldiers who were being recruited and converted to Christianity by the Russian army. These soldiers known as Cantonists were taken away from the Jewish community to other villages. Schneersohn arranged for his students to pay them regular visits to keep up their spirits and discourage them from converting.
In 1844-45 he took steps to increase the enrollment and viability of the Lubavitch Yeshivas in Dubroŭna, Pasana, Lyozno and Kalisz, expanding their enrollment to around 600 students in total.
Repeated attempts by the authorities to entrap him using informers such as Hershel Hodesh, Benjamin the Apostate and Lipman Feldman failed. H.

Death and legacy

He died in Lubavitch on 13 Nissan 5626 at the age of 77, leaving behind him seven sons and two daughters. He was succeeded by one of his youngest son Shmuel as the Rebbe of Lubavitch, while three of his other sons formed breakaways of the Chabad movement which continued to some extent until the Second World War. These movements saw themselves as part of Chabad.
Several of his sons established Chasidic dynasties,  see #Sons.

Famous quotes

A famous saying of the Tzemach Tzedek is Think good and it will be good (original Yiddish: Trakht gut vet zein gut). This expresses the Chabad view that simply by virtue of a person's trust in God, that person's prayer may be answered.chabadtalk.php3?p=1869
The following quotes are attributed to the Tzemach Tzedek in Hayom Yom. 

Sons

The Tzemach Tzedek had seven sons:The introduction to Hayom Yom, by Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson.
1. Rabbi Baruch Shalom (1805–1869) did not become a rebbe in his own right; he chose to remain in Lubavitch and become a chasid of his youngest brother. Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, the seventh Rebbe of Chabad-Lubavitch, was his great-great-grandson.
2.  Rabbi Yehuda Leib Schneersohn (Maharil) (1808–1866) settled in Kopys a few months after the death of his father, where he founded the Kopust branch of Chabad. He died two months later. He had three sons:
Available at HebrewBooks. Shemen La'moar. Vol. 2. Kfar Chabad, Israel. (1967): p. 1. Available at HebrewBooks.org
3. Rabbi Chaim Schneur Zalman (1814–1880) was Rebbe in Lyady after his father, the Tzemach Tzedek died. He founded the Liadi brach of Chabad. He was succeeded by his son, Rabbi Yitzchak Dovber (1835–1910) of Liadi, author of Siddur Maharid, and his son-in-law, Rabbi Levi Yitzchak (–1905) of Siratin, a scion of the Rebbe of Radzimin.
4. Rabbi Yisroel Noach (1815–1883) of Nizhyn founded the Niezhin branch of Chabad. Although officially a Rebbe, had only a small following. He had no successor. His son was Rabbi Avraham Schneerson of Kischinev, whose daughter, Nechama Dina Schneersohn, married Rabbi Yosef Yitzchok Schneersohn, the sixth Rebbe of Chabad-Lubavitch.
5. Rabbi Yosef Yitzchak (1822–1876) was a Rebbe in Ovruch. He founded the Avrutch branch of Chabad. He was compelled to assume this position by his father-in-law, Rabbi Yaakov Yisroel of Cherkas (son of Rabbi Mordechai of Chernobyl and son-in-law of the Mitteler Rebbe) against his father's wishes.
6. Rabbi Yaakov, although leaving descendants, died at quite a young age.  He lived in Orsha. Little is known about him.
7. Rabbi Shmuel Schneersohn (Maharash) (1834–1882) of Lubavitch, his youngest son succeeded him as the Rebbe of Lubavitch.

Ohr HaTorah

Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson said of the Tzemach Tzedek's work "Ohr HaTorah" that it contains all the previous and future teachings of the Chabad Rebbes. 1, p. 6

Noted students

Works

Notes



 
 
ImageSize  = width:590 height:120
PlotArea   = width:570 height:25 left:5 bottom:60
TimeAxis   = orientation:horizontal
DateFormat = yyyy
Period     = from:-250 till:2000
AlignBars  = early
ScaleMajor = unit:year increment:200 start:-200
ScaleMinor  = unit:year increment:50 start:-200
Colors =
  id:turkiz    value:rgb(0,0.76,0.76)
  id:treaty    value:rgb(0.6,0.8,0.6)
  id:lightgrey value:rgb(0.6,0.8,0.4)
  id:darkgrey  value:rgb(0.6,0.8,0)
  id:Celadon  value:rgb(0.67,1,0.68)
  id:TeaGreen  value:rgb(0.81,0.94,0.75)
Define $hx = 15 # shift text to right side of bar
PlotData =
  bar:Leaders color:blue width:20 align:left fontsize:s
