[[Christmas cracker]]

CATEGORIES: Christmas traditions, Party favors

Christmas crackers are part of Christmas celebrations primarily in the United Kingdom, Ireland and Commonwealth countries such as Australia, Canada, New Zealand and South Africa. A cracker consists of a cardboard tube wrapped in a brightly decorated twist of paper, which is highly unstable.
Assembled crackers are typically sold in boxes of three to twelve. These typically have different designs usually with red, green and gold colours. Making crackers from scratch using tissue paper and the tubes from toilet rolls is a common activity for children.

Tradition

Crackers are typically pulled at the Christmas dinner table or at parties. In one version of the cracker tradition, the person with the larger portion of cracker empties the contents from the tube and keeps them. In another each person will have their own cracker and will keep its contents regardless of whose end they were in. Typically these contents are a coloured paper hat; a small toy, small plastic model or other trinket and a motto, a joke, a riddle or piece of trivia on a small strip of paper. In 2009, Harrod's offered a version of Christmas cracker retailing at $1,000: "Harrods Luxury 6 Christmas Cracker Collection: Bling it up this festive season!" The paper hats, with the appearance of crowns, are usually worn when eating Christmas dinner. The tradition of wearing festive hats is believed to date back to Roman times, and the Saturnalia celebrations, which also involved decorative headgear.

History

The Oxford English Dictionary records the use of cracker bonbons and the pulling of crackers from the early 1840s.[ref]
OED, Second edition, 1989; online version November 2010. ; accessed 23 December 2010. Earlier version first published in New English Dictionary, 1893.
[/ref] Tradition tells of how Tom Smith of London invented crackers in 1847. Tom Smith's Christmas crackers: an illustrated history. Tempus, 2005. ISBN 0-7524-3164-1Margaret Baker. Discovering Christmas customs and folklore: a guide to seasonal rites. p.72. Osprey Publishing, 1992. ISBN 0-7478-0175-4 He created the crackers as a development of his bon-bon sweets, which he sold in a twist of paper (the origins of the traditional sweet-wrapper). As sales of bon-bons slumped, Smith began to come up with new promotional ideas. His first tactic was to insert "love messages" into the wrappers of the sweets (cf. fortune cookies).
Smith added the "crackle" element when he heard the crackle of a log he had just put on a fire. The new product was initially marketed as the Cosaque (i.e., Cossack), but the onomatopoeic "cracker" soon became the commonly used name, as rival varieties came on the market. The other elements of the modern cracker —the gifts, paper hats and varied designs— were all introduced by Tom Smith's son, Walter Smith, to differentiate his product from the rival cracker manufacturers which had suddenly sprung up. As the demand for crackers increased, Tom Smith merged with Caley Crackers in 1953 taking over their headquarters and factory in Norwich, East Anglia.           
A memorial water fountain to Tom Smith and his family stands in Finsbury Square, London. London Christmas Past: The Invention Of The Christmas Cracker 
The longest Christmas cracker pulling chain is 603 participants and was achieved by the RuneScape Community, at RuneFest 3, Tobacco Dock, London, UK, on 2 November 2013. Guinness World Records; online version November 2013. ; accessed 7 November 2013.



§Origin of the Christmas Cracker

