[[Orthogonal group]]

CATEGORIES: Lie groups, Quadratic forms, Euclidean symmetries

In mathematics, the orthogonal group of dimension n, denoted O(n), is the group of distance-preserving transformations of a Euclidean space of dimension n that preserve a fixed point, where the group operation is given by composing transformations. Equivalently, it is the group of n×n orthogonal matrices of a given dimension, where the group operation is given by matrix multiplication, and an orthogonal matrix is a real matrix whose inverse equals its transpose.
The determinant of an orthogonal matrix being either 1 or −1, an important subgroup of O(n) is the special orthogonal group, denoted SO(n), of the orthogonal matrices of determinant 1. This group is also called the rotation group, because, in dimensions 2 and 3, its elements are the usual rotations around a point (in dimension 2) or a line (in dimension 3). In low dimension, these groups have been widely studied, see SO(2), SO(3) and SO(4).
The term "orthogonal group" may also refer to a generalization of the above case: the group of invertible linear operators that preserve a non-degenerate symmetric bilinear form or quadratic formFor base fields of characteristic not 2, it is equivalent to use bilinear forms or quadratic forms. But in characteristic 2 these notions differ. on a vector space over a field. 
In particular, when the bilinear form is the scalar product on the vector space  given by
where  is the identity matrix.
This article mainly discusses the orthogonal groups of quadratic forms that may be expressed over some bases as the dot product; over the reals, they are the positive definite quadratic forms. Over the reals, for any non-degenerate quadratic form, there is a basis, on which the matrix of the form is a diagonal matrix such that the diagonal entries are either 1 or −1. Thus the orthogonal group depends only on the numbers of 1 and of −1, and is denoted O(p, q), where p is the number of ones and q the number of −1. For details, see indefinite orthogonal group.
The derived subgroup  a central extension of a finite simple group.
Both  are algebraic groups, because the condition that a matrix be orthogonal, i.e. have its own transpose as inverse, can be expressed as a set of polynomial equations in the entries of the matrix. The Cartan–Dieudonné theorem describes the structure of the orthogonal group for a non-singular form.

Name

The determinant of any orthogonal matrix is either 1 or −1. The orthogonal . The term rotation group can be used to describe either the special or general orthogonal group.

Even and odd dimension

Over the real number field

Over the field  being the identity component, i.e., the connected component containing the identity matrix.

Geometric interpretation

The real orthogonal and real special orthogonal groups have the following geometric interpretations:
-sphere and all objects with spherical symmetry, if the origin is chosen at the center.
. It is the rotation group of the sphere and all objects with spherical symmetry, if the origin is chosen at the center.
.
Relative to suitable orthogonal bases, the isometries are of the form:
where the matrices  is rotation about a uniquely defined axis.
The orthogonal group is generated by reflections (two reflections give a rotation), as in a Coxeter group,The analogy is stronger: Weyl groups, a class of (representations of) Coxeter groups, can be considered as simple algebraic groups over the field with one element, and there are a number of analogies between algebraic groups and vector spaces on the one hand, and Weyl groups and sets on the other. and elements have length at most ), though so are other maximal combinations of rotations (and a reflection, in odd dimension).
The symmetry group of a circle is . 
It is isomorphic (as a real Lie group) to the circle group, also known as  of absolute value 1 to the orthogonal matrix
The group , understood as the set of rotations of 3-dimensional space, is of major importance in the sciences and engineering, and there are numerous charts on SO(3).

Low-dimensional topology

The low-dimensional (real) orthogonal groups are familiar spaces:

Homotopy groups

In terms of algebraic topology, for  is the unique 2-fold cover).
Generally, the homotopy groups  of the real orthogonal group are related to homotopy groups of spheres, and thus are in general hard to compute. However, one can compute the homotopy groups of the stable orthogonal group (aka the infinite orthogonal group), defined as the direct limit of the sequence of inclusions:
Since the inclusions are all closed, hence cofibrations, this can also be interpreted as a union. On the other hand , and one has the following fiber bundle:
which can be understood as "The orthogonal group : thus the homotopy groups of the stable space equal the lower homotopy groups of the unstable spaces.
From Bott periodicity we obtain , and one needs only to compute the lower 8 homotopy groups:

=Relation to KO-theory=

Via the clutching construction, homotopy groups of the stable space  fit into the periodicity), one obtains:

=Computation and interpretation of homotopy groups=

==Low-dimensional groups==

The first few homotopy groups can be calculated by using the concrete descriptions of low-dimensional groups.

==Lie groups==

From general facts about Lie groups,  is free (free abelian).

==Vector bundles==

From the vector bundle point of view,  is dimension.

==Loop spaces==

Using concrete descriptions of the loop spaces in Bott periodicity, one can interpret higher homotopy of  have countably many components, and the rest are connected.

=Interpretation of homotopy groups=

In a nutshell:John Baez "This Week's Finds in Mathematical Physics" week 105
Let , these yield vector bundles over the corresponding spheres, and
From the point of view of symplectic geometry, .

Over the complex number field

Over the field  these groups are noncompact.
Just as in the real case  is infinite cyclic.

Over finite fields

Orthogonal groups can also be defined over finite fields .
If  acts, it can be written as a direct orthogonal sum as follows:
where  is of minus type.
In the special case where .
We have the following formulas for the order of , when the characteristic is greater than two:
If −1 is a square in 
If −1 is a non-square in 

The Dickson invariant

For orthogonal groups, the Dickson invariant is a homomorphism from the orthogonal group to the quotient group 
Algebraically, the Dickson invariant can be defined as . Over fields that are not of characteristic 2 it is equivalent to the determinant: the determinant is −1 to the power of the Dickson invariant.
Over fields of characteristic 2, the determinant is always 1, so the Dickson invariant gives more information than the determinant.
The special orthogonal group is the kernel of the Dickson invariant and usually has index 2 in  has determinant ±1. Thus in characteristic 2, the determinant is always 1.
The Dickson invariant can also be defined for Clifford groups and Pin groups in a similar way (in all dimensions).

Orthogonal groups of characteristic 2

Over fields of characteristic 2 orthogonal groups often exhibit special behaviors, some of which are listed in this section. (Formerly these groups were known as the hypoabelian groups but this term is no longer used.)

The spinor norm

The spinor norm is a homomorphism from an orthogonal group over a field 
For the usual orthogonal group over the reals it is trivial, but it is often non-trivial over other fields, or for the orthogonal group of a quadratic form over the reals that is not positive definite.

Galois cohomology and orthogonal groups

In the theory of Galois cohomology of algebraic groups, some further points of view are introduced. They have explanatory value, in particular in relation with the theory of quadratic forms; but were for the most part post hoc, as far as the discovery of the phenomena is concerned. The first point is that quadratic forms over a field can be identified as a Galois , or twisted forms (torsors) of an orthogonal group. As an algebraic group, an orthogonal group is in general neither connected nor simply-connected; the latter point brings in the spin phenomena, while the former is related to the discriminant.
The 'spin' name of the spinor norm can be explained by a connection to the spin group (more accurately a pin group). This may now be explained quickly by Galois cohomology (which however postdates the introduction of the term by more direct use of Clifford algebras). The spin covering of the orthogonal group provides a short exact sequence of algebraic groups.
Here  is isomorphic to the multiplicative group of the field modulo squares.
There is also the connecting homomorphism from  of the kernel of the spin covering. The cohomology is non-abelian, so that this is as far as we can go, at least with the conventional definitions.

Lie algebra


The representation theory of the orthogonal Lie algebras includes both representations corresponding to linear representations of the orthogonal groups, and representations corresponding to projective representations of the orthogonal groups (linear representations of spin groups), the so-called spin representation, which are important in physics.

Related groups

The orthogonal groups and special orthogonal groups have a number of important subgroups, supergroups, quotient groups, and covering groups. These are listed below.
The inclusions  is the Lagrangian Grassmannian.

Lie subgroups

In physics, particularly in the areas of Kaluza–Klein compactification, it is important to find out the subgroups of the orthogonal group. The main ones are:

Lie supergroups

The orthogonal group  is also an important subgroup of various Lie groups:

=Conformal group=

Being isometries, real orthogonal transforms preserve angles, and are thus conformal maps, though not all conformal linear transforms are orthogonal. In classical terms this is the difference between congruence and similarity, as exemplified by SSS (Side-Side-Side) congruence of triangles and AAA (Angle-Angle-Angle) similarity of triangles. The group of conformal linear maps of .
Similarly one can define .

Discrete subgroups

As the orthogonal group is compact, discrete subgroups are equivalent to finite subgroups. These subgroups are known as point group and can be realized as the symmetry groups of polytopes. A very important class of examples are the finite Coxeter groups, which include the symmetry groups of regular polytopes.
Dimension 3 is particularly studied – see point groups in three dimensions, polyhedral groups, and list of spherical symmetry groups. In 2 dimensions, the finite groups are either cyclic or dihedral – see point groups in two dimensions.
Other finite subgroups include:

Covering and quotient groups

The orthogonal group is neither simply connected nor centerless, and thus has both a covering group and a quotient group, respectively:
These are all 2-to-1 covers.
For the special orthogonal group, the corresponding groups are:
In dimension 3 and above these are the covers and quotients, while dimension 2 and below are somewhat degenerate; see specific articles for details.

Principal homogeneous space: Stiefel manifold

The principal homogeneous space for the orthogonal group -frames).
In other words, the space of orthonormal bases is like the orthogonal group, but without a choice of base point: given an orthogonal space, there is no natural choice of orthonormal basis, but once one is given one, there is a one-to-one correspondence between bases and the orthogonal group. Concretely, a linear map is determined by where it sends a basis: just as an invertible map can take any basis to any other basis, an orthogonal map can take any orthogonal basis to any other orthogonal basis.
The other Stiefel manifolds  for {{math|k 


Specific transforms

Specific groups

Related groups

Lists of groups

Notes






