[[Hoover Dam]]

CATEGORIES: Art Deco architecture in Arizona, Buildings and structures in Clark County, Nevada, Dams on the Colorado River, Dams in Arizona, Dams in Nevada, Dams on the National Register of Historic Places in Nevada, Arch-gravity dams, Historic Civil Engineering Landmarks, Hydroelectric power plants in Arizona, Hydroelectric power plants in Nevada, Buildings and structures in Mohave County, Arizona, National Historic Landmarks in Arizona, National Historic Landmarks in Nevada, Buildings and monuments honoring American Presidents, Engineering projects, Visitor attractions in Mohave County, Arizona, U.S. Route 93, United States Bureau of Reclamation dams, Visitor attractions in Clark County, Nevada, Dams completed in 1936, Energy infrastructure completed in 1939, Industrial buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Arizona, Historic American Engineering Record in Nevada, Historic American Engineering Record in Arizona

Hoover Dam, once known as Boulder Dam, is a concrete arch-gravity dam in the Black Canyon of the Colorado River, on the border between the U.S. states of Arizona and Nevada. It was constructed between 1931 and 1936 during the Great Depression and was dedicated on September 30, 1935, by President Franklin D. Roosevelt.  Its construction was the result of a massive effort involving thousands of workers, and cost over one hundred lives. The dam was controversially named after President Herbert Hoover.
Since about 1900, the Black Canyon and nearby Boulder Canyon had been investigated for their potential to support a dam that would control floods, provide irrigation water and produce hydroelectric power.  In 1928, Congress authorized the project.  The winning bid to build the dam was submitted by a consortium called Six Companies, Inc., which began construction on the dam in early 1931.  Such a large concrete structure had never been built before, and some of the techniques were unproven.  The torrid summer weather and the lack of facilities near the site also presented difficulties.  Nevertheless, Six Companies turned over the dam to the federal government on March 1, 1936, more than two years ahead of schedule.
Hoover Dam impounds Lake Mead, the largest reservoir in the United States by volume.  The dam's generators provide power for public and private utilities in Nevada, Arizona, and California.  Hoover Dam is a major tourist attraction; nearly a million people tour the dam each year.  Heavily travelled U.S. 93 ran along the dam's crest until October 2010, when the Hoover Dam Bypass opened.

Background

Search for resources

As the United States developed the Southwest, the Colorado River was seen as a potential source of irrigation water.  An initial attempt at diverting the river for irrigation purposes occurred in the late 1890s, when land speculator William Beatty built the Alamo Canal just north of the Mexican border; the canal dipped into Mexico before running to a desolate area Beatty named the Imperial Valley.
As the technology of electric power transmission improved, the Lower Colorado was considered for its hydroelectric-power potential.  In 1902, the Edison Electric Company of Los Angeles surveyed the river in the hope of building a 
In the following years, the Bureau of Reclamation (BOR), known as the Reclamation Service at the time, also considered the Lower Colorado as the site of a dam. Service chief Arthur Powell Davis proposed using dynamite to collapse the walls of Boulder Canyon,

Planning and agreements

In 1922, the Reclamation Service presented a report calling for the development of a dam on the Colorado for flood control and electric power generation.  The report was principally authored by Davis, and was called the Fall-Davis report after Interior Secretary Albert Fall.  The Fall-Davis report cited use of the Colorado River as a federal concern, because the river's basin covered several states, and the river eventually entered Mexico.
With little guidance on water allocation from the Supreme Court, proponents of the dam feared endless litigation.  A Colorado attorney proposed that the seven states (California, Nevada, Arizona, Utah, New Mexico, Colorado and Wyoming) which fell within the river's basin form an interstate compact, with the approval of Congress.  Such compacts were authorized by Article I of the United States Constitution but had never been concluded among more than two states.  In 1922, representatives of seven states met with then-Secretary of Commerce Herbert Hoover.
Legislation to authorize the dam was introduced repeatedly by Representative Phil Swing (R-Calif.) and Senator Hiram Johnson (R-Calif.), but representatives from other parts of the country considered the project as hugely expensive and one that would mostly benefit California.  The 1927 Mississippi flood made Midwestern and Southern congressmen and senators more sympathetic toward the dam project. On March 12, 1928, the failure of the St. Francis Dam, constructed by the city of Los Angeles, caused a disastrous flood that killed up to 600 people. As that dam was a curved-gravity type, similar in design to the arch-gravity as was proposed for the Black Canyon dam, opponents claimed that the Black Canyon dam's safety could not be guaranteed.  Congress authorized a board of engineers to review plans for the proposed dam.  The Colorado River Board found the project feasible, but warned that should the dam fail, every downstream Colorado River community would be destroyed, and that the river might change course and empty into the Salton Sea.  The Board cautioned: "To avoid such possibilities, the proposed dam should be constructed on conservative if not ultra-conservative lines."
On December 21, 1928  President Coolidge signed the bill authorizing the dam.

Design, preparation and contracting

Even before Congress approved the Boulder Canyon Project, the Bureau of Reclamation was considering what kind of dam should be used.  Officials eventually decided on a massive concrete arch-gravity dam, the design of which was overseen by the Bureau's chief design engineer John L. Savage.  The monolithic dam would be thick at the bottom and thin near the top, and would present a convex face towards the water above the dam.  The curving arch of the dam would transmit the water's force into the abutments, in this case the rock walls of the canyon.  The wedge-shaped dam would be  
On January 10, 1931, the Bureau made the bid documents available to interested parties, at five dollars a copy.  The government was to provide the materials; but the contractor was to prepare the site and build the dam.  The dam was described in minute detail, covering 100 pages of text and 76 drawings. A $2 million bid bond was to accompany each bid; the winner would have to post a $5 million performance bond.  The contractor had seven years to build the dam, or penalties would ensue.
The Wattis Brothers, heads of the Utah Construction Company, were interested in bidding on the project, but lacked the money for the performance bond.  They lacked sufficient resources even in combination with their longtime partners, Morrison-Knudsen, which employed the nation's leading dam builder, Frank Crowe.  They formed a joint venture to bid for the project with Pacific Bridge Company of Portland, Oregon; Henry J. Kaiser & W. A. Bechtel Company of San Francisco; MacDonald & Kahn Ltd. of Los Angeles; and the J.F. Shea Company of Portland, Oregon.
The city of Las Vegas had lobbied hard to be the headquarters for the dam construction, closing its many speakeasies when the decision maker, Secretary of the Interior Ray Wilbur came to town.  Instead, Wilbur announced in early 1930 that a model city was to be built in the desert near the dam site.  This town became known as  Boulder City, Nevada.  Construction of a rail line joining Las Vegas and the dam site began in September 1930.

Construction

Labor force

Soon after the dam was authorized, increasing numbers of unemployed converged on southern Nevada.  Las Vegas, then a small city of some 5,000, saw between 10,000 and 20,000 unemployed descend on it.
As part of the contract, Six Companies, Inc. was to build Boulder City to house the workers.  The original timetable called for Boulder City to be built before the dam project began, but President Hoover ordered work on the dam to begin in March 1931 rather than in October.
The Industrial Workers of the World (IWW or "Wobblies"), though much reduced from their heyday as militant labor organizers in the early years of the century, hoped to unionize the Six Companies workers by capitalizing on their discontent. They sent eleven organizers,
On the morning of the 9th, Crowe met with the committee and told them that management refused their demands, was stopping all work, and was laying off the entire work force, except for a few office workers and carpenters.  The workers were given until 5 p.m. to vacate the premises.  Concerned that a violent confrontation was imminent, most workers took their paychecks and left for Las Vegas to await developments.
A second labor action took place in July 1935, as construction on the dam wound down.  When a Six Companies manager altered working times to force workers to take lunch on their own time, workers responded with a strike.  Emboldened by Crowe's reversal of the lunch decree, workers raised their demands to include a $1 per day raise.  The company agreed to ask the Federal government to supplement the pay, but no money was forthcoming from Washington.  The strike ended.

River diversion

Before the dam could be built, the Colorado River needed to be diverted away from the construction site. To accomplish this, four diversion tunnels were driven through the canyon walls, two on the Nevada side and two on the Arizona side. These tunnels were 
Tunneling began at the lower portals of the Nevada tunnels in May 1931. Shortly afterward, work began on two similar tunnels in the Arizona canyon wall. In March 1932, work began on lining the tunnels with concrete. First the base, or invert, was poured. Gantry cranes, running on rails through the entire length of each tunnel were used to place the concrete. The sidewalls were poured next. Movable sections of steel forms were used for the sidewalls. Finally, using pneumatic guns, the overheads were filled in. The concrete lining is 
Following the completion of the dam, the entrances to the two outer diversion tunnels were sealed at the opening and halfway through the tunnels with large concrete plugs. The downstream halves of the tunnels following the inner plugs are now the main bodies of the spillway tunnels.

Groundworks, rock clearance and grout curtain

To protect the construction site from the Colorado River and to facilitate the river's diversion, two cofferdams were constructed.  Work on the upper cofferdam began in September 1932, even though the river had not yet been diverted.  The cofferdams were designed to protect against the possibility of the river flooding a site at which two thousand men might be at work, and their specifications were covered in the bid documents in nearly as much detail as the dam itself.  The upper cofferdam was 
Once the cofferdams were in place and the construction site was drained of water, excavation for the dam foundation began. For the dam to rest on solid rock, it was necessary to remove accumulated erosion soils and other loose materials in the riverbed until sound bedrock was reached. Work on the foundation excavations was completed in June 1933. During this excavation, approximately  of material was removed.  Since the dam was an arch-gravity type, the side-walls of the canyon would bear the force of the impounded lake.  Therefore the side-walls were excavated too, to reach virgin rock as weathered rock might provide pathways for water seepage.
The men who removed this rock were called "high scalers".  While suspended from the top of the canyon with ropes, high-scalers climbed down the canyon walls and removed the loose rock with jackhammers and dynamite.  Falling objects were the most common cause of death on the dam site; the high scalers' work thus helped ensure worker safety.  One high scaler was able to save life in a more direct manner:  when a government inspector lost his grip on a safety line and began tumbling down a slope towards almost certain death, a high scaler was able to intercept him and pull him into the air.  The construction site had, even then, become a magnet for tourists; the high scalers were prime attractions and showed off for the watchers.  The high scalers received considerable media attention, with one worker dubbed the "Human Pendulum" for swinging co-workers (and, at other times, cases of dynamite) across the canyon.
The cleared, underlying rock foundation of the dam site was reinforced with grout, called a grout curtain. Holes were driven into the walls and base of the canyon, as deep as   It took nine years (1938–47) under relative secrecy, to complete the supplemental grout curtain.

Concrete

The first concrete was poured into the dam on June 6, 1933, 18 months ahead of schedule.
The concrete was delivered in huge steel buckets 
A total of 

Dedication and completion

With most work finished on the dam itself (the powerhouse remained uncompleted), a formal dedication ceremony was arranged for September 30, 1935, to coincide with a western tour being made by President Franklin D. Roosevelt.  The morning of the dedication, it was moved forward three hours from 2 p.m. Pacific time to 11 a.m.; this was done because Secretary of the Interior Harold L. Ickes had reserved a radio slot for the President for 2 p.m. but officials did not realize until the day of the ceremony that the slot was for 2 p.m. Eastern Time.
Most work had been completed by the dedication, and Six Companies negotiated with the government through late 1935 and early 1936 to settle all claims and arrange for the formal transfer of the dam to the Federal Government.  The parties came to an agreement and on March 1, 1936, Secretary Ickes formally accepted the dam on behalf of the government.  Six Companies was not required to complete work on one item, a concrete plug for one of the bypass tunnels, as the tunnel had to be used to take in irrigation water until the powerhouse went into operation.

Construction deaths

There were 112 deaths associated with the construction of the dam.  Included in that total was J. G. Tierney, a surveyor who drowned on December 20, 1922, while looking for an ideal spot for the dam.  He is generally counted as the first man to die in the construction of Hoover Dam.  His son, Patrick W. Tierney, was the last man to die working on the dam's construction, 13 years to the day later. Ninety-six of the deaths occurred during construction at the site.  Of the 112 fatalities, 91 were Six Companies employees, three were BOR employees, and one was a visitor to the site, with the remainder employees of various contractors not part of Six Companies.
Not included in the official fatalities number were deaths that were recorded as pneumonia.  Workers alleged that this diagnosis was a cover for death from carbon monoxide poisoning, brought on by the use of gasoline-fueled vehicles in the diversion tunnels, and a classification used by Six Companies to avoid paying compensation claims.

Architectural style

The initial plans for the facade of the dam, the power plant, the outlet tunnels and ornaments clashed with the modern look of an arch dam. The Bureau of Reclamation, more concerned with the dam's functionality, adorned it with a Gothic-inspired balustrade and eagle statues. This initial design was criticized by many as being too plain and unremarkable for a project of such immense scale, so Los Angeles-based architect Gordon B. Kaufmann, then the supervising architect to the Bureau of Reclamation, was brought in to redesign the exteriors.  Kaufmann greatly streamlined the design, and applied an elegant Art Deco style to the entire project. He designed sculptured turrets rising seamlessly from the dam face and clock faces on the intake towers set for the time in Nevada and Arizona — the two states are in different time zones, but as Arizona does not observe Daylight Saving Time, the clocks display the same time for more than half the year.
At Kaufmann's request, Denver artist Allen Tupper True
With the agreement of Kaufmann and the engineers, True also devised an innovative color-coding for the pipes and machinery, which was implemented throughout all BOR projects.
Complementing Kaufmann and True's work, the Norwegian-born, naturalized American sculptor Oskar J.W. Hansen designed many of the sculptures on and around the dam. His works include the monument of dedication plaza, a plaque to memorialize the workers killed and the bas-reliefs on the elevator towers. In his words, Hansen wanted his work to express "the immutable calm of intellectual resolution, and the enormous power of trained physical strength, equally enthroned in placid triumph of scientific accomplishment", because "the building of Hoover Dam belongs to the sagas of the daring." Hansen's dedication plaza, on the Nevada abutment, contains a sculpture of two winged figures flanking a flagpole. 
Surrounding the base of the monument is a terrazzo floor embedded with a "star map". The map depicts the Northern Hemisphere sky at the moment of President Roosevelt's dedication of the dam. This is intended to help future astronomers, if necessary, calculate the exact date of dedication.  Hansen's bas-relief on the Nevada elevator tower depicts the benefits of the dam: flood control, navigation, irrigation, water storage, and power. The bas-relief on the Arizona elevator depicts, in his words, "the visages of those Indian tribes who have inhabited mountains and plains from ages distant."

Operation

Power plant and water demands

Excavation for the powerhouse was carried out simultaneously with the excavation for the dam foundation and abutments. A U-shaped structure located at the downstream toe of the dam, its excavation was completed in late 1933 with the first concrete placed in November 1933. Filling of Lake Mead began February 1, 1935, even before the last of the concrete was poured that May.  The powerhouse was one of the projects uncompleted at the time of the formal dedication on September 30, 1935—a crew of 500 men remained to finish it and other structures.
In the latter half of 1936, water levels in Lake Mead were high enough to permit power generation, and the first three Francis turbine-generators, all on the Nevada side, began operating. In March 1937, one more Nevada generator went online and the first Arizona generator by August. By September 1939, four more generators were operating and the dam's power plant became the largest hydroelectricity facility in the world. The final generator was not placed in service until 1961, bringing the maximum generating capacity to 1345 megawatts at the time.  Original plans called for 16 large generators, eight on each side of the river, but two smaller generators were installed instead of one large one on the Arizona side for a total of 17. The smaller generators were used to serve smaller communities at a time when the output of each generator was dedicated to a single municipality, before the dam's total power output was placed on the grid and made arbitrarily distributable.  The present contracts for the sale of electricity expire in 2017.
Before water from Lake Mead reaches the turbines, it enters the intake towers and enters four gradually narrowing penstocks which funnel the water down towards the powerhouse. The intakes provide a maximum hydraulic head (water pressure) of   Following an uprating project from 1986 to 1993, the total gross power rating for the plant, including two 2.4 megawatt Pelton turbine-generators that power Hoover Dam's own operations is a maximum capacity of 2080 megawatts.  The annual generation of Hoover Dam varies. The maximum net generation was 10.348 TWh in 1984, and the minimum since 1940 was 2.648 TWh in 1956. The average has been about 4.2 TWh/year.
Control of water was the primary concern in the building of the dam. Power generation has allowed the dam project to be self-sustaining: proceeds from the sale of power repaid the 50-year construction loan, and those revenues also finance the multi-million dollar yearly maintenance budget. Power is generated in step with and only with the release of water in response to downstream water demands. Lake Mead and downstream releases from the dam provide water for both municipal and irrigation uses. Water released from the Hoover Dam eventually reaches the All-American Canal for the irrigation of over  of land. Water from the lake serves 8 million people in Arizona, Nevada and California.

=Power distribution=

Electricity from the dam's powerhouse was originally sold pursuant to a fifty-year contract, authorized by Congress in 1934, which ran from 1937 to 1987.  In 1984, Congress passed a new statute which set power allocations from the dam from 1987 to 2017.  The powerhouse was run under the original authorization by the Los Angeles Department of Water and Power and Southern California Edison; in 1987, the Bureau of Reclamation assumed control.  In 2011, Congress enacted legislation extending the current contracts until 2067, after setting aside 5% of Hoover Dam's power for sale to Native American tribes, electric cooperatives, and other entities.  The new arrangement will begin in 2017.  The Bureau of Reclamation reports that the energy generated is presently allocated as follows:
| valign="top" |

File:Tourgroup1940.jpg|Tourists gather around one of the generators in the Nevada wing of the powerhouse to hear its operation explained, September 1940
File:Hoover Dam Penstock Header. diameter Nevada penstock before its junction with another penstock that delivers water to a turbine

|}

Spillways

The dam is protected against over-topping by two spillways. The spillway entrances are located behind each dam abutment, running roughly parallel to the canyon walls. The spillway entrance arrangement forms a classic side-flow weir with each spillway containing four  of lake level.
Water flowing over the spillways drops sharply into  was empirically verified in post construction tests in 1941.
The large spillway tunnels have only been used twice, for testing in 1941 and because of flooding in 1983.  Both times, in inspecting the tunnels after the spillways were used, engineers found major damage to the concrete linings and underlying rock.

Roadway and tourism

There are two lanes for automobile traffic across the top of the dam, which formerly served as the Colorado River crossing for U.S. Route 93.  In the wake of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, authorities expressed security concerns and the Hoover Dam Bypass project was expedited. Pending the completion of the bypass, restricted traffic was permitted over Hoover Dam. Some types of vehicles were inspected prior to crossing the dam while semi-trailer trucks, buses carrying luggage, and enclosed-box trucks over  downstream from the dam.
With the opening of the bypass, through traffic is no longer allowed across Hoover Dam, dam visitors are allowed to use the existing roadway to approach from the Nevada side and cross to parking lots and other facilities on the Arizona side.
Hoover Dam opened for tours in 1937, after its completion, but on December 7, 1941, was closed to the public for the duration of World War II, during which only authorized traffic, in convoys, was permitted.  It reopened September 2, 1945, and by 1953, annual attendance had risen to 448,081.  The dam closed on November 25, 1963 and March 31, 1969, days of mourning in remembrance of Presidents Kennedy and Eisenhower.  In 1995, a new visitors' center was built, and the following year, visits exceeded one million for the first time.  The dam closed again to the public on September 11, 2001; modified tours were resumed in December and a new "Discovery Tour" was added the following year.

Environmental impact

The changes in water flow and use caused by Hoover Dam's construction and operation have had a large impact on the Colorado River Delta.
The Colorado River had experienced natural flooding before the construction of the Hoover Dam.  The dam eliminated the natural flooding, which imperiled many species adapted to the flooding, including both plants and animals.

Naming controversy

During the years of lobbying leading up to the passage of legislation authorizing the dam in 1928, the dam was generally referred to by the press as "Boulder Dam" or "Boulder Canyon Dam", notwithstanding the fact that the proposed site had been shifted to Black Canyon.  The Boulder Canyon Project Act of 1928 (BCPA) never mentions a proposed name or title for the dam. The BCPA merely allows the government to "construct, operate, and maintain a dam and incidental works in the main stream of the Colorado River at Black Canyon or Boulder Canyon".
When Secretary Wilbur spoke at the ceremony starting the building of the railway between Las Vegas and the dam site on September 17, 1930, he named the dam "Hoover Dam", citing a tradition of naming dams after Presidents, though none had been so honored during their terms of office.  Wilbur justified his choice on the ground that Hoover was "the great engineer whose vision and persistence ... has done so much to make  possible".
After Hoover's election defeat and the accession of the Roosevelt administration, Secretary Ickes ordered on May 13, 1933 that the dam be referred to as "Boulder Dam". Ickes stated that Wilbur had been imprudent in naming the structure after a sitting president, that Congress had never ratified his choice, and that it had long been referred to as Boulder Dam.
In the following years, the name "Boulder Dam" failed to fully take hold, with many Americans using the two names interchangeably and mapmakers divided as to what name should be printed.  Memories of the Great Depression faded, and Hoover to some extent rehabilitated himself through good works during and after World War II.  In 1947, a bill passed both Houses of Congress unanimously restoring the name to "Hoover Dam".  Ickes, who was by then a private citizen, opposed the change, stating, "I didn't know Hoover was that small a man to take credit for something he had nothing to do with."





Bibliography

  | first1 = Andrew J.
  | last1 = Dunar
  | first2 = Dennis
  | last2 = McBride
  | title = Building Hoover Dam: An Oral History of the Great Depression
  | origyear = 1993
  | year = 2001
  | publisher = University of Nevada Press
  | location = Reno, Nev.
  | isbn = 978-0-87417-489-2
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | first = Michael A.
  | last = Hiltzik
  | title = Colossus: Hoover Dam and the Making of the American Century
  | year = 2010
  | publisher = Free Press
  | location = New York
  | isbn = 978-1-4165-3216-3
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | first = Joseph E.
  | last = Stevens
  | title = Hoover Dam: An American Adventure
  | year = 1988
  | publisher = University of Oklahoma Press
  | location = Norman, OK
  | isbn = 978-0-8061-2283-0
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | first1 = Jere
  | last1 = True
  | first2 = Victoria Tupper
  | last2 = Kirby
  | title = Allen Tupper True: An American Artist
  | year = 2009
  | publisher = Canyon Leap
  | location = San Francisco
  | isbn = 978-0-9817238-1-5
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | author = Bureau of Reclamation
  | year = 2006
  | title = Reclamation:  Managing Water in the West:  Hoover Dam
  | publisher = US Department of the Interior
  | ref = harv
  }}
  | title = The Story of the Hoover Dam
  | year = 2006
  | publisher = Nevada Publications, Inc.
  | location = Las Vegas
  | isbn = 978-0-913814-79-6
  | ref = harv
  }}
Other sources
  | last1 = Bartojay
  | first1 = Katie
  | last2 = Joy
  | first2 = Westin
  | date = October 21–22, 2010
  | title = Long-Term Properties of Hoover Dam Mass Concrete
  | pages = 74–84
  | editor1-last = Wiltshire
  | editor1-first = Richard L.
  | editor2-last = Gilbert
  | editor2-first = David R.
  | editor3-last = Rogers
  | editor3-first = Jerry R.
  | booktitle = Hoover Dam 75th Anniversary History Symposium
