[[Special unitary group]]

CATEGORIES: Lie groups

The special unitary group of degree .
The 
The simplest case,  is also identical to one of symmetry groups of spinors, Spin(3), that enables a spinor presentation of rotations.

Properties

The special unitary group  is the trivial group.
The Lie algebra of 
Additionally, the operator
satisfies
which implies that the number of independent generators is .R.R. Puri, Mathematical Methods of Quantum Optics, Springer, 2001.

Generators

In general the infinitesimal generators (elements of the Lie algebra) of , are represented as traceless hermitian matrices.  I.e:
and

Fundamental representation

In the defining, or fundamental, representation the generators are represented by  matrices, where:
where the -coefficients are symmetric in all indices.
As a consequence:
We also take
as a normalization convention.

Adjoint representation

In the adjoint representation, the generators are represented by  of them, whose elements are defined by the structure constants themselves:

 = 2

 is the following group:
where the overline denotes complex conjugation. Now consider the following map:
where  is a compact, connected Lie group.
The Lie algebra of  is:
It is easily verified that matrices of this form have trace zero and are antihermitian.  The Lie algebra is then generated by the following matrices
which are easily seen to have the form of the general element specified above. These satisfy . The commutator bracket is therefore specified by
The above generators are related to the Pauli matrices by . This representation is often used in quantum mechanics to represent the spin of fundamental particles such as electrons. They also serve as unit vectors for the description of our 3 spatial dimensions in loop quantum gravity.
The Lie algebra is used to work out the representations of .

 = 3

The generators of , in the defining representation, are:
where :
|-
|
|-
|}
These obey the relations
The  are the structure constants, given by:
The  take the values:

Lie algebra

The above representation bases generalize to .
The Lie algebra corresponding to .
If we choose an (arbitrary) particular basis, then the subspace of traceless diagonal -dimensional Cartan subalgebra.
Complexify the Lie algebra, so that any traceless  coordinates has to be zero (because the unit matrix is only auxiliary).
So, . The construction given two paragraphs ago explains why. A choice of simple roots is
Its Cartan matrix is
Its Weyl group or Coxeter group is the symmetric group -simplex.

Generalized special unitary group

For a field  can be replaced by a commutative ring, in which case the vector space is replaced by a free module.
Specifically, fix a Hermitian matrix , then all
satisfy
Often one will see the notation  is
However there may be better choices for .

Example

A very important example of this type of group is the Picard modular group .

Important subgroups

In physics the special unitary group is used to represent bosonic symmetries. In theories of symmetry breaking it is important to be able to find the subgroups of the special unitary group. Subgroups of :
where × denotes the direct product and , known as the circle group, is the multiplicative group of all complex numbers with absolute value 1.
For completeness there are also the orthogonal and symplectic subgroups:
Since the rank of  is a subgroup of various other lie groups:
There are also the identities .
One should finally mention that , a relation that plays an important role in the theory of rotations of 2-spinors in non-relativistic quantum mechanics.



Notes




