[[Billy Ocean]]

CATEGORIES: 1950 births, Living people, English male singers, English soul musicians, English tenors, English dance musicians, English singer-songwriters, Trinidad and Tobago musicians, Grammy Award-winning artists, Black British singers, Epic Records artists, Trinidad and Tobago people of Grenadian descent, English people of Trinidad and Tobago descent, English people of Grenadian descent

Billy Ocean (born Leslie Sebastian Charles; January 21, 1950) is a British recording artist who had a string of R&B international pop hits in the 1970s and 1980s. He was the most popular British R&B singer-songwriter of the early to mid-1980s. After scoring his first four UK top 20 successes, seven years passed before he accumulated a series of transatlantic successes, including three U.S. number ones. In 1985, Ocean won the Grammy Award for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance for his worldwide hit, "Caribbean Queen", and in 1987 was nominated for the Brit Award for Best British Male. BRIT Awards Ltd. Retrieved January 26, 2013
In 2002, the University of Westminster, London awarded Ocean an honorary doctorate of music. In 2010, Ocean was presented with the Lifetime Achievement Award at the MOBO Awards. On July 29, 2011, Ocean became a Companion of the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts, presented to him by Sir Paul McCartney."Billy Ocean will be named a LIPA companion by Paul McCartney this afternoon". Liverpool Daily Post. Retrieved January 26, 2013
He is a member of the Rastafari movement.Billy Ocean: 'Rastafari is my anchor'

Biography

Early life and stardom

Ocean was born as Leslie Charles in Fyzabad, Trinidad and Tobago, to Grenadian parents, and moved to Romford, Essex, England, with his family at the age of eight. During his teenage years, he sang regularly in London clubs while also working as a tailor in London's Savile Row. He released his first single in 1972 on Spark Records as Les Charles.
He was originally discovered by his first manager, John Morphew, who recorded a double A side single at Pye Studios in London with a full orchestra, However, the ballad singing style of Les was going out of fashion and Morphew was unable to  get any major label to release it. It remains unissued. Les's father, who countersigned the management contract as Les was under 18 asked Morphew to release him from contract which he did without penalty.
Ocean took his stage name from the Ocean Estate, Stepney in London's East End, where he was living at the time. In 1976, he recorded his first album, Billy Ocean, with its first single release, "Love Really Hurts Without You," charting at number 2 in the UK Singles Chart and number 22 in the U.S. Billboard Hot 100. He enjoyed club success from the songs "Are You Ready" and "Stay The Night" from the album City Limit – both of which were later covered by La Toya Jackson. More successes ensued, including "L.O.D. (Love On Delivery)". He also wrote and composed songs for other artists. In 1981, he scored the U.S. R&B chart with "Nights (Feel Like Getting Down)".

=The prime of his international success=

Ocean's period of greatest success began with the releases, during 1984, of the album Suddenly and its main single, "Caribbean Queen (No More Love On The Run)." The song's title and lyrics were changed for different regions, such that the song is also known as "African Queen" or "European Queen." The song won Ocean the Grammy Award for Best Male R&B Vocal Performance at the 1985 Grammy Awards. The album's title track also became a success, peaking at #4 in both the US and the UK and the song "Loverboy", while also being a #2 US success in 1985 was also featured in the very first scene of the popular UK BBC One TV series, Casualty, in 1986.
Ocean appeared at Live Aid in 1985, singing "Caribbean Queen" and "Loverboy", from the JFK Stadium in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
His 1986 album Love Zone also sold well. It included the successful singles "When the Going Gets Tough, the Tough Get Going," the theme from the film The Jewel of the Nile; this was a number one success in the UK and a number two in the U.S.; and "There'll Be Sad Songs (To Make You Cry)" (a U.S. number one, and also a major UK success). Also included were the title track and "Love Is Forever", which were #10 and #16 U.S. successes for Ocean, respectively.
In February 1986, Ocean's video of "When the Going Gets Tough, the Tough Get Going" was banned by the BBC, owing to such non-union members as the American actors Michael Douglas, Kathleen Turner and Danny DeVito, all three of whom were cast members of Romancing The Stone and The Jewel Of The Nile, miming to the backing vocals. At the 1987 BRIT Awards, Ocean was nominated for the Brit Award for Best British Male.
Ocean's next album, Tear Down These Walls (1988) featured another number one single, "Get Outta My Dreams, Get into My Car", while the album was certified platinum.

Later career

His 1993 album Time to Move On failed to produce any major successes, but his 1989 Greatest Hits collection has been a steady seller over the years, and his 1997 compilation Love Is For Ever made #7 on the UK album chart. Ocean's last studio album for Jive Records was Time to Move On, which he recorded in Chicago with R&B star R. Kelly. It turned out that R. Kelly had been a long-time admirer of the way Ocean was able to mix the more emotive soul style with a crossover popular style.
In 2002, the University of Westminster in London awarded Ocean an honorary doctorate of music.net) – accessed January 2008 The awards ceremony took place in the Barbican Centre, in London.tcm.  He lives in Sunningdale, Berkshire with his wife of 27 years, Judy; and their three children Cherie, Antony and Rachel. Ocean is now a patron for Tech Music Schools in London,Retroland. He regularly visits to hold clinics and seminars for the students.
In 2004, "Caribbean Queen" was re-released as a digital single for its 20th anniversary, shooting up to #25 on the Billboard digital singles chart and garnering radio play across the US and UK.  A remix of the single by will.i.
In October 2007, Ocean commenced his first UK tour in over 15 years.co. His album, Because I Love You was released on February 2, 2009.com To coincide with this tour and album launch, Ocean worked with Adoseof Design on a revision of Ocean's website.
In April 2010, an eighteen track compilation album was released in the UK by Sony Music entitled The Very Best of Billy Ocean, to tie in with a thirty date tour of the UK and Ireland. Featuring Ocean's biggest hits, the album debuted in the UK Albums Chart at number 17.Billy Ocean interview by Pete Lewis, 'Blues & Soul' May 2010
On October 20, 2010, Ocean was presented with the Lifetime Achievement Award at the MOBO Awards.
On July 29, 2011, Ocean became a Companion of the Liverpool Institute for Performing Arts. His title was presented by Sir Paul McCartney.
In 2012, Ocean made a cameo appearance in the British comedy movie Keith Lemon: The Film as Lemon's father.

Discography

Ocean-penned songs recorded by other artists








