[[University of British Columbia]]

CATEGORIES: Universities and colleges in British Columbia, University of British Columbia, Educational institutions established in 1890, Educational institutions established in 1915, Gothic Revival architecture in Vancouver, Universities in Canada, 1890 establishments in Canada, Port-City University League

The University of British Columbia, commonly referred to as UBC, is a public research university in British Columbia, Canada.
Founded in 1908 as the McGill University College of British Columbia, the university became independent and adopted its current name in 1915. It is the oldest institution of higher learning in British Columbia and enrolls over 57,000 students at its Vancouver and Okanagan Valley campuses. Publicaffairs.ca. Retrieved on 2014-04-12. UBC's  Kelowna campus, acquired in 2005, is located in the Okanagan Valley.
UBC is consistently included among the top three research universities in Canada,2014 University Rankings: Medical Doctoral results - Macleans.ca. Oncampus.ca. Retrieved on 2014-04-12. Huffingtonpost. Retrieved on 2014-04-12. Shanghai Ranking. Retrieved on 2014-04-12. Top Universities (2012-12-06). Retrieved on 2014-04-12. Ubc. Retrieved on 2014-04-12. Huffingtonpost. Retrieved on 2014-04-12.
In 2011, UBC reported the highest entrance requirements for undergraduate admission in Canada. UBC faculty, alumni, and researchers have won seven Nobel Prizes, 68 Rhodes Scholarships, 64 Olympic medals, and alumni include two Canadian prime ministers. Publicaffairs.ca (2012-07-04). Retrieved on 2014-04-12. Times Higher Education (2014-01-31). Retrieved on 2014-04-12.
UBC is a non-sectarian and coeducational institution, with more than 275,000 living alumni in 120 countries. The university is a member of Universitas 21, the Association of Universities and Colleges of Canada, the Association of Southeast Asian Institutions of Higher Learning, the International Association of Universities, the U15 and the only Canadian member of the Association of Pacific Rim Universities. The university's varsity teams, known as the  Thunderbirds, compete in the Canada West Universities Athletic Association of the Canadian Interuniversity Sport.

History

Foundation and early years


In 1877, only six years after British Columbia joined Canada, Superintendent of Education John Jessop submitted a proposal for the formation of a provincial university. An Act Respecting the University of British Columbia was passed by the provincial legislature in 1890, but disagreements arose over whether to build the university on Vancouver Island or the mainland. A provincial university was formally called into being by the British Columbia University Act of 1908, although its location was not yet specified.  The governance was modelled on the provincial University of Toronto Act of 1906 which established a bicameral system of university government consisting of a senate (faculty), responsible for academic policy, and a board of governors (citizens) exercising exclusive control over financial policy and having formal authority in all other matters. The president, appointed by the board, was to provide a link between the two bodies and to perform institutional leadership. The Act constituted a twenty-one member senate with Francis Carter-Cotton of Vancouver as Chancellor.
Before the University Act, there had been several attempts at establishing a degree-granting university with assistance from the Universities of Toronto and McGill.  Columbian College in New Westminster, through its affiliation with Victoria College of the University of Toronto, began to offer university-level credit at the turn-of-the-century, but it was McGill that would come to dominate higher education in the early 1900s.
Building on a successful affiliation between Vancouver and Victoria high schools with McGill University, Henry Marshall Tory[ref]"Henry Marshall Tory, A Biography", originally published 1954, current edition January 1992, E.A. Corbett, Toronto: Ryerson Press, ISBN 0-88864-250-4
[/ref] helped to establish the McGill University College of British Columbia. From 1906 to 1915 McGill BC (as it was called) operated as a private institution providing the first few years toward a degree at McGill University or elsewhere. The Henry Marshall Tory Medal was established in 1941 by Tory, founding President of the University of Alberta and of the National Research Council of Canada, and a co-founder of Carleton University. thumb|Henry Marshall Tory
In the meantime, appeals were again made to the government to revive the earlier legislation for a provincial institution, leading to the University Endowment Act in 1907, and The University Act in 1908. In 1910 the Point Grey site was chosen, and the government appointed Dr. Frank Fairchild Wesbrook as President in 1913. A declining economy and the outbreak of war in August 1914 compelled the University to postpone plans for building at Point Grey, and instead the former McGill University College site at Fairview became home to the University until 1925. The first day of lectures was September 30, 1915, the new independent university absorbing McGill University College. University of British Columbia awarded its first degrees in 1916.

Move to Point Grey

World War I dominated campus life, and the student body was "decimated" by enlistments for active service, with three hundred UBC students in Company "D" alone. By the end of the war, 697 members of the University had enlisted. A total of 109 students graduated in the three war-time congregations, all but one in the Faculty of Arts and Science.
By 1920, the university had only three faculties: Arts, Applied Science, and Agriculture (with Departments of Agronomy, Animal Husbandry, Dairying, Horticulture and Poultry). It only awarded the degrees of Bachelor of Arts (BA), Bachelor of Applied Science (BASc), and Bachelor of Science in Agriculture (BSA).University of British Columbia Library – University Archives
In the early part of the 20th century, professional education expanded beyond the traditional fields of theology, law and medicine. UBC provided no degrees in these areas, but was beginning to offer degrees in new professional areas such as engineering, agriculture, nursing, and school teaching. Graduate training based on the German-inspired American model of specialized course work and the completion of a research thesis was introduced, with students completing M.A. degrees in natural sciences, social sciences, and humanities.
In 1922, the now twelve-hundred-strong student body embarked on a "Build the University" campaign. Students marched in the streets of Vancouver to draw attention to their plight, enlist popular support, and embarrass the government.  Fifty-six thousand signatures were presented at legislature in support of the campaign, which was ultimately successful.  On September 22, 1925, lectures began on the new Point Grey campus.  Except for the Library, Science and Power House buildings, all the campus buildings were temporary constructions. Two playing fields were built by the students themselves, but the University had no dormitories and no social centre. Still, the University continued to grow steadily.
Soon, however, the effects of the depression began to be felt. The provincial government, upon which the University depended heavily, cut the annual grant severely. In 1932–33 salaries were cut by up to 23%. Posts remained vacant, and a few faculty lost their jobs. Most graduate courses were dropped. In 1935, the University established the Department of Extension.  Just as things began to improve, World War II broke out.  Canada declared war on September 10, 1939. Soon afterwards, University President Klinck wrote:
 From the day of the declaration of war, the University has been prepared to put at the disposal of the Government all possible assistance by way of laboratories, equipment and trained personnel, insofar as such action is consistent with the maintenance of reasonably efficient instructional standards. To do less would be unthinkable. 
Heavy rains and melting snowfall eroded a deep ravine across the north end of the campus, in the Grand Campus Washout of 1935. The campus did not yet have storm drains, and surface runoff went down a ravine to the beach. When the University carved a ditch to drain flooding on University Avenue, the rush of water steepened the ravine and eroded it back as fast as , two bridges, and buildings near Graham House. The University was closed for 4½ days.  Afterwards, the gully was filled with debris from a nearby landslide, and only traces are visible today.[ref]
 Includes several contemporary photos of the Washout.</ref>
Military training on the campus became popular, then mandatory. WWII marked the first provision of money from the federal government to the University for research purposes.

Postwar Years

By the end of the war, it became clear that the facilities at Point Grey had become totally inadequate to cater to the huge influx of veterans returning to their studies. The University needed new staff, new courses, new faculties, and new buildings for teaching and accommodation. The student population rose from 2,974 in 1944–45 to 9,374 in 1947–48.  Surplus Army and Air Force camps were used for both classrooms and accommodation. Fifteen complete camps were taken over by the University in the course of the 1945–46 session alone, with a sixteenth camp situated on Little Mountain in Vancouver, converted into suites for married students.  Most of the camps were dismantled and carried by barge or truck to the University where the huts were scattered across the campus.
Student numbers hit 9,374 in 1948; more than 53% of the students were war veterans in 1947–67. Between 1947 and 1951 twenty new permanent buildings were erected.
The War Memorial Hall (more generally known as Memorial Hall) and War Memorial Gym are landmark buildings on the campus of the University of British Columbia. The lecture hall, theatre and gym were the result of a student alumni campaign to honour men and women of British Columbia who served in the First World War and Second World War.War Memorial gymnasium
The single-university policy in the West was changed as existing colleges of the provincial universities gained autonomy as universities – the University of Victoria was established in 1963.
On February 10, 1964 Harvey Reginald MacMillan donated $8.2 million for postgraduate education to the university.

Recent history

The Museum of Anthropology at UBC was announced on July 1, 1971 by Prime Minister Trudeau. At a construction cost of $2.5 million, the museum building designed by Arthur Erickson opened in 1976.
UBC's current president is Dr. Stephen Toope, appointed on July 1, 2006. He succeeded Dr. Martha Piper, who was the University's first female president and the first non-Canadian born president. The Chancellor of the University, who acts as the University's ceremonial head and sits on the academic Senate and the Board of Governors, is Sarah Morgan-Silvester (as of July 1, 2008).[ref]
