[[Stavanger]]

CATEGORIES: Cities and towns in Norway, Populated coastal places in Norway, Stavanger, Jæren, Port cities and towns in Norway, Port cities and towns of the North Sea, Viking Age populated places, Municipalities of Rogaland

Stavanger  and has contributed significantly to spreading the city's population growth to outlying parts of Greater Stavanger.
Stavanger is today considered the center of the oil industry in Norway and is one of Europe's energy capitals and is often called the oil capital. Forus Business Park located on the municipal boundary between Stavanger, Sandnes and Sola and is one of the largest business parks with 2,500 companies and nearly 40,000 jobs. Scandinavia's largest company, Statoil, has its headquarters at Forus in Stavanger, and in addition, several international oil and gas company 's Norwegian office in the city . As a result, the city is considered to be very international, with an immigrant share of 20.2% . Several state actors Petoro, NPD and PSA also has its head office in Stavanger. Stavanger is also home to several institutions of higher education, where the University of Stavanger (UIA) is the largest. The University offers several PhD programs, including petroleum engineering and offshore technology. The town is also the residence of the city to Stavanger University Hospital (SUS), Western, Norwegian Petroleum Museum, International Research Institute, Rogaland Theatre, Chicago Symphony, the Culinary Institute and boot camp KNM Harald.
The city's rapid population growth in the late 1900s was primarily a result of Norway's booming offshore oil industry. Today the oil industry is a key industry in the Stavanger region and the city is widely referred to as the Oil Capital of Norway. Multiple educational institutions for higher education are located in Stavanger. The largest of these is the University of Stavanger.
Domestic and international military installations are located in Stavanger, among these is the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation's Joint Warfare Center. Other international establishments, and especially local branches of foreign oil and gas companies, contribute further to a significant foreign population in the city. Immigrants make up 11.3% of Stavanger's population.Facts on Stavanger's immigrant population 
Stavanger is served by international airport Stavanger Airport, Sola, which offers flights to cities in most major European countries, as well as a limited number of intercontinental charter flights. The airport was named most punctual European regional airport by flightstats.
Stavanger organizes every two years Offshore Northern Seas (ONS), which is the second largest exhibition and conference for the energy sector. Glad food festival are also held each year in Stavanger and is considered to be one of Scandinavia's leading food festivals. The city is also known for being one of the nation 's premier culinary clusters. Stavanger 2008 European Capital of Culture, the city is also host to the award of a Grammy Award.

History

The first traces of settlement in the Stavanger region come from the days when the ice retreated after the last ice age ca. 10,000 years ago. A number of historians have argued convincingly that North-Jæren was an economic and military centre as far back as the 9th-10th century with the consolidation of the nation at the Battle of Hafrsfjord around 872. Stavanger grew into a centre of church administration and an important south-west coast market town around 1100–1300.Phenomenology and the pioneer settlement on the Western Scandinavian Peninsula  (Ingrid Fuglestvedt (2009)   Lindome : Bricoleur Press) ISBN 978-91-85411-07-8
Stavanger fulfilled an urban role prior to its status as city (1125), from around the time the Stavanger bishopric was established in the 1120s. Bishop Reinald, who may have come from Winchester, England, is said to have started construction of Stavanger Cathedral (Stavanger domkirke)  around 1100.
With the Protestant Reformation in 1536, Stavanger's role as a religious centre declined, and the establishment of Kristiansand in the early 17th century led to the relocation of the bishopric. However, rich herring fisheries in the 19th century gave the city new life. Stavanger was established as a municipality 1 January 1838 (see formannskapsdistrikt). The then rural municipalities of Hetland and Madla merged with Stavanger 1 January 1965.
The city's history is a continuous alternation between economic booms and recessions.
Stavanger kommune - Byhistorie For long periods of time its most important industries have been shipping, shipbuilding, the fish canning industry and associated subcontractors.
In 1969, a new boom started as oil was first discovered in the North Sea.
Stavanger kommune – Byhistorie
After much discussion, Stavanger was chosen to be the on-shore center for the oil industry on the Norwegian sector of the North Sea, and a period of hectic growth followed.

City development

Stavanger is one of Norway's oldest cities. It emerged in the 1100s during a period of population growth and increasing urbanization throughout northern Europe. The archaeological and historical sources about the first city development are sparse. Therefore, there is much we do not know about the first city development. Power of the monarchy and the church needed a strong foothold in the South West coast, as early stands out as an important area. In North Jæren suggests a rich archaeological material that is just from the early Iron Age were strong chief power. Stavanger had a natural harbor and was strategically with Jæren in the south, the county of the East and the shipping route along the coast to the west and the fertile Ryfylke Islands in the north.
The earliest Christian impulses in Norway came to Stavanger region through contact with the rich Christian, European culture. This flourished during the Viking era. Mid 900s ceases traditional Norse burial customs in the Stavanger area, together with the first Christian priests begin their work. Big stone cross is visible memorials of Christian age (including the Tjora and Kvitsøy). At the entrance to the Stavanger over land was erected a memorial cross of HERS and lenderman Erling Skjalgsson after his fall in 1028. Erling controlling power over the South West coast, and the location of the cross indicate that he had a special connection to Stavanger. It was obviously a priest who was behind the inscription on the cross, and he did maybe an early service at church on site.
The great fire of 1272 probably leave large parts of the city and the Cathedral in ruins. The Romanesque chancel of the cathedral burned up. Western Front was also replaced with a vestibule. Archaeological investigations in the current downtown and in the crypt of the cathedral has encountered a fire team can be dated to this fire. Reconstruction after the fire led to the construction (or reconstruction) of St. Mary's  Church, Bishop's Chapel, the Gothic cathedral and the expansion of stone cellar at Kongsberg.
Stavanger has a long history of education as elsewhere in Western Europe was the monastery who first saw the need to train new employees through education. Probably took the first organized teaching in the city at a Benedictine monastery in the town, either Olav's Monastery or Monastery of people from the mid-1100s.
One of the most important events in Stavanger's oldest city history, the gift letter that King Magnus Erlingsson gave to Stavanger Bishop Eirik Ivarsson in the second half of 1100. Exactly when the king made gift letter, and in what connection it happened is unknown. It may have been in connection with the coronation in 1163-1164, but also in association with the support of Stavanger Bishop Erik around 1181-1184 gave to King Magnus - at the end of his fight against the late King Sverre.
It is undoubtedly right to characterize Stavanger as a city church throughout the Middle Ages to the Reformation. Therefore the Reformation a hard blow to Stavanger. The cathedral, the bishop and canons of the monastery had been large landowners. Recession of the city began with the loss of people in rural areas. The revenues of the cathedral and the bishop fell dramatically due to reduced rental income. In 1537 the bishop and the monastery estate and property confiscated by the king. Kongsberg was plundered by Christoffer Trondsen in 1539, St. Swithun casket disappeared and Bishop Hoskuld Hoskuldsson may have been executed.

World War 2

Early on the morning of 9 April 1940, notified explosions and exploding bombs from Sola-edge news bulletins on radio the German attack on Norway and northern area. It was Sola Airport which was the first strike on North Jæren. The airport was attacked by six German Messerschmitt Bf 110 fighters around 8 am. The airport at Sola was built in 1937 and fortifications round the airport was in April 1940 not complete. Defense here consisted of a concrete bunker that was built and which was under construction and several open shooting positions. Armament consisted of three luftvernmitraljøser three bakkemitraljøser and some machine guns at the disposal of the approximately 80 soldiers who defended the airport. Bomb Wing was a military aircraft in 1939 was transferred to the Sun, but the planes, a total of six Fokker and three Caprioni aircraft was old and outdated. Shortly after the attack began, they took off.
The German air attack increased in intensity and eventually got bombers. The bombardment lasted for about an hour before ten slow Ju 52 transport aircraft into the airport. They had taken off from the airport at Hamburg a few hours earlier. First, it was released parachutes with yellow containers containing weapons and equipment. There after it was dropped paratroopers between ten and twelve from each of the planes. It was the second time this happened in a war situation in the world. 3 hours earlier was a bridge south of Denmark captured in the same way. Concrete bunker held out longest, but the Germans did eventually threw a hand grenade. The Norwegian soldier was badly damaged, but no Norwegian soldiers lost their lives in contrast to the Germans who had several fallen. Lieutenant Thor Tang violence that led the Norwegian defense of the airport had capitulated 10.00. Immediately thereafter began the approach of troops, fuel and other supplies. In all the country and took 200 to 300 transport aircraft during invasion day. Some failed, but when evening came they had many hundreds of soldiers and large quantities of war material moved from Germany to the Sun.
Already on 8 April, the German freighter "Roda" (6780 grt .) Anchored by Ulsnes. "Roda" was reportedly loaded with coke, but customs officials and police authorities become suspicious about other cargo when the ship was lying deep in the water. The ship was taken under arrest/praise and was ordered to move to Riska. "Roda" did not move, and the captain of the "Aeger," Nils Bruun, decided on his own initiative to lower the ship. After sending the crew in lifeboats shot "Aeger" 25 shots with 10 cm Bofors guns without the ship sank.
Around 12:30 was the first German troops were advancing in Stavanger. The city was then conquered peacefully, but this was the first sparks of resistance to the enemy tent with many. Several men left the city and made his way to the Norwegian troops inside Gjesdal, there to join the armed struggle against the enemy. Police station, telephone office, telegraph center, post office, port office, customs house and the gas company was the most important places which now came under new control.
On April 29, 1944, Southern Railway was completed till Stavanger. This had been a high priority for the Germans who in 1940 had envisioned it to be completed no later than 1 November 1941. It was important to have a good railway connection between the air base at Sola - Stavanger district, and the rest of the country.
After Hitler's death in 1945  the Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz leadership of the German forces took over, and gave 9 May 1945 the head of the armed German forces in Norway, General Franz Böhme, told that "Reichskommissar" in Norway, Josef Terboven, was deposed and that all his duties were transferred to Böhme. Böhme turns giving him the task of how the capitulation of Festung Norwegen be implemented. In Rogaland was the commander of 274 Infantry Division, General Weckman, who gave the formal German surrender. There were around 15,000 German soldiers in Rogaland in 1945.
Before repatriation of Germans remained clean up after five years of occupation. There were 180 German minefield in Rogaland, with a total of 480,000 mines. The German Wehrmacht had even clear away minefields on land. 62 Germans were killed and 94 were injured during mine clearance in Rogaland.

Oil capital

In 1969, a new boom started as oil was first discovered in the North Sea.
Stavanger kommune – Byhistorie
After much discussion, Stavanger was chosen to be the on-shore center for the oil industry on the Norwegian sector of the North Sea, and a period of hectic growth followed.
It was in March 1965 it was signed an agreement on the sharing of the continental shelf by the median line principle between Norway and the United Kingdom. The same year it signed a similar agreement between Norway and Denmark. It was designed a legal regime for oil exploration. The first licensing round on the Norwegian shelf was announced on 13 April 1965. In August the government granted 22 licenses for 78 blocks for oil companies or groups of companies. The production license giving oil companies exclusive rights to exploration, drilling and production in a defined geographical area for a given period at an annual fee. Esso was the first oil company to start drilling for oil off the coast of Norway. The semi-submersible drilling vessel Ocean Traveler was towed from New Orleans to Norway. The vessel began drilling on 19 July 1966. Drilling occurred at block 8/3, about 180 km southwest of Stavanger.

Coat of arms

Hallvard Trætteberg (1898–1987), a leading specialist in heraldry, was commissioned to design the official coat of arms of Stavanger, a work that lasted from the end of the 1920s and until approved in 1939. His design is also used as the city's arms, flag and seal. The coat of arms is based upon a seal which dated 1591. It shows a branch of vine (Vitis vinifera). Which leaves and branch type that is depicted on the coat of arms has been hotly debated. The original meaning and representation of the vine remains unknown.The Coat of Arms of Norway (The American-Scandinavian Review, June 1964)

Origin of the name

The Old Norse form of the name was Stafangr. The origin of the name has been discussed for decades, and the most used interpretation is that it originally was the name of the inlet now called Vågen which was the original of the city on the east shore of the bay.  
The first element of the name is stafr meaning 'staff, branch'. This could refer to the form of the inlet, but also to the form of the mountain Valberget (Staven meaning the staff is a common name of high and steep mountains in Norway). The last element is angr meaning 'inlet, bay'. Facing the North Sea, Stavanger has always been economically dependent on its access to the sea.stafr (Wiktionary)

Geography

Stavanger is part of the Low-Jæren, a flat area of land consisting mostly of marsh, sand, and stone aur. Stavanger bordering the sea to the west and Boknafjorden in the northeast. Low- Jæren ranging from Ogna River in the south to Tungenes in the north, where the northernmost part including Stavanger called North that area. The city is located in a coastal landscape where the majority of the municipality lies between 0 and 50 m. The landscape has a distinctive appearance with rocks and hills where there is no settlement or agriculture. The city is closely linked to the sea and water, with five lakes and three fjords (Hafrsfjord, Byfjorden and Gandsfjorden). Sea and water form the landscape and line kite while providing a rich shoreline vegetation and wildlife.
The terrain is low-lying . 49% of the area is less than 20 m., While 7% is 60 m. Stavanger's highest point is Jatta Without (139 m. ), Followed by Ullandhaug ( 136 m . ) .
The city has developed on both sides of a hollow that runs right through the terrain with steep slopes and slopes up from the bottom. As an extension of Boknafjorden and Byfjorden intersects the harbor into the hollow from the northwest, while Hillevåg lake intrudes from Gandsfjorden on stream in the southeast. Breiavatnet located between the two fjordtarmene .

Parks

There are several parks and grønntområder in Stavanger municipality, both in the city and beyond. Central to the town is the city lake which is surrounded by the city park, which was built as the city's first urban park in 1866-1868. Between the city lake and bay in city park located Kielland garden which got its name because the poet Alexander Kielland's house at the time was here. Kielland Park went through a major renovation in 2007 as part of the Millennium in Stavanger municipality. At the opposite end of the city lake there is a small park outside the station. There is Emigration, a gift from the Norwegian - emigrants in the United States for men and women of Norwegian ancestry who built America.
Bjergstedparken north of Old Stavanger is a park and here is Bjergsted Music Center including Stavanger Concert Hall and the outdoor areas are often used for festivals and outdoor concerts. Missing The park was built in honor of fools Lars Missing, located up the hill on the west side of the harbor, which forms the entrance from the south towards the Old Town. Canon park forms the border between Stavanger and exit from the E39. Northward go Løkkeveien against Bjergsted westward go Madlaveien the theater and Bergelandstunnelen, east towards E39. The park is located next to old Stavanger Hospital, which also has a large park area around the main building. Through the park runs Kannik creek, which comes to the surface at the statue of the Little Mermaid in park and runs into Breiavannet. Kannikkbekken runs mostly in the pipes before it reaches Kannik park.
Outside the center, the park southerly in relation to the large inland lakes such as Mosvatnet, Large and Small Stokkavatnet and Water Assen. Mosvatnet is 0.46 km ² making it the third largest in Stavanger after Hålandsvatnet and Store Stokkavatn. The water was the city's drinking water from 1863 to 1931, is by far the most used recreation area in Stavanger. Sampling was conducted in 1995 showed that an estimated 560,000 people used the walking trail around Mosvatnet. Cyclists and joggers use the good path around the lake is 3.2 km long. At the south end is Mosvangen Camping, Stavanger Svømmestadion old man and Vålandskogen and to the west we find Rogaland Kunstmuseum. Store Stokkavatnet is 2.19 km ² - the largest in Stavanger. Right at Stora Stokkavatnet is Litla Stokkavatnet (0.15 km ²) . Hike trail around the lake is 8.2 km long. In the water is a small island, Storeholmen. Store Stokkavatnet were Stavanger drinking from 1931 to 1959, and was later demoted to the reserve drinking water. In 2009 it was relegated once more, and it is now legal to swim in the water.

Boroughs

Stavanger is officially partitioned into 22 parts and 218 subparts. Stavanger is also divided into 7 boroughs.List of boroughs in Oslo, Bergen, Trondheim and Stavanger

Economy

In the early 1900s, Stavanger was mainly related to fisheries and shipping, and were in the first half of the century known for canning, and in the 1950s there were over 50 canneries in town. The town was also called Norway "canned capital", with Christian Bjelland who founded Chr Bjelland & Co. A/S. The last of these factories were closed down in 2002.
Around 1950, over half of the working population in the city employed in industry. Structural changes in industry and the strong development of the service industry has radically changed the city's economic base, and now represents the industry's share of employment over 11 percent, but the city still has 29 percent of the county's industrial employment.
The engineering industry is the main industry with 59 percent of manufacturing employment. This is mostly related to the offshore industry and production of oil platforms alone account for 40 percent. Other important industries are graphic - publishing and food and beverage industry . Within the food and beverage industry is the processing of local agricultural products from Jæren, including Gilde Vest with one of the largest slaughterhouses. By the printing industry is especially high printing and the major daily newspapers in town, Stavanger and Rogaland Avis Aftenblad.
Employment by place of work and industry in 2007 to 0.6% in primary, 27.4% in secondary and tertiary industries 71.7%. Employment by place of work by sector in 2007 to 24.4% in the public sector and 75.6% in the private sector and public enterprises.
Industry has in recent years become highly decentralized. The most important of the newer industrial areas are Forus area on the border of Sandnes and Sola in the south and Dusavik the border of Randfontein in the north, mainly petroleum - related activities. Significant older industrial areas are Hillevåg, Buøy, the eastern districts and in some places elsewhere along the coast. On Hundvåg located Rosenberg Shipyard from 1896. Shipbuilding and shipping industry has traditionally been of great importance to the city's economic growth. Also today Stavanger among the country's most important maritime cities and coming in fourth for registered fleet of the country's cities after Oslo, Bergen and Ålesund.

Media

The city's largest daily newspaper is Stavanger Aftenblad came out with its first issue in 1893. Competitor Rogalands Avis was first published in 1899 under the name May 1, 1906 and published the newspaper daily newspaper. In 1987 an attempt was made to establish a new daily newspaper, The West Coast, but it was only released two months and ended a total loss of 27 million.
The first newspaper published in "Stavanger Stavangerske Adressecontoirs Efterretninger", a handwritten weekly newspaper that probably came out in 1769 and 1770 . This newspaper was not an ordinary newspaper, but a so-called link newspaper with the privilege of bringing announcements, small articles and ads. The first printed newspaper in Stavanger Stavanger Addresseavis, who came out with the first edition Friday 4 October 1833.
Stavanger Avis was published from 1888 until 1911. Writer and locals do Alexander L. Kielland was editor in 1889. Stavanger Avis was also the name of the newspaper that came out from 1942 to 1945, where Stavanger Aftenblad and Stavangeren merged by the Press Directorate.
Student newspaper Hugin comes out every other week.
For the fourth consecutive year Stavanger Region in 2007 ranked best business region. It is Telemarksforsking Bo who has worked Ministry NM where they rank the regions in Norway with regard to profitability, growth and new businesses.
Stavanger has one television station, TV Western that sends local news and reports. Viking TV is the TV channel to the football team Viking FK. Viking TV started on 2 March 2008. Channel distributed via Lyse's broadband network and reaches 120,000 viewers in 45,000 households. Besides sending BBC1 Rogaland local news broadcasts on radio and television as well as other local radio stations and student radio.

Agriculture and food

Stavanger region often referred to as Norway's answer to the French food region of Lyon.  Culinary Institute headquartered in Ullandhaug was very important to focus on food in Stavanger. After the Culinary Institute went bankrupt, partly due to a fault activities in Oslo on 4 June 2008, the Culinary Institute established by the Foundation Rogaland knowledge park and Rogaland County Council. They shall maintain parts of the work of the Culinary Institute and was eventually bought back the name, logo and brand Culinary Institute of the bankruptcy estate.
In summer 2007, mataktørene in the region awarded the title " Norwegian Centres of Expertise in Culinoloy." The building also under construction at Ullandhaug will serve as a platform and innovative arena, not only for the region's R & D environment, but also against other expertise, industry and the public. In July 2008 the Stavanger European championship qualifying for the Bocuse d' Or. In 2008, Norway was represented by Geir Skeie, who also won gold. Every year there is a "Happy Food Festival" in the city center. The festival originated in the network Rogaland county as they would impart culinary traditions of the region. Stavanger region aims that should by 2020 be the region most Norwegians associate with food products and culinary experiences.

Oil industry

In recent times, the city is called the "oil capital" and Norway's largest oil company Statoil is headquartered at Forus in Stavanger. Norwegian oil company Statoil was established by a unanimous parliamentary resolution on 14 June 1972, the headquarters was placed in Stavanger. Today Petoro is a Norwegian state-owned company responsible for managing the commercial aspects of the state 's direct financial interest in petroleum activities on the Norwegian continental headquarters in the city. Several other international oil companies have their headquarters in Stavanger.
NPD was created in 1972 by Ullandhaug and PSA was established on 1 January 2004 and co-located with the agency, as a regulatory body.
Jåttåvågen by Gandsfjorden was from 1970s the 1990s, a large industrial area, particularly for the offshore industry, with the construction of large Condeep platform and oil platforms in concrete. Among other Condeep jacket for the three Gullfaks platforms and Troll A cast of Norwegian Contractors here.
Offshore Northern Seas is the second largest exhibition of its kind in the oil and gas. ONS takes place in Stavanger last week of August every other year. In 2008, there were 38,000 visitors, half of whom came from abroad.

Tourism

Stavanger is a popular tourist destination, especially in summer. The hotels in the city have good occupancy year round due to a lot of commuters who travel to work and meetings in Stavanger. In recent years, Stavanger has also become one of the most popular port of call for cruise ships. Number of coming here has increased steadily in recent years, and Stavanger is one of Europe's fastest growing port of call for cruise ships north of the Mediterranean. In 2009, 99 ships and 146,000 passengers pass through the town and in 2010 there were a total of 111 cruise ships with about 175,000 passengers visited the city.

Transport

Airport

Stavanger Airport, Sola is the airport in Stavanger, it is located in Sola and is 14 minutes away from Stavanger city center. The airport opened in 1937. In 1940 Stavanger Airport, Forus opened but closed in 1989. Sola airport had in 2013 over 4 million passenger and was the largest airport in Rogaland county. It is also the 3th largest airport in Norway and 7th in the Nordic countries. The busiest routes is Oslo-Gardermoen with over 1,5 million passengers, the second most popular is Bergen Airport, Flesland with over 700,000 passengers and Oslo-Torp is the third most popular, then comes Trondheim Airport, Værnes and Kristiansand Airport, Kjevik domestically. International Copenhagen, Amsterdam and Aberdeen is the most international routes. Stavanger also has connections to domestic and European destinations, including London, Berlin, Paris, Barcelona, Stockholm, Warsaw. Domestic destinations is all the way up from Tromsø down to Kristiansand. The airport also got intercontinental routes to Cancun, Phuket and soon Houston.

Railway

Stavanger S opened in 1878 and is the final destination of the Sørlandet Line and Jæren Line.
The Southern Railways final stop is in Stavanger, it goes from Oslo S - Drammen - Kristiansand S - Stavanger S. This route is schedule over 4 times every day and take around 7 hours. The railway is The line is 545 kilometers (339 mi) long between Oslo and Stavanger. The railway was constructed in several phases, the first section being opened in 1871 and the last not opened until 1944. While there was a continual construction work from Oslo westward as far as Moi, the Jæren Line from Egersund to Stavanger in Western Norway was opened in 1878. Up to 1913 the name used on plans and for the completed sections was the Vestlandet Line (The West Country Line).
There is also local trains in Jæren with 19 stops on one line. The line opened as a 1,067 mm (3 ft 6 in) narrow gauge stand-alone line on 27 February 1878. The railway was extended from Egersund to Flekkefjord as the Flekkefjord Line in 1904. The Jæren Line's only branch, the Ålgård Line from Ganddal to Ålgård, opened in 1924. In 1944, the Sørlandet Line was extended to Sira on the Flekkefjord Line, and the Jæren Line was integrated in the main railway network. Because of this, the line was converted to standard gauge.

Roads

European route E39 goes through Stavanger from Haugesund and the Mastrafjord Tunnel and Byfjord Tunnel, then south to Sandnes. Fylkesvei 44 starts from Stavanger and end in Kristiansand via Sandnes and Flekkefjord.
National road 509 runs between Stavanger, via Tananger arm Stavanger Airport, Sola Cross and Forus the European route E39, and between National road 44 and E39 at Soma in Sandnes. The road length is 19.5 km (+ new part).
Before 1 January 2010, the county road 509 part of the way.
18 December 2012 opened the new engine traffic road Solasplitten as new thoroughfare eastward, north of Forus the European route E39.

Sea

Located outside Stavanger, there is a port serving ferries to Hirtshals, Denmark. There have been advocates for the Smyril Line ferry between the Faroe Islands and Denmark to make a stop in Stavanger as the new port in Risavika allows this to be done while only adding one hour to the total sailing time.
Local ferries go to Tau and Kvitsøy, while fast passenger boats go to many villages and islands between the main routes from Stavanger to Haugesund and Sauda. Flaggruten operates catamaran passenger services to Bergen with multiple stops along the way, among others Haugesund.

Bus

The local bus service in Stavanger is administered by Rogaland Kollektivtrafikk (RKT) under the brand name "Kolumbus".kolumbus. RKT administers all bus routes in Rogaland County.
Express bus services are operated by NOR-WAY Bussekspress from Stavanger City Terminal to Kristiansand, Bergen and Haugesund, and by Lavprisekspressen to Oslo via Kristiansand. There are plans to reestablish the ferry link to Newcastle in the United Kingdom, which was suspended in 2008.journallive.co.uk/north-east-news/todays-news/2012/08/27/north-shields-to-norway-ferry-plan-raises-job-hopes-61634-31703489/
The city has a number of bus services and taxis. There are two tunnel projects planned: Ryfast and Rogfast.

Education

University of Stavanger (UIS) is the fifth university established on 29 October 2004 when the University of Stavanger (HiS) gained university status by decision of the Council. The university has about 9,000 students and 1,200 employees and is organized into three faculties: Faculty of Humanities, Social Sciences and the Faculty of Science. Archaeological Museum is also part of the university. The campus is located on Ullandhaug and most department and departments are also located here. John B. Møst was employed as a university in 2011. Marit Boyesen is selected as the principal for the period 2011 to 2015 and started its principal period 1 August 2011. Rector is the head of the academic activities of the University of Stavanger and is Chairman of the University Board. University of Stavanger became a member of European Consortium of Innovative Universities ( ECIU ) in October 2012.
MHS was established in 1843 and has about 300 students from approx. 20 countries. College was accredited in 2008 as a research university. MHS is owned by the Norwegian Missionary Society. Centre for Intercultural Communication (SIK) is associated with the college's mission.
Art School in Rogaland was established in 1978, with a history back to 1957. Scandinavian School of Management offers college studies in Marketing and Management. The school is 92.5% owned by John Bauer Group. Solborgveien Folk takes annually welcomes over 140 students and is owned by the Lutheran. Other private schools include International School of Stavanger, The British International School of Stavanger and Stavanger French school which is in the same premises as Kampen School.
Other schools in the city 's Enterprise Technical College Stavanger, Noroff Institute Stavanger, Utdanningshuset Stavanger, Acta Bible, BI Stavanger, Fjelltun Bible, Folkeuniversitetet Stavanger, Imente Vocational School Stavanger, Nor Offshore Stavanger, Norwegian School of Creative Studies Stavanger, NæringsAkademiet Stavanger Peteka - Stavanger, PNI Training Centre and Stavanger Offshore Technical College.
The High schools categorized under Rogaland county, but in Stavanger municipality located schools St. Olaf, St. Swithun, Stavanger Cathedral School, Kongsberg, Hetland, Jatta, Godalen and Bergeland.

Culture

Museums

The city has several museums and collections that are both local and national. The city's most visited museum is Norwegian Petroleum Museum, which has had ten years of visitation records from 1998 to 2008, when almost 95,000 people visited the museum and that is the only petroleum museum in Europe.
The city's oldest museum is Missjonmuseet witch was established in 1864. The museum is located on the ground floor of the faculty building at MHS. The museum has about 5,000 objects consisting of several objects of ethnographic and mission of historical interest from the various mission fields.
Stavanger Museum was founded in 1877 and is thus one of the oldest museums. Stavanger Museum is an institution that includes several historic buildings and collections. Stavanger Museum consists of a total of eight buildings: Stavanger Museum Muségata 16, Stavanger Maritime Museum, the Norwegian Canning Museum, Ledaal, Breidablikkveien museum, combined indretning, Norwegian Printing Museum and the Norwegian Children's Museum. In the main museum are now a cultural department, a zoological collection, and a library.
Museum of Archaeology in Stavanger is the largest museum in Stavanger, measured by number of employees. AmS is a state museum for the prehistoric sites in Rogaland which is part of UIS. The museum also conducts extensive outreach activities, and facilities fairly close to Stavanger Museum.
Rogaland Art Museum located by a park and has also the largest collection of Lars Hertervigs work. The museum has paintings by Norwegian artist Edvard Munch, Christian Krogh, Eilif Peterssen and Harriet Backer. Artists Rogaland is also represented by including Kitty Kielland, Nicolai Ulfsten, Carl Sundt - Hansen, Olaf Lange and Åge Storstein.
Western Norway School Museum is a museeum in Stavanger. School Museum is currently on Kvaleberg school the old 1920 building. Vestlandske School Museum was established in 1925 and is a museum of school history in Rogaland.
By the bay lies the Norwegian Emigration Center on the west side and on the eastern side of the bay is Valbergtårnet with his vektermuseeum. Norwegian Telecom Museum has an office in Stavanger at Løkkeveien.

Film

South West Film Forum was established in 1992 and is an organization of film workers in Rogaland. Goal is to increase the skills of film workers in the region and encourage more filmmaking. Film Forum Southwest has received operating support from the City of Stavanger since 1995 and from the county since 1997. Additionally, they have received grants for film workshop from the county and grants to other industry- stimulating measures from Stavanger municipality.
Stavanger has since 1997 had a grant with the support of local filmmaking. The aim has been to stimulate the local film community growth and development, and contribute to local filmmakers can get their film projects initiated so that they can apply for production funding from other government agencies. In addition, you want to support the already completed projects - primarily to help cinema display locally produced film.
The feature film Mongoland became a Norwegian film success, made outside of the traditional infrastructure for Norwegian film. So far this has culminated with the establishment of the production company South West Film and Film Kraft Rogaland, to ensure long-term fund allocations to filmproduksjoner. Arild Østin Ommundsen directorial debut with the feature film Mongoland in 2000 and has since directed and written the script for The Haunting (2003) and Monster Thursday (2005). Ommundsen helped start the new Stavanger wave that came after Mongoland premiered, and several of the actors who were instrumental has since enjoyed great success. In 1999 won the Ommundsen Gullstolen on Short Film Festival with the film before the sun rise.
Tore Renberg's book The Man Who Loved Yngve was recorded as a movie and had theatrical release on 15 February 2008. The film has received top marks in Norwegian media, and was watched by over 30,000 people during the premiere weekend. 16 June 2008 was the set of 171,435 people at Norwegian theaters. Filmmaker Stian Kristiansen from Stavanger had his breakthrough with the feature film " Mongoland and debuted as a feature film director with "The Man Who Loved Yngve". Kristiansen received in 2008 Stavanger's screenplay scholarship.
On September 30, 2010, the film Nokas permiere in Stavanger. The film is about about the NOKAS robbery in Stavanger on 5 April 2004 and the action is added to Stavanger and especially robbery that took place at the counting center to Nokse in Norway Bank building in King Street and the Cathedral Square by Maria Church Ruins. Nokas was directed by Erik Skjoldbjærg. The family of the police officer who died during the robbery has not authorized the film.

European Capital of Culture 2008

Stavanger and its region, along with Liverpool, United Kingdom, was selected as a European Capital of Culture for 2008. The Stavanger2008 vision is expressed through the concept "Open Port". This can be understood both in its English sense – "an open harbour" – and in its Norwegian meaning of "an open gate". Open Port – Openness towards the world. The region and its people is supposed to be even more open and inclusive towards art, ideas and opportunities.
Every May, Stavanger is host to MaiJazz, the Stavanger International Jazz Festival. The International Chamber Music Festival takes place every August. Stavanger was the host port of the Cutty Sark Tall Ships' Race in 1997 and 2004.

Sport and recreation

The largest local football club Viking FK, plays in the Norwegian Premier League. The club plays its home matches at the football stadium, Viking Stadion, which was opened in 2004.
FK Vidar, currently play football in the Norwegian third division.
Stavanger Oilers plays in the Norwegian ice hockey elite league, GET-ligaen. The handball team Stavanger Håndball plays in the Norwegian second division.
Stavanger was the host of the 2010 beach volleyball SWATCH FIVB World Championships.

Music

Stavanger is the home of the Stavanger Symphony Orchestra (SSO).  Covering another part of the musical spectrum, it is also home to gothic metal bands Theatre of Tragedy, Tristania, Sirenia and the singer Liv Kristine and the black metal band Gehenna (band), among others. Janove Ottesen and Geir Zahl founding members of the alternative rockband Kaizers Orchestra both live in Stavanger as well. The band Kvelertak has its roots as well in Stavanger.

Tourism

Especially in the summertime the harbour is full of large cruiseships. In 2011 Stavanger was hosting 130 cruiseships. The Port of Stavanger is a popular stop on the route to the Norwegian Fjords. The charming city center is just a small walk from the quay.

Outdoor activities

Lysefjorden is popular for hiking. Tourists typically visit places like Preikestolen (aka the Pulpit Rock), and Kjeragbolten. Preikestolen is a massive rock overhanging the fjord (604 meters below). Kjeragbolten is a rock wedged in the cliff approx. 1000 meters above the fjord. The straight fall 1000 meters down to the fjord makes Kjerag a very popular location for BASE jumping.
Not too far from Stavanger, alpine centers are ready for skiers and snowboarders throughout the winter season.
Statistics – Stavanger BASE Klubb
Along the coast south of Stavanger there are a number of large, sandy beaches, including at Sola is within closest reach from the city.Beaches of Rogaland in west Norway – Stavanger Travel

City centre

Old Stavanger (Gamle Stavanger) is located right next to the city centre and has a collection of 18th and 19th century wooden structures.
Stavanger domkirke (St. Svithun's cathedral) was built between 1100 and 1150 by the English bishop Reinald in Anglo-Norman style, and in the late 13th century a new choir was added in Gothic style, with a vaulted roof. The cathedral is the only Norwegian cathedral that is almost unchanged since the 14th century.
The city centre itself is small and intimate, with narrow streets and open spaces protected from car traffic. The open-air vegetable market is one of the very few in Norway where you can buy produce directly from local farmers every working day through the year. Unfortunately the Market has been in decline of recent years, it is now filled with very few stall holders. 

Climate

The city is located on a peninsula on the southwest coast of Norway. The climate is maritime mild temperate (marine west coast - cfb) and rather windy, with all monthly temperature averages above freezing, and precipitation 1180 mm/year. Summers are pleasant and lowland areas in and around Stavanger has the longest growing season in Norway.

Notable people

Twin towns – sister cities

Stavanger has several sister cities; they are:






