[[Lough Corrib]]

CATEGORIES: Loughs of County Galway, Loughs of County Mayo, Protected areas of County Galway, Ramsar sites in the Republic of Ireland, Important Bird Areas of the Republic of Ireland

Lough Corrib () is a lake in the west of Ireland.  The River Corrib or Galway river connects the lake to the sea at Galway.  It is the second largest lough in the island of Ireland (after Lough Neagh). It covers 176 km² and lies mostly in County Galway with a small area of its northeast corner in County Mayo.
The first canal on the island of Ireland was cut in the 12th century.  Known as the Friar's Cut, it allowed boats to pass from Lough Corrib to the sea at Galway.
William Wilde, father of Oscar Wilde wrote a book about the lake, first published in 1867. He built a summerhouse on the banks of the lake, called Moytura House.
Lough Corrib was designated a Ramsar site on June 16, 1996.  It has also been designated a Special Area of Conservation.

Name

Loch Coirib is a corruption of Loch nOirbsean, which according to placename lore is named after the Tuatha Dé Danann figure Orbsiu Mac Alloid (commonly called Manannán Mac Lir). In Irish the lough is also called An Choirib ("the Corrib").

Marine Archaeology and Charts

Surveys have been undertaken since 2007 by a local surveyor / cartographer using sidescan sonar. These have uncovered a great many objects of historical significance, including many Bronze Age vessels Canoes, some up to 40 ft in length,

Wildlife

There is an abundance of wildlife in Lough Corrib including birds and hawks, otters, mink, stoat, frogs, bats and much more. The dawn chorus in early spring is spectacular to listen to. Lough Corrib can be divided into two parts: a smaller shallower basin to the south and a larger deeper basin to the north. These two parts are connected by a narrow channel. In the southern and eastern parts of the lake, the lake bed is dominated by limestone bedrock covered by deposits of precipitated marl. The surrounding land is mostly pastoral farmland to the south and east and bog to the west and north. In addition to the lake basis, some areas of scientific interest adjoining the lake, e.g. woodland, callows grassland, and raised bog, have been incorporated into the Special Area of Conservation.

Threats to ecology

As well as being an internationally recognised attraction for tourists and fisherman, Lough Corrib has recently become more famous for its many unwelcome visitors.  In early 2007, large numbers of the protozoan parasite Cryptosporidium were detected in water from the lake, leading to contamination of the public water supply in Galway city, and an outbreak of cryptosporidiosis.  Another unwelcome visitor is the highly invasive species Lagarosiphon major (also known as 'curly-leaved waterweed' or 'South African pondweed') which is destroying fish habitat, and the zebra mussel.

Cryptosporidium outbreak

On March 21, 2007, Cryptosporidium was confirmed to be present in the drinking water of  Galway City, Moycullen, Oughterard and Headford, which had been instructed six days earlier to boil their water before drinking.  The water taken from Lough Corrib was likely contaminated by migration of animal and human faeces. Dick Roche, the Minister of the Environment, announced a further allocation of €48 million to tackle the issue.
Galway City Council announced a one-for-one scheme on April 10, 2007, whereby they would carry the cost of a second bottle of water, if one is purchased. Other measures include upgrading existing water treatment and filtration systems, as well as the projected importing of water from nearby Luimnagh, Tuam, County Galway.  This plant at Luimnagh has modern facilities for Cryptosporidium eradication and filtration.
The Community Care Organisation, Cope, delivered bottled water to their elderly clients from March 30, 2007.
A lobby group was formed on April 8, 2007 to highlight the issue. One aspect of the group is an account on the MySpace social network.

Islands

While Lough Corrib is reputed to have 365 islands, a more accurate estimate suggests over 1,200.com The most famous of the islands is Inchagoil Island, midway between Cong and Oughterard. It is one of the largest of the many wooded islands along Lough Corrib. The island has spectacular views of the Maumturk range, Joyce Country and the mountains of Connemara. There are some secluded beaches and enchanting woods with a variety of walks around the island. There is evidence of an early monastic settlement which still mostly remains a mystery. There are two churches remaining, Saint Patrick's and the 12th-century church known as the "saints" church. There are several paths around the island, an old cemetery and remains of four or five cottages which housed the few inhabitants.
Another noted island is Caislean-na-Circe, between Maam and Doon. This section of Lough Corrib is free from islands except for the rock on which the ancient Hen's Castle of the O'Connor's and the O'Flaherty's stands. The castle was home of the pirate Queen Gráinne O'Malley, who lived in the time of Queen Elizabeth I of England. In 1225, the Lord Justice caused Odo O'Flatherty to give up Kirk Castle to Odo O'Connor, King of Connaught; for assurance of his fidelity. Castle of the Hen is considered The rocks slope abruptly into the water on all sides. It is only accessible in a few places. The castle is steeped in history and legend. Cruises on the lake can be enjoyed starting from Cong, Ashford Castle, Galway City, and Oughterard.

Annalistic references

See Annals of Inisfallen (AI)








