[[Hazaragi dialect]]

CATEGORIES: Hazaragi language, Persian dialects of Afghanistan, Languages of Iran, Languages of Tajikistan, Languages of Pakistan, Languages of Balochistan, Pakistan, Languages of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa

Hazaragi () is a dialect of the Persian language spoken by the Hazara people, primarily in an area of central Afghanistan known as the Hazarajat, as well as other Hazara-populated areas of Afghanistan, Pakistan, and Iran.

General

The primary differences between Standard Persian and Hazaragi are the accentSchurmann, Franz (1962) The Mongols of Afghanistan: An Ethnography of the Moghôls and Related Peoples of Afghanistan Mouton, The Hague, Netherlands, page 17, OCLC 401634 and Hazaragi's greater array of Mongolic loanwords. Kieffer, "HAZĀRA iv. Hazāragi dialect," Encyclopedia Iranica Online Edition, December 15, 2003, available at   Despite these differences, Hazaragi is mutually intelligible with other regional Persian dialects. Language and civilization change in South Asia Brill Archive, 1978. ISBN 90-04-05741-2, ISBN 978-90-04-05741-8. Pg. 131
Academic estimates of the Hazaragi-speaking population range from 1.8 to over 2.2 million speakers.

Classification

Hazaragi is classified and further subclassified as an Indo-European, Indo-Iranian, Iranian, Western, Southwestern, Persian, Hazaragi Language.
Hazaragi is a dialect of the Persian language (recognized as a language by Ethnologue), with loanwords borrowed from Mongolic. It is a member of the Iranian branch of the Indo-European family and is closely related to Dari Persian (the Persian dialect in Afghanistan). Hazaragi in the Daykundi Province has a significant admixture of Mongolic influence in the language via Karluk.

Geographic distribution

Hazaragi is spoken by Hazara people who mainly live in Afghanistan (the Hazarajat and also in major urban areas), Pakistan (particularly Quetta) and Iran (particularly Mashhad),Area Handbook for Afghanistan, page 77, Harvey Henry Smith, American University (Washington, D.C.) Foreign Area Studies  with diaspora communities in Eastern Uzbekistan, Northern Tajikistan, the Americas, Europe and Australia.

Diaspora

In recent years a substantial population of Hazara refugees have settled in Australia, prompting the Department of Immigration and Citizenship to moves towards an official recognition of Hazaragi language. Currently NAATI (national accreditation authority for translators and interpreters) holds interpreting tests for Hazaragi as a distinct language, noting in test materials that Hazaragi varies by dialect, and that any dialect of Hazaragi may be used in interpreter testing as long as it would be understood by the average speaker.  The test materials also note that Hazaragi in some locations has been significantly influenced by surrounding languages, and that the use of non-Hazaragi words assimilated from neighboring languages would be penalised in testing.  NAATI, VERSION 1.10- August 2010

History

The history of the language of the Hazara people has been an issue of some debate.  While some scholars believe that the Hazara originally spoke a Mongolic language during the time of the Mongol king Babur, who came to Afghanistan in the 16th century, many well established scholars like BaconBacon E: The Hazara Mongols of Afghanistan: A study in social organization, PhD Dissertation, University of California, 1951, page 6. and SchumannH.F. Schurmann: The Mongols of Afghanistan: an ethnography of the Mongols and related people of Afghanistan, University of California 1962, page 25-26 believe that the original language of Hazaras was Dari Persian from the beginning. A distinct Hazara Persian dialect began to emerge amongst the people of the Hazarajat in the late 18th century.  The Hazara spoke Mongolian until the late 18th century. During the time of King Babur Hazaras spoke the Mongolic language of their ancestors. It is not certain when Mongolic died out as a living language in the Hazarajat. DullingDulling G.K. The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian. London, Central Asian Research Center 1973 states that, "they ceased to be Mongolic speakers by the end of eighteenth century at the latest, and were then speaking Tajik of a sort".K. The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian. London, Central Asian Research Center 1973:13

Decline of the Mongolic language

There seem to be two main reasons that caused the demise of Mongolic language and emergence of Hazaragi amongst the people of the Hazarajat. The first was the civilization of Persia, their knowledge, art and culture which strongly affected the people living in the mountains of central Afghanistan. The second major reason was the religion of Islam and the role of the Persian language in Islam.

Persian art and culture

The Persian language extended and spread out of the boundaries of Iran and supplanted the language of Mongols. fled and went out to Greater Khurasan (now northern Afghanistan), of whom a large number also took refuge in sub-continent (current India and Pakistan). It is said that the "Soofis" both Iranian and non-Iranian left indelible memories in the propagation of Persian language.
The second generation
When Nadir Shah Afshar conquered Kandahar in 1150 A.H,

Persian and Islam

One of the reasons behind the demise of Mongolic language was the religion of Islam. The Persian language became so much part of the religion of Islam that it almost went wherever Islam took roots.
Timur, though he committed many great depredations, was brought up according to the Iranian culture and patronized the learned to such an extent that Samarkand and Herat became seats of Iranian learning. ix Khurdad 1325 solar, Khanlari 1325:3) under the title Ba Deedar e Yaran
Similarly the Ilkhanate Mongols (one main tribe of the ancestors of Hazara when the Mongols went to the mountains of present Hazarajat they took the language of Persia with them along with Shi'a Islam.A Sociological Study of Hazara Tribe in Balochistan (An Analysis of Socio-Cultural Change) University of Karachi, Pakistan July 1976 p.305
There are some Mongols, mainly in Karez and Kundur between Maymana and Herat (northwestern and western Afghanistan) who still speak the Mongolic language that other Hazaras do not understand.Elphinstone, Mountstuart (Kingdom of Caubul) with a new introduction by Sir Olaf Caroe, London and New York, Oxford University press, 1972

Mongolic influence

Modern Hazaragi contains a number of Mongolic words.199. Over time the Mongolian language has died out in Afghanistan as living language amongst the Hazara people. Persian language has had a strong impression on the people of Hazarajat due to religion and Iranian learning and culture. Such as Afghanistan: where the Hazaragi speakers are adding more and more Dari to their language, whereas in Pakistan the Hazara are adding more Urdu and English words to Hazaragi. A number of Hazara people live in the United States, Europe and Australia where they adapt the language culture of their respective countries.
Dulling says in his book "Grammatically the Mongolian was probably fairly pure, it contained a certain amount of original language, Persian and its substratum. It would seem, too, that because the long period that separated the initial and final Mongol settlements, the Mongolic language itself was not homogeneous, containing as it did not only Middle Mongol but also modern Mongol elements."Dulling G.K (The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian) London, Central Asian Research Center 1973: 13
The existence of Mongolic languages is discussed in Hayat Mohammad Khan's Hayate Afghan:
Khan concludes that because of their connection in the Government in Zabul their language underwent a change into a dialect of Persian spoken by the Zabulis, their own Mongolian ceased to exist owing the passage of time.

Grammatical structure

The grammatical structure of HazaragiValentin Aleksandrovich Efimov, Yazyk afganskikh khazara: Yakavlangskii dialect, Moscow, 1965. pp. 22-83Idem, "Khazara yazyk," in Yazyki mira. Iranskiĭ yazyki I: yugo-zapadnye iranskiĭ yazyki, Moscow, 1997, pp. 154-66.G. K. Dulling, The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian: A Preliminary Study, Central Asian Monograph 1, London, 1973. pp. 29-41 is practically identical with that of Dari or even Kabuli Persian.A. G. Ravan Farhadi, Le persan parlé en Afghanistan: Grammaire du kâboli accompagnée d'un recuil de quatrains populaires de région de Kâbol, Paris, 1955. G. K. DullingG. K. Dulling, The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian: A Preliminary Study, Central Asian Monograph 1, London, 1973 pp. 14 considers "the present dialect to consist of three strata:
He is probably right when he asserts soG. K. Dulling, The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian: A Preliminary Study, Central Asian Monograph 1, London, 1973 pp. 12 and that: "Although these dialects are essentially forms of modern Tajik [more properly modern Dari; they are nevertheless lexically distinctive enough to merit their local special name of 'Hazaragi'".G. K. Dulling, The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian: A Preliminary Study, Central Asian Monograph 1, London, 1973 discussion on pp. 47-99 Examples of the vocabulary are: Mongolic: Mongolian: ber - Hazaragi: beri "bride", Mongolian: alga - Hazaragi: alagha - "palm (of hand)", Mongolian: hulgai - Hazaragi: qulaghay "thief"; Turkic: "father", "big, large", "black";Valentin Aleksandrovich Efimov, Yazyk afganskikh khazara: Yakavlangskii dialect, Moscow, 1965. pp. 22-23

Phonology

As a group of eastern Persian varieties which are considered the more formal and classical varieties of Persian, Hazara retains the voiced fricative γ and the bilabial articulation of w has borrowed the (rare) retro flexes ṭ ḍ example: meaning boot vs. meaning idol (Persian. Bot); and rarely articulates h. (غ) in Iranian Persian (probably under the influence of Turkic languages like Azeri and Turkmen),A. Pisowicz, Origins of the New and Middle Persian phonological systems (Cracow 1985), p. 112-114, 117. is still kept separate in Hazara.
Diphthongs are ay, aw, and ēw (Persian -ab-āb-ûw). The vocalic system is typically eastern Persian characterized by the loss of length distinction, the retention of the mid vowels, and the rounding of ā å/o, alternating with its merger with a, or û (Persian-ān).
Stress is dynamic and similar to that in Dari Afghan PersianFarhadi, Le persan parlé en Afghanistan: Grammaire du kâboli accompagnée d'un recuil de quatrains populaires de région de Kâbol, Paris, 1955, pp. 64-67 and TajikV. S. Herbert H. Paper, Bloomington, Ind., and The Hague, 1963, pp. 9-10 Persian, and not variable.G. K. Dulling, The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian: A Preliminary Study, Central Asian Monograph 1, London, 1973. p. 37 It generally falls on the last syllable of a nominal form, including derivative suffixes and a number of morphological markers. Typical is the insertion of epenthetic vowels in consonant clusters, example: (pašm) to (póšum) meaning wool and final devoicing, example: (ḵût) meaning own.

Nominal morphology

The most productive derivative marker is -i the plural markers are -o (Persian -hā), example: meaning books and animate -û (Persian -ān) example: meaning brothers. The emphatic vocative marker is û and -o, the indefinite marker is -i, and the specific object marker is -(r)a. The comparative marker is -tar, example: meaning big az u (kada) kalû-tar bigger than that one. Dependent adjectives and nouns follow the head noun and are connected by -i, example: kitab-i mamud the book of Maḥmud; topicalized possessors precede the head noun marked by the resumptive personal suffix, example, Zulmay ayê-ši literally Zulmay her mother. Prepositions include, in addition to the standard Persian ones, meaing with, by means of, meaing in (Persian dar); the latter often replaces meaning to in dative function; loaned postpositions include comitative meaning together with and -worî meaning like. Interrogatives typically function also as indefinites, example: meaning which, someone''.

Particles, conjunctions, modals, and adverbials

These include meaning yes; liken, wali meaning but; meaning however; meaning perhaps;meaning now,; meaning then''. These are also marked by distinctive initial stress.

Verb morphology

The imperfective marker is mi- (assimilated variants m-, mu-, m-, mê-), example: mi-zan-um I hit, I am hitting; the subjunctive and imperative marker is bi- (with similar assimilation); the negation is na-, example: na-mi-zad-um I was not hitting. These usually attract stress.

Tenses

The tense, mood, and aspect system is typically quite different from western Persian. The basic tense system is threefold: present-future, past, and remote (pluperfect). New modal paradigms developed in addition to the subjunctives:
Moreover, all past and remote forms have developed imperfective forms marked by mi-. There are doubts about several of the less commonly found, or recorded, forms, in particular those with ḵot.G. K. Dulling, The Hazaragi Dialect of Afghan Persian: A Preliminary Study, Central Asian Monograph 1, London, 1973. pp. 35-36 However, the systematic arrangement of all forms according to their morphological, as well as semantic, function shows that those forms fit well within the overall pattern. The system may tentatively be shown as follows (all forms are 1st sing), leaving out complex compound forms such as ḵot mu-buda baš-um.
In the assumptive, the distinction appears to be not between present versus past, but indefinite versus definite. Also, similar to all Persian varieties, the imperfective forms in mi- and past perfect forms, such as mi-zad-um, zadabud-um, are used in irreal conditional clauses and wishes, e.g., kaški zimi qulba kadagi mu-but "If the field would only be/have been plowed!" Modal verbs, such as tan- "can," are constructed with the perfect participle, e.g., ma bû-r-um, da čaman rasid-a ḵot tanist-um "I shall go, and may be able to get to Čaman." Participial nominalization are typical, both with the perfect participle, e.g., kad-a "(having) done" and with the derived participle with passive meaning, kad-ag-i "having been done," e.g., zimin-i qulba kada-ya "The field is ploughed," zamin-i qulba (na-)šuda-ra mi-ngar-um "I am looking at a plowed/unplowed field," imrûz ḵondagi tikrar mu-kun-a "Today he repeats (reading) what he had read." The gerundive, e.g., kad-an-i "to be done," is likewise productive, e.g., yag čiz, ki uftadani baš-a, ma u-ra qad-dist-ḵu girift-um, tulḡa kad-um "One object, that was about to fall, I grabbed, and held it." The clitic -ku/-ḵu topicalizes parts of speech, -di the predicate; e.g., i-yši raft, ma-ḵu da ḵona mand-um "He himself left; I, though, I stayed."








