[[Tula, Russia]]

CATEGORIES: Tula, Russia, Tula Governorate, Hero Cities of the Soviet Union



Tula (

Etymology

The name of the city is of pre-Russian, probably Baltic, origin.Е. М. Поспелов. "Географические названия мира". Москва: Русские словари, 1998, p. 423: "The earliest etymologies derived the place name from Russian dialectal tulá 'hidden, unreachable place'... The pre-Russian origin of the name of the river and town is no longer doubted 1985.... Since the name of the river Upa is certainly Baltic..., its tributary *Tula presumed earlier form of Tulitsa may also be of Baltic origin, which is supported by a series of parallels in Lithuanian toponymy: the river Tule, the Tulis swamp, the Tulyte field, the meadow Tulejos, the valley Tulija, etc. 1981; the meaning of these toponyms is not entirely clear...."

History

Tula was first mentioned in the Nikon Chronicle in relation to a military operation conducted in 1146.
In the Middle Ages, Tula was a minor fortress at the border of the Principality of Ryazan. As soon as it passed to the Grand Duchy of Moscow, a brick citadel, or kremlin, was constructed in 1514–1521. It was a key fortress of the Great Abatis Belt and successfully resisted a siege by the Tatars in 1552. In 1607, Ivan Bolotnikov and his supporters seized the citadel and withstood a four-months siege by the Tsar's army. In the 18th century, some parts of the kremlin walls were demolished. Despite its archaic appearance, the five-domed Assumption Cathedral in the kremlin was built as late as 1764.
In 1712, Tula was visited by Peter the Great, who commissioned the Demidov blacksmiths to build the first armament factory in Russia. Several decades later, Tula was turned by the Demidovs into the greatest ironworking center of Eastern Europe. The oldest museum in the city, showcasing the history of weapons, was inaugurated by the Demidovs in 1724, and Nicholas-Zaretsky Church in the city houses their family vault. The first factory to produce samovars industrially was also established there in the course of the 18th century. After the Demidovs moved the center of their manufacture to the Urals, Tula continued as a center of heavy industry, particularly in the manufacture of matériel.
In the 1890s, Ivan Savelyev, a medical orderly, became the founder of Social Democracy in Tula, and set up a workers' study circle
The city grew rapidly in the early 20th century as a result of arms production during the 1905 Russo-Japanese War and World War I. Tula's factories also manufactured weapons for the Red Army during the Russian Civil War of 1918–1921.
During the Great Patriotic War (World War II) of 1941–1945, the city was important in the production of armaments. Tula became the target of a German offensive to break Soviet resistance in the Moscow area between October 24 and December 5, 1941. The heavily fortified city held out, however, and Guderian's Second Panzer Army was stopped near Tula. The city secured the southern flank during the Battle of Moscow and the subsequent counter-offensive. Tula was awarded the title Hero City in 1976. It is home to the Klokovo air base and the Tula Arms Plant.

Administrative and municipal status

Tula serves as the administrative center of the oblast. As a municipal division, Tula City Under Oblast Jurisdiction is incorporated as Tula Urban Okrug.Law #553-ZTO

Mayors

Economy

More than four centuries Tula weapon known as a center of crafts and metalworking. Tula is a developed industrial center. Importance in the industrial structure of Tula are metallurgy, machinery and metal with a high share of the military-industrial complex and food manufacturing. 

Culture

A musical instrument, the Tula accordion, is named for the city, which is a center of manufacture for such instruments sold throughout Russia and the world. Tula is also renowned for traditional Russian pryaniki (gingerbread), cookies made with honey and spices (see Tula gingerbread). In the West, Tula is perhaps best known as the center of samovar production: the Russian equivalent of "coals to Newcastle" is "You don't take a samovar to Tula".
The most popular tourist attraction in Tula Oblast is Yasnaya Polyana, the home and burial place of the writer Leo Tolstoy. It is situated  south-west of the city. It was here that Tolstoy wrote his celebrated novels War and Peace and Anna Karenina.

Education

Tula is home to:

Transportation

Since 1867, there is a railway connection between Tula and Moscow. The Moscow to Simpheropol M2 motorway runs past the city. City transport is presented by trams, trolleybuses, buses, and marshrutkas. Tula trams, trolleybuses, and 14 of 26 bus routes are operated by "Tulgorelectrotrans" (Tula city electrotransport company), other 12 bus routes are operated by "Tulaavtotrans" (Tula automobile transport company).

File:LiAZ-5256-bus in Tula.jpg|Bus LiAZ-5256
File:Tramway-tula.jpg|Tram Tatra T3
File:SMU 83-84 Tula.JPG|Tatra T6B5
File:LM-2008 Perekop Tula.JPG|LM-2008
File:Trolley-tula.jpg|Trolleybus VMZ-5298

Religion

Most of Tula constitutes Russian Orthodox churches. Next in size is Protestants and Catholics. Non-Christian organizations that are present Muslims, Jews, Hare Krishna, Buddhists and Taoists. 
All Orthodox organization Tula and the Tula Oblast included in the Diocese of Tula and Yefremov. Among the Tula Orthodox churches should mention Saints Cathedral (1776-1800), the oldest church in Tula - Annunciation (1692) and the Assumption Cathedral of the Tula Kremlin (1762-1764). In Tula also Old Believers' community services which are performed in the church of St. John Chrysostom. 
In Tula is the only Catholic church area, the Holy Apostles Peter and Paul. Since the 1990s, Tula has several Protestant denominations, the largest of which is a Baptist church with a prayer house in Tula. Representatives of other Protestant trends in Tula are Seventh-day Adventists, Presbyterians (Church of the Holy Trinity, The Glorious Jesus the Lord, the Good News), Pentecostals (Tula Christian Center, Church of the New Testament) and other evangelical churches (Word of Life, the Vine Gypsy Church). 
Also in town is a Synagogue and the Jewish Community House. 

Sports

In Russian fist fighting, Tula was considered to have some of the most famous fighters.Русский кулачный бой: "Tula's fighters were always glorious, but every place had its heroes."Сказания о русских народных играх "Tula's fighters were considered the best one on one."
The city association football club, FC Arsenal Tula, plays in the Russian Amateur League.

Notable people

Ksenia Afanasyeva, Olympic artistic gymnast and world champion
Maria Ouspenskaya, Russian actress and acting teacher

Climate

International relations

Twin towns and sister cities

Tula is twinned with:



Notes

Sources

Further reading


