[[California Über Alles]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 singles, Dead Kennedys songs, Songs written by Jello Biafra, Songs about California, Hardcore punk songs

"California Über Alles" was the first single by the Dead Kennedys. The record was released in June 1979 on Optional Music with "The Man with the Dogs" as the b-side. The title track was re-recorded for the band's first album, Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables (1980), and the latest version that appeared on this single, as well as the single's b-side, and the video games: Tony Hawk's American Wasteland and the Rock Band series are available on the compilation album Give Me Convenience or Give Me Death (1987).
The lyrics were written by Jello Biafra and John Greenway for their band, The Healers, Biafra composed the musicJello Biafra and The Melvins. Liner notes. Sieg Howdy! San Francisco: Alternative Tentacles. 2005. in one of his rare attempts at composing on bass. "Dead Kennedys' 'California Uber Alles'". Mix Online. October 1, 2005.
It is also sampled in a song by the dance-punk/big beat trio The Prodigy, "Dead Ken Beats". The song was also featured in the 2010 film The Social Network.

Meaning

The title is an allusion to the first (and no longer sung) stanza of the national anthem of Germany, which begins with the words "Deutschland, Deutschland über alles" (literally: "Germany, Germany above all").
The song focuses on Jerry Brown, the Governor of California from 1975-1983 (and later 2011–present), and is sung from his perspective, as an imaginary version of Brown outlines a hippie-fascist vision for America. Lines such as "Serpent's egg already hatched", a reference to a line from William Shakespeare's play Julius Caesar, comment on the corrosive nature of power, while the lines "Big Bro on white horse is near" and "now it is 1984" refer to the totalitarian regime of George Orwell's classic novel Nineteen Eighty-Four to describe a future (from 1979) where Jerry Brown has become President, and his "suede denim secret police" kill "uncool" people with "organic poison gas" chambers.
The song is also an early example of the Dead Kennedys' trademark use of menace and musical tension. It fades in with sinister military-styled drums, joined by an ominous bass riff. Biafra paints the scene in low, sneering tones before bursting in manic chanting chorus: "California Über Alles x2, Über Alles, California x2"; after two verses and choruses, the song shifts into a slower middle eight section set to a martial drum beat over which Jello Biafra imagines the nightmarish actions of Brown's SS-styled secret police ("Come quietly to the camp; you'd look nice as a drawstring lamp," a reference to the claim that lampshades were sometimes made from human skin during the Holocaust). The pace speeds up as it approaches the last iteration of the chorus, closing with a repeated chord sequence accompanied by a final burst of explosive drums.
German-American author Gero Hoschek was inspired by the song to title a 1988 magazine piece about the "Golden State" in the prestigious German Zeit Magazin weekly titled "Kalifornia Über Alles!" as well as a never produced screenplay. Biafra complained, got and liked a copy of the movie script, understood that there was no copyright violation, and used the same spelling for the song's 2004 remake with Melvins, "Kalifornia Über Alles, 21st Century".

Alternative versions

The original improvised version (containing familiar lyrics but different music performed by the Dancing Assholes and Biafra's first band, The Healers) is included as the final track on the vinyl version of the "Rocky Mountain Low" compilation.
There is a faster version of "California Über Alles" on Fresh Fruit for Rotting Vegetables, with more strident Biafra vocals and a more garage-like mix.
On their EP In God We Trust, Inc., they recorded an updated version of the song, titled "We've Got a Bigger Problem Now," about then-President Ronald Reagan, including a lounge-jazz introduction, different lyrics, and several verses set at a much slower pace. A live version of the song was recorded with the instrumentals of the original version of the song.
Jello Biafra has made satirical references to the song in his political advocacy. A speech of his appears on the spoken word album Mob Action Against the State that is entitled "We've Got a Bigger Problem Now: War, Terrorism & Beyond." After the election of Arnold Schwarzenegger as governor of California, Biafra commented, "California Über Alles indeed."
Glisando* has made a Catalonia situation version of the song in Catalan language for the movie "Catalunya Über alles" directed by the Spanish director Ramon Térmens.
Another updated version of this song about Governor Schwarzenegger, called "Kali-Fornia Über Alles 21st Century", was performed live (among a few other Dead Kennedys classics) when Biafra toured with the band Melvins to support their collaboration album in 2004. A live recording of this new version appears on their second collaborative effort, Sieg Howdy!.

Cover versions






