[[Power Rangers]]

CATEGORIES: Power Rangers, 1990s American television series, 1993 American television series debuts, 2000s American television series, 2010s American television series, ABC Kids, Action figures, American action television series, American Broadcasting Company network shows, American children's television series, American television series based on non-American television series, Bandai brands, Fox network shows, Jetix, 2010s Nickelodeon shows, Superheroes, Television franchises, Television series by Buena Vista Television, 1990s toys, 2000s toys, 2010s toys



Power Rangers is a long-running American entertainment and merchandising franchise built around a live action children's television series featuring teams of costumed heroes. Produced first by Saban Entertainment, later by BVS Entertainment, and currently by SCG Power Rangers LLC, the television series takes much of its footage from the Japanese tokusatsu Super Sentai, produced by Toei Company.
Despite initial criticism for its action violence targeted to child audiences, the franchise has continued, and  the show consists of 20 television seasons of 17 different themed series and two theatrical films. Creator Haim Saban regained ownership of the franchise in 2010 after seven years under The Walt Disney Company. The current season, Power Rangers Super Megaforce, debuted in the United States on February 15, 2014.

Premise

Since Power Rangers derives most of its footage from the Super Sentai Series, it features many hallmarks that distinguish it from other superhero series.  Each series revolves around a team of young people recruited and trained by a mentor to morph into Rangers, able to utilize special powers and pilot colossal assault machines called Zords to defeat and overcome evil forces that threaten humanity. For example in Mighty Morphin, alien wizard Zordon recruits "teenagers with attitude" to harness the power of the dinosaurs to overcome the forces of evil space alien Rita Repulsa.
When "morphed," the rangers become powerful superheroes wearing color-coded skin-tight spandex battle suits and helmets with opaque visors. Each team's costumes are nearly identical aside from individual rangers' color and helmet design. Morphed Rangers generally possesses superhuman strength, durability, and ability in hand-to-hand combat. Some possess superhuman abilities such as super-speed or invisibility, attributes somewhat related to their Ranger abilities.P.D., Power Rangers Operation Overdrive, Power Rangers Jungle Fury In addition, each individual ranger has a unique individual weapon as well as common weaponry used for ground fighting. In many series, a Ranger is also given additional Zords or weapons. In some cases, one Ranger may receive something that other Rangers may not have; an example of this is the Battlizer given to the Red Ranger of each series since Power Rangers in Space (up through Operation Overdrive). When enemies grow to incredible sizes, Rangers utilize individual Zords that combine into a larger Megazord.
Rangers teams operate in teams of five or three, with more Rangers joining the team part way into each season. Each team of Rangers, with a few exceptions, obeys a general set of conventions, outlined at the beginning of Mighty Morphin and implied by mentors throughout many of the other series: Power Rangers may not use their Ranger powers for personal gain or for escalating a fight (unless forced to do so), nor may the Power Rangers disclose their identities to the general public.) appearing as Rangers disregarded this convention in Power Rangers Lightspeed Rescue, Power Rangers S.P.D., Power Rangers Operation Overdrive and Power Rangers RPM. The penalty for disobeying these rules, at least in Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, would be the loss of their power.
As in Super Sentai, the color palette of each Power Rangers team changes every series. Only Red, Blue, and Yellow appear in every Ranger team. The most common color that does not appear every year is Pink, followed by Green, Black, and White.  Other colors and designations also appear throughout the series. A Rangers' color designation also influences their wardrobe throughout the series: civilian clothing often matches Ranger color.A joke highlighted this correlation in Dino Thunder when Tommy Oliver (a former Green Ranger, White Ranger, and Red Ranger) became the new Black Ranger; he said that he had to go shopping because he did not own enough black-colored clothing.

History

Adapting the Super Sentai series

Production of Power Rangers episodes involves extensive localization of and revision of original Super Sentai source material in order to incorporate American culture and conform to American television standards. Rather than making an English dub or translation of the Japanese footage, Power Rangers programs consist of scenes featuring English-speaking actors (either from the United States, Canada, Australia, New Zealand, or the United Kingdom) spliced with scenes featuring either Japanese actors dubbed into English or the action scenes from the Super Sentai Series featuring the Rangers fighting monsters or the giant robot (Zord and Megazord) battles with English dubbing. In some series, original fight scenes are filmed to incorporate characters or items unique to the Power Rangers production. Like many of Saban Entertainment's previous ventures in localizing Japanese television for a Western audience, the plot, character names, and other names usually differ greatly from the source footage, though a few seasons have stayed close to the story of the original Super Sentai season.
The series that began the franchise, Mighty Morphin Power Rangers (an American adaptation of the 1992 Japanese Super Sentai Series, Kyōryū Sentai Zyuranger), began broadcasting as part of the Fox Kids block of programing that aired on the Fox network. It lasted for three seasons (from 1993 to 1996).[ref]
[/ref]

Broadcast history

Saban Entertainment distributed the Power Rangers series from 1993 until the end of 2001, and Fox broadcast it until the fall of 2002. The Walt Disney Company purchased the franchise as part of a buyout that took place in 2001.
An article in The New Zealand Herald published on March 7, 2009 identified Power Rangers RPM as the last season of the Power Rangers run. Production manager Sally Campbell stated in an interview, "..."
On October 1, 2009, Bandai released a press release that Disney would re-broadcast Mighty Morphin Power Rangers starting in January 2010 on ABC Kids in lieu of a new series utilizing footage from the 2009 Super Sentai television series. A new toy line accompanied the series and appeared in stores in the later part of 2009. ABC's over-the air telecasts ended on August 28, 2010, and turned the hour back to affiliates.
On May 12, 2010, Haim Saban's Saban Brands bought back the Power Rangers franchise from Disney for $43 million
On July 2, 2012, it was announced that Saban Brands will launch a Saturday morning cartoon block on The CW, called Vortexx, on August 25, 2012 that will air Power Rangers.

Television series

The first series Mighty Morphin Power Rangers through In Space followed a story arc with a gradually changing cast and characters over six years. Beginning with Lost Galaxy, although it had ties with the previous story arc, each Power Rangers series had its own  self-contained storylines, independent of previous series. Crossover episodes between different series featuring rangers, villains, and other characters from past seasons also began with Lost Galaxy, with a few exceptions.

Feature films

The Power Rangers franchise has also generated two theatrical films, both distributed by 20th Century Fox.  - long after Fox's parent company News Corporation and Haim Saban sold Fox Family (currently ABC Family), including Saban Entertainment and the Power Rangers franchise, to the Walt Disney Company - Fox's home entertainment division maintained worldwide home-entertainment rights to both of these Power Rangers films.

Distribution

Power Rangers has long had success in international markets and continues to air in many countries, with the exception of New Zealand, where the series filming takes place 
Broadcast in East Asian territories has been treated differently than in other international markets due to the prevalence and familiarity of 'the Super Sentai brand originating in Japan. When Power Rangers aired in Malaysia, it was either banned or having its word "Morphin'" being censored or substituted because, as part of its campaign against drugs, it may encourage children to use morphine. In Japan, many Power Rangers television seasons and movies were dubbed into Japanese for television and video with the voice actors often pulled from past Super Sentai casts, leading to the English-dubbed action sequences being "re-dubbed" or "restored" back to Japanese as well. Power Rangers SPD is the latest season to be broadcast in Japan on Toei Channel in August 2011, with the Dekaranger cast voicing their counterparts. in place of Dekaranger.

Home media

, 33 Power Rangers DVD collections have been released in the United States:
Internationally, additional DVD releases have occurred (such as Lightspeed Rescue, Time Force and Wild Force in Germany) and as free DVDs attached to the Jetix magazine, published in the UK. Mighty Morphin Power Rangers Season 1, Season 2, and Season 3, Power Rangers Zeo, Power Rangers Turbo, and Power Rangers In Space have been released in Germany as well in both English and German, with Power Rangers Lost Galaxy only in German. In Italy, Mighty Morphin, Zeo, Dino Thunder and S.P.D. have appeared in their entirety. Zeo and S.P.D. were made available as commercial DVDs, while Mighty Morphin and Dino Thunder were issued as bi-weekly volumes at newsstands.
The iTunes Store previously made Power Rangers episodes available: part of Mighty Morphin Power Rangers, all of Power Rangers S.P.D., and the first 26 episodes of Power Rangers Mystic Force. Subsequent seasons and episodes of the program also made their appearances in the iTunes Store, but , Turbo: A Power Rangers Movie is the only Power Rangers film available. In 2012, Mighty Morphin Power Rangers Season 1 volumes 1-2 were released on iTunes to coincide with the DVD releases. As of February 2013, all 3 seasons of MMPR were released on iTunes.
On June 15, 2011, all episodes of Power Rangers from Mighty Morphin Power Rangers Season 1 to Mighty Morphin Power Rangers re-version were made available for instant streaming on Netflix.
On March 12, 2012, Shout! Factory announced a home video distribution deal with Saban, which includes the first 17 series of Power Rangers. Shout! Factory plans on releasing the series to DVD in season set form beginning in Summer 2012.
On March 22, 2012 Lionsgate Home Entertainment reached a home media distribution deal with Saban to release Power Rangers Samurai to DVD and Blu-ray.
As of April 2014, the first seventeen seasons of Power Rangers as well as Super Samurai are available on the iTunes Store.

Reception

Power Morphicon

The Power Morphicon, the first Power Rangers convention, took place in Los Angeles, in 2007. It celebrated fifteen years of Power Rangers on the air at the time, from Mighty Morphin Power Rangers (1993) to Power Rangers Operation Overdrive (2007). A second convention took place from August 27–29, 2010 in Los Angeles, celebrating the fifteenth anniversary of the release of Mighty Morphin Power Rangers: The Movie.



Notes






