[[Heckler & Koch]]

CATEGORIES: Heckler & Koch, Companies based in Baden-Württemberg, Companies established in 1949, Defence companies of Germany, Firearms manufacturers in Germany, German brands, Firearms manufacturers in the United States

Heckler & Koch GmbH (HK) () is a German defense manufacturing company that manufactures handguns, assault rifles, submachine guns, and grenade launchers. The company is located in Oberndorf in the state of Baden-Württemberg, and also has subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, France and the United States. 
The Heckler & Koch Group comprises Heckler & Koch GmbH, Heckler & Koch Defense, NSAF Ltd., and Heckler & Koch France SAS. The company motto is "Keine Kompromisse!" (No Compromises!). HK provides firearms for many military and paramilitary units, like the Special Air Service, U.S. Navy SEALs, Delta Force, FBI HRT, the German KSK and GSG 9 and many other counter-terrorist and hostage rescue teams.
Their products include the MP5 SMG, the G3 battle rifle, the HK33, G36, HK416 assault rifles, the Heckler & Koch HK21 general-purpose machine gun, the MP7 PDW, the UMP SMG, the USP series of handguns, and the high-precision PSG1 sniper rifle. All firearms made by HK are named by a prefix and the official designation, with suffixes used for variants.
HK has a history of innovation in firearms, such as the use of polymers in weapon designs and the use of an integral rail for flashlights on handguns. HK also developed modern polygonal rifling, noted for its high accuracy, increased muzzle velocity and barrel life. Not all of its technologically ambitious designs have translated into commercially successful products (for instance, the advanced but now abandoned G11 assault rifle, which fired caseless high-velocity ammunition). In its extensive product range, HK has used the following operating systems for small arms: blowback operation, short-recoil, roller-delayed blowback, gas-delayed blowback, and gas operation.

History

With the fall of Germany at the end of World War II, Oberndorf came under French control, and the entire Waffenfabrik Mauser AG factory was dismantled by French occupying forces. All records in the factory were destroyed on orders of the local US Army commander. In 1948, three former Mauser engineers, Edmund Heckler, Theodor Koch, and Alex Seidel saved what they could from the factory and what they salvaged was used to start a machine tool plant in the vacant factory that became known as the Engineering Office Heckler & Co.
On December 28, 1949, the Engineering Office Heckler & Co. changed its name and was registered officially as Heckler & Koch GmbH. Initially the new company manufactured machine tools, bicycle and sewing machine parts, gauges and other precision parts.
In 1956, Heckler & Koch responded to the West German Government's tender for a new infantry rifle for the Bundeswehr (German Federal Army) with the proposal of the G3 battle rifle, which was based on the Spanish CETME rifle. The introduction of the G3 battle rifle was a milestone in modern rifle engineering.  The German Government awarded Heckler & Koch this tender and by 1959, declared the G3 as the standard rifle of the Bundeswehr.
In 1966, Heckler & Koch introduced the HK54 machine pistol, which eventually launched in 1969 as the MP5 machine pistol.

Diversification

In 1974, Heckler & Koch diversified into the following two business areas: HK Defense and Law Enforcement Technology and HK Hunting and Sports Firearms. Since then HK has designed and manufactured more than one hundred different types of firearms and devices for the world's military and law enforcement organizations as well as sportsmen and hunters.
In 1990, Heckler & Koch finalized over two decades of development with their revolutionary case-less weapon system and produces prototypes of the HK G11.  In addition, the company produces prototypes for the HK G41 assault rifle intended for the Bundeswehr.  Due to the international political climate at that time (East and West Germany uniting and defense budget cuts) the company was unable to secure funded contracts from the German Government to support production of either weapon system and this resulted in the company becoming financially vulnerable. In the following year, the Heckler & Koch company was sold to the British Aerospace's Royal Ordnance division.
During 1994 and 1995, the German Government awarded Heckler & Koch with contracts for producing an updated standard assault rifle and updated standard sidearm for the Bundeswehr. As a result, Heckler & Koch developed and produced the Project HK50, a lightweight carbon fiber–reinforced polymer assault rifle, which became the HK G36 assault rifle.  In addition, Heckler & Koch produced the HK P8 derived as a variant based upon its Universale Selbstladepistole (USP) series of handguns (which had been in production since 1989).  The P8 was adopted as the standard issue handgun for the Bundeswehr in 1994 and the G36 was adopted in 1997.
As the result of a 1999 merger between British Aerospace and Marconi Electronic Systems, Heckler & Koch was then owned by BAE Systems and was contracted to refurbish the SA80 rifle for the British Army.  This contract entailed a modification programme to the SA80 series of rifles  to address a number of reliability issues with the SA80. Three years later in 2002, BAE Systems restructured and sold Heckler & Koch to a group of private investors, who created the German group holding company (HK Beteiligungs-GmbH).
In 2003, the HK Beteiligungs GmbH group's business organization restructured as Heckler & Koch Jagd und Sportwaffen GmbH (HKJS) and its business was separated into the following two business areas (similar to the 1974 business mission areas):  Defense and Law Enforcement and Sporting Firearms.
In 2004, Heckler & Koch was awarded a major handgun contract for the DHS, worth a potential $26.2 million for up to 65,000 handguns. 
HK was contracted by the U.S. Army to produce the kinetic energy subsystem (see: kinetic projectiles or kinetic energy penetrator) of the Objective Individual Combat Weapon, a planned replacement for the M16/M203 grenade launcher combination. The OICW was designed to fire 5.56 mm bullets and 25 mm grenades. The kinetic energy component was also developed separately as the XM8, though both the OICW and XM8 are now indefinitely suspended.
Heckler & Koch developed a Colt M4 variant, marketed as the HK416. HK replaced the direct impingement system used by the Stoner design on the original M16 platform with a short-stroke piston operating system. 
At this date, there is no indication that the rifle will be adopted by the United States Armed Forces. However, the elite Delta Force and other special operations units have fielded the HK416 in combat,
HK sells its pistols in the United States to both law enforcement and civilian markets. The company has locations in Virginia, New Hampshire, and Georgia.

HK abbreviations

Format: Abbreviation = German Text ("English Text")








