[[Lamanite]]

CATEGORIES: Book of Mormon peoples, Book of Mormon words and phrases, Mormonism and Native Americans, Mormonism and race

The Lamanites 
According to the Book of Mormon, the Lamanites are members of a historically dark-skinned nation of indigenous Americans that occasionally battled with the historically light-skinned Nephite nation. They are usually described as descendants of Laman and Lemuel, two rebellious brothers of a family of Israelites who crossed the ocean in a ship around 600 BC.  Their brother Nephi founded the Nephite nation.
The Lamanites were cut off from the presence of the Lord as a curse for their rebelliousness, and later gained their dark skin as a sign of this curse. believe that the Polynesian people originated from the descendents of Hagoth who led his people off on a ship and was never heard from again. Although Hagoth was a Nephite, these Mormons regard Polynesians as Lamanites.
No non-LDS archaeologists, geneticists, and historians has ever found data relating to the existence of Lamanites from any other source, but adherents of the Latter Day Saint movement typically believe that the Lamanites comprise some part, if not the entirety, of the indigenous peoples of the Americas and the Polynesian people.

Lamanites as described by the Book of Mormon

According to the Book of Mormon, the family of Lehi (a wealthy Hebrew prophet), the family of Ishmael, and Zoram traveled from the Middle East circa 600 BC to the Americas by boat. Some time after the death of Lehi (in the Americas), one of the sons of Lehi, Nephi, overheard that his brothers were plotting to kill him, so Nephi, his family, and his followers left and went into the wilderness. The followers of Nephi called themselves Nephites and referred to others as Lamanites, after Lehi's oldest son, Laman.
The Nephites later discovered another civilization living in America, and the combined group also called themselves Nephites. According to the Book of Mormon, there were many interactions between the Lamanites and the Nephites; intermittent war, trade, and proselytizing transpired with varying degrees of success. God initially marked the Lamanites with a darker skin color to identify them and their state of wickedness. The Nephites were initially righteous, though over time, individuals and sub-groups defected and joined the Lamanites. Likewise, some penitent Lamanites defected to the Nephites.
Following the American visitation of the resurrected Jesus Christ, the Lamanites and Nephites coexisted for two centuries in peace (from circa AD 30 until 230); "There were no robbers, nor murderers, neither were there Lamanites, nor any manner of -ites; but they were in one, the children of Christ, and heirs to the kingdom of God." Eighty-four years after the coming of Christ, "a small part of the people who had revolted from the church" started calling themselves Lamanites. After four generations this period of peace and cooperation between the two suffered corruption and decline as social and economic classes resurfaced. In the year 231 "the true believers in Christ" started calling themselves Nephites. The Lamanites eventually became a larger portion of the population.
Ultimately, the Lamanites were successful in destroying the Nephites, in a series of wars from 326 to about 400 A.D.
Zeniff describes them as:
Zeniff also says that the Lamanites felt that they were wronged by Nephi, and thus swore vengeance against his descendants:

Theories regarding modern descendants

Many Latter Day Saints believe that the Lamanites comprise some part, if not the primary origin, of Native Americans. Some publications of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) have accepted this position,Lane Johnson, "Who and Where Are the Lamanites?," Ensign, Dececember 1975, p. 15. Prior to 2002, the non-canonical introduction stated that the Lamanites were the "principal ancestors of the American Indians." although the church has stated its view that "nothing in the Book of Mormon precludes migration into the Americas by peoples of Asiatic origin."See LDS Church, Comments on the News, taking issue with "DNA and the Book of Mormon", (February 16, 2006), Los Angeles Times. The non-canonical introduction to the 1981 LDS Church edition of the Book of Mormon stated, "the Lamanites are the principal ancestors of the American Indians.""Introduction", Book of Mormon (LDS Church edition), 1981. The wording was changed in the 2006 Doubleday edition and subsequent editions published by the LDS Church, stating only that the Lamanites "are among the ancestors of the American Indians.""Introduction", Book of Mormon (LDS Church edition), on-line version.  Many Latter Day Saints also consider Polynesian peoples and the other indigenous peoples of the Americas to be Lamanites. Kimball, "Of Royal Blood," Ensign, July 1971, p. 7."The Church in the Lamanite World: Scanning the Special Programs Created to Meet Lamanite Needs," Ensign, December 1975, pp. 16, 20–24. A 1971 church magazine article referred to Lamanites as "consisting of the Indians of all the Americas as well as the islanders of the Pacific.""The Lamanites (Introduction)," Ensign, July 1971, p. 5.
The existence of a Lamanite nation has received no support within mainstream science or archaeology. Genetic studies indicate that the indigenous Americans are related to present-day populations in Mongolia, Siberia, and environs,M. Raghavan et al, "Upper Palaeolithic Siberian genome reveals dual ancestry of Native Americans," Nature, (July 2013) and Polynesians to those in southeast Asia.
Some Mormon scholars

Skin colors

In the Book of Mormon, Lamanites are described as having received a "skin of blackness" as means of distinguishing themselves from the Nephites. This "change" in skin color is often mentioned in conjunction with God's curse on the descendants of Laman for their wickedness and corruption, as seen in 2 Nephi 5:21: "And he had caused the cursing to come upon Lamanites, yea, even a sore cursing, because of their iniquity. For behold, they had hardened their hearts against him, and they had become like unto a flint; wherefore, as they were white, and exceedingly fair and delightsome, that they might not be enticing unto my people the Lord God did cause a skin of blackness to come upon them."
On the other hand, the Book of Mormon teaches that skin color is not a bar to salvation: God "denieth none that come unto him, black and white, bond and free, male and female; and he remembereth the heathen; and all are alike unto God, both Jew and Gentile".
Similarly, the Book of Mormon teaches that the color of one's skin has no bearing on one's status as a righteous or sinful person. One prophet declared to the Nephites:

The non-canonical 1981 footnote text of the Book of Mormon closely linked the concept of "skin of blackness" with that of "scales of darkness falling from their eyes", suggesting that the LDS Church has interpreted both cases as being examples of figurative language.org.
Several Book of Mormon passages have been interpreted by some Latter Day Saints as indicating that Lamanites would revert to a lighter skin tone upon accepting the gospel. For example, at a 1960 LDS Church General Conference, apostle Spencer W. Kimball suggested that the skin of Latter-day Saint Native Americans was gradually turning lighter:
This view was buoyed by passages such as 2 Nephi 30:6, which in early editions of the Book of Mormon, read: "Their scales of darkness shall begin to fall from their eyes; and many generations shall not pass away among them, save they shall be a white and a delightsome people".
Eventually in the Book of Mormon narrative, the labels "Nephite" and "Lamanite" became terms of political convenience, where membership was varied and fluid and not based on skin color. Within the first two centuries of the Nephites' thousand-year chronology, the prophet Jacob stated that any who were enemies of his people were called Lamanites, and any who were friends were called Nephites: "But I, Jacob, shall not hereafter distinguish them by these names, but I shall call them Lamanites that seek to destroy the people of Nephi, and those who are friendly to Nephi I shall call Nephites, or the people of Nephi, according to the reigns of the kings."

Changes to Book of Mormon chapter summaries

In December 2010, the LDS Church made changes to the non-canonical chapter summaries and also to some of the footnotes in its online version of the Book of Mormon. In Second Nephi chapter 5, the original wording was: "Because of their unbelief, the Lamanites are cursed, receive a skin of blackness, and become a scourge unto the Nephites." The phrase "skin of blackness" was removed and became: "Because of their unbelief, the Lamanites are cut off from the presence of the Lord, are cursed, and become a scourge unto the Nephites."Fletcher Stack, Peggy. "Church removes racial references in Book of Mormon headings", Salt Lake Tribune 2010-12-16. The second change appears in summary of Mormon chapter 5. Formerly, it included the phrase that "the Lamanites shall be a dark, filthy, and loathsome people ..." The new version deleted the phrase "dark, loathsome, and filthy" and now reads, "... the Lamanites will be scattered, and the Spirit will cease to strive with them."
These changes are seen by some critics to be another step in the evolution of the text of the Book of Mormon to delete racist language from it. On the other hand, some believers in the Book of Mormon, such as Marvin Perkins, see these changes as better conforming the chapter headers and footnotes to the meaning of the text in light of the LDS Church's 1978 Revelation on Priesthood.org, 2011-02-07. In an interview, a former BYU graduate student suggested that the changes were made for "clarity, a change in emphasis and to stick closer to the scriptural language."



Notes



 | last=Walker
 | first=Ronald W.
 | title=Seeking the 'Remnant': The Native American During the Joseph Smith Period
