[[Heavy water]]

CATEGORIES: Deuterated solvent, Forms of water, Neutron moderators, Nuclear reactor coolants

Heavy water, formally called deuterium oxide or  

Explanation

Some or most of the hydrogen atoms in heavy water contain a neutron, making each hydrogen atom about twice as heavy as a normal hydrogen atom (though the weight of the water molecules is not as substantially affected, since about 89% of the molecular weight resides in the unaffected oxygen atom). The increased weight of the hydrogen in the water thus makes it slightly more dense. The colloquial term heavy water is often also used to refer to a highly enriched water mixture that contains mostly deuterium oxide but also contains some ordinary water molecules as well: for instance heavy water used in CANDU reactors is 99.75% enriched by hydrogen atom-fraction, meaning that 99.75% of the hydrogen atoms are of the heavy type. In comparison, in ordinary water, which is the "ordinary water" used for a deuterium standard on Earth, there are only about 156 deuterium atoms per million hydrogen atoms.
Heavy water is not radioactive. In its pure form, it has a density about 11% greater than water, but otherwise, is physically and chemically similar. Nevertheless, the various differences in deuterium-containing water (especially affecting the biological properties) are larger than in any other commonly occurring isotope-substituted compound because deuterium is unique among heavy stable isotopes in being twice as heavy as the lightest isotope. This difference increases the strength of water's hydrogen-oxygen bonds, and this in turn is enough to cause differences that are important to some biochemical reactions. The human body naturally contains deuterium equivalent to about five grams of heavy water, which is harmless. When a large fraction of water (> 50%) in higher organisms is replaced by heavy water, the result is cell dysfunction and death. 
Heavy water was first produced in 1932, a few months after the discovery of deuterium. Since then, heavy water has been an essential component in some types of reactors, both those that generate power and those designed to produce isotopes for nuclear weapons. These heavy water reactors have the advantage of being able to run on natural uranium without using graphite moderators that can pose radiological hazards in the decommissioning phase. Most modern reactors use enriched uranium with normal "light water" (H2O) as the moderator.

Other heavy forms of water

Semiheavy water

Semiheavy water, HDO, exists whenever there is water with light hydrogen (protium, 1H) and deuterium (D or 2H) in the mix. This is because hydrogen atoms (hydrogen-1 and deuterium) are rapidly exchanged between water molecules. Water containing 50% H and 50% D in its hydrogen actually contains about 50% HDO and 25% each of H2O and D2O, in dynamic equilibrium.
In normal water, about 1 molecule in 3,200 is HDO (one hydrogen in 6,400 is in the form of D), and heavy water molecules (D2O) only occur in a proportion of about 1 molecule in 41 million (i.e. one in 6,4002). Thus semiheavy water molecules are far more common than "pure" (homoisotopic) heavy water molecules.

Heavy-oxygen water

Water enriched in the heavier oxygen isotopes 17O and 18O is also commercially available, e.g., for use as a non-radioactive isotopic tracer. It is "heavy water" as it is denser than normal water (H218O is approximately as dense as D2O, H217O is about halfway between H2O and D2O)—but is rarely called heavy water, since it does not contain the deuterium that gives D2O its unusual nuclear and biological properties. It is more expensive than D2O due to the more difficult separation of 17O and 18O. V, Ignatov, I. (2011) Separation of Heavy Isotopes Deuterium (D) and Tritium (T) and Oxygen (18O) in Water Treatment, Clean Water: Problems and Decisions, Moscow,  No. 3–4, pp. 69–78.

Tritiated water

Tritiated water contains tritium in place of protium or deuterium.

Physical properties (with comparison to light water)

Physical properties obvious by inspection: Heavy water is 10.6% denser than ordinary water, a difference not immediately obvious. One of the few ways to demonstrate heavy water's physically different properties without equipment is to freeze a sample and drop it into normal water (it sinks). If the water is ice-cold the higher melting temperature of heavy ice can also be observed: it melts at 3.8 °C, and thus endures very well in ice-cold normal water.
An early experiment
No physical properties are listed for "pure" semi-heavy water, because it is unstable as a bulk liquid. In the liquid state, a few water molecules are always in an ionised state, which means the hydrogen atoms can exchange among different oxygen atoms. Semi-heavy water can be created by a chemical method but would rapidly transform into a dynamic mixture of 25% light water, 25% heavy water, and 50% semi-heavy water (however if it were made in the gas phase and directly frozen to a solid, this semiheavy ice would be stable).

History

Harold Urey discovered the isotope deuterium in 1931 and was later able to concentrate it in water.[ref]
