[[Darren Aronofsky]]

CATEGORIES: American film directors, AFI Conservatory alumni, American film producers, American screenwriters, Camp Rising Sun alumni, English-language film directors, Harvard University alumni, Jewish American writers, Independent Spirit Award winners, Independent Spirit Award for Best Director winners, People from Brooklyn, 1969 births, Living people, Film directors from New York City, Writers from New York City, American music video directors

Darren Aronofsky (born February 12, 1969) is an American film director, screenwriter and film producer. He has received acclaim for his often surreal, disturbing films and has been noted for frequent collaborations with cinematographer Matthew Libatique, film editor Andrew Weisblum and composer Clint Mansell. His films have generated controversy and are well known for their often violent, bleak subject matter.
Aronofsky attended Harvard University, where he studied film and social anthropology, and the American Film Institute to study directing. He won several film awards after completing his senior thesis film, Supermarket Sweep, which went on to become a National Student Academy Award finalist. Aronofsky's feature debut, Pi, was shot in November 1997. The low-budget, $60,000 production, starring Sean Gullette, was sold to Artisan Entertainment for $1 million, and grossed over $3 million; Aronofsky won the Directing Award at the 1998 Sundance Film Festival and an Independent Spirit Award for best first screenplay. Aronofsky's followup, Requiem for a Dream, was based on the novel of the same name by Hubert Selby, Jr. The film garnered strong reviews and received an Academy Award nomination for Ellen Burstyn's performance. After turning down an opportunity to direct an entry in the Batman franchise and writing the World War II horror film Below, Aronofsky began production on his third film, The Fountain. The film received mixed reviews and performed poorly at the box-office, but has since garnered a cult following.
His fourth film, The Wrestler, was released to critical acclaim and both of the film's stars, Mickey Rourke and Marisa Tomei, received Academy Award nominations. In 2010 Aronofsky was an executive producer on The Fighter and his fifth feature film, Black Swan, received further critical acclaim and many accolades, being nominated for five Academy Awards including Best Picture and Best Director and winning Best Actress for Natalie Portman's performance in the film. Aronofsky received nominations for Best Director at the Golden Globes, and a DGA nomination. His sixth film, Noah, was released in theaters on March 28, 2014.

Early life and education

Aronofsky was born in Brooklyn, New York, in 1969, the son of public school teachers Charlotte and Abraham Aronofsky, who are Conservative Jews. Undated; updated version of story from The Star, 1998, n.d.
During his youth, he trained as a field biologist with The School for Field Studies in Kenya in 1985 and Alaska in 1986."Alumni: Darren Aronofsky", The School for Field Studies (official site), 2009-12-22 He attended school in Kenya to pursue an interest in learning about ungulates. He later said, "The School for Field Studies changed the way I perceived the world". Aronofsky's interest in the outdoors led him to backpack his way through Europe and the Middle East.
He became seriously interested in film while attending Harvard after befriending Dan Schrecker, an aspiring animator.
Aronofsky's senior thesis film, Supermarket Sweep, was a finalist in the 1991 Student Academy Awards.

Career

Early work

Aronofsky's debut feature, Pi (also known as π), was shot in November 1997. The film was financed entirely from $100 donations from friends and family. In return, he promised to pay each back $150 if the film made money, and they would at least get screen credit if the film lost money. While visiting Israel as a youth he spent a couple days
Aronofsky followed his debut with Requiem for a Dream, a film based on Hubert Selby, Jr.'s novel of the same name. He was paid $50,000, and worked for three years with nearly the same production team as his previous film.
In May 2000, Aronofsky was briefly attached to make an adaptation of David Wiesner's 1999 children's book Sector 7 for Nickelodeon Movies, the project remains unmade.
In March 2001, he helped write the screenplay to the horror film Below, which he also produced.

Breakthrough

In 2007, Aronofsky hired writer Scott Silver to develop The Fighter with him. When asked about the film, he said, "I think I'm still attached. I don't know. I haven't heard from anyone in a while."Zeitchik, Steven."It's a swan, it's a plane… Darren Aronofsky latest name to surface in Superman director search", Los Angeles Times, 2010/10/27 Later during 2007, Aronofsky said he was planning to film a movie about Noah's Ark."Exclusive: Aronofsky To Direct Noah", Empire, 2007/05/30
Aronofsky had the idea for The Wrestler for over a decade.
The Wrestler premiered at the 65th Venice International Film Festival. Initially flying under the radar, the film wound up winning the Golden Lion, the highest award at the world's oldest film festival.
Aronofsky's next film was Black Swan, which had been in development since 2001, a psychological thriller horror film about a New York City ballerina."Direct Effect Season 1, Episode 7 Darren Aronofsky of BLACK SWAN". Fox Movie Channel Originals. TV Guide. 2011-10-11.
Black Swan has received high praise from film critics, and received a record 12 Broadcast Film Critics Association nominations, four Independent Spirit Award nominations, four Golden Globe nominations, three SAG nominations, and many more accolades. Aronofsky served as an executive producer on The Fighter, which was also nominated for Best Picture at the Oscars.

Larger budget production

Aronofsky was attached to The Wolverine, which was scheduled to begin production in March 2011, but he left the project due to scheduling issues.
In 2011, Aronofsky tried to launch production on Noah, a retelling of the Bible story of Noah's Ark, projected for a $115 million budget. Aronofsky did not use live animals for the film, saying in a PETA video that "There's really no reason to do it anymore because the technology has arrived.""Darren Aronofsky: 'There were no real animals used in Noah'," WENN. The HSUS gave him their inaugural Humane Filmmaker Award in honor of his use of computer-generated animals."Darren Aronofsky honoured for kindness to animals," WENN.
Aronofsky will direct an HBO series pilot called Hobgoblin. Announced on June 16, 2011, the series will depict a group of magicians and con artists who use their powers of deception to defeat Hitler during WWII. He is set to work on this project with Pulitzer Prize winning author Michael Chabon and his wife Ayelet Waldman. It was also announced that Aronofsky will also produce an upcoming horror film, XOXO, written by Black Swan writer Mark Heyman.

Directing style

Aronofsky's first two films, Pi and Requiem for a Dream, were low-budget and used montages of extremely short shots, also known as hip hop montages.
With The Fountain, Aronofsky restricted the use of computer-generated imagery. Henrik Fett, the visual effects supervisor of Look Effects, said, "Darren was quite clear on what he wanted and his intent to greatly minimize the use of computer graphics... and I think the results are outstanding."

Themes and influences

Pi features several references to mathematics and mathematical theories. In a 1998 interview, Aronofsky acknowledged several influences for "Pi":
The visual style of "Pi" (and even "Requiem for a Dream") features numerous similarities to the Japanese film Tetsuo: The Iron Man."Darren Aronofsky: THE ASK HOLLYWOOD INTERVIEW". Darren Aronofsky Online (1998). Retrieved 2013-08-27.
"An Interview with Darren Aronofsky and Sean Gullette of "Pi"". IndieWire (January 21, 1998). Retrieved 2013-08-27.
The majority of reviewers characterized Requiem for a Dream in the genre of "drug movies", along with films like The Basketball Diaries, Trainspotting, Spun, and Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. But, Aronofsky placed his movie in a wider context, saying:
With his friend Ari Handel, Aronofsky developed the plot for The Fountain; the director wrote the screenplay. In 1999, Aronofsky thought that The Matrix redefined the science fiction genre in film. He sought to make a science fiction film that explored new territory, as did The Matrix and its predecessors Star Wars and 2001: A Space Odyssey. He wanted to go beyond science fiction films with plots driven by technology and science.
In the Toronto International Film Festival interview conducted by James Rocchi, Aronofsky credited the 1957 Charles Mingus song "The Clown" as a major influence on The Wrestler. It's an instrumental piece, with a poem read over the music about a clown who accidentally discovers the bloodlust of the crowds and eventually kills himself in performance.
Aronofsky called Black Swan a companion piece to The Wrestler, recalling one of his early projects about a love affair between a wrestler and a ballerina. He eventually separated the wrestling and the ballet worlds, considering them as "too much for one movie". He compared the two films: "Wrestling some consider the lowest art—if they would even call it art—and ballet some people consider the highest art. But what was amazing to me was how similar the performers in both of these worlds are. They both make incredible use of their bodies to express themselves." About the psychological thriller nature of Black Swan, actress Natalie Portman compared the film's tone to Polanski's 1968 film Rosemary's Baby,

Controversy

Several aspects of Aronofsky's films have been controversial, most notably Requiem for a Dream, The Wrestler and Black Swan. Requiem for a Dream was originally set for release in 2000, but it met with controversy in the United States, being rated NC-17 by the MPAA due to a graphic sex scene.
The Wrestler has been condemned as an "anti-Iranian" film in many Iran newspapers and websites, in response to a scene in which Mickey Rourke violently breaks a pole bearing an Iranian flag in half across his knee. Borna News, a state-run Iranian newspaper, also criticized the heel (bad-guy) wrestler character "The Ayatollah." Portrayed as a villain, he wears Arabic items of clothing (keffiyeh and bisht), which the newspaper believed was intended to lead audiences to associate Iranians with Arabs. In the wrestling ring, he wears a skimpy leotard in the pattern of an Iranian flag with the alef character, representing the first letter of the word Ayatollah.
Some Iranian newspapers avoided mentioning the character, presumably to avoid offending Iran's clerical rulers. On March 2009, Javad Shamaqdari, cultural adviser to President Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, demanded an apology from a delegation of Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences actors and producers visiting Iran for what he characterized as negative and unfair portrayals of the Islamic republic in The Wrestler and other Hollywood films.
The question of who had designed 40 ballet costumes for Portman and the dancers in Black Swan was one publicized controversy related to the film.
Aronofsky said in an interview with Entertainment Weekly:

Personal life

Aronofsky began dating English actress Rachel Weisz in the summer of 2001, and in 2005 they were engaged.
He said of his spiritual beliefs in 2014, "I think I definitely believe. My biggest expression of what I believe is in The Fountain". 

Filmography

Feature films

Unreleased short films

Accolades






