[[Mae West]]

CATEGORIES: 1893 births, 1980 deaths, 20th-century American actresses, Actresses from New York, American dramatists and playwrights, American female singers, American film actresses, American people of English descent, American people of German descent, American people of Jewish descent, American people of Irish descent, American people of Scottish descent, American screenwriters, American stage actresses, American television actresses, American Theater Hall of Fame inductees, Burials at Cypress Hills National Cemetery, Burlesque performers, Deaths from stroke, Disease-related deaths in California, Paramount Pictures contract players, People from Brooklyn, People from Queens, New York, Vaudeville performers, Women screenwriters

Mary Jane "Mae" West (August 17, 1893 – November 22, 1980) was an American actress, singer, playwright, screenwriter and sex symbol whose entertainment career spanned seven decades.
Known for her bawdy double entendres, West made a name for herself in vaudeville and on the stage in New York before moving to Hollywood to become a comedienne, actress and writer in the motion picture industry. In consideration of her contributions to American cinema, the American Film Institute named West 15th among the greatest female stars of all time. One of the more controversial movie stars of her day, West encountered many problems, including censorship. When her cinematic career ended, she continued to perform on stage, in Las Vegas, in the United Kingdom, on radio and television, and recorded rock and roll albums. Asked about the various efforts to impede her career, West said, "I believe in censorship. I made a fortune out of it." 

Early life and career

West was born Mary Jane West in Bushwick, Brooklyn, delivered at home by an aunt who was a midwife. She was the eldest surviving child of1870, 1880, 1900 US censuses.
Her eldest sibling, Katie, died in infancy. The other siblings were Mildred Katherine West, later known as Beverly (December 8, 1898 – March 12, 1982), and John Edwin West, II (sometimes inaccurately called "John Edwin West, Jr."; February 11, 1900 – October 12, 1964). During her childhood, West's family moved to various parts of Woodhaven, Queens, as well as the Williamsburg and Greenpoint neighborhoods of Brooklyn. It was in Woodhaven, at Neir's Tavern (87-48 78th Street), which opened in the 1830s and is still extant, that West first performed in a bar. 23.
West was five when she first entertained a crowd at a church social, and she started appearing in amateur shows at the age of seven. She often won prizes at local talent contests.
She was encouraged as a performer by her mother, who, according to West, always thought that anything Mae did was fantastic. 106–08 Other family members were less encouraging, including an aunt and her paternal grandmother. They are all reported as having disapproved of her career and her choices. In 1918, after exiting several high-profile revues, West finally got her break in the Shubert Brothers revue Sometime, opposite Ed Wynn. and her photograph appeared on an edition of  the sheet music for the popular number "Ev'rybody Shimmies Now".
Eventually, she began writing her own risqué plays using the pen name Jane Mast. She served eight days with two days off for good behavior. Media attention surrounding the incident enhanced her career.
Her next play, The Drag, dealt with homosexuality, and was what West called one of her "comedy-dramas of life".
West continued to write plays, including The Wicked Age, Pleasure Man and The Constant Sinner. Her productions aroused controversy, which ensured that she stayed in the news, which also often resulted in packed houses at her performances.

Motion pictures

In 1932, West was offered a motion picture contract by Paramount Pictures despite being close to 40. This was an unusually high age to begin a movie career, especially for women, but she nonetheless managed to keep this fact ambiguous for some years. She made her film debut in Night After Night starring George Raft. At first, she did not like her small role in Night After Night, but was appeased when she was allowed to rewrite her scenes. Reflecting on the overall result of her rewritten scenes, Raft is said to have remarked, "She stole everything but the cameras."
She brought her Diamond Lil character, now renamed Lady Lou, to the screen in She Done Him Wrong (1933).
Her next release, I'm No Angel (1933), paired her with Grant again. I'm No Angel was also a financial success, a film that proved to be her most successful film of her entire movie career.
Her following effort, Klondike Annie (1935) dealt, as best it could given the heavy censorship, with religion and hypocrisy.
West next starred in Every Day's a Holiday (1937) for Paramount before their association came to an end. After the film failed at the box office, West was put on a list of actors called "Box Office Poison" by Harry Brandt on behalf of the Independent Theatre Owners Association. Others on the list were Greta Garbo, Joan Crawford, Marlene Dietrich, Fred Astaire, Dolores del Río, Katharine Hepburn, and James Cagney. The attack was published as a paid advertisement in the Hollywood Reporter and was taken seriously by studio executives. The association argued that these stars' high salaries and extreme public popularity didn't affect their ticket sales and thus hurt the exhibitors.
In 1939, Universal Pictures approached West to star in a film opposite W. C. Fields. The studio was eager to duplicate the success of Destry Rides Again starring Marlene Dietrich and James Stewart with a vehicle starring West and Fields.
West's next film was The Heat's On (1943) for Columbia Pictures. She initially didn't want to do the film but after producer and director Gregory Ratoff pleaded with her and claimed he would go bankrupt if she didn't, West relented.

Radio

On December 12, 1937, West appeared in two separate sketches on ventriloquist Edgar Bergen's radio show The Chase and Sanborn Hour.
More outrageous still was a sketch written by Arch Oboler, starring West and Don Ameche as Adam and Eve in the Garden of Eden on NBC. She told Ameche in the show to "get me a big one... I feel like doin' a big apple!" This ostensible reference to the then-current dance craze was one of the many double entendres in the dialogue. Days after the broadcast, the studio received letters calling the show "immoral" and "obscene".
NBC blamed West personally for the incident and banned her (and the mention of her name) from their stations.

Middle years

After appearing in The Heat's On in 1943, West remained active during the ensuing years. Among her stage performances was the title role in Catherine Was Great (1944) on Broadway, in which she spoofed the story of Catherine the Great of Russia, surrounding herself with an "imperial guard" of tall, muscular young actors.
When casting the role of Norma Desmond for the 1950 film Sunset Boulevard, Billy Wilder offered the 57-year old West the role. Still smarting from the failure of The Heat's On, she declined, claiming  to be offended at the notion. Wilder later said, "The idea of casting Mae West was idiotic because we only had to talk to  her to find out that she thought she was as great, as desirable, as sexy as she had ever been."
In 1958, West appeared at the Academy Awards and performed the song "Baby, It's Cold Outside" with Rock Hudson.

Later career and final years

West made occasional appearances on television, including The Red Skelton Show in 1960. In 1964, she made a guest appearance on the sitcom Mister Ed.
The April 18, 1969 issue of Life featured West at age 75. The article detailed her views on homosexuals, her generosity to certain charities, her vast real estate holdings and her desire to continue an active career in the upcoming decade. 
After a 27-year absence from motion pictures, West appeared as Leticia Van Allen in Gore Vidal's Myra Breckinridge (1970) with Raquel Welch, Rex Reed, Farrah Fawcett, and Tom Selleck in a small part. The movie was a deliberately campy sex change comedy that was both a box office and critical failure. Vidal later called the film "an awful joke".
West recorded another rock album in 1968 (released in 1972) on MGM Records, titled Great Balls of Fire, which covered songs by The Doors among others.
In 1976, she appeared on The Dick Cavett Show
In August 1980, West tripped while getting out of bed. After the fall, West was unable to speak and was taken to Good Samaritan Hospital in Los Angeles where tests revealed that she had suffered a stroke.
A private service was held in the Old North Church replica, in Forest Lawn, Hollywood Hills, on November 25, 1980.
For her contribution to the film industry, Mae West has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1560 Vine Street in Hollywood. For her contributions as a stage actor in the theater world, she has been inducted into the American Theater Hall of Fame.

Personal life

West was married on April 11, 1911, in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, to Frank Szatkus,Maurice Leonard in Mae West, Empress of Sex ISBN 0-00-637471-9, pp. 29–30 whose stage name was Frank Wallace, a fellow vaudevillian  whom she first met in 1909. She was 17, he was 21,
In August 1913, she met an Italian-born vaudeville headliner and star of the piano-accordion, Guido Deiro. Her affair went "very deep, hittin' on all the emotions. You can't get too hot over anybody unless there's somethin' that goes along with the sex act, can you?"
West made no public statements indicating that she had been married to Deiro. She referred to him simply as "D" in her autobiography. West's biographers state that the two never married.
Deiro's son claimed that years later West privately revealed that she had become pregnant by Guido, and had an abortion  without his knowledge, resulting in complications which left her sick for nearly a year and reportedly unable to bear children. 2 (Archeophone 5014: 2009), p. 13
According to Deiro's biographer, West filed for divorce on the grounds of adultery on July 14, 1920. Misc. Letters & Legal Documents, "The Guido Deiro Archive: Part II. Printed Items" Center for the Study of Free-Reed Instruments at the City University of New York Graduate Center  divorce certificate can be found in the Deiro Archive at the Center for the Study of Free-Reed Instruments at the Graduate Center of the City University of New York. See also Doktorski, The Brothers Deiro. West later said, "Marriage is a great institution. I'm not ready for an institution yet."
West remained close to her family throughout her life and was devastated by her mother's death in 1930.
After she began her movie career, her sister, brother and father followed her there. West provided them with nearby homes and also jobs, and sometimes financial support.
West had a relationship with James Timony, an attorney 15 years her senior, in 1916 when she was a vaudeville actress. Timony was also her manager. By the time West was an established movie actress in the mid-1930s, they were no longer a couple. However, West and Timony remained extremely close, living in the same building, working together, and providing support for each other, until Timony's death in 1954.
At 61, West became romantically involved with one of the muscle-men in her Las Vegas stage show, wrestler, former Mr. California and former merchant marine Chester Rybinski

In popular culture

Broadway stage

Filmography

Discography

Albums:
At least 21 singles (78 rpm and 45 rpm) also were released from 1933 to 1973.

Bibliography








