[[San Ignacio, Belize]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places in Cayo District

San Ignacio and Santa Elena are towns in western Belize. San Ignacio serves as the capital of Cayo District. It got its start from Mahogany and chicle production during British rule.  It began to attract different people from the surrounding areas, which led to the diverse population of the town at present day.

History

The town was originally named El Cayo by the Spanish. On October 19, 1904, El Cayo was officially declared a town by the government of British Honduras. In the past a creek ran between the macal and the mopan rivers one mile outside of San Ignacio going toward Benque Viejo. This creek then fulfilled the definition of an area of land completely surrounded by water and thus the name Cayo. There was a big wooden bridge across this creek in the late nineteen forties, but since the creek eventually dried up the area was filled with lime stone gravel and today there remains no evidence of its past existence. This unfortunate demise of the creek, however, took away the distinction of the classification 'cayo' from the venerable western town of 'El Cayo' and returned it to a regular land mass no longer an island.

Geography

San Ignacio is situated on the banks of the Macal and Mopan Rivers, about 68.5 miles (115 kilometres) west of Belize City and 22 miles (35 km) west of the country's capital, Belmopan. The town has a total area of approximately 

File:San Ignacio Town Street, Belize.jpg|View of San Ignacio, looking towards the Hawksworth Bridge
File:The crowd heading to see the independence day parade in san ignacio cayo district of belize.jpg|Crowd heading to see the independence day parade
File:Small park in downtown san ignacio in fron of the police station.jpg|Small park of downtown San Ignacio in front of the police station
File:Belize independence day celebration sept.21 2012.jpg|Belize independence day celebration

Demographics

The population is largely Mestizo and Kriol, with some Lebanese and Mopan. San Ignacio also boasts a fairly large Chinese population, most of whom emigrated from Guangzhou in waves in the mid-20th century. A sizable Mennonite community resides near San Ignacio. In 2009 the combined population was estimated at 20,000 people but a new census in 2010 counted only 9,925 inhabitants in San Ignacio proper, of whom 4,856 are males and 5,069 are females. The total number of households is 2,593 and the average household size is 3.8.

Santa Elena

In recent years San Ignacio has absorbed the formerly separate village of Santa Elena. San Ignacio and its sister-town Santa Elena make up Belize's second largest urban area. The two towns are connected by Belize's only suspension bridge, the one-lane Hawksworth Bridge across the Macal river, built in 1949. The two are collectively referred to as the "Twin Towns" although San Ignacio has a larger population.

Government

San Ignacio is currently governed by a Town Council affiliated with the United Democratic Party (UDP). The mayor is John August Jr.
Town council elections are made every three years to elect a new town mayor, both, UDP (United Democratic Party) and the PUP (People's United Party) candidates participate in town elections.

Educational institutions

San Ignacio has three main colleges. Sacred Heart College of Catholic denomination is the biggest and largest institution with both a high school and a junior college division. Eden Seventh Day Adventist High School and Saint Ignatius High School (Catholic) is also found here. Galen University was founded in 2003 and is located at Central Farm, a couple of minutes away from San Ignacio.  The University of Belize also has an agricultural campus next to Galen.

Medicine

The city is served by the San Ignacio Hospital and the Loma Luz Adventist hospital in Santa Elena.  It also has various clinics, doctors and pharmacies scattered around town.

Attractions

The area around San Ignacio is one of the most popular parts of the country for tourism. Nearby attractions include the ancient Maya ruins of Caracol, Xunantunich, Cahal Pech, El Pilar, Tikal (Guatemala), the cave Actun Tunichil Muknal, San Ignacio Resort Hotel Iguana Conservation Project Chaa Creek Nature Reserve, and the Mountain Pine Ridge Forest Reserve. 
Visitors can tour the Mayan ruins independently by foot or by car, or by participating in the many local tour companies that include guided tours of the ruins.








