[[L. E. J. Brouwer]]

CATEGORIES: 1881 births, 1966 deaths, 20th-century mathematicians, 20th-century philosophers, Dutch mathematicians, Dutch philosophers, Philosophers of mathematics, Mathematical analysts, Mathematical logicians, Topologists, Set theorists, University of Amsterdam alumni, University of Amsterdam faculty, People from Rotterdam, Members of the Prussian Academy of Sciences, Intuitionism, Foreign Members of the Royal Society, Road accident deaths in the Netherlands

Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer ForMemRS He was the founder of the mathematical philosophy of intuitionism.

Biography

Early in his career, Brouwer proved a number of theorems that were breakthroughs in the emerging field of topology. The most celebrated result was his proof of the topological invariance of dimension. Among his further results, the Brouwer fixed point theorem is also well known. Brouwer also proved the simplicial approximation theorem in the foundations of algebraic topology, which justifies the reduction to combinatorial terms, after sufficient subdivision of simplicial complexes, of the treatment of general continuous mappings.
Brouwer in effect founded the mathematical philosophy of intuitionism as an opponent to the then-prevailing formalism of David Hilbert and his collaborators Paul Bernays, Wilhelm Ackermann, John von Neumann and others (cf. Kleene (1952), p. 46–59). As a variety of constructive mathematics, intuitionism is essentially a philosophy of the foundations of mathematics. It is sometimes and rather simplistically characterized by saying that its adherents refuse to use the law of excluded middle in mathematical reasoning.
Brouwer was member of the Significs group. It formed part of the early history of semiotics—the study of symbols—around Victoria, Lady Welby in particular. The original meaning of his intuitionism probably can not be completely disentangled from the intellectual milieu of that group.
In 1905, at the age of 24, Brouwer expressed his philosophy of life in a short tract Life, Art and Mysticism described by Davis as "drenched in romantic pessimism" (Davis (2002), p. 94). Arthur Schopenhauer had a formative influence on Brouwer, not least because he insisted that all concepts be fundamentally based on sense intuitions."..." Teun Koetsier, Mathematics and the Divine, Chapter 30, "Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer: A Comparison," p. 584." (Quoted in Vladimir Tasić's Mathematics and the roots of postmodernist thought, § 4.1, p. 36)"Brouwer's debt to Schopenhauer is fully manifest. For both, Will is prior to Intellect." T. Koetsier. "Arthur Schopenhauer and L.E.J. Brouwer, a comparison," Combined Proceedings for the Sixth and Seventh Midwest History of Mathematics Conferences, pages 272–290. Department of Mathematics, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse, La Crosse, 1998.. (Mark van Atten and Robert Tragesser, "Mysticism and mathematics: Brouwer, Gödel, and the common core thesis," Published in W. Deppert and M. Rahnfeld (eds.), Klarheit in Religionsdingen, Leipzig: Leipziger Universitätsverlag 2003, pp.145–160) Brouwer then "embarked on a self-righteous campaign to reconstruct mathematical practice from the ground up so as to satisfy his philosophical convictions"; indeed his thesis advisor refused to accept his Chapter II " 'as it stands, ... all interwoven with some kind of pessimism and mystical attitude to life which is not mathematics, nor has anything to do with the foundations of mathematics' " (Davis, p. 94 quoting van Stigt, p. 41). Nevertheless, in 1908:
"After completing his dissertation (1907 - see Van Dalen), Brouwer made a conscious decision to temporarily keep his contentious ideas under wraps and to concentrate on demonstrating his mathematical prowess" (Davis (2000), p. 95); by 1910 he had published a number of important papers, in particular the Fixed Point Theorem. Hilbert—the formalist with whom the intuitionist Brouwer would ultimately spend years in conflict—admired the young man and helped him receive a regular academic appointment (1912) at the University of Amsterdam (Davis, p. 96). It was then that "Brouwer felt free to return to his revolutionary project which he was now calling intuitionism " (ibid).
He was combative for a young man. He was involved in a very public and eventually demeaning controversy in the later 1920s with Hilbert over editorial policy at Mathematische Annalen, at that time a leading learned journal. He became relatively isolated; the development of intuitionism at its source was taken up by his student Arend Heyting.
About his last years, Davis (2002) remarks:

Bibliography

Primary literature in English translation

Secondary








