[[Dennis Gabor]]

CATEGORIES: Articles with inconsistent citation formats, 1900 births, 1979 deaths, Academics of Imperial College London, Berlin Institute of Technology alumni, Berlin Institute of Technology faculty, British agnostics, British electrical engineers, British inventors, British Jews, British Nobel laureates, British physicists, British people of Hungarian descent, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Fellows of the Royal Society, Futurologists, Hungarian agnostics, Hungarian electrical engineers, Hungarian emigrants to the United Kingdom, Hungarian inventors, Hungarian Jews, Hungarian Nobel laureates, Hungarian refugees, Hungarian physicists, Members of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, IEEE Medal of Honor recipients, Converts to Protestantism from Judaism, Jews who emigrated to the United Kingdom to escape Nazism, Jewish agnostics, Jewish engineers, Jewish inventors, Jewish physicists, Jewish refugees, Nobel laureates in Physics, People from Pest, Hungary

Dennis Gabor 

Biography

He was born as Günszberg Dénes, into a Jewish family in Budapest, Hungary, his family converted to Lutheranism, as the first-born son of Günszberg Bernát and Jakobovits Adél. Despite having a religious background, religion played a minor role in his later life and considered himself agnostic. At the start of his career, he analysed the properties of high voltage electric transmission lines by using cathode-beam oscillographs, which led to his interest in electron optics. Studying the fundamental processes of the oscillograph, Gabor was led to other electron-beam devices such as electron microscopes and TV tubes. He eventually wrote his Ph.D. thesis on Recording of Transients in Electric Circuits with the Cathode Ray Oscillograph in 1927, and worked on plasma lamps.
Gabor, a Jew, fled from Nazi Germany in 1933, and was invited to Britain to work at the development department of the British Thomson-Houston company in Rugby, Warwickshire. During his time in Rugby, he met Marjorie Louise Butler, and they married in 1936. He became a British citizen in 1946,
He experimented with a heavily filtered mercury arc light source. However, the earliest hologram was only realised in 1964 following the 1960 invention of the laser, the first coherent light source. After this,  holography became commercially available.
Gabor's research focused on electron inputs and outputs, which led him to the invention of re-holography. The basic idea was that for perfect optical imaging, the total of all the information has to be used; not only the amplitude, as in usual optical imaging, but also the phase. In this manner a complete holo-spatial picture can be obtained. Gabor published his theories of re-holography in a series of papers between 1946 and 1951.
Gabor also researched how human beings communicate and hear; the result of his investigations was the theory of granular synthesis, although Greek composer Iannis Xenakis claimed that he was actually the first inventor of this synthesis technique. Gabor's work in this and related areas was foundational in the development of time–frequency analysis.
In 1948 Gabor moved from Rugby to Imperial College London, and in 1958 became professor of Applied Physics until his retirement in 1967. While spending much of his retirement in Italy at Lavinio Rome, he remained connected with Imperial College as a Senior Research Fellow and also became Staff Scientist of CBS Laboratories, in Stamford, Connecticut; there, he collaborated with his lifelong friend, CBS Labs' president Dr. Peter C. Goldmark in many new schemes of communication and display. One of Imperial College's new halls of residence in Prince's Gardens, Knightsbridge is named Gabor Hall in honour of Gabor's contribution to Imperial College. He developed an interest in social analysis and published The Mature Society: a view of the future in 1972.
Following the rapid development of lasers and a wide variety of holographic applications (e.g., art, information storage, and the recognition of patterns), Gabor achieved acknowledged success and worldwide attention during his lifetime. He received numerous awards besides the Nobel Prize.
Gabor died in a nursing home in South Kensington, London, on 8 February 1979.  In 2006 a blue plaque was put up on No. 79 Queen's Gate in Kensington, where he lived from 1949 until the early 1960s.

Awards

Awards named after Dennis Gabor

The International Society for Optical Engineering (SPIE) presents its Dennis Gabor Award annually, "in recognition of outstanding accomplishments in diffractive wavefront technologies, especially those which further the development of holography and metrology applications." [ref]
</ref>
The NOVOFER Foundation of the Hungarian Academy of Sciences annually presents its International Dennis Gabor Award, for outstanding young scientists researching in the fields of physics and applied technology.
The  Gabor Medal is awarded by the Royal Society of London for "acknowledged distinction of interdisciplinary work between the life sciences with other disciplines".

In popular culture



Bibliography






