[[Perceptron]]

CATEGORIES: Classification algorithms, Neural networks, Articles with example Python code

In machine learning, the perceptron is an algorithm for supervised classification of an input into one of several possible non-binary outputs.  It is a type of linear classifier, i.e. a classification algorithm that makes its predictions based on a linear predictor function combining a set of weights with the feature vector. The algorithm allows for online learning, in that it processes elements in the training set one at a time.
The perceptron algorithm was invented in 1957 at the Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory by Frank Rosenblatt. Report 85-460-1, Cornell Aeronautical Laboratory.

Definition

In the context of artificial neural networks, a perceptron is an artificial neuron using the Heaviside step function as the activation function. The perceptron algorithm is also termed the single-layer perceptron, to distinguish it from a multilayer perceptron, which is a misnomer for a more complicated neural network.  As a linear classifier, the single-layer perceptron is the simplest feedforward neural network.

Learning algorithm

Below is an example of a learning algorithm for a (single-layer) perceptron. For multilayer perceptrons, where a hidden layer exists, more sophisticated algorithms such as backpropagation must be used. Alternatively, methods such as the delta rule can be used if the function is non-linear and differentiable, although the one below will work as well.
When multiple perceptrons are combined in an artificial neural network, each output neuron operates independently of all the others; thus, learning each output can be considered in isolation.

Definitions

We first define some variables:
We show the values of the nodes as follows:
To represent the weights: 
Too high a learning rate makes the perceptron periodically oscillate around the solution unless additional steps are taken.

Steps

1. Initialise the weights and the threshold. Weights may be initialised to 0 or to a small random value. In the example below, we use 0.
The algorithm updates the weights after steps 2a and 2b. These weights are immediately applied to a pair in the training set, and subsequently updated, rather than waiting until all pairs in the training set have undergone these steps.

Convergence

But if the training set is linearly separable, then the perceptron is guaranteed to converge, and there is an upper bound on the number of times the perceptron will adjust its weights during the training.
amount that depends only on the input vector.

Variants

The pocket algorithm with ratchet (Gallant, 1990) solves the stability problem of perceptron learning by keeping the best solution seen so far "in its pocket". The pocket algorithm then returns the solution in the pocket, rather than the last solution. It can be used also for non-separable data sets, where the aim is to find a perceptron with a small number of misclassifications. 
In separable problems, perceptron training can also aim at finding the largest separating margin between the classes. The so-called perceptron of optimal stability can be determined by means of iterative training and optimization schemes, such as the Min-Over algorithm (Krauth and Mezard, 1987)W. Krauth and M. Mezard. Learning algorithms with optimal stabilty in neural networks. J. of Physics A: Math. Gen. 20: L745-L752 (1987)  or the AdaTron (Anlauf and Biehl, 1989))
.J.K. Anlauf and M. Biehl. The AdaTron: an Adaptive Perceptron algorithm. Europhysics Letters 10: 687-692 (1989) AdaTron uses the fact that the corresponding quadratic optimization problem is convex. The perceptron of optimal stability, together with the kernel trick, are the conceptual foundations of the support vector machine.
For example, consider the case of having to classify data into two classes. Here is a small such data set, consisting of two points coming from two Gaussian distributions.

Image:Two_class_Gaussian_data.png|Two-class Gaussian data
Image:Linear_classifier_on_Gaussian_data.png|A linear classifier operating on the original space
Image:Hidden_space_linear_classifier_on_Gaussian_data.png|A linear classifier operating on a high-dimensional projection

A linear classifier can only separate points with a hyperplane, so no linear classifier can classify all the points here perfectly. On the other hand, the data can be projected into a large number of dimensions. In our example, a random matrix was used to project the data linearly to a 1000-dimensional space; then each resulting data point was transformed through the hyperbolic tangent function. A linear classifier can then separate the data, as shown in the third figure. However the data may still not be completely separable in this space, in which the perceptron algorithm would not converge. In the example shown, stochastic steepest gradient descent was used to adapt the parameters.
Another way to solve nonlinear problems without using multiple layers is to use higher order networks (sigma-pi unit). In this type of network, each element in the input vector is extended with each pairwise combination of multiplied inputs (second order). This can be extended to an n-order network.
It should be kept in mind, however, that the best classifier is not necessarily that which classifies all the training data perfectly. Indeed, if we had the prior constraint that the data come from equi-variant Gaussian distributions, the linear separation in the input space is optimal.
Other linear classification algorithms include Winnow, support vector machine and logistic regression.

Example

Training set, consisting of four samples:
In the following, the final weights of one iteration become the initial weights of the next. Each cycle over all the samples in the training set is demarcated with heavy lines.
This example can be implemented in the following Python code.

Multiclass perceptron

Learning again iterates over the examples, predicting an output for each, leaving the weights unchanged when the predicted output matches the target, and changing them when it does not.  The update becomes:
In recent years, perceptron training has become popular in the field of natural language processing for such tasks as part-of-speech tagging and syntactic parsing (Collins, 2002).

History

Although the perceptron initially seemed promising, it was eventually proved that perceptrons could not be trained to recognise many classes of patterns. This led to the field of neural network research stagnating for many years, before it was recognised that a feedforward neural network with two or more layers (also called a multilayer perceptron) had far greater processing power than perceptrons with one layer (also called a single layer perceptron).
Single layer perceptrons are only capable of learning linearly separable patterns; in 1969 a famous book entitled Perceptrons by Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert showed that it was impossible for these classes of network to learn an XOR function. It is often believed that they  also conjectured (incorrectly) that a similar result would hold for a multi-layer perceptron network. However, this is not true, as both Minsky and Papert already knew that multi-layer perceptrons were capable of producing an XOR Function. (See the page on Perceptrons for more information.)  Three years later Stephen Grossberg published a series of papers introducing networks capable of modelling differential, contrast-enhancing and XOR functions. (The papers were published in 1972 and 1973, see e.g.: Grossberg, Contour enhancement, short-term memory, and constancies in reverberating neural networks. Studies in Applied Mathematics, 52 (1973), 213-257, online  Nevertheless the often-miscited Minsky/Papert text caused a significant decline in interest and funding of neural network research. It took ten more years until neural network research experienced a resurgence in the 1980s.  This text was reprinted in 1987 as "Perceptrons - Expanded Edition" where some errors in the original text are shown and corrected.
The kernel perceptron algorithm was already introduced in 1964 by Aizerman et al.M. A. Aizerman, E. M. Braverman, and L. I. Rozonoer. Theoretical foundations of the potential function method in pattern recognition learning. Automation and Remote Control, 25:821–837, 1964 Margin bounds guarantees were given for the Perceptron algorithm in the general non-separable case first by Freund and Schapire (1998),Freund, Y. and Schapire, R. E. 1998. Large margin classification using the perceptron algorithm. In Proceedings of the 11th Annual Conference on Computational Learning Theory (COLT' 98). ACM Press. and more recently by Mohri and Rostamizadeh (2013) who extend previous results and give new L1 bounds. Perceptron Mistake Bounds arXiv:1305.0208, 2013.






