[[Caraway]]

CATEGORIES: Carum, Edible Apiaceae, Medicinal plants of Africa, Medicinal plants of Asia, Medicinal plants of Europe, Root vegetables, Spices, Plants described in 1753

Caraway (Carum carvi), also known as meridian fennel,Anise Seed Substitute: Caraway SeedGlobal Crops Database: Meridian FennelBenefits of Carawy Seeds: Meridian Fennel, a biennial herb with a fleshy root ..... or Persian cumin,""Shahi Zeera"Plant Name: Meridian Fennel Meridian FennelCaraway: In the culinary arts, Caraway seeds ... is a biennial plant in the family Apiaceae,USDA Plants Classification Report: Apiaceae native to western Asia, Europe and Northern Africa.
The plant is similar in appearance to other members of the carrot family, with finely divided, feathery leaves with thread-like divisions, growing on 20–30 cm stems. The main flower stem is 40–60 cm tall, with small white or pink flowers in umbels. Caraway fruits (erroneously called seeds) are crescent-shaped achenes, around 2 mm long, with five pale ridges.

Names and history

The etymology of caraway is complex and poorly understood.
Caraway has been called by many names in different regions, with names deriving from the Latin cuminum (cumin), the Greek karon (again, cumin), which was adapted into Latin as carum (now meaning caraway), and the Sanskrit karavi, sometimes translated as "caraway" but other times understood to mean "fennel".)
English usage of the term caraway dates back to at least 1440,Walter William Skeat,  Principles of English etymology, Volume 2, page 319. 1891 Words of Arabic Origin and is considered by Skeat to be of Arabic origin, though Katzer believes the Arabic al-karawya (cf. Spanish alcaravea) to be derived from the Latin carum.

Uses

The fruits, usually used whole, have a pungent, anise-like flavor and aroma that comes from essential oils, mostly carvone and limonene. They are used as a spice in breads, especially rye bread.
Caraway is also used in desserts, liquors, casseroles, Indian dishes and other foods.  It is used in some Indian cuisine such as in rice dishes like Pulaos, Biryani, as well as a breath freshener, and medicinal purposes. It is more commonly found in European cuisine. For example, it is commonly used in British caraway seed cake and is also added to sauerkraut.    

The roots may be cooked as a root vegetable like parsnips or carrots.
Additionally, leaves are sometimes consumed, either raw, dried, or cooked, as herbs, similar to parsley...
Caraway fruit oil is also used as a fragrance component in soaps, lotions, and perfumes.
Caraway also has a long tradition of medical uses, primarily for stomach complaints. Emerging and ongoing research from Arabic regional studies suggest Carum carvi use as an endocrine function support agent, specifically related to thyroid disorders and auto immune disease (see Hashimoto's thyroiditis)

Cultivation

The plant prefers warm, sunny locations and well-drained soil rich in organic matter.  In warmer regions it is planted in the winter months as an annual.  In temperate climates it is planted as a summer annual or biennial. There is however a polyploid variant (with four haploid sets=4n) of this plant that was found to be perennial.
Finland produces approximately 28% (2011) of the world's caraway production.goodnewsfinland. This results in fruits that contain higher levels of essential oils than those produced in other main growing areas which include Canada, the Netherlands, Egypt and central Europe.

Companion plant

Caraway, like many umbellifers, is a useful companion plant. It can hide the scent of neighboring crops from pest insects, as well as attracting beneficial insects like predatory wasps and predatory flies to its flowers.

Similar herbs

Caraway thyme has a strong caraway scent and is sometimes used as a substitute for real caraway in recipes.
Other similar members of the family Apiaceae include anise, fennel, dill, cumin, licorice-root (Ligusticum), and coriander (cilantro).






