[[F.C. Porto]]

CATEGORIES: F.C. Porto, Sport in Porto, Football clubs in Portugal, Companies listed on the Euronext exchanges, Publicly traded sports companies, Association football clubs established in 1893, Sports clubs established in 1893, Multi-sport clubs in Portugal, G-14 clubs, 1893 establishments in Portugal, Unrelegated association football clubs, Taça de Portugal winners

Futebol Clube do Porto MH IH MH OM), commonly known as F.C. Porto or simply Porto, is a Portuguese sports club based in Porto, which is mostly known for its professional football team. 
Founded on 28 September 1893, it is one of the "Big Three" (Portuguese: Três Grandes) teams in Portugal, together with Benfica and Sporting CP, who have never been relegated from the top flight of Portuguese football since the Primeira Liga was created in 1933. The team is nicknamed Dragões (Dragons), for the mythological creature standing atop the club's crest, or Azuis e brancos (Blue and white), for their kit colours; their supporters are called Portistas.
As of 2014, Porto is the most successful Portuguese club, having won a total of 74 senior titles. Domestically, it has 67 titles (one less than Benfica), which include 27 Primeira Liga trophies. Porto is the only Portuguese team to have won a record five consecutive league titles, between 1994–95 and 1998–99. Other national honours won by the club include the Taça de Portugal (16 times), the defunct Campeonato de Portugal (a record four times, along with Sporting CP) and the Supertaça Cândido de Oliveira (a record 20 times, five of which in succession). Porto became the second team in Portuguese league history, after Benfica, to complete two full 30-game seasons without defeats, namely in the 2010–11 and 2012–13 seasons. In the former, Porto achieved the largest difference ever between champion and runners-up (21 points) in a 3 points-per-win system.
Porto is an internationally successful team, having won the European Cup/UEFA Champions League in 1987 and 2004, the UEFA Cup/Europa League in 2003 and 2011, the UEFA Super Cup in 1987, and the Intercontinental Cup in 1987 and 2004, for a total of seven titles. They are the only Portuguese team to have won any of the last three competitions and one of few teams in the world to have won three international titles in the same season (1987). In addition, Porto were runners-up in the 1983–84 European Cup Winners' Cup and the 2003, 2004 and 2011 editions of the UEFA Super Cup.

History

The club was founded in 1893 by a wine merchant, António Nicolau de Almeida. The original stadium still exists (the field of constitution), currently serving the formation of the club, under the name Dragon Force.
FC Porto's nickname, "Dragões" (Dragons), as well as the name of their stadium, Estádio do Dragão (Dragon's Stadium), is related to the club's coat of arms. Until 1922 the club's emblem was a blue football with the letters FCP in white. That year, one of the club's players thought of combining that emblem with the city of Porto's coat of arms at the time. These arms, given by Queen Maria II in 1837 (subsequently altered in 1940), had a quartered shield, showing in the first and fourth quarter the arms of Portugal, and in the second and third quarter the Virgin Mary holding the Child Jesus. The crest of the Royal House of Portugal was a dragon holding the motto "Invicta" (undefeated), surrounded by the collar of the Order of the Tower and Sword, Portugal's highest honour, bestowed on the city by the queen after the undefeated siege of July 1832 – August 1833. Still today the official titles of the city of Porto are: "Antiga, Mui Nobre, Sempre Leal e Invicta" (ancient, very noble, always loyal and undefeated), and to this date, the city is often referred to in Portugal as "a (cidade) Invicta" (the undefeated city). The colours of the club may likewise be inspired by the historical colours of Portugal: until the overthrow of the Monarchy in 1910, the Portuguese flag was blue and white (instead of the modern green and red) with the coat of arms of Portugal in the centre, crowned by a royal crown.
The Dragon
The traditional symbol and crest of the House of Braganza is a green dragon,345 representing Saint George,6 patron saint of Portugal. Because of the use of the dragon in heraldry by the Braganza and Pedro IV's link with Porto, a dragon was added to the old coat of arms of the municipality of Porto9 and is still a part of F.C. Porto's coat of arms, who are nicknamed "the dragons".

1984 European Cup Winners' Cup

When Pinto da Costa joined as president, FC Porto was the only club from the "Três Grandes" without European honours, but that quickly changed. Its first final in an international competition was played against Juventus for the 1983–84 European Cup Winners' Cup.

First time champions of Europe in 1987

Three years later, the team led by Artur Jorge, the name hand-picked by José Maria Pedroto, won its first European honour in a thrilling 2–1 victory over Bayern Munich in the 1986-1987 European Champion Clubs' Cup.

European Super Cup and Toyota Cup winners

The following season, Porto won the European Super Cup against AFC Ajax, and the Toyota Cup against Peñarol, making it the first Portuguese winner of either cup. The coach was Tomislav Ivić.

1988–2002

The following 16 years saw FC Porto as an average team – often in the final 16, but not progressing much further. The exception was in 1994, when Porto reached the semi-finals of the UEFA Champions League. The semi-final, decided on a single game, resulted in a heavy loss (3–0) at the hands of Johann Cruyff's FC Barcelona at the Nou Camp.

2003 UEFA Cup winners and first Treble

In 2003, under the guidance of José Mourinho, FC Porto made a UEFA Cup run, concluding with a victory in the final against Celtic in Seville, Spain. It was FC Porto's first Treble (consisting in the Portuguese Liga, in the Portuguese Cup and in the UEFA Cup titles).
In this year, FC Porto lost the UEFA Super Cup against A.C. Milan.

2004 – Champions of Europe for the second time

The following season set a greater challenge, but despite a slow start which included a 1–3 loss against Real Madrid, FC Porto never lost again in the UEFA Champions League, relegating Olympique de Marseille to the UEFA Cup (where they reached the final), drawing with Manchester United at Old Trafford in the dying minutes of play to go through on aggregate, and beating Olympique Lyonnais and Deportivo La Coruña. FC Porto beat AS Monaco 3–0 in the Final, played in Arena AufSchalke in Germany. FC Porto's UEFA Champions League winning line-up for their spectacular cup-run was: Vítor Baía, Nuno Valente, Ricardo Carvalho, Jorge Costa(c), Paulo Ferreira, Costinha, Maniche, Pedro Mendes, Deco (Pedro Emanuel), Derlei (Benni McCarthy), and Carlos Alberto (Dmitri Alenichev).
In this year, FC Porto lost the UEFA Super Cup against Valencia.

Second Toyota Cup triumph

Even after the departure of José Mourinho to Chelsea, the club kept winning at the international level. On 12 December 2004, FC Porto won the last-held Toyota Cup, by beating Once Caldas from Colombia 8–7 in a penalty shoot-out. The coach was Víctor Fernández.

2011 UEFA Europa League winners and second Treble

2011 saw the club winning a second Treble (consisting of the Portuguese Liga, Portuguese Cup (their third consecutive triumph) and UEFA Europa League titles). Under the guidance of André Villas-Boas (who became at 33 years old the youngest coach ever to win a European competition), FC Porto won the 2010–11 UEFA Europa League ensuring its second UEFA Cup/UEFA Europa League title. It was the first European final ever between two Portuguese clubs (FC Porto and Braga). Radamel Falcao also set a new goalscoring record of 17 goals in 14 matches during the campaign (Play-off round excluded), surpassing Jürgen Klinsmann's previous record. FC Porto however lost the UEFA Super Cup against F.C. Barcelona.
The following year, FC Porto won the Portuguese SuperCup for the third successive year and retained the Primeira Liga, for their 26th title.

Crest and kit

The club's first crest was created in 1910 and consisted of an old blue football with white seams bearing the club name's initials in white. On 26 October 1922, the crest was changed to its present-day appearance after the club approved a design by Augusto Baptista Ferreira (nicknamed "Simplício"), a graphical artist and one of the club's players.
In 1906, the club's first official team wore kits with a variety of colors and patterns, which included white shirts with red collars or vertical blue stripes, and even red shirts.
Porto was the first Portuguese team to have a shirt partner, when in 1983 they signed a sponsorship deal with Revigrés for 10 million escudos per year. 

Grounds

The club's first ground was the Campo da Raínha (Queen's Field), inaugurated in 1906 with an exhibition game against Boavista. The site was located near the residence of Monteiro da Costa and was the property of the city's horticultural society. Aided by his father, a horticultor by profession, Monteiro da Costa rented a portion (30 by 50 meters) of uncultivated terrain to create the first dedicated football pitch in the country. Later that year, the society's vivaria were transferred to another location, allowing Porto to increase the pitch area to match the sport's official dimensions.
By 1911, the Campo da Raínha was becoming too small for the growing attendances. After being notified about the sale of the ground for construction of a factory, the club searched for a new ground and rented a terrain near the Constituição street for an annual fee of 350$00.
In 1933, Porto approved a plan to build a new stadium to accommodate and meet the demands of larger attendances, but the project only moved forward with the purchase of  
The awarding of the UEFA Euro 2004 hosting rights to Portugal in 1999 was the perfect opportunity for Porto to move into a more modern, functional and comfortable stadium, in line with the demands of high-level international football. The club decided to build an entirely new ground and chose a site located a few hundreds of meters southeast of the Estádio das Antas. The project was commissioned to Portuguese architect Manuel Salgado, For safety reasons, its current capacity is limited to 50,431.

Honours

Domestic

European

Worldwide

Statistics

Recent seasons

Players

Current first squad

On loan







Organisation

After going public in 1997, Porto created several satellite companies:
The FCPorto SAD is listed in the Euronext Lisbon stock exchange.

Personnel

Current technical staff

Management


