[[Paul Graham (computer programmer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, Living people, Lisp people, English computer programmers, Cornell University alumni, Businesspeople in information technology, Harvard University alumni, O'Reilly writers, Programming language designers, American technology company founders, Yahoo! employees

Paul Graham (born 13 November 1964) (1995), and the book Hackers & Painters (2004).

Education

Graham has a Bachelor of Arts in philosophy from Cornell UniversityUndergraduation. Paul Graham. Retrieved 22 July 2011. (1986). He has also studied painting at the Rhode Island School of Design and the Accademia di Belle Arti in Florence.

Biography

In 1996, Graham and Robert Morris founded Viaweb, the first application service provider (ASP). Viaweb's software, originally written mostly in Common Lisp, allowed users to make their own Internet stores. In the summer of 1998 Viaweb was sold to Yahoo! for 455,000 shares of Yahoo! stock, valued at $49.6 million. At Yahoo! the product became Yahoo! Store.
He has since begun writing essays for his popular website paulgraham. They range from "Beating the Averages", which compares Lisp to other programming languages and introduced the word Blub, to "Why Nerds are Unpopular", a discussion of nerd life in high school. A collection of his essays has been published as Hackers & Painters  by O'Reilly, which includes a discussion of the growth of Viaweb and what Graham perceives to be the advantages of Lisp to program it.
In 2005, after giving a talk at the Harvard Computer Society later published as "How to Start a Startup", Graham along with Trevor Blackwell, Jessica Livingston and Robert Morris started Y Combinator to provide seed funding to a large number of startups, particularly those started by younger, more technically oriented founders. Y Combinator has now invested in more than 400 startups across over 30 distinct markets, including Justin.
In response to the proposed Stop Online Piracy Act (SOPA), Graham announced in late 2011 that no representatives of any company supporting it would be invited to Y Combinator's Demo Day events.
BusinessWeek included Paul Graham in 2008 edition of its annual feature, The 25 Most Influential People on the Web.
In 2008, Paul Graham married Jessica Livingston.

Arc programming language

In 2001, Paul Graham announced that he was working on a new dialect of Lisp named "Arc". Over the years since, he has written several essays describing features or goals of the language, and some internal projects at Y Combinator have been written in Arc, most notably the Hacker News web forum and news aggregator program.
In the essay Being Popular Graham describes a few of his goals for the language. While many of the goals are very general ("Arc should be hackable," "there should be good libraries"), he did give some specifics. For instance, he believes that it is important for a language to be terse:
  It would not be far from the truth to say that a hacker about to write a program decides what language to use, at least subconsciously, based on the total number of characters he'll have to type. If this isn't precisely how hackers think, a language designer would do well to act as if it were.  
He also stated that it is better for a language to only implement a small number of "axioms", even when that means the language may not have features that large organizations want, such as object-orientation (OO). In fact, Graham feels that OO is not useful as its methods and patterns are just "good design", and he sees the language features used to implement OO as partially mistaken.
A controversy among Lisp programmers is whether, and how much, the S-expressions of the language should be complemented by other forms of syntax. Graham feels that additional syntax should be used in situations where pure S-expressions would be overly verbose, saying, "I don't think we should be religiously opposed to introducing syntax into Lisp." Graham also feels that efficiency problems should be solved by giving the programmer a good profiler.
The first publicly released version of Arc was made available on 29 January 2008. The release comes in the form of a . A tutorial and a discussion forum are also available. The forum is copied from news.com and is written itself in Arc.
The initial version caused some controversy, by only supporting the ASCII character set, and by shipping with a built-in web application library that bases its layout on HTML tables. This, combined with the hype surrounding Arc and its generally slow development pace, has gathered some unfavorable comments.

Blub

Blub is a hypothetical programming language; it is an average language "right in the middle of the abstractness continuum. It is not the most powerful language, but it is more powerful than Cobol or machine language."[ref]
; published in Hackers & Painters, 2004; the essay was also reprinted in The Planning and Scheduling Working Group Report on Programming Languages, by JM Adams, R Hawkins, C Myers, C Sontag, S Speck[/ref] It was used by Graham to illustrate a comparison of power between programming languages that go beyond Turing completeness, and more specifically, to illustrate the difficulty of comparing a programming language one knows to one that one does not:"... Determining such a relation between languages objectively rather than subjectively seems to be somewhat problematic, a phenomenon that Paul Graham has discussed in "The Blub Paradox" 6." "An Introduction to Aspect Oriented Programming in e", D. Robinson; see also "Expressive power of recursion and aggregates in XQuery", by J Hidders, J Paredaens, R Vercammen, S Marrara
The concept has been cited by writers such as Joel Spolsky.

Bayesian filtering

In 2002, Graham published an essay entitled "A Plan for Spam", in which he advocated using a Naive Bayes classifier to identify spam.

Graham's hierarchy of disagreement 

Graham proposed a "disagreement hierarchy" in a 2008 essay "How to Disagree", putting types of argument into a seven-point hierarchy and observing that "If moving up the disagreement hierarchy makes people less mean, that will make most of them happier."
Although originally written as a simple list, Graham's hierarchy can be represented as a pyramid with the most convincing form of disagreement at the top, and the weakest at the bottom:
Graham notes that articulate forms of name-calling ("The author is a self-important dilettante.") are no different from crude insults, in this hierarchy.








