[[Queenstown, New Zealand]]

CATEGORIES: Queenstown, New Zealand, Populated places in Otago

Queenstown () is a resort town in Otago in the south-west of New Zealand's South Island.
It is built around an inlet called Queenstown Bay on Lake Wakatipu, a long thin Z-shaped lake formed by glacial processes, and has spectacular views of nearby mountains such as The Remarkables, Cecil Peak, Walter Peak and just above the town; Ben Lomond and Queenstown Hill.
The town is the largest centre in Central Otago, and the second largest in Otago after Dunedin. According to the 2006 census, the usually resident population of the Queenstown urban area (including Fernhill, Frankton and Kelvin Heights) is 13,062,2006 Census Data, Final counts, Otago Region. Cited population is the sum total of Frankton () an increase of 22.1% since 2001.
The population of the Queenstown ward at 30 June 2011 is 16,600. Stats.nz. Retrieved on 2014-04-12.
The Queenstown-Lakes District has a land area of 8,704.97 km² (3,361.01 sq mi) not counting its inland lakes (Lake Hāwea, Lake Wakatipu, and Lake Wanaka). The region has an estimated resident population of 

History

Māori visitors

The area was known to Māori before Europeans arrived. The first European to see Lake Wakatipu was Nathanael Chalmers who was guided by Reko, the chief of the Tuturau, over the Waimea Plains and up the Mataura River in September 1853., F.W.G., (1949), Golden Days of Lake County. Whitcombe and Tombs. p 3-11. Evidence of stake nets, baskets for catching eels, spears and ashes indicated the Glenorchy area was visited by Māori. It is likely Ngāi Tahu Māori visited Queenstown en route to collect Pounamu (greenstone), although no evidence of permanent settlement is known.

European settlers

Explorers William Gilbert Rees and Nicholas von Tunzelmann were the first Europeans to settle the area. Rees established a high country farm in the location of Queenstown's current town centre in 1860, but the discovery of gold in the Arrow River in 1862 encouraged Rees to convert his wool shed into a hotel named the Queen's Arms, now known as Eichardt's. Many Queenstown streets bear names from the gold mining era (such as Camp Street) and some historic buildings remain. William's Cottage, the Lake Lodge of Ophir, Queenstown Police Station, and St Peter's Anglican Church lie close together in a designated historic precinct.

Tourism and education

See and do

A resort town, Queenstown boasted 220 adventure tourism activities in 2012.
Queenstown is a major centre for snow sports in New Zealand, with people from all over the country and many parts of the world travelling to ski at the four main mountain ski fields (Cardrona Alpine Resort, Coronet Peak, The Remarkables and Treble Cone). Cross country skiing is also available at the Waiorau Snowfarm, near Cardrona village.
The 100 year old twin screw coal fired steamer TSS Earnslaw traverses Lake Wakatipu.
Queenstown lies close to the centre of a small wine producing region, reputed to be the world's southernmost. The Two Paddocks vineyard is owned by local actor Sam Neill.
Queenstown has many festivals.Queenstown Jazz Festival
Queenstown Airport is located 8 km from townTravel Info - Queenstown. Best Mountain Towns. Retrieved on 2014-04-12. and has scheduled flights from Auckland, Christchurch, Rotorua, Wellington, Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane.

Locations for television and film

Jane Campion's six-part drama  mystery Top of the Lake was shot during 2012 for pay TV release in 2013. The lakes of the Wakatipu appear ominous, and the Southern Alps spectacular. The main location is Moke Lake and Thomas M Wright.
In 2010, Cycle 14 of America's Next Top Model, was, in part filmed in Queenstown. The cycle was won by Krista White. Raina Hein was runner up.
Queenstown and the surrounding area contains many locations used in the filming of the Lord of the Rings film trilogy. Locations used include Paradise near Glenorchy, at the head of Lake Wakatipu.
Queenstown featured for 17 minutes in I Hate Luv Storys, a 2010 Bollywood romantic comedy. Queenstown and the surrounding areas were also used in the 2009 X-Men Origins: Wolverine film. Mee-Shee: The Water Giant was shot in Queenstown in 2005, and released to  DVD in the same year. Queenstown was also used to film most of the 1988 The Rescue. Queenstown was the base for filming the George Lucas 1988 fantasy film Willow.
Filming of the 1981 film Race for the Yankee Zephyr took place in and around Queenstown, the first major motion picture production for the area.
The first and last episodes of the fifth season of The Mole were filmed in Queenstown. In the latter episode, the final three contestants took the final computer quiz on the Kingston Flyer.

Language, tourism, and community education

Wakatipu High School, a government co-ed school services the community for students 13–18 years.
Adult training institutions provide a variety of options in English, sustainability, tourism and community education in Queenstown.
Specialist English language providers offers various courses, including scholarships for English study.Southern Institute of Technology 24 Week English Scholarship
Queenstown Resort College actively supports events for international travel agents, It offers accredited management courses in hospitality and adventure tourism,Queenstown Resort College and a rare Diploma of Adventure Tourism Management specialising in Snowsport.Queenstown Resort College: Diploma of Adventure Tourism Management specialising in Snowsport
ACE Wakatipu has a community focus, and provides links to many adult training opportunities.ACE Wakatipu
Otago Polytechnic offers introductory courses in sustainability.

Highlights

Queenstown Golf  Club[/ref]

Geography and Climate

Queenstown is situated on the shore line of Lake Wakatipu, the second largest lake by surface area in New Zealand. It is at a relatively high altitude nestled among mountains, and there are close-by gorges and some plains suitable for agriculture.

Despite its relatively high altitude and mountain surroundings, it has an oceanic climate (Köppen climate classification Cfb)..archive.niwa.co.prn (from the NIWA website)

Transport

Queenstown is accessible by road and air but not by rail (similar to Taupo and Nelson).
As a resort centre, there are many bus services that operate into Queenstown, with most being for package tours, but daily services for the local or itinerant are available to and from Invercargill, Dunedin and Christchurch, which are the main cities closest to Queenstown.
Queenstown has an international airport with flights from Australia by Air New Zealand, Qantas, Virgin Australia and Jetstar and in particular, from Brisbane, Melbourne, and Sydney (the frequency is much increased over the ski season and during summer). Domestic flights operate from Auckland, Rotorua, Wellington and Christchurch. Due to sustained growth, expansion of the airport terminal was undertaken in 2005 through 2010.
Queenstown Airport is New Zealand's busiest helicopter base, also the fourth busiest airport by passenger traffic, and is also heavily used for tourist 'flightseeing', especially to Milford Sound and Mount Cook, using both fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft.
The primary road access to the Queenstown area is via State Highway 6 (SH6), which travels from Cromwell through the Kawarau Gorge to Frankton, where a 9 km spur (SH6A) leads to the CBD and connects with the Glenorchy Road. SH6 continues south, crossing the Kawarau river before heading down the eastern side of Lake Wakatipu to Kingston before crossing the provincial boundary and emerging on the plains of Southland, terminating in the city of Invercargill. A difficult road over the Crown Range leads to Cardrona skifield and Wanaka, and is New Zealand's highest paved public road.
Queenstown is the departure point for a large number of day trips to the similarly famous Milford Sound, which entails a return trip of approximately 12 hours. There are scenic flights available to Milford Sound. A return flight, including a two-hour cruise, is approximately four hours.

Suburbs and nearby areas

Central Queenstown contains many businesses, apartments and homes but is near many suburbs or large areas of housing which are:
Fernhill / Sunshine Bay, Goldfield Heights, Kelvin Heights, Arthurs Point and Frankton.
Just outside of Queenstown are the areas of:
Arrowtown, Dalefield, Closeburn, Gibbston, Jack's Point, Lake Hayes and Quail Rise.

Sister cities





Bibliography




