[[The Big Red One]]

CATEGORIES: 1980 films, World War II films, War drama films, American films, English-language films, Films directed by Samuel Fuller, North African Campaign films, Italian Campaign of World War II films, Operation Overlord films

The Big Red One is a World War II war film starring Lee Marvin and Mark Hamill, released in 1980. It was written and directed by Samuel Fuller.
It was heavily cut on its original release, but a restored version, The Big Red One: The Reconstruction, was premièred at the 2004 Cannes Film Festival, seven years after Fuller's death. Fuller wrote a book, with the same title, which was more a companion novel than a novelization of the film, although it features many of the scenes that were originally cut.

Background

Fuller was a World War II veteran and served with the 1st Infantry Division, which was nicknamed The Big Red One for the red numeral "1" on the Division's shoulder patch. He received the Silver Star, Bronze Star and Purple Heart during his service. He was present at the liberation of the Falkenau concentration camp.

Plot

The film begins in black and white in November 1918 at the end of World War I. A private (Marvin), using his trench knife, kills a German soldier who was approaching with his arms raised and muttering in German. When he returns to his company's headquarters, the private is told that the war ended "about four hours ago." The 1st Division patch is shown in color.
The film then moves to November 1942, when the soldier, now a sergeant (Sgt. Possum) in the 'Big Red One', leads his squad of infantrymen through North Africa. Over the next two years the squad serves in campaigns in Sicily, Omaha Beach at the start of the Battle of Normandy, the liberation of France and the invasion of western Germany.
Throughout the film, the Sgt. Possum's German counterpart, Schroeder, participates in many of the same battles and displays a murderous loyalty to Hitler and Germany. At different times he and the sergeant express the same sentiment that soldiers are killers but not murderers.
During the advance across northern France the squad crosses the same field where the sergeant killed the surrendering German at the start of the film, where a memorial now stands. The following short conversation takes place:
The squad's final action in the war is the liberation of Falkenau concentration camp in Czechoslovakia. Shortly after this, the sergeant is in a forest at night, having just buried a young boy he had befriended after liberating a concentration camp. Schroeder approaches, attempting to surrender, but the sergeant stabs him. His squad then arrives and informs him that the war ended "about four hours ago." This time, as the squad walks away, Pvt. Griff (Mark Hamill) notices that Schroeder is still alive; the sergeant and his men work frantically to save his life as they return to their encampment.

Cast

Restored scenes

Production

Warner Brothers Studio was interested in filming The Big Red One in the late 1950s, sending Fuller on a trip to Europe to scout locations. Fuller directed Merrill's Marauders as a dry run for the film.  When Fuller argued with Jack Warner and his studio over cuts they made to Merrill's Marauders, the plans for the  film The Big Red One were dropped. Knopf (2002)
Originally, John Wayne was to play The Sergeant, but Fuller felt that he was not right for the role.
Peter Bogdanovich helped set the film up at Paramount Pictures who paid Fuller to write a script. However when Paramount head Frank Yablans left the studio, the project was in turnaround. It shifted over to Lorimar with Bogdanovich to produce (he says Fuller wanted him to play the Robert Carradine part) but then Bogdanovich pulled out and brought in Gene Corman to produce.John Gallagher, "Between Action and Cut", August 2004 accessed 3 June 2013 
The film was shot on location in Israel and Ireland, with some snow scenes featuring Marvin shot in and around Big Bear National Park. Trim Castle in Trim, County Meath was used as the derelict castle where the adolescent sniper kills one of the GIs (Boyne) as he crosses the river.
Originally rated PG by the MPAA, the film reconstruction by Brian Jamieson and Richard Schickel was re-rated R for "war violence and some language".

Reception

The Big Red One ranks 483rd on Empire magazine's 2008 list of the 500 greatest movies of all time. Terry Lawson of the Detroit Free Press called it the greatest war movie of all time.
The film was entered into the 1980 Cannes Film Festival.
In his review of the original, theatrical version of the film, Roger Ebert wrote:  While this is an expensive epic, he hasn't fallen to the temptations of the epic form. He doesn't give us a lot of phony meaning, as if to justify the scope of the production. There aren't a lot of deep, significant speeches. In the ways that count, "The Big Red One" is still a B-movie -- hard-boiled, filled with action, held together by male camaraderie, directed with a lean economy of action. It's one of the most expensive B-pictures ever made, and I think that helps it fit the subject. "A" war movies are about War, but "B" war movies are about soldiers."The Big Red One." Chicago Sun-Times. 
It is currently listed 'Certified Fresh' by the critical website Rottentomatoes.7 based on 44 reviews.



Bibliography




