[[Caltrop]]

CATEGORIES: Roman weapons, Roman fortifications, Area denial weapons, Fortification (obstacles), Medieval weapons, Guerrilla warfare tactics

A caltrop (also known as caltrap, galtrop, cheval trap, galthrap, galtrap, calthrop, crow's foot In more modern times, caltrops are used against wheeled vehicles with pneumatic tires.
The modern name "caltrop" is derived from the Latin calcitrapa (foot-trap). The synonymous Latin word tribulus gave rise to the modern Latin name of a plant offering similar hazards to sandaled or bare feet, Tribulus terrestris (Zygophyllaceae), whose spiked seed case can injure feet and puncture tires. This plant can also be compared to the starthistle, Centaurea calcitrapa, which is sometimes called the "caltrop". A water plant with similarly-shaped spiked seeds is called the "water caltrop", Trapa natans.

History

According to Quintus Curtius (IV.13.36), iron caltrops were used as early as 331 BC at Gaugamela. They were known to the Romans as tribulus the latter meaning 'jagged iron'.
They were used in the Battle of Carrhae in 51 BC.
The late Roman writer Vegetius, referring in his work De Re Militari to scythed chariots, wrote:

Contrary to popular belief, there is no evidence that the caltrop was used in either the first Wars of Scottish Independence (1296–1328), or second wars (1332–1357). A single example was found in Jamestown, Virginia, in the United States.
The Japanese version of the caltrop is called makibishi. Makibishi were sharp spiked objects that were used in feudal Japan to slow pursuers and also were used in the defence of samurai fortifications. Iron makibishi were called tetsubishi, while the makibishi made from the dried seed pod of the water chestnut, formed a natural type of makibashi called tennenbishi. Both types of makibishi could penetrate the thin soles of shoes, such as the waraji sandals, that were commonly worn in feudal Japan.32Samurai, Warfare and the State in Early Medieval Japan, Karl F. Friday, Psychology Press, 2004 P.119
Caltrops were used extensively and to very good effect during World War II. The modifications and variants produced by the Special Operations Executive (SOE) and the Office of Strategic Services (OSS) of the United States .

Caltrop-like devices

Punji sticks perform a similar role to caltrops. These are sharpened sticks placed vertically in the ground. Their use in modern times targets the body and limbs of a falling victim by means of a pit or tripwire.
During the Second World War, large caltrop-shaped objects made from reinforced concrete were used as anti-tank devices, although it seems that these were rare. are still used defensively by the army to deny access to wheeled vehicles, especially in camp areas. As dragon's teeth are immobile, the analogy with the caltrop is inexact. Another caltrop-like defence during World War II was the massive steel, freestanding Czech hedgehog; the works were designed as anti-tank obstacles, and could also damage landing craft and warships that came too close to shore. These were used by the Germans to defend beaches at Normandy and other coastal areas. 
Tetrapods are concrete blocks shaped like caltrops, which interlock when piled up. They are used in the construction of breakwaters and other sea defences, as they have been found to let the water pass through them and interrupt natural processes less than some other defenses.

Modern uses

Tire deflation device

Researchers have tried to develop a caltrop-like device to deflate vehicle tires in a manner useful to law enforcement agencies or the military.

Australian Light Horse troops

During service in World War I, Australian Light Horse troops collected caltrops as keepsakes. These caltrops were either made by welding two pieces of wire together to form a four-pointed star or pouring molten steel into a mould to form a solid, seven-pointed star. The purpose of these devices was to disable horses. They were exchanged with French troops for bullets. The Australian Light Horse troops referred to them as "Horse Chestnuts". Examples from 1917 are kept in the Cart Museum in Bundeena, in the state of Victoria, Australia.

Labor activists

Caltrops have been used at times during labor strikes and other disputes. Such devices were used by some to destroy the tires of management and replacement workers. In this context, caltrops are usually referred to as "jack rocks." They have become icons at pro-union rallies, often depicted on t-shirts, hats, or worn as jewelry in some cases.
Because of labor's use of caltrops during the Caterpillar strike of the mid-1990s in Illinois, the state legislature passed a law making the possession of such devices a misdemeanor.

Symbolic use

A caltrop has had a variety of symbolic uses and is commonly found as a charge in heraldry. For instance, the Finnish noble family Fotangel (Swedish for 'caltrop') had arms Gules, three caltrops Argent.
It has been adopted by military units: the caltrop is the symbol of the US Army's III Corps, which is based at Fort Hood, Texas.  III Corps traces its lineage to the days of horse cavalry, which used the caltrop as a defensive area denial weapon.
It is also the symbol of the United States Marine Corps' 3rd Division, formed on September 16, 1942.



Footnotes



  | last       = Lovell
  | year       = 1964
  | first      = Stanley P
  | authorlink = 
  | title      = Of spies & stratagems
  | publisher  = Pocket Books
  | asin       = B0007ESKHE
  | ref        = harv 
 }}

