[[Athenry]]

CATEGORIES: Towns and villages in County Galway

Athenry ( east of Galway city, and one of the attractions of the town is its medieval castle. The town is also well known by virtue of the song "The Fields of Athenry".

History

Its name derives from the ford ('Áth') crossing the river Clarin just east of the settlement. Because three kingdoms met at that point, it was called 'Áth na Ríogh', or 'the Ford of the Kings'. On some medieval maps of English origin the town is called Kingstown. The kingdoms were Hy-Many to the north-east, east and south-east; Aidhne to the south and south-west; Maigh Seola to the west and north-west. Up to around 1000 it was included in Uí Briúin Seóla. In the mid-11th century it was part of the trícha cét of Clann Taidg.
The earliest remaining building in the town is Athenry Castle which was built sometime before 1240 by Meyler de Bermingham. In 1241, the Dominican Abbey was founded, a major institution. It was ostensibly closed during the Protestant Reformation but survived until being desecrated and burned during the MacanIarla Wars of the 1570s, and was finally vandalised by Cromwellians in the 1650s. The Medieval walls around Athenry are among the most complete and best preserved in Ireland and still retain a number of the original towers as well as the original North gate. The remains of the Lorro Gate were partially unearthed in 2007 during redevelopment road works in the area. In the centre of the town is the square; it is here that Athenry's late 15th century Market Cross is located. The monument which is of Tabernacle or Lantern type is the only one of its kind in Ireland and the only medieval cross still standing in situ in the country. A Heritage centre now occupies the remains of the mid-13th century St Mary's Collegiate Church immediately North of the Square. The original church is largely destroyed but in 1828 a Church of Ireland church was built into its chancel.
In 1791, Caquebert de Montbret visited the town, which he described as:
Moyode Castle is another tall 16th-century fortified tower house of the Dolphin family, which went to the Persse family. The castle is now restored and inhabited and is located  from the town of Athenry.

Transport

Road

Athenry is served by the newly constructed M6 Motorway which links Galway city to Dublin.

Rail

Athenry railway station opened on 1 August 1851 and the Athenry-Tuam section due in 2011.

Sport

Athenry is home to St. Mary's G.A.A. club who have won numerous All-Ireland Senior Club Hurling Championships.
Athenry Athletics Club
Athenry is also home to Athenry Soccer Club In 2007 Athenry Soccer Club became the Galway Premier League Champions for the first time in the clubs 36 year history. The club has followed this by winning the Galway Premier Title again in 2008 & 2010. In 2007,2008,2010 & 2011 Athenry Soccer Club also captured the Connaught Junior Cup title.
Athenry Golf Club is an eighteen hole championship course located between Athenry and Oranmore in the townland of Palmerstown. The club is a mixture of parkland and heathland built on a limestone base against the backdrop of a large forest giving excellent drainage, which makes the course playable all year round. Athenry Golf course was extended to 18 holes in 1991 under the guidance of architect Eddie Hackett and further improvements in recent years have led to the club hosting recent Provincial and National championships.

International relations

Twin towns – Sister cities

Athenry is twinned with the town of Quimperlé in Brittany and, as of the 15th of August 2013, Renews-Cappahayden, Newfoundland and Labrador.

People

The following is a list of notable natives of Athenry:

The "Stations of the Cross" in Kiltullagh Church were painted by the artist Evie Hone.Eva Hone

Annalistic references

From the Annals of the Four Masters:UCC,ie – Annala Uladh: Annals of Ulster



Further reading






