[[Takbir]]

CATEGORIES: Islamic terms, Arabic words and phrases, Superlatives in religion

The Takbīr or Tekbir ( as an informal expression of faith, in times of distress, to express celebration or victory, or to express resolute determination or defiance.
The form 
The term , meaning "great".

Usage

This phrase is recited by Muslims in many different situations. For example, when they are very happy, to express approval, to prevent a Muslim from becoming prideful by reminding them that Allah is their source of success, or as a battle cry, during times of extreme stress.  In the Islamic world, instead of applause, often someone will shout "Takbīr" and the crowd will respond "Allahu Akbar" in response.

In prayer

The phrase is said during each stage of both obligatory prayers (performed five times a day), and supererogatory prayers (performed at will). The Muslim call to prayer (adhan) by the muezzin and to commence prayer (iqama) also contains the phrase.

In times of distress

This phrase is also used in times of distress.
Just before a Garuda Airbus A300B-4 crashed into the jungle near Medan, Indonesia, the pilot screamed "Aaaaaah! Allahu Akbar!" into his radio. According to a radio communication transcript, the pilot's conversation with the air controller had been in English, but his last words were this Arabic phrase as the plane crashed on September 26, 1997, killing all 235 people aboard in Indonesia's deadliest crash.  It was suspected that the crash may have been due to either disorientation or engine failure caused by local dense smog resulting from forest fires.AP via Seattle Times: Indonesian Pilot Was Confused Before Crash, September 29, 1997
After a failed attempt to climb the world's second highest peak, K2, according to Greg Mortenson's book, he was greeted by his porter with the phrase, "Allah Akbar! Blessings to Allah you're alive!"

In times of joy and gratitude

When Reshma Begum was discovered alive 17 days after the 2013 Savar building collapse in Bangladesh which killed 1129 people, crowds jubilantly cried Allahu Akbar to express their joy and gratitude that she had survived.
As a multi-purpose phrase, it is sometimes used by Arab football commentators as an expression of amazement.

Following births and deaths

The phrase is used after the birth of a child as a means of praising God.jerrahi.org/library/articles/birth_school
In the hadith, Muhammad is reported to have spoken the Takbīr after a funeral.

During the Eid Festival and the Hajj

During the festival of Eid al-Adha and the days preceding it, Muslims recite the Takbīr. This is particularly the case on the Day of Arafa.

Jihadist usage

The phrase is well known in the west for its common use in Islamist protests, Islamic extremism and Islamic terrorism.
After 9/11, the FBI released a letter reportedly handwritten by the hijackers and found in three separate locations on September 11, 2001 — at Dulles International Airport, at the Pennsylvania crash site, and in hijacker Mohamed Atta's suitcase. It included a checklist of final reminders for the 9/11 hijackers.  An excerpt reads: "When the confrontation begins, strike like champions who do not want to go back to this world. Shout, 'Allahu Akbar,' because this strikes fear in the hearts of the non-believers." Also, in the cockpit voice recorders found at the crash site of Flight 93, the hijackers are heard to be reciting the Takbīr repeatedly as the plane plummeted toward the ground and the passengers attempted to retake control of the plane."Holy terrors: thinking about religion after September 11, p. 116, Bruce Lincoln, University of Chicago Press, 2006, ISBN 0-226-48203-0, comparing it to Quranic passage 8.12–14, accessed February 5, 2010
When in March 2002 Maryam Mohammad Yousif Farhat of Hamas, popularized as "Umm Nidal" (and subsequently elected to the Palestinian Legislative Council),Stalinsky, Steven, "Hamas's Philosophy on Raising Martyrs", New York Sun, March 15, 2006, accessed February 5, 2010 learned that her 17-year-old son had died during a suicide attack in which he killed five teenagers, she celebrated by proclaiming "Allahu Akbar!" and giving out boxes of halva and chocolates. MEMRI TV
In the video of Nick Berg being beheaded in Iraq in 2004, the perpetrators can be heard shouting "Allahu Akbar!".
During the 2009 Fort Hood shooting, witnesses reported that gunman Nidal Malik Hasan shouted "Allahu Akbar" before opening fire, killing 13 people and wounding 30 others.
During the incident aboard American Airlines Flight 1561, the person attempting to bash his way into the cockpit was heard shouting "Allahu Akbar".

In warfare and politics

=In history=

It has been used historically as a battle cry during war. Adamec, Historical Dictionary of Islam, Scarecrow Press, 2nd ed. 2009, pg. 32

=Iranian usage=

During the Iranian revolution of 1979, it was shouted from rooftops in Iran during the evenings as a form of protest.  This practice returned in the aftermath of the 2009 Iranian presidential election,Yahoo News Many people shouted it from 22:00–22:30 every night, after the 2009 Iranian election to protest the result.

In Syrian Civil War

In videos released during the course of the Syrian Civil War, Free Syrian Army, Al-Nusra Front and ISIS forces are heard shouting "Allahu Akbar" in the background.

=On flags=

The phrase "Allahu Akbar" is written on the center of the flag of Iraq, 22 times along the borders of the central white stripe on the flag of Iran, and beneath the Shahadah in the flag of Afghanistan in white script on the central red background as determined by the 2004 draft constitution.
During the Persian Gulf war in January 1991, Saddam Hussein held a meeting with top military commanders, where it was decided to add the words Allahu Akbar (described as the Islamic battle cry)
In 2004, Iraq's U.S.-picked Governing Council approved a new flag for Iraq that abandoned symbols of Hussein's regime, such as the words Allahu Akbar.
The phrase Allahu Akbar is written on the Iranian flag, as called for by Article 18 of Iran's constitution.  The phrase appears 22 times on the flag.Jacoby, Jeff, "Is Israel a Jewish State?", The Boston Globe, November 14, 2007, accessed February 11, 2010
The Afghan constitution that came into force on January 4, 2004, required that Allahu Akbar be inscribed on Afghanistan's national flag., "Cold Comfort on Islam and Apostasy; No one who's actually read the Afghan constitution should be surprised by the Abdul Rahman case", National Review, March 27, 2006, accessed February 11, 2010
A resistance movement that fought British rule in Waziristan, Pakistan, in the 1930s used a red flag bearing Allahu Akbar in white letters.

Image:Flag of Afghanistan.svg|Flag of Afghanistan, with the phrase beneath the Shahadah
Image:Flag of Iraq.svg|Flag of Iraq, with stylized Kufic script
Image:Flag of Iran.svg|Flag of Iran, introduced in 1980
Image:Flag of Waziristan resistance (1930s).svg|Flag of 1930s Waziristan (Pakistan) resistance movement



Notes






