[[OpenEXR]]

CATEGORIES: High dynamic range file formats, Graphics file formats, Free graphics software, Open formats

OpenEXR is a high dynamic range imaging image file format, released as an open standard along with a set of software tools created by Industrial Light and Magic (ILM), released under a free software license similar to the BSD license.
It is notable for supporting 16-bit-per-channel floating point values (half precision), with a sign bit, five bits of exponent, and a ten-bit mantissa. This allows a dynamic range of over thirty stops of exposure.
Both lossless and lossy compression of high dynamic range data is also supported.

OpenEXR Overview

For a full technical introduction of OpenEXR, see the Technical Introduction available on the OpenEXR.
OpenEXR, or simply EXR for short, is a deep raster format developed by ILM and very broadly used in the computer-graphics industry, both visual effects and animation.
OpenEXR's multi-resolution and arbitrary channel format makes it appealing for compositing. OpenEXR alleviates several painful elements of the compositing process. Since it can store arbitrary channels, specular, diffuse, alpha, RGB, normals, and various other types of channels in one file, it takes away the need to store this information in separate files. The multi-channel concept also reduces the necessity to "bake" in the aforementioned data to the final image. If a compositer is not happy with the current level of specularity, he or she can adjust that specific channel. 
OpenEXR's API makes tools development a relative ease for developers. Since there are almost never two production pipelines that are the same, custom tools always need to be developed to address problems in the production process, e. g. to address image manipulation issue. OpenEXR's library  allows quick and easy access to the image's attributes such as tiles and channels.

History

OpenEXR was created by ILM in 1999 and released to the public in 2003 along with an open source software library. It soon received wide adoption by software used in computer graphics, particularly for film and television production. The format has been updated several times, adding support for tiles, mipmaps, new compression methods, and other features. In 2007, OpenEXR was honored with an Academy Award for Technical Achievement.
OpenEXR 2.0 was released in April 2013, extending the format with support for deep image buffers and multiple images embedded in a single file.

Compression methods

There are 3 general types of lossless compression built into OpenEXR, with two different methods of Zip compressing.  For most images without a lot of grain, the two Zip compression methods seem to work best, while the PIZ compression algorithm is better suited to grainy images.  The following options are available:

Credits

From OpenEXR.org's Technical Introduction:
 The ILM OpenEXR file format was designed and implemented by Florian Kainz, Wojciech Jarosz, and Rod Bogart. The PIZ compression scheme is based on an algorithm by Christian Rouet. Josh Pines helped extend the PIZ algorithm for 16-bit and found optimizations for the float-to-half conversions. Drew Hess packaged and adapted ILM's internal source code for public release and maintains the OpenEXR software distribution. The PXR24 compression method is based on an algorithm written by Loren Carpenter at Pixar Animation Studios.  

Developing with OpenEXR

The OpenEXR library is developed in C++ and is available in source format as well as compiled format for Windows, Mac OS X and Linux. Python bindings for the library are also available.python.org/pypi/OpenEXR
As of version 1.3.0, released on June 8, 2006, support for multithreaded reading and writing was added to OpenEXR. Multithreaded reading and writing offers a higher performance gain for systems that have multiple cores or CPUs. OpenEXR handles reading and writing by a means of a thread pool.






