[[FLCL]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 anime OVAs, 2000 manga, Anime with original screenplays, Comedy anime and manga, Dark Horse Comics titles, Funimation Entertainment, Gainax, Japanese novels, Kodansha manga, Mecha anime and manga, Music-themed anime and manga, Parody anime and manga, Production I.G, Science fiction anime and manga, Seinen manga, Tokyopop titles, Toonami

 is an original video animation series written by Yōji Enokido, directed by Kazuya Tsurumaki and produced by the FLCL Production Committee, which included Gainax, Production I.G, and Starchild Records. FLCL follows Naota Nandaba, a twelve-year-old boy living in the fictional Japanese suburb of Mabase, and his interactions with Haruko Haruhara, who arrives in the quiet suburb, drawn by the industrial town houses and the Medical Mechanica building.
The English adaptation of the series was first licensed by Synch-Point which released the DVDs and soundtrack, but these went out of print in 2006. In January 2010, Funimation Entertainment announced that they would be re-releasing the series on DVD and releasing it for the first time on Blu-ray. 
The series aired in Canada on G4techTV Canada's Anime Current block, and in America on Cartoon Network's Adult Swim several times. It aired on the channel's Toonami block from October 26, 2013 to January 25, 2014. The series is also available via Hulu, iTunes, and on Funimation's website.

Plot

FLCL revolves around Naota Nandaba, a 12-year-old, working class boy living with his widower father and grandfather. His life in the city of Mabase is interrupted by the arrival of Haruko Haruhara, who runs over Naota with her yellow Vespa 180 SS scooter, gives him CPR, then hits him on the head with a blue vintage Rickenbacker 4001 left-handed electric bass guitar. Naota discovers that the blow to his head created an "N.O." portal, from which giant robots produced by a company known as Medical Mechanica emerge periodically.
Naota later finds Haruko working in his house as a live-in maid. It is later discovered that Haruko is an investigator for the Galactic Space Police Brotherhood. Haruko uses Naota for her search for the Pirate King, Atomsk. She is at odds with Medical Mechanica, a monolithic industrial corporation. Naota is being watched by Commander Amarao, a special agent of the Bureau of Interstellar Immigration, who believes that Medical Mechanica is out to conquer the galaxy. Naota is ultimately drawn into a three-way battle between Haruko, Amarao and Medical Mechanica.

Production

FLCL
The Medical Mechanica building featured is in the shape of a large iron. The character, Amarao, describes Medical Mechanica's goal as the destruction of all thought. FLCL uses the iron as a symbolic breakdown of "thought" by smoothing out the wrinkles as equated to the removing of the brains wrinkles. For English localization, the Japanese team had to explain the concept because a direct translation of script did not convey the ideology.

Episodes

FLCL is directed by Kazuya Tsurumaki and produced by the FLCL Production Committee, which included Gainax, Production I.G,
Tsurumaki has said that he tried to "break the rules" of anime when making FLCL, for example, by choosing a contemporary Japanese band to provide the soundtrack, and patterning the style more after "a Japanese TV commercial or promotional video", creating a work that is "short, but dense-packed".03 FLCL

Release

Six DVD compilations, each containing one episode, have been released in Japan by Gainax.

Other media

Novels

A three-volume novel series was written by screenwriter Yoji Enokido and published by Kadokawa Shoten. The novels were released in Japan on June 2000, October 2000, and March 2001 respectively. The English-language versions were published by Tokyopop and were released in North America on March 11, 2008; September 9, 2008; and March 10, 2009 respectively.

Manga

A two-volume manga was created by artist Hajime Ueda. The manga interprets the series with all of the key elements intact, and tells the events of the anime with a crude artwork and unsteady pacing. Jack Kotin defended the unique artstyle of the manga, saying "It can be crudely drawn at times, but this style fits in well with the overall story and atmosphere...".
The manga was published by Kodansha and serialized in monthly Magazine Z. The two volumes were released on October 23, 2000 and August 23, 2001 respectively.
The English-language editions of the manga was released by Tokyopop on September 16, 2003 and on November 4, 2003 respectively.

Soundtracks

Six pieces of theme music are used for the episodes; five opening themes and one closing theme, all by the Japanese rock band, The Pillows. The battle themes are "Advice", "Little Busters" and "I Think I Can"; the opening themes are: "One Life", used in episode one, "Instant Music" in episodes two and three, "Happy Bivouac" in episode four, "Runners High", in episode five, and "Carnival" in episode six. The closing theme of each episode is "Ride on Shooting Star". Geneon Entertainment has released three original soundtracks encompassing the songs, with the soundtracks titled Addict (released on January 20, 2004), King of Pirates (released on September 7, 2004), and FLCL No. 3 (released on June 7, 2005). The remaining music was written by Shinkichi Mitsumune. Three soundtrack CDs were released in Japan and later distributed to America.

=FLCL No.1: Addict=

 Most of the music is by Japanese rock group The Pillows. The rest is by Shinkichi Mitsumune, a composer.

=FLCL No.2: King of Pirates=

 is the second soundtrack from the anime series FLCL. The album contains tracks featured in the last three episodes of FLCL. Most of the music is by Japanese rock group The Pillows, the rest by Shinkichi Mitsumune. This volume features several audio dramas, with the cast of FLCL playing the various parts. Due to the dramas included, this album acts as a sequel of sorts to the anime.

=FLCL No.3=

 is the third soundtrack from the anime series FLCL. The album is a compilation of the first two soundtracks, Addict and King of Pirates, featuring only music by the Japanese rock group The Pillows.  Unlike the previous two soundtracks, the songs are the original vocal versions from the band's LPs.

Reception

FLCL has received positive reviews. Christopher McDonald of Anime News Network called it "downright hilarious" and "visually superb" with great music, citing the packaging of 2 episodes per DVD as the only weakness of Synch-Point's original release.
On August 12, 2003, Time Warner press release noted the success of Cartoon Network, FLCL "ranked No. 42 among all shows on ad-supported cable among adults 18–34".
On February 24, 2007, FLCL was nominated for "Best Cast", and won "Best Comedy Series" and "Best Short Series" at the first American Anime Awards show.



Further reading




