[[Bhajan]]

CATEGORIES: Hindu prayer and meditation, Bhakti movement, Indian styles of music, Hindu music

A Bhajan is any type of Hindu devotional song. It has no fixed form: it may be as simple as a mantra or kirtan or as sophisticated as the dhrupad or kriti with music based on classical ragas and talas.chandrakantha.html It is normally lyrical, expressing love for the Divine. The name, a cognate of bhakti, meaning religious devotion, suggests its importance to the bhakti movement that spread from the south of India throughout the entire subcontinent in the Moghul era.
Anecdotes and episodes from scriptures, the teachings of saints and descriptions of gods have all been the subject of bhajans. The Dhrupad style, Sufi qawwaliAnna King, John Brockington, The Intimate Other: Love Divine in Indic Religions, Orient Longman 2005, p 359. and the kirtan or song in the Haridasi tradition are related to bhajan. Nanak, Kabir, Meera, Narottama Dasa, Surdas and Tulsidas are notable composers. Traditions of bhajan such as Nirguni, Gorakhanathi, Vallabhapanthi, Ashtachhap, Madhura-bhakti and the traditional South Indian form Sampradya Bhajan each have their own repertoire and methods of singing.

Classic bhajans

Bhajans by Kabir, Mirabai, Surdas, Tulsidas and a few others are considered to be classic. The language of their works is influenced by several of the dialects of Hindi. They are widely enjoyed even among those who do not speak Hindi. Here is a representative selection of the best known bhajans by these  poets.

Kabir: Chadaria Jhini Re Jhini

This bhajan has been recorded by several well-known singers. Kabir refers to his body as a chadar, a sheet of cloth. Kabir is the best-known exponent of Nirguni bhajan, which celebrate a formless (nirguna) divinity, encouraging listeners to shed dogma and look  at reality. Baba Bulleh Shah is another and the Bauls of Bengal have developed from these roots. The Sikh guru Nanak gathered many such bhajans into the Guru Granth Sahib.

Meera: Mane Chakar Rakho Ji

A version of this famous hymn was used in the 1947 Hindi film Meerabai.  Mirabai lived in Rajasthan and her dialect of Hindi is more properly called a variety of Rajasthani.  Because of Rajasthan's proximity to Gujarat, Rajasthani and Gujarati share many similar linguistic features, and Mirabai seemed equally at home in either language.

Tulsidas: Shri Ramachandra Kripalu Bhaju Man

Surdas: Main Nahi Makhan Khayo

Main Naahin Maakhan Khaayo, a very popular pad in Raga Ramkali. The naughty child Krishna was caught with
freshly churned butter by his mother Yashoda, with some still on his face. He claims:

Sampradaya Bhajan

Sampradaya Bhajan or Dakshina Bharatha Sampradaya Bhajan is the tradition of Bhajans (singing songs in praise of God and his divine love and simplicity) in India, particularly in South India. "Dakshina" means "south" in Sanskrit and "Bharat" means "India". "Sampradaya" means a tradition which is handed down by one's ancestors.
It is the collection of Kirtanas (songs) and Namavalis (songs composed of names of Hindu gods like Lord Rama, Lord Krishna etc.) in a specific order.  Marudhanallur Sadguru Sri Venkataramana Swamigal was instrumental in establishing the format and had chosen the songs himself. Later Sri Pudukottai Gopala Krishna Bhagavathar, and Sri krishna Premi were instrumental in identifying the Kirtanas and Namavalis that are to be sung in any Bhajan and their evolution.
Swami Haridhoss Giri is one of the principal exponents of the Dhakshina Baratha sampradaya and is regarded by the bhajan fraternity as the sole reason for this traditional form of art to spread worldwide and to reach the masses
The trinity of gurus as far as Bhajans are considered as Bodhendra Swamigal, Sridhara Ayyaval and Marudhanallur Sadguru Swamigal. The sampradaya bhajana paddhati has mainly evolved due to the tradition and efforts of Marudhanallur Sadguru Swamigal.
The bhajans are typically rendered in the following order:
Panchapati (Five songs in Telugu (Bhadrachala Ramadas), Kannada (Sri Purandara dasa), Sanskrit (Sri Sadasiva Brahmendral), Tamil (Sri Gopalakrishna Bharathi) and compositions of Sri Tyagaraja
And if time permits, one can sing the North Indian Bhajan Compositions of
The comes the turn of Dyana keertanais (hymns on Gods, stuti, Abhangs or Guru Keertanai). In the Dyana Keertana, it starts from 
Lord Ganesha
Saraswati
Muruga (Karthikeyan)
Shiv
Durga
Narasimhan
Ram
Krishna
Venkateshwar
Vittal
Ranganathan
Dashavatara stuti
Vittal (Marathi Abhangs on Lord Panduranga)
Lakshmi
Sita / Radha
Hanuman
Garuda
Aiyappan
Chandeeshwaran
Nandikeshwaran
Chaitanya deva (Gauranga)
Guru Keertana
Then comes Pooja Sampradaya Kritis
Pooja ends here and Divya namam starts. (deepa pradakshinam - With lighted lamp in the middle considering the lamp as God, bhagavatas will do sankeertan by doing pradakshinas). This equals going around the earth.
Then comes dolotsavam (making God sleep).
The Thotaka Ashtakam was composed by Thotakachariyar. It is sung in praise of Sri Adi Sankara of Kaladi. Legend says that Thotakachariya (or Thotakar) was a devotee of Aadi Sankara. Do not confuse this Thodaya Mangalam of Bhagavathas with the Thotaka Ashtakam of Thotakachariyar.

Modern forms

V. D. Paluskar and V. N. Bhatkhande have combined Indian classical music with bhajan. Pandit Kumar Gandharva made famous the Nirguni Bhajans of Sant Kabir and Malwa Region. The dancer Mallika Sarabhai has produced performances based on bhajans. Mallika Sarabhai, one of the nation's most intelligent dance professionals, was successful in producing this piece that is innovative, yet flows into the inherent poetic structures of Bhajan with ease.  Abhinaya Chakravathi Sri JS Eswara Prasad Rao of Hyderabad who is the disciple of AL Krishnamurthy Bhagavathar, Pudukkottai system, has produced performances based on Sampradaya bhajans under the title "Nitrya sankeerthnam", he has performed abhinaya for all the bhajans irrespective of the languages.
Jagadguru Shree Kripaluji Maharaj (born 1922) is a prominent poet Saint of modern times, in the path of Bhakti Marg, the path of love or devotion to God. 2008. Rose lore: essays in cultural history and semiotics. Lexington Books. He has composed eleven thousand one hundred and eleven doha (couplets) on the leela of Radha Krishn and the devotional philosophy called Radha Govind Geet; 1008 pad (songs) called Prem Ras Madira; hundreds of kirtan in the form of Yugal Shatak and Yugal Ras and twelve pad which fully describe the beauty and the decorations of Krishn, and thirteen pad which describe the beauty and the decorations of Radha Rani called Shree Krishn Dwadashi and Shree Radha Trayodashi. 2001. The true history and the relfigion of India: a concise encyclopedia of authentic hinduism. Motilal Banarsidass Renditions of Shree Maharajji's bhajans and kirtans have been recorded by well-known singers in India such as Manna DeyKinnear, M. 1985. A discography of Hindustani and Karnatic music. Greenwood Press. Anuradha PaudwalVideo Keertans by Shri Kripalu Ji Maharaj. Retrieved 15 December 2011. and Anup Jalota. 20 Oct 2011. Indo-American News. Retrieved 15 December 2011.
In Surat Shabd Yoga, the spiritual exercises (sadhanas) include repetition, particularly silent repetition, of a mantra given at initiation and bhajan ( here meaning listening to inner sounds).
Also bhajan singing is common in some Surat Shabd Yoga groups. In this case the bhajan are written by the living Master or his predecessors. Sant Ji on Bhanans, by Ajaib Singh.
