[[Tracy Kidder]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, Living people, Pulitzer Prize for General Non-Fiction winners, National Book Award winners, American technology writers, Phillips Academy alumni, Harvard University alumni, Iowa Writers' Workshop alumni, American military personnel of the Vietnam War, People from New York City, United States Army officers, 20th-century American writers, 21st-century American writers

John Tracy Kidder (born November 12, 1945) is a Pulitzer Prize-winning American writer of the 1981 nonfiction narrative The Soul of a New Machine, about the creation of a new computer at Data General Corporation. He also received praise for his biography of Paul Farmer, Mountains Beyond Mountains.
Kidder is considered a literary journalist because of the strong story line and personal voice in his writing.
He has cited as his writing influences John McPhee, A. J. Liebling, and George Orwell.
Kidder wrote in a 1994 essay, "In fiction, believability may have nothing to do with reality or even plausibility. It has everything to do with those things in nonfiction. I think that the nonfiction writer's fundamental job is to make what is true believable."[ref]
[/ref]

Early life and education

Kidder was born November 12, 1945, in New York City.
He graduated from Phillips Academy in 1963.
He attended Harvard University, originally majoring in political science but switching to English after taking a course in creative writing from Robert Fitzgerald. 
He received an BA degree from Harvard in 1967. 
He served in the United States Army as a first lieutenant, Military Intelligence, Vietnam, from 1967 to 1969.
He received an MFA degree from the University of Iowa in 1974.

Career

Kidder wrote his first book, The Road to Yuba City: a Journey into the Juan Corona Murders, while at the University of Iowa. The Atlantic Monthly commissioned the work, and he continued writing as a freelancer for the magazine during the 1970s.
Kidder said that, unlike many other writers, he was not much influenced by his Vietnam experience: "Of course, whenever you're in an experience like Vietnam, it is bound to influence your work; it's inevitable, but I really don't think it greatly shaped me as a writer." 
His second book, The Soul of a New Machine, was much more successful than his first, and won the Pulitzer Prize for General Non-fiction in 1982. He has continued to write nonfiction books and articles, and these have been well received by the critics. Kidder's latest book, Strength in What Remains, is a vivid and moving portrait of a man who survived the genocide in Burundi.
In fall 2010 Kidder was the first A.M. Rosenthal Writer-in-Residence at the Harvard Kennedy School's Joan Shorenstein Center on the Press, Politics and Public Policy. At the center he worked with Richard Todd on a book about writing, titled Good Prose: The Art of Nonfiction, and also looked for a narrative subject.

Selected awards

"National Book Awards – 1982". National Book Foundation. Retrieved 2009-06-08.[/ref][ref]
This was the award for hardcover "General Nonfiction".  From 1980 to 1983 in National Book Awards history there were several nonfiction subcategories including General Nonfiction, with dual hardcover and paperback awards in most categories.[/ref]

Books by Tracy Kidder

Notes






