[[Netflix]]

CATEGORIES: Commerce, Companies based in Silicon Valley, Companies established in 1997, 1997 establishments in California, Online retail companies of the United States, Video on demand services, Video rental services, Companies listed on NASDAQ

Netflix, Inc. is an American provider of on-demand Internet streaming media available to viewers in North and South America, the Caribbean, and parts of Europe (Denmark, Finland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, and the United Kingdom), and of flat rate DVD-by-mail in the United States, where mailed DVDs are sent via Permit Reply Mail. The company was established in 1997 and is headquartered in Los Gatos, California. It started its subscription-based digital distribution service in 1999, and by 2009 it was offering a collection of 100,000 titles on DVD and had surpassed 10 million subscribers.
On February 25, 2007, Netflix announced its billionth DVD delivery. In January 2013, Netflix reported they had added 2 million U.S. customers during the 4th quarter of 2012 with a total of 27.1 million U.S. streaming customers, and 29.4 million total streaming customers. In addition, revenue was up 8% to $945 million for the same period."Netflix 4Q 2012 Earnings Show 2 Million User Surge In Subscriber Base" Huffington Post Retrieved February 4, 2013
As of mid-March 2013, Netflix had 33 million subscribers.
On January 16, 2014, the nomination of The Square (2013) for an Academy Award became the first ever nomination for a Netflix Original production.

History

Netflix was founded in 1997 in Scotts Valley, California by Marc Randolph and then dropped the single-rental model in early 2000. Since that time the company has built its reputation on the business model of flat-fee unlimited rentals without due dates, late fees, shipping and handling fees, or per title rental fees.
Netflix was offered to Blockbuster for $50 million in 2000, but Blockbuster declined.
Netflix initiated an initial public offering (IPO) on May 29, 2002, selling 5.5 million shares of common stock at the price of US $15.00 per share. On June 14, 2002, the company sold an additional 825,000 shares of common stock at the same price. After incurring substantial losses during its first few years, Netflix posted its first profit during fiscal year 2003, earning US $6.5 million profit on revenues of US $272 million.
In 2005, 35,000 different film titles were available, and Netflix shipped 1 million DVDs out every day.
Netflix developed and maintains an extensive personalized video-recommendation system based on ratings and reviews by its customers. On October 1, 2006, Netflix offered a $1,000,000 prize to the first developer of a video-recommendation algorithm that could beat its existing algorithm, Cinematch, at predicting customer ratings by more than 10%.
In February 2007, the company delivered its billionth DVD
Netflix has played a prominent role in independent film distribution. Through a division called Red Envelope Entertainment, Netflix licensed and distributed independent films such as Born into Brothels and Sherrybaby. As of late 2006, Red Envelope Entertainment also expanded into producing original content with filmmakers such as John Waters.
Netflix has been one of the most successful dot-com ventures. A September 2002 article from The New York Times said that at the time, Netflix mailed about 190,000 discs per day to its 670,000 monthly subscribers.
By 2010, Netflix's streaming business had grown so quickly that within months the company had shifted from the fastest-growing customer of the United States Postal Service's first-class mail service to the biggest source of Internet traffic in North America in the evening. In November of that year it began offering a standalone streaming service separate from DVD rentals.
On October 24, 2011, Netflix announced it lost 800,000 US subscribers in the third quarter of 2011 and more subscriber losses were expected in the fourth quarter of 2011. Despite the losses, earnings for Netflix jumped 63 percent for the third quarter of 2011. Retrieved October 25, 2011Netflix earnings jump. Retrieved October 25, 2011
On January 26, 2012, Netflix said it added 610,000 subscribers in the US by the end of the fourth quarter of 2011. The company announced it had 24.4 million US subscribers for this time period. Retrieved January 29, 2012
In April 2012, Netflix filed with the FEC to form a political action committee (PAC) called FLIXPAC.
On December 24, 2012, at around 1 pm, a number of Amazon Web Services servers crashed affecting numerous services including Netflix "instant streaming". The outage lasted more than 20 hours.
In February 2013, Netflix announced it would be hosting its own awards ceremony, The Flixies.
In February 2014, Netflix landed the "Lost Mission" 13-episode sixth and final season of Star Wars: The Clone Wars plus the full run 5 season including director's cuts of the episodes starting March 7.
In April 2014, Netflix approaches 50 million global subscribers with a 32.3 percent video streaming market share in the United States. Netflix operates in 41 countries total. A price hike is expected soon. 

International

September 22, 2010 Netflix launched their streaming-only service in Canada, thus marking their first expansion into international markets. although this ultimately proved to be false. Subsequently, Netflix completed the launch of streaming-content services in Latin America in September 2011 by launching in the Caribbean, Mexico, Central and South America.
On January 9, 2012, Netflix was officially launched as a streaming-only service in the United Kingdom and Ireland. Retrieved October 25, 2011
On August 15, 2012, Netflix announced further expansion by rolling out its services to Norway, Denmark, Sweden, and Finland before the end of 2012.
Netflix announced on June 19, 2013 that the company would expand its service to the Netherlands by late 2013. Further details on the service in this area, such as prices and content, would be released at a later time.
More recently, Netflix announces its intention to expand and launch in France and Germany./ Netflix reportedly in discussions to launch in Germany and France The Verge Retrieved January 28, 2014

Services

Netflix is a subscription-based movie and television show rental service that offers media to subscribers via Internet streaming and via US mail.

Internet video streaming

In addition to Netflix's disc rental service, Netflix separately offers an Internet video streaming service, which gives internet-connected devices access to Netflix's online content library.  The two libraries are also notably different, with the disc library having more movie titles available,
When the streaming service first launched, Netflix's traditional rental-disc subscribers were given access at no additional charge.  Subscribers were allowed approximately one hour of streaming per dollar spent on the monthly subscription. (A $16.99 plan, for example, entitled the subscriber to 17 hours of streaming media.)
In January 2008, however, Netflix lifted this restriction, at which point virtually all rental-disc subscribers were entitled to unlimited streaming at no additional cost. (However, subscribers on the restricted plan of two DVDs per month ($4.99) were still limited to two hours of streaming per month.) This change was a response to the introduction of Hulu and to Apple's new video rental services. Subsequently, as it became clear that disc-rental and internet streaming markets were distinct, Netflix split DVD rental subscriptions and streaming subscriptions into separate, standalone services, at which point the monthly caps on internet streaming were lifted.
Netflix does not officially support playback on Linux PCs although the Linux-based Roku devices are supported. It is possible to connect the Roku device, game console, or Blu-ray Disc player to a Linux PC (or directly to the computer monitor) with an adapter. It is also possible to run Windows and Netflix in a virtual machine such as Virtualbox or QEMU. In a TechRepublic interview in August 2010, Netflix's VP of Corporate Communications stated that available Silverlight plugins for Linux, such as Moonlight, do not support the PlayReady DRM system that Netflix requires for playback.
The selection of available titles is based upon the user's IP address. For most users, this corresponds to the user's physical location. However, it means that, for example, a user in Canada who is accessing the Internet through a U.S.-based router connection will see the selection available to U.S. users.
According to a survey by Nielsen in July 2011, 42% of all Netflix users make use of a stand-alone computer to connect to Netflix, 25% do so by using the Wii, 14% by connecting their computers to a TV, 13% make use of a PlayStation 3 and 12% use an Xbox 360.

=History=

On October 1, 2008, Netflix announced a partnership with Starz Entertainment to bring 2,500+ new movies and television shows to Watch Instantly in what is being called Starz Play.
In August 2010, Netflix announced it had reached a five-year deal worth nearly $1 billion to stream movies from Paramount, Lionsgate and MGM. The deal increased the amount Netflix was spending on streaming movies annually and adds roughly $200 million per year. It spent $117 million in the first six months of 2010 on streaming, up from $31 million in 2009.
As of 2011, Netflix's "Watch Instantly" service holds first-run rights to films from Paramount Pictures, MGM, Lions Gate Entertainment (through an output deal with Epix), along with back-catalog titles to films from Time Warner, Universal Pictures, Sony Pictures, Paramount Pictures, MGM, Lions Gate Entertainment, 20th Century Fox, Disney, and other distributors. Netflix also provides current and back-catalog TV programs distributed by NBC Universal, 20th Century Fox, Sony Pictures, Disney-ABC Domestic Television, with select shows from Warner Bros. as well. Netflix also previously held the rights to select titles from the Criterion Collection, but those were pulled from the streaming library when Criterion titles were added to Hulu's Hulu Plus streaming library.
On July 12, 2011, Netflix announced that it would separate the current subscription plans into two separate plans: one covering the instant streaming and the other DVD rental. Twitter comments also spiked a "Dear Netflix" trend with generally negative comments as well. The company defended its decision during its initial announcement of the change. "Given the long life we think DVDs by mail will have, treating DVDs as a $2 add-on to our unlimited streaming plan neither makes great financial sense nor satisfies people who just want DVDs," Netflix wrote on its blog. "Creating an unlimited-DVDs-by-mail plan (no streaming) at our lowest price ever, $7.99, does make sense and will ensure a long life for our DVDs-by-mail offering."
In a reversal, Netflix announced in October 2011 that its streaming and DVD-rental plans would remain together under the Netflix brand.
On September 1, 2011, Starz announced it would remove their movies from Netflix streaming on February 28, 2012. Since the agreement was strictly for streaming movie titles, DVD rentals through Netflix were not affected. Retrieved September 1, 2011 However, around that same time, it was announced Netflix would, in 2013, assume the pay-TV rights to films from DreamWorks Animation (those output rights are currently held by HBO).

Disc rental

In the United States, the company provides a monthly flat-fee service for the rental of DVD and Blu-ray Discs. A subscriber creates an ordered list, called a rental queue, of movies to rent. The movies are delivered individually via the United States Postal Service from an array of regional warehouses. As of March 28, 2011, Netflix had 58 shipping locations throughout the U.S. The subscriber can keep the rented movie as long as desired, but there is a limit on the number of movies (determined by subscription level) that each subscriber can have on loan simultaneously. To rent a new movie, the subscriber must mail the previous one back to Netflix in a metered reply mail envelope. Upon receipt of the disc, Netflix ships the next available disc in the subscriber's rental queue.
Netflix offers several pricing tiers for DVD rental of one to three DVDs at a time. Subscribers with accounts in good standing can upgrade to plans offering up to eight DVDs at a time. Gift subscriptions are also available. Since November 21, 2008, Netflix has offered their subscribers access to Blu-ray Discs for an additional fee.
In addition to its movie rental service, Netflix formerly sold used movies. The purchase was delivered via the same system and billed using the same payment methods as rentals. This service was discontinued at the end of November 2008.
Starting January 6, 2010, Netflix reached an agreement with Warner Brothers Pictures to delay renting new releases for 28 days from their retail release in an attempt to help studios sell more physical media at retail outlets. A similar deal with Universal Studios and Twentieth Century Fox was reached on April 9, 2010.
In 2011, Netflix split its service pricing so that customers can decide whether they want to pay for online streams, access to DVDs by mail, or both.

=Qwikster=

On September 18, 2011, Netflix CEO and Co-Founder Reed Hastings said in a Netflix blog post that the DVD section of Netflix would be split off and renamed Qwikster, and the only major change would be separate websites for the services. The new service was to also carry video games for an additional charge, whereas the previous Netflix did not. Netflix subscribers who wanted DVDs by mail would have had to use a separate website to access Qwikster.
On October 10, 2011, following negative reaction from customers, Hastings announced the cancellation of the planned Qwikster service and said the DVD-by-mail service would remain a part of Netflix.

Profiles

In June 2008, Netflix announced plans to eliminate its online subscriber profile feature.

Programming

Original programming

In March 2011, Netflix announced plans to begin acquiring original content for its popular subscription streaming service, beginning with the hour-long political drama House of Cards, which debuted on the streaming service in February 2013. The series was produced by David Fincher, with Kevin Spacey starring.
House of Cards, Hemlock Grove, and Orange Is the New Black have all been renewed for another season and are scheduled to air on Netflix in 2014.
In November 2013, Netflix and Marvel Television announced a five-season deal for four Marvel superheroes: Daredevil, Jessica Jones, Iron Fist, and Luke Cage. The deal involves the broadcast of four 13-episode seasons that culminate in a mini-series called The Defenders. Broadcasting is planned to commence in 2015.
In February 2014, Netflix renewed House of Cards for a third season scheduled to air in 2015 and released the second season of the show.
In addition to the Marvel Television deal with Netflix, The Walt Disney Company announced that the television series Star Wars: The Clone Wars would release its sixth and final season exclusively on Netflix, as well as the previous five seasons and the Clone Wars feature film. The new content was released on Netflix's streaming service March 7, 2014.
In April 2014, Netflix signed Mitch Hurwitz and The Hurwitz Company to a multi-year deal to create original projects.

Movie and TV library

Netflix currently has exclusive pay-TV deals with major and mini-major movie studios. Films featured on Watch Instantly include recent releases from Relativity Media (and its subsidiary Rogue Pictures),Wall Street Journal: Relativity Media Netflix. Retrieved July 6, 2010 as well as titles from DreamWorks Animation (DreamWorks Animation began streaming their films in 2013 after the expiration of HBO's previous deal with the studio),Netflix, Weinstein Co To "Reinvent" Pay-TV Experience With New Multi-Year Pact Retrieved August 20, 2013 and Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures (including Walt Disney Pictures, Walt Disney Animation Studios, Disneynature, Pixar, Lucasfilm, and Marvel Studios). It also includes the English-language anime.
Epix signed a five-year streaming deal with Netflix where for the first two years, Epix content was exclusive to Netflix (Epix films will come to Netflix 90 days after they premiere on Epix. The exclusive portion ended on September 4, 2012, when Amazon signed a deal with Epix to feature movies on their streaming service.
On September 1, 2011, Starz announced it had broken off talks with Netflix to renew its streaming deal. This meant any Starz movies and shows would be removed from Netflix streaming on February 28, 2012. Movie titles that are available on DVD are not affected and can be acquired from Netflix by this method.
Other studios providing content on Netflix under license include Disney–ABC Television Group, DreamWorks Classics, Kino International, Warner Bros. Television, 20th Television, Hasbro Studios, Saban Brands (with the MarVista Entertainment distribution) and CBS Television Distribution. On August 23, 2012, Netflix and The Weinstein Company sign a Multi-Year Output Deal for RADiUS-TWC.
On December 4, 2012, Netflix and The Walt Disney Company announced an exclusive multi-year U.S. subscription television service agreement with Netflix for first run of Walt Disney Studios animated and live-action movies. New titles from Disney, Walt Disney Animation Studios, Pixar, Marvel Studios and Disneynature will be available from Netflix in 2016. However, classic titles such as Dumbo, Pocahontas and Alice in Wonderland were made available to Netflix immediately.Disney inks exclusive licensing deal with Netflix Retrieved December 4, 2012 The agreement came after Disney's announcement in November 2012, that it would be shutting down its web movie service Disney Movies Online on December 31, 2012.'Disney Movies Online' Store, Site Shutting Down  Retrieved December 4, 2012
On January 14, 2013, Netflix signed an agreement with Time Warner subsidiaries Turner Broadcasting System and Warner Bros. Television to distribute content from Cartoon Network, Warner Bros. Animation and Adult Swim, as well as the 2012 Dallas TV series airing on TNT beginning in March 2013.

Device support

Hardware supported

List of Netflix-ready devices:

Software support

Supported Web Browsers by Platform:
Other software options:

Video game consoles

At E3 2008, Microsoft announced a deal to distribute Netflix videos over Xbox Live.
In October 2009, Sony Computer Entertainment and Netflix announced that the service would also be available on the PlayStation 3 from November 2009. The set-up was similar to that on the Xbox 360, allowing Netflix subscribers to stream movies and TV shows from their Instant Queue to watch on the console. Unlike on the Xbox 360, the Netflix application was originally available on a Blu-ray Disc (available free to subscribers). On October 19, 2010, a downloadable application was made available through the PlayStation Network. In 2012, the PlayStation 3 became the device most used to watch Netflix.[ref]
[/ref]
On January 13, 2010, Nintendo and Netflix announced that the service would become available on the Wii. This service was launched in Spring 2010. The service allows the console to stream content in a user's Instant Queue. Initially, a streaming disc specifically for the Wii was required along with an Internet connection to the console. Besides a Netflix account with unlimited streaming, there are no additional costs for the service. In contrast to the other two consoles, the Wii is not capable of HD resolution. On October 18, 2010, the streaming disc on the Wii was no longer necessary as Netflix became a free downloadable application on the Wii Shop Channel.
The Netflix service launched for the Nintendo 3DS on July 14, 2011.
The Netflix application for PlayStation Vita was launched the same day the device launched on February 22, 2012, making it available for download via the PlayStation Store for free.
The Wii's successor console, the Wii U, began supporting Netflix shortly after its North American release on November 18, 2012.
On November 15, 2013, the Playstation 4 was released in the United States. The Netflix app was downloadable from the Playstation Store on launch day.
In November 22, 2013, Microsoft's Xbox One launched in the United States. Netflix became available for download shortly after its release.

Set-top boxes

In May 2008, Roku released the first set-top box, The Netflix Player by Roku, to stream Netflix's Instant Watch movies directly to televisions. The device provided unlimited access to the Netflix streaming media catalog for all subscribers.

Blu-ray Disc players

In October 2008, Netflix agreed to instantly stream movies to two of Samsung's Blu-ray Disc players.

Televisions

In January 2009, Netflix announced a similar partnership with Vizio and LG to instantly stream movies directly to their high definition televisions.
In July 2009, Sony announced a partnership with Netflix that will enable Sony BRAVIA Internet Platforms to access instant queues for Netflix users. Any Netflix member with an Internet-enabled BRAVIA HDTV will be able to link up their account to their TV and stream videos from their queue.
The 2010 line of Panasonic HDTVs with Viera Cast functionality gained the ability to stream Netflix content directly to the television.
With 2010's release of the Google TV, Netflix streaming was a built-in application.
A Netflix application is available to download on Samsung Smart TV through the Samsung Apps Service, and is preloaded on higher-end sets.

Handheld devices

Sales and marketing

The domain netflix.com survey. This is about five times the number of visitors to blockbuster.
During the first quarter of 2011, sales and rentals of packaged DVDs and Blu-ray Discs plunged about 20 percent, and the sell-through of packaged discs fell 19.99 percent to $2.07 billion, with more money spent on subscription rentals than in-store rentals.com. "Netflix, Video Kiosks Replacing the Local Video Store." May 4, 2011. Retrieved May 6, 2011.
In July 2012 Netflix hired Kelly Bennett to become their new chief marketing officer. Bennett had previously been at Warner Bros. for almost a decade as the VP of Interactive, Worldwide Marketing. This also filled a vacancy at Netflix that had been empty for over six months when their previous CMO Leslie Kilgore left in January 2012. July 24, 2012. "Netflix Adds Warner Bros. Exec As Its New chief marketing officer." 

Expansion

On July 19, 2010 Netflix announced that in the fall of 2010 it would launch its instant streaming service in Canada, making Canada the first international market expansion for Netflix. On September 22, 2010, Netflix became available in Canada for $7.99/month, but with a severely limited selection. Canadian Business (February 10, 2013).
Netflix announced on July 5, 2011 that by the end of 2011 it would expand its services into 43 countries and territories in Latin America and the Caribbean, offering items in English, Spanish and Portuguese. On September 5, Brazil became the first country in Latin America to introduce the service, followed by Argentina on September 7, Chile on September 8, Colombia on September 9 and Mexico on September 12, with the rest of the continent having the service in the next few weeks.
Netflix launched in the UK and Ireland on January 9, 2012 and in The Netherlands on September 11, 2013.

Competitors

Netflix's success was followed by the establishment of numerous other DVD rental companies, both in the United States and abroad. Wal-Mart began an online rental service in October 2002, but left the market in May 2005. However, they returned with their acquisition of the Vudu service in 2010.
In 2005, Netflix cited Amazon.com as a potential competitor,
Blockbuster Video entered the U.S. online market in August 2004, with a US$19.95 monthly subscription service. This sparked a price war; Netflix had raised its popular three-disc plan from US$19.95 to US$21.99 just prior to Blockbuster's launch, but by October, Netflix reduced this fee to US$17.99. Blockbuster responded with rates as low as US$14.99 for a time, but by August 2005, both companies settled at identical rates.
Redbox is another competitor that uses a kiosk approach: Rather than mailing DVDs, customers pick up and return DVDs at self-service kiosks located in metropolitan areas. In September 2012, Coinstar, the owners of Redbox announced plans to partner with Verizon to launch Redbox Instant by Verizon by late 2012.
Netflix and Blockbuster largely avoid offering pornography, but several "adult video" subscription services were inspired by Netflix, such as SugarDVD and WantedList.

Awards

On July 18, 2013 Netflix earned the first Primetime Emmy Award nominations for original online only web television at the 65th Primetime Emmy Awards. Three of its web series, Arrested Development, Hemlock Grove, and House of Cards, earned a combined 14 nominations (9 for House of Cards, 3 for Arrested Development, and 2 for Hemlock Grove).
On December 12, the network earned six Golden Globe Awards nominations for the 71st Golden Globe Awards, including 4 for House of Cards.

Time Warner

In a 2010 New York Times interview, Time Warner CEO Jeffrey Bewkes downplayed Netflix as a threat to more traditional media companies. "It's a little bit like, is the Albanian army going to take over the world?" Bewkes told the newspaper. "I don't think so."  At the same time, he recognized that the company's DVD service may have contributed to a decline in DVD sales, and regarding the industry's willingness to make special deals with Netflix in the future, he added, "This has been an era of experimentation, and I think it's coming to a close."Tim Arango, New York Times. "Time Warner Views Netflix as a Fading Star." December 12, 2010. Retrieved September 19, 2011. Bewkes later refined his position, stating during a 2011 conference call that "Things like Netflix are welcome additions to the infrastructure. They can monetize value for companies like Warner that maybe there wasn't – in terms of efficiency for older product, wasn't as available before... I've tried at times to be humorous about it, sometimes to make a point."Matt Phillips, Wall Street Journal blog. "Time Warner Chief: 'Things Like Netflix are Welcome Additions'. "May 4, 2011. Retrieved September 19, 2011.
After the contract with Viacom that allowed Netflix to instantly stream Nickelodeon & Nick Jr. programs expired, Netflix received a new contract from Time Warner that allowed them to instantly stream Cartoon Network & Adult Swim programs.

Finance and revenue

2010

In 2010, Netflix's stock price increased 219% to $175.70 and it added 8 million subscribers, bringing its total to 20 million. Revenue jumped 29% to $2.16 billion and net income was up 39% to $161 million. "Netflix Chief Executive Reed Hastings' compensation doubled to $5.5 million." April 20, 2011. Retrieved April 22, 2011.

2011

In April 2011, Netflix was expected to earn $1.07 a share in the first quarter of 2011 on revenue of $705.7 million, a huge increase compared to the year-earlier profit of 59 cents on revenue of $493.7 million, according to a survey of 25 analysts polled by FactSet Research. Wilkerson, Market Watch."Netflix expected to post strong earnings." April 21, 2011. Retrieved April 22, 2011.
At their peak, in July 2011, Netflix shares were trading for $299. Following the customer dissatisfaction and resulting loss of subscribers after the announcements by CEO Reed Hastings that streaming and DVD rental would be charged separately, leading to a higher price for customers who wanted both (on September 1), and that the DVD rental would be split off as the subsidiary Qwikster (on September 18), the share price fell steeply, to around $130.

Legal issues and controversies

Recommendation algorithm and the "Netflix Prize"

In 2006, Netflix held the first Netflix Prize competition to find a better program to predict user preferences and beat its existing Netflix movie recommendation system, known as Cinematch, by at least 10%. CEO Reed Hastings did not necessarily expect a lot of quick progress towards the prize. "We thought we built the best darn thing ever," Hastings said. January 31, 2007. But by June 2007 Hastings said the competition is "three-quarters of the way there in three-quarters of a year."New York Times.  "Netflix Prize Still Awaits a Movie Seer" by Katie Hafner.   June 4, 2007. Three teams—an AT&T Research Team called BellKor, commendo's team BigChaos, and Pragmatic Theory—combined to win the 2009 grand prize competition for $1 million. The winning team, called BellKor's Pragmatic Chaos, used machine learning techniques to find that, for example, the rating system people use for older movies is very different from that used for a movie they just saw. The mood of the day made a difference also; for example, Friday ratings were different from Monday morning ratings.
In 2010, Netflix canceled a running contest to improve the company's recommendation algorithm due to privacy concerns: under the terms of the competition, contestants were given access to customer rental data, which the company had purportedly anonymized. However, it was discovered that even this anonymized dataset could, in fact, identify a user personally. Netflix was sued by KamberLaw L.L.C. and ended the contest after reaching a deal with the FTC.

Throttling of DVDs by mail

Netflix's allocation policy – referred to by many as "throttling" – gives priority shipping and selection to customers who rent fewer discs per month. Higher volume renters may see some of their selections delayed, routed elsewhere, or sent out of order.
Netflix claims that "the large majority of our subscribers are able to receive their movies in about one business day following our shipment of the requested movie from their local distribution center." However, not all shipments come from the subscriber's local distribution center, and shipments from distant centers are often delayed, as well.
In September 2004, a consumer class action lawsuit, Frank Chavez v. Netflix, Inc.,Class action suit
In October 2005, Netflix proposed a settlement for those who had enrolled as a paid Netflix member prior to January 15, 2005. These earlier members would be able to renew their subscriptions with a one-month free membership, and those early members with current subscriptions would receive a one-month free upgrade to the next-highest membership level. Netflix's settlement denied allegations of any wrongdoing, and the case did not reach a legal judgment. Netflix estimated the settlement cost at approximately US$4 million, which included up to US$2.53 million to cover plaintiff lawyer fees. A controversial aspect of the settlement offer was that the customer's account would continue at the renewed or upgraded membership level after the free month provided by the settlement, with customers being charged accordingly unless they opted out after the month-long free period ended. After Trial Lawyers for Public Justice filed a challenge to the proposed settlement The court said:
 
 The summary notice and long-form notice together provided all of the detail required by statute or court rule, in a highly accessible form. The fact that not all of the information was contained in a single e-mail or mailing is immaterial… Using a summary notice that directed the class member wanting more information to a Web site containing a more detailed notice, and provided hyperlinks to that Web site, was a perfectly acceptable manner of giving notice in this case… The class members conducted business with defendant over the Internet, and can be assumed to know how to navigate between the summary notice and the Web site. Using the capability of the Internet in that fashion was a sensible and efficient way of providing notice, especially compared to the alternative Vogel apparently preferred—mailing out a lengthy legalistic document that few class members would have been able to plow through.

The settlement was criticized because it paid out $2.5 million to attorneys for fees and costs, while offering only coupons to the class members.[ref]
[/ref]
The Terms of Use have since been amended with terms that indicate such a suit would not be possible in the future:
 
 These Terms of Use shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the state of Delaware, without regard to conflicts of laws provisions. You and Netflix agree that the United States District Court for the Northern District of California and/or the California Superior Court for the County of Santa Clara shall have exclusive jurisdiction over any dispute between you and Netflix relating in any way to the Netflix service or Web site or these Terms of Use. You and Netflix expressly and irrevocably consent to personal jurisdiction and venue in these courts. The parties agree that in any such dispute or subsequent legal action, they will only assert claims in an individual (non-class, non-representative) basis, and that they will not seek or agree to serve as a named representative in a class action or seek relief on behalf of those other than themselves.

Releasing this week

The Netflix website at one time featured a list of titles, "Releasing This Week" (RTW), that enabled customers to easily view new DVDs the company planned for rental release each week. The listing of new releases is still active, although there is no menu option that links to the page.
On January 1, 2008, a Netflix employee unofficially stated on the Netflix Community Blog that customers used the RTW page to add newly released movies to the top of their queues, then complained about delays in receiving them after demand outstripped the supply of DVDs on hand. By removing the page, Netflix sought to quell complaints that these movies were not readily available. Critics, however, have suggested this was just another Netflix attempt at throttling.

Dynamic queue, subscription, and delivery methods

On April 4, 2006, Netflix filed a patent infringement lawsuit in which it demanded a jury trial in the United States District Court for the Northern District of California, alleging that Blockbuster's online DVD rental subscription program violated two patents held by Netflix. The first cause of action alleged Blockbuster's infringement of U.S. Patent No. 7,024,381 (issued April 4, 2006; only hours before the lawsuit was filed) by copying the "dynamic queue" of DVDs available for each customer, Netflix's method of using the ranked preferences in the queue to send DVDs to subscribers, and Netflix's method permitting the queue to be updated and reordered. Blockbuster also said that the company planned to close 282 stores that year to shift focus to its online service. The company already had closed 290 stores in 2006. Bizjournals.
In fall 2006, Blockbuster signed a deal with The Weinstein Company, that gave it the exclusive rental rights to the studio's films beginning January 1, 2007., Netflix continues to make available Weinstein movies, including Unknown, School For Scoundrels and Harsh Times, among others. The first-sale doctrine allows Netflix and other video rental businesses to offer movies released by the Weinstein Company, but the long-term effects of the Blockbuster-Weinstein deal remain uncertain.

Removal of social networking feature

Since 2004, Netflix subscribers could use a feature that allowed them to interact with friends who were also members. This feature was meant to tap into the growing popularity of social networking. With this feature, users could see how their friends rated a movie on that movie's page; view what DVDs their friends were renting; and allow them to leave their friends notes with film recommendations.
In March 2010, as part of a redesign of its movie-details pages, the Friends feature began to be phased out. Users could no longer see their friends' ratings on movie pages, and what remained of the friends section was moved to a small link at the bottom of each page. The initial announcement about the redesign on Netflix's official blog made no reference to any changes to the Friends feature.

Linux support

Netflix supports online streaming only on Microsoft Windows, OS X, iOS, and Android, relying on Microsoft's Silverlight technology.  Partly due to digital rights management issues, despite the open-source implementation of Silverlight known as Moonlight, this has created problems for users of fully open source versions of Linux and similar operating systems.  Though Google's partially proprietary Android and Chrome OS platforms are essentially based upon Linux and other open source software infrastructure, Netflix did not provide any crossover support for using its proprietary components to stream any of its content upon fully free systems, such as Ubuntu and Fedora.
On August 9, 2011, Netflix released a Google Chrome web store item for Chrome OS, Mac, and PC; however, it does not yet enable Netflix streaming on Linux machines. On Linux systems running the Chrome browser, the extension simply redirects users to view Netflix.

=Third-party solutions=


On November 15, 2012, patches to the Wine compatibility layer to make viewing of Netflix on Linux and similar systems were announced.
On November 18, 2012, a PPA and installation files were made publicly available making the installation and use of Netflix much easier for users of Ubuntu 12.04 and possibly other distributions.
On August 8, 2013, software repositories were made publicly available making possible the usage of the Windows Silverlight plugin in Linux-native web browsers using Wine. Previous Linux Netflix support required running the entire Firefox web browser through the Wine compatibility layer.

Closed captioning

On March 11, 2011, Don Cullen filed a national class action lawsuitNATIONWIDE CLASS ACTION FILED AGAINST NETFLIX; LAWSUIT ALLEGES POPULAR MOVIE WEBSITE FAILED TO CAPTION STREAMING VIDEO LIBRARY IN VIOLATION OF STATE AND FEDERAL LAW, MISLED DEAF AND HARD OF HEARING CUSTOMERS. Cullen v. Netflix, Inc., Case No. CV 11-1199 (N.D. Cal.). Retrieved 3/1/2012 against Netflix alleging Netflix failed to close caption its streaming video library and had misled deaf and hard of hearing customers. In June 2011, the National Association of the Deaf filed a lawsuit against Netflix for not providing closed captioning on all of its Watch Instantly movies. The group claims Netflix is violating the Americans with Disabilities Act by not providing equal access on entertainment. On November 11, 2011, the court denied a Netflix motion to dismiss the case. United States DISTRICT COURT FOR THE DISTRICT OF MASSACHUSETTS. Case 3:11-cv-30168-MAP. Document 32. Retrieved December 30, 2011.
In March 2012, Netflix announced it had increased the number of programs that are closed captioned. Almost all Netflix-ready devices in distribution today (including AppleTV, BD players, the Roku set-top box, and all the game consoles, phone apps, tablet apps, and TVs) are capable of rendering captions.
In July 2012, Netflix announced the formation of an experimental project to crowdsource the closed-captioning effort using the Amara (formerly Universal Subtitles) platform. Amara operates under DMCA safe-harbor provisions which indemnify it from secondary copyright infringement lawsuits over user-uploaded content, and presumably Netflix would not publish any subtitles produced by this effort without authorization. Netflix was careful to say it is not committed to using any subtitles produced by the crowdsourcing project.
In October 2012, Netflix was found to be offering the television series Andromeda to customers in Finland with unauthorized subtitles from the fansub scene.
On January 20, 2014, Jon Christian published an article in The Week, titled "How Netflix alienated and insulted its deaf subscribers: The streaming video giant still can't manage to competently produce closed captions", which catalogues Netflix's various technical and legal issues regarding closed captioning, including the poor quality of the subtitles that are provided. For example, he states: "But for all the service's strengths, one aspect is still decidedly twentieth century: The bizarrely low standards for Netflix's closed captions, which continue to alienate subscribers who are deaf, hard of hearing, or simply have difficulty understanding dialogue." The article was updated the following day to publish Netflix's response: "Update: The day after this article was published, a representative from Netflix contacted the author of this piece with an additional comment: 'While we don't have the rights to make edits to subs/captions we do, in fact, request redelivery of subtitles or captions when we discover errors. The titles in your piece are now under investigation.' "

Technical details

Streaming

Initially streaming solely using Microsoft technologies and codecs such as VC-1 for video and WMA for audio,  the rapid expansion and diversity of Netflix-capable devices have necessitated encoding into many different formats —  including H.264 (AVC), VC-1, H.263 and H.265 (HEVC) for video, and Dolby Digital, Dolby Digital Plus, AAC and Ogg Vorbis for audio.
Netflix uses adaptive bitrate streaming technology to adjust the video and audio quality to match a customer's broadband connection speed and realtime network conditions. Netflix recommend a 1.5Mbit/s download speed as a minimum, 3Mbit/s for DVD quality, 5Mbit/s for HD, 7Mbit/s for Super HD and 12Mbit/s for 3D streaming.
Netflix provides users the ability to choose their download rates / quality of video on their site (

Netflix API

On October 1, 2008, Netflix launched an application programming interface (API). 
A variety of services has been created around or has integrated the API. Examples include Rotten Tomatoes and The New York Times, which allow users to click to add titles to their Netflix queue or begin watching on Watch Instantly from their pages,
Additionally, the API has allowed many developers to release Netflix applications for mobile devices. For example, on November 16, 2009, Netflix released an official Nokia app that allows some trailer streaming,

IT infrastructure

In 2010, Netflix migrated its infrastructure to Amazon EC2. Master copies of digital films from movie studios are stored on Amazon S3, and each film is encoded into over 50 different versions based on video resolution and audio quality using machines on the cloud. In total, Netflix has over 1 petabyte of data stored on Amazon, and the data are sent to content delivery networks (including Akamai, Limelight, and Level 3) that feed the content to local ISPs. Netflix uses a number of pieces of open-source software in its backend, including FreeBSD and nginx,








