[[Surrey, British Columbia]]

CATEGORIES: Populated places established in 1879, Populated places in Greater Vancouver, Populated places on the Fraser River, Surrey, British Columbia

 
Surrey is a city in the province of British Columbia, Canada.  It is a member municipality of Metro Vancouver, the governing body of the Greater Vancouver Regional District. It is the province's second-largest city by population after the city of Vancouver.
The six "town centres" the City of Surrey comprises are: Fleetwood, Whalley/City Centre, Guildford, Newton, Cloverdale, and South Surrey.surrey.htm

History

Surrey became incorporated in 1879, and encompasses land formerly occupied by a number of Halqemeylem-speaking aboriginal groups. When Englishman H.J. Brewer looked across the Fraser River from New Westminster and saw a land reminiscent of his native County of Surrey in England, the settlement of Surrey was placed on the map. The area then comprised forests of douglas-fir, fir, red cedar, hemlock, blackberry bushes, and cranberry bogs. A portion of present-day Whalley (named after Harry Whalley, who owned and operated a gas bar at the bend in King George Blvd, (formerly King George Highway) at 108 Avenue, "Whalley's Corner") was used as a burial ground by the Kwantlen (or Qw'ontl'en) Nation.
Settlers arrived first in Cloverdale and parts of South Surrey, mostly to farm, fish, harvest oysters, or set up small stores. Once the Pattullo Bridge was erected in 1937, the way was open for Surrey to expand. In the post-war 1950s, North Surrey's neighbourhoods filled with single family homes and Surrey (not yet a city) became a bedroom community, absorbing commuters who worked in Burnaby or Vancouver.
In the 1980s and 1990s, Surrey witnessed unprecedented growth, as people from different parts of Canada and the world, particularly Asia, began to make the municipality their home. Surrey is projected to surpass the city of Vancouver as the most populous city in BC by 2020–2030.

Government and politics

Surrey is governed by an eight-member city council. The current mayor of Surrey is Dianne Watts. The last elections were held in November 2011.
In the recent 2009 provincial elections, the British Columbia New Democratic Party won four of Surrey's seats, all of them in the more urbanized north and centre of the city, while the BC Liberal Party won four seats in the more rural east and south.
Following the 2011 federal election, the Conservative Party of Canada holds two of Surrey's four seats (Fleetwood—Port Kells and South Surrey—White Rock—Cloverdale) in the Canadian House of Commons, while the other two seats (Surrey North and Newton—North Delta) are held by the New Democratic Party.

Demographics

 The City of Surrey estimated that 502,000 residents lived within its municipality in 2013.City of Surrey: Population Estimates & Projections
As of 2006, the racial makeup in Surrey is as follows:

Crime

In 2002, Surrey was named the car theft capital of North America.

File:Provincial Court of Surrey, BC-2009.
File:Surrey Pretrial Centre, BC-2009.jpg|Surrey Pretrial Services Centre

Geography and climate

The city is characterized by low population density urban sprawl, typical of North American cities, which includes areas of residential housing, light industry and commercial centres and is prone to strip development and malls. Approximately 35 percent of the land is designated as part of the Agricultural Land Reserve. The city is mostly hills and flatland, with most of the flatland in Tynehead, Hazelmere, south of Cloverdale, and Colebrook.
The climate is typically inter-coastal Pacific-Northwest: rainy, wet winters, often with heavy rainfall lasting into early spring, with mild, sunny summers and cool autumns.

Religion

A predominant religion in Surrey is Christianity. The 2001 census indicates that nearly 50% of the population self-identifies as Christian, including Protestant, Catholic, other Christian, and Orthodox. The next largest religious group are Sikhs with 16.3% self-identifying. Just over 25% identifying no religious affiliation.

Education

Schools

School District 36 Surrey oversees 100 public elementary and 21 public secondary schools, making it the largest public school district in British Columbia.

Universities and colleges

Surrey is home to the third campus of Simon Fraser University (SFU), which opened in 2002. SFU took over the space and programming that was initially built for TechBC, a technical university proposed for south of the Fraser River by the then-NDP led provincial government. SFU Surrey offers a number of cutting-edge programs, including TechOne and Explorations; first-year cohort options; and studies in Applied Sciences, Criminology, World Literature, Business Administration, and Interactive Arts and Technology.
Surrey is also the home of Kwantlen Polytechnic University. Kwantlen opened its doors in the Newton Town Centre of Surrey in 1981. Since then, it has expanded to provide satellite campuses in Richmond, Langley, a trades and technology centre in the Cloverdale Town Centre of Surrey. The Surrey campus focuses on sciences, business, arts, and health, including a publicly accessible wellness centre, while the new Cloverdale campus trains apprentices for the skilled trades industries.
Surrey also has many private post-secondary institutions to choose from including; Sprott Shaw College, CDI College, Academy of Learning and Vancouver Career College, among others.

Culture

Attractions

The Surrey Museum is affiliated with CMA, CHIN, and Virtual Museum of Canada.
The historic Surrey Municipal Hall complex includes the Cenotaph in Heritage Square, the Surrey Museum, and Cloverdale Library.
"REMEMBRANCE" by André Gauthier (sculptor) in Heritage Square, is an oversized bronze statue depicting a WWI kneeling soldier, helmet in hand, in remembrance of his fallen comrade.Remembrance

Events

Attracting 15,000 people every February since 2004, WinterFest is a day of live music, sporting activities, food, and fireworks, held at the Central City Plaza.
Since 1888, the town centre of Cloverdale has hosted the annual Cloverdale Rodeo and Country Fair at the Cloverdale Fairgrounds every May long weekend. The Fair is Canada's second largest rodeo, of family-oriented entertainment including agricultural/horticultural exhibits, a western tradeshow, parade, community stages, and the Pacific Northwest Firefighter Combat Challenge.
Due in part to having one of British Columbia's youngest populations, with nearly one-third of all citizens under 18, which began 2004. The free, multi-day festival features circus and clay arts, world rhythm music and movement, popular children's performers, storytelling sessions, and a parade.
Every year on April 13, the Sikh community celebrates Vaisakhi, which often includes a nagar kirtan, or parade, and free food is often handed out. Roughly 100,000 people attended in 2008.
Surrey has the largest Canada Day event of its kind in Western Canada. Presented every July 1 at Cloverdale's Millennium Amphitheatre Park, the event includes amusement rides, a tea ceremony, booths, musicians and performers, and a fireworks show at night.
In 2008, the City, thanks to the federal government's designation of Surrey as Canada's Cultural Capital for the year,
Following the success of the Surrey Regional Economic Summit, held in September 2008 at the Sheraton Vancouver Guildford Hotel, in Guildford Town Centre, it is anticipated that this too will become an annual event.
Every October since 1991, Surrey has hosted the Surrey International Writers' Conference. This event brings established writers, agents, editors and publishers from all over the world to the Comfort Inn & Suites Surrey Hotel and Sheraton Vancouver Guildford Hotel in Guildford Town Centre.
The Surrey Festival of Dance, an annual event since 1966, is one of the largest dance competitions held in North America, with over 10,000 dancers participating in the multi-week festival.
There are presently 3 live theatre venues in the City of Surrey in British Columbia as of January 2013: the Bell Centre for Performing Arts, the Chandos Pattison Auditorium and the Surrey Arts Centre.A12
The Surrey RCMP hold an annual basketball tournament with participation from all the city's secondary schools. The event is the city's largest annual sports tournament.
One of the lesser-known events in Surrey is the annual Nicomekl River Race. Every year, in early June, teams of four meet at Nicomekl Park in Langley, British Columbia to begin the race. Unlike most traditional boat races, the Nicomekl River Race requires that all boats be made by the participants. The racecourse extends from Nicomekl Park to Blackie Spit Park at Crescent Beach. The first team to reach the mouth of the river is awarded a prize of $1,000. Additional prizes are awarded to the most creative boat and costume. All proceeds go towards the BC Cancer society.

News media

In addition to news media from Vancouver, the community is served by The Surrey Now newspaper, the Surrey Leader newspaper, and the Peace Arch News newspaper (for South Surrey).

Sports

Every summer, Surrey hosts the Canada Cup International Women's Fastpitch Tournament. It began in 1993 as an international women's fastpitch developmental tournament to help teams prepare for the Olympics by facing top-calibre competition. The event continues to be a fan favourite with gate attendance reaching 93,000 for the nine-day tournament in 2004.
The BCHL Surrey Eagles hockey team plays at the South Surrey Arena in Surrey. The Eagles won the BCHL championship, the Fred Page Cup, in 1997, 1998, 2005 and 2013; the western championship, the Doyle Cup, in 1997 and 1998; and the national championship, the Royal Bank Cup, in 1998.
Surrey hosted the Canadian national qualifying tournament in 2006, and sends a local team to compete for a spot in the Little League World Series in Williamsport, Pennsylvania.
Surrey is also home to Canada's first kabaddi-specific stadium.[ref]
</ref>

Transportation

History

The first settlement of Surrey was Crescent Beach, in South Surrey, and Bridgeview/Brownsville, in North Surrey. Early trails and roads helped to encourage the settlement of Surrey. The first trail built by a settler was the 1861 the Kennedy Trail. James Kennedy built the trail to provide a route between New Westminster and the natural pasture land on the Mud Bay Flats next to the Serpentine River. N. Draper, British Columbia Historical Quarterly, January, 1943, Vol. 7, p. 49-56.
The Semiahmoo Wagon Road was built in 1873 between Brownsville opposite New Westminster and Semiahmoo (Blaine).
The first regular ferry service across the Fraser River started in 1882 on the steam ferry K de K with the point of departure at Brownsville. The ferry landed on the Surrey side at the start of the Old Yale Road, which connected directly inland to Yale, and was a major gold rush trail.
The New Westminster Rail Bridge was opened in 1904, allowing personal vehicles to cross the Fraser River on the upper deck. The lower deck, for rail, enabled BC Electric Railway to finally construct the Interurban line, an electric suburb commuter rail route connecting Chilliwack to Vancouver. It opened for service in 1910, and ran through Kennedy, Newton, Sullivan, and Cloverdale. Currently, two of the BCER cars (1225 & 1304) are nearly finished being restored for operation on the mainline between Cloverdale and Sullivan. New car barns and museum currently under construction in Cloverdale(as of 2012)
In 1937, the then two-lane Pattullo Bridge linking New Westminster and Surrey was opened.
In the early 1950s, BC Electric Railways ceased operating its interurban line, thus increasing the number of vehicles on Surrey roads. Highway 10 was built in 1953, and Highway 15 in 1957. In 1964, the provincial government completed Highway 401 and the Port Mann Bridge; that section of roadway would later be renamed Highway 1. In 1959, the George Massey Tunnel was opened, along with what is known as Highway 99. With the completion of the new Highways 1 and 99, the Fraser Highway and King George Boulevard became major arteries.
In the early 1990s, Surrey saw the return of rail transit with the SkyTrain Expo Line expansion into Surrey. The four stations added were Scott Road, Gateway, Surrey Central (and bus loop) and King George.

Current transportation network

The Canadian National Railway, Canadian Pacific Railway, BNSF Railway, and Southern Railway of British Columbia have trackage running through Surrey.
Public transport, operated by TransLink, connects some of Surrey's centres to each other and to other Lower Mainland municipalities. The SkyTrain Expo Line provides 35-minute service to Downtown Vancouver via four stations: Scott Road, Gateway, Surrey Central (also a bus loop), and King George.
Vancouver International Airport is located  west of Surrey. Vancouver International Airport offers direct daily service to destinations in Canada, North America, Europe, and Asia.
Bellingham International Airport is located  south of Surrey, and offers connections to Seattle, Las Vegas, and Hawaii.
Abbotsford International Airport is located  east of Surrey, and offers daily flights to Calgary and Edmonton.

Sustainable Development

In 2008, Surrey city council created and adopted the Surrey Sustainability Charter:

Origins

Since the 1960s, Metro Vancouver has been involved in green advocacy, most prominently by the founding of Greenpeace and advocate David Suzuki.  When the Brundtland Report was published in 1987, it laid the groundwork for the convening of the 1992 Earth Summit and the adoption of Agenda 21, the Rio Declaration  and to the establishment of the Commission on Sustainable Development.
Metro Vancouver has taken steps to introduce initiatives to help reduce the ecological impact with a 1996 report "Liveable Region Plan" and also a 2001 update titled "Sustainable Region Initiative" (SRI for short). While the SRI was not met without criticism, it provided a useful baseline and foundation for Surrey to construct an encompassing plan that includes not only environmental issues, but economic and social issues as well.

Components

The Charter is broken down into multiple layers, with high level conceptual goals, a framework for action and low level details such as the implementation strategy. The charter follows the basic structure inspired by the Brundland Commission.
The report heavily incorporates the Triple Bottom Line Accounting methodology and breaks down the facets of Sustainable development onto the three sides of a cube. On one face of the cube, there are the three pillars to sustainability–Socio-Cultural, Economic and Environmental. On the second facet, is the political domain, and lastly, three time frames: short, medium and long term goals. 
 
 "To promote a safe, caring, engaged, and liveable community, with a sense of place, that is inclusive of all aspects of diversity and provides a range of educational, recreational, cultural and employment opportunities, affordable and appropriate housing, transportation options and personal, health and social services that are accessible to all."

 
 "To create a local economy that builds on Surrey's natural advantages, and uses the land base and human resources efficiently to create a broad range of well located, transit accessible and environmentally friendly businesses that provide attractive local employment opportunities and a sustainable revenue base for the City. "

 
 "To demonstrate good stewardship of the land, water, air and built environment, protecting, preserving and enhancing Surrey's natural areas and ecosystems for current and future generations while making nature accessible for all to enjoy."

Hurdles

Being an all inclusive plan requires an interplay of many complex and sometimes wicked problems. Trying to account for all problems is ambitious, and as the report admits, being at the municipal level reduces the funding, power and resources to implement the vision. The report acknowledges the political hurdle and notes that the city needs to influence players with more power such as the provincial or federal government in order for the vision to be successful. Some other hurdles that have arisen since the inception of the charter include the following:

=Suburban Sprawl and the Gateway Program=

Surrey currently faces the problem of Urban Sprawl, the phenomenon that is characterized by the low density residential, with almost no commercial or industrial zoning. This results in a heavy outflow of traffic in the morning, and inflow in the evening.
The announcement of the Gateway Program in 2005 by the British Columbia Ministry of Transportation meant a large expenditure in transportation infrastructure. Despite the oppositions by the Metro Vancouver and several mayoral councils,

=Transportation and Land Use=

The Sustainability Charter hinges on a large reduction on automobile dependancy requiring a well established transit infrastructure to the multiple districts of Surrey. In 2008, Gordon Campbell announced the extension of the Expo Line beyond the current terminus to as far as Langley. However, financial shortfall came upon Translink shortly after, and many of the announced plans came to a halt. Plans to expand northward via the Evergreen Line came to fruition prior the vision of extending light rail out to Guildford, Newton and Langley. Trying to make ends meet, Mayor 
Watts attempts to impose equal tolling across the region to assist with funding transit to reduce car reliance.
Protecting agricultural land reserves also play an important part in the charter of sustainability. The idea behind the agricultural land reserves is to encourage and increase the role of urban agriculture thus reducing the reliance of food transport and increasing the quality and availability of food to local people. The Charter takes the idea one step further by bringing in value adding food processing agribusiness to complete the supply chain circle.
In a case study of Toronto completed by Pierre Filion, he claims that while transit and natural area conservation are successful at achieving their respective immediate objectives, they "do not modify metropolitan-wide relations between transportation and land use... Filion identifies that the largest obstacles are NIMBY reactions from the public and the limited finances from the public sector.

Notable people

Affiliated cities and municipalities

Surrey has two sister cities:
Surrey also has two Friendship Cities:






