[[Hydrogen peroxide]]

CATEGORIES: Antiseptics, Bleaches, Disinfectants, 1894 introductions, Household chemicals, Hydrogen compounds, Hydrogen peroxide, Light-sensitive chemicals, Peroxides, Otologicals, Oxidizing agents, Rocket oxidizers

Hydrogen peroxide is a chemical compound with the formula (
Organisms naturally produce trace quantities of hydrogen peroxide, most notably by a respiratory burst as part of the immune response.

Structure and properties

Properties

The boiling point of 

=In aqueous solutions=

In aqueous solutions hydrogen peroxide differs from the pure material due to the effects of hydrogen bonding between water and hydrogen peroxide molecules. Hydrogen peroxide and water form a eutectic mixture, exhibiting freezing-point depression; pure water has a melting point of 0°C and pure hydrogen peroxide of −0.43 °C, but a 50% (by volume) solution of the 2 freezes at -51°C. The boiling point of the same mixture is also depressed in relation with the median of both boiling points (125.1°C). It occurs at 114°C, This is 14 more than pure water and 36.2 less  than pure hydrogen peroxide boiling point.60% hydrogen peroxide msds 50% H2O2 MSDS

Structure

Hydrogen peroxide ( for comparison, the rotational barrier for ethane is 12.5 kJ/mol. The increased barrier is ascribed to repulsion between the lone pairs of the adjacent oxygen atoms and results in hydrogen peroxide displaying 
atropisomerism.

Comparison with analogues

Hydrogen peroxide has a number of structural analogues of which hydrogen disulfide is perhaps the most closely related. It has the highest (theoretical) boiling point of all the analogues. Its melting point is also fairly high, being comparable to that of hydrazine, with only hydroxylamine crystallising significantly more readily. This indicates the presence of particularly strong hydrogen bonding. All of the analogues are thermodynamically unstable, particularly upon heating, with hydrazine and hydroxylamine being potentially explosive. Diphosphane is unique in being pyrophoric and is the most difficult of the analogues to synthesise. Structurally, the analogues all adopt similar skewed structures, due to repulsion between adjacent lone pairs.

Discovery

Hydrogen peroxide was first described in 1818 by Louis Jacques Thénard, who produced it by treating barium peroxide with nitric acid. An improved version of this process used hydrochloric acid, followed by addition of sulfuric acid to precipitate the barium sulfate byproduct. Thénard's process was used from the end of the 19th century until the middle of the 20th century.C. W. Jones, J. H. Clark. Applications of Hydrogen Peroxide and Derivatives. Royal Society of Chemistry, 1999.
Pure hydrogen peroxide was long believed to be unstable as early attempts to separate it from the water, which is present during synthesis, all failed. However, this instability was due to traces of impurities (transition metals salts) which catalyze the decomposition of the hydrogen peroxide. Pure hydrogen peroxide was first obtained 80 years after its discovery by Richard Wolffenstein, who produced it via vacuum distillation. At the end of the 19th century, Petre Melikishvili and his pupil L. Pizarjevski showed that of the many proposed formulas of hydrogen peroxide, the correct one was H−O−O−H.

Manufacture

Previously, hydrogen peroxide has been prepared industrially by hydrolysis of the ammonium peroxydisulfate, which was itself obtained via the electrolysis of a solution of ammonium bisulfate () in sulfuric acid.
Today, hydrogen peroxide is manufactured almost exclusively by the anthraquinone process, which was formalized in 1936 and patented in 1939. It begins with the reduction of an anthraquinone (such as 2-ethylanthraquinone or the 2-amyl derivative) to the corresponding anthrahydroquinone, typically via hydrogenation on a palladium catalyst; the anthrahydroquinone then undergoes to autoxidation to regenerate the starting anthraquinone, with hydrogen peroxide being produced as a by-product. Most commercial processes achieve oxidation by bubbling compressed air through a solution of the derivatized anthracene, whereby the oxygen present in the air reacts with the labile hydrogen atoms (of the hydroxy group), giving hydrogen peroxide and regenerating the anthraquinone. Hydrogen peroxide is then extracted and the anthraquinone derivative is reduced back to the dihydroxy (anthracene) compound using hydrogen gas in the presence of a metal catalyst.  The cycle then repeats itself.[ref]
</ref><ref name="Riedl&Pleiderer">H. Riedl and G. Pfleiderer, U.S. Patent 2,158,525 (2 October 1936 in USA, and 10 October 1935 in Germany) to I. G. Farbenindustrie, Germany</ref>
The simplified overall equation for the process is deceptively simple:
The economics of the process depend heavily on effective recycling of the quinone (which is expensive) and extraction solvents, and of the hydrogenation catalyst.
A process to produce hydrogen peroxide directly from the elements has been of interest for many years. Direct synthesis is difficult to achieve as, in terms of thermodynamics, the reaction of hydrogen with oxygen favours production of water. Systems for direct synthesis have been developed; most of which are based around finely dispersed metal catalysts.  However none of these have yet reached a point where they can be used for industrial-scale synthesis.

Availability

Hydrogen peroxide is most commonly available as a solution in water. For consumers, it is usually available from pharmacies at 3 and 6 wt% concentrations. The concentrations are sometimes described in terms of the volume of oxygen gas generated; one milliliter of a 20-volume solution generates twenty milliliters of oxygen gas when completely decomposed. For laboratory use, 30 wt% solutions are most common. Commercial grades from 70% to 98% are also available, but due to the potential of solutions of >68% hydrogen peroxide to be converted entirely to steam and oxygen (with the temperature of the steam increasing as the concentration increases above 68%) these grades are potentially far more hazardous, and require special care in dedicated storage areas. Buyers must typically allow inspection by commercial manufacturers.
In 1994, world production of  sold for around US $0.54 per kg, equivalent to US $1.50 per kg (US $0.68 per lb) on a "100% basis".Hydrogen Peroxide Synthesis researchgateresearch for Ministry of Science and Technology, Government of India

Reactions

Decomposition

Hydrogen peroxide is thermodynamically unstable and decomposes to form water and oxygen with a ΔHo of −98.2 kJ·mol−1 and a ΔS of 70.5 J·mol−1·K−1.
The rate of decomposition increases with rising temperature, concentration and pH. With cool, dilute, acidic solutions showing the best stability. Decomposition is catalysed by various compounds, including most transition metals and their compounds (e.g. manganese dioxide, silver, and platinum)., can cause the decomposition to take a different path, with free radicals such as (HO·) and (HOO·) being formed.
Non-metallic catalysts include potassium iodide; which reacts particularly rapidly and forms the basis of the Elephant toothpaste experiment. Hydrogen peroxide can also be decomposed biologically by enzyme catalase.
The decomposition of hydrogen peroxide liberates oxygen and heat; this can be dangerous as spilling high concentrations of hydrogen peroxide on a flammable substance can cause an immediate fire.

Redox reactions

Hydrogen peroxide exhibits oxidizing and reducing properties, depending on pH.
In acidic solutions,  can be converted into hydroxyl radicals (•OH), which are highly reactive.
In acidic solutions  (hydrogen peroxide acting as an oxidizing agent),
and sulfite ().
In basic solution, hydrogen peroxide can reduce a variety of inorganic ions. When it acts as a reducing agent, oxygen gas is also produced.  For example hydrogen peroxide will reduce sodium hypochlorite and potassium permanganate, which is a convenient method for preparing oxygen in the laboratory.

=Organic substrates=

Hydrogen peroxide is frequently used as an oxidizing agent in organic chemistry. One application is for the oxidation of thioethers to sulfoxides. Ravikumar, Venkitasamy Kesavan, Benoit Crousse, Danièle Bonnet-Delpon, Jean-Pierre Bégué
 "Mild and Selective Oxidation of Sulfur Compounds in Trifluoroethanol: Diphenyldisulfide and Methyl phenyl Sulfoxide" Org. Synth. 2003, vol. 80, 184.

Alkaline hydrogen peroxide is used for epoxidation of electron-deficient alkenes such as acrylic acids, and also for oxidation of alkylboranes to alcohols, the second step of hydroboration-oxidation.

Formation of peroxide compounds

Hydrogen peroxide is a weak acid, and it can form hydroperoxide or peroxide salts or derivatives of many metals.
For example, on addition to an aqueous solution of chromic acid (. In aqueous solution it rapidly decomposes to form oxygen gas and chromium salts.
It can also produce peroxoanions by reaction with anions; for example, reaction with borax leads to sodium perborate, a bleach used in laundry detergents:
 in some reactions.

Biological function

Hydrogen peroxide is also one of the two chief chemicals in the defense system of the bombardier beetle, reacting with hydroquinone to discourage predators.
A study published in Nature found that hydrogen peroxide plays a role in the immune system. Scientists found that hydrogen peroxide inside of cells increased after tissues are damaged in zebra fish, which is thought to act as a signal to white blood cells to converge on the site and initiate the healing process. When the genes required to produce hydrogen peroxide were disabled, white blood cells did not accumulate at the site of damage. The experiments were conducted on fish; however, because fish are genetically similar to humans, the same process is speculated to occur in humans. The study in Nature suggested asthma sufferers have higher levels of hydrogen peroxide in their lungs than healthy people, which could explain why asthma sufferers have inappropriate levels of white blood cells in their lungs.
Hydrogen peroxide has important roles as a signaling molecule in the regulation of a wide variety of biological processes. These studies have frequently been quoted in fraudulent treatment claims.
The amount of hydrogen peroxide in biological systems can be assayed using a fluorimetric assay.

Uses

Bleaching wood pulp

About 50% of the world's production of hydrogen peroxide in 1994 was used for pulp- and paper-bleaching.[ref]
</ref>

Chemical intermediate

It is used in the production of certain organic peroxides, such as dibenzoyl peroxide, used in polymerisations and other chemical processes. Reaction with carboxylic acids produces a corresponding peroxy acid. Peracetic acid and meta-chloroperoxybenzoic acid (commonly abbreviated mCPBA) are prepared from acetic acid and meta-chlorobenzoic acid, respectively. The latter is commonly reacted with alkenes to give the corresponding epoxide.

=Propylene oxide=

A method of producing propylene oxide from hydrogen peroxide has been developed.  The process is claimed to be environmentally friendly, since the only significant byproduct is water.  Two of these "HPPO" (hydrogen peroxide to propylene oxide) plants came onstream in 2008: One of them located in Belgium is a Solvay, Dow-BASF joint venture, and the other in Korea is an EvonikHeadwaters, SK Chemicals joint venture.  A caprolactam application for hydrogen peroxide has been commercialized.  Potential routes to phenol and epichlorohydrin utilizing hydrogen peroxide have been postulated.

Water treatment

Hydrogen peroxide is used in certain waste water remediation processes.  It oxidizes organic compounds as well as deodorizes sulfur-containing species.

Bleaches and laundry aids

The second major industrial application for hydrogen peroxide is the manufacture of sodium percarbonate and sodium perborate.  These compounds are used as mild bleaches in laundry detergents.

=Other bleaching applications=

Other bleaching applications are becoming more important as hydrogen peroxide is seen as an environmentally benign alternative to chlorine-based bleaches.Bleach vs. Hydrogen Peroxide (Canadian Agency for Durgs and Technology in Health website)

Therapeutic use

Hydrogen peroxide is generally recognized as safe (GRAS) as an antimicrobial agent, an oxidizing agent and for other purposes by the U.S. FDA. For example, 35% hydrogen peroxide is used to prevent infection transmission in the hospital environment, and hydrogen peroxide vapor is registered with the US EPA as a sporicidal sterilant.
On the other hand many false claims have been made about the therapeutic properties of hydrogen peroxide, some even lethal, as discussed below.Pitfalls in Regulating Physicians (Science Based Medicine organization website)

=Disinfectant for inanimate objects=

Hydrogen peroxide has been used, in sufficient concentrations, to disinfect inanimate objects. As stated above scientific research concluded that chlorine based disinfectants are better used in hospital and other public institutions.

=Veterinary practice=

Hydrogen peroxide is used as an emetic in veterinary practice.How to Induce Vomiting (Emesis) in Dogs

=Toothpaste=

Hydrogen peroxide mixed with baking soda and salt is used as a toothpaste, but its use was shown to be no more effective than toothpaste.

=Acne treatment=

Hydrogen peroxide and benzoyl peroxide are sometimes used to treat acne. This too has been challenged by the medical establishment, after research showed that hydrogen peroxide even at minute quantities is harmful to the healing process. A fundamental difference from benzoyl peroxide is that hydrogen peroxide is not lipid soluble. Benzoyl peroxide selectively concentrates in the follicles and sebaceous glands because of its lipophilic properties, but hydrogen peroxide is much less soluble in lipids and is a much smaller molecule. This allows it to penetrate at any point in the skin and enter damaged cells relatively easily, leading to the aforementioned harm to the healing process.

=Disinfecting wounds=

Commonly used as treatment for disinfecting wounds, there is a body of evidence, e.g. and many reports since, that the use of large volumes of hydrogen peroxide over substantial tissue areas can lead to a dangerous oxygen embolism (gas embolism). While judicious use on surface wounds can utilize the catalase-caused "fizzing" effect to assist debridement and cleaning of soil from the wound, clinicians are advised to consult the literature before using peroxide on wounds and tissue cavities. It has also been shown that hydrogen peroxide, even in dilute solutions and minute quantities can slow the healing process on wounds. Ascenzi, Handbook of Disinfectant and Antiseptics, CRC Press, 1996, ISBN 0824795245, page 161. Further, hydrogen peroxide applied to wounds can impede healing and lead to scarring because it destroys newly formed skin cells.
At one time, the most common household use of hydrogen peroxide was to disinfect wounds, but it is now thought to slow healing by affecting tissue growth through several possible factors. Only a very minute concentration of H2O2 can induce healing, and only if not repeatedly applied... implies that H2O2 can cause poor healing by other mechanisms besides causing oxidation of these biological substrates." Surgical use can lead to gas embolism formation. Gas embolism produced by hydrogen peroxide. N Engl J Med 1967; 277: 238–41.

=Cure for cancer=

Following the call by alternative medicine advisors for drinking diluted hydrogen peroxide, and using it in various ways such as in shampoo and as an additive to toothpaste, as a treatment to illness in general and cancer in particular, the American Cancer Society states that "there is no scientific evidence that hydrogen peroxide is a safe, effective or useful cancer treatment", and advises cancer patients to "remain in the care of qualified doctors who use proven methods of treatment and approved clinical trials of promising new treatments."

=Inhalation, oral administration and Injection=

For treatment of various illnesses, another alternative medical procedure advocated by this group of medical doctors (now banned from publishing their material) is intravenous injection of hydrogen peroxide, which has been linked to several deaths. Also advocated by this group and its followers are oral administration of "dilute quantities" of H2O2, and inhalation of hydrogen peroxide at a concentration of about 1%. These practices have been challenged by the medical establishment as well.

Niche uses

=Micro-etching=

In the PCB manufacturing process, hydrogen peroxide mixed with sulfuric acid was used as the microetch chemical for copper surface roughening preparation.

=Instant steam=

A combination of a powdered precious metal-based catalyst, hydrogen peroxide, methanol and water can produce superheated steam in one to two seconds, releasing only  and high-temperature steam for a variety of purposes.Instant steam puts heat on MRSA, Society Of Chemical Industry

=Rapid oxidation for nuclear plant shutdown=

Nuclear pressurized water reactors (PWRs) use hydrogen peroxide during the plant shutdown to force the oxidation and dissolution of activated corrosion products deposited on the fuel.  The corrosion products are then removed with  the cleanup systems before the reactor is disassembled.

=Oil and gas exploration fossil analysis=

Hydrogen peroxide is also used in the oil and gas exploration industry to oxidize rock matrix in preparation for micro-fossil analysis.

Domestic uses

=Bleach=

Diluted 
It is absorbed by skin upon contact and creates a local skin capillary embolism that appears as a temporary whitening of the skin.4
It is used to whiten bones that are to be put on display.
3%  is effective at treating fresh (red) blood-stains in clothing and on other items. It must be applied to clothing before blood stains are "set" with heated water. Cold water and soap are then used to remove the peroxide-treated blood.
Hydrogen peroxide can be used to clean tile and grout on floors. It is sometimes recommended to clean with both hydrogen peroxide and baking soda together.
Mixed with baking soda and a small amount of hand soap, hydrogen peroxide is effective at removing skunk odor.Chemist Paul Krebaum claims to have originated the formula for use on skunked pets at Skunk Remedy

=Other uses=

Hydrogen peroxide is used with phenyl oxalate ester and an appropriate dye in glow sticks as an oxidizing agent. It reacts with the ester to form an unstable  dimer, which excites the dye to an excited state; the dye emits a photon (light) when it spontaneously relaxes back to the ground state.
Hydrogen peroxide can be combined with vinegar and table salt to form a substitute for industrial chemicals such as ferric chloride, ammonium persulfate, or hydrochloric acid as a hobbyist's printed circuit board etchant.PCB Etchant from household materials
Hydrogen peroxide may be used in accelerated aging of alcoholic spirits. Some hobby distillers advocate adding small amounts of hydrogen peroxide to distilled spirits, on the theory that the oxygen released will accelerate the oxidation of compounds that occurs naturally when spirits are aged in somewhat permeable oak barrels."Making Fine Spirits using simple, easy-to-build gear" by Zymurgy Bob, available from The Amphora Society  This has not been proven scientifically.

==Aeration for fish and plants==

Some horticulturalists and users of hydroponics advocate the use of weak hydrogen peroxide solution in watering solutions. Its spontaneous decomposition releases oxygen that enhances a plant's root development and helps to treat root rot (cellular root death due to lack of oxygen) and a variety of other pests.
Laboratory tests conducted by fish culturists in recent years have demonstrated that common household hydrogen peroxide can be used safely to provide oxygen for small fish. The hydrogen peroxide releases oxygen by decomposition when it is exposed to catalysts such as manganese dioxide.orgfws.gov

Propellant

High concentration  monopropellant produces a maximum specific impulse (Isp) of 161 s (1.6 kN·s/kg), which makes it a low-performance monopropellant. Peroxide generates much less thrust than hydrazine. The Bell Rocket Belt used hydrogen peroxide monopropellant.
As a bipropellant  is decomposed to burn a fuel as an oxidizer. Specific impulses as high as 350 s (3.5 kN·s/kg) can be achieved, depending on the fuel. Peroxide used as an oxidizer gives a somewhat lower Isp than liquid oxygen, but is dense, storable, noncryogenic and can be more easily used to drive gas turbines to give high pressures using an efficient closed cycle. It can also be used for regenerative cooling of rocket engines. Peroxide was used very successfully as an oxidizer in World War II German rocket motors (e.g. T-Stoff, containing oxyquinoline stabilizer, for the Me 163B), most often used with C-Stoff in a self-igniting hypergolic combination, and for the low-cost British Black Knight and Black Arrow launchers. 
In the 1940s and 1950s, the Walter turbine used hydrogen peroxide for use in submarines while submerged; it was found to be too noisy and require too much maintenance compared to diesel-electric power systems. Some torpedoes used hydrogen peroxide as oxidizer or propellant, but this was dangerous and has been discontinued by most navies. Hydrogen peroxide leaks were blamed for the sinkings of HMS Sidon and the Russian submarine Kursk. It was discovered, for example, by the Japanese Navy in torpedo trials, that the concentration of Soyuz using hydrogen peroxide propellant (NASA website)
While rarely used now as a monopropellant for large engines, small hydrogen peroxide attitude control thrusters are still in use on some satellites. However, hydrazine is more often used in spacecraft because of its higher specific impulse and lower rate of decomposition.

=Explosives=

Hydrogen peroxide has been used for creating organic peroxide based explosives for improvised explosive devices, including the 7 July 2005 London bombings. (NBC News) These explosives tend to degrade quickly and hence are not used as commercial or military explosives.

Safety

Regulations vary, but low concentrations, such as 6%, are widely available and legal to buy for medical use.  Most over-the-counter peroxide solutions are not suitable for ingestion. Higher concentrations may be considered hazardous and are typically accompanied by a Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS). In high concentrations, hydrogen peroxide is an aggressive oxidizer and will corrode many materials, including human skin. In the presence of a reducing agent, high concentrations of  will react violently.
High-concentration hydrogen peroxide streams, typically above 40%, should be considered hazardous due to concentrated hydrogen peroxide's meeting the definition of a DOT oxidizer according to U.S. regulations, if released into the environment. The EPA Reportable Quantity (RQ) for D001 hazardous wastes is , of concentrated hydrogen peroxide.
Hydrogen peroxide should be stored in a cool, dry, well-ventilated area and away from any flammable or combustible substances.Ozonelab Peroxide compatibility Because it breaks down quickly when exposed to light, it should be stored in an opaque container, and pharmaceutical formulations typically come in brown bottles that filter out light.
Hydrogen peroxide, either in pure or diluted form, can pose several risks, the main one being that it forms explosive mixtures upon contact with organic compounds. Highly concentrate hydrogen peroxide itself is unstable, and can then cause a boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) of the remaining liquid. Distillation of hydrogen peroxide at normal pressures is thus highly dangerous.  It is also corrosive especially when concentrated but even domestic-strength solutions can cause irritation to the eyes, mucous membranes and skin. Swallowing hydrogen peroxide solutions is particularly dangerous, as decomposition in the stomach releases large quantities of gas (10 times the volume of a 3% solution) leading to internal bleeding. Inhaling over 10% can cause severe pulmonary irritation.H2O2 toxicity and dangers Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry website
With a significant vapor pressure (1.2 kPa at 50 °CHandbook of Chemistry and Physics, 76th Ed, 1995–1996), hydrogen peroxide vapor is potentially hazardous. According to the U.S. NIOSH Immediately dangerous to life and health limit (IDLH) is only 75 ppm.S. Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has established a permissible exposure limit of 1.0 ppm calculated as an eight hour time weighted average (29 CFR 1910.1000, Table Z-1)Occupational Safety and Health Guideline for Hydrogen Peroxide and hydrogen peroxide has also been classified by the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) as a "known animal carcinogen, with unknown relevance on humans."Threshold Limit Values for Chemical Substances and Physical Agents & Biological Exposure Indices, ACGIH Information on the hazards of hydrogen peroxide is available from OSHA and from the ATSDR.Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

Dubious health claims

Hydrogen peroxide therapy, a purported treatment where small, highly diluted amounts of food-grade hydrogen peroxide are taken orally or administered intravenously, is claimed to cure everything from acne to HIV and cancer. Several books on the topic advocate this therapy.  This therapy is not approved by the U.S. FDA.  Large oral doses of hydrogen peroxide at a 3% concentration may cause "irritation and blistering to the mouth, throat, and abdomen", as well as "abdominal pain, vomiting, and diarrhea". 3. Hazards Identification Southeast Fisheries Science Center, daughter agency of NOAA. Deaths and serious injury have been reported after intravenous injection of hydrogen peroxide.thedenverchannel.com/news/naturopath-sentenced-for-injecting-teen-with-hydrogen-peroxide

Historical incidents





Notes
Bibliography




