[[Blondie (band)]]

CATEGORIES: Blondie (band), Chrysalis Records artists, American punk rock groups, Musical groups established in 1974, Musical groups disestablished in 1982, Musical groups reestablished in 1997, American New Wave musical groups, American post-punk music groups, Musical groups from New York City, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, NME Awards winners, Juno Award winners

Blondie is an American rock band founded by singer Deborah Harry and guitarist Chris Stein.  The band was a pioneer in the early American new wave and punk scenes of the mid-1970s. Its first two albums contained strong elements of these genres, and although successful in the United Kingdom and Australia, Blondie was regarded as an underground band in the United States until the release of Parallel Lines in 1978. Over the next three years, the band achieved several hit singles"Blondie". Rock and Roll Hall of Fame. 2006. including "Call Me", "Atomic" and "Heart of Glass" and became noted for its eclectic mix of musical styles incorporating elements of disco, pop,Ruhlmann, William. "Parallel Lines - Blondie". Allmusic. Retrieved November 29, 2011. rap,Ruhlmann, William. "Autoamerican - Blondie". Allmusic. Retrieved November 29, 2011. and reggae, while retaining a basic style as a new wave band.[ref]
 [/ref]
Blondie broke up after the release of its sixth studio album The Hunter in 1982. Deborah Harry continued to pursue a solo career with varied results after taking a few years off to care for partner Chris Stein, who was diagnosed with pemphigus, a rare autoimmune disease of the skin.
The band re-formed in 1997, achieving renewed success and a number one single in the United Kingdom with "Maria" in 1999, exactly 20 years after their 1st UK No1 single.
The group toured and performed throughout the world and is still active today. The band's ninth studio album, Panic of Girls, was released in 2011, with their tenth, Ghosts of Download, to be released in 2014.

History

Early career (1974–78)

Inspired by the burgeoning new music scene at the Mercer Arts Center, Chris Stein sought to join a similar band. He joined The Stilettos in 1973 as their guitarist and formed a romantic relationship with one of the band's vocalists, Deborah Harry, a former waitress and Playboy Bunny. Harry had been a member of a folk-rock band, The Wind in the Willows, in the late 1960s. In 1974, Stein parted ways with The Stilettos and Elda Gentile, the band's originator. Stein and Harry formed a new band with drummer Billy O'Connor and bassist Fred Smith. By 1975, after some personnel turnover (including sisters Tish and Snooky Bellomo on backing vocals), Stein and Harry were joined by drummer Clem Burke, keyboard player Jimmy Destri and bass player Gary Valentine. Originally billed as Angel and the Snake, they renamed themselves Blondie in late 1975. The name derived from comments made by truck drivers who catcalled "Hey, Blondie" to Harry as they drove by. eNotes. 2006. 12 Sep, 2010
Blondie became regular performers at Max's Kansas City and CBGB. The band signed with Private Stock Records and their debut album, Blondie, was issued in December 1976 but was initially not a commercial success. In September 1977, the band bought back its contract with Private Stock and then signed with Chrysalis Records."Talent Talk" Billboard October 22, 1977: 54 The first album was re-released on the new label in October 1977. Rolling Stone's review of the debut album observed the eclectic nature of the group's music, comparing it to Phil Spector and the Who, and commented that the album's two strengths were Richard Gottehrer's production and the persona of Deborah Harry, saying she performed with "utter aplomb and involvement throughout: even when she's portraying a character consummately obnoxious and spaced-out, there is a wink of awareness that is comforting and amusing yet never condescending." It also noted that Harry was the "possessor of a bombshell zombie's voice that can sound dreamily seductive and woodenly Mansonite within the same song".
The band's first commercial success occurred in Australia in 1977, when the music television program Countdown mistakenly played their video "In the Flesh", which was the B-side of their then current single "X-Offender". Jimmy Destri later credited the show's Molly Meldrum for their initial success, commenting that "we still thank him to this day" for playing the wrong song.
The single reached number 2 in Australia, while the album reached the Australian top twenty in October 1977, and a subsequent double-A release of "X-Offender" and "Rip Her to Shreds" was also popular. A successful Australian tour followed in December, though it was marred by an incident in Brisbane when disappointed fans almost rioted after Harry cancelled a performance due to illness.
In February 1978, Blondie released their second album, Plastic Letters (UK No. 10, US No. 78, Australia No. 64). The album was recorded as a four-piece band as Gary Valentine had left the band in mid 1977.[ref]
