[['Pataphysics]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional philosophies, 'Pataphysics, Surrealism

Pataphysics () is a philosophy or media theory dedicated to studying what lies beyond the realm of metaphysics. The concept was coined by French writer Alfred Jarry (1873–1907), who defined 'pataphysics as "the science of imaginary solutions, which symbolically attributes the properties of objects, described by their virtuality, to their lineaments".21.
A practitioner of 'pataphysics is a pataphysician or a pataphysicist.

Definitions

There are over one hundred differing definitions of pataphysics. 2003 Some examples are shown below.

Etymology

The word pataphysics is a contracted formation, derived from the Greek, " (ta meta ta physika).
Jarry mandated the inclusion of the apostrophe in the orthography, 'pataphysique and 'pataphysics, "to avoid a simple pun". The words pataphysician or pataphysicist and the adjective pataphysical should not include the apostrophe. Only when consciously referring to Jarry's science itself should the word pataphysics carry the apostrophe.8. The term pataphysics is a paronym (considered a kind of pun in French) of metaphysics. Since the apostrophe in no way affects the meaning or pronunciation of pataphysics, this spelling of the term is a sly notation, to the reader, suggesting a variety of puns that listeners may hear, or be aware of. These puns include patte à physique ("physics paw"), as interpreted by Jarry scholars Keith Beaumont and Roger Shattuck, pas ta physique ("not your physics"), and pâte à physique ("physics pastry dough").

History

The term first appeared in print in the text of Alfred Jarry's play Guignol in the 28 April 1893 issue of L'Écho de Paris littéraire illustré, but it has been suggested that the word has its origins in the same schoolpranks at the lycée in Rennes that led Jarry to write Ubu Roi.207. Jarry considered Ibicrates and Sophrotatos the Armenian as the fathers of this "science".20.

The Collège de 'Pataphysique

The Collège de 'Pataphysique, founded in 1948 in Paris, France,Brotchie 1995, p.11. is a "society committed to learned and inutilious research".77. (The word 'inutilious' is synonymous with 'useless'.) The motto of the college is  ("I arise again the same though changed"), and its current Vice-Curator is Her Magnificence Lutembi - a crocodile.38.
The permanent head of the college is the fictional Dr. Faustroll (Inamovable Curator), with assistance of the equally fictional Bosse-de-Nage (Starosta).39. The Vice-Curator is as such the "first and most senior living entity" in the college's hierarchy.113. Publications of the college, generally called Brotchie 1995, p.22.

=Offshoots of the Collège de 'Pataphysique=

Although France had been always the centre of the pataphysical globe, there are followers up in different cities around the world. In 1966 Juan Esteban Fassio was commissioned to draw the map of the Collège de 'Pataphysique and its institutes abroad. In the 1950s, Buenos Aires in the Western Hemisphere and Milan in Europe were the first cities to have pataphysical institutes. London, Edinburgh, Budapest, and Liège, as well as many other European cities, caught up in the sixties. In the 1970s, when the Collège de 'Pataphysique occulted, Germany, Sweden, Switzerland, Canada, The Netherlands, and many other countries showed that the internationalization of pataphysics was irreversible. During the Communist Era, a small group of pataphysicists in Czechoslovakia started a journal called PAKO, or Pataphysical Collegium.48. Alfred Jarry's plays had a lasting impression on the country's underground philosophical scene. A Pataphysics Institute opened in Vilnius, Lithuania in May 2013:  Patafizikos instituto atidarymas Vilniuje.

London Institute of 'Pataphysics

The London Institute of 'Pataphysics was established in September 2000 to promote pataphysics in the English-speaking world. The institute has various publications, including a journal and has six departments:Webpage of the London Institute of 'Pataphysics
The institute also contains a pataphysical museum and archive and organised the Anthony Hancock Paintings and Sculptures exhibition in 2002.Anthony Hancock Paintings and Sculptures exhibition

Concepts

Pataphysical calendar

The pataphysical calendar Reference number 1230, published 1954, as listed in the college's catalogue in 1949.21-22. The pataphysical era (E.P.) started on 8 September 1873 (Jarry's birthday). When converting pataphysical dates to Gregorian dates, the appendage (vulg.) for vulgate is added.
The week starts on a Sunday. Every 1st, 8th, 15th and 22nd is a Sunday and every 13th day of a month falls on a Friday (see Friday the 13th). Each day is assigned a specific name or saint. For example, the 27 Haha (1 November vulg.) is called .45-54.
The year has a total of 13 months each with 29 days. The 29th day of each month is imaginary with two exceptions:
The table below shows the names and order of months in a pataphysical year with their corresponding Gregorian dates and approximate translations or meanings by Hugill.
For example:
See also Bob Richmond's comments on the calendar and the French Wikipedia article.

Influences

In the 1960s pataphysics was used as a conceptual principle within various fine art forms, especially pop art and popular culture. Works within the pataphysical tradition tend to focus on the processes of their creation, and elements of chance or arbitrary choices are frequently key in those processes. Select pieces from the artist Marcel DuchampHugill 2012, p.55. and the composer John CageHugill 2012, p.51-52. characterize this. At around this time, Asger Jorn, a pataphysician and member of the Situationist International, referred to pataphysics as a new religion.

In literature

In music

In visual art

Pataphor

The pataphor (), is a term coined by writer and musician Pablo Lopez, for an unusually extended metaphor based on Alfred Jarry's "science" of pataphysics. As Jarry claimed that pataphysics existed "as far from metaphysics as metaphysics extends from regular reality", a pataphor attempts to create a figure of speech that exists as far from metaphor as metaphor exists from non-figurative language. Whereas a metaphor is the comparison of a real object or event with a seemingly unrelated subject in order to emphasize the similarities between the two, the pataphor uses the newly created metaphorical similarity as a reality on which to base itself. In going beyond mere ornamentation of the original idea, the pataphor seeks to describe a new and separate world, in which an idea or aspect has taken on a life of its own.(Spanish) Luis Casado, Pataphors And Political Language, El Clarin: Chilean Press, 2007The Cahiers du Collège de 'Pataphysique, n°22 (December 2005), Collège de 'Pataphysique
Like pataphysics itself, pataphors essentially describe two degrees of separation from reality (rather than merely one degree of separation, which is the world of metaphors and metaphysics). The pataphor may also be said to function as a critical tool, describing the world of "assumptions based on assumptions", such as belief systems or rhetoric run amok. The following is an example.
"Non-figurative:
Metaphor
Pataphor
Thus, the pataphor has created a world where the chessboard exists, including the characters who live in that world, entirely abandoning the original context.
The pataphor has been subject to commercial interpretations,
Pataphors have been the subject of art exhibits, as in Tara Strickstein's 2010 "Pataphor" exhibit at Next Art Fair/Art Chicago.
There is also a book of pataphorical art called Pataphor by Dutch artist Hidde von Schie.
It is worth noting that a pataphor is not the traditional metaphorical conceit but rather a set of metaphors built upon an initial metaphor, obscuring its own origin rather than reiterating the same analogy in myriad ways.





Bibliography




