[[Jan Masaryk]]

CATEGORIES: 1886 births, 1948 deaths, People from Prague, People from the Kingdom of Bohemia, Austro-Hungarian military personnel of World War I, Czech Protestants, World War II political leaders, Deaths by defenestration, People executed by defenestration, Czechoslovak diplomats, Czech people of Slovak descent, Czech people of Huguenot descent, Czech people of American descent, Czech people of French descent, Government ministers of Czechoslovakia, Ambassadors of Czechoslovakia to the United Kingdom, Recipients of the Order of Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk, Bates College alumni

Jan Garrigue Masaryk (14 September 1886 – 10 March 1948) was a Czech diplomat and politician and Foreign Minister of Czechoslovakia from 1940 to 1948. American journalist John Gunther described Masaryk as "a brave, honest, turbulent, and impulsive man".

Early life

Born in Prague, he was a son of professor and politician Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk (who became the first President of Czechoslovakia in 1918) and Charlotte Garrigue, Tomáš Garrigue Masaryk's American wife. Masaryk was educated in Prague and also in the USA, where he also for a time lived as a drifter and lived on the earnings of his manual labor. His father resigned as President in 1935 and died two years later. He was succeeded by Edvard Beneš.

Wartime

In September 1938 the Sudetenland was occupied by German forces and Masaryk resigned as ambassador in protest, although he remained in London. Other government members including Beneš also resigned. In March 1939 Germany occupied the remaining parts of the Czech provinces of Bohemia and Moravia, and a puppet Slovak state was established in Slovakia. When a Czechoslovak Government-in-Exile was established in Britain in 1940, Masaryk was appointed Foreign Minister. In July 1942 Masaryk called for the "killing of Germans" as the shortest way to win the war. "I favour bombing of open towns—and killing of women and children if necessary."Lowell Sun July 18, 1942, p.12

After the war

Masaryk remained Foreign Minister following the liberation of Czechoslovakia as part of the multi-party, communist-dominated National Front government. (2001) Europe Since 1945: An Encyclopedia, Volume 1, p. 251 New York: Taylor & Francis The Communists under Klement Gottwald saw their position strengthened after the 1946 elections but Masaryk stayed on as Foreign Minister. (2010) The Clash of Ideas in World Politics, p. 185 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press He was concerned with retaining the friendship of the Soviet Union, but was dismayed by the veto they put on Czechoslovak participation in the Marshall Plan. In February 1948 the majority of the non-communist cabinet members resigned, hoping to force new elections, but instead a communist government under Gottwald was formed in what became known as the Czech coup (Victorious February in the Eastern Bloc). Masaryk remained Foreign Minister, and was the only prominent minister in the new government who wasn't either a Communist or a fellow traveler. However, he was apparently uncertain about his decision and possibly regretted his decision not to oppose the communist coup by broadcasting to the Czech people on national radio, where he was a much loved celebrity.

Death

On March 10, 1948 Masaryk was found dead, dressed only in his pajamas, in the courtyard of the Foreign Ministry (the Černín Palace in Prague) below his bathroom window. 133 New York: Sterling Publishing Co., Inc. The initial investigation by the Ministry of the Interior stated that he had committed suicide by jumping out of the window, although for a long time it has been believed by some that he was murdered by the nascent Communist government. and a third investigation in the early 1990s after the Velvet Revolution concluded that it had been a murder.
Discussions about the mysterious circumstances of his death continued for some time. Those who believe that Masaryk was murdered called it the Third Defenestration of Prague, and point to the presence of nail marks on the window sill from which Masaryk fell, as well as smearings of feces and Masaryk's stated intention to leave Prague the next day for London. Members of Masaryk's family—including his former wife, Frances Crane Leatherbee, a former in-law named Sylvia E. Crane, and his sister Alice Masaryková — stated their belief that he had indeed killed himself, according to a letter written by Sylvia E. Crane to The New York Times, and considered the possibility of murder a "cold war cliché". & Sylvia E. (1991) Czechoslovakia: Anvil of the Cold War, pp. xiv, 321-323 New York: Praeger A Prague police report in 2004 concluded after forensic research that Masaryk had indeed been thrown out the window to his death.  This report was seemingly corroborated in 2006 when a Russian journalist claimed that his mother knew the Russian intelligence officer who threw Masaryk out the window.
The highest-ranking Soviet Bloc intelligence defector, Lt. Gen. Ion Mihai Pacepa, described his conversation with Nicolae Ceauşescu, who told him about "ten international leaders the Kremlin killed or tried to kill". Jan Masaryk was one of them.

Private life

From 1924 until their divorce in 1931, Masaryk was married to Frances Crane Leatherbee (1887-1954). She was an heiress to the Crane piping, valves and elevator fortune, the former wife of Robert Leatherbee, a daughter of Charles R. Crane, a U.S. minister to China, and a sister of Richard Teller Crane II, a U.S. ambassador to Czechoslovakia. By that marriage, Masaryk had three stepchildren: Charles Leatherbee, Robert Leatherbee Jr., and Richard Crane Leatherbee.com, December 13, 2005.  Stepson Charles Leatherbee (Harvard 1929) co-founded the University Players, a summer stock company in Falmouth, Massachusetts, in 1928 with Bretaigne Windust.  He married Mary Lee Logan, younger sister of Joshua Logan, who became one of the co-directors of the University Players in 1931.  But Not Forgotten: The Adventure of the University Players.  New York, William Sloane Associates: 1951.
Masaryk was a skilled amateur pianist.  In that capacity, he accompanied Jarmila Novotná in a recital of Czech folk songs issued on 78 RPM records to commemorate the victims of the Nazi eradication of Lidice. In Fact, It Still Is", The New York Times, March 7, 1993, accessed October 30, 2008.
At the time of his death, Masaryk was reportedly planning to marry the American writer Marcia Davenport.



Further reading




