[[Backslash]]

CATEGORIES: Punctuation, Typographical symbols

The backslash (\) is a typographical mark (glyph) used mainly in computing and is the mirror image of the common slash (/). It is sometimes called a hack, whack, escape (from C/UNIX), reverse slash, slosh, backslant, downhill, backwhack, and in rare occasions, bash, reverse slant, and reversed virgule.

History

Bob Bemer introduced the "\" character into ASCII Both these operators were included in early versions of the C programming language supplied with Unix V6, Unix V7  and more currently BSD 2.11.

Usage

In many programming languages such as C, Perl, and PHP and in Unix scripting languages, the backslash is used to indicate that the character following it should be treated specially (if it would otherwise be treated normally), or normally (if it would otherwise be treated specially). It is thus an escape character. In various regular expression languages it acts as a switch, changing subsequent literal characters into metacharacters and vice versa.  The backslash is used similarly in the TeX typesetting system and in RTF files to begin markup tags.  In Haskell, the backslash is used both to introduce special characters and to introduce lambda functions (since it is a reasonable approximation in ASCII of the Greek letter lambda, λ).O'Sullivan, Stewart, and Goerzen,  Real World Haskell, ch. 4: anonymous (lambda) functions, p.99 
In the context of line-oriented text, especially source code for some programming languages, it is often used at the end of a line to indicate that the trailing newline character should be ignored, so that the following line is treated as if it were part of the current line. In this context it may be called a "continuation". The GNU make manual says, "We split each long line into two lines using backslash-newline; this is like using one long line, but is easier to read."
MS-DOS 2.0, released 1983, copied the hierarchical file system from Unix and thus used the (forward) slash, but (possibly on the insistence of IBM) added the backslash to allow paths to be typed at the command line interpreter's prompt while retaining compatibility with MS-DOS 1.0 and CP/M where the slash was the command-line option indicator (i.e. as in typing "DIR/W" to give the "wide" option to the "DIR" command). Except for COMMAND. This holds true for MS-DOS and PC DOS, but also all other DOS operating systems like DR-DOS, PTS-DOS, RxDOS or FreeDOS as well as to Concurrent DOS, Multiuser DOS, FlexOS, 4680 OS, 4690 OS, OS/2 and Windows. In some versions of DOS, the option character can be changed from / to - via SWITCHAR, which also makes COMMAND.
The Microsoft Windows family of operating systems inherited the MS-DOS behavior and so still support either character - but individual Windows programs and sub-systems may, wrongly, only accept the backslash as a path delimiter, or may misinterpret a forward slash if it is used as such. Some programs will only accept forward slashes if the path is placed in double-quotes. The failure of Microsoft's security features to recognize unexpected-direction slashes in local and Internet paths, while other parts of the operating system still act upon them, has led to some serious lapses in security. Resources that should not be available have been accessed with paths using particular mixes, such as .
In the Japanese encodings ISO 646 (a 7-bit code based on ASCII), JIS X 0201 (an 8-bit code), and Shift JIS (a multi-byte encoding which is 8-bit for ASCII), the code point 0x5C that would be used for backslash in ASCII is instead rendered as a yen mark (¥), while in Korean encoding, it is drawn as a won currency symbol (₩). Computer programs still treat the code as a backslash in these environments, causing confusion, especially in MS-DOS filenames.
In mathematics, a backslash-like symbol is used for the set difference. 
In some dialects of the BASIC programming language, the backslash is used as an operator symbol to indicate integer division. 
In MATLAB and GNU Octave the backslash is used for left matrix divide, while the slash is for right matrix divide.
In PHP version 5.3 and higher, the backslash is used to indicate a namespace.
In USFM, the backslash is used to mark format features for editing Bible translations.






