[[Shiga-like toxin]]

CATEGORIES: AB5 toxins

 
Shiga-like toxin, also known as verotoxin, It is named for its similarity to  the AB5-type Shiga toxin produced by the bacteria Shigella dysenteriae,   Vero cell . 
There are two types, known as SLT1 and SLT2.

History

Transmission

As with Shiga toxin, the toxin requires highly specific receptors on the cells' surface in order to attach and enter the cell; species such as cattle, swine, and deer which do not carry these receptors may harbor toxigenic bacteria without any ill effect, shedding them in their feces, from where they may be spread to humans.

Clinical significance

Shiga-toxin is associated with Hemolytic-uremic syndrome.

Structure and mechanism

Structure

The toxin is a multisubunit protein made up one molecule of A subunit (32,000 molecular weight) responsible for the toxic action of the protein, and five molecules of the B subunit (7,700 molecular weight) responsible for binding to a specific cell type.

Mechanism of action

The toxin acts on the lining of the blood vessels, the vascular endothelium. The B subunits of the toxin bind to a component of the cell membrane known as glycolipid globotriaosylceramide (Gb3). When the protein is inside the cell, the A subunit interacts with the ribosomes to inactivate them. The A subunit of Shiga toxin is an N-glycosidase that modifies the RNA component of the ribosome to inactivate it and so bring a halt to protein synthesis leading to the death of the cell. The vascular endothelium has to continually renew itself, so this killing of cells leads to a breakdown of the lining and to hemorrhage. The first response is commonly a bloody diarrhea. This is because Shiga toxin is usually taken in with contaminated food or water. 
The toxin is effective against small blood vessels, such as found in the digestive tract, the kidney, and lungs, but not against large vessels such as the arteries or major veins. A specific target for the toxin appears to the vascular endothelium of the glomerulus. This is the filtering structure that is a key to the function of the kidney. Destroying these structures leads to kidney failure and the development of the often deadly and frequently debilitating hemolytic uremic syndrome. Food poisoning with Shiga toxin often also has effects on the lungs and the nervous system.

Source of toxin gene

It has been suggested by some researchers that the gene coding for Shiga-like toxin comes from a toxin-converting
lambdoid prophage, such as H-19B or 933W, inserted into the bacteria's chromosome via transduction.








