[[Abc conjecture]]

CATEGORIES: Conjectures, Number theory, Unsolved problems in mathematics

The ''abc'' conjecture (also known as Oesterlé–Masser conjecture) is a conjecture in number theory, first proposed by  as an integer analogue of the Mason–Stothers theorem for polynomials. The conjecture is stated in terms of three positive integers, a, b and c (hence the name), which have no common factor and satisfy a + b = c. If d denotes the product of the distinct prime factors of abc, the conjecture essentially states that d is usually not much smaller than c. In other words: if a and b are composed from large powers of primes, then c is usually not divisible by large powers of primes. The precise statement is given below.
The abc conjecture has already become well known for the number of interesting consequences it entails. Many famous conjectures and theorems in number theory would follow immediately from the abc conjecture.  described the abc conjecture as "the most important unsolved problem in Diophantine analysis".
Several solutions have been proposed to the abc conjecture, the most recent of which is still being evaluated by the mathematical community, though it still remains open as of February 2014.

Formulations

The abc conjecture can be expressed as follows:
For every ε > 0, there are only finitely many triples of coprime positive integers a + b  c such that c > d1+ε, where d denotes the product of the distinct prime factors of abc.
To illustrate the terms used, if
then d = 2·17·3·11 = 1122, which is greater than c.  Therefore, for all ε > 0, c is not greater than d1+ε.  According to the conjecture, most coprime triples where  are like the ones used in this example, and for only a few exceptions is c > d1+ε.
To add more terminology:
For a positive integer n, the radical of n, denoted rad(n), is the product of the distinct prime factors of n. For example
If a, b, and c are coprimeNote that when it is given that a + b = c, coprimeness of a, b, c implies pairwise coprimeness of a, b, c. So in this case, it does not matter which concept we use. positive integers such that a + b = c, it turns out that "usually" c   ABC Conjecture. For every ε > 0, there exist only finitely many triples (a, b, c) of positive coprime integers, with a + b = c, such that
 
An equivalent formulation states that:
  ABC Conjecture II. For every ε > 0, there exists a constant Kε such that for all triples (a, b, c) of coprime positive integers, with a + b = c, the inequality
 holds.
A third formulation of the conjecture involves the quality, q(a, b, c), of the triple (a, b, c), defined by:
For example,
A typical triple (a, b, c) of coprime positive integers with a + b = c will have c  1 such as in the second example are rather special, they consist of numbers divisible by high powers of small prime numbers.
  ABC Conjecture III. For every ε > 0, there exist only finitely many triples (a, b, c) of coprime positive integers with a + b = c such that q(a, b, c) > 1 + ε. 
Whereas it is known that there are infinitely many triples (a, b, c) of coprime positive integers with a + b = c such that q(a, b, c) > 1, the conjecture predicts that only finitely many of those have q > 1.01 or q > 1.001 or even q > 1.0001, etc.

Examples of triples with small radical

The condition that ε > 0 is necessary for the truth of the conjecture, as there exist infinitely many triples a, b, c with rad(abc) < c. For instance, such a triple may be taken as
As a and c together contribute only a factor of two to the radical, while b is divisible by 9, rad(abc) < 2c/3 for these examples, if n > 1. By replacing the exponent 6n by other exponents forcing b to have larger square factors, the ratio between the radical and c may be made arbitrarily small. Specifically, replacing 6n by p(p − 1)n for an arbitrary prime p will make b divisible by p2, because 2p(p−1) ≡ 1 (mod p2) and 2p(p−1) − 1 will be a factor of b.
A list of the highest quality triples (triples with a particularly small radical relative to c) is given below; the highest quality of these, with quality 1.6299, was found by Eric Reyssat :

Some consequences

The abc conjecture has a large number of consequences. These include both known results (some of which have been proven separately since the conjecture has been stated), and conjectures for which it gives a conditional proof. While an earlier proof of the conjecture would have been more significant in terms of consequences, the abc conjecture itself remains of interest for the other conjectures it would prove, together with its numerous links with deep questions in number theory.

Theoretical results

The abc conjecture implies that c can be bounded above by a near-linear function of the radical of abc. However, exponential bounds are known. Specifically, the following bounds have been proven:
In these bounds, K1 is a constant that does not depend on a, b, or c, and K2 and K3 are constants that depend on ε (in an effectively computable way) but not on a, b, or c. The bounds apply to any triple for which c > 2.

Computational results

In 2006, the Mathematics Department of Leiden University in the Netherlands, together with the Dutch Kennislink science institute, launched the ABC@Home project, a grid computing system which aims to discover additional triples a, b, c with rad(abc) < c. Although no finite set of examples or counterexamples can resolve the abc conjecture, it is hoped that patterns in the triples discovered by this project will lead to insights about the conjecture and about number theory more generally.

Note: the quality q(a, b, c) of the triple (a, b, c) is defined above.

Refined forms and generalizations

A stronger inequality proposed by  states that in the inequality, one can replace rad(abc) by
where ω is the total number of distinct primes dividing a, b and c .
 also describes related conjectures of Andrew Granville that would give upper bounds on c of the form
where Ω(n) is the total number of prime factors of n and
where Θ(n) is the number of integers up to n divisible only by primes dividing n.
 formulated the n-conjecture—a version of the abc conjecture involving n > 2 integers.

Attempts at solution

Lucien Szpiro attempted a solution in 2007 but it was found to be incorrect."Finiteness Theorems for Dynamical Systems", Lucien Szpiro, talk at  Conference on L-functions and Automorphic Forms (on the occasion of Dorian Goldfeld's 60th Birthday), Columbia University, May 2007. See .
In August 2012, Shinichi Mochizuki released a series of four preprints containing a claim to a proof of the abc conjecture. Mochizuki calls the theory on which this proof is based "inter-universal Teichmüller theory", and it has other applications including a proof of Szpiro's conjecture and Vojta's conjecture. Inter-universal Teichmuller Theory I: Construction of Hodge Theaters, Inter-universal Teichmuller Theory II: Hodge-Arakelov-theoretic Evaluation, Inter-universal Teichmuller Theory III: Canonical Splittings of the Log-theta-lattice., Inter-universal Teichmuller Theory IV: Log-volume Computations and Set-theoretic Foundations, available at  Attempts at verifying Mochizuki's work are severely hampered by his refusal to leave his home university and lecture on his new mathematics, as is standard in the academy.The Paradox of the Proof
When an error in one of the articles was pointed out by Vesselin Dimitrov and Akshay Venkatesh in October 2012, Mochizuki posted a comment on his website acknowledging the mistake, stating that it would not affect the result, and promising a corrected version in the near future. He revised all of his papers on "inter-universal Teichmüller theory" of which the latest 2 revisions dated December 2013. Mochizuki has refused all requests for media interviews, but released a progress report in December 2013.kurims.ac.pdf



Notes






