[[Hydrocodone]]

CATEGORIES: Euphoriants, German inventions, Ketones, Morphinans, Mu-opioid agonists, Phenol ethers, Semisynthetic opioids

Hydrocodone is a semi-synthetic opioid derived from codeine. Hydrocodone is used orally as a narcotic analgesic and antitussive (cough medicine), often in combination with paracetamol (acetaminophen) or ibuprofen.

Medical uses

Hydrocodone is used to treat moderate to severe pain and as an antitussive to treat cough. In one study comparing the potency of hydrocodone to that of oxycodone, it was found that it took 50% more hydrocodone to achieve the same degree of miosis (pupillary contraction). Recommended dosing interval is 4–6 hours.

Adverse effects

Common side effects of hydrocodone are nausea, vomiting, constipation, drowsiness, dizziness, lightheadedness, fuzzy thinking, anxiety, abnormally happy or sad mood, dry throat, difficulty urinating, rash, itching, and narrowing of the pupils.  Serious side effects include slowed or irregular breathing and chest tightness. Last Revised—1 October 2008. Retrieved on 20 April 2013.
Several cases of progressive bilateral hearing loss unresponsive to steroid therapy have been described as an infrequent adverse reaction to hydrocodone/acetaminophene abuse. This adverse effect has been considered due to the ototoxicity of hydrocodone.
It is in FDA pregnancy category C. No adequate and well-controlled studies in humans have been conducted. A newborn of a mother taking opioid medications regularly prior to the birth will be physically dependent. The baby may also exhibit respiratory depression if the opioid dose was high. An epidemiological study indicated that opioid treatment during early pregnancy results in increased risk of various birth defects.
Symptoms of hydrocodone overdose include narrowed or widened pupils; slow, shallow, or stopped breathing; slowed or stopped heartbeat; cold, clammy, or blue skin; excessive sleepiness; loss of consciousness; seizures; or death.
Hydrocodone can be habit-forming, causing physical and psychological dependence. Its abuse liability is similar to morphine and less than oxycodone.

Contraindications and interactions

Patients consuming alcohol, other opioids, antihistamines, antipsychotics, antianxiety agents, or other central nervous system (CNS) depressants together with hydrocodone may exhibit an additive CNS depression.

Pharmacology

As a narcotic, hydrocodone relieves pain by binding to opioid receptors in the CNS. It acts primarily on μ-opioid receptors, with about six times lesser affinity to δ-opioid receptors. In blood, 20–50% of hydrocodone is bound to protein.
Studies have shown hydrocodone is stronger than codeine but only one-tenth as potent as morphine at binding to receptors and reported to be only 59% as potent as morphine in analgesic properties. However, in tests conducted on rhesus monkeys, the analgesic potency of hydrocodone was actually higher than morphine.

Pharmacokinetics

Hydrocodone is biotransformed by the liver into several metabolites, and has a serum half-life that averages 3.8 hours. The hepatic cytochrome P450 enzyme CYP2D6 converts it into hydromorphone, a more potent opioid. However, extensive and poor cytochrome 450 CYP2D6 metabolizers had similar physiological and subjective responses to hydrocodone, and CYP2D6 inhibitor quinidine did not change the responses of extensive metabolizers, suggesting that inhibition of CYP2D6 metabolism of hydrocodone has no practical importance.
A major metabolite, norhydrocodone, is predominantly formed by CYP3A4-catalyzed oxidation. Inhibition of CYP3A4 in a child who was, in addition, a poor CYP2D6 metabolizer, resulted in a fatal overdose of hydrocodone.

Formulations

In 2014, the FDA approved prescription-only marketing by Zogenix Pharmaceuticals of the first pure hydrocodone product in the U.S, known by the brand name Zohydro.  The drug comes as a extended-release capsule with hydrocodone powder inside in doses of 10 mg, 15 mg, 20 mg, 30 mg, 40 mg and 50 mg. This is 5 times as much active opioid as the highest strength Hydrocodone/APAP product (10 mg/325 mg). Zohydro is schedule II controlled substance under the CSA.zogenix.htm
Most of the states of the U.S. asked the FDA not to approve Zohydro in capsule form due to its potency and the ease with which it can be abused by being crushed and snorted or injected.  It was briefly prohibited in Massachusetts before a federal judge ruled the state ban was preempted by the earlier federal approval.bostonglobe.html

Recreational use

Many users of hydrocodone report a sense of satisfaction (euphoria), especially at higher doses. A number of users also report a warm or pleasant numbing sensation throughout the body, one of the best known effects of narcotics.
Taking hydrocodone with grapefruit juice is one of the measures believed to enhance its narcotic effect. It is believed that CYP3A4 inhibitors in grapefruit juice may decrease metabolism of hydrocodone, although there has been no research into this issue. Additionally, many medications are either substrates (competing for metabolism and exhausting available enzymes) or direct inhibitors or CYP3A4. Inhibition of CYP2D6 would also increase the duration of hydrocodones effects and its concentration in the blood, leading to exaggerated effects. Complete inhibition of both enzymes would theoretically inhibit 60% of the factors involved in hydrocodones metabolism.

Detection in body fluids

Hydrocodone may be quantitated in blood, plasma or urine to monitor for misuse, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning or assist in a medicolegal death investigation. Many commercial opiate screening tests cross-react appreciably with hydrocodone and its metabolites, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish hydrocodone from other opiates. Blood or plasma hydrocodone concentrations are typically in the 5–30 µg/L range in persons taking the drug therapeutically, 100–200 µg/L in abusers and 100–1,600 µg/L in cases of acute fatal overdosage. Postmortem oxycodone and hydrocodone blood concentrations. J. Forensic Sci. 48: 429–431, 2003.R. Baselt, Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man, 9th edition, Biomedical Publications, Seal Beach, CA, 2011, pp. 812–814.

Regulation

In Australia, hydrocodone is a Schedule 8 (S8) or Controlled Drug.
Hydrocodone is regulated in the same fashion as in Germany (see below) under the Austrian Suchtmittelgesetz; since 2002 it has been available in the form of German products and those produced elsewhere in the European Union under Article 76 of the Schengen Treaty—prior to this, no Austrian companies produced hydrocodone products, with dihydrocodeine and nicomorphine being more commonly used for the same levels of pain and the former for coughing.
In Belgium, hydrocodone is no longer available for medical use.
In Canada, hydrocodone is a controlled substance and is available by prescription only. Hydrocodone is prescribed alone as well as in proprietary combinations, typically with an NSAID or paracetamol, 
In France, hydrocodone (Vicodin) is no longer available for medical use. Hydrocodone is a prohibited narcotic.
In Germany, hydrocodone is no longer available for medical use. Hydrocodone is listed under the Betäubungsmittelgesetz as a Suchtgift in the same category as morphine.
In Luxembourg, hydrocodone is available by prescription under the name Biocodone. Prescriptions are more commonly given for use as a cough suppressant (antitussive) rather than for pain relief (analgesic).
In the Netherlands, hydrocodone is not available for medical use and is classified as a List 1 drug under the Opium Law.
Hydrocodone is no longer available for medical use. The last remaining formula was banned in 1967.
In the UK, hydrocodone is not available for medical use and is listed as a Class A drug under the Misuse of Drugs Act 1971. Various formulations of dihydrocodeine, a weaker opioid, are frequently used as an alternative for the aforementioned indications of hydrocodone use.
In the U.S., formulations containing more than 15 mg per dosage unit are considered Schedule II drugs, as would any formulation consisting of just hydrocodone alone. Those containing less than or equal to 15 mg per dosage unit in combination with acetaminophen or another non-controlled drug are called hydrocodone compounds and are currently considered Schedule III drugs. Hydrocodone is typically found in combination with other drugs such as acetaminophen, aspirin, ibuprofen and homatropine methylbromide. The purpose of the non-controlled drugs in combination is often twofold: 1) To provide increased analgesia with a synergy from multiple painkillers. 2) To deter the misuse of hydrocodone by causing exaggerated side effects at higher-than-prescribed doses.
Hydrocodone is not commercially available in pure form in the United States due to a separate regulation, and is always sold with an NSAID, paracetamol, antihistamine, expectorant, or homatropine. Pure hydrocodone is a more strictly controlled Schedule II drug and sold by compounding pharmacies. The cough preparation Codiclear DH is the purest commercial US hydrocodone item, containing guaifenesin and small amounts of ethanol as active ingredients.
Under the Controlled Substances Act (CSA), hydrocodone is currently listed as both a Schedule II and Schedule III substance depending on the formulation.
On 25-Oct-2013 the U.S. Food & Drug Administration recommended tighter controls of the drug by reclassifying all formulations of hydrocodone as Schedule II. Critics of hydrocodone use have lobbbied unsuccessfully to reclassify all hydrocodone preparations as Schedule II Controlled Substances, with some seeking reform in 2014. However, there has been pressure from many pharmaceutical firms, medical professionals, and patients, particularly those undergoing pain management, have stressed that reclassification is unnecessary and would be counter-productive to effectively provide pain relief for those suffering. Those opposed to reclassification also maintain that existing protocol for prescribing opioids and the existing inclusion of acetaminophen along with other NSAIDs, are effective measures in deterring misuse. 
Hydrocodone was until recently the active antitussive in more than 200 formulations of cough syrups and tablets sold in the United States. In late 2006, the FDA began forcing the recall of many of these formulations due to reports of deaths in infants and children under the age of six. The legal status of drug formulations originally sold between 1938 and 1962—before FDA approval was required—was ambiguous. As a result of FDA enforcement action, by August 2010, 88% of the hydrocodone-containing medications had been removed from the market.
At the present time
As of July 2010, the FDA was considering banning some hydrocodone and oxycodone fixed-combination proprietary prescription drugs—based on the paracetamol content and the widespread occurrence of liver damage. FDA action on this suggestion would ostensibly also affect codeine and dihydrocodeine products such as the Tylenol With Codeine and Panlor series of drugs.
The rationale of combining hydrocodone with other pain-killers is that the combination may increase efficacy, and the adverse effects may be reduced as compared with an equally effective dose of a single agent. Similar results were observed for hydrocodone-acetaminophen combination.
Four pharmaceutical companies (Purdue Pharma, Cephalon, Egalet and Zogenix) are developing extended-release formulations of hydrocodone by itself; the Zogenix product was approved by the US FDA on October 25, 2013 and was launched in the 1st Quarter of the Market in 2014. These formulations were designed to avoid the issue of hepatotoxicity precipitated by acetaminophen. These new extended-release preparations also offer lower abuse potential.

History

Hydrocodone was first synthesized in Germany in 1920 by Carl Mannich and Helene Löwenheim. It was approved by the Food and Drug Administration on 23 March 1943 for sale in the United States and approved by Health Canada for sale in Canada under the brand name Hycodan.[ref]
 See section I. B., ''DESI Review of Hydrocodone Products[/ref]








