[[The Bachelor (U.S. TV series)]]

CATEGORIES: American Broadcasting Company network shows, American dating and relationship reality television series, Television series by Warner Bros. Television, 2002 American television series debuts, 2000s American television series, 2010s American television series, English-language television programming

The Bachelor is an American reality television dating game show debuting in 2002 on ABC. For all seasons, the show is hosted by Chris Harrison. There are two related series: The Bachelorette and Bachelor Pad.

Production

It is produced and directed by Mike Fleiss and is shot by camera operator Jesse Fleiss. Supervising producer (2013–14) is Elan Gale.

Plot

As the show is designed, the series revolves around a single bachelor (deemed eligible) who starts with a pool of romantic interests (typically 25) from whom the bachelor is expected to select a wife. During the course of the season, the bachelor eliminates candidates (see The elimination process), with the bachelor proposing marriage to his final selection. The participants travel to romantic and exotic locations for their adventures, and the conflicts in the series, both internal and external, stem from the elimination-style format of the show.
The above description is a general guideline. In practice, the show does not always follow its designed structure, and those variations are often a source of drama and conflict.
The two most notable cases where the bachelor violated the premise of the show are Brad Womack, who selected neither of his final two women, and Jason Mesnick, who in the After the Final Rose episode broke off his engagement and proposed to the first runner-up. (The two are now married.)

Setting

For the first two weeks of filming the contestants stay in "Villa De La Vina," a  For the third and remaining episodes are the contestants have filmed around the world. Episodes have been filmed throughout the United States, Canada, England, New Zealand, Vietnam, Korea to name just a few.  The Agoura Hills, California mansion was not used during a few seasons including season 7 that was filmed  New York City, where Charlie O'Connell, who had appeared in Sliders with his brother Jerry O'Connell, lived,  Paris, France for season 8; Rome, Italy for season 9, where Lorenzo Borghese lived who is half-Italian.

The elimination process

On each Bachelor episode, the bachelor interacts with the women and presents a rose to each woman he wishes to remain on the show. Those who do not receive a rose are eliminated. Eliminations are based upon the bachelor's personal feelings about each contestant, guided primarily by the impression made by each woman during dates or other events of the week. Most roses are presented at a rose ceremony at the end of each episode, but roses can also be bestowed on dates. Typical activities include
The final episodes of each season traditionally follow this pattern:
A woman may withdraw from the competition at any time if she is no longer interested in the bachelor. On rare occasions, a woman is removed from the show for breaking one of the rules.
The bachelor has wide discretion in choosing how many and when to present the roses. For example, Sean Lowe presented several roses at his initial cocktail party.
It is common to accuse a contestant for not being on the show for the right reasons, meaning that her aim is not to establish a relationship with the bachelor but rather to garner publicity for her own career, induce jealousy in an ex-boyfriend, or simply to get a free trip to exotic locations.

Seasons

Spinoffs

The show's success has led producer Mike Fleiss to create multiple spin-offs, including The Bachelorette, in which the format is gender-reversed. The bachelorettes are  eliminated contestants from The Bachelor.
On August 9, 2010, Bachelor Pad premiered, giving previous contestants of both The Bachelor and The Bachelorette the opportunity to compete in dating-themed eliminations for $250,000.
The weddings of Trista Rehn (the first Bachelorette), Jason Mesnick (13th Bachelor) Ashley Hebert (seventh Bachelorette) and Sean Lowe (the 17th Bachelor) were broadcast as television specials. Rehn's vow-renewal ceremony upon her 10-year anniversary was also broadcast.

Questions of authenticity

On February 26, 2009, in an exclusive interview between The Bachelor Season 13 contestant Megan Parris, and Steve Carbone, Megan commented that the producers edit the footage to create a fictional storyline. "I don't think producers showed any real conversation I had with anyone... The viewers fail to realize that editing is what makes the show... You'll hear someone make one comment and then they'll show a clip of somebody's face to make it look like that is their facial reaction to that statement, but really, somebody made that face the day before to something else. It's just piecing things together to make a story."
On March 26, 2009, Megan Parris argued that not only was the show scripted, but that producers bullied contestants into saying things to the camera that contestants did not want to say.
On March 15, 2010, creator Mike Fleiss appeared on 20/20 and said that he develops contestants into characters that will cater to his audience's tastes and that they "need their fair share of villains every season."
On February 24, 2012, during the taping of The Women Tell All episode of The Bachelor, a private conversation between contestant Courtney Robertson and a show producer went public when microphones were accidentally left on in between camera takes. The conversation revealed the producer's role as a coach encouraging Robertson to fake certain emotions for the camera which she was not feeling.

Lawsuit

In December 2011, the producer of The Bachelor sued Steve Carbone, proprietor of the website RealitySteve. Carbone has denied that the source of the leaks are current contestants.

International versions

Parodies

Ben Stiller produced a web spoof of the series entitled Burning Love.
Late night talk show host Jimmy Kimmel also created a parody called "The Baby Bachelor", in which the titular role is given to his 3-year-old nephew Wesley.
Fox also played did a version of the show based on pretending that the bachelor was a millionaire via inheritance with the program Joe Millionaire.








