[[Modularity theorem]]

CATEGORIES: Algebraic curves, Riemann surfaces, Modular forms, Theorems in number theory, Theorems in algebraic geometry

In mathematics, the modularity theorem (formerly called the Taniyama–Shimura–Weil conjecture and several related names) states that elliptic curves over the field of rational numbers are related to  modular forms.  Andrew Wiles proved the modularity theorem for semistable elliptic curves, which was enough to imply Fermat's last theorem. Later, Christophe Breuil, Brian Conrad, Fred Diamond, and Richard Taylor extended Wiles' techniques to prove the full modularity theorem in 2001. 
The modularity theorem is a special case of more general conjectures due to Robert Langlands. The Langlands program seeks to attach an automorphic form or automorphic representation (a suitable generalization of a modular form) to more general objects of arithmetic algebraic geometry, such as to every elliptic curve over a number field.  Most cases of these extended conjectures have not yet been proved.

Statement

The theorem states that any elliptic curve over Q can be obtained via a rational map with integer coefficients from the classical modular curve
for some integer N; this is a curve with integer coefficients with an explicit definition. This mapping is called a modular parametrization of level N.  If N is the smallest integer for which such a parametrization can be found (which by the modularity theorem itself is now known to be a number called the conductor), then the parametrization may be defined in terms of a mapping generated by a particular kind of modular form of weight two and level N, a normalized newform with integer q-expansion, followed if need be by an isogeny.
The modularity theorem implies a closely related analytic statement: to an elliptic curve E over Q we may attach a corresponding L-series. The L-series is a Dirichlet series, commonly written
If we make the substitution
Some  modular forms of weight two, in turn, correspond to  holomorphic differentials for an elliptic curve. The Jacobian of the modular curve can (up to isogeny) be written as a product of irreducible Abelian varieties, corresponding to Hecke eigenforms of weight 2. The 1-dimensional factors are elliptic curves (there can also be higher-dimensional factors, so not all Hecke eigenforms correspond to rational elliptic curves). The curve obtained by finding the corresponding cusp form, and then constructing a curve from it, is isogenous to the original curve (but not, in general, isomorphic to it).

History


The conjecture attracted considerable interest when 's completion of a proof of the epsilon conjecture.
Even after gaining serious attention, the Taniyama–Shimura-Weil conjecture was seen by contemporary mathematicians as extraordinarily difficult or perhaps inaccessible to proof.
In 1995  who, building on Wiles' work, incrementally chipped away at the remaining cases until the full result was proved. 
Once fully proven, the conjecture became known as the modularity theorem.
Several theorems in number theory similar to Fermat's Last Theorem follow from the modularity theorem. For example: no cube can be written as a sum of two coprime n-th powers, n ≥ 3. (The case n = 3 was already known by Euler.)






