[[Charleroi]]

CATEGORIES: Charleroi, Populated places in Hainaut (province), Municipalities of Hainaut (province), World Heritage Sites in Belgium

Charleroi ( with a total population of 522,522 by January 1, 2008, ranking it as the 5th most populous in Belgium after Brussels, Antwerp, Liège and Ghent. The metropolitan area of Charleroi is divided into three levels. First, the central agglomeration (agglomeratie) with 288,549 inhabitants (2008-01-01). Adding the closest surroundings (banlieue or suburbs), the total of 405,236. And, with the outer commuter zone (forensenwoonzone), the population is 522,522. Retrieved on 2008-10-19. The inhabitants are called Carolorégiens or simply Carolos.

Geography

The municipality of Charleroi straddles both banks of the river Sambre in an area marked by industrial activities (coal mining and steel industry), which has been nicknamed the Pays Noir ("Black Country"), part of the larger sillon industriel. Even though most of the factories have closed since the 1950s, the landscape remains dotted with spoil tips and old industrial buildings.
Charleroi lies around  south of Brussels.
The municipality comprises:
and the following former municipalities, merged into Charleroi in 1977:
Neighboring:

History

The Charleroi area was already settled in the prehistoric period, with traces of metallurgical and commercial activities along the Sambre. Several public buildings, temples and villas were built in the area in the Roman period. Burial places, with jewels and weapons, have been found. The first written mention of a place called Charnoy dates from a 9th-century offering in the Lobbes abbey, which lists various neighboring towns and related tithe duties. During the Middle Ages, Charnoy was one of the many small hamlets in the area, with no more than about 50 inhabitants, part of the County of Namur.

Foundation

The history of the city of Charleroi began in 1666. In the spring of that year, Francisco Castel Rodrigo, Governor of the Netherlands at the service of five-year-old Charles II of Spain, expropriated the area from the local lords to build a fortress near the Sambre. In September of that same year, the name Charnoy was officially replaced by that of the newly founded city of Charles-Roy (King Charles), so named in honor of Charles II. The chronogram FVNDATVR CAROLOREGIVM (MLCDVVVI) can be found in the register of the parish of Charnoy for the year 1666. A year later, Louis XIV's armies, under the command of the Vicomte de Turenne, besieged the unfinished fortress. Sébastien Le Prestre de Vauban completed the fortification work; the future city was granted its privileges; a bridge was built over the river, and free land was distributed to the inhabitants.

From 1666 to the Belgian Revolution

Shortly after its foundation, the new city was in turn besieged by the Dutch, ceded to the Spanish in 1678 (Treaty of Nijmegen), taken by the French in 1693, ceded again to the Spanish in 1698 (Treaty of Rijswijk), then taken by the French, the Dutch and the Austrians in 1714 (Treaty of Baden). The French Prince of Conti took the city again in 1745, but it was ceded back to Austria in 1748, beginning a period of prosperity under Joseph II. Glass, steel and coal industries, which had already sprung up a century earlier, could now flourish.
Trouble began again in 1790, the year of the civil uprising that eventually led to the United States of Belgium. The Austrians occupied the city, were forced out by the French after the Battle of Jemappes on November 6, 1792, and took it back again four months later. On June 12, 1794, the French revolutionary Army of Sambre-et-Meuse under the command of Jean-Baptiste Jourdan, invested Charleroi and won a decisive victory in the ensuing Battle of Fleurus. The city took the revolutionary name of Libre-sur-Sambre until 1800. Napoleon stayed in Charleroi for a couple of days in June 1815, just before the Battle of Waterloo. After his defeat, the whole area was annexed to the Netherlands, and new walls were built around the city.

1830 to present

The Belgian Revolution of 1830 gave the area its freedom from the Netherlands and ushered in a new era of prosperity, still based mostly on glass, metallurgy and coal, hence the area's name, Pays Noir ("Black Country"). After the Industrial Revolution, Charleroi benefited from the increased use of coke in the metallurgical industry. People from across Europe were attracted by the economic opportunities, and the population grew rapidly.
Following the Industrial revolution in Wallonia, Charleroi from the 1850s–1860s became one of the most important places where labor strikes broke out. In 1886, 12 strikers were killed by the Belgian army in Roux. In the 1880s, miners in Hainaut were recruited by the Dominion Coal Company in Glace Bay, Nova Scotia. These Walloon miners were experienced in organizing unions and working-men's associations. They immigrated also to collieries on Vancouver Island in Canada. See Louis Balthazar, Leen Haenens, Images of Canadianness: Visions on Canada's Politics, Culture, Economics, International Council for Canadian Studies, University of Ottawa Press, 1998, ISBN 0-7766-0489-9. These miners were anxious to flee the repression following bloody strikes and riots in Liège and CharleroiLouis Balthazar and Leen Haenens, Images of Canadianness: Visions on Canada's Politics, Culture, Economics, International Council for Canadian Studies, University of Ottawa Press, 1998, p. 73, ISBN 0-7766-0489-9. during the Walloon Jacquerie of 1886. Walloon miners from Charleroi also emigrated to Alberta, Canada.[ref]
Miners from Wallonia began arriving at the collieries in Alberta to work for West Canadian Collieries, founded in 1903 by a group of French and Belgian entrepreneurs, and for Canadian Coal Consolidated, a Paris-based firm. Léon Cabeaux, a well-known union leader, who had organized a particularly violent strike in Hainaut in 1886, settled in Lethbridge and soon attracted disgruntled compatriots from the collieries in Pennsylvania in the US. The miners soon became deeply involved in labor radicalism, because in Alberta the mine disasters were among the worst anywhere, and there were no provisions for the welfare of families of the miners maimed or killed in the workplace. Frank Soulet, Joseph Lothier and Gustave Henry emerged as dedicated socialist union leaders. in Louis Balthazar and Leen Haenens, Images of Canadianness: Visions on Canada's Politics, Culture, Economics, International Council for Canadian Studies, University of Ottawa Press, 1998, p. 75, ISBN 0-7766-0489-9.[/ref] The working men of Charleroi always played an important role in Belgian general strikes and particularly during the Belgian general strike of 1936, the General strike against Leopold III of Belgium and the 1960-1961 Winter General Strike.
By 1871, the fortified walls around the city were completely torn down.
Heavy fighting took place during World War I due to the city's strategic location on the Sambre. After World War II, Charleroi witnessed a general decline of its heavy industry. Following the merger with several surrounding municipalities in 1977, the city  ranks as the largest city in Wallonia and the 4th largest in Belgium.

Politics

The Socialist Party (Parti Socialiste or PS) has had a stronghold in Charleroi for some time. However, in October 2006, mayor Jacques Van Gompel of the PS was jailed on fraud and forgery charges.
In April 2010, the director of technical services of Charleroi, Henri Stassens, was convicted in court of fraud and corruption.

Municipal elections

Landmarks

Economy

The municipality contains an industrial area for the electrical engineering and the production of iron, steel, glass and chemicals. Charleroi is in the center of a coal basin. Even so, due to the widespread loss in industrial power in the area since the 1970s, the area has suffered some of the highest unemployment and poverty rates in Europe for most of the 1980s and 1990s. However, from the early 2000s, the overall economy of the area has diversified to include health care, transportation and telecommunications. Nevertheless, the poverty rates are still significant.

Transport

Air

The Brussels South Charleroi Airport in Gosselies,  north of the center, opened in 1919 as a flight school. charleroi-airport.Avions Fairey Gosselies. Baha.be. Retrieved on 2012-12-21.
Gosselies is now used as an alternate airport for Brussels. Low-cost carrier Ryanair is the largest airline to provide service there; others include Wizz Air, Jetairfly and, in the summer only, On Air. Seasonal holiday charters also use the airport.
A new terminal opened in January 2008,Tuesday 29 January 2008: Opening of the new Terminal at Charleroi Brussels South airport User guide replacing a much smaller building which had exceeded capacity.
Brussels is  north of Charleroi Airport.

Rail

Charleroi is connected by train to other Belgian major cities through the main Charleroi-South railway station. The city also has a secondary railway station, Charleroi-West, on the Charleroi-to-Ottignies line.

Public transport

Public transport is provided by TEC (Transport En Commun), the Walloon service. The greater Charleroi region is served by bus lines and a light-rail Metro system, (Métro Léger de Charleroi). Part of the latter is famous for incorporating one of the few remnants of the Vicinal, the former Belgian national tramway network.

Métro léger de Charleroi (MLC)

The TEC Light Rail Métro is equally famous for the parts of the system which were never built, partially built or fully completed but not opened. It was planned in the 1960s as a 48 km (30 mi.) light-rail network, operating on the heavy rail metro infrastructure, consisting of eight branch lines radiating from a central loop downtown.net (gif image) However, only one line (to Petria), part of another line (to Gilly) and three-quarters of the loop were actually built and opened to traffic, all from 1976 to 1996. Another branch line toward the suburb of Châtelet (Châtelineau) was almost fully built, to the extent of installing power cables, escalators and still-working electric signals in the first three stationsDiggelfjoer: Abandoned. Diggelfjoer.nl. Retrieved on 2012-12-21. but was never opened as passenger numbers would be too low to economically justify the extra staff. The high costs of construction, a decline in Charleroi's traditional "smokestack" industries and questioning of the scope of the whole project in proportion to the actual demand for it are cited as reasons for the original plan's becoming unfulfilled.
Completion of the central loop and the Gilly branch as far as Soleilmont are planned within the next five years, with funds from the European Investment Bank. Railway Gazette (2008-01-17) The Gosselies branch will also open as a street-level tramline. There are no plans to open any part of the Chatelet branch.> Europe > Belgium > Charleroi Prémétro (Belgium). UrbanRail. Retrieved on 2012-12-21.

Crime

During the 1990s, Charleroi was notorious for some violence due to its high poverty and unemployment rates.. (2001-09-05) Charleroi Journal – A Rust-Belt City's Mean Streets Keep Their Edge. NYTimes. Retrieved on 2012-12-21.
Marc Dutroux, nicknamed "the Monster", lived in Marcinelle, a suburb of Charleroi. Nytimes. Retrieved on 2012-12-21.

Sports

Charleroi is home to a number of champion teams in various sports. Spirou Charleroi in basketball has been an eight-times winner in the Basketball League Belgium. La Villette Charleroi in table tennis is the most successful club in the Champions League with five titles and has been the Belgian champion multiple times. Action 21 Charleroi in futsal has won one UEFA Futsal Cup and nine titles in the Belgian Division 1. In football, R Charleroi SC and ROC Charleroi have finished second in the Belgian Pro League. The 30,000-capacity Stade du Pays de Charleroi was a venue at UEFA Euro 2000.archive.org/web/20010810002245/www.org/en/venues/0,1068,,00.html

Personalities

People born in Charleroi

Other notable inhabitants

Twin cities








