[[Tommy Dorsey]]

CATEGORIES: 1905 births, 1956 deaths, Accidental deaths in Connecticut, American bandleaders, American jazz bandleaders, American jazz trombonists, Bell Records artists, Big band bandleaders, Deaths from choking, Decca Records artists, Drug-related deaths in Connecticut, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer contract players, Musicians from Pennsylvania, National Radio Hall of Fame inductees, Musicians from Greenwich, Connecticut, RCA Victor artists, Swing bandleaders, Swing trombonists, Swing trumpeters, Burials at Kensico Cemetery

Thomas Francis "Tommy" Dorsey, Jr. (November 19, 1905 – November 26, 1956Tommy Dorsey at Find a Grave) was an American jazz trombonist, trumpeter, composer, and bandleader of the Big Band era. He was known as "The Sentimental Gentleman of Swing", because of  his smooth-toned trombone playing. Although he was not known for being a notable soloist, his technical skill on the trombone gave him renown amongst other musicians. He was the younger brother of bandleader Jimmy Dorsey. After Dorsey broke with his brother in the mid-1930s, he led an extremely popular and highly successful band from the late 1930s into the 1950s.

Early life

Thomas Francis Dorsey, Jr., was born in Shenandoah, Pennsylvania, the second of four children born to Thomas Francis Dorsey, Sr., a bandleader himself,Billboard, July 25, 1942 died July 13, 1942 and Theresa (née Langton) Dorsey. ('Tommy,' 'The Sentimental Gentleman of Swing')
[/ref] He and Jimmy, his older brother by slightly less than two years, would become famous as the "Dorsey Brothers". The two younger siblings were Mary and Edward (who died young). Tommy Dorsey initially studied the trumpet with his father, only to later switch to the trombone.
At age 15, Jimmy recommended Tommy as the replacement for Russ Morgan in the 1920s territory band "The Scranton Sirens."  Tommy and Jimmy worked in several bands, including those of Tal Henry, Rudy Vallee, Vincent Lopez, Nathaniel Shilkret.  In 1923, Dorsey followed his brother Jimmy to Detroit to play in Jean Goldkette's band and later returned to New York in 1925 to play with the California Ramblers.
In 1934, the Dorsey Brothers band signed with Decca records, having a hit with "I Believe In Miracles". for the band. Ongoing acrimony between the brothers, however, led to Tommy Dorsey's walking out to form his own band in 1935, just as the orchestra was having a hit with "Every Little Moment."
 Dorsey's orchestra was known primarily for its renderings of ballads at dance tempos, frequently with singers such as Jack Leonard and Frank Sinatra.

His own band

Tommy Dorsey's first band was formed out of the remains of the Joe Haymes band, and so began Dorsey's long-running practice of raiding other bands for talent. If he admired a vocalist, musician, or arranger, he would think nothing of taking over their contracts and careers. He was volatile and also known to hire and fire (and sometimes rehire) musicians based on his mood. I only fire people." Drummer Louis Bellson sees a more a benign Dorsey, as the same website quotes him, "He wanted you to play your best every night." see  George Spink's website, saxophonist Bud Freeman says that he quit twice and was fired three times during his employment with Dorsey. Also the same website says that singers Jo Stafford and the Pied Pipers quit the Dorsey band in 1942 because of an argument with Dorsey. see  After his 1935 recording however, Dorsey's manager cut the "hot jazz" that Dorsey had mixed with his own lyrical style and instead had Dorsey play pop and vocal tunes.  Dorsey would keep his Clambake Seven as a Dixieland group that played during performances, too.  The Dorsey band had a national radio presence in 1936, first from Dallas and then from Los Angeles.  Tommy Dorsey and his Orchestra took over comedian Jack Pearl's radio show in 1937."

By 1939, Dorsey was aware of criticism that his band lacked a jazz feeling.  He hired arranger Sy Oliver away from the Jimmie Lunceford band."Jazz Wax""When I moved from the Lunceford band to Tommy Dorsey, I didn't change my writing approach. He made the transition. The band that Dorsey had when I joined him was Dixieland-orientated 
The band featured a number of future famous instrumentalists, singers and arrangers in the 1930s and '40s, including trumpeters Zeke Zarchy,
and Connie Haines. In 1944, Dorsey hired The Sentimentalists who replaced The Pied Pipers.Levinson 174-175 Dorsey also performed with singer Connee Boswell Dorsey
hired ex-bandleader and drummer Gene Krupa after Krupa's arrest and scandal for marijuana possession in 1943.
In 1942 Artie Shaw broke up his band and Dorsey hired the Shaw string section. As George Simon in Metronome magazine notes at the time, "They're used in the foreground and background (note some of the lovely obbligatos) for vocal effects and for Tommy's trombone."
As Dorsey became successful, he made business decisions in the music industry.  He loaned Glenn Miller money to launch Miller's successful band of 1938, but Dorsey saw the loan as an investment, entitling him to a percentage of Miller's income. When Miller balked at this, the angry Dorsey got even by sponsoring a new band led by Bob Chester, and hiring arrangers who deliberately copied Miller's style and sound. Dorsey branched out in the mid-1940s and owned two music publishing companies, Sun and Embassy. After opening at the Los Angeles ballroom, The Hollywood Palladium, on the Palladium's first night, Dorsey's relations with the ballroom soured and he opened a competing ballroom, The Casino Gardens circa 1944. Dorsey also owned for a short time a trade magazine called The Bandstand.
Tommy Dorsey disbanded his own orchestra at the end of 1946. Dorsey might have broken up his own band permanently following World War II, as many big bands did due to the shift in music economics following the war, but Tommy Dorsey's album for RCA, "All Time Hits" placed in the top ten records in February 1947.  In addition, "How Are Things In Glocca Morra?", a single recorded by Dorsey, became a top-ten hit in March 1947. Both of these successes made it possible for Dorsey to re-organize a big band in early 1947.  The biographical film of 1947, The Fabulous Dorseys describes sketchy details of how the brothers got their start from-the-bottom-up into the jazz era of one-nighters, the early days of radio in its infancy stages, and the onward march when both brothers ended up with Paul Whiteman before 1935 when The Dorsey Brothers' Orchestra split into two.  In the early 1950s, Tommy Dorsey moved from RCA Victor back to the Decca record label."Tommy Dorsey" Billboard
Jimmy Dorsey broke up his own big band in 1953. Tommy invited him to join up as a feature attractionTommy and Jimmy Dorsey reunited on March 15, 1945, to record a V-Disc at Liederkranz Hall in New York City. Released in June 1945, V-Disc 451 featured "More Than You Know" backed with "Brotherly Jump". The songs featured the combined orchestras of Tommy and Jimmy Dorsey. and a short while later, Tommy renamed the band the Tommy Dorsey Orchestra featuring Jimmy Dorsey.  In 1953, the Dorseys focused their attention on television.imdb. The brothers took the unit on tour and onto their own television show, Stage Show, from 1955 to 1956. On numerous episodes, they introduced future noted rock musician Elvis Presley to national television audiences, prior to Presley's better known appearance on the Ed Sullivan Show.

Married life

Dorsey's married life was varied and, at times, lurid.  They had two children, Patricia and Tom (nicknamed "Skipper"). They divorced in 1943 after Dorsey's affair with his former singer Edythe Wright. Finally, Dorsey married Jane Carl New b. 20 October 1923 in Dublin, Laurens County, Georgia; d. 24 August 2003 in Bay Harbor Island, Miami-Dade County, Florida see Jane Carl New Dorsey at Find a grave on March 27, 1948, in Atlanta, Georgia. She had been a dancer at the Copacabana nightclub in New York City. Tommy and Jane Dorsey had two children, Catherine Susan and Steve.

Death and aftermath

On November 26, 1956, Tommy Dorsey died at age 51 in his Greenwich, Connecticut, home. He had eaten a heavy meal and began choking in his sleep. He had begun taking sleeping pills regularly at this time, from which he was so sedated that he died in his sleep from choking.  At that point, trombonist Warren Covington became leader of the band with Jane Dorsey's blessing"Tommy died with no will and reportedly left only about $15,000.... Since widow Janie New continued to need money to support her family and because she legally owned the rights to Tommy's library of arrangements, she was naturally very interested when Willard Alexander approached her about creating a Tommy Dorsey band."  Levinson 308-309 as she owned the rights to her late husband's band and name. Billed as the "Tommy Dorsey Orchestra Starring Warren Covington", they topped the charts in 1958 with "Tea For Two Cha-Cha".Levinson 309-310  Buddy Morrow conducted the Tommy Dorsey orchestra until his death on September 27, 2010.  Jane Dorsey died of natural causes at the age of 79, in Miami, Florida in 2003. Tommy and Jane Dorsey are interred together in Kensico Cemetery in Valhalla, New York.Jane Dorsey date of death and interment facts from Levinson 320

Number one hits

Tommy Dorsey had a run of 286 Billboard chart hits.
The Dorsey band had seventeen number one hits with his orchestra in the 1930s and 1940s including: "On Treasure Island", "The Music Goes 'Round and Around", "You", "Marie" (written by Irving Berlin), "Satan Takes a Holiday", "The Big Apple", "Once in a While", "The Dipsy Doodle", "Our Love", "All the Things You Are", "Indian Summer", and "Dolores". He had two more number one hits in 1935 when he was a member of the Dorsey Brothers Orchestra: "Lullaby of Broadway" (written by Harry Warren), number one for two weeks, and "Chasing Shadows", number one for three weeks. His biggest hit was "I'll Never Smile Again", featuring Frank Sinatra on vocals, which was number one for twelve weeks on the Billboard pop singles chart in 1940. "In the Blue of Evening""RCA Victor ... scored with 'There Are Such Things', which had a Sinatra vocal; it hit number one in January 1943, as did 'In the Blue of the Evening', another Dorsey record featuring Sinatra, in August, while a third Dorsey/Sinatra release, 'It's Always You,' hit the Top Five later in the year, and a fourth, 'I'll Be Seeing You', reached the Top Ten in 1944. see "Frank Sinatra Biography" at  was number 1 on the Billboard pop singles chart in 1943. 1 hits 'The Music Goes Round and Round' (1935), 'Alone' (1936) 'You' (1936), 'Marie' (1937), 'Satan Takes a Holiday' (1937), 'The Big Apple' (1937), 'Once in a While' (1937), 'The Dipsy Doodle' (1937), 'Music, Maestro, Please' (1938), 'Our Love' (1939), 'Indian Summer' (1939), 'All the Things You Are' (1939), 'I'll Never Smile Again' (1940), 'Dolores' (1941), 'There are Such Things' (1942), 'In the Blue of the Evening' (1943)."  see 

Songs written by Tommy Dorsey

Honors and posthumous recognition

In 1982, the 1940 Victor recording "I'll Never Smile Again" was the first of a trio of Tommy Dorsey recordings to be inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame."I'll Never Smile Again" was recorded February 17, 1941 with vocals by Frank Sinatra and the Pied Pipers.  see the liner notes to the compact disc The Best of Tommy Dorsey  by Mort Goode, 1991.  Bluebird/RCA 51087-2. According to Peter Levinson in Livin In A Great Big Way, "I'll Never Smile Again" was recorded May 23, 1940.  "I'll Never Smile Again" had the catalogue number for its initial 78rpm release as Victor 26628. Tommy Dorsey and/or RCA Victor also released the song as a V-Disc, V-Disc 582. See the website "Songs By Sinatra" at  His theme song, "I'm Getting Sentimental Over You" was inducted in 1998, along with his recording of "Marie" written by Irving Berlin in 1928.  In 1996, the U.S. Postal Service issued a Tommy Dorsey and Jimmy Dorsey commemorative postage stamp.

Discography

V-Disc Recordings

Filmography

Tommy Dorsey and his Orchestra appear in the following films for the studios Paramount, MGM, Samuel Goldwyn, Allied Artists and United Artists:see individual films and their references for the studio that produced which movie
The Dorsey Brothers appear in the 1953 sixteen-minute Universal-International film called The Dorsey Brothers Encore.

Grammy Hall of Fame

Tommy Dorsey was posthumously inducted into the Grammy Hall of Fame, which is a special Grammy award established in 1973 to honor recordings that are at least 25 years old and that have "qualitative or historical significance."

Noted sidemen

Notes






