[[The Bachelorette]]

CATEGORIES: American Broadcasting Company network shows, Television series by Warner Bros. Television, Reality television spin-offs, 2000s American television series, 2010s American television series, 2003 American television series debuts, 2005 American television series endings, 2008 American television series debuts, American dating and relationship reality television series, Television series revived after cancellation, English-language television programming

The Bachelorette is a spin-off from the American competitive reality dating game show The Bachelor. In its January 2003 debut on ABC, the first season featured Trista Rehn, the runner-up date from the first season of The Bachelor, offering the opportunity for Rehn to choose a husband among 25 bachelors. The 2004 season of The Bachelorette again took a runner-up from the previous season of The Bachelor. After last airing on February 28, 2005, the series returned to ABC during the spring of 2008, following an absence of three years.

Plot

All of the rules are adopted from its parent show, The Bachelor. The series revolves around a single bachelorette (deemed eligible) and a pool of romantic interests (typically 25; 30 in season 5), which could include a potential husband for the bachelorette. The format is the same as the parent show. Unlike The Bachelor, one of two male suitors proposes to the bachelorette for the final selection.
Unlike The Bachelor, all eight seasons of The Bachelorette have ended with a proposal whether or not the Bachelorette decided to accept or decline. Trista Rehn's marriage to Ryan Sutter and Ashley Hebert's marriage to JP Rosenbaum have been the only marriages to result.

Questions of authenticity

Mike Fleiss, creator of The Bachelor and The Bachelorette, as well as former contestants, have come forth saying that both shows are scripted.
Season 13 contestant Megan Parris said in 2009 that the producers edited footage to create a false storyline. "I don't think producers showed any real conversation I had with anyone... The viewers fail to realize that editing is what makes the show... You'll hear someone make one comment and then they'll show a clip of somebody's face to make it look like that is their facial reaction to that statement, but really, somebody made that face the day before to something else. It's just piecing things together to make a story."
On March 15, 2010, The Bachelorette creator Mike Fleiss appeared on 20/20 to confess that he developed the show's contestants into characters that catered to his audience's tastes, and that they "need their fair share of villains every season."
By Season 7 of The Bachelorette, some believe that actors were being hired by ABC to play specific roles on the show. Some viewers were becoming tired of the show's scripted nature and speaking out.

Seasons

International versions






