[[James Chadwick]]

CATEGORIES: 1891 births, 1974 deaths, Academics of the Victoria University of Manchester, Alumni of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, Alumni of the Victoria University of Manchester, British nuclear physicists, English physicists, English Nobel laureates, Experimental physicists, Fellows of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, Fellows of the Royal Society, Knights Bachelor, Manhattan Project people, Masters of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, Medal for Merit recipients, Members of the Order of the Companions of Honour, Nobel laureates in Physics, Recipients of the Copley Medal, Recipients of the Pour le Mérite (civil class), People associated with the University of Liverpool, People from Bollington, World War I civilian detainees held by Germany

Sir James Chadwick   (20 October 1891 – 24 July 1974) was an English physicist who was awarded the 1935 Nobel Prize in physics for his discovery of the neutron in 1932. He wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. He was the head of the British scientists who worked on the Manhattan Project during World War II. He was knighted in England in November 1945 for achievements in physics.
A graduate of the University of Manchester, where he studied under  Ernest Rutherford, also known as the father of nuclear physics. Chadwick was awarded an 1851 Research Fellowship from the Royal Commission for the Exhibition of 1851, and elected to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger. Using Geiger's recently developed Geiger counter, he was able to demonstrate that beta radiation produced a continuous electromagnetic spectrum, and not discrete lines as had been thought. Still in Germany when World War I broke out in Europe, he spent the war in the Ruhleben internment camp.
After the war, Chadwick followed Rutherford to the Cavendish Laboratory at the University of Cambridge, where Chadwick earned his Doctor of Philosophy degree at Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge. He was Rutherford's Assistant Director of Research at the Cavendish Laboratory for over a decade at a time when it was one of the world's foremost centres for the study of physics, attracting students like John Cockcroft, Norman Feather, and Mark Oliphant. In 1932, Chadwick pursued a line of research that led to his discovery of the neutron. He went on to measure its mass. He looked forward to research about his neutron becoming a major weapon in the fight against cancer. 
Chadwick left the Cavendish Laboratory in 1935 to become a professor of physics at the University of Liverpool, where he overhauled an antiquated laboratory and, by installing a cyclotron, made it an important centre for the study of nuclear physics. During the Second World War, he carried out research as part of the Tube Alloys project to build an atomic bomb. He is said to have been the physicist most responsible for "Churchill's Bomb". In the summer of 1941, he wrote the final draft of the MAUD Report, which inspired the U.S. government to begin serious atomic bomb research efforts. When the Quebec Agreement merged his project with the American Manhattan Project, he became head of the British Mission, and worked at the Los Alamos Laboratory. For his efforts, Chadwick received a knighthood in the New Years Honours on 1 January 1945. In July 1945, he viewed the Trinity nuclear test. After this, he served as the British scientific advisor to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission. Uncomfortable with the trend toward Big Science, Chadwick became the Master of Gonville and Caius College, Cambridge, in 1948. He retired in 1959.

Education and early life

Chadwick was born in Bollington, Cheshire, on 20 October 1891,
Chadwick chose to attend Victoria University of Manchester, which he entered in 1908. Like most students, he lived at home, walking the 
Having devised a means of measuring gamma radiation, Chadwick proceeded to measure the absorption of gamma rays by various gases and liquids. This time the resulting paper was published under his name only. He was awarded his Master of Science (MSc) degree in 1912, and was appointed a Beyer Fellow. The following year he was awarded an 1851 Exhibition Scholarship, which allowed him to study and research at a university in continental Europe.  He elected to go to the Physikalisch-Technische Reichsanstalt in Berlin in 1913, to study beta radiation under Hans Geiger.
Chadwick was still in Germany at the start of World War I, and was interned in the Ruhleben internment camp near Berlin, where he was allowed to set up a laboratory in the stables and conduct scientific experiments using improvised materials such as radioactive toothpaste.
Rutherford gave Chadwick a part-time teaching position at Manchester, allowing him to continue research.

Research

Cambridge

Chadwick's Clerk Maxwell studentship expired in 1923, and he was succeeded by the Russian physicist Pyotr Kapitza. The Chairman of the Advisory Council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, Sir William McCormick arranged for Chadwick to become Rutherford's Assistant Director of Research. In this role, Chadwick helped Rutherford select PhD students. Over the next few years these would include John Cockcroft, Norman Feather and Mark Oliphant, who would become firm friends with Chadwick. As many students had no idea what they wanted to research, Rutherford and Chadwick would suggest topics. Chadwick would also edit all the papers produced by the laboratory.
In 1925, Chadwick met Aileen Stewart-Brown, the daughter of a Liverpool stockbroker. The two were married in August 1925.
In his research, Chadwick continued to probe the atomic nucleus. In 1925, the concept of spin had allowed physicists to explain the Zeeman effect, but it also created unexplained anomalies. At the time it was believed that the nucleus consisted of protons and electrons, so nitrogen, for example, with a mass number of 14, was assumed to contain 14 protons and 7 electrons. This gave it the right mass and charge, but the wrong spin.
At a conference at Cambridge on beta particles and gamma rays in 1928, Chadwick met Geiger again, who brought with him a new model of his Geiger counter, which had been improved by his post-doctoral student Walther Müller. This was something that Chadwick had not used since the war, and the new Geiger-Müller counter was potentially a major improvement over the scintillation techniques then in use, which relied on the human eye for observation. The major drawback with it was that it detected alpha, beta and gamma radiation, and radium, which the Cavendish laboratory normally used in its experiments, emitted all three and was therefore unsuitable for what Chadwick had in mind. However, polonium is an alpha emitter, and Lise Meitner sent Chadwick about 2 millicuries from Germany.
In Germany, Walter Bothe and his student Herbert Becker used polonium to bombard beryllium, producing an unusual form of radiation. Chadwick had his Australian 1851 Exhibition scholar, Hugh Webster, duplicate their results. To Chadwick, this was evidence of something that he and Rutherford had been hypothesising for years: the neutron, a theoretical nuclear particle with no electric charge. Chadwick dropped all his other responsibilities to concentrate on the neutron, frequently working late at night. He devised a simple apparatus that consisted of a cylinder containing a polonium source and beryllium target. The resulting radiation could then be directed at a material such as paraffin wax and the particles displaced, which were protons, would go into a small ionisation chamber where they could be detected with an oscilloscope.
In February 1932, after only about two weeks of experimentation with neutrons, Chadwick sent a letter to Nature titled Possible Existence of a Neutron.
Chadwick's discovery of the neutron also made it possible to produce elements heavier than uranium in the laboratory, by the capture of slow neutrons followed by beta decay. Unlike the positively-charged alpha particles, which are repelled by the electrical forces present in the nuclei of other atoms, neutrons do not need to overcome any Coulomb barrier and can therefore penetrate and enter the nuclei of even the heaviest elements such as uranium. His discovery of the neutron inspired Enrico Fermi, the Italian physicist and eventual Nobel Prize winner, to investigate the nuclear reactions brought about by collisions of nuclei with slow neutrons.

Liverpool

Rutherford succeeded McCormick as  Chairman of the Advisory Council of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research in 1930. With the onset of the Great Depression in the United Kingdom, the government became more parsimonious with funding for science. At the same time, Ernest Lawrence's recent invention, the cyclotron, promised to revolutionise the experimental nuclear physics, and Chadwick felt that the Cavendish laboratory would fall behind unless it also acquired one. Chadwick therefore chafed under Rutherford, who clung to the belief that good nuclear physics could still be done without large, expensive items of equipment.
In March 1935, Chadwick received an offer of the Lyon Jones Chair of physics at the University of Liverpool, in Aileen's home town, in succession to Lionel Wilberforce. The university was something of a backwater, and the laboratory was so antiquated that it still ran on direct current, but Chadwick seized the opportunity, assuming the chair on 1 October 1935. The university's prestige was soon bolstered by Chadwick's Nobel Prize, which was announced in November 1935.
Chadwick set about acquiring a cyclotron for Liverpool. He started by spending £700 to refurbish the antiquated laboratories at Liverpool, so some components could be made in-house.

Second World War

Tube Alloys

In January 1939, Meitner and her nephew Otto Frisch created an uproar with a paper that explained how uranium atoms, when bombarded by neutrons, broke into two roughly equal fragments, a process they called fission. They calculated that this would result in the release of about 200 MeV, implying an energy release orders of magnitude greater than chemical reactions. It was soon noted by Otto Hahn and Fritz Strassmann that if neutrons were released during fission, then a chain reaction was possible. French scientists, Pierre Joliot, Hans von Halban and Lew Kowarski, soon verified that more than one neutron was indeed emitted per fission. Niels Bohr theorised that fission was more likely to occur in the uranium-235 isotope, which made up only 0.7 percent of natural uranium. He published this in a paper co-authored with the American physicist John Wheeler.
Chadwick did not believe that there was any likelihood of another war with Germany in 1939, and took his family for a holiday on a remote lake in northern Sweden. The news of the outbreak of the Second World War therefore came as a shock. Determined not to spend another war in an internment camp, Chadwick made his way to Stockholm as fast as he could, but when he arrived there with his family, he found that all air traffic between Stockholm and London had been suspended. They made their way back to England on a tramp steamer. When he reached Liverpool, Chadwick found Joseph Rotblat, a Polish post-doctoral fellow who had come to work with the cyclotron, who was now destitute, as he was cut off from funds from Poland. Chadwick promptly hired Rotblat as a lecturer, despite his poor grasp of English.
In October 1939, Chadwick received a letter from Sir Edward Appleton the Secretary of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, asking for his opinion on the feasibility of an atomic bomb. Chadwick responded cautiously. He did not dismiss the possibility, but carefully went over the large number of theoretical and practical difficulties involved. Chadwick decided to investigate the properties of uranium oxide further with Rotblat.
As a result, a special subcommittee of the Committee for the Scientific Survey of Air Warfare (CSSAW) known as the MAUD Committee was created to investigated the matter further. It was chaired by Sir George Thomson and its original membership included Chadwick, along with Mark Oliphant, John Cockcroft and Philip Moon.

Manhattan Project

Owing to the danger from aerial bombardment, the Chadwicks sent Julie and Joanna to Canada as part of a government evacuation scheme.
The matter of cooperation had to be taken up at the highest level. In September 1943, Prime Minister Winston Churchill and President Franklin Roosevelt negotiated the Quebec Agreement, which reinstated cooperation between Britain, the United States and Canada. As a result, Chadwick, Oliphant, Peierls and Simon were summoned to the United States by the director of Tube Alloys, Sir Wallace Akers, to work with the Manhattan Project. The Quebec Agreement established a new Combined Policy Committee to direct the joint project, but the Americans disliked Akers, and so Chadwick was appointed technical advisor to the Combined Policy Committee, and the head of the British Mission.
Leaving Rotblat in charge in Liverpool, Chadwick began a tour of the Manhattan Project facilities in November 1943, except for the Hanford Site, which he was not allowed to see. Observing the work on the K-25 gaseous diffusion facility at Oak Ridge, Tennessee, he realised how wrong he had been about building the plant in wartime Britain.
Chadwick accepted that the Americans did not need British help, but that it could still be useful in bringing the project to an early and successful conclusion. Working closely with the director of the Manhattan Project, Major General Leslie R. Groves, Jr., he attempted to do everything he could to support the effort; to everyone's surprise, Groves' confidence in him became such that he has been called "Groves' Viceroy among the scientists". He also endeavoured to place British scientists in as many parts of the project as possible in order to facilitate a post-war British project that Chadwick was committed to. Requests from Groves via Chadwick for particular scientists tended to be met with an immediate rejection by the company, ministry or university currently employing them, only to be overcome by the overriding priority accorded to Tube Alloys.
Although he had more knowledge about the project that anyone else from Britain,
By early 1945, Chadwick was spending most of his time in Washington, D.C., and his family relocated from Los Alamos to a house on Washington's Dupont Circle in April 1945. As described by William Lawrence, New York Times ace reporter, "Never before in history had any man lived to see his own discovery materialize itself with such telling effect on the destiny of man."

Later life

Shortly after the war ended, Chadwick was appointed to the Advisory Committee on Atomic Energy (ACAE). He was also appointed as the British scientific advisor to the United Nations Atomic Energy Commission. He clashed with fellow ACAE member Patrick Blackett, who disagreed with Chadwick's conviction that Britain needed to acquire its own nuclear weapons; but it was Chadwick's position that was ultimately adopted.
In 1948, Chadwick accepted an offer to become the Master of Gonville and Caius College. The job was a prestigious but ill-defined one; the Master was the titular head of the College, but authority actually resided in a council of 13 fellows, of whom one was the Master. As Master, Chadwick strove to improve the academic reputation of the college. He increased the number of research fellowships from 31 to 49, and sought to bring talent into the college.
Over the years, Chadwick received many honours, including the Medal for Merit from the United States, and Pour le Mérite from Germany.

Notes






