[[European Southern Observatory]]

CATEGORIES: European Southern Observatory, Organizations established in 1962, Astronomy institutes and departments, Astronomical observatories in Chile, Science and technology in Europe, International scientific organizations

The European Southern Observatory (ESO, formally the European Organisation for Astronomical Research in the Southern Hemisphere; Observatoire européen austral in French) is a 15-nation intergovernmental research organisation for astronomy. Created in 1962, ESO has provided astronomers with state-of-the-art research facilities and access to the southern sky. The organisation employs about 730 staff members and receives annual member state contributions of approximately €143 million. Its observatories are located in northern Chile.
ESO has built and operated some of the largest and most technologically-advanced telescopes in the world. These include the New Technology Telescope (NTT) (which pioneered active optics technology) and the Very Large Telescope (VLT), which consists of four 8-metre-class telescopes and four 1.8-metre auxiliary telescopes. Ongoing ESO projects include the Atacama Large Millimeter Array (ALMA) and the European Extremely Large Telescope (E-ELT).
ALMA is a facility for observation of the universe in the millimetre and submillimetre wavelength ranges, and is the largest ground-based astronomy project extant. It was completed in March 2013. The ALMA project is an international collaboration by Europe (represented by ESO), East Asia, North America and Chile.
The E-ELT is a 40-metre class telescope in the detailed design phase, and will be the world's largest optical near-infrared telescope. Its light-gathering power will allow detailed studies of planets around other stars, the first objects in the universe, supermassive black holes, and the nature and distribution of the dark matter and dark energy which dominate the universe. ESO has been working together with its user community of European astronomers and astrophysicists to define the telescope since late 2005.
ESO's observing facilities have made astronomical discoveries and produced several astronomical catalogues.

History

The idea that European astronomers should establish a common large observatory was broached by Walter Baade and Jan Oort at the Leiden Observatory in the Netherlands in spring 1953.
At the time, all reflector telescopes with an aperture of 2 metres or more were located in the northern hemisphere. The decision to build the observatory in the southern hemisphere resulted from the necessity of observing the southern sky; some research subjects (such as the central parts of the Milky Way and the Magellanic Clouds) were accessible only from the southern hemisphere. The decision was preceded by the ESO Convention, signed 5 October 1962 by Belgium, Germany, France, the Netherlands and Sweden.
A preliminary proposal for a convention of astronomy organisations in these five countries was drafted in 1954. Although some amendments were made in the initial document, the convention proceeded slowly until 1960 when it was discussed during that year's committee meeting. The new draft was examined in detail, and a council member of CERN (the European Organization for Nuclear Research) highlighted the need for a convention between governments (in addition to organisations).
The convention and government involvement became pressing due to rapidly rising costs of site-testing expeditions. The final 1962 version was largely adopted from the CERN convention, due to similarities between the organisations and the dual membership of some members.
In 1966, the first ESO telescope at the La Silla site in Chile began operating. Because CERN (like ESO) had sophisticated instrumentation, the astronomy organisation frequently turned to the nuclear-research body for advice and a collaborative agreement between ESO and CERN was signed in 1970. Several months later, ESO's telescope division moved into a CERN building in Geneva and ESO's Sky Atlas Laboratory was established on CERN property. ESO's European departments moved into the new ESO headquarters in Garching (near Munich), Germany in 1980.

Member states

Chilean observation sites

Although ESO is headquartered in Germany its telescopes and observatories are in northern Chile, where the organisation operates advanced ground-based astronomical facilities:
These are among the best locations for astronomical observations in the southern hemisphere.
Each year about 2,000 requests are made for the use of ESO telescopes, for four to six times more nights than are available. Observations made with these instruments appear in a number of peer-reviewed publications annually; in 2009, more than 650 reviewed papers based on ESO data were published.
ESO telescopes generate large amounts of data at a high rate, which are stored in a permanent archive facility at ESO headquarters. The archive contains more than 1.5 million images (or spectra) with a total volume of about 65 terabytes (65,000,000,000,000 bytes) of data.
Additional ESO research facilities are located in Santiago, Chile and include a library, computing resources and programmes for visiting scientists.

La Silla

La Silla, located in the southern Atacama Desert  In La Silla, ESO operates three telescopes: a 3.6-metre telescope, the New Technology Telescope (NTT) and the 2.2-metre Max-Planck-ESO Telescope.
The observatory hosts visitor instruments, attached to a telescope for the duration of an observational run and then removed. La Silla also hosts national telescopes, such as the 1.2-metre Swiss and the 1.5-metre Danish telescopes.
About 300 reviewed publications annually are attributable to the work of the observatory. Discoveries made with La Silla telescopes include the HARPS-spectrograph detection of the system around Gliese 581, which contains the first known rocky planet in a habitable zone outside the solar system.

=ESO 3.6-metre telescope=

The ESO 3.6 metre telescope began operations in 1977. It has been upgraded, including the installation of a new secondary mirror.

=New Technology Telescope (NTT)=

The New Technology Telescope (NTT) is an altazimuth, 3.58-metre Ritchey-Chrétien telescope, inaugurated in 1989 and the first in the world with a computer-controlled main mirror. The flexible mirror's shape is adjusted during observation to preserve optimal image quality. The secondary mirror position is also adjustable in three directions. This technology (developed by ESO and known as active optics) is now applied to all major telescopes, including the VLT and the future E-ELT.
The design of the octagonal enclosure housing the NTT is innovative. The telescope dome is relatively small and ventilated by a system of flaps directing airflow smoothly across the mirror, reducing turbulence and resulting in sharper images.

=MPG/ESO 2.2-metre telescope=

The 2.2-metre telescope has been in operation at La Silla since early 1984, and is on indefinite loan to ESO from the Max Planck Society (Max-Planck-Gesellschaft zur Förderung der Wissenschaften, or MPG, in German). Telescope time is shared between MPG and ESO observing programmes, while operation and maintenance of the telescope are ESO's responsibility.
Its instrumentation includes a 67-million-pixel wide-field imager (WFI) with a field of view as large as the full moon, and the high-resolution spectrograph FEROS (Fiber-fed Extended Range Optical Spectrograph), used to make detailed studies of stars.

=Other telescopes=

La Silla also hosts several national and project telescopes not operated by ESO. Among them are the Swiss 1.2-metre Euler Telescope, the Danish 1.54-metre telescope and the REM and TAROT telescopes.
The Euler Telescope is a 1.2-metre telescope built and operated by the Observatory of Geneva in Switzerland. It is used to conduct high-precision radial velocity measurements primarily used in the search for large extrasolar planets in the southern celestial hemisphere. Its first discovery was a planet orbiting Gliese 86.
The 1.54-metre Danish telescope was built by Grubb-Parsons and has been in use at La Silla since 1979. The telescope has an off-axis mount, and the optics are a Ritchey-Chrétien design. Because of the telescope's mount and limited space inside the dome, it has significant pointing restrictions.
The Rapid Eye Mount Telescope (REM) is a small rapid-reaction automatic telescope with a primary 
The TAROT (Télescope à Action Rapide pour les Objets Transitoires, "Quick-action telescope for transient objects") is a very fast-moving optical robotic telescope able to observe a gamma-ray burst from its beginning. Satellites detecting GRBs send signals to TAROT, which can provide a sub-arc second position to the astronomical community. Data from the TAROT telescope is also useful in studying the evolution of GRBs, the physics of a fireball and its surrounding material.

Paranal

The Paranal Observatory is located atop Cerro Paranal in the Atacama Desert in northern Chile. Cerro Paranal is a 
The observatory has seven major telescopes operating in visible and infrared light: the four 

=Very Large Telescope=

The main facility at Paranal is the VLT, which consists of four nearly-identical 
The first of the UTs had its first light in May 1998, and was offered to the astronomical community on 1 April 1999.
Data from the VLT have led to the publication of an average of more than one peer-reviewed scientific paper per day; in 2007, almost 500 reviewed scientific papers were published based on VLT data.

==Mapuche unit-telescope names==

The ESO intended to name the four VLT Unit Telescopes, replacing their technical designations UT1–UT4. In March 1999, at the Paranal inauguration, four names of celestial objects in the Mapuche language (spoken by the indigenous Mapuche) were chosen. An essay contest was arranged for schoolchildren in the Chilean II region concerning the meaning of these names which attracted many entries dealing with the cultural heritage of ESO's host country. The winning essay was submitted by 17-year old Jorssy Albanez Castilla of Chuquicamata, near Calama. She received her prize (an amateur telescope) during the inauguration.

=Survey telescopes=

Visible and Infrared Survey Telescope for Astronomy (VISTA) is housed on the peak adjacent to the one hosting the VLT, sharing  observational conditions. VISTA's main mirror is 
VISTA was conceived and developed by a consortium of 18 universities in the United Kingdom led by Queen Mary, University of London, and it became an in-kind contribution to ESO as part of the UK's ratification agreement. The telescope's design and construction were managed by the Science and Technology Facilities Council's UK Astronomy Technology Centre (STFC, UK ATC). Provisional acceptance of VISTA was formally granted by ESO at the December 2009 ceremony at ESO headquarters in Garching, which was attended by representatives of Queen Mary, University of London and STFC. Since then the telescope has been operated by ESO,
The VLT Survey Telescope (VST) is a state-of-the-art, 
The scientific goals of both surveys range from the nature of dark energy to assessing near-Earth objects. Teams of European astronomers will conduct the surveys; some will cover most of the southern sky, while others will focus on smaller areas. VISTA and the VST are expected to produce large amounts of data; a single picture taken by VISTA has 67 megapixels, and images from OmegaCam (on the VST) will have 268 megapixels. The two survey telescopes will collect more data every night than all the other instruments on the VLT combined. The VST and VISTA will produce more than 100 terabytes of data per year.

Llano de Chajnantor

The Llano de Chajnantor is a  The telescopes are:
APEX and ALMA are telescopes designed for millimetre and submillimetre astronomy. This type of astronomy is a relatively unexplored frontier, revealing a universe which cannot be seen in more-familiar visible or infrared light and ideal for studying the "cold universe"; light at these wavelengths shines from vast cold clouds in interstellar space at temperatures only a few tens of degrees above absolute zero. Astronomers use this light to study the chemical and physical conditions in these molecular clouds, the dense regions of gas and cosmic dust where new stars are being born. Seen in visible light, these regions of the universe are often dark and obscure due to dust; however, they shine brightly in the millimetre and submillimetre portions of the electromagnetic spectrum. This wavelength range is also ideal for studying some of the earliest (and most distant) galaxies in the universe, whose light has been redshifted into longer wavelengths from the expansion of the universe.

=Atacama Pathfinder Experiment (APEX)=

The Atacama Pathfinder Experiment telescope is operated by ESO in collaboration with the Max Planck Institute for Radio Astronomy in Bonn, Germany and the Onsala Space Observatory in Onsala, Sweden. It is a  APEX is a precursor of ALMA (the Atacama Large Millimeter Array), an astronomical interferometer which ESO and its international partners is building on the Chajnantor plateau. APEX is based on a prototype ALMA antenna that is modified to be operated as single dish radio telescope.

=Atacama Large Millimeter/submillimeter Array (ALMA)=

ALMA is an astronomical interferometer of innovative design, initially composed of 66 high-precision antennas and operating at wavelengths of 0.3 to 3.6 mm. Its main array will have 50  ALMA is a collaboration between East Asia (Japan and Taiwan), Europe (ESO), North America (USA and Canada) and Chile.
The scientific goals of ALMA include studying the origin and formation of stars, galaxies, and planets with observations of molecular gas and dust, studying distant galaxies towards the edge of the observable universe and studying relic radiation from the Big Bang.

ESO telescopes: research and discoveries

Search for extrasolar planets

"Is there life elsewhere in the universe?" is one of humankind's most profound unanswered questions. A step in the attempt to answer this question is the search for planets outside the solar system. ESO's observatories are equipped with an arsenal of instruments for finding, studying, and monitoring extrasolar planets. In 2004, the Very Large Telescope detected a faint glow from an apparent planet orbiting a star about 200 light-years from earth. A year later, this detection was confirmed as the first picture of an exoplanet ever recorded. Although the planet is large (five times more massive than Jupiter), this observation is a first step toward identifying the physical structure and chemical composition of exoplanets.
Despite the fact that planets seem very common in the universe they are tiny, faint objects at cosmic scales; this makes their detection difficult with current technology. For this reason, most exoplanets have been detected with indirect methods. Of these, the most successful has been the radial velocity method. HARPS (the High Accuracy Radial-velocity Planet Searcher) has allowed the discovery of a number of planets with masses below that of Neptune orbiting nearby stars.
The Danish 1.54-metre telescope at La Silla participated in the discovery of one of the most Earth-like planets found to date. The planet, detected using the microlensing technique and about five times as massive as Earth, circles its parent star in about 10 years and most certainly has a rocky and icy surface.

Age of the universe

With the Very Large Telescope, astronomers have made an independent determination of the age of the universe and shed new light on the earliest stages of the Milky Way. For the first time, they measured the amount of the radioactive isotope uranium-238 in a star born when the Milky Way was still forming.
Like carbon dating over longer timescales, the uranium clock measures the age of a star. It shows that this star is 12.5 billion years old. Because the star cannot be older than the universe itself, the universe must be older than this. This agrees with known cosmology, which gives an age of the universe of 13.8 billion years. The star (and the Milky Way) must have formed soon after the Big Bang.
Another result is the first measurement of the beryllium content of two stars in a Milky Way globular cluster. With this measurement, astronomers found that the first generation of stars in our galaxy must have formed soon after the end of the 200-million-year "Dark Age" following the Big Bang.

Milky Way black hole

Astronomers long suspected that a black hole exists at the center of the Milky Way, but their theory was unproven. Conclusive evidence was obtained after 16 years of monitoring the Galactic Center with ESO telescopes at the La Silla and Paranal observatories.
Stars at the centre of the Milky Way are so densely packed that special imaging techniques (such as adaptive optics) were needed to boost the resolution of the VLT. Thanks to these techniques, astronomers were able to watch individual stars with unprecedented accuracy as they circled the Galactic Center.
The VLT has also peered into the centre of galaxies beyond our own, where clear signs of activity produced by supermassive black holes are found.

Gamma-ray bursts

Gamma-ray bursts (GRBs) are bursts of highly-energetic gamma rays lasting from less than one second to several minutes. They are known to occur at great distances from earth, near the limits of the observable universe.
The VLT has observed the afterglow of the farthest known gamma-ray burst. With a measured redshift of 8.2, the light from this very remote astronomical source has taken more than 13 billion years to reach the earth. It occurred when the universe was less than 600 million years old (less than five percent of its present age), and released 300 times as much energy in a few seconds as the sun will in its entire lifetime (more than 10 billion years).
The nature of these explosions has long been a mystery. Observations show that GRBs are one of two types: short- (less than a few seconds) and long-duration. Until 2003, it was suspected that two different types of cosmic event caused them. In 2003, ESO telescopes followed the aftermath of an explosion for one month. Their data showed that the light had similar properties to that of a supernova, and allowed astronomers to link long-duration GRBs with the ultimate explosions of massive stars (hypernovae).
Observations of gamma-ray-burst afterglows were coordinated between the VLT and the Atacama Pathfinder Experiment (APEX) to identify the possible counterpart (and its decay) at submillimeter wavelengths.

Digital archives

The Science Archive Operation Group receives and redistributes ESO and Hubble Space Telescope data and provides archival support. About 12 terabytes of public data are distributed per year through the ESO archive in response to about 10,000 web requests. Additionally, more than 2,000 CDs and DVDs of proprietary data are sent out annually to principal investigators for service-mode observations. The archive is about 65 TB, with an input rate of about 15 TB per year; this is being increased by a factor of 10 or so due to the survey telescopes' data-production rate.
Breakthroughs in telescope, detector and computer technology now allow astronomical surveys to produce large numbers of images, spectra and catalogues. These data sets cover the sky at all wavelengths, from gamma- and X-rays through optical, infrared and radio waves. Astronomers are developing ways to make the large amount of data easily accessible. These techniques use the grid paradigm of distributed computing with seamless, transparent access to data through virtual observatories (VOs). As a physical observatory has telescopes with unique astronomical instruments, a VO consists of data centres with unique collections of astronomical data, software systems and processing capabilities. This global, community-based initiative is being developed under the International Virtual Observatory AllianceInternational Virtual Observatory Alliance. Ivoa. Retrieved on 2011-04-05. and in Europe as part of the EURO-VO project. Euro-vo. Retrieved on 2011-04-05.
VOs have proven their effectiveness in a number of ways, including discovering 31 optically-faint, obscured quasar candidates in existing Great Observatories Origins Deep Survey(GOODS) fields (quadrupling the number previously found). The discovery means that surveys of supermassive black holes have underestimated their numbers by a factor of two to five.

Major discoveries

Several of ESO telescopes were used in a 16-year study to obtain the most detailed view to date of the surroundings of the supermassive black hole at the centre of the galaxy.
Two independent research teams have shown that the universe's expansion is accelerating, based on exploding-star observations with astronomical telescopes at La Silla.
The VLT has obtained the first image of a planet outside the solar system. The 5-Jupiter-mass planet orbits a failed star—a brown dwarf—at a distance of 55 times the mean Earth-Sun distance.
ESO telescopes have provided proof that long gamma-ray bursts are linked with the explosion of massive stars; short gamma-ray bursts seem to be produced by merging neutron stars.
The VLT has detected, for the first time, carbon-monoxide molecules in a galaxy located almost 11 billion light-years away. This has allowed astronomers to obtain a precise measurement of cosmic temperature at such a remote location.
Using ESO's VLT, astronomers have measured the age of the oldest known star in the Milky Way. At 13.2 billion years, the star was born in the universe's earliest era of star formation.
The VLT and APEX collaborated to study violent flares from the supermassive black hole at the centre of the Milky Way, revealing material stretched as it orbits in the intense gravitational field near the central black hole.
The atmosphere around an exoplanet has been analysed for the first time with the VLT. The planet, GJ 1214b, was studied as it passed in front of its parent star and starlight passed through the planet's atmosphere.
Astronomers using HARPS (High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher) have discovered a planetary system (with at least five planets) orbiting a sunlike star, HD 10180. Two other planets may be present, one of which would have the lowest mass ever found.
After more than 1,000 nights of observation at La Silla over a 15-year period, astronomers have determined the motion of more than 14,000 sunlike stars in the vicinity of the sun (demonstrating that the Milky Way is more turbulent and chaotic than previously thought).

Outreach

Outreach activities are carried out by the ESO education and Public Outreach Department (ePOD).
Events such as the 2009 International Year of Astronomy (IYA2009) (with IAU and UNESCO), VLT First Light, Astronomy Online and the Comet Shoemaker–Levy 9 impact, have been reported by the Department.
A collection of photos and videos can be found in the ESO Public Image Gallery and Video Library.
As part of the Department, European outreach for the NASA/ESA Hubble Space Telescope provides comprehensive information about the telescope and its scientific discoveries. The International Astronomical Union (IAU) Press Office is also hosted by ePOD.

Publications

ESO press releases describe scientific, technical and organisational developments and achievements and results obtained by scientists with ESO facilities. The organisation publishes three types of press releases. and press releases translated into the languages of ESO's member countries.
The Messenger is a quarterly journal which has presented ESO's activities to the public since May 1974. All back copies are available for download. on its website. Announcements are shorter than press releases (typically less than 200 words) highlighting stories and events of interest to the community. Pictures of the Week show beautiful (or interesting) photos from ESO telescopes, and may highlight recent events or archival photos. All former entries are available on the website.
ESOcast
In 2013, the IMAX documentary Hidden Universe 3D was produced in cooperation of Cinema Productions, Film Victoria, Swinburne University of Technology, and the European Southern Observatory.

Gallery

These images are from ESO's top-100 list.
 
File: VISTA's infrared view of the Orion Nebula.jpg|VISTA's infrared view of the Orion Nebula
File: Image of the Helix Nebula (NGC 7293).jpg|The Helix Nebula
File: Omega Centauri by ESO.jpg|The Globular Cluster Omega Centauri
File: Guisard - Milky Way.jpg|A 340-million pixel starscape from Paranal
File: NGC 2264 by ESO.jpg|NGC 2264 and the Christmas Tree cluster
File: Centre of the Milky Way.jpg|The Centre of the Milky Way
File: NGC 2467 and Surroundings.jpg|NGC 2467 and Surroundings
File: ESO-Horsehead Nebula.jpg|The Horsehead Nebula
File: Messier 78.jpg|Messier 78: a reflection nebula in Orion
File: Eta Carinae Nebula.jpg|Panoramic view of the WR 22 and Eta Carinae regions of the Carina Nebula
File: The hidden fires of the Flame Nebula.jpg|The hidden fires of the Flame Nebula
File: Early Morning on Paranal.jpg|Early morning on Paranal
File: The future ALMA array on Chajnantor.jpg|The future ALMA array on Chajnantor (artist's rendering)
File: 360-degree Panorama of the Southern Sky.jpg|Rare 360-degree Panorama of the Southern Sky
File: Lagoon Nebula (ESO).jpg|370-million-pixel starscape of the Lagoon Nebula
File: ESO - The Milky Way panorama (by).jpg|The Milky Way panorama
File: ESO-The Omega Nebula-phot-25a-09-fullres.jpg|The Omega Nebula
File: ESO Centaurus A LABOCA.jpg|Centaurus A
File: ESO-RCW120-Phot-40-08-fullres.tif|Glowing Stellar Nurseries
File: R Coronae Australis region.jpg|The R Coronae Australis region imaged with the Wide Field Imager at La Silla





Shaw, E. N. (1976) "The European Southern Observatory" The Observatory, Royal Astronomical Society, London
Council of Europe (2010) European Yearbook / Annuaire Européen Volume 58 Martinus Nijhoff Publishers ISBN 9004206795 pg cdxliii
Lodewijk, Woltjer (2012) Europe's Quest for The Universe EDP Sciences ISBN 9782759801671
Schilling, Govert; Christensen, Lars Lindberg (2013) Europe to the Stars: ESO's first 50 years of exploring the southern sky John Wiley & Sons ISBN 9783527671670




