[[Ferris wheel]]

CATEGORIES: Ferris wheels, American inventions, World Digital Library related, Articles which contain graphical timelines

A Ferris wheel (also known as an observation wheel or big wheel), named after George Washington Gale Ferris, Jr., is a nonbuilding structure consisting of a rotating upright wheel with multiple passenger-carrying components (commonly referred to as passenger cars, cabins, capsules, gondolas, or pods) attached to the rim in such a way that as the wheel turns, they are kept upright, usually by gravity.
Some of the largest modern Ferris wheels have cars mounted on the outside of the rim, with electric motors to independently rotate each car to keep it upright. These wheels are sometimes referred to as observation wheels, and their cars referred to as capsules, however these alternative names are also sometimes used for wheels with conventional gravity-oriented cars.
The original Ferris Wheel was designed and constructed by George Washington Gale Ferris, Jr. as a landmark for the 1893 World's Columbian Exposition in Chicago. The term Ferris wheel is used generically for all such structures, which are now the most common type of carnival ride at state fairs in the US.Still turning – Jacksonville built the world's first portable Ferris Wheel
Since the original 1893 Chicago Ferris Wheel, there have been nine world's tallest-ever Ferris wheels. The current record holder is the  High Roller in the United States, which opened to the public in March 2014.

Early history

"Pleasure wheels", whose passengers rode in chairs suspended from large wooden rings turned by strong men, may have originated in 17th-century Bulgaria.Eyes in the sky
The travels of Peter Mundy in Europe and Asia, 1608–1667The travels of Peter Mundy in Europe and Asia, 1608–1667 describes and illustrates "severall Sorts of Swinginge used in their Publique rejoyceings att their Feast of Biram" on 17 May 1620 at Philippopolis in the Ottoman Balkans. Among means "lesse dangerous and troublesome" was one: 
Five years earlier, in 1615, Pietro Della Valle, a Roman traveller who sent letters from Constantinople, Persia, and India, attended a Ramadan festival in Constantinople. He describes the fireworks, floats, and great swings, then comments on riding the Great Wheel:Wilfrid Blount, Pietro's pilgrimage: a journey to India and back at the beginning of the seventeenth century, Volume 1
Similar wheels also appeared in England in the 17th century, and subsequently elsewhere around the world, including India, Romania, and Siberia.
A Frenchman, Antonio Manguino, introduced the idea to America in 1848, when he constructed a wooden pleasure wheel to attract visitors to his start-up fair in Walton Spring, Georgia.

Somers' Wheel

In 1892, William Somers installed three fifty-foot wooden wheels at Asbury Park, New Jersey; Atlantic City, New Jersey; and Coney Island, New York. The following year he was granted the first U.S. patent for a "Roundabout".com - Ferris Wheel Inventor Historical MarkerU.S. Patents for Ferris Wheels George Washington Gale Ferris, Jr. rode on Somers' wheel in Atlantic City prior to designing his wheel for the World's Columbian Exposition. In 1893 Somers filed a lawsuit against Ferris for patent infringement, however Ferris and his lawyers successfully argued that the Ferris Wheel and its technology differed greatly from Somers' wheel, and the case was dismissed.

The original Ferris Wheel

The original Ferris Wheel, sometimes also referred to as the Chicago Wheel,Ferris wheels - an illustrated history, Norman D. AndersonHyde Park Historical Society: Chicago's Great Ferris Wheel of 1893, Patrick MeehanThe Kensington Canal, railways and related developments - British History Online was designed and constructed by George Washington Gale Ferris, Jr..
With a height of  Eiffel Tower, the centerpiece of the 1889 Paris Exposition.
Ferris was a graduate of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute and a Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, bridge-builder. He began his career in the railroad industry and then pursued an interest in bridge building. Ferris understood the growing need for structural steel and founded G.W.G. Ferris & Co. in Pittsburgh, a firm that tested and inspected metals for railroads and bridge builders.
The wheel rotated on a 71-ton, 45.5-foot axle comprising what was at that time the world's largest hollow forging, manufactured in Pittsburgh by the Bethlehem Iron Company and weighing 89,320 pounds, together with two  cast-iron spiders weighing 53,031 pounds.
There were 36 cars, each fitted with 40 revolving chairs and able to accommodate up to 60 people, giving a total capacity of 2,160. The wheel carried some 38,000 passengers daily and took 20 minutes to complete two revolutions, the first involving six stops to allow passengers to exit and enter and the second a nine-minute non-stop rotation, for which the ticket holder paid 50 cents.
The Exposition ended in October 1893, and the wheel closed in April 1894 and was dismantled and stored until the following year. It was then rebuilt on Chicago's North Side, near Lincoln Park, next to an exclusive neighborhood. This prompted William D. Boyce, then a local resident, to file a Circuit Court action against the owners of the wheel to have it removed, but without success. It operated there from October 1895 until 1903, when it was again dismantled, then transported by rail to St. Louis for the 1904 World's Fair and finally destroyed by controlled demolition using dynamite on May 11, 1906.George Ferris

Antique Ferris wheels

The Wiener Riesenrad (German for "Viennese Giant Wheel") is a surviving example of nineteenth-century Ferris wheels. Erected in 1897 in the Wurstelprater section of Prater public park in the Leopoldstadt district of Vienna, Austria, to celebrate Emperor Franz Josef I's Golden Jubilee, it has a height of Wiener Riesenrad - technical data and originally had 30 passenger cars. A demolition permit for the Riesenrad was issued in 1916, but due to a lack to funds with which to carry out the destruction, it survived.Wiener Riesenrad - history
Following the demolition of the  Technocosmos was constructed for Expo '85, at Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
Still in operation today, it is one of Vienna's most popular tourist attractions, and over the years has featured in numerous films (including Madame Solange d`Atalide (1914), Letter from an Unknown Woman (1948), The Third Man (1949), The Living Daylights (1987), Before Sunrise (1995)) and novels.

World's tallest Ferris wheels

Chronology of world's tallest-ever wheels
Timeline
 
 ImageSize = width:850 height:258
PlotArea = left:180 bottom:99 top:0 right:10
Alignbars = justify
DateFormat = dd/mm/yyyy
Period = from:01/01/1890 till:01/07/2014
TimeAxis = orientation:horizontal format:yyyy
Colors =
 id:tallestever value:blue legend:world's&nbsp;tallest&nbsp;ever&nbsp;at&nbsp;time&nbsp;of&nbsp;completion
 id:tallestextant1 value:pink legend:world's&nbsp;tallest&nbsp;extant&nbsp;1920–1985
 id:tallestextant2 value:green legend:world's&nbsp;tallest&nbsp;extant&nbsp;1985–1989
Legend = orientation:vertical position:bottom columns:1
ScaleMajor = increment:5 start:1890
ScaleMinor = increment:1 start:1891
LineData =
 at:21/06/1893 color:blue layer:back
 at:17/07/1895 color:blue layer:back
 at:01/01/1900 color:blue layer:back
 at:01/01/1920 color:pink layer:back
 at:01/01/1985 color:green layer:back
 at:25/03/1989 color:blue layer:back
 at:12/07/1997 color:blue layer:back
 at:19/03/1999 color:blue layer:back
 at:09/03/2000 color:blue layer:back
 at:01/03/2006 color:blue layer:back
 at:01/03/2008 color:blue layer:back
 at:31/03/2014 color:blue layer:back
BarData =
 bar:High text:"High Roller - 167.6 m"
 bar:Singapore text:"Singapore Flyer - 165 m"
 bar:Star text:"Star of Nanchang - 160 m"
 bar:London text: "London Eye - 135 m"
 bar:Daikanransha text:"Daikanransha - 115 m"
 bar:Tempozan text:"Tempozan Ferris Wheel - 112.5 m"
 bar:Cosmo text:"Cosmo Clock 21 - 107.5 / 112.5 m"
 bar:Grande text:"Grande Roue de Paris - 100 m"
 bar:Great text:"Great Wheel - 94 m"
 bar:Techno text:"Technostar / Technocosmos - 85 m"
 bar:Ferris text:"the original Ferris Wheel - 80.4 m"
 bar:Wiener text:"Wiener Riesenrad - 64.75 m"
PlotData=
 width:10 textcolor:black align:left anchor:from shift:(10,-4)
 bar:High from:31/03/2014 till:end color:tallestever
 bar:Singapore from:01/03/2008 till:end color:tallestever
 bar:Star from:01/03/2006 till:end color:tallestever
 bar:London from:09/03/2000 till:end color:tallestever
 bar:Daikanransha from:19/03/1999 till:end color:tallestever
 bar:Tempozan from:12/07/1997 till:end color:tallestever
 bar:Cosmo from:25/03/1989 till:end color:tallestever
 bar:Grande from:01/01/1900 till:01/01/1920 color:tallestever
 bar:Great from:07/07/1895 till:01/01/1907 color:tallestever
 bar:Techno from:01/01/1985 till:01/01/2009 color:tallestextant2
 bar:Ferris from:21/06/1893 till:01/01/1906 color:tallestever
 bar:Wiener from:01/01/1897 till:end color:tallestextant1

Future wheels

Following the huge success of the  London Eye since it opened in 2000, giant Ferris wheels have been proposed for many other world-class cities, however a large number of these projects have stalled or failed.NYC Ferris wheel project has big backers

=Current proposals=

==Erection currently in progress==

==Erection yet to begin==

=Incomplete, delayed, or cancelled proposals=

Wheels for which no completion date has been announced, or whose original completion date has already passed:

==Erection begun but delayed, stalled, or abandoned==

==Erection not begun==

Nippon Moon, described as a "giant observation wheel" by its designers,UNStudio - GOW NIPPON MOON was reported in September 2013 to be "currently in development". At that time, its height was "currently undisclosed", but "almost twice the scale of the wheel in London." Its location, an unspecified Japanese city, was "currently under wraps", and its funding had "yet to be entirely secured." Commissioned by Ferris Wheel Investment Co., Ltd., and designed by UNStudio in collaboration with Arup, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, and Experientia, it was expected to have 32 individually themed capsules and take 40 minutes to rotate once.Giant Japanese ferris wheel 'Nippon Moon' to be among largest in world
 Kolkata Eye is a possible name for a giant wheel proposed in 2011 for construction on the banks of Hooghly River in Kolkata, West Bengal, India. Favoured by Mamata Banerjee, Chief Minister of West Bengal, the project is valued at 100 crore rupees.Kolkata's London dreams to take shape soon
 structure, the Shanghai Kiss, with capsules ascending and descending a pair of towers which met at their peaks instead of a wheel, was deemed too expensive at £100m.Developer spurns Alsop's £100m Shanghai Kiss
 wheel proposed for location near Sparrow Hills.Чертово колесо - разберут в московском ЦПКиО - BN.

Observation wheels

Observation wheel is an alternative name for Ferris wheel...
Some Ferris wheels are marketed as observation wheels, any distinction between the two names being at the discretion of the operator, however the wheels whose operators reject the term Ferris wheel are often those having most in common with the original 1893 Chicago Ferris Wheel, especially in terms of scale and being an iconic landmark for a city or event.
Wheels with passenger cars mounted external to the rim and independently rotated by electric motors, as opposed to wheels with cars suspended from the rim and kept upright by gravity, are those most commonly referred to as observation wheels, and their cars are often referred to as capsules. However, these alternative names are also sometimes used for wheels with conventional gravity-oriented cars.
Currently, only four Ferris wheels with motorised capsules exist.
The  High Roller, world's tallest since March 2014, has externally mounted motorised capsules of a transparent spherical design,Colorado's Leitner-Poma to build cabins for huge observation wheel in Las VegasA vital Linq for Las Vegas and is described as both a Ferris wheel and an observation wheel by the media.Las Vegas plans to top London Eye with massive Ferris wheelNew Vegas attraction helps Grand Junction's economy
The  Singapore Flyer has cylindrical externally mounted motorised capsules and is described as an observation wheel by its operators,We don't use the F-word but was also credited as "world's largest Ferris wheel"  by the media when it opened in 2008.Singapore to open world's largest Ferris wheel - ReutersDozens trapped in world's largest ferris wheel as Singapore Flyer judders to a halt - Times Online
The  London Eye, typically described as a "giant Ferris wheel" by the media,London: 10 Things to Do in 24 Hours - 3. The London Eye - TIMEWheel deal: the London Eye turns 10 - Jonathan Glancey - Art and design - guardian.co. This is not the case: first, the passenger capsules are completely enclosed and are climate controlled; secondly, the capsules are positioned on the outside of the wheel structure and are fully motorised; and third, the entire structure is supported by an A-frame on one side only." However the Singapore Flyer subsequently billed itself as the "world's largest observation wheel", despite being supported on both sides.Home - Singapore Flyer
The  Melbourne Star (previously the Southern Star) in Australia, has ovoidal externally mounted motorised capsules and is described by its operators as "the only observation wheel in the southern hemisphere",Welcome to the Southern Star but also as a Ferris wheel by the media.Work to spin Ferris wheelSouthern Star Observation Wheel profileMelbourne's big wheel of misfortune
Official conceptual renderings of the proposed  also show a wheel equipped with externally mounted motorised capsules.St. George Waterfront | NYCEDC | North Site Conceptual Rendering - View towards Manhattan from Elevated Open Space

Transportable wheels

Transportable Ferris wheels are designed to be operated at multiple locations, as opposed to fixed wheels which are usually intended for permanent installation. Small transportable designs may be permanently mounted on trailers, and can be moved intact. Larger transportable wheels are designed to be repeatedly dismantled and rebuilt, some using water ballast instead of the permanent foundations of their fixed counterparts.
Fixed wheels are also sometimes dismantled and relocated. Larger examples include the original Ferris Wheel, which operated at two sites in Chicago, Illinois, and a third in St. Louis, Missouri; Technocosmos/Technostar, which moved to Expoland, Osaka, after Expo '85, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, for which it was built, ended; and Cosmo Clock 21, which added  height when erected for the second time at Minato Mirai 21, Yokohama, in 1999.
The world's tallest transportable wheel  Bussink Design R80XL.R80 XL World's Largest Transportable Giant Wheel - WelcomeBussink launches world's tallest transportable Ferris WheelFerris R80XLMünchen dreht ein großes Ding
One of the most famous transportable wheels is the  Roue de Paris, originally installed on the Place de la Concorde in Paris for the 2000 millennium celebrations. Roue de Paris left France in 2002 and in 2003–04 operated in Birmingham and Manchester, England. In 2005 it visited first Geleen then Amsterdam, Netherlands, before returning to England to operate at Gateshead. In 2006 it was erected at the Suan Lum Night Bazaar in Bangkok, Thailand, and by 2008 had made its way to Antwerp, Belgium.The History of 'La grande Roue de Paris'
Roue de Paris is a Ronald Bussink series R60 design using , and can be erected in 72 hours and dismantled in 60 hours by a specialist team. Transport requires seven 20-foot container lorries, ten open trailer lorries, and one closed trailer lorry. Its 42 passenger cars can be loaded either 3 or 6 at a time, and each car can carry 8 people.
Other notable transportable wheels include the 

Double and triple wheels

Swiss manufacturer Intamin produced a series of rides comprising a vertical column supporting multiple horizontal arms, with each arm supporting a Ferris wheel. Custom designed for the Marriott Corporation, each ride had three main components: the wheels with their passenger cars; a set of supporting arms; and a single central supporting column. Each wheel rotated about the end of its own supporting arm. The arms in turn would either pivot or rotate together as a single unit about the top of the supporting column. The axis about which the rotating arms turned was offset from vertical, so that as the arms rotated, each arm and its corresponding wheel was raised and lowered. This allowed one wheel to be horizontal at ground level, and brought to a standstill for simultaneous loading and unloading of all its passenger cars, while the other wheel(s) continued to rotate vertically at considerable height.
The first such ride was Astrowheel, which had two arms and wheels with 8 passenger cars each, and operated at the former Six Flags Astroworld, Houston, Texas, from 1968 until 1980.com - Rides - Astrowheel
Similar wheels included Giant Wheel (Hersheypark, Hershey, Pennsylvania), Zodiac (Kings Island, Mason, Ohio), and Galaxy (Six Flags Magic Mountain, Valencia, California). All were Intamin designs; all are now defunct.
Sky Whirl was the world's first triple Ferris wheel, debuting at both Marriott's Great America parks (now Six Flags Great America, Gurnee, Illinois, and California's Great America, Santa Clara) in 1976. Also known as a triple Ferris wheel,Need Six Flags Great America Tickets? Triple Giant Wheel,Theme Park Timelines or Triple Tree Wheel, it was  The Santa Clara ride, renamed Triple Wheel in post-Marriott years, closed on 1 September 1997. The Gurnee ride closed in 2000.Sky Whirl at Marriott's Great America parks

Eccentric wheels

Eccentric wheels (sometimes called sliding wheelsMickey's Fun Wheel  or coaster wheelsCoaster wheel) differ from conventional Ferris wheels in that some or all of the passenger cars are not fixed directly to the rim of the wheel, but instead slide on rails between the hub and the rim as the wheel rotates.
The two most famous eccentric wheels are Mickey's Fun Wheel (previously Sun Wheel), at Disney California Adventure Park, US, and Wonder Wheel, at Deno's Wonder Wheel Amusement Park, Coney Island, US. The former is a replica of the latter. There is a second replica in Yokahama, Japan.
Mickey's Fun Wheel is  tall and has 24 fully enclosed passenger cars, each able to carry 6 passengers. 16 of the cars slide inward and outward as the wheel rotates, the remainder are fixed to the rim. There are separate boarding queues for sliding and fixed cars, so that passengers may choose between the two.
Wonder Wheel was built in 1920, is  tall, and can carry 144 people.The Wonder Wheel
Major designers, manufacturers, and operators== 
Allan Herschell Company (merged with Chance Rides in 1970)
Chance Morgan / Chance Rides / Chance Wheels / Chance American WheelsChance Celebrates 50 Years of Fun and AttractionsChance Morgan 
Great Wheel CorporationThe Great Wheel Corporation | Singapore Flyer | Great Wheel Beijing Orlando Berlin Dubai (merged with World Tourist Attractions in 2009 to form Great City Attractions)World Tourist Attractions, Great Wheel Merge Ahead Of IPO
Intamin / Waagner-BiroIntamin - Ride Trade - The Art of Thrill - Giant Wheels (Rides brokered by Intamin — manufactured by Waagner-Biro)Waagner-Biro Ride Catalogue page
Mir / PaxA business story with twists and turns
Ronald Bussinkbussink.com (formerly Nauta Bussink; then Ronald Bussink Professional Rides; then Bussink Landmarks since 2008)
Sanoyas Rides Corporation (has built more than 80 Ferris wheelsDocklands' trouble-plagued observation wheel set to open in ten weeks)




