[[Mark Bosnich]]

CATEGORIES: 1972 births, Living people, Sportspeople from Sydney, Australian people of Croatian descent, Association football goalkeepers, Association football goalkeepers who have scored, Australian soccer players, Australian expatriate soccer players, Australia international soccer players, 1997 FIFA Confederations Cup players, Olympic soccer players of Australia, Footballers at the 1992 Summer Olympics, Premier League players, A-League players, National Soccer League (Australia) players, Aston Villa F.C. players, Central Coast Mariners FC players, Chelsea F.C. players, Manchester United F.C. players, Sydney United FC players, Sydney Olympic FC players, Expatriate footballers in England, Doping cases in association football, Australian sportspeople in doping cases, Doping cases in Australian soccer

Mark Bosnich (born 13 January 1972) is an Australian former goalkeeper and sports pundit. He played in England for Premier League clubs Aston Villa, Manchester United and Chelsea. He also played in Australia for Sydney United, Central Coast Mariners and Sydney Olympic, as well as representing Australia 17 times during his career.

Career

Manchester United (1988–1991)

Bosnich was born and grew up in Liverpool, New South Wales and Fairfield, Sydney and attended Liverpool Boys High School. Bosnich played for Sydney Croatia youth team before moving to England. In 1989, at the age of 17, he moved to England to join Manchester United on a non-contract basis and made his debut for them in a First Division fixture against Wimbledon on 30 April 1990.
He only played two more games for Manchester United before his registration with the club was cancelled on 30 June 1991. He then returned to Sydney Croatia briefly in the 1991–92 season. He returned to England signing for Aston Villa on a free transfer on 28 February 1992.

Aston Villa (1992–1999)

Bosnich did not claim a regular place in the Aston Villa first team until the 1993–94 season. In the League Cup semi-final against Tranmere Rovers that season, he dramatically stopped three shots in a penalty shoot-out. He later admitted that he should have been sent off before extra-time began for fouling Tranmere's John Aldridge. Villa would go on to win the final, against his former club, Manchester United. 1994–95 was Bosnich's first full season as Villa's first-choice goalkeeper, but it was a hugely disappointing season for the club as they narrowly avoided relegation.
Bosnich was one of the few players to be retained by new manager Brian Little following Atkinson's dismissal in November 1994, as the bulk of Atkinson's team was sold off to make way for a new side. 1995–96 was perhaps the best season of Bosnich's career. He was now widely acclaimed as one of the best goalkeepers in the Premier League, as he helped Villa finished fourth in the league and win the Football League Cup final at Wembley with a 3–0 triumph over Leeds United.
In 1996, Bosnich was fined £1,000 and censured by the FA after he was found guilty of misconduct by upsetting fans of Tottenham Hotspur (a club with a large Jewish following) with a Nazi salute. Bosnich spent three more seasons at Villa Park before his contract expired and he joined Manchester United on a free transfer. He had played 227 times in seven-and-a-half years with the Midlanders.

Return to Manchester United (1999–2001)

Bosnich was signed for Manchester United in the 1999 close season as successor to Peter Schmeichel. During the season he picked up a Premier League title medal as United were crowned champions by an 18-point margin. He also played a key role in Manchester United becoming the first English team to win the Toyota World Club Championship in keeping a clean sheet against Palmeiras of Brazil, in Tokyo, during the 1999 Intercontinental Cup.
He had a short stint as first choice goalkeeper for Manchester United as they signed the French World Cup winning goalkeeper, Fabien Barthez, in the 2000 close season. Soon after Bosnich found himself as third-choice goalkeeper. Newly appointed Celtic manager Martin O'Neill made an offer to loan Bosnich for the 2000–01 season, but he decided against the move and decided that he would try and regain his place in the Manchester United first team. He had also fallen out of favour with the national side, losing his spot to Mark Schwarzer. With hopes of a first team return fading Bosnich was linked with Chelsea.
In Alex Ferguson's autobiography released in 2013, he called Bosnich a "terrible professional".

Chelsea (2001–2002)

Bosnich never played a first-team game for United after the arrival of Fabien Barthez, and on 18 January 2001 he signed for Chelsea on a free transfer. Problems with his fitness and injury meant his debut did not happen until the following season. Bosnich was earning A$130,000-a-week (approximately £45,500-a-week) at Chelsea.dailytelegraph.au/sport/soccer/insult-that-raised-a-smile-from-mark-bosnich/story-e6frey4r-1111117250989

Exile and return (2002–2007)

The suspension scuppered a move to Bolton Wanderers in the newly introduced winter transfer window. Bosnich was keen on the idea of moving to the Reebok Stadium and the player's agent admitted that dialogue had taken place but Sam Allardyce remained coy about his interest. In the autumn of 2004, he spurned an opportunity to return to football with League One side, Walsall, who were then managed by Paul Merson, who had played alongside Bosnich in his final season at Aston Villa. Later speculation linked him with a return to football with Conference side Grays Athletic.
Bosnich developed a $5,000-a-week cocaine addiction and became a recluse.

Australia

Bosnich returned to Australia in 2008 after many years living in London.
Bosnich made his A-League debut with the Central Coast Mariners on 31 August 2008 in a 4–2 away win against the Queensland Roar at the Suncorp Stadium in Brisbane. Once Mariners first-choice goalkeeper Danny Vukovic had served his suspension, Bosnich did not play again for the Mariners. On 31 May 2009, it was announced that Bosnich had signed to play for Sydney Olympic for the remainder of the NSW Premier League season.
Bosnich suffered a hamstring injury and he ended his playing career to focus on his television commitments. However, Bosnich was not allowed by the FFA because he did not have a coaching license.

International career

His first appearance with the national team came in 1990 against touring USSR club side Torpedo, followed by a number of further appearances in 'unofficial' Socceroos matches in the next few years. His first full international appearance came in 1993 against New Zealand in a qualifying match for the 1994 World Cup. Bosnich also appeared for the Socceroos at the 1992 Barcelona Olympics and the 1997 FIFA Confederations Cup.
Although his international appearances with the Socceroos were rare, they were memorable occasions. Keeping for Australia in the away leg of its home-and-away qualifier with Iran in a failed attempt to qualify for the 1998 World Cup, Australia losing on away goals in what Bosnich described as "the lowest moment in Australian football". Bosnich also scored a late penalty for his national team in a 13–0 win over the Solomon Islands. He admitted that he was hopeful of selection for Australia to make up for the times he shunned it in favour of his club commitments. "If I ever get the chance to play for Australia again, I will never make the mistake of saying 'no'." SBS The World Game – Bosnich targets comeback

Personal life

Bosnich married for the first time in 1992, to an English woman named Lisa Hall. The wedding took place in Sydney, New South Wales, in February. It was rumoured that he married Hall in order to be able to return to Britain, after problems with his working visa. After two years of marriage, Home Office officials were satisfied it was not a wedding of convenience and Bosnich was allowed to remain indefinitely in Britain. However, the marriage ended just three months later. According to him, "We were in love but our marriage just didn't work out."
The marriage lasted only 14 months. Jarrett was pregnant at the time of the divorce, but she lost the baby soon afterwards, in the third month of pregnancy.
Bosnich provided special comments for the Socceroos' friendly with Nigeria on 17 November alongside Simon Hill on Australia's Fox Sports and subsequently on SBS' coverage of the 2008 FA Cup final. Bosnich is now a football analyst and commentator for Fox Sports football programmes. He also works as a player agent. Bosnich trains at Kostya Tszyu's Boxing Academy in Rockdale.foxsports.au/story/0,8659,27534798-5019516,00.

Career statistics

Club

International

Honours

Club

Individual






