[[River Mole]]

CATEGORIES: Rivers of Surrey, Rivers of Sussex, Tributaries of the River Thames, Mole Valley, Local Nature Reserves in Surrey

The River Mole is a tributary of the River Thames in southern England. It rises in West Sussex near Horsham and flows north west through Surrey for  Much of the catchment area lies on impermeable rock (including Wealden Clay and London Clay), meaning that the river level responds rapidly to heavy rainfall.
During the second half of the 20th century pollution levels in the river were high, however since 1995 the water quality has improved dramatically and the Mole now boasts the greatest diversity of fish species of any river in England.environment-agency.uk/static/documents/Leisure/fisheries_eng_765655. The Mole Gap forms part of a Special Area of Conservation and is an SSSI of European importance.
The river has captured the imagination of several authors and poets, particularly since in very hot summers the river channel can become dry between Dorking and Leatherhead (most recently during the 1976 drought).

Catchment area

The drainage area of the River Mole is 512 km² and forms 5% of the River Thames catchment area above Teddington. Annually the catchment area receives 761 mm rain each year, the greatest average level of rainfall is 800 mm rain around Crawley. The Mole catchment reaches a maximum elevation of  There is only one aquifer in the drainage basin, at Fetcham, which means that the majority of the water in the river is from surface drainage, particularly from Gatwick Airport and the urban areas of Horley and Crawley, and that the flow rate responds rapidly to rainfall.

Course

Upper Mole

River Mole rises in Baldhorns Copse  The first tributaries to join the young river drain the northernmost part of St Leonard's Forest, between Horsham and Crawley, although much of the forest is in the catchment area of the River Arun. The Mole skirts the northern suburbs of Crawley where it is joined by its first major tributary, Ifield Brook, which drains Ifield Mill Pond.
The first gauging station on the Mole is south of Gatwick Airport (57 m above OD). The mean flow is 
The Mole enters Surrey to the south of Horley, where it meets the Gatwick Stream, a tributary draining Worth Forest to the southeast of Crawley. The second-largest Sewage Treatment Works (STW) in the Mole catchment is located on the Gatwick Stream  at Kinnersley Manor gauging station (48 m above OD). The Earlswood Brook, a tributary draining the urban area of Reigate and Redhill, joins the Mole at Sidlow. The largest STW in the Mole catchment (Reigate STW) discharges up to 118.5 megalitres per day into the Earlswood Brook.A principal tributary of the Earlswood Brook is the Redhill Brook, which includes The Moors wetland nature reserve within its catchment area.
From Sidlow the Mole turns north west towards Brockham. A number of minor tributaries join the river from the west and are typically second order streams draining the woodland and arable land between Horsham and Dorking. The 18th century weir at Betchworth was modified in 2004 to facilitate the installation of two 27.5 kW low-head hydro turbines. About 90% of the energy generated is fed into the regional electricity grid, while the remainder is used to supply the Betchworth Park Estate, where the weir is situated. is measured at a fourth gauging station, located at Castle Mill (39 m above OD). At Pixham the Mole meets the Pipp Brook, a tributary draining the northeastern slopes of Leith Hill.

Mole Gap

Between Dorking and Leatherhead the Mole cuts a steep-sided valley (the Mole Gap) though the North Downs, carving a 

Lower Mole

At Leatherhead, the Mole leaves the chalk and turns northwestwards to flow across impermeable London Clay, winding towards Cobham.  The water table rises at this point and much of the water which drained out of the channel through the chalk returns through springs in the riverbed. The aquifer at Fetcham is the only one in the entire catchment area.  The next major tributary, The Rye, (which drains Ashtead) joins to the north of Leatherhead, before the river is crossed by the M25 motorway.  At Cobham the river swings round in a pronounced axe-head meander skirting Painshill Landscape Garden, where a The undershot wheel at Painshill Park was restored in 1987 and is located at the end of an artificial leat, rather than on the main river channel.
From Painshill Park the river flows northeastwards to the Thames, passing to the west of Esher Commons and then forming the boundary between Hersham and Esher, where the mean flow of the river is  Finally the Mole splits into two branches at the Island Barn Reservoir near Molesey: the northern (and smaller) branch continues as the River Mole and the southern branch is known as the River Ember. (For the purposes of the remainder of this article, the River Mole and the River Ember are treated as a single entity.)
Prior to the last Ice Age, the River Thames followed a more northerly route to the North Sea, from Reading via Marlow, Chorleywood, St Albans, Hertford and along the present Suffolk-Essex border. During the Middle Pleistocene period,The Middle Pleistocene period was ca. 781,000-126,000 years ago a large ice sheet built up across much of the East of England, reaching as far south as St Albans and Chelmsford, blocking the path of the proto-Thames.  Glacial meltwater from the Anglian ice sheet, caused the Thames to divert southwards and flood the valley of the Mole-Wey river, thus adopting its present route through London.Bridgland and Gibbard (1997) Quaternary River Diversions in the London Basin and the Eastern English Channel Géographie physique et Quaternaire'' 51 (3) 337-346

Ecology

Water quality

The water quality of the watercourses in the River Mole catchment area has improved dramatically since the 1990s.  In 1990 the Environment Agency assessed only 23% of the watercourses as Grade B (good) or better, but by 2002 60% had reached this standard.  Investment in the Sewage Treatment Works within the catchment area has improved the quality of the discharges into the river and modifications to the runway and apron drainage systems at Gatwick Airport means that surface water is diverted to aerated pollution control lagoons and balancing ponds for treatment prior to being released into the river.
There have been a number of high profile pollution incidents of the river in recent years: In 2003, Gatwick Airport Ltd pleaded guilty to charges of allowing chemical pollution to enter the River Mole after a detergent, used to clean rubber and oil from the runway, was washed into Crawters Brook by airport workers.

Biodiversity

The Marsh Frog Pelophylax ridibundus (a non-native species introduced from Europe in the 1930s) is now commonly found in the upper Mole and its tributaries around Newdigate and Gatwick. There is no evidence that the presence of the frogs has had a deleterious effect on indigenous amphibians.
The River Mole has the most diverse fish population of any river in England. The Gatwick Stream is dominated by coarse fish such as brown trout, brook lamprey, and eel. In 2003, the upper River Mole near Meath Green Lane, Salfords, was enhanced to create a gravel spawning area to encourage chub and dace in addition to roach. In 1974 zander, a non-indigenous coarse fish native to Europe, were introduced legally to Old Bury Hill Lake which supplies the Pipp Brook. Zander have been caught in the Lower Mole below Dorking since the 1980s.
In the Mole Gap between Dorking and Leatherhead the river supports populations of chub, dace, barbel, brown trout. Both barbel and brown trout are extremely sensitive to water quality and pollution. Below Leatherhead the river has historically supported larger predatory fish including chub, perch, pike, and eels, however in recent years  chub and eel numbers have begun to decline. North of Esher the old river channel is dominated by floating pennywort, a highly invasive weed, which cuts off all light to the river bed, reducing oxygen levels and resulting in a poor habitat for fish. The Ember flood relief channel has a diverse fish population, including chub, dace, roach, bleak, large pike and barbel. At the confluence of the Mole and the River Thames at Hampton Court Palace it is possible to catch a wide variety of coarse fish species.
The geographical distribution of many species of invertebrate in the river reflects the geology of the catchment area. Viviparid snails and water scorpions (of the genus Nepidae) are commonly found where the river runs over the London Clay. Crayfish are common in areas associated with high alkalinity particularly around Brockham and the tributaries which run over the Wealden Clay provide an excellent habitat for stoneflies, caddisflies, fast swimming mayflies and riffle beetles.Ruse LP (1996) Multivariate techniques relating macroinvertebrate and environmental data from a river catchment Water Research 30 (12) 3017–3024
The Beautiful Demoiselle (Calopteryx virgo) disappeared from the River Mole during the 1960s owing to deteriorating water quality, but has since recolonised.
A nationally scarce species which is locally common on the River Mole is the Greater Dodder Cuscuta europaea.

Conservation

The Mole catchment area includes twelve Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSIs) which include wetland habitats and the stretch of river through Leatherhead has been designated a Local Nature Reserve. The Mole Gap forms part of a Special Area of Conservation and is an SSSI of European importance.
The stretch of river between Thorncroft Manor (1 km south of Leatherhead) and River Lane in Fetcham has been designated a Local Nature Reserve.  Although much of the surrounding land has been taken by residential and commercial development, this section of the Mole supports 20 different mammal species,  20 butterfly species and 15 species of dragonfly.  The geology of the local area is complex, since the river leaves the chalk of the Mole Gap at this point and flows over gravel and clay, creating a patchwork of different habitats including scrub, woodland, hedges, banks, and meadows as well as the water itself.  The river also provides a corridor for wildlife through the centre of Leatherhead.
The West End Common forms part of the Esher Commons, owned and managed by Elmbridge Borough Council. The River Mole forms the western boundary of the common, flowing past a steep sandy area known locally as The Ledges.  Plant species typical of ancient woodland are found in this area, including bluebells (Hyacinthoides non-scriptus), Marsh Marigolds (Caltha palustris) and Golden Saxifrages (Chrysosplenium sp.). Large Bittercress (Cardamine amara) and the non-native Himalayan Balsam (Impatiens glandulifera) are also found along the river banks.
Molesey Heath Local Nature Reserve lies on the west bank of the Mole, west of the Island Barn Reservoir.  The Heath is an area of rough scrubland and, despite its name, is  a reclaimed landfill site rather than an area of natural heathland.  The site is a rich habitat for birds including the  redshank and Little Ringed Plover.

Angling

Below is a list of the coarse fish records for the river Mole
l Barbel - 15 lb 6oz
l Roach - 2 lb 5oz
l Chub - 6 lb 12oz
l Pike - 25 lb 2oz
l Carp - 35 lb
l Perch - 2 lb 15oz

Geology

Upper Mole (geology)

The Mole above Dorking drains an area of  The upper Mole catchment is dominated by a single broad terrace, which runs continuously from the entry to the Mole Gap as far south as Tilgate Forest.  Above Meath Green (near Horley), the terrace corresponds to the flood plain of the river, however from this point downstream to Brockham, the river cuts a narrow trench no more than 150m wide.  A similar trench is runs up several of the Mole's tributaries, notably along Deanoak Brook which follows a local strike.  The presence of the trench protects the land from flooding rendering it suitable for agriculture.

Mole Gap (geology)

Between Dorking and Leatherhead the Mole cuts a steep-sided valley through the North Downs, creating a  At Leatherhead, the river leaves the chalk and flows across impermeable London Clay. At this point that the water table rises enough for the water to flow back into the main river channel.
In a survey in 1958, the geologist C.C. Fagg identified 25 active swallow holes between Dorking and Mickleham; most were only a few centimetres in diameter and were located in the vertical banks of the river below the water line. under the centre of one of the domes. When the Dorking to Leatherhead railway was constructed in 1859, a fossilised swallow hole was discovered in the cutting at the south end of Box Hill and Westhumble railway station, suggesting that even in its early history, the river had swallow holes.
The author Daniel Defoe, who attended school in Dorking and probably grew up in the village of Westhumble, described the swallow holes in the River Mole in his book A tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain (first published in 1724): 
 .. the current of the river  being much obstructed by the interposition of those hills, called Box Hill ... it forces the waters as it were to find their way through as well as they can; and in order to do this, beginning, I say, where the river comes close to the foot of the precipice of Box-Hill, called the Stomacher, the waters sink insensibly away, and in some places are to be seen (and I have seen them) little channels which go out on the sides of the river, where the water in a stream not so big as would fill a pipe of a quarter of an inch diameter, trills away out of the river, and sinks insensibly into the ground. In this manner it goes away, lessening the stream for above a mile, near two, and these they call the Swallows.

Not all of the water removed from the river by the swallow holes is returned to the channel at Leatherhead. The chalk aquifer also feeds the springs at the southern end of Fetcham Mill Pond, which have never been known to run dry. A survey in March 1883 estimated that the Fetcham springs were producing about 3.6 million gallons of water (16,000 m3) every day.

Lower Mole (geology)

At Leatherhead the river leaves the chalk bedrock, moving onto London Clay. towards Hersham, where the river enters the flood plain of the River Thames.
There are a series of gravel deposits laid down by the river above the London Clay between Cobham, Walton-on-Thames and Esher. are located along the side of St George's Hill.

History

Etymology

The river is first recorded in the Red Book of Thorney in AD 983 as Emen and in the AD 1005 Cartulary of the Abbey of Eynsham as both Emen and Æmen.
The name Mole does not appear until the 16th century, first occurring as Moule in Harrison's Description of Britain of 1577. The antiquarian William Camden uses the Latinized form Molis in the 1586 edition of Britannia and Michael Drayton is the first to use Mole in his poem Poly-Olbion published in 1613. In John Speed's 1611 map of Surrey this stretch of the river is denoted by a series of hills accompanied by the legend "The river runneth under".  However the river's name is unlikely to have derived from this behaviour: The Oxford Dictionary of English Place Names suggests that Mole either comes from the Latin mola (a mill) or is a back-formation from Molesey (Mul's island). In John Rocque's 1768 map of Surrey, the name Moulsey River is used.

Archaeology

In common with much of the rest of the Weald, the earliest evidence of human settlement along the Upper Mole is from the Mesolithic Period (20 000 - 7000 BC).  Mesolithic sites at Wonham, Flanchford and Sidlow. Finds at Wonham include arrowheads and a plano-convex knife.
The Mole Gap and North Downs do not appear to have been settled until the late Stone Age: A large axe, typical of a "rough-out" axe produced during the Neolithic period, which was discovered in 1952 during building work in Westhumble,
Significant Bronze Age finds include a bronze sword found close to the river north of Amberley Farm near Charlwood

Navigation

It is not clear to what extent the Mole was used for navigation in the past: In the late 13th century, Thorncroft Manor (south of Leatherhead) purchased a shout, a type of boat up to 
During the 17th century, two bills came before parliament to make sections of the river  navigable.  The first, in 1663, was passed by the House of Commons but was defeated in the House of Lords. During the following year (1664), an act was passed by both Houses of Parliament to make the River Mole navigable from Reigate to the River Thames, but was never executed. The only Surrey river to have been made fully navigable is the River Wey.
In 1798 William Marshall advocated the canalisation of a short stretch of the River Mole between Betchworth and Dorking to facilitate the movement of chalk from quarry to market.
Today the Mole is navigable for the 400 m from the confluence with the River Thames to Molember Weir at East Molesey where there is a private mooring facility.

World War II defences

During the Second World War several sites along the course of the Mole were fortified for the defence of London against invasion from the south.  GHQ Line B ran along the North Downs from Farnham and Guildford, crossing the Mole Gap to the north of Dorking and following the river to Horley. An anti-tank ditch was dug from the Stepping Stones eastwards across the fields belonging to Bradley Farm (now Denbies vineyard).
The river crossing at Sidlow Bridge was heavily defended and a line of pill boxes was constructed on the north bank of the river. Concrete anti-tank dragon's teeth were built on both sides of the river, a short distance upstream of the bridge, as an obstacle to armoured vehicles.

Crossings of the Mole

Mole Gap

The North Downs Way crosses the river at Box Hill via seventeen hexagonal stepping stones, which are frequently submerged after heavy rainfall.  The current stones were dedicated in September 1946 by the then Prime Minister Clement Attlee, replacing those destroyed during WW2 as an anti-invasion measure. The location is popular both with anglers and families, although swimming is strongly discouraged as the water is polluted in places. The stones give their name to the pub in the nearby village of Westhumble.
When the Burford Bridge was rebuilt in 1937, excavations revealed a "flint-surfaced approach to a ford at low level having all the signs of Roman workmanship" suggesting that Stane Street (which ran from London to Chichester via Dorking) crossed the river at this point.

Leatherhead

There are three listed bridges in Leatherhead of which the 14 arch Leatherhead Town Bridge is the oldest. The first bridge on this site was probably constructed during the late Middle Ages and was rebuilt and enlarged by the county surveyor George Gwilt in 1782-83.  The bridge is a long structure of 14 segmental arches resting on low piers, finished in red brick in Flemish bond, with some Portland stone dressing.Heritage Gateway listing NGR TQ1631356299
A few metres downstream of Leatherhead Bridge stands the Grade II listed railway viaduct which carries the Leatherhead to Dorking line over the river.
The single span Shell Bridge stands in the grounds of Thorncroft Manor, to the south of the Town Centre. The bridge was constructed as an ornamental feature in parkland laid out by Capability Brown in the late 18th century.  The bridge is largely composed of flint and has a large inverted scallop shell in the place of the keystone and similar shells in the spandrels at each side. The restoration project was dedicated to the memory of  the Canadian servicemen, who were billeted in the Manor during the second world war.

Cobham

A wooden bridge is thought to have existed on the site of Cobham Bridge since the twelfth century, the upkeep of which was the responsibility of the adjacent landowners.  The present bridge was constructed by George Gwilt in 1792, after responsibility for maintenance had been transferred to the County Council by Act of Parliament.  The bridge has nine low arches and is primarily built of red brick with stone coping.  The parapets were rebuilt in 1914 and the structure was given a Grade II listing in 1953.Heritage Gateway listing NGR TQ0988960541

Watermills

Domesday Book listed twenty mills on the River Mole in 1086.

Upper Mole

Horley Mill was first mentioned in a deed of the early thirteenth century.  The most recent mill was demolished in 1959, although the mill house still stands.
The first mill at Sidlow was built during Saxon times. The final mill on the site was demolished in 1790, however remains of the mill leat are still visible.
Mention is made of a mill at Brockham in 1634 and remains of the mill race are still visible.

Lower Mole

Slyfield Mill near Stoke d'Abernon is first mentioned in Domesday Book.  It was used for fulling woollen cloth and milling corn.
Five of the mills mentioned in Domesday Book were in the borough of Elmbridge.
Downside Mill, Cobham was the mill of the manor of Downe.  Until the Dissolution of the Monasteries it was owned by Chertsey Abbey. It has been used for many purposes including the processing of corn, paper, iron, tinplate and flock and the generation of electricity. The present building dates from the 18th century but it is inaccessible to the public.
Cobham Mill, downstream of Leatherhead, consisted of two mills used for grinding corn. In 1953 the larger mill was demolished by Surrey County Council to allieviate traffic congestion on Mill Road. The remaining red brick mill dates from the 1822 and was in use until 1928. It was restored to full working order by the Cobham Mill Preservation Trust, and is now open to the public from 2 pm to 5 pm on the second Sunday of each month (between April and October).
Esher Mill was at the end of Lower Green Road where there is now an industrial estate. It was used to process corn, brass wire, iron, paper, linoleum, and books. For many years there may have been two mills on the site for corn grinding and industrial use. There were a series of fires over a century and after the last in 1978 the buildings were demolished.
East Molesey Upper Mill was associated  with the manor of Molesey Matham. It was used to produce gunpowder from the time of the Commonwealth until about 1780. The island where it stood now forms part of the ornamental gardens of a housing development called "The Wilderness".
East Molesey Lower Mill, also known as Sterte Mill, was associated with the manor of Molesey Prior. During the Commonwealth it was used for gunpowder manufacture, but after the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 it reverted to corn milling. An old timber structure was replaced by a brick building in the 1820s which can be seen from the bridge over the Ember in Hampton Court Way.
In addition there was Ember Mill, which stood on the banks of the old course of the River Ember near Hampton Court Way.

River Ember Flood Relief Channel and confluence with the Thames

The River Mole originally flowed into the River Thames at the point where the present Hampton Court bridge now crosses the Thames (approximately 500 m upstream of the present confluence, on the reach above Teddington Lock).
However, during the early 1930s, when Hampton Court Way and the bridge were built, the River Mole was redirected to flow into the River Ember and both rivers now enter the Thames in a single widened and straightened channel once occupied only by the River Ember. There have been further alterations to the courses of these two rivers in a major flood prevention scheme since serious flooding in the area in 1947 and 1968.

Literature

The river has captured the imagination of several authors and poets, particularly since in very hot summers the river channel can become dry between Dorking and Leatherhead (most recently during the 1976 drought).
In The Faerie Queene (first published in 1590) Edmund Spenser wrote of the river:
 
 
In Poly-Olbion (first published in 1612) the poet Michael Drayton described the journey taken by the River Thames to the sea:
 
 
He writes in the appendix to Song XVII
 
 This Mole runnes into the earth, about a mile from Darking in Surrey, and after some two miles sees the light againe, which to be certaine hath been affirmed by Inhabitants thereabout reporting triall made of it.

John Milton (c. 1562–1647) described the river as
 
 
In a similar vein, Alexander Pope (1688–1744) wrote in his poem Windsor Forest (first published 1713)
 
 
Robert Bloomfield (1766–1823) writes the following lines about the Mole Valley in his 1806 poem Wild Flowers.
 
 
Extract from The River Mole or Emlyn Stream by Mary Uniacke (writing under her maiden name Mary Drinkwater-Bethune), which was published in 1839.
 
 

Tributaries

The major tributaries of the River Mole are the Ifield Brook, Gatwick Stream, Earlswood Brook, Pipp Brook and The Rye, which drains Ashtead.  A full list of the tributaries is given in the table below.

Distributary



Notes






