[[Fylfot]]

CATEGORIES: Crosses in heraldry, Cross symbols, Swastika

Fylfot or fylfot cross ( (fil-fot), is a synonym for swastika, sometimes used in Britain.
However – at least in modern heraldry texts, such as Friar and Woodcock & Robinson (see below) – the fylfot differs somewhat from the archetypal form of the swastika: always upright and typically with truncated limbs, as shown in the figure at right.

Etymology

The most commonly cited etymology for this is that it comes from the notion common among nineteenth-century antiquarians, but based on only a single 1500 manuscript,  that it was used to fill empty space at the foot of stained-glass windows in medieval churches. This etymology is often cited in modern dictionaries (such as the Collins English Dictionary and Merriam-Webster OnLine).
Thomas Wilson (1896), suggested other etymologies, now considered untenable:

History

The Fylfot, together with its sister figure the Gammadion, has been found in a great variety of contexts over the centuries. It has occurred in both secular and sacred contexts in the British Isles, elsewhere in Europe, in Asia MinorWujewski, T Anatolian Sepulchral Stelae in Roman Times, (1991), 23-4 and in Africa. Archaeologia 92 (1947), 11 and 23.
While these two terms might be broadly interchangeable in some places, we can detect a certain degree of affinity between term and terrain. Thus we might usefully associate the Gammadion more with Byzantium, Rome and Graeco-Roman culture on the one hand, and the Fylfot more with Celtic and Anglo-Saxon culture on the other. Although the Gammadion is very similar to the Fylfot in appearance, it is thought to have originated from the conjunction of four capital 'Gammas', Gamma being the third letter of the Greek alphabet.
Both of these swastika-like crosses may have been indigenous to the British Isles before the Roman invasion. Certainly they were in evidence a thousand years earlier but these may have been largely imports. They were certainly substantially in evidence during the Romano-British period with widespread examples of the duplicated Greek fret motif appearing on mosaics. century there occurred the Anglo-Saxon and Jutish migrations.
We know that the Fylfot was very popular amongst these incoming tribes from Northern Europe as we find it on artefacts such as brooches, sword hilts and funerary urns.Evans, A C Sutton Hoo Ship Burial (1986),57-58
The Fylfot was widely adopted in the early Christian centuries.  It is found extensively in the Roman catacombs. 
A most unusual example of its usage is to be found in the porch of the parish church of Great Canfield, Essex, England.Portella, I della Subterranean Rome(2000),106-107 More recently it has been found on grave-slabs in Scotland and Ireland.Cormack, W F "Barhobble" Transactions of the Dumfriesshire and Galloway Natural History and Antiquarian Society (1995) passim
Gospel books also contain examples of this form of the Christian cross.  Mention must also be made of an intriguing example of this decoration that occurs on the Ardagh Chalice, discovered under a thorn bush in Co. Limerick in 1968.Grogan, L S The Ardagh Chalice (1932),93  
From the early 14th Century onwards the Fylfot was often used to adorn Eucharistic robes. During that period it appeared on the monumental brasses that preserved the memory of those priests thus attired.Taylor, S G The Fylfot-Cross in the Church of St. Mary the Virgin, Great Canfield (2003),10-14
Probably its most conspicuous usage has been its incorporation in stained glass windows notably in Cambridge and Edinburgh. In Cambridge it is found in the baptismal window of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre, together with other allied Christian symbols, originating in the 19th century.  The work was undertaken by Dr Robert Strachan and installed during the 1920s.  He was also responsible for a window in the chapel of Westminster College, Cambridge.  A similar usage is to be found in the Central Congregational Church in Providence, Rhode Island, USA. 
It was not a little surprising to find the Fylfot on Church Bells in England. They were adopted by the Heathcote family in Derbyshire as part of their iconographic tradition in the 16th and 17th Centuries. This is probably an example where pagan and Christian influence both have a part to play as the Fylfot was amongst other things the symbol of Thor, the Norse god of thunderEitel, E J Buddhism, its Historical, Theoretical and Popular Aspects (1873) and its use on bells suggests it was linked to the dispelling of thunder in popular mythology.Morris, E Legends o' the Bells (1935), 12-14

In heraldry

thumb|190px|Arms of Leonard Chamberlayne: Argent a chevron between three fylfots gules – drawn from the blazon given in MS. Harleian, 1394 In modern heraldry texts the fylfot is typically shown with truncated limbs, rather like a cross potent that's had one arm of each T cut off.  It's also known as a cross cramponned, ~nnée, or ~nny, as each arm resembles a crampon or angle-iron (compare Winkelmaßkreuz in German). 
Examples of fylfots in heraldry are extremely rare, and the charge is not mentioned in Oswald Barron's article on "Heraldry" in most 20th-century editions of Encyclopædia Britannica. A twentieth-century example (with four heraldic roses) can be seen in the Lotta Svärd emblem.
Parker's Glossary of Heraldry  (see below) gives the following example:
(In lieu of an image from this MS., a modern rendering of this blazon is shown on the right.) 
Even in the last few centuries the fylfot is conspicuous by its absence from grants of arms (understandably so since 1945; see: Swastika – Stigma).

Modern use of the term

From its use in heraldry - or from its use by antiquaries - fylfot has become an established word for this symbol, in at least British English. 
However, it was only rarely used. Wilson, writing in 1896, says, "The use of Fylfot is confined to comparatively few persons in Great Britain and, possibly, Scandinavia. Outside of these countries it is scarcely known, used, or understood." 
In more recent times, fylfot has gained greater currency within the areas of design history and collecting, where it is used to distinguish the swastika motif as used in designs and jewellery from that used in Nazi paraphernalia. Even though the swastika does not derive from Nazism, it has become associated with it, and fylfot functions as a more acceptable term for a "good" swastika. 
Hansard for 12 Jun 1996Hansard for 12 Jun 1996 reports a House of Commons discussion about the badge of No. 273 Fighter Squadron, Royal Air Force. In this, fylfot is used to describe the ancient symbol, and swastika used as if it refers only to the symbol used by the Nazis.
Odinic Rite (OR), a Germanic pagan organization, use both "swastika" and "fylfot" for what they claim as a "holy symbol of Odinism". The OR fylfot is depicted with curved outer limbs, more like a "sunwheel swastika" than a traditional (square) swastika or heraldic fylfot.



Notes






