[[Hindhead]]

CATEGORIES: Post towns in the GU postcode area, Road junctions in England, Villages in Surrey, Waverley, Surrey

Hindhead is a large village in Surrey, England. It is the highest village in Surrey, with buildings at between 185 and 246 metres above sea level. The A3 now passes under Hindhead in the Hindhead Tunnel and its route along the Punch Bowl has been removed and landscaped, but the crossroads still exists for local traffic.
Hindhead is located 
The place-name "Hindhead" is first attested in 1571, and means "hill frequented by hinds", i.e. deer.240.

History

This area was notorious for highwaymen. In 1736, Stephen Phillips, a robber tried and convicted at the Old Bailey, admitted to the Newgate chaplain to having stolen 150 guineas in gold on the road towards London. In 1786, three men were convicted of the murder of an unknown sailor on his way from London to rejoin his ship, a deed commemorated by several memorials in the area. The perpetrators were hung in chains to warn others on Gibbet Hill, a short walk away on top of the Devil's Punch Bowl. With an increase in traffic and opening of the London to Portsmouth railway line removing much of the road transport of freight, such incidents reduced during the 19th century. Ordinary and Chaplain's account of 26 July 1736. Accessed 2012-04-26Moorey, Peter. 2000. Blackdown Press ISBN 0-9533944-2-5
Hindhead became a substantial settlement in the late 19th century. In 1904 a temporary mission church was built to serve the new community. An architectural competition to design a permanent church, that of St Albans in Beacon Hill, was held in 1906, and John Duke Coleridge (1879-1934) was chosen as the architect. The first phase, comprising the chancel, north chapel, transept and the lower stage of a projected bell tower, was completed by 1907, and the church gained its own parish in the same year. A series of windows by the Arts and Crafts designers Karl Parsons and Christopher Whall were installed in the unfinished church between 1908 and 1912. The three eastern bays of the nave were consecrated in 1915, but the two western bays were not built until 1929-31; the bell-tower was never completed and became in effect a south transept. There followed two additional stained glass windows: by Christopher Webb in 1945 and by Francis Skeat in 1950. A large vestry extension was added in 1964. A fire in 1999 destroyed the original high altar and reredos paintings.

Famous inhabitants

George Bernard Shaw, playwright, lived at "Blen Cathra" in Hindhead, now the site of St Edmund's School.
Sir Arthur Conan Doyle lived at "Undershaw" from 1897 to 1907. Here he wrote some of his most famous novels, including The Hound of the Baskervilles. Undershaw later became a hotel and restaurant, but this closed in 2004 and the property is now vacant and derelict. Conan Doyle was Hindhead Golf Club's first President in 1904.
Another author to live at Hindhead was the Canadian-born novelist Grant Allen (1848–99), who lived at "Hilltop". Conan Doyle was one of Allen's neighbours and became his friend; he completed Allen's novel Hilda Wade when Allen died. 
The scientist John Tyndall (1820-1893) lived and died in the village at Hindhead House, now on "Tyndalls", named after him. He is most famous for his work on the discovery of the Greenhouse Effect.
Peter Alliss, professional golfer and commentator, lives in Hindhead.

Government

For the purposes of local government, Hindhead is within the civil parish of Haslemere, the district of Waverley and the county of Surrey. Hindhead forms a ward for elections to Haslemere Town Council and Waverley Borough Council, and is part of the Waverley Western Villages electoral division for Surrey County Council elections. The ward elects a single county councillor, two district councillors and five town councillors.  
Hindhead is within the UK constituency of South West Surrey and the European constituency of South East England.

Transport

Until 2011, Hindhead village was situated on the main A3 road between London and Portsmouth. In that year, a £371 million bypass was completed, reducing the amount of traffic passing through the village. This bypass includes the  twin-bore tunnel, which is the longest non-estuarial tunnel in the UK.A3 Hindhead Tunnel - Mott MacDonald Project Page
The village is still served by the A287, between Hook and Haslemere, and the A333, a stretch of the former A3 that links the village south to the new bypass. The section of the old A3 north of Hindhead and alongside the Devil's Punch Bowl has since been dug up and the area returned to heathland.
Rail access to Hindhead is through Haslemere railway station, 

Nearest settlements

Neighbouring settlements are Beacon Hill (Hindhead, Surrey) (administratively part of Hindhead, while geographically separate) and Grayshott village. The town of Haslemere is  to the north-east.






