[[Henry Chadwick (writer)]]

CATEGORIES: National Baseball Hall of Fame inductees, American sportswriters, Baseball developers, Baseball writers, English emigrants to the United States, Burials at Green-Wood Cemetery, People from Exeter, 1824 births, 1908 deaths

Henry Chadwick (October 5, 1824 – April 20, 1908), an English-born American who is often called the "father of baseball", was a sportswriter, baseball statistician and historian. He edited the first baseball guide that was sold to the public. He is credited with creating box scores, as well as creating the abbreviation "K" that designates a strikeout. He is said to have created the statistics of batting average and earned run average (ERA). He was posthumously inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame.

Early life

Chadwick was born in Exeter, England. His grandfather, Andrew Chadwick, had been a close friend of theologian John Wesley. 24. His father, James Chadwick, was a supporter of the French Revolution who also tutored John Dalton in music and botany. 25. Biographer Andrew Schiff writes that Henry Chadwick "was not brought up to value possessions or with an understanding of commerce and trade; rather he received an education that was drenched in moral philosophy and science."Schiff, p. 26. 
Chadwick was the younger half brother of Sir Edwin Chadwick, England's sanitary philosopher who developed environmental measures and laws designed to counteract the effects of the Industrial Revolution. (Edwin Chadwick's mother had made James Chadwick a widower shortly after Edwin's birth.)Schiff, pp. 27–29. Chadwick moved to Brooklyn with his family at the age of 12. He became a frequent player of cricket and similar ball games such as rounders.  He began covering cricket for numerous local newspapers such as the Long Island Star.  
It is said that Chadwick first came across baseball in 1856 in New York as a young cricket reporter, while watching a match between New York's Eagle and Gotham clubs. In 1857 he focused his attention as a journalist and writer on baseball after joining the New York Clipper, and was also soon hired on to provide coverage for other New York papers including the Sunday Mercury. The national game, p. 356 (1911)  

Contributions to baseball

Promotion of the game

Chadwick was one of the prime movers in the rise of baseball to its unprecedented popularity at the turn of the 20th century. A keen amateur statistician and professional writer, he helped sculpt the public perception of the game, as well as providing the basis for the records of team's and player's achievements in the form of baseball statistics. He also served on baseball rules committees and influenced the game itself.
Chadwick edited The Beadle Dime Base-Ball Player, the first annual baseball guide on public sale, as well as the Spalding and Reach annual guides for a number of years and in this capacity promoted the game and influenced the infant discipline of sports journalism. In his 1861 Beadle guide, he listed totals of games played, outs, runs, home runs, and strikeouts for hitters on prominent clubs, the first database of its kind. His goal was to provide numerical evidence to prove what players helped or hurt a team to win.
In 1867 he accompanied the National Base Ball Club of Washington D.C. on their inaugural national tour, as their official scorer. The next year, Chadwick wrote the first hardcover baseball book, The Game of Base Ball. In 1874 was instrumental in organizing a tour of England which included games of both baseball and cricket.  In his role as journalist, he campaigned against the detrimental effects on the game of both alcohol and gambling.
Despite a friendship with Albert Spalding, Chadwick was scornful of the attempts to have Abner Doubleday declared the inventor of baseball.  "He means well", said Chadwick, "but he don't know".

Box scores and statistics

He is credited with devising the baseball box scoreHis Hall of Fame plaque states, in part: "Inventor of the box score. Author of the first rule-book ...  Chairman of rules committee in first nation-wide baseball organization."  Lederer, Rich. By the Numbers: Computer technology has deepened fans' passion with the game's statistics. Memories and Dreams (Vol. 33, No. 6; Winter 2011–2012, pp. 32–34). National Baseball Hall of Fame official magazine. (which he adapted from the cricket scorecard) for reporting game events. The first box score appeared in an 1859 issue of the Clipper. It was a grid with nine rows for players and nine columns for innings. The original box scores also created the often puzzling abbreviation for strikeout as "K" – "K" being the last letter of "struck" in "struck out".
Newspapers had previously tallied runs scored, but Chadwick's 1859 box score looked similar in structure to modern ones. Baseball researcher Bill James credits Chadwick's creation of the box score with his interest in the game, but he criticized Chadwick's omission of the walk from calculation of a player's batting average: ""What they failed to understand is that actually the batter has as much or a little more to do with when the walk occurs as the pitcher does. They ignored that element of it and that did distort the game for a lot of people." The box score was popularized in 1925 when Baseball Magazine republished Chadwick's 1859 Clipper article.
Chadwick is credited with devising statistical measures such as batting average and earned run average. Ironically, ERA originated not in the goal of measuring a pitcher's worth but to differentiate between runs caused by batting skill (hits) and lack of fielding skill (errors). He is also noted as believing fielding range to be a superior skill to avoiding errors.

Journalistic style

The following description of a game was written by Henry Chadwick and appeared in his Base Ball Memoranda.  It is typical of his style of sports journalism, and that of his time:

Later life

Late in life, Chadwick continued editing the Spalding Base Ball Guides and producing a column for the Brooklyn Daily Eagle. In late 1905, he wrote the editor of The New York Times to propose widening of the baseball bat to overcome the advantage that pitchers had established in the game. In his letter, Chadwick noted that some cricket experts had advocated for the narrowing of the cricket bat to bring balance to the advantage that belonged to the batter in that game.  
In the winter before the 1908 baseball season, Chadwick was struck by an automobile and was bedridden for several weeks. 215. He recovered and attended an exhibition game at the Polo Grounds the week before the season began. He caught a cold while at the game, and the illness worsened when he attended an Opening Day game at Washington Park in Brooklyn. 219. 
On April 19, Chadwick was moving furniture from the fourth floor of his apartment to the second floor when he fell unconscious. He was diagnosed with pneumonia and heart failure. He awakened briefly and asked about the game between Brooklyn and New York, but he died the next day. 219–20.

Legacy

For his contributions to the game of Baseball, he was elected to the Baseball Hall of Fame by the Veterans Committee in 1938. In 2009, the Society for American Baseball Research (SABR) established the Henry Chadwick Award to honor the outstanding contributions of baseball researchers. Bill James and John Thorn are among the award's recipients.  








