[[NTL Incorporated]]

CATEGORIES: Cable television companies, Companies established in 1992, Companies disestablished in 2006, Defunct Internet service providers, Defunct media companies of the United Kingdom, Defunct telecommunications companies of the United Kingdom, Virgin Media

NTL Incorporated, branded as ntl:, was a U.S.-listed British company founded in 1992, which provided cable television, cable internet and fixed-line cable telephone services. While NTL has its headquarters in New York City, the company's activities focus heavily on the United Kingdom, with operational headquarters in Hook, Hampshire.
NTL became the dominant cable operator in the United Kingdom, controlling more than 90% of the market. NTL also produced content through its Flextech subsidiary. In 2005 residential services generated 78% of NTL's revenue, and business services 22%.
In March 2006, NTL merged with fellow cable telecom company Telewest, and created 'NTL:Telewest', which then also merged with Virgin Mobile UK and Virgin. In February 2007, NTL:Telewest was rebranded as Virgin Media.

History

1992–2006

=NTL=

Barclay Knapp and George Blumenthal, the founders of the cellular network company Cellular Communications, Inc. (sold to Airtouch in 1996), established International CableTel in 1993. They founded CableTel in order to take advantage of the deregulation of the UK cable market. Initially, Cabletel acquired local cable franchises covering Guildford and parts of Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales. In 1996 CableTel acquired National Transcommunications Limited (NTL), the privatised UK Independent Broadcasting Authority transmission-network. In 1998 CableTel adopted "NTL" as its new name.
The company spent heavily: both on expanding its network and on acquiring rivals. The company also began to expand outside the UK in 2000, buying into markets on continental Europe and in Ireland.
A collapse of the telecommunications markets from mid-2000 dealt a serious blow to the company. This, combined with NTL's rapid acquisition of local cable-operators, led to severe integration problems. NTL, struggling to cope with rapid expansion and suffering from significant customer-service problems, then had to contend with the setting up in November 2002 of one of the UK's first consumer lobby-groups, nthellworld, with ntl:hell following shortly after. As a complementary move, a team of NTL employees founded www.co.
Devalued and struggling with debts of around $18bn, NTL had to seek Chapter 11 bankruptcy-protection in May 2002 in order to organise a refinancing deal. The company did not emerge from protection until January 2003, having converted around $11bn of debt into shares — technically, this amounted to the largest debt default in US corporate history. The company reduced its debt to $6.4bn. A re-organisation split NTL itself into NTL Inc. (covering the UK and Irish markets) and NTL Europe Inc. (for the French, Swiss and German parts of the corporation). New executives replaced the NTL president, CEO and co-founder Barclay Knapp, as well as Stephen Carter, the MD and COO.
After exiting from Chapter 11 protection NTL produced an operating profit. In 2004 it announced plans to split the broadcasting division off from the main company. In December 2004 NTL sold its broadcast-unit to a consortium led by Macquarie Communications Infrastructure Group (MCG) for £1.27 billion. (Macquarie renamed the division Arqiva in May 2005.) This sale allowed NTL to focus on its "core businesses" of providing communications packages and cable services.
In Autumn 2004, NTL purchased the remaining shares of the Internet service provider (ISP) virgin.net, originally a joint venture between NTL and Sir Richard Branson's Virgin Group[ref]
</ref>
By 2005 its UK network consisted of a 7,800 km fibre backbone with the potential to reach 8.4 million residential homes and around 610,000 businesses. In January of that year, NTL started rolling out Video On Demand. With content selected by NTL, this service covers genres including music videos, children's programming and adult entertainment. This provides an extension to the basic 'pay per view' services the company offered for film and sport content. The new service allows customers to rewind, fast forward and pause content.
Despite NTL Ireland turning a profit, in May 2005, NTL sold their Dublin, Galway, and Waterford cable business (which they had acquired in 1999 for €825 million from the Irish government) to UGC Europe for €325 million — this after having spent in excess of €100 million on network infrastructure (i.e. making a gross loss of €500 million - more than 50% - over what they paid). Liberty Global continued to use the NTL brand in Ireland, but was eventually merged with Chorus Communications and rebranded as UPC Ireland in May 2010.
By July 2005, NTL had cut its debt to £1.445 billion with an operating cashflow of £178 million. The company had 3.2 million customers buying at least one service from them, with the 1.4 million subscribers to broadband services making NTL the market leader in this field.

=Telewest=

NTL/Telewest merger

From late 2003 discussions commenced on a merger between Telewest and NTL. Thanks to their geographically different areas, NTL and Telewest had co-operated previously, as in re-directing potential customers living outside their respective areas. On 3 October 2005, NTL announced a USD$6 billion purchase of Telewest, forming one of the largest media companies in the UK. The merger agreement as structured would have left NTL having to negotiate with BBC Worldwide, the BBC's commercial arm, due to a change-of-ownership clause written into the agreement for UKTV, a joint venture with Telewest's Flextech content division. To prevent this, Telewest instead acquired NTL.
The parties completed the merger on 3 March 2006, making the merged company the UK's largest cable-provider, with more than 90% of the market. Once merged, the combined company renamed itself to ntl:Telewest, with ex-NTL shareholders controlling 75% of the stock and ex-Telewest shareholders 25%. Nine of the eleven directors of the new board came from NTL and two from Telewest.

Virgin Mobile merger

In December 2005 NTL and Virgin Mobile announced that talks had taken place regarding a merger.
Virgin Mobile's independent directors rejected the original bid of £817 million ($1.4 billion), taking the view that NTL's bid "undervalued the business". Sir Richard Branson reportedly expressed confidence that a re-structured deal could go ahead, and in January 2006 NTL increased its offer to £961m (372p per share). On 4 April 2006, NTL Incorporated announced a £962.4m recommended offer for Virgin Mobile. According to reports, Branson accepted a mix of shares and cash, making him a 10.7% shareholder of the combined company.
The takeover completed on 4 July 2006 creating the UK's first 'quadruple play' media company, bringing together television, Internet broadband, mobile-phone and fixed-line phone services. The deal included a 30-year exclusive branding agreement that will see NTL adopt the Virgin name across its consumer operations as it merges operations with its current Telewest brand. As a result, on 8 November 2006, NTL announced it would change its name to Virgin Media Plc.

Rumoured private equity bid

On 16 August 2006, The Times reported that the NTL Incorporated group could become the subject of a £10bn-takeover-bid from a private-equity firm consortium made up of Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, Bain, Cinven, Blackstone and Providence Private Equity with a formal approach expected within a fortnight. The £10bn figure would include £6bn worth of debt already on the NTL balance-sheet. Additional new banking facilities would probably fund the private-equity bid. As of January 2007 no such bid has materialised.

ITV merger

In November 2006, NTL announced that it had approached commercial television broadcaster ITV about a proposed merger BSkyB effectively blocked the merger on 12 November 2006, when it controversially bought a 17.9% stake in ITV plc,[ref]
