[[Indian religions]]

CATEGORIES: Indian religions, Religion in India, Religious comparison

Indian religions are the religions that originated in the Indian subcontinent; namely Hinduism, Jainism, Buddhism and Sikhism. J., Classification of religions: Geographical, Encyclopædia Britannica, 2007. Accessed: 15 July 2010 These religions are also classified as Eastern religions. Although Indian religions are connected through the history of India, they constitute a wide range of religious communities, and are not confined to the Indian subcontinent.
Evidence attesting to prehistoric religion in the Indian subcontinent derives from scattered Mesolithic rock paintings. The Harappan people of the Indus Valley Civilisation, which lasted from 3300–1300 BCE (mature period, 2600-1900 BCE), was an early urbanised culture which predates the Vedic religion. The Dravidian peoples and Dravidian languages of South India also predate the Vedic religion.
The documented history of Indian religions begins with the historical Vedic religion, the religious practices of the early Indo-Aryans, which were collected and later redacted into the Vedas. The period of the composition, redaction and commentary of these texts is known as the Vedic period, which lasted from roughly 1750 to 500 BCE.
The Reform Period between 800-200 BCE marks a "turning point between the Vedic religion and Hindu religions". This period also saw the writing of the Upanishads and the rise of Vedanta.
The Puranic Period (200 BCE - 500 CE) and Early Medieval period (500-1100 CE) gave rise to new configurations of Hinduism, especially bhakti and Shaivism, Shaktism, Vaishnavism, Smarta and much smaller groups like the conservative Shrauta.
The early Islamic period (1100-1500 CE) also gave rise to new movements. Sikhism was founded in the 15th century on the teachings of Guru Nanak and the nine successive Sikh Gurus in Northern India. The vast majority of its adherents originate in the Punjab region.
With the colonial dominance of the British a reinterpretation and synthesis of Hinduism arose, which aided the Indian independence movement.

History

Periodisation

Prevedic religions (before c. 1750 BCE)

=Prehistory=

Evidence attesting to prehistoric religion in the Indian subcontinent derives from scattered Mesolithic rock paintings such as at Bhimbetka, depicting dances and rituals. Neolithic agriculturalists inhabiting the Indus River Valley buried their dead in a manner suggestive of spiritual practices that incorporated notions of an afterlife and belief in magic.

=Indus Valley Civilisation=

The Harappan people of the Indus Valley Civilisation, which lasted from 3300–1300 BCE (mature period, 2600-1900 BCE) and was centered around the Indus and Ghaggar-Hakra river valleys, may have worshiped an important mother goddess symbolising fertility, a concept that has recently been challenged. Clark, The social lives of figurines : recontextualising the third millennium BCE terracotta figurines from Harappa, Pakistan. PhD dissertation, Harvard 2007. Excavations of Indus Valley Civilisation sites show small tablets with animals and altars, indicating rituals associated with animal sacrifice.
Figures of nude male deities excavated at Indus Valley civilization are interpreted as Jain yogi. Recently, Acarya Vidyanadji tried to prove the prevalence of Jainism in ancient India through detailed research on various artifacts, seals and other relics from Indus Valley Civilization.
Ram Prasad Chanda, who supervised Indus Valley Civilisation excavations, statesIn his article "Mohen-jo-Daro: Sindh 5000 Years Ago" in Modern Review (August, 1932) that,Patil, Bal In: Jaya Gommatesa, Hindi Granth Karyalay : Mumbai, 2006 ISBN 81-88769-10-X 
The archeological evidence are, however, problematic and can have multiple interpretations. The standing posture is too generic to be affirmatively associated with a yogic posture or any religion. The evidence is not enough to say with full conformity that Jainism existed in the Indus Valley Civilization.

=Dravidian culture=

According to Zimmer,

Dravidian religion refers to a broad range of deities and belief systems nowadays still found in South India, South West India and some parts of East India. Scholars like Arumuka Navalar worked to subsume native deities in the Vedic pantheon. The Dravidian worship of village deities is recognised as a survival of the pre-Brahmanic Dravidian religion.  A large portion of these deities continue to be worshipped in the Village deities of Tamil Nadu and Sri Lanka, and their subsequent influence in South-east Asia examples of which include the Mariamman temples in Singapore and Vietnam. Worship of anthills, snakes and other forms of guardian deities and heroes are still worshiped in the Konkan coast, Maharashtra proper and a few other parts of India including North India which traces its origins to ancient Dravidian religion which has been influencing formation of mainstream Hinduism for thousands of years.

Vedic period (1750 BCE-800 BCE)

The documented history of Indian religions begins with the historical Vedic religion, the religious practices of the early Indo-Aryans, which were collected and later redacted into the Samhitas (usually known as the Vedas), four canonical collections of hymns or mantras composed in archaic Sanskrit. These texts are the central shruti (revealed) texts of Hinduism. The period of the composition, redaction and commentary of these texts is known as the Vedic period, which lasted from roughly 1750 to 500 BCE.
The Vedic Period is most significant for the composition of the four Vedas, Brahmanas and the older Upanishads (both presented as discussions on the rituals, mantras and concepts found in the four Vedas), which today are some of the most important canonical texts of Hinduism, and are the codification of much of what developed into the core beliefs of Hinduism. Jamison and Michael Witzel in Arvind Sharma, editor, The Study of Hinduism. University of South Carolina Press, 2003, page 65
Some modern Hindu scholars use the "Vedic religion" synonymously with "Hinduism."History Of Ancient India (portraits Of A Nation), 1/e By Kamlesh Kapur According to Sundararajan, Hinduism is also known as the Vedic religion.P. 382 Hindu Spirituality: Vedas Through Vedanta, Volume 1 edited by K. R. Sundararajan, Bithika Mukerji Other authors state that the Vedas contain "the fundamental truths about Hindu Dharma"Ashim Kumar Bhattacharyya declares that Vedas contain the fundamental truths about Hindu Dharma; P. 6Hindu Dharma: Introduction to Scriptures And Theology By Ashim Kumar Bhattacharyya which is called "the modern version of the ancient Vedic Dharma"P. 46 I Am Proud To Be A Hindu By J. Agarwal The Arya Samajis recognize the Vedic religion as true Hinduism.P. 41 Hinduism: An Alphabetical Guide By Roshen Dalal Nevertheless, according to Jamison and Witzel,


=Early Vedic period - early Vedic compositions (c. 1750-1200 BCE)=

The rishis, the composers of the hymns of the Rigveda, were considered inspired poets and seers.
The mode of worship was the performance of Yajna, sacrifices which involved sacrifice and sublimation of the havana sámagri (herbal preparations) in the fire, accompanied by the singing of Samans and 'mumbling' of Yajus, the sacrificial mantras. The sublime meaning of the word yajna is derived from the Sanskrit verb yaj, which has a three-fold meaning of worship of deities (devapujana), unity (saògatikaraña) and charity (dána).G. Axiological Approach to the Vedas. Northern Book Centre, 1986. P. 81. ISBN 81-85119-18-x. An essential element was the sacrificial fire - the divine Agni - into which oblations were poured, as everything offered into the fire was believed to reach God.
Central concepts in the Vedas are Satya and Rta. Satya is derived from Sat, the present participle of the verbal root as, "to be, to exist, to live". Conformity with Ṛta would enable progress whereas its violation would lead to punishment. Panikkar remarks:
The term rta is inherited from the Proto-Indo-Iranian religion, the religion of the Indo-Iranian peoples prior to the earliest Vedic (Indo-Aryan) and Zoroastrian (Iranian) scriptures. Asha. to Zoroastrian theology and doctrine. The term "dharma" was already used in Brahmanical thought, were it was conceived as an aspect of Rta. (1982). The Conception of Punishment in Early Indian Literature. Ontario: Wilfrid Laurier University Press. P. 42-45. ISBN 0-919812-15-5.
Major philosophers of this era were Rishis Narayana, Kanva, Rishaba, Vamadeva, and Angiras.P. 285 Indian sociology through Ghurye, a dictionary By S. Devadas Pillai

=Middle Vedic period (c. 1200-850 BCE)=

During the Middle Vedic period Rgveda X, the mantras of the Yajurveda and the older Brahmana texts were composed.

=Late Vedic period (from 850 BCE)=

The Vedic religion evolved into Hinduism and Vedanta, a religious path considering itself the 'essence' of the Vedas, interpreting the Vedic pantheon as a unitary view of the universe with 'God' (Brahman) seen as immanent and transcendent in the forms of Ishvara and Brahman. This post-Vedic systems of thought, along with the Upanishads and later texts like epics (namely Gita of Mahabharat), is a major component of modern Hinduism. The ritualistic traditions of Vedic religion are preserved in the conservative Śrauta tradition.

Sanskritization

Since Vedic times, "people from many strata of society throughout the subcontinent tended to adapt their religious and social life to Brahmanic norms", a process sometimes called Sanskritization. It is reflected in the tendency to identify local deities with the gods of the Sanskrit texts.

Classical or reform period (c. 800-200 BCE)

During the time of the shramanic reform movements "many elements of the Vedic religion were lost".

=Late Vedic period - Brahmanas and Upanishads - Vedanta (850-500 BCE)=

The late Vedic period (9th to 6th centuries BCE) marks the beginning of the Upanisadic or Vedantic period. later the Sanskrit epics, still later followed by the Puranas.
Upanishads form the speculative-philosophical basis of classical Hinduism and are known as Vedanta (conclusion of the Vedas).
Scholars believe that Parsva, the 23rd Jain tirthankara lived during this period in 9th century BCE.

=Rise of Shramanic tradition (7th to 5th centuries BCE)=

Jainism and Buddhism belong to the sramana tradition. These religions rose into prominence in 700-500 BCE 
The shramana movements challenged the orthodoxy of the rituals. Mahavira, proponent of Jainism, and  Buddha (c. 563-483), founder of Buddhism were the most prominent icons of this movement.
Shramana gave rise to the concept of the cycle of birth and death, the concept of samsara, and the concept of liberation. Olivelle, Patrick. 2003. The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism. Malden: Blackwell. pg. 273-4. In Buddhist texts Buddha is presented as rejecting avenues of salvation as "pernicious views". Reprint by Motilal Banarsidass Publ., 1990, page 139.

==Jainism==

Jainism was established by a lineage of 24 enlightened beings culminating with Parsva (9th century BCE) and Mahavira (6th century BCE). ISBN 1-933316-22-5
The 24th Tirthankara of Jainism, Mahavira, stressed five vows, including ahimsa (non-violence), satya (truthfulness), asteya (non-stealing) and aparigraha (non-attachment). Jain orthodoxy believes the teachings of the Tirthankaras predates all known time and scholars believe Parshva, accorded status as the 23rd Tirthankara, was a historical figure. The Vedas are believed to have documented a few Tirthankaras and an ascetic order similar to the shramana movement.B.Tauris : London ISBN 1-86064-148-2

==Buddhism==

Buddhism was historically founded by Siddhartha Gautama, a Kshatriya prince-turned-ascetic, and was spread beyond India through missionaries. It later experienced a decline in India, but survived in Nepal and Sri Lanka, and remains more widespread in Southeast and East Asia.
Gautama Buddha, who was called an "awakened one" (Buddha), was born into the Shakya clan living at Kapilavastu and Lumbini in what is now southern Nepal. The Buddha was born at Lumbini, as emperor Asoka's Lumbini pillar records, just before the kingdom of Magadha (which traditionally is said to have lasted from c. 546–324 BCE) rose to power.  The Shakyas claimed Angirasa and Gautama Maharishi lineage,The Life of Buddha as Legend and History, by Edward Joseph Thomas via descent from the royal lineage of Ayodhya.

=Spread of Jainism and Buddhism (500-200 BCE)=

Both Jainism and Buddhism spread throughout India during the period of the Magadha empire.
Buddhism in India spread during the reign of Ashoka of the Maurya Empire, who patronised Buddhist teachings and unified the Indian subcontinent in the 3rd century BCE. He sent missionaries abroad, allowing Buddhism to spread across Asia.. Jainism began its golden period during the reign of Emperor Kharavela of Kalinga in the 2nd century BCE.

Epic and Early Puranic Period (200 BCE-500 CE)

Flood and Muesse take the period between 200 BCE and 500 BCE as a separate period,
According to Hiltebeitel, a period of consolidation in the development of Hinduism took place between the time of the late Vedic Upanishad (c. 500 BCE) and the period of the rise of the Guptas (c. 320-467 CE), which he calls the "Hindus synthesis", "Brahmanic synthesis", or "orthodox synthesis". It develops in interaction with other religions and peoples:

The end of the Vedantic period around the 2nd century CE spawned a number of branches that furthered Vedantic philosophy, and which ended up being seminaries in their own right. Prominent amongst these developers were Yoga, Dvaita, Advaita and the medieval Bhakti movement.

=Smriti=

The Hinduist smriti texts of the period between 200 BCE-100 CE proclaim the authority of the Vedas, and acceptance of the Vedas becomes a central criterium for defining Hinduism over and against the heterodoxies, which rejected the Vedas.

=Vedanta - Brahma sutras (200 BCE)=

In earlier writings, Sanskrit 'Vedānta' simply referred to the Upanishads, the most speculative and philosophical of the Vedic texts. However, in the medieval period of Hinduism, the word Vedānta came to mean the school of philosophy that interpreted the Upanishads. Traditional Vedānta considers scriptural evidence, or shabda pramāna, as the most authentic means of knowledge, while perception, or pratyaksa, and logical inference, or anumana, are considered to be subordinate (but valid).
The systematisation of Vedantic ideas into one coherent treatise was undertaken by Badarāyana in the Brahma Sutras which was composed around 200 BCE. The cryptic aphorisms of the Brahma Sutras are open to a variety of interpretations. This resulted in the formation of numerous Vedanta schools, each interpreting the texts in its own way and producing its own sub-commentaries.

=Indian philosophy=

After 200 CE several schools of thought were formally codified in Indian philosophy, including Samkhya, Yoga, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Mimāṃsā and Advaita Vedanta.. Other Indian philosophies generally regarded as atheistic include Samkhya and Mimāṃsā.

=Hindu literature=

Two of Hinduism's most revered epics, the Mahabharata and Ramayana were compositions of this period. Devotion to particular deities was reflected from the composition of texts composed to their worship. For example the Ganapati Purana was written for devotion to Ganapati (or Ganesh). Popular deities of this era were Shiva, Vishnu, Durga, Surya, Skanda, and Ganesh (including the forms/incarnations of these deities.)
In the latter Vedantic period, several texts were also composed as summaries/attachments to the Upanishads. These texts collectively called as Puranas allowed for a divine and mythical interpretation of the world, not unlike the ancient Hellenic or Roman religions. Legends and epics with a multitude of gods and goddesses with human-like characteristics were composed.

=Jainism and Buddhism=

The Gupta period marked a watershed of Indian culture: the Guptas performed Vedic sacrifices to legitimize their rule, but they also patronized Buddhism, which continued to provide an alternative to Brahmanical orthodoxy. Buddhism continued to have a significant presence in some regions of India until the 12th century.
There were several Buddhistic kings who worshiped Vishnu, such as the Gupta Empire, Pala Empire, Malla Empire, Somavanshi, and Sattvahana. 116, History of the Andhras up to 1565 A. D. Buddhism survived followed by Hindus. National GeographicJanuary 2008, VOL. 213, #1

=Tantra=

Tantrism originated in the early centuries CE and developed into a fully articulated tradition by the end of the Gupta period. According to Michaels this was the "Golden Age of Hinduism"

Medieval and Late Puranic Period (500–1500 CE)

=Late-Classical Period (c. 650-1100 CE)=

After the end of the Gupta Empire and the collapse of the Harsha Empire, power became decentralised in India. Several larger kingdoms emerged, with "countless vasal states".
The disintegration of central power also lead to regionalisation of religiosity, and religious rivalry.

==Vedanta==

In the same period Vedanta changed, incorporating Buddhist thought and its emphasis on consciousness and the working of the mind.

==Buddhism==

Between 400 CE and 1000 CE Hinduism expanded as the decline of Buddhism in India continued. Buddhism subsequently became effectively extinct in India but survived in Nepal and Sri Lanka.

==Bhakti==

The Bhakti movement began with the emphasis on the worship of God, regardless of one's status - whether priestly or laypeople, men or women, higher social status or lower social status. The movements were mainly centered around the forms of Vishnu (Rama and Krishna) and Shiva. There were however popular devotees of this era of Durga. Female saints include figures like Akkamadevi, Lalleshvari and Molla.
The "alwar" or "azhwars" ( The most popular Vaishnava teacher of the south was Ramanuja, while of the north it was Ramananda.
Several important icons were women. For example, within the Mahanubhava sect, the women outnumbered the men,Ramaswamy, P. 204 Walking Naked and administration was many times composed mainly of women. 210 Walking Naked Mirabai is the most popular female saint in India.
Sri Vallabha Acharya (1479–1531) is a very important figure from this era. He founded the Shuddha Advaita (Pure Non-dualism) school of Vedanta thought.
According to The Centre for Cultural Resources and Training,

=Early Islamic rule (c. 1100-1500 CE)=

In the 12th and 13th centuries, Turks and Afghans invaded parts of northern India and established the Delhi Sultanate in the former Rajput holdings. The Sultanate ushered in a period of Indian cultural renaissance. The resulting "Indo-Muslim" fusion of cultures left lasting syncretic monuments in architecture, music, literature, religion, and clothing.

==Bhakti movement==

During the 14th to 17th centuries, a great Bhakti movement swept through central and northern India, initiated by a loosely associated group of teachers or sants. Ramananda, Ravidas, Srimanta Sankardeva, Chaitanya Mahaprabhu, Vallabhacharya, Surdas, Meera Bai, Kabir, Tulsidas, Namdev, Dnyaneshwar, Tukaram and other mystics spearheaded the Bhakti movement in the North while Annamacharya, Bhadrachala Ramadas, Tyagaraja among others propagated Bhakti in the South. They taught that people could cast aside the heavy burdens of ritual and caste, and the subtle complexities of philosophy, and simply express their overwhelming love for God. This period was also characterized by a spate of devotional literature in vernacular prose and poetry in the ethnic languages of the various Indian states or provinces.

==Lingayathism==

Lingayatism is a distinct Shaivite tradition in India, established in the 12th century by the philosopher and social reformer Basavanna.
The adherents of this tradition are known as Lingayats. The term is derived from Lingavantha in Kannada, meaning 'one who wears Ishtalinga on their body' (Ishtalinga is the representation of the God). In Lingayat theology, Ishtalinga is an oval-shaped emblem symbolising Parasiva, the absolute reality. Contemporary Lingayatism follows a progressive reform–based theology propounded, which has great influence in South India, especially in the state of Karnataka.M. R. Sakhare, History and Philosophy of the Lingayat Religion, Prasaranga, Karnataka University, Dharwad

==Unifying Hinduism==

According to Nicholson, already between the 12th and 16th century,

The tendency of "a blurring of philosophical distinctions"  has also been noted by Burley.

==Sikhism (15th century)==

Sikhism originated in 15th-century Northern India with the teachings of Nanak and nine successive gurus. The principal belief in Sikhism is faith in Vāhigurū— represented by the sacred symbol of  one god. Sikhism's traditions and teachings are distinctly associated with the history, society and culture of the Punjab. Adherents of Sikhism are known as Sikhs (students or disciples) and number over 27 million across the world.

Modern period (1500 - present)

=Early modern period=

According to Gavin Flood, the modern period in India begins with the first contacts with western nations around 1500.

=Modern India (after 1800)=

==Hinduism==

In the 19th century, under influence of the colonial forces, a synthetic vision of Hinduism was formulated by Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Swami Vivekananda, Sri Aurobindo, Sarvepalli Radhakrishnan and Mahatma Gandhi.
The modern era has given rise to dozens of Hindu saints with international influence. Representing traditional Gaudiya Vaishnavism, Prabhupada founded the Hare Krishna movement, another organisation with a global reach. In late 18th-century India, Swaminarayan founded the Swaminarayan Sampraday. Anandamurti, founder of the Ananda Marga, has also influenced many worldwide. Through the international influence of all of these new Hindu denominations, many Hindu practices such as yoga, meditation, mantra, divination, and vegetarianism have been adopted by new converts.

==Jainism==

Jainism continues to be an influential religion and Jain communities live in Indian states Gujarat, Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Tamil Nadu.  Jains authored several classical books in different Indian languages for a considerable period of time.

==Buddhism==

The Dalit Buddhist movement (dubbed as Navayana by certain Ambedkerites)Omvedt, Gail. Buddhism in India : Challenging Brahmanism and Caste. 3rd ed. London/New Delhi/Thousand Oaks: Sage, 2003. pages: 2, 3–7, 8, 14–15, 19, 240, 266, 271 is a 19th- and 20th-century Buddhist revival movement in India. It received its most substantial impetus from B. R. Ambedkar's call for the conversion of Dalits to Buddhism, to escape a caste-based society that considered them to be the lowest in the hierarchy.

Similarities and differences

According to Tilak, the religions of India can be interpreted "differentially" or "integrally",

Similarities

Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism share certain key concepts, which are interpreted differently by different groups and individuals.

=Dharma=

Frawley and Malhotra use the term "Dharmic traditions" to highlight the similarities between the various Indian religions. and can be

According to Paul Hacker, as described by Halbfass, the term "dharma"

The emphasis on the similarities and integral unity of the dharmic faiths has been criticised for neglecting the vast differences between and even within the various Indian religions and traditions. of Neo-Vedanta: 


=Soteriology=

Hinduism, Buddhism, Jainism and Sikhism share the concept of moksha, liberation from the cycle of rebirth.

=Ritual=

Common traits can also be observed in ritual. The head-anointing ritual of abhiseka is of importance in three of these distinct traditions, excluding Sikhism (in Buddhism it is found within Vajrayana). In literature, many classical narratives and purana have Hindu, Buddhist or Jain versions.c.f. Encyclopædia Britannica, s.v. "Jainism > Jainism, Hinduism, and Buddhism" All four traditions have notions of karma, dharma, samsara, moksha and various forms of Yoga.

=Mythology=

Rama is a heroic figure in all of these religions. In Hinduism he is the God-incarnate in the form of a princely king; in Buddhism, he is a Bodhisattva-incarnate; in Jainism, he is the perfect human being. Among the Buddhist Ramayanas are: Vessantarajataka,Pollock, P. 661 Literary Cultures in History: Reamker, Ramakien, Phra Lak Phra Lam, Hikayat Seri Rama etc.  There also exists the Khamti Ramayana among the Khamti tribe of Asom wherein Rama is an Avatar of a Bodhisattva who incarnates to punish the demon king Ravana (B. The Tai Ramayana is another book retelling the divine story in Asom.

Differences

Critics point out that there exist vast differences between and even within the various Indian religions.

=Dharma=

For a Hindu, dharma is his duty. For a Jain, dharma is righteousness, his conduct. For a Buddhist, dharma is usually taken to be the Buddha's teachings.

=Mythology=

Indian mythology also reflects the competition between the various Indian religions. A popular story tells how Vajrapani kills Mahesvara, a manifestation of Shiva depicted as an evil being.

Āstika and nāstika categorisation

Āstika and nāstika are variously-defined terms sometimes used to categorise Indian religions. The traditional definition, followed by Adi Shankara, classifies religions and persons as āstika and nāstika according to whether they accept the authority of the main Hindu texts, the Vedas, as supreme revealed scriptures, or not. By this definition, Nyaya, Vaisheshika, Samkhya, Yoga, Purva Mimamsa and Vedanta are classified as āstika schools, while Charvaka is classified as a nāstika school. Buddhism and Jainism are also thus classified as nāstika religions since they do not accept the authority of the Vedas.
Another set of definitions—notably distinct from the usage of Hindu philosophy—loosely characterise āstika as "theist" and nāstika as "atheist". By these definitions, Sāṃkhya can be considered a nāstika philosophy, though it is traditionally classed among the Vedic āstika schools. From this point of view, Buddhism and Jainism remain nāstika religions.
Buddhists and Jains have disagreed that they are nastika and have redefined the phrases āstika and nāstika in their own view. Jains assign the term nastika to one who is ignorant of the meaning of the religious texts,Page i, Forms of Indian Philosophical Literature and Other Papers by V.S. Kambi or those who deny the existence of the soul was well-known to the Jainas.P. 163 Mahāvīra: His Life and Teachings by Bimala Churn Law

Status of non-Hindus in the Republic of India

The inclusion of Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs within Hinduism is part of the Indian legal system. The 1955 Hindu Marriage Act "defines as Hindus all Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs and anyone who is not a Christian, Muslim, Parsee or Jew".
In a judicial reminder, the Indian Supreme Court observed Sikhism and Jainism to be sub-sects or special faiths within the larger Hindu fold,Supreme Court observation, Bal Patil vs. Union of India, Dec 2005
However, some individual states have over the past few decades differed on whether Jains, Buddhists and Sikhs are religious minorities or not, by either pronouncing judgments or passing legislation. One example is the judgment passed by the Supreme Court in 2006, in a case pertaining to the state of Uttar Pradesh, which declared Jainism to be indisputably distinct from Hinduism, but mentioned that, "The question as to whether the Jains are part of the Hindu religion is open to debate.(para 25, Committee of Management Kanya Junior High School Bal Vidya Mandir, Etah, U.P. v. Sachiv, U.P. Basic Shiksha Parishad, Allahabad, U.P. and Ors., Per Dalveer Bhandari J., Civil Appeal No. 9595 of 2003, decided On: 21.08.2006, Supreme Court of India) 
Another example is the Gujarat Freedom of Religion Bill, that is an amendment to a legislation that sought to define Jains and Buddhists as denominations within Hinduism.



Notes



Sources

Printed sources

Web-sources

Further reading




