[[Imaginary number]]

CATEGORIES: Complex numbers

An imaginary number is a number that can be written as a real number multiplied by the imaginary unit .[ref]
, Chapter 2, p 38
[/ref] The square of an imaginary number Extract of page 11.2), imaginary numbers produce negative real numbers when squared.
An imaginary number  are called, respectively, the real part and the imaginary part of the complex number. Imaginary numbers can therefore be thought of as complex numbers whose real part is zero. The name "imaginary number" was coined in the 17th century as a derogatory term, as such numbers were regarded by some as fictitious or useless. The term "imaginary number" now means simply a complex number with a real part equal to 0, that is, a number of the form bi.

History

Although Greek mathematician and engineer Heron of Alexandria is noted as the first to have conceived these numbers,, discusses ambiguities of meaning in imaginary expressions in historical context.  The use of imaginary numbers was not widely accepted until the work of Leonhard Euler (1707–1783) and Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855). The geometric significance of complex numbers as points in a plane was first described by Caspar Wessel (1745–1818).[ref]
, Chapter 10, page 382
[/ref]
In 1843 a mathematical physicist, William Rowan Hamilton, extended the idea of an axis of imaginary numbers in the plane to a three-dimensional space of quaternion imaginaries.
With the development of quotient rings of polynomial rings, the concept behind an imaginary number became more substantial, but then one also finds other imaginary numbers such as the j of tessarines which has a square of +1. This idea first surfaced with the articles by James Cockle beginning in 1848.James Cockle (1848) "On Certain Functions Resembling Quaternions and on a New Imaginary in Algebra", London-Dublin-Edinburgh Philosophical Magazine, series 3, 33:435–9 and Cockle (1849) "On a New Imaginary in Algebra", Philosophical Magazine 34:37–47

Geometric interpretation

In this representation, multiplication by –1 corresponds to a rotation of 180 degrees about the origin. Multiplication by . In general, multiplying by a complex number is the same as rotating around the origin by the complex number's argument, followed by a scaling by its magnitude.

Multiplication of square roots

Care must be used in multiplying square roots of negative numbers. For example,[ref].
Chapter VI, §I.2[/ref] the following reasoning is incorrect:





Bibliography




