[[David Gilmour]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Living people, Pink Floyd members, English atheists, English guitarists, English male singers, English rock singers, English multi-instrumentalists, English rock guitarists, English singer-songwriters, English songwriters, Ivor Novello Award winners, Pedal steel guitarists, Slide guitarists, Alumni of Anglia Ruskin University, People educated at The Perse School, English philanthropists, People from Cambridge, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Lead guitarists, Progressive rock guitarists, Music in Cambridge, Weissenborn players, David Gilmour, Harvest Records artists, Rock and Roll Hall of Fame inductees, Musicians from Cambridgeshire

David Jon Gilmour, 
In addition to his work with Pink Floyd, Gilmour has produced a variety of artists, and has enjoyed a successful career as a solo artist. He has also been actively involved with many charities. In 2005, Gilmour was appointed CBE for his services to music. In 2011, Rolling Stone magazine ranked him number 14 in their list of the greatest guitarists of all time.

Early life

David Jon Gilmour was born on 6 March 1946, in Cambridge, England.
Gilmour's parents encouraged him to pursue his interest in music, and in 1954 he bought his first single, Bill Haley's "Rock Around the Clock".
In 1962, Gilmour began studying A-Level modern languages at Cambridge Technical College.
Gilmour travelled to France in mid 1967 with Rick Wills and Willie Wilson, formerly of Jokers Wild. The trio performed under the band name Flowers, then Bullitt; they were not successful. After hearing their uninspired covers of current chart hits, club owners were reluctant to pay them, and soon after their arrival in Paris, thieves stole their equipment.

Pink Floyd

In late December 1967, drummer Nick Mason approached Gilmour and asked him if he would be interested in joining Pink Floyd. He accepted and soon afterward became their fifth member; they initially intended to continue with Barrett as a nonperforming songwriter.
After Barrett's departure, Gilmour sang much of Pink Floyd's lead vocals; Waters and keyboard player Richard Wright also occasionally sang lead. After the successes of The Dark Side of the Moon and Wish You Were Here, Waters took greater control of the band, writing and singing lead on most of Animals and The Wall. Wright was fired during the sessions for The Wall, and the relationship between Gilmour and Waters would further deteriorate during the making of the eponymous film, and later during recording sessions for  The Final Cut. The last band performance of The Wall took place on 16 June 1981, at Earls Court, London; it was Pink Floyd's last appearance with Waters until the band's reunion on 2 July 2005, at the Live 8 concert in London's Hyde Park, 24 years later.
By the late 1970s, Gilmour began to think that his musical talents were being underused by Pink Floyd, so in 1978 he channeled his ideas into the eponymous solo album, David Gilmour, which showcased his guitar playing and songwriting skills. Music written during the finishing stages of the album, but too late to be used, were incorporated into song by Waters, which became "Comfortably Numb", which was included on The Wall.
In 1985, Waters declared that Pink Floyd were "a spent force creatively". The majority of the two most recent Pink Floyd albums, as well as Gilmour's 2006 solo release On an Island, were recorded there.
On 2 July 2005, Gilmour played with Pink Floyd—including Roger Waters—at Live 8. The performance caused a temporary sales increase of Pink Floyd's album Echoes: The Best of Pink Floyd.
On 3 February 2006, he announced in an interview with the Italian newspaper La Repubblica that Pink Floyd would most likely never tour or write material together again. He said: "I think enough is enough. I am 60 years old. I don't have the will to work as much any more. Pink Floyd was an important part in my life, I have had a wonderful time, but it's over. For me it's much less complicated to work alone."
Regarding agreeing to play at Live 8, he said: "There was more than one reason, firstly to support the cause. The second one is the energy-consuming and uncomfortable relationship between Roger and me that I was carrying along in my heart. That is why we wanted to perform and to leave the trash behind. Thirdly, I might have regretted it if I declined." On 20 February 2006, Gilmour commented again on Pink Floyd's future when he was interviewed by Billboard. My plans are to do my concerts and put my solo record out."
In December 2006, Gilmour released a tribute to Syd Barrett, who had died on 7 July of that year, in the form of his own version of Pink Floyd's first single "Arnold Layne".
Since their Live 8 appearance in 2005, Gilmour has repeatedly said that there will be no Pink Floyd reunion. With the death of Pink Floyd keyboardist Richard Wright in September 2008, another reunion of the core group members became impossible.

Musical style

Gilmour is primarily regarded as a lead guitarist. His own solo style is often characterized by blues-influenced phrasing, expressive note bends and sustain.
Early in his career with Pink Floyd, Gilmour played a multitude of Fender Stratocasters. He recorded one of his guitar solos, for "Another Brick in the Wall, Part 2", in one take using no editing or mixing using a 1955 Gibson Les Paul Gold Top guitar equipped with P-90 pick-ups. In 1996, Gilmour was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame as a member of Pink Floyd. Gilmour's solo on "Comfortably Numb" was voted as one of the  greatest guitar solos of all time in several polls by listeners and critics.David Gilmour's Guitar Solo is Number 1 (Musicjot)/
Although mainly known for his guitar work, Gilmour is also a proficient multi-instrumentalist. He also played bass guitar on many Pink Floyd tracks, keyboards, synthesiser, banjo, lap steel, mandolin, harmonica, and drums on the Syd Barrett solo track "Dominoes". He also plays the saxophone.
Many critics have been very favourable towards Gilmour and his style, music critic Alan di Perna has praised Gilmour's guitar work as being an integral element of Pink Floyd's sound.rollingstone." In a 2006 interview with Gilmour, he commented on his playing technique: "My fingers make a distinctive sound ... they aren't very fast, but I think I am instantly recognisable ... The way I play melodies is connected to things like Hank Marvin and the Shadows".
In 2006, writer for Guitar World, Jimmy Brown described Gilmour's playing style as "characterised by simple, huge-sounding riffs; gutsy, well-paced solos; and rich, ambient chordal textures."
According to Brown, Gilmour's solos on "Money", "Time" and "Comfortably Numb" "cut through the mix like a laser beam through fog." Brown described the "Time" solo as "a masterpiece of phrasing and motivic development ... Gilmour paces himself throughout and builds upon his initial idea by leaping into the upper register with gut-wrenching one-and-one-half-step 'over bends', soulful triplet arpeggios and a typically impeccable bar vibrato." Brown described Gilmour's sense of phrasing as intuitive, singling it out as perhaps his best asset as a lead guitarist. Gilmour explained how he achieved his signature tone: "I usually use a fuzz box, a delay and a bright EQ setting ... get singing sustain ... you need to play loud—at or near the feedback threshold. It's just so much more fun to play ... when bent notes slice right through you like a razor blade."

Solo projects

Gilmour has recorded four solo albums, all four of which charted in the US Top 40: 2006's On an Island peaked at number 6 in 2006, 2008's Live in Gdansk peaked at number 26, his 1978 self-titled solo debut peaked at number 29 in 1978 and 1984's About Face peaked number 32 in 1984.
Taking time off from Pink Floyd's schedule, Gilmour also took up various roles as a producer, sideman and even concert sound engineer for a wide variety of acts which included former bandmate Syd Barrett, Paul McCartney, Kate Bush, Berlin, John Martyn, Grace Jones, Tom Jones, Elton John, Eric Clapton, B. B. King, Seal, Sam Brown, Jools Holland, Bob Dylan, Pete Townshend, the Who, Supertramp, Levon Helm, Robbie Robertson, Alan Parsons, Peter Cetera, and various charity groups among others.
In 1985, Gilmour was a member of Bryan Ferry's band. He played on Ferry's album Boys and Girls, as well as the song "Is Your Love Strong Enough" for the US release of the Ridley Scott-Tom Cruise film Legend. A music video for the latter was created, incorporating Ferry and Gilmour into footage from the film (released as a bonus on the 2002 "Ultimate Edition" DVD release). Later that year, Gilmour played with Ferry at the London Live Aid concert; his first collaboration with Ferry's keyboard player Jon Carin, later to tour with Pink Floyd.
Gilmour also took part in a comedy skit titled The Easy Guitar Book Sketch with comedian Rowland Rivron and fellow British musicians Mark Knopfler, Lemmy from Motorhead, Mark King from Level 42, and Gary Moore. Guitar tech Phil Taylor explained in an interview that Knopfler used Gilmour's guitar rig and managed to sound like himself when performing in the skit."David Gilmour – DVD Draw" – The Phil Taylor Interview In 1994, Gilmour played guitar for the video game Tuneland, along with the addition of Scott Page, a  saxophonist who had frequently worked with Pink Floyd. On 14 December 1999, Gilmour played a show at The Cavern Club in Liverpool with Paul McCartney, Mick Green, Ian Paice & Pete Wingfield.

2000s

In 2001 and 2002, Gilmour performed a total of six acoustic solo concerts in London and Paris, along with a small band and choir, which was documented on the In Concert release.
On 6 March 2006, Gilmour's 60th birthday, he released his third solo album, On an Island. In a press release to promote the tour, Gilmour stated: "I'm rather hoping that with this tour announcement, people will believe me when I say, honestly, this is the only band I plan to tour with!"
On 10 April 2006, On an Island was certified platinum in Canada, with sales of over 100,000 copies. A video recording of a show from Gilmour's solo tour, titled Remember That Night – Live at the Royal Albert Hall, was released on 17 September 2007.
On 25 May 2009, he participated in a concert at the Union Chapel in Islington, London. The concert was part of the 'Hidden Gigs' campaign against hidden homelessness, which is organised by Crisis, a UK-based national charity campaigning against homelessness. In the concert he collaborated with the Malian musicians Amadou and Mariam. 

2010s

On 11 July 2010, Gilmour gave a performance for the charity Hoping Foundation with Roger Waters in Oxfordshire, England.
Gilmour released an album with the Orb in 2010 entitled Metallic Spheres,
Graham Nash and Phil Taylor, Gilmour's guitar technician have both stated that Gilmour is currently working on a new studio album Gilmour's wife, Polly Samson has also stated via her Twitter account that she has been writing lyrics for her husband.

Equipment

Some of the equipment Gilmour has used on his solo or Pink Floyd records and tours include many versions of the Fender Stratocaster, several Les Paul, and other guitar models. His primary stage and studio guitar is a 1969 Fender Stratocaster. Black with a black pickguard, it has white pick-up covers and knobs. It does not have the original neck. The guitar has an added switch that combines the neck and bridge pick-ups. It has a Seymour Duncan SSL-1C (SSL-5 Prototype) bridge pick-up. The guitar strap that Gilmour pairs with this instrument once belonged to Jimi Hendrix.
His main guitar for the post-Roger Waters era Pink Floyd tours was a Candy Apple Red 1984 1957 Stratocaster reissue. It has a set of EMG SA active pick-ups. This guitar still continues to be used for specific songs during Gilmour's live performances.
Gilmour owns a Stratocaster # 0001. This is not the first model made.
Others include:

Other electric guitars

Along with the Fender models, Gilmour has also used a Gibson Les Paul goldtop model with P-90 pick-ups during recording sessions for The Wall and A Momentary Lapse of Reason. It was used for the guitar solo on 'Another Brick in the Wall, Part 2'.
Gilmour also plays a Gretsch Duo-Jet, a Gretsch White Falcon, and a "White Penguin". He played a Bill Lewis 24-fret guitar during the Meddle and Dark Side of the Moon recording sessions, and a Steinberger GL model which was his main guitar during A Momentary Lapse of Reason recording sessions.

Acoustics

Gilmour has used many different acoustic guitars throughout his career including a Gibson "Chet Atkins" classical model, and a Gibson J-200 Celebrity acoustic guitar. Gilmour's large acoustic collection also includes many models from Taylor, Takamine and Guild.

Steel guitar

Throughout his recording career Gilmour has added a different element to his guitar style with his use of steel guitars. A pair of Jedson pedal steel guitars were used frequently in the early 1970s. Originally purchased from a pawn shop while Gilmour was in Seattle in 1970, the Jedson was used during recording of "One of These Days" from "Meddle" and "Breathe" and "Great Gig in the Sky" from The Dark Side of the Moon.

Bass guitars

Gilmour has played bass both in the studio and onstage, and has played many different bass models including: an Ovation Magnum, a Fender Bass VI, Fender Precision and Jazz bass models and a Charvel fretless (all used during The Wall recording sessions). He also owns a Doug Wilkes built Precision-style single pick-up bass which was used on the 'Momentary Lapse of Reason' sessions. During the 1991 Amnesty International concert Gilmour used a Music Man Fretless Stingray bass while conducting the house band and again during Spinal Tap's performance of "Big Bottom".

Fender Signature Stratocaster

In November 2006, Fender Custom Shop announced two reproductions of Gilmour's "Black" Strat for release on 22 September 2008. Gilmour's website states the release date was chosen to coincide with the release of his Live in Gdansk album.

Personal life

Gilmour's first marriage was to American-born model and artist Virginia "Ginger" Hasenbein, on 7 July 1975.
Gilmour has been associated with various charity organisations. In May 2003, Gilmour sold his house in Little Venice to the ninth Earl Spencer and donated the proceeds worth £3.6 million to Crisis to help fund a housing project for the homeless. He has been named a vice president of the organisation. He also donated £25,000 to the Save the Rhino foundation in exchange for Douglas Adams's name suggestion for the album that became The Division Bell.
Gilmour is an experienced pilot and aviation enthusiast. Under the aegis of his company, Intrepid Aviation, he had amassed a collection of historical aircraft. He later decided to sell the company, which he had started as a hobby, feeling that it was becoming too commercial for him to handle. In a BBC interview, he stated:

Gilmour has stated in interviews that he doesn't believe in an afterlife and that he is an atheist...""The theme of the new album – those Pink Floyd habits die hard – is mortality. One song, 'This Heaven', reflects Gilmour's atheism". 8. On 22 May 2008, he won the 2008 Ivor Novello Lifetime Contribution Award.2008 Ivor Novello Award Winners In autumn 2008, he was awarded for outstanding contribution for music by the Q Awards. He dedicated his award to his bandmate Richard Wright, who died in September 2008. On 11 November 2009, Gilmour received an honorary doctorate from the Anglia Ruskin University.
When it comes to Gilmour's political views he has stated that he is left wing, and that his beliefs spring from that of his parents; David stated that his parents were "Proper Manchester Guardian readers", and went onto say "Some of their friends went on the Aldermaston marches. Mine never did to my knowledge, but they were both committed to voting for the Labour Party"; Gilmour inherited his parents liberalism, stating "I still consider myself to be more a socialist than anything else, even if I can't quite stick with party politics".neptunepinkfloyd.co.php/npf-mag/426-david-gilmour-mojo-interview

Discography

Notes

Citations

Sources

Further reading




