[[Terrier]]

CATEGORIES: Dog types, Hunting dogs

A terrier is a dog of any one of many breeds or landraces of terrier type, which are typically small, wiry, very active and fearless dogs. Terrier breeds vary greatly in size from just a couple of pounds to over 70 pounds and are usually categorized by size or function. There are five different groups with each group having several different breeds.

History

Most terrier breeds were developed in Great Britain and Ireland. They were used to control rats, rabbits, and foxes both over and under the ground. Some larger terriers were also used to hunt badgers. In fact, the word terrier comes from the Middle French terre, derived from the Latin terra, meaning earth. Terrier is also the modern French for "burrow". The Kerry Blue Terrier and Airedale, however, are particularly noted for tackling river rats and otters in deep water. Not long ago many terriers were also herding dogs, such as Wheaten Terriers. Different localities raised terriers suited to their hunting or vermin control needs. Terriers were crossed with hunting dogs, fighting dogs, and other terriers. In the mid-19th century, with the advent of dog shows, various breeds were refined from the older purpose-bred dogs. All of today's terrier breeds are bred primarily as pets.
The gameness of the early hunting terriers was exploited by using them in sporting contests. Initially, terriers competed in events such as clearing a pit of rats. The dog that was fastest in killing all the rats won. In the 18th century some terriers were crossed with hounds to improve their hunting, and some with fighting dog breeds to "intensify tenacity and increase courage". Some of the crosses with fighting dogs, Bull and Terrier crosses, were used in the blood sport of dog fighting.  Modern pet breeds developed from the Bull and Terrier, such as the Miniature Bull Terrier, are listed by the  Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) under Bull type terriers.
Today, most terriers are kept as companion dogs and family pets. They are generally loyal and affectionate to their owners but can be "big characters" requiring a firm hand.

Genetics of origins

Genetic analysis shows that most terriers are in the "modern/hunting" genetic cluster of dog breeds developed from the same pool of ancestors in Europe in the 19th century. A few terriers are found in the "mastiff" genetic cluster with Pomeranians, Labrador Retrievers, and other large-headed dogs, and the Tibetan Terrier is found in the older grouping of Asian and African dogs, along with the Pekingese.

Appearance

Terriers range greatly in appearance from very small, light bodied, smooth coated dogs such as the English Toy Terrier (Black and Tan), which weighs as little as 2.7 kg (6 lbs), to the very large rough coated  Airedale Terriers, which can be up to 32 kg (70 lbs) or more.  As of 2004, the United Kennel Club recognized a new hairless breed of terrier derived from the Rat Terrier called the American Hairless Terrier.

Terrier types and groups

In the 18th century in Britain, only two types of terriers were recognized, long- and short-legged.
Today, terriers are often informally categorized by size or by function: 

Breed groups

Breed Groups are groupings of similar breeds of dog by kennel clubs; Breed Groups are not scientific classifications, and breeds included in a Breed Group will vary  from club to club. The Fédération Cynologique Internationale, The Kennel Club (UK), Canadian Kennel Club, American Kennel Club, Australian National Kennel Council,  New Zealand Kennel Club, and United Kennel Club as well as with the myriad hunting and pet registries may all vary in which breeds of terrier are included in the various Breed Groups that the club uses. The Miniature Schnauzer is placed in the Terrier Group by the American Kennel Club but not categorised as Terrier by the Kennel Club (UK), which places all Schnauzers in the Utility Group. Boston Terriers are true terriers although the Kennel Club also places them in the Utility Group, while the Canadian Kennel Club places them in the Non-Sporting Group. The American Kennel Club and the Canadian Kennel club recognise the Toy Manchester Terrier in the Toy Group, while the Australian National Kennel Council does not recognise the breed at all. The Tibetan Terrier and the Tchiorny Terrier (Black Russian Terrier) are terriers in name only and not related to the other terriers.
The organization of each breed group varies from club to club as well. The Fédération Cynologique Internationale subdivides the Terrier Group into Sections, including Large and medium-sized Terriers, Small-sized Terriers,  Bull type Terriers, and Toy Terriers, while other major national kennel clubs do not subdivide the Terrier Group, although some terrier types are placed in the Toy Group by some kennel clubs, and some terriers are placed in other Breed Groups. Listed at the bottom of the article are all Terrier breeds organized by Fédération Cynologique Internationale (FCI) Section.

Gallery

Examples of specific types of terriers.

File:Terriers.
File:Elias1červen2006.jpg|Long legged terrier type, digging
File:Yorkshire teriery 522.jpg|Toy terriers, Yorkshire Terriers with typical show-length coats
File:BostonTerrierMaleBlack.jpg| Bull-type terrier showing the typical shortened muzzle (Boston Terrier)
File:Airedale Terriers Flickr.jpg| Airedale Terriers are the largest terriers
File:Jack russel.JPG| Jack Russel Terrier resting








