[[Neal Boortz]]

CATEGORIES: 1945 births, Living people, People from Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, American talk radio hosts, National Radio Hall of Fame inductees, American aviators, American columnists, American libertarians, American political pundits, American political writers, Radio personalities from Atlanta, Georgia, Commentators, Members of the Libertarian Party (United States), Military brats, People from College Station, Texas, Texas A&M University alumni, American anti–illegal immigration activists, American Episcopalians, Cox Radio, Conservative talk radio

Neal A Boortz, Jr. (born April 6, 1945) is an American author, attorney, and former radio host. The content of the show included politics, current events, social issues, and topics of interest, which Boortz discussed with callers, correspondents and guests. Boortz touched on many controversial topics and referred to himself as an "equal opportunity offender."
Boortz's first involvement with radio was in the 1960s, while he was a student at Texas A&M University, working as a local on-air personality at WTAW-AM. After moving to Georgia, he became an avid listener of Atlanta's first talk radio station. Boortz became a regular caller to the morning talk show. When the show's host died, it created a job opening, which Boortz actively pursued. He was initially hired on a two-week "trial run", and later offered the permanent position. Boortz attended night law school, earning a law degree in 1977. For some years he worked as both an attorney and as a talk show host. He eventually closed his law practice in order to concentrate on his work in radio.
Boortz has received many industry accolades. He was named as one of the "25 Most Important Radio Talk Show Hosts in America" by Talkers magazine, and one of "Georgia's 100 Most Influential People" by Georgia Trend. In 2009, Boortz was inducted into the Radio Hall of Fame.
Boortz's first book was The Commencement Speech You Need To Hear in 1997, In 2005, he co-wrote The FairTax Book with Congressman John Linder, proposing to implement a variant of a national retail sales tax in lieu of other federal taxes. Boortz's involvement with the FairTax is covered in the documentary film An Inconvenient Tax.

Biography

Early life and education

Boortz was born in Bryn Mawr, Pennsylvania, which was his mother's home. His father was a World War II pilot in the Marine Corps and later served in the Korean War and Vietnam War. Describing himself as a "military brat", Boortz lived in many locations throughout the country (including the small community of Thrall, Texas).

Personal life

Neal Boortz makes his permanent home in Naples, Florida, spending a few months in Atlanta, Georgia. He lives with his wife, Donna, whom he calls "The Queen", and "My Bride." They have one married daughter, and a granddaughter. Boortz is an avid pilot and enjoys spending his free time playing golf or flying. He has said that "There's nothing like flying upside down to clear your mind ... among other things." Boortz owns a Mooney Ovation3 and a Super Decathlon. He is also a motorcycle enthusiast.

Career path

Boortz began his radio career in College Station, Texas in the 1960s at WTAW-AM, under the name of Randy Neal, while attending Texas A&M University. While watching the news one evening, he heard that Elfman had committed suicide. The next morning, Boortz showed up at the front door of WRNG and announced that he was ready to take Elfman's place. Even though the management told him that "they were going to search for a 'qualified' host to take his place", Boortz was offered to be a temporary two-week replacement. In the interim, the evening host was moved to mornings and Boortz hosted the evening. Two weeks later, Boortz was moved to the morning show, embarking on an Atlanta talk radio career that spanned more than forty years. Boortz honed his skills at the tiny 1,000-watt station, and even wrote a few speeches for then Georgia Governor Lester Maddox. He continued working at the station until 1974, when WRNG "dumped him". He worked briefly at a radio station in Schenectady, New York, but soon returned to Atlanta.
In 1974, Boortz enrolled in then-unaccredited John Marshall Law School (Atlanta) going to class in his spare time, while he and his wife Donna worked full-time loading mail trucks. Boortz credits his wife with providing "the money to keep me in law school". After graduating from law school in 1977, Boortz practiced law in a solo law firm from 1977 through 1993. During that period, he divided his time between his law practice and work in radio. One of Boortz's clients was boxer Evander Holyfield. Holyfield later sued Boortz and other members of his management team in the aftermath of a failed Subaru dealership investment. Boortz told Atlanta Magazine "It had nothing to do with representing him as a boxer. It was settled and disappeared." Some time later, in a heated on-air exchange between Atlanta mayor Bill Campbell and Boortz, Campbell remarked on the Holyfield relationship: Campbell (sarcastically): By the way, Neal, Evander Holyfield sends his regards ... We talked a little about how good he's doing now and the fact he's getting ready to open up his 57,000 square-foot, $20 million home. How he's fighting for $35 million a fight. I was sorta thinking about when you were representing him. He was living in an apartment over on Lenox Road. He was fighting for about $20,000 a fight. It's sort of interesting how your great legal skills have transferred into financial well-being for Evander .... Boortz responded by calling mayor Campbell an "unethical son of a bitch". Boortz later remarked "It's the only time I've ever been on the air that I lost control." In 1993, Boortz closed his law practice and devoted his full-time to his radio career.

Radio career

While in law school, Boortz returned to work at WRNG. In 1983 he moved to the larger news and talk radio station WGST. He later recounted how he would often go into work at his law office at 5:00am, work there for several hours, then go to WGST, and finally back to the law office until 11:00pm. In 1992, Boortz asked WGST for a raise; a salary equal to his combined income as an attorney and a radio host. When WGST refused, Boortz left. He got his raise when he signed an exclusive contract with WSB to host a daily radio show. Shortly after that, he closed his law office. In 1995, Talkers Magazine named Boortz one of the "25 Most Important Radio Talk Show Hosts in America". That same year, Georgia Trend magazine added Boortz to its list of the "100 Most Powerful & Influential People in Georgia".

In 1999, his show became nationally syndicated through WSB's owner Cox Radio. The show originated in Atlanta. The Neal Boortz Show featured Boortz, producer Belinda Skelton, interviewees, and callers. On the air and on his website Boortz admonished his listeners to take no heed nor place any credence in anything he said, presenting himself as merely an "entertainer." As an entertainer, Boortz was a 2002 NAB Marconi Radio Awards finalist and Radio & Records NewsTalk Personality of the Year for 2002.
In 2007, Boortz and his radio show were awarded "Best Radio On-Air Personality" and "Best Radio Program, Any Type" by The Georgia Association of Broadcasters. He was also a recipient of the Georgia Radio Hall of Fame 2007 Career Achievement Award."Neal Boortz accepts his award from Pete Spriggs, WSB Program Director", www.com. Retrieved 2008-12-28. The Neal Boortz Show originated from the nation's ninth (9th) largest radio market
Boortz was inducted in the National Radio Hall of Fame in 2009."Radio Hall of Fame inductees: Neal Boortz", www.org/

Author

Boortz's first foray into authorship was in 1997 with The Commencement Speech You Need To Hear, in which he delivers his opinions on various topics in the form of a commencement speech he would give to new college graduates, if ever invited to do so. His second book, entitled The Terrible Truth About Liberals, was published in 1998, and contains reprinted material from his first book, along with a significant amount of new material.
His third book (co-authored by Georgia Congressman John Linder) entitled The FairTax Book, explains the proposal to implement a national retail sales tax in lieu of the federal income taxes, payroll taxes, estate tax, etc. The book is one of his most frequent topics of discussion.
His fourth book entitled Somebody's Gotta Say It was released on February 20, 2007, He occasionally writes columns on the Internet news/commentary site Townhall.
His latest book is titled FairTax: The Truth. This book attempts to answer the critics of the Fair Tax proposal and claims to correct some of its myths and misrepresentations. It achieved #4 on the New York Times Best Seller list for the week of March 2, 2008 for paperback nonfiction.

Political beliefs

Boortz is a self-described libertarian. Boortz disagrees with the Libertarian Party platform on several key issues including his firm support of the war in Iraq, incremental tax reform, and his opposition to the unrestricted immigration policy advocated by the Libertarian Party.
Boortz criticizes the major parties saying "I believe that the principal difference between the Democrats and the Republicans is that the Democrats just want to grow our Imperial Federal Government a bit faster than the Republicans do." He sides with liberals on some social issues such as abortion, same-sex marriage, and civil liberties. He agrees with fiscal conservatives in advocating less government spending and decreasing corporate regulation. He is an advocate for freedom of speech. In line with the traditional views of the Libertarian Party, Boortz supports eliminating the War on Drugs, and emphasizing personal responsibility. He has repeatedly stated his belief that global climate change is not man-made. His stances on many of these issues make him popular among conservative Republicans, who, due to their larger numbers in comparison to Libertarians, make up the majority of his listeners and callers.
Boortz's post-9/11 platforms include support for the US-led War on Terror, a more aggressive foreign policy, and the USA Patriot Act. He is also strongly in favor of a crackdown on illegal immigration, including harsh penalties for businesses who employ illegals. These views occasionally put him in conflict with the Libertarian Party. Justin Raimondo of Antiwar.
Prior to the 2006 midterm elections, Boortz opined that perhaps it would be a good thing to have the Republicans lose power in Congress, forcing them to wake up and stop taking their base for granted. Boortz told one disgruntled caller:
 I am happy about it defeat. It's the only way to get these Republicans to wake themselves up and say, 'You have abandoned what you were put in office for.' 
Boortz creates controversy among conservatives for his support of abortion rights (on which Boortz does not allow calls), for his refusal to condemn homosexuality or gay marriage,

The Neal Boortz Show

The Neal Boortz Show was a nationally syndicated talk show, which ended in January 2013. It aired live from 8:30am to noon, weekdays. Boortz routinely criticized politicians, Muslim extremism, the homeless, public schools (which he called 'government schools'), liberals, opponents of the Iraq war, teachers, smokers, the obese, Chevrolet Camaro drivers, cats, and welfare recipients. On air, Boortz referred to himself as an "equal opportunity offender".
Boortz marketed his talk radio show as "insensitivity training", creating controversy which increased ratings. His stated "beliefs" included a claim that ADD and ADHD are "medical frauds" and a scam that teachers, parents, and drug companies use.
Some of his outlandish remarks got him in trouble. After the Virginia Tech shootings, Boortz criticized the media, saying, "When the history of this event is written, we will have 25 students standing meekly waiting for this guy to execute them."Steinberg, Jacques. The New York Times. 2007/04/20. Talk Radio Tries for Humor and a Political Advantage Retrieved 2008/08/06 When public outrage resulted from his comments, members of the Virginia Legislature tried to have Boortz's show removed from local radio stations. The Roanoke Times. 2007/05/02. Radio stations report little outcry about Boortz Retrieved 2008/08/06. In March 2008, Boortz attracted controversy by playing an audiotape of a nine-year-old where he repeatedly ridiculed the child's speech,Burnett, Daniel.  Retrieved 2008/08/04 leading to an unsuccessful FCC petition to deny Boortz's employer the right to purchase five local radio stations. Athens Banner-Herald. 2008/06/12  2008/06/10. Daily Report. Retrieved 2008/08/04Federal Communications Commission. 2008/06/10. Complaint letter. Retrieved 2008/08/04
Boortz announced his retirement from radio on June 4, 2012. His last live show aired on January 18, 2013. Boortz's regular fill-in host, Herman Cain, replaced him on January 21, 2013. Confirmed: Boortz to retire, Cain to take over radio show AUDIO. The Daily Caller. Retrieved June 4, 2012. Boortz stated he would host commentaries for WSB and national syndication, and fill in for Cain and Sean Hannity when needed.



Notes

Further reading




