[[Kenilworth]]

CATEGORIES: Kenilworth, Post towns in the CV postcode area

Kenilworth (pronounced  east of the centre of the town. The 2011 Census recorded a parish population of 22,413.
Kenilworth is notable for the extensive ruins of Kenilworth Castle. Other local sights include the ruins of Kenilworth Abbey in Abbey Fields park, St Nicholas' Parish Church and Kenilworth Clock.

History

A settlement existed at Kenilworth by the time of the Domesday Book of 1086, which records it as Chinewrde meaning "farm of a woman named Cynehild".
Geoffrey de Clinton (d. 1134) initiated the building of an Augustinian priory in 1122, and suppressed in the Dissolution of the Monasteries in the 1530s. Thereafter the abbey grounds next to the castle, were made common land in exchange for common land that Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester used to enlarge the castle. Only a few walls and a storage barn of the original abbey survive.
Just off Coventry Road in Kenilworth is a field called the Parliament Piece. It is traditionally said Members of the public have free access to Parliament Piece, which is owned by the Open Spaces Society and leased to Warwick District Council.
Geoffrey de Clinton had a deer park created near Kenilworth. west of the castle and the northern part forms the boundary between Chase Wood and the farm road and bridleway between Little Chase Farm and Warrior's Lodge Farm.
In about 1414 Henry V had le plesans en marais The mere was drained in 1649 but "The Pleasance" earthworks survive and are a Scheduled Monument.
Elizabeth I visited Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester at Kenilworth Castle several times, the last of which was in 1575. Dudley entertained the Queen with pageants and banquets that cost some £1,000 per day, presenting diversions and pageants surpassing anything ever before seen in England.Information about Elizabethan masques
Warwick District Council owns and manages land across the Coventry Road at Tainter's Hill. This area of public open space was designated "for the poor of the parish" under an inclosure act in 1756 and is now registered as common land. Around this time in 1778 Kenilworth windmill was built, which was later made the town's water tower. It is now a private home, minus its sails.
In 1844 the London and Birmingham Railway opened the Coventry to Leamington Line, including Kenilworth railway station. The L&NWR had a new station built in 1883 and a new link line between Kenilworth and . In the latter part of the 20th century British Railways closed the link line and had it dismantled.
BR withdrew passenger services from the Coventry to Leamington Line and closed Kenilworth station in January 1965 in accordance with The Reshaping of British Railways report. In May 1977 BR reinstated passenger services but did not reopen Kenilworth station, which fell into dereliction and was eventually demolished. In 2011 Warwick Council granted John Laing plc planning permission to build a new station,
The railway brought industrialists from Birmingham and Coventry who developed the residential area around the town's railway station. In the 19th century the town had some fine large mansions with landscaped gardens; these were demolished after the First World War and Second World War for housing developments. The names of these mansions still survive in the names of some roads and areas of the town. For example, Towers Close was built on the grounds of Rouncil Towers. Some large trees from their grounds still survive, including Giant Sequoias from the Moorlands and Rouncil Towers.
The town's growth occasioned the addition of a second Church of England parish church, St. John's, which is on Warwick Road in Knights Meadow. It was designed by Ewan Christian and built in 1851–52.
After 1883 the original 1844 railway station on Warwick Road was partially rebuilt at the opposite end of Station Road at the rear of the King's Arms and Castle Hotel public house and used as a cafe. The King's Arms was demolished in 1983 but the railway station stonework remains. An exterior copy of the King's Arms was built on the site, in 2007 the building was redeveloped as a chain restaurant. The building's distinctive pillars have been retained (but not the originals) on its Warwick Road frontage. Sir Walter Scott stayed in the King's Arms and Castle Hotel when researching his novel Kenilworth.
In 1884 St Nicholas' Parish Church established a mission room in an upstairs room above the Co-Op in Park Road. It attracted a congregation of 150 people and in 1885 moved to new premises. In 1905 the congregation moved to new a "tin tabernacle" iron building that had been newly erected in Albion Street and consecrated as Saint Barnabas' Mission Church, a daughter church of St. Nicholas'.
The railway boosted Kenilworth's market gardening.
The former mansion on Forrest Road, built around 1901, still stands. It is believed that a William Forrest bought the surrounding land, except that of the terrace to the north of Abbey End, and built the house, either for himself or for his family. The house was split into three separate residential lots in the 1970s, the main part of the house forming 'Hillcrest', the west wing of the house with the main grand staircase and gardens forming 'Max Gate', and the billiards room forming the bungalow 'South Brent'. The former landscaped gardens to the east and west of the property have been built on for residential purposes, but the south and north gardens still belong to the house. Some main features have been lost during the transition internally, but externally the house still keeps its grand bay windows, tiled walls, high chimney stacks and other features, which can be seen in the new flats, Mulberry Court on Abbey End. Warwick Road is now the main commercial centre of the town 
Most of the older existing buildings of Kenilworth are on Castle Green, New Row and High Street (formerly Alta Strata, meaning the high dry ground above the Abbey
In May 1961, the Kenilworth Society was formed as a result of concerns about a group of 17th century listed cottages adjacent to the Finham Brook in Bridge Street. The Society's objectives are to promote consciousness about Kenilworth's character and to encourage its preservation.

Modern Kenilworth

Modern Kenilworth has been described as a dormitory town for commuters to Coventry, Birmingham and Leamington Spa. Despite its proximity to the University of Warwick on Coventry's southern outskirts, it has only a small student population of mostly postgraduate students, although many staff at the university choose to live in Kenilworth.
The town has good road and air links. The A46 bypass was opened in June 1974 of central Kenilworth.
There is a regular bus service to 
In 2008, Waitrose opened a supermarket in Kenilworth and hardware chain Robert Dyas opened a 'new format' store in November 2011. There are also plans to renovate the existing public library buildings. The town's old youth centre was demolished in 2007 to make way for the new supermarket, and a new one was built.

Districts

Districts within the town include Abbey End, Burton Green, Castle End, Crackley, Knight's Meadow, Ladyes Hill, St John's, Whitemoor and Windy Arbour.

Sports

Kenilworth Town FC, on Gypsy Lane south of the town, played in the Midland Combination until June 2011 when it resigned, preferring to spend money on ground improvements rather than field a team.
Kenilworth Wardens FC a Community Amateur Sports Club located on Glasshouse Lane to the east of the town.
Kenilworth RFC is the town's rugby union club. It fields three senior sides and hosts a large minis, juniors and colts section. The ground is also located on Glasshouse Lane.
Kenilworth Tennis, Squash and Croquet Club, at the north of the town on Crackley Lane, has nine tennis courts, five squash and racketball courts and two croquet lawns.
Kenilworth has two cricket clubs. Kenilworth Wardens fields three senior teams and plays at the Warwick Road pitch south of the town.
Kenilworth Runners, which meets at the Wardens, caters for runners of all ages and abilities.
Octavian Droobers is the local orienteering club, using its maps of Abbey Fields and Kenilworth Common on which to stage events.
Kenilworth Wheelers, meets every Saturday and Sunday morning throughout the year for a road ride. During the summer months regular evening training rides catering for all abilities from novice to racer take place.
Abbey Fields Swimming Pool is in Abbey Fields in the middle of the town. It has a 25m x 10m indoor pool and an outdoor pool that is open from May to September. It is also the home of Kenilworth Swimming Club and the highly successful Kenilworth Masters Swimming Club.
Kenilworth Golf Club is located on the north east side of the town and features a mature 18 hole parkland course, plus a small six hole par 3 course.
Castle Farm Recreation Centre has a four court badminton hall which can accommodate basketball, volleyball, netball, table tennis, short mat bowls and children's parties. The hall is available for casual use by members of the public in addition to sports clubs who have block bookings throughout the year.

Two Castles Run

The Two Castles Run began in 1983 as a fun run between Warwick Castle and Kenilworth Castle.twocastlesrun.uk/ Since then it has grown into an English AthleticsEnglish Athletics licensed run that attracted 3,000 entrants in 2010. The field was increased to 4,000 places from 2011. In 2010 and 2011 it had the status of the Warwickshire Amateur Athletic Association 10 Kilometre Championship. In 2012 all 4,000 places were sold with 25 hours of the event opening. The race is organised by Kenilworth Rotary ClubKenilworth Rotary Club in conjunction with the Leamington Cycling and Athletic ClubLeamington Cycling and Athletic Club and is held each June.Two Castles Run

Arts

Theatres

The Talisman Theatre was founded as the Talisman Players in 1942 and moved to its current 156-seat auditorium in Barrow Road in 1969.
The Priory Theatre was founded in 1932 as the Kenilworth Players. dating from 1816 was converted into a 119-seat theatre building for the company in 1945–46. It was gutted by fire in 1976 but was restored and in September 1978 was reopened.

Kenilworth Festival

In 2005, the Kenilworth FestivalKenilworth Festival was revived after a 70 year interval.

Famous people

Town twinning

Kenilworth is twinned with:
Kenilworth has friendship links with:



Sources





