[[Adobe InDesign]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 software, Adobe Creative Suite, Adobe software, Desktop publishing software, Graphics software, Typesetting software, Mac OS software, DTP for OS X, DTP for Windows

Adobe InDesign is a desktop publishing software application produced by Adobe Systems. It can be used to create works such as posters, flyers, brochures, magazines, newspapers and books. InDesign can also publish content suitable for tablet devices in conjunction with Adobe Digital Publishing Suite. Graphic designers and production artists are the principal users, creating and laying out periodical publications, posters, and print media. It also supports export to EPUB and SWF formats to create e-books and digital publications, including digital magazines, and content suitable for consumption on tablet computers. In addition, InDesign supports XML, style sheets and other coding markup, making it suitable for exporting tagged text content for use in other digital and online formats. The Adobe InCopy word processor uses the same formatting engine as InDesign.

History

InDesign is the successor to Adobe's own PageMaker, which was acquired with the purchase of Aldus in late 1994. By 1998 PageMaker had lost almost the entire professional market to the comparatively feature-rich QuarkXPress 3.3, released in 1992, and 4.0, released in 1996.  Quark stated its intention to buy out Adobe and to divest the combined company of PageMaker to avoid anti-trust issues.
Adobe rebuffed the offer and instead continued to work on a new page layout application. The project had been started by Aldus and was code-named "Shuksan".  It was later code-named "K2" and was released as InDesign 1.0 in 1999.
In 2002, InDesign was the first Mac OS X-native desktop publishing (DTP) software.  In version 3 (InDesign CS) it received a boost in distribution by being bundled with Photoshop, Illustrator, and Acrobat in the Creative Suite.
InDesign exports documents in Adobe's Portable Document Format (PDF) and has multilingual support. It was the first DTP application to support Unicode for text processing, advanced typography with OpenType fonts, advanced transparency features, layout styles, optical margin alignment, and cross-platform scripting using JavaScript.
Later versions of the software introduced new file formats. To support the new features, especially typographic, introduced with InDesign CS, both the program and its document format are not backward-compatible. Instead, InDesign CS2 has the backward-compatible INX (. InDesign CS versions updated with the 3.1 April 2005 update can read InDesign CS2-saved files exported to the . The InDesign Interchange format does not support versions earlier than InDesign CS. With InDesign CS 5, Adobe replaced INX with InDesign Markup Language (IDML), another XML-based document representation.
Adobe developed InDesign CS3 (and Creative Suite 3) as universal binary software compatible with native Intel and PowerPC Mac machines in 2007, two years after the announced 2005 schedule, inconveniencing Intel-Mac early-adopters. Adobe CEO Bruce Chizen had announced that "Adobe will be first with a complete line of universal applications".San Francisco - Live Coverage of Steve Jobs Keynote 1:00PM EDT, June 6th, 2005, WWDC 2005 - Live Coverage of Keynote, The Mac Observer
The CS2 Mac version had code tightly integrated to the PPC architecture, and not natively compatible with the Intel processors in Apple's new machines, so porting the products to another platform was more difficult than had been anticipated. Adobe developed the CS3 application integrating Macromedia products (2005), rather than recompiling CS2 and simultaneously developing CS3.

InDesign and Leopard

InDesign CS3 initially had a serious compatibility issue with Leopard (Mac OS X v10.5), as Adobe stated: "InDesign CS3 may unexpectedly quit when using the Place, Save, Save As or Export commands using either the OS or Adobe dialog boxes. Unfortunately, there are no workarounds for these known issues."  Apple fixed this with their OS X 10.5.4 update.5.4 Fixes InDesign Nav Services Glitches By: Anne-Marie, June 30, 2008, InDesignSecrets

Server version

In October 2005, Adobe released "InDesign Server CS2", a modified version of InDesign (without user interface) for Windows and Macintosh server platforms. It does not provide any editing client; rather it is for use by developers in creating client-server solutions with the InDesign plug-in technology. In March 2007 Adobe officially announced Adobe InDesign CS3 Server as part of the Adobe InDesign family.

Versions

Internationalization and localization

Language availability

Adobe InDesign CS5 is available in the following languages: Arabic (Middle Eastern version), Brazilian Portuguese, Chinese Simplified, Chinese Traditional, Czech, Danish, Dutch, English (International & United States), Finnish, French, German, Greek, Hebrew (Middle Eastern version), Hungarian, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Norwegian, Polish, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Turkish, Ukrainian.

Historical language availability

Adobe InDesign CS4 offered a Romanian version, though this is no longer available for CS5.
French (Canadian) and Spanish (Latin American) versions use the same files as are used in French and Spanish versions, respectively.

=Text settings=

InDesign Middle Eastern versions come with special settings for laying out Arabic or Hebrew text, such as:

=Bi-directional text flow=

In InDesign Middle Eastern versions, the notion of right-to-left behaviour applies to several objects: Story, Paragraph, Character and Table. It allows for mixing Right-to-Left and Left-to-Right Words, Paragraphs and Stories in a document.

=Table of contents=

InDesign Middle Eastern versions come with a set of Table of contents titles, one for each supported language. The TOC is also sorted according to the chosen language.
InDesign CS4 Middle Eastern versions allows to choose the language of the index title and cross-references by right clicking in the title field in the Generate Index window.

=Indices=

InDesign allows for the creation of a simple keyword index or a somewhat more detailed index of the information in the text using embedded indexing codes which are instantiated as an index using a command in the Indexing palette. Unlike more sophisticated programs, InDesign is incapable of inserting character style information as part of an index entry (e.g., when indexing book, journal or movie titles). Indices are limited to four levels (top level and three sub-levels). InDesign Middle Eastern versions allow the user to set various Sort Options for the indices according to the language dealt with.
There are no provisions for importing index entries as part of an XML file.

=Importing and exporting=

InDesign Middle Eastern versions bring the capability of opening directly and converting QuarkXPress files, even using Arabic XT, Arabic Phonyx or Hebrew XPressWay fonts, retaining the layout and content.
InDesign Middle Eastern versions come with more than 50 import/export filters enabling to place many kinds of images and Roman texts: Microsoft Word 97-98-2000 Import filter and Text Import filter. QuarkXPress data can be converted to InDesign with Markzware's Q2ID. 
InDesign can also be used as a front end on top of database applications, such as CCI Europe's NewsGate software.

=Reverse layout=

InDesign Middle Eastern versions include a reverse layout feature to reverse the layout of a document, when converting a Left to Right document (Roman) to a Right to Left one (Arabic or Hebrew) or vice versa. It is also helpful when creating a multilingual document.
The Middle Eastern versions are also available for Adobe Acrobat, (Design Standard, Design Premium, Web Premium).

Complex script rendering

InDesign supports Unicode character encoding and there is a special Middle East version supporting complex text layout for Arabic and Hebrew types of complex script. The underlying Arabic and Hebrew support is present in the Western-language editions of InDesign CS4, CS5, CS5.5 and CS6, but the user interface is not exposed, so it is difficult to access.

User groups

InDesign has spawned 86 user groups in 36 countries with a total membership of over 51,000.








