[[Pomacentridae]]

CATEGORIES: Pomacentridae, Labroidei

The Pomacentridae are a family of perciform fish, comprising the damselfishes and clownfishes.  They are primarily marine, while a few species inhabit freshwater and brackish environments (e.g., Neopomacentrus aquadulcis, N. taeniurus, Pomacentrus taeniometopon, Stegastes otophorus). They are noted for their hardy constitutions and territoriality.  Many are brightly colored, so they are popular in aquaria.
Around 360 species are classified in this family, in about 29 genera. Of these, members of two genera, Amphiprion and  Premnas (subfamily Amphiprioninae), are commonly called clownfish or anemonefish, while members of other genera (e.g., Pomacentrus) are commonly called damselfish.

Etymology

The name of the family is derived from the Greek words; poma roughly translates to the English "cover", referring to the fishes' opercula, and kentron is Greek for sting. The name refers to the serrations found along the margins of the opercular bones in many members of this family.

Distribution and habitat

Pomacentrids are found primarily in tropical seas, with a few species occurring in temperate waters (e.g., Hypsypops rubicundus). Most species are found on or near coral reefs in the Indo-West Pacific (from East Africa to Polynesia). The area from the Philippines to Australia hosts the greatest concentration of species.
Most members of the family live in shallow water, from   Most species are specialists, living in specific parts of the  reef, such as sandy lagoons, steep reef slopes, or areas exposed to strong wave action. In general, the coral is used as shelter, and many species can only survive in its presence.
The bottom-dwelling species are territorial, occupying and defending a portion of the reef, often centered around shelter. By keeping away other species of fish, some pomacentrids encourage the growth of thick mats of algae within their territories, leading to the common name farmerfish.

Characteristics

Pomacentrids have an orbiculated to elongated body shape, which is often laterally compressed.  They have interrupted or incomplete lateral lines and they usually have a single nostril on each side (some species of Chromis and Dascyllus have two on each side).  They have small- to medium-sized ctenoid scales. They have one or two rows of teeth, which may be conical or spatulated.
They display a wide range of colors, predominantly bright shades of yellow, red, orange, and blue, although some are a relatively drab brown, black, or grey. The young are often a different, brighter color than adults.
Pomacentrids are omnivorous or herbivorous, feeding on algae, plankton, and small bottom-dwelling crustaceans, depending on their precise habitats. Only a small number of genera, such as Cheiloprion, eat the coral where they live.
They also engage in symbiotic relationship with cleaner gobies of genus Elacatinus, allowing the gobies to feed off of ectoparasites on their body. 

Reproduction

Before breeding, the males clear an area of algae and invertebrates to create a nest. They engage in ritualised courtship displays, which may consist of rapid bursts of motion, chasing or nipping females, stationary hovering, or wide extension of their fins. After being attracted to the site, the female lays a string of sticky eggs that attach to the substrate. The male swims behind the female as she lays the eggs, and fertilises them externally. Varying by species, brood sizes range from 50 to 1000 eggs.
The male guards the nest for the two to seven days that it takes for the eggs to hatch. The transparent larvae are  When they arrive at a suitable environment, the young settle and adopt their juvenile colors.
In captivity, pomacentrids live up to 18 years, but they probably do not live longer than 10 to 12 years in the wild.

Genera

About 28 genera in four subfamilies are recognized:

Timeline

ImageSize  = width:1000px height:auto barincrement:15px
PlotArea   = left:10px bottom:50px top:10px right:10px
Period      = from:-65.5 till:10
TimeAxis    = orientation:horizontal
ScaleMajor  = unit:year increment:5 start:-65.5
ScaleMinor  = unit:year increment:1 start:-65.5
TimeAxis    = orientation:hor
AlignBars   = justify
Colors =
 #legends
  id:CAR	  value:claret
  id:ANK 	 value:rgb(0.4,0.3,0.196)
  id:HER	  value:teal
  id:HAD	  value:green
  id:OMN	  value:blue
  id:black        value:black
  id:white        value:white
  id:cenozoic     value:rgb(0.54,0.54,0.258)
  id:paleogene     value:rgb(0.99,0.6,0.32) 
  id:paleocene     value:rgb(0.99,0.65,0.37) 
  id:eocene     value:rgb(0.99,0.71,0.42) 
  id:oligocene     value:rgb(0.99,0.75,0.48) 
  id:neogene     value:rgb(0.999999,0.9,0.1) 
  id:miocene     value:rgb(0.999999,0.999999,0) 
  id:pliocene     value:rgb(0.97,0.98,0.68)  
  id:quaternary   value:rgb(0.98,0.98,0.5)
  id:pleistocene   value:rgb(0.999999,0.95,0.68)
  id:holocene   value:rgb(0.999,0.95,0.88)
BarData=
 bar:eratop
 bar:space
 bar:periodtop
 bar:space
 bar:NAM1
 bar:space
 bar:period
 bar:space
 bar:era 
PlotData=
 align:center textcolor:black fontsize:M mark:(line,black) width:25 
 shift:(7,-4)
 bar:periodtop
