[[Pete Postlethwaite]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, 2011 deaths, 20th-century English male actors, 21st-century English male actors, Alumni of Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, Cancer deaths in England, Deaths from pancreatic cancer, English male film actors, English male stage actors, English male television actors, English Roman Catholics, Officers of the Order of the British Empire, People from Warrington, Male Shakespearean actors, Testicular cancer survivors, Alumni of St. Mary's University College (Twickenham)

Peter William "Pete" Postlethwaite, OBE, ( was an English stage, film and television actor. After minor television appearances including in The Professionals, his first success came with the film Distant Voices, Still Lives in 1988. He played a mysterious lawyer, Mr. Kobayashi, in The Usual Suspects, and he appeared in Alien 3, Amistad, Brassed Off, The Shipping News, The Constant Gardener, The Age of Stupid, The Lost World: Jurassic Park and Romeo + Juliet. In television, He played Sergeant Obadiah Hakeswill on Sharpe opposite Richard Sharpe, played by Sean Bean. 
Postlethwaite trained as a teacher and taught drama before training as an actor. Director Steven Spielberg called him "the best actor in the world" after working with him on The Lost World: Jurassic Park. He received an Academy Award nomination for his role in In the Name of the Father in 1993, and was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 2004 New Year Honours list. A survivor of testicular cancer, he died from pancreatic cancer on 2 January 2011, aged 64. 

Early life

Postlethwaite was born in Warrington in Lancashire on 7 February 1946, the fourth and youngest child of William (1913–1988) and Mary Postlethwaite (née Lawless; 1913–2000), working-class Roman Catholics.

Career

Early in his career, Postlethwaite was advised to adopt a new surname for his acting work by his first agent and by peers who quipped that his "would never be put up in lights outside theaters because they couldn't afford the electricity" (Postlethwaite rejected the advice).
Postlethwaite started his career at the Everyman Theatre in Liverpool, where his colleagues included Bill Nighy, Jonathan Pryce, Antony Sher and Julie Walters. Postlethwaite and Walters had an intimate relationship during the latter half of the 1970s.
In 2003, he was both the physical and vocal actor for the villain Deeth in Zixx: Level One, a Canadian TV series created by IDT Entertainment. Later that same year, he toured Australia and New Zealand in a 90-minute one-man play, Scaramouche Jones, in which he played a clown trying to find out why he is who he is before he dies at midnight, receiving a nomination for the TMA Award for Best Actor and winning the Theatregoers' Choice Award for Best Solo Performance.
In The Art of Discworld (2004), Terry Pratchett wrote that he had always imagined Sam Vimes as 'a younger, slightly bulkier version of Pete Postlethwaite'. The Art of Discworld, Victor Gollancz Ltd, 2004; ISBN 0-575-07511-2 
Steven Spielberg called Postlethwaite "the best actor in the world" after working with him on The Lost World: Jurassic Park,
One of his more notable roles was Sergeant Obadiah Hakeswill in ITV's Sharpe series. The actor said this was one of his favourite roles and that he and fellow actor Sean Bean played well off each other because of their mutual love and respect. Bernard Cornwell, the author and creator of the Sharpe series, specifically wrote Hakeswill's character in later novels to reflect Postletwaite's performance as the character in the TV series. Postlethwaite co-starred with Bean in When Saturday Comes. 
Postlethwaite next starred in a Liverpool stage production of King Lear in 2008 at the Everyman Theatre, Liverpool, and at the Young Vic, London. He appeared in the climate change-themed film The Age of Stupid, premiered in March 2009. Having recently installed a wind turbine in his garden, he said was extremely impressed by the film and made an impassioned call for action on climate change on its release in The Sun newspaper "The stakes climate of change are very, very high. They're through the roof. How could we willingly know that we're going into extinction... and let it happen." 
Terminally ill, Postlethwaite had a minor role in the 2010 blockbuster hit Inception, playing an industrialist who is similarly dying. That same year, his performance in The Town as florist and crime boss Fergus "Fergie" Colm was well received by critics. Postlethwaite's last appearance on screen was in Nick Hamm's film Killing Bono, based on the memoir of Neil McCormick. The role was written specially for Postlethwaite to accommodate his illness.meg. His final role was due to be in the BBC series Exile, written by Danny Brocklehurst and Paul Abbott, but he had to pull out because of ill health. Jim Broadbent replaced him in the role."Jim Broadbent takes Pete Postlethwaite part in drama", BBC.co.

Awards

Postlethwaite was made an Officer of the Order of the British Empire in the 2004 New Year Honours list and received an honorary degree from Liverpool University in 2006. He received an Academy Award nomination for his role In the Name of the Father.

Personal life

Postlethwaite lived in West Itchenor, West Sussex, before moving to Shropshire, near Bishop's Castle, with his wife Jacqueline (Jacqui) Morrish Postlethwaite, a former BBC producer, whom he began a relationship with in 1987 and later married in 2003 in Chichester. Postlethwaite was diagnosed with testicular cancer in 1990, and had one testicle removed.

Political activity

Postlethwaite appeared as a taxi driver in one of the Labour Party's political broadcasts during the 1997 general election.

Illness and death

In March 2009, Postlethwaite was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer, He left behind two children, William John (born 1989), a drama student at LAMDA, and Lily Kathleen (born 1996).
Postlethwaite continued acting almost to the end of 2010, showing clear signs of weight-loss during his last performances. In his last  two years he worked on his memoirs A Spectacle of Dust with Shropshire Star writer Andy Richardson. It was published June 1, 2011.

Filmography

Films

Television






