[[Kansai region]]

CATEGORIES: Kansai region

The . The region includes the prefectures of Mie, Nara, Wakayama, Kyoto, Osaka, Hyōgo, and Shiga. Depending on who makes the distinction, Fukui, Tokushima and even Tottori Prefecture are also included. While the use of the terms "Kansai" and "Kinki" have changed over history, in most modern contexts the use of the two terms is interchangeable. The urban region of Osaka, Kobe and Kyoto (Keihanshin region) is the second most populated in Japan after the Greater Tokyo Area.



The Kansai region is the cultural and historical heart of Japan with 11% of its land area and 22,757,897 residents as of 2010. The Kinki Plain with the cities of Osaka and Kyoto forms the core of the region, from there the Kansai area stretches west along the Seto Inland Sea towards Himeji and Kobe and east encompassing Lake Biwa, Japan's largest freshwater lake. In the north the region is bordered by the Sea of Japan, to the south by the Kii Peninsula and Pacific Ocean, and to the east by the Ibuki Mountains and Ise Bay. The area also contains six of the seven top prefectures in terms of national treasures.
The Kansai region is often compared with the Kantō region, which lies to its east and consists primarily of Tokyo and the surrounding area. Whereas the Kanto region is symbolic of standardization throughout Japan, the Kansai region displays many more idiosyncrasies – the culture in Kyoto, the mercantilism of Osaka, the history of Nara, or the cosmopolitanism of Kobe – and represents the focus of counterculture in Japan. This East-West rivalry has deep historical roots, particularly from the Edo period. With a samurai population of less than 1% the culture of the merchant city of Osaka stood in sharp contrast to that of Edo, the seat of power for the Tokugawa shogunate.Omusubi - "Japan's Regional Diversity", retrieved January 22, 2007
Many characteristic traits of Kansai people descend from Osaka merchant culture. Catherine Maxwell, an editor for the newsletter Omusubi, writes: "Kansai residents are seen as being pragmatic, entrepreneurial, down-to-earth and possessing a strong sense of humour.  Kanto people on the other hand are perceived as more sophisticated, reserved and formal, in keeping with Tokyo's history and modern status as the nation's capital and largest metropolis."Livingabroadin.com - "Prime Living Locations in Japan", retrieved January 22, 2007
Kansai is known for its food, especially Osaka, as supported by the saying . Popular Osakan dishes include takoyaki, okonomiyaki, kitsune udon and kushikatsu. Kyoto is considered one of a mecca of traditional Japanese cuisine. Kansai has many wagyu brands such as Kobe beef and Tajima cattle from Hyōgo, Matsusaka beef from Mie and Omi beef from Shiga. Sake is another specialty of the region, the areas of Nada-Gogō and Fushimi produce 45% of all sake in Japan.
The dialects of the people from the Kansai region, commonly called Kansai-ben, have their own variations of pronunciation, vocabulary, and grammar. Kansai-ben is the group of dialects spoken in the Kansai area, but is often treated as a dialect in its own right.
Kansai is one of the most prosperous area of baseball in Japan. Two Nippon Professional Baseball teams, Hanshin Tigers and Orix Buffaloes, are based in Kansai. Koshien Stadium, a home studium of the Hanshin Tigers is also famous for the nationwide high school baseball tournaments. The Kansai Independent Baseball League was founded in 2009. For association football purposes, a regional football league of Kansai is founded in 1966 and 16 teams join now. Cerezo Osaka, Gamba Osaka, Vissel Kobe and Kyoto Sanga F.C. belong J. League Division 1 and J. League Division 2.

History

The terms . In common usage, Kinai now refers to the Osaka-Kobe-Kyoto (Keihanshin) area, the center of the Kansai region.
Kansai (literally west of the tollgate) in its original usage refers to the land west of the Osaka Tollgate (. Kōjien, fifth edition, 1998, 4-00-080111-2 (see Kamigata)  Like all regions of Japan, the Kansai region is not an administrative unit, but rather a cultural and historical one, which emerged much later during the Heian Period after the expansion of Japan saw the development of the Kanto Region to the east and the need to differentiate what was previously the center of Japan in Kansai emerged.
The Kansai region lays claim to the earliest beginnings of Japanese civilization.  It was Nara, the most eastern point on the Silk Road, that became the site of Japan's first permanent capital.  The Kansai region also boasts the Shinto religion's holiest shrine at Ise Shrine (built in 690 AD) in Mie prefecture.Japan Reference - "Ise Jingu Guide", retrieved January 17, 2007
The Heian period saw the capital moved to Heian-kyō (, present-day Kyoto), where it would remain for over a thousand years until the Meiji Restoration. During this golden age, the Kansai region would give birth to traditional Japanese culture. In 788, Saicho, the founder of the Tendai sect of Buddhism established his monastery at Mount Hiei in Shiga prefecture. Japan's most famous tale, and some say the world's first modern novel, The Tale of Genji was penned by Murasaki Shikibu while performing as a lady-in-waiting in Heian-kyo.  Noh and Kabuki, Japan's traditional dramatic forms both saw their birth and evolution in Kyoto, while Bunraku, Japanese puppet theater, is native to Osaka.
Kansai's unique position in Japanese history, plus the lack of damage from wars or natural disasters has resulted in Kansai region having more UNESCO World Heritage Listings than any other region of Japan.UNESCO World Heritage Centre: Japan, retrieved January 17, 2007 - Kiyomizu-dera, Todai-ji, and Mount Koya are part of collections of sites and chosen as representative

Major cities

Other major cities

Gallery

Image:NintokuTomb.Consulate-General of Japan in San Francisco - "History", retrieved March 15, 2007
Image:Horyu-ji kondo02 2000b.
Image:TodaijiDaibutsu0224.
Image:NaraTodaiji.
Image:Biwa Lake.
Image:Okuni with cross dressed as a samurai.
Image:Kongo.
Image:Amanohashidate view from Mt Moju02s3s4592.
Image:Sen_no_Rikyu_JPN.
Image:Toji-temple-kyoto.
Image:Nintendo_office. 
Image:Osaka Castle Nishinomaru Garden April 2005.



Notes






