[[David Brooks (journalist)]]

CATEGORIES: 1961 births, Writers from Toronto, University of Chicago alumni, American columnists, American people of Canadian-Jewish descent, American political pundits, American political writers, Jewish American writers, Living people, Newsweek people, People from Bethesda, Maryland, The Atlantic (magazine) people, The New York Times columnists, The Wall Street Journal people, The Washington Times people, The Weekly Standard people, Writers from Maryland, D.C. cocktail party circuit conservative pundits

David Brooks (born August 11, 1961) is an American"David Brooks." Contemporary Authors Online. Detroit: Gale, 2012. Biography In Context. Web. 7 Nov. 2013."David Brooks." Gale Biography in Context. Detroit: Gale, 2011. Biography In Context. Web. 7 Nov. 2013. political and cultural commentator who writes for The New York Times.), "Why I turned right: leading baby boom conservatives chronicle their political journeys," Simon and Schuster (2007). He worked as an editorial writer and film reviewer for the Washington Times;David Brooks Analyst Bio Online NewsHour a reporter and later op-ed editor for The Wall Street Journal;Columnist Biography: David Brooks, New York Times a senior editor at The Weekly Standard from its inception; a contributing editor at Newsweek and The Atlantic Monthly; and as a commentator on National Public Radio. He is now a columnist for The New York Times and commentator on the PBS NewsHour.

Background

Brooks was born in Toronto, Canada – his father was an American citizen living in Canada at the time – and grew up in the middle-income Stuyvesant Town housing development in downtown New York City. During his childhood, Brooks' father taught English literature at New York  University, while his mother studied nineteenth-century British history at Columbia. Although his family was Jewish,Jewish It's Back, The Weekly Standard, Feb 20, 2003A Loud and Promised Land, New York Times, April 16, 2009. "As an American Jew, I was taught to go all gooey-eyed at the thought of Israel..." Brooks himself is not especially observant. When he was 12 his family moved to Philadelphia. He graduated from Radnor High School (located in a prosperous Main Line suburb of Philadelphia) in 1979 and from the University of Chicago in 1983, with a degree in history. His senior thesis was on popular science writer Robert Ardrey, best known for his 1966 book espousing "hard" primitivism, The Territorial Imperative: A Personal Inquiry Into the Animal Origins of Property and Nations, in which he argued that humans were descended from "killer apes."
As an undergraduate, Brooks frequently contributed reviews and satirical pieces to campus publications. In his senior year he wrote a spoof of the life-style of wealthy conservative William F. Buckley, Jr., who was scheduled to speak at the university: "In the afternoons he is in the habit of going into crowded rooms and making everybody else feel inferior. The evenings are reserved for extended bouts of name-dropping."University of Chicago Maroon, April 5, 1983. To his piece, Brooks appended the note: "Some would say I'm envious of Mr. Buckley. But if truth be known, I just want a job and have a peculiar way of asking. So how about it, Billy? Can you spare a dime?" When Buckley arrived to give his talk,  he asked if Brooks was in the lecture audience and offered to give him a job."Everybody's a Critic", Mary Ruth Yoe, University of Chicago Magazine(February, 2004).
Upon graduation, Brooks became a police reporter for the City News Bureau, a wire service owned jointly by the Chicago Tribune and Chicago Sun Times. He says that his experience on Chicago's crime beat had a conservatizing influence on himBeam, "A Reasonable Man" (New York Magazine, 2010). In 1984, mindful of the offer he had previously received from William F. Buckley, Brooks applied and was accepted as an intern on Buckley's National Review. According to Christopher Beam, the internship included an all-access pass to the affluent life style that Brooks had previously mocked, including yachting expeditions; Bach concerts; dinners at Buckley's Park Avenue apartment and villa in Stamford, Connecticut; and a constant stream of writers, politicians, and celebrities.
 Brooks was an outsider in more ways than his relative inexperience. National Review was a Catholic magazine, and Brooks is not Catholic. Sam Tanenhaus later reported in The New Republic that Buckley might have eventually named Brooks his successor if it hadn't been for his Judaism. "If true, it would be upsetting," Brooks says. 
After his internship with Buckley ended, Brooks spent some time at the conservative Hoover Institute at Stanford University and then got a job writing movie reviews for the Washington Times. In 1986, Brooks was hired by the Wall Street Journal, where he worked first as an editor of the book review section, enlisting William Kristol to review Alan Bloom's The Closing of the American Mind, which catapulted that book to national prominence. He also filled in for five months as a movie critic. From 1990–94, The Wall Street Journal posted Brooks as an op-ed columnist in Brussels, from whence he covered Russia (making numerous trips to Moscow); the Middle East; South Africa; and European affairs. On his return, Brooks joined the neo-conservative Weekly Standard on its inception in 1994–95. In 1996, he edited an anthology, Backward and Upward: The New Conservative Writing.
In 2000, Brooks published a book of cultural commentary entitled Bobos in Paradise: The New Upper Class and How They Got There to considerable acclaim. The book, a paean to consumerism, argued that the new managerial or "new upper class" represents a marriage between the liberal idealism of the 1960s and the self-interest of the 1980s.
According to Christopher Beam, in 2003, New York Times editorial-page editor Gail Collins called Brooks and invited him to lunch. Collins was looking for a conservative to replace outgoing columnist William Safire, but one who understood how liberals think. "I was looking for the kind of conservative writer that wouldn't make our readers shriek and throw the paper out the window," says Collins. "He was perfect." Brooks started writing in September 2003. "The first six months were miserable," Brooks says. "I'd never been hated on a mass scale before." 
In 2004, Brooks produced  On Paradise Drive: How We Live Now (And Always Have) in the Future Tense, a sequel to his 2000 best seller, Bobos in Paradise which was not so well received as its predecessor.  Brooks is also the volume editor of The Best American Essays (publication date Oct. 2, 2012). Brooks also authored The Social Animal: The Hidden Sources of Love, Character and Achievement.  The book was excerpted in The New Yorker magazine in January 2011 and received mixed reviews upon its full publication, by Random House, in March of that year.
Brooks was a visiting professor of public policy at Duke University's Terry Sanford Institute of Public Policy, and he taught an undergraduate seminar there in the fall of 2006.

Personal life

In 2012, Brooks and his wife moved from their home in Bethesda, Maryland to the Cleveland Park neighborhood of Northwest Washington, D.C., where they had purchased a home. She had converted to Judaism and changed her given name to Sarah. The couple divorced in 2013. They have three children.

Political views

Ottawa Citizen  conservative commentator David Warren has identified Brooks as the sort of conservative pundit that liberals like, one who, in contrast to hardliners like Charles Krauthammer is "sophisticated" and "engages with" the liberal agenda. But I do think that I'm part of a longstanding conservative tradition that has to do with Edmund Burke, which is be cautious, don't think you can do all things by government planning, and Alexander Hamilton, who wanted to use government to help people compete in the capitalist economy." In the same interview with Howard Kurtz in September 2012 Brooks talked about being criticized from the conservative side, saying: "if it's from a loon, I don't mind it. I get a kick out of it. If it's Michelle Malkin attacking, I don't mind it." With respect to whether he was "the liberals' favorite conservative" Brooks said he "didn't care," stating that "I don't mind liberals praising me, but when it's the really partisan liberals, you get an avalanche of love, it's like uhhh, I gotta rethink this."Howard Kurtz, "David Brooks, Riling Up the Right" The Daily Beast September 30, 2012
Brooks describes himself as having originally been a liberal before, as he put it, "coming to my senses."  He recounts that a turning point in his thinking came while he was still an undergraduate, during a televised debate with free-market economist Milton Friedman. As Brooks describes it, "was essentially me making a point, and he making a two-sentence rebuttal which totally devastated my point. That didn't immediately turn me into a conservative, but ...."
Before the 2003 invasion of Iraq, Brooks argued forcefully for American military intervention, echoing the belief of commentators and political figures that American and British forces would be welcomed as liberators.
Brooks' public writing about the U.S. wars in Afghanistan and Iraq is in line with the opinions of his neoconservatives former colleagues on the Weekly Standard, as pointed out by Glenn Greenwald. His dismissal of the conviction of Scooter Libby as being "a farce" and having "no significance" was derided by political blogger Andrew Sullivan.
On August 10, 2006, Brooks wrote a column for The New York Times entitled "Party No. 3". The column proposed the idea of the McCain-Lieberman Party, or the fictional representation of the fictional moderate majority in America.
Brooks has long been a supporter of John McCain; however, he did not show a liking for McCain's 2008 running mate, Sarah Palin, calling her a "cancer" on the Republican Party. He has referred to her as a "joke," unlikely to ever win the Republican nomination."CSPAN Book TV: In Depth - David Brooks" (December 4, 2011) CSPAN Book TV: In Depth - David Brooks
In a March 2007 article published in The New York Times titled "No U-Turns",
Brooks has frequently expressed admiration for President Barack Obama. In an August 2009 profile of Brooks, The New Republic describes his first encounter with Obama, in the spring of 2005: "Usually when I talk to senators, while they may know a policy area better than me, they generally don't know political philosophy better than me. I got the sense he knew both better than me. ... I remember distinctly an image of--we were sitting on his couches, and I was looking at his pant leg and his perfectly creased pant, and I'm thinking, a) he's going to be president and b) he'll be a very good president." However as of December 2011 in a CSPAN interview, Brooks' opinion of Obama's presidency was more tempered, giving Obama only a "B-" rating, and said that Obama's chances of reelection would be less than 50-50 if elections were held at that time.
In writing for The New York Times in January 2010, Brooks described Israel as "an astonishing success story". He wrote that "Jews are a famously accomplished group," who, because they were "forced to give up farming in the Middle Ages... have been living off their wits ever since". In Brooks' view, "Israel's technological success is the fruition of the Zionist dream. The country was not founded so stray settlers could sit among thousands of angry Palestinians in Hebron. It was founded so Jews would have a safe place to come together and create things for the world."

Social views

Brooks opposes what he sees as self-destructive behavior, such as the prevalence of teenage sex and divorce. His view is that "sex is more explicit everywhere barring real life. As the entertainment media have become more sex-saturated, American teenagers have become more sexually abstemious" by "waiting longer to have sex..." He sees the culture war as nearly over, because "today's young people..." As a result, he is optimistic about the United States' social stability, which he considers to be "in the middle of an amazing moment of improvement and repair."New York Times, April 17, 2005, 4-14
As early as 2003, Brooks wrote favorably of same-sex marriage, pointing out that marriage is a traditional conservative value. Rather than opposing it, he wrote: "We should insist on gay marriage.  We should regard it as scandalous that two people could claim to love each other and not want to sanctify their love with marriage and fidelity.... It's going to be up to conservatives to make the important, moral case for marriage, including gay marriage."New York Times, November 22, 2003, A-15
Brooks also takes a moderate position on abortion, which he thinks should be legal, but with parental consent for minors, during the first four or five months, and illegal afterward, except in extremely rare circumstances. (New York Times, April 22, 2002.)
On the legalization of drugs, he has expressed opposition to the liberalization of marijuana, advocating that it encourages moraly reprovable behaviour. Brooks stated he smoked it in his youth, but quit after feeling highly embarassed during a class presentation under the influence. 

Partial bibliography








