[[University of Pennsylvania Law School]]

CATEGORIES: Law schools in Pennsylvania, University of Pennsylvania Law School, 1790 establishments in the United States, University of Pennsylvania schools

The University of Pennsylvania Law School, located in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, is the law school of the University of Pennsylvania.  A member of the Ivy League, it is among the oldest and most selective law schools in the nation. It is currently ranked 7th overall by U.S. News & World Report, It offers the degrees of Juris Doctor (J.D.), Master of Laws (LL.M.), Master of Comparative Laws (LL.C.M.), and Doctor of the Science of Law (S.J.D.).
Penn Law's entering class generally consists of approximately 250 students, and admission is highly competitive. For the class entering in the fall of 2012, 907 out of 5,848 applicants (15.5%) were offered admission, with 243 matriculating. The 25th and 75th LSAT percentiles for the 2012 entering class were 164 and 171, respectively, with a median of 170. The 25th and 75th undergraduate GPA percentiles were 3.55 and 3.94, respectively, with a median of 3.87.lsac.aspx?sid=117 Penn Law's July 2012 Pennsylvania Bar Examination passage rate was 96.08%.pabarexam.pdf According to ABA data, Penn Law's admission and yield rates are generally on par with its peers, and in some cases better relatively to the school's general rank (e.g. NYU and Chicago have higher admission and lower yield rates than Penn Law).lsac.pdf Penn Law is also one of the "T14" law schools, that is, schools that have consistently ranked within the top 14 law schools since U.S. News & World Report
Penn Law emphasizes cross-disciplinary education, both within the law school and through courses, certificates, and joint/dual degree programs with the other graduate and professional schools on the Penn campus, such as the Wharton School.
Although the school is particularly well known for its corporate and criminal law faculty, it offers a very extensive curriculum and hosts various student groups, research centers and activities. Penn Law students also publish the University of Pennsylvania Law Review, the oldest law journal in the country."University of Pennsylvania Law School Sesquicentennial History", University of Pennsylvania Almanac, accessed 15 Sep 2011 Among the school's alumni are a US Supreme Court Justice, several state Supreme Court Justices and supreme court justices of foreign countries, as well as several founders of law firms, university presidents and deans, business entrepreneurs, and politicians.

History

The University of Pennsylvania Law School officially traces its origins to a series of lectures delivered in 1790 by James Wilson, a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and United States Constitution. Following this early beginning, Penn began offering a full-time program in law in 1850, under the leadership of George Sharswood, an innovator in legal education.  Under Sharswood's leadership, Penn Law created what has become the template for modern legal education: a combination of lectures in law with practical experience for students. In 1852 Penn Law was the first law school in the nation to publish a law journal still in existence, then called The American Law Register, which was later renamed to the University of Pennsylvania Law Review, one of the most-cited law journals in the world.wlu.aspx
The School entered a new era when William Draper Lewis was named dean in 1896. Lewis aspired to put Penn Law in the first rank of law schools in the country. He convinced the Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania that the school needed to move to a new building, and in 1900,Owen Roberts, William Draper Lewis, 98 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1 (1949) the new Law School building (now Silverman Hall) opened in its present site on the Penn campus with its massive Georgian structure of brick and limestone with ornamental details throughout. It was at the time considered the largest structure devoted solely to legal education in the country. Under Lewis' deanship the law school was also one of the first schools to emphasize legal teaching by full-time professors instead of practitioners, a system that is still followed today. As legal education became more formalized the School initiated a three-year curriculum and instituted stringent admissions requirements. While the School continued to accept students that did not hold a bachelor's degree, it warned applicants that "a large number of those who study law are college graduates; and those who are not cannot hope, except in rare instances, to compete successfully with the college man.""Department of Law," Catalogue of the University of Pennsylvania, 1899-1900 234 (1899).
After completing almost 30 years within the ranks of the law school, Lewis eventually devoted his powers to founding the American Law Institute, in 1925, which was seated in the law school and was chaired by Lewis himself. The ALI was later chaired by another of Penn Law's Deans, Herbert Funk Goodrich. Two years before Goodrich was named Dean, the law school graduated with a J.D. Sadie Tanner Mossell Alexander (in 1927), the first African-American woman to ever receive a Ph.D. in the United States (also from the University of Pennsylvania, in economics). The first woman to join the faculty was Martha Field in 1969, now a professor at Harvard Law School, while the first black woman to join the faculty was Regina Austin (in 1977) who is still teaching at Penn.

Campus

The University of Pennsylvania campus covers over 269 acres (~1 km²) in a contiguous area of West Philadelphia's University City district. All of Penn's schools, including the Law School, and most of its research institutes are located on this campus. Recent improvements to the surrounding neighborhood include the opening of several restaurants, a large upscale grocery store, and a movie theater on the western edge of campus. Much of Penn's architecture was designed by the architecture firm of Cope & Stewardson, whose principal architects combined the Gothic architecture of the University of Oxford and the University of Cambridge with the local landscape to establish the Collegiate Gothic style.
The Law School consists of four interconnecting buildings around a central courtyard.  At the east end of the courtyard is Silverman Hall built in 1900, housing the Levy Conference Center, classrooms, faculty offices, the Gittis Center for Clinical Legal Studies, and administrative and student offices.  Directly opposite is Tanenbaum Hall, which opened in 1993, home to the Biddle Law Library several law journals, administrative offices, and comfortable student spaces. The law library houses 1,053,824 volumes and volume equivalents making it the 4th largest law library in the country.usnews.com/best-graduate-schools/top-law-schools/university-of-pennsylvania-03140 Gittis Hall sits on the north side and has new state-of-the-art classrooms (renovated in 2006) and new and expanded faculty offices.  Opposite is the recently  finished Golkin Hall, a new building that contains  and includes a state-of-the-art court room, 350-seat auditorium, seminar rooms, faculty and administrative offices, a two-story entry hall, and a roof-top garden.  Golkin Hall is awaiting LEED certification by the U.S. Green Building Council.  The building project cost approximately $33.5 million, and was completed in early 2012.
A small row of restaurants and shops faces the Law School on Sansom Street.  North of Penn Law, on Chestnut Street, is a new deluxe apartment complex with retail outlets.  Nearby are the Penn Bookstore, the Pottruck Center (a new  multi-purpose sports activity area), the Institute of Contemporary Art, a performing arts center, and area shops.

Academics

School orientation

Throughout its modern history Penn Law has been well known for its collegiality and its strong focus on inter-disciplinary studies, a character that was shaped early on by Dean William Draper Lewis. 1901). Its medium-size student body and the tight integration with the rest of Penn's schools (the "One University Policy")

Career prospects

In terms of student career focus the School combines a strong tradition in public service with being one of the top feeders of law students to the most prestigious law firms.law.jsp?id=1202483173162&slreturn=1&hbxlogin=1 Penn Law was the first top-ranked law school to establish a mandatory pro bono requirement, and the first law school to win American Bar Association's Pro Bono Publico Award. Nevertheless, still about 75% of each graduating class enters private practice. In 2012, Penn Law placed more than 60% of its graduates into the United States' top 250 law firms, maintaining Penn Law's rank as the number one law school in the nation for the percentage of students securing employment at these top law firms.law.jsp?id=1202589189668&interactive=true National Law Journal law. Retrieved August 12, 2013.

Journals

Students at the Law School publish several legal journals. The flagship publication is the University of Pennsylvania Law Review, the oldest law review in the United States.pennumbra. It is one of the most cited law journals in the world, and one of the four journals that are responsible for the Bluebook (along with the Harvard, Yale and Columbia law journals). Penn Law Review articles have captured seminal historical moments in the 19th and 20th century, such as the passage of the 19th Amendment, the lawlessness of the first and second World War, the rise of the civil rights movement and the war in Vietnam. Greenlee, The University of Pennsylvania Law Review: 150 Years of History, 150 U. Pa. L. Rev. 1875 (2002)
Other law journals include:

Notable faculty

Penn Law's faculty is selected to match the School's inter-disciplinary orientation. Seventy percent of the standing faculty hold advanced degrees beyond the JD, and more than a third hold secondary appointments in other departments at the University. The School is particularly well known for its corporate law group, with professors William Bratton, Jill Fisch, Edward Rock, David Skeel, and Michael Wachter being regularly included among the best corporate and securities law scholars in the country.professorbainbridge.html The School has also built a strong reputation for its law and economics group (professors Howard F. Chang, Tom Baker, David S. Abrams) and its criminal law group (professors Stephanos Bibas, David Rudovsky). Some of the notable Penn Law faculty members include:
