[[Easter Road]]

CATEGORIES: Hibernian F.C., Sports venues in Edinburgh, Football venues in Scotland, Leith, Sports venues completed in 1893, Rugby union stadiums in Scotland, 1893 establishments in Scotland, Scottish Premier League venues, Scottish Football League venues, Scottish Professional Football League venues, Scotland national football team venues

Easter Road is a football stadium located in the Leith area of Edinburgh, Scotland, which is the home ground of Scottish Premiership club Hibernian (Hibs). The stadium currently has an all-seated capacity of 20,421, which makes it the fifth-largest football stadium in Scotland. Easter Road is also known by Hibs fans as "The Holy Ground" or "The Leith San Siro". The venue has also been used to stage international matches, Scottish League Cup semi-finals and was briefly the home ground of the Edinburgh professional rugby union team.
Hibs first played at the present site of Easter Road in 1893. The record attendance of 65,860, when the stadium had vast terracing sections, was set by an Edinburgh derby on 2 January 1950. The size of the terracing was greatly reduced in the 1980s.  After the publication of the Taylor Report, Hibs considered leaving Easter Road and moving to a different site, but these plans were abandoned in 1994. Redevelopment of the stadium began in 1995 and was completed in 2010. The Easter Road pitch had a pronounced slope until it was removed at the end of the 1999–2000 season.

History

The stadium is named after the Easter Road some 300 metres to its west. The road is not named after Easter the festival, but Easter the compass direction, as evidenced in maps by its counterpart Wester Road (now Bonnington Road). It was the haunt of highwaymen before the area was developed. In April 1604 James Hardie of Bounmylnerig was found guilty of robbing Jacques de la Berge, a Fleming, of his gold and silver on the moor in this location. He was hanged at the Mercat Cross on the Royal Mile.
Hibernian played its first match on the Meadows, on 25 December 1875.
Easter Road staged its first Scottish League match when Hibs joined the league in 1893. This meant the club were unwilling to develop the ground and looked for alternatives. Hibs considered relocating to Aberdeen in 1902, a year before Aberdeen F.C. was formed by a merger of three local clubs. In 1909, work began on a potential new ground in the Piershill area of Ednburgh, but the North British Railway company won a court order allowing them to build a railway line over the ground. No line was ever built, but Hibs' interest in moving to the site was thwarted. The long term future of Easter Road was only secured in 1922, when the club agreed a 25-year lease on the ground. Two years later, three banks of terraces were raised, while a main stand seating 4,480 people was built on the west side of the ground. The redeveloped stadium had a capacity of 45,000. The pitch was also moved 40 yards to the east, providing space for the main stand. The slope was reduced to approximately 6 feet as part of this work.
Hibs enjoyed great success in the period immediately after the end of the Second World War, winning three league championships between 1948 and 1952. A record attendance of 65,860 was set by an Edinburgh derby against Hearts played on 2 January 1950. As the fans had been tightly packed on the terraces to achieve this record attendance, the size of the East Terrace was increased further. The club even drew up plans to expand the overall capacity to nearly 100,000. This would have been done by raising each end terrace to the same height as the east side, but these plans were never realised.
Hibs were one of the first clubs to install corner floodlight pylons, rather than the roof-mounted lights used at Ibrox. The Easter Road floodlights were installed by a local company, Miller & Stables, who would construct similar leaning gantries in many other Scottish grounds. They were first used for an Edinburgh derby played on 18 October 1954. A roof was put over the North Terrace in 1960, but the ground was largely unchanged through the 1960s and 1970s. The capacity was reduced in 1975 to 30,000, due to the regulations of the Safety of Sports Grounds Act. Hibs became the first club in Scotland to install undersoil heating, in 1980. Benches were installed in the North Terrace in 1982, but this was only because they were cheaper than replacing the terrace crush barriers. Soon afterwards, Hibs chairman Kenny Waugh admitted that the stadium was a "mess".
The height of the East Terrace was greatly reduced and a roof was erected in the mid-1980s. This work reduced the capacity to 27,000. Hibs was taken over by a consortium led by David Duff in 1987. The new regime spent approximately £1 million on executive boxes and refurbishments, but their policy of diversifying the business into property and public houses crippled the club financially when there was an economic downturn in the late 1980s. Hearts chairman Wallace Mercer attempted a takeover of Hibs in June 1990, with the intention of merging the two major Edinburgh football clubs. The Hibs fans protested against this and Mercer was prevented from gaining the 75% shareholding that was needed to close Hibs.
Sir Tom Farmer took control of Hibs in 1991, Hibs also invited Hearts to share this stadium, as their proposal for a site in Millerhill had been rejected by planners. Those plans were scaled down in 1993 when Lothian Regional Council refused to allow the rest of the Straiton site to be used for commercial development. The Hibs board continued to back the Straiton proposal and they insisted the installation of bucket seats in the uncovered South Terrace was merely to comply with the Taylor Report deadline. This measure also reduced the capacity of Easter Road to 13,500.
Later in 1994, however, the Straiton proposals were abandoned and Easter Road underwent major redevelopment  in 1995. Stands behind each goal were built at a cost of £8 million, increasing the capacity to 16,531. The ground was made all seated by the installation of bucket seats in the East Terrace during 1995.
Despite this development work, a move to a shared stadium in Straiton was again proposed in 2003. Selling players, including Steven Whittaker, Scott Brown, Kevin Thomson and Steven Fletcher, also funded these debts and further work.
The club first obtained planning permission to replace the East Stand in 1999, and this was renewed in 2005. Hibs started a consultation with supporters on its redevelopment in 2007. The development was put on hold until sufficient cash resources were obtained to finance the project.

Structure and facilities

Easter Road is an all-seated stadium, split into four geographic sections, known as the Famous Five (formerly North), East, South and West Stands. The Famous Five and South Stands are the oldest part of the present stadium, built in 1995. Each stand has two tiers, a cantilevered roof and a capacity of nearly 4,000. To keep within the boundaries of the site, the upper deck of each stand angles toward the centre. When the stands were built, the Famous Five Stand was above pitch level and the South Stand was below, but this was corrected when the natural slope was removed.
The West Stand, which initially had a capacity of 6,500, was built in 2001. A reception area, club offices, media centre, banqueting suites, hospitality area and changing rooms are located in the West Stand.

Other uses

Other football matches

Kirkcaldy club Raith Rovers used Easter Road as a home venue once, for the home leg of a UEFA Cup tie against Bayern Munich in 1995.
Scotland have played five full international matches at Easter Road. These have been friendly matches against less attractive opposition where a relatively small crowd was expected, and it has therefore been unnecessary to play the match at Hampden Park. The Scotland under-21 team has also sometimes played matches at Easter Road, such as when Scotland played Iceland in the 2011 UEFA European Under-21 Football Championship qualification play-offs.

=Full internationals=

Six full international football matches have been played at Easter Road, all of them since 1998.

Other sports

Easter Road was briefly the home ground for the Edinburgh professional rugby union team in the late 1990s.

Uses other than sport

Elton John performed Easter Road's first rock concert on 25 June 2005.

Transport

Edinburgh Waverley railway station, the main station in Edinburgh, is approximately  Visitors to the ground travelling by car can park in the surrounding streets.






