[[Metathesis (linguistics)]]

CATEGORIES: Phonology, Speech error

Metathesis (
Metathesis may also involve switching non-contiguous sounds, known as nonadjacent metathesis, long-distance metathesis, or hyperthesis:
Many languages have words that show this phenomenon, and some use it as a regular part of their grammar (e.g. the Fur language). The process of metathesis has altered the shape of many familiar words in the English language, as well.
The original form before metathesis may be deduced from older forms of words in the language's lexicon, or, if no forms are preserved, from phonological reconstruction.  In some cases, including English "ask" (see below), it is not possible to settle with certainty on the original version.

Rhetorical metathesis

Dionysius of Halicarnassus was a historian and scholar in rhetoric living in 1st century BC Greece. He analysed classical texts and applied several revisions to make them sound more eloquent. One of the methods he used was re-writing documents on a mainly grammatical level: changing word and sentence orders would make texts more fluent and 'natural', he suggested. He called this way of re-writing metathesis.

Examples

Egyptian Arabic

A common appearance of metathesis in Egyptian Arabic is when the consonants of the word's root have changed their order.
The following examples of metathesis have been identified in Egyptian Arabic texts, but are not necessarily more common than their etymological spellings:
The following loanwords are also sometimes found with metathesis:
The likely cause for metathesis in the word "hospital" is that the result resembles a common word pattern familiar to Arabic speakers (namely a Form X verbal noun).

English

Metathesis is responsible for some common speech errors, such as children acquiring spaghetti as pasketti.  The pronunciation .  Chaucer, Caxton, and the Coverdale Bible use "ax"; Shakespeare and the King James Bible have "ask". ed., under "ask".
Some other frequent English pronunciations or pronunciation errors that display metathesis are:
The process has shaped many English words historically. Bird and horse came from Old English bryd and hros; wasp and hasp were also written wæps and hæps. Likewise, it explains why the 'r' moved after the vowel in third and thirteen, even though they originally had it before like three still does.
The Old English beorht "bright" underwent metathesis to bryht, which became Modern English bright.
The Old English þreo "three" formed þrid "thrid" and þreotene "thriteen". These underwent metathesis to forms which became Modern English third and thirteen.
The Old English verb wyrcan "to work" had the passive participle worht "worked". This underwent metathesis to wroht, which became Modern English wrought.
The Old English þyrl "hole" underwent metathesis to þryl. This gave rise to a verb þrylian "pierce", which became Modern English thrill, and formed the compound nosþryl "nose-hole" which became Modern English nostril.
Metathesis is also a common feature of the West Country dialects.

French

Modern French makes extensive use of metathesis of syllables through a pattern of informal speech called verlan (itself an example: verlan A few well known examples are:
Some words were metathesized more than once:
Simple metathesis exists as well and shaped some words, such as fromage (from formage, "shaping").

Spanish

Old Spanish showed occasional metathesis when phonemes not conforming to the usual euphonic constraints were joined. This happened, for example, when a clitic pronoun was attached to a verb ending: it is attested that forms like dejad'le'' "leave plural him" were often metathesized to ''dejal'de (the phoneme cluster /dl/ does not occur elsewhere in Spanish). The Spanish name for Algeria (Argelia) is likely a metathesis of the Arabic name for the territory (al-Jazāʼir).
Lunfardo, an argot of Spanish from Buenos Aires, is fond of vesre, metathesis of syllables. The word vesre itself is an example:
Gacería, an argot of Castile, incorporates metathesized words:
Some frequently heard pronunciations in Spanish display metathesis:

Greek

In Greek, the present stem often consists of the root with a suffix of y (ι˰ in Greek). If the root ends in the vowel a or o, and the consonant n or r, the y switches position with the consonant and is written i:
For metathesis of vowel length, which occurs frequently in Attic and Ionic Greek, see quantitative metathesis.

Slavic languages

Metathesis of liquid consonants is an important historical change during the development of the Slavic languages: a syllable-final liquid metathesized to become syllable-initial, therefore e.g. Polish mleko vs. English milk.

Finnish

In western dialects of Finnish, historical stem-final /h/ has been subject to metathesis (it is lost in standard Finnish). This leads to variant word forms such as:
Some words have been standardized in the metathetized form, e.g.:
Sporadic examples include the word vih'reä'' "green", which derives from older ''viherä'', and the vernacular change of the word ''juoheva'' "jovial" to ''jou'heva (also a separate word meaning "bristly").

Hungarian

In case of a very narrow range of Hungarian nouns, metathesis occurs before accusative case ending, possessive suffixes, and in plural:
Note that in all the examples above, the consonant h is transposed to the end of the stem.

Hebrew

In Hebrew the verb conjugation (binyan)  (where the numbers signify the root consonants) becomes hi1ta22ē3. Examples:
Hebrew also features isolated historical examples of metathesis. For example, the words כֶּֽבֶשׂ Cf. Leviticus 3:7 both appear in the Torah, both with the meaning "lamb."

Japanese

In slang, the word for sorry, gomen, is sometimes reversed informally as mengo.

Navajo

In Navajo, verbs have (often multiple) morphemes prefixed onto the verb stem. These prefixes are added to the verb stem in a set order in a prefix positional template. Although prefixes are generally found in a specific position, some prefixes change order by the process of metathesis.
For example, prefix , as in
However, when , as in
instead of the expected *adinisbąąs (a-di-ni-sh-ł-bąąs'') (note also that a- is reduced to -').

Rotuman

The Rotuman language of Rotuman Island (a part of Fiji) uses metathesis as a part of normal grammatical structure by inverting the ultimate vowel with the immediately preceding consonant.

Straits Saanich

In Straits Saanich metathesis is used as a grammatical device to indicate "actual" aspect.  The actual aspect is most often translated into English as a be ... -ing progressive. The actual aspect is derived from the "nonactual" verb form by a CV → VC metathetic process (i.e. consonant metathesizes with vowel).
See Montler (1986), Thompson & Thompson (1969) for more information.

Telugu

From a comparative study of Dravidian vocabularies, one can observe that the retroflex consonants () do not occur initially in common Dravidian etyma, but Telugu has words with these consonants at the initial position. It was shown that the etyma underwent a metathesis in Telugu, when the root word originally consisted of an initial vowel followed by one of the above consonants. When this pattern is followed by a consonantal derivative, metathesis has occurred in the phonemes of the root-syllable with the doubling of the suffix consonant (if it had been single); when a vowel derivative follows, metathesis has occurred in the phonemes of the root syllable attended by a contraction of the vowels of root and (derivative) suffix syllables. ISBN 81-208-2324-9 p. 51–52. These statements and the resulting sequences of vowel contraction may be summed up as follows:
Type 1: V1C1-C² > C1V1-C²C²
Type 2: V1C1-V²- > C1V1-
Examples:

Turkish

Two types of metathesis are observed in Turkish. The examples given are from the Turkish of Turkey but Azerbaijani Turkish is best known for its metatheses:

Urdu and Hindi

Like many other natural languages Urdu and Hindi also manifest this phenomenon. The example given hereunder is diachronic.
Sanskrit जन्म (جنمہ) Janma 

American Sign Language

In ASL, several signs which have a pre-specified initial and final location can have the order of these two locations reversed in contexts which seem to be purely phonological. While not possible with all signs, this does happen with quite a few. For example, the sign DEAF, prototypically made with the '1' handshape making contact first with the cheek and then moving to contact the jaw (as in the sentence FATHER DEAF), can have these locations reversed if the preceding sign, when part of the same constituent, has a final location more proximal to the jaw (as in the sentence MOTHER DEAF). Both forms of the sign DEAF are acceptable to native signers. 



Notes

Bibliography




