[[Mytilene]]

CATEGORIES: Mytilene, Greek prefectural capitals, Greek regional capitals, Populated coastal places in Greece, North Aegean, Mediterranean port cities and towns in Greece, Ancient Greek sites in Greece, Roman sites in Greece, Populated places in Ancient Greece, Archaeological sites on the Aegean Islands, Territories of the Republic of Genoa, Provinces of Greece

Mytilene (Greek: Μυτιλήνη) is a town and a former municipality on the island of Lesbos, North Aegean, Greece. Since the 2011 local government reform, it is part of the municipality Lesbos, of which it is a municipal unit.  Mytilene is built on the southeast edge of the island. It is also the seat of a metropolitan bishop of the Orthodox church.

Geography

Mytilene is located in the southeastern part of the island, north and east of the Bay of Gera. It has a land area of  and a population of 36,196 inhabitants (2001). With a population density of 336.8/km² it is by far the most densely populated municipal unit in Lesbos. The next largest towns in the municipal unit are Vareiá (pop. 1,254), Pámfila (1,247), Mória (1,207), and Loutrá (1,118). The Greek National Road 36 connects Mytilene with Kalloni. Farmlands surround Mytilene, the mountains cover the west and to the north. The airport is located a few kilometres south of town.

Province

The province of Mytilene ( It was abolished in 2006.

History

As an ancient city, lying off the east coast, Mytilene was initially confined to a small island just offshore that later was joined to Lesbos, creating a north and south harbour. in less than a day and brought the decision to cancel the massacre.
Aristotle lived on Mytilene for two years, 337-335 BC, with his friend and successor, Theophrastus (a native of the island), after becoming the tutor to Alexander, son of King Philip II of Macedon.Bio of Theophrastus accessed December 11, 2007Grade Saver bio on Aristotle accessed December 11, 2007
The Romans, among whom was a young Julius Caesar, successfully besieged Mytilene in 80 BC.  Although Mytilene supported the losing side in most of the great wars of the 1st century BC, her statesmen succeeded in convincing Rome of her support of the new ruler of the Mediterranean and the city flourished in Roman times.
In AD 56, Paul the Apostle stopped there on the return trip of his third missionary journey(). The novel Daphnis and Chloe, by Longus,  is set in the country around it and opens with a description of the city.
In the Middle Ages, it was part of the Byzantine Empire and was occupied for some time by the Seljuqs under Tzachas of Smyrna in 1085. In 1198, the Republic of Venice obtained the right to commerce from the city's port. In the 13th century, it was captured by the Emperor of Nicaea, Theodore I Laskaris. In 1335, the Byzantines, with the help of Ottoman forces, reconquered the island, then property of the Genoese nobleman Domenico Cattaneo. In 1354, emperor John V Palaiologos gave it to the Genoese adventurer Francesco Gattilusio, who married the emperor's sister, Maria.  They renovated the fortress in 1373, and it remained in Genoese hands until 1462, when it was captured by the Ottoman sultan Mehmed II.

Demographics

Education

There are 15 primary schools in Mytilene, along with seven lyceums, and eight gymnasiums., the Central Library and the Research Committee of Aegean University. The University of Aegean is housed in privately owned buildings, in rented buildings located in the city centre, and in modern buildings on University Hill.

Industry

Mytilene has a port with ferries to the nearby islands of Lemnos and Chios and Ayvalık and at times Dikili in Turkey. The port also serves the mainland cities of Piraeus, Athens and Thessaloniki. One ship, named during the 2001 IAAF games in Edmonton Aeolos Kenteris, after Kostas Kenteris, used to serve this city (his hometown) with 6-hour routes from Athens and Thessaloniki. The main port serving Mytilene on the Greek mainland is Piraeus.
The city produces ouzo. There are more than 15 commercial producers on the island.
The city exports sardines harvested from the Bay of Kalloni and olive oil and woodwork.

Archaeology

Archaeological investigations at Mytilene began in the late 19th century when Robert Koldewey (later excavator of Babylon) and a group of German colleagues spent many months on the island preparing plans of the visible remains at various ancient sites like Mytilene.  Significant excavations, however, do not seem to have started until after the First World War when in the mid-1920s Evangelides uncovered much of the famous theatre (according to Plutarch it was the inspiration for Pompey's theatre in Rome in 55 BC, the first permanent stone theatre in that city) on the hill on the western side of town.  Subsequent work in the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s by various members of the Archaeological Service revealed more of the theatre, including a Roman conversion to a gladiatorial arena.  Salvage excavations carried out by the Archaeological Service in many areas of the city have revealed sites going back to the Early Bronze Age although most have been much later (Hellenistic and Roman).  Particularly significant is a large stoa over a hundred metres long recently dug on the North Harbour of the city.  It is clear from various remains in different parts of the city that Mytilene was indeed laid out on a grid plan as the Roman architect Vitruvius had written.
Archaeological excavations carried out between 1984 and 1994 in the Medieval Castle of Mytilene by the University of British Columbia and directed by Caroline and Hector Williams revealed a previously unknown sanctuary of Demeter and Kore of late classical/Hellenistic date and the burial chapel of the Gattelusi, the medieval Genoese family that ruled the northern Aegean from the mid-14th to mid-15th centuries of our era.  The Demeter sanctuary included five altars for sacrifices to Demeter and Kore and later also to Cybele, the great mother goddess of Anatolia.  Among the discoveries were thousands of oil lamps, terracotta figurines, loom weights and other dedications to the goddesses.  Numerous animal bones, especially of piglets, also appeared. The Chapel of St. John served as the church of the castle and as a burial place for the Gattelusi family and its dependents.  Although conversion to a mosque after the Ottoman capture of the city in 1462 resulted in the destruction of many graves some remained.  The great earthquake of February 1867 damaged the building beyond repair and it was demolished; the Turks built a new mosque over the ruins to replace it later in the 19th century.
Other excavations done jointly with the K' Ephoreia of Prehistoric and Classical Antiquities near the North Harbour of the city uncovered a multiperiod site with remains extending from a late Ottoman cemetery (including a "vampire" burial, a middle aged man with 
The city has two excellent archaeological museums, one by the south harbour in an old mansion and the other two hundred metres further north in a large new purpose built structure.  The former contains the rich Bronze Age remains from Thermi, a site north of Mytilene dug by the British in the 1930s as well as extensive pottery and figurine displays; the former coach house accommodates ancient inscriptions, architectural pieces, and coins.  The latter museum is especially rich in mosaics and sculpture, including the famous late Roman mosaic floor from the "House of Menander" with scenes from plays by that Athenian 4th-century BC playwright.  There are also mosaics and finds from other Roman mansions excavated by the Archaeological Service under the direction of the archeologist Mme. Aglaia Archontidou-Argyri.

Buildings, sites and monuments

Climate

Sporting teams

Famous Mytilenians

Ancient

Religious

Modern

Fictional

Twin cities

Gallery

File:Mytilini harbour, view from the air, Mytilini, Lesbos, Greece.jpg|Panorama of the city
File:Experimental Lyseum School of Mytilene.JPG|Experimental Lyceum School of Mytilene
File:Hotel Pyrgos Mytilinis.JPG|Hotel Pyrgos
File:Neoclasical2.JPG|Neoclassical house
File:Pink house.JPG|Another neoclassical







 

