[[Songkran (Thailand)]]

CATEGORIES: April observances, Festivals in Thailand, New Year celebrations, Fixed holidays (on non-Gregorian calendars)



The Songkran festival (,Saṃkrānti, Monier Williams Sanskrit-English Dictionary or literally "astrological passage") is celebrated in Thailand as the traditional New Year's Day from 13 to 15 April. It coincides with the New Year of many calendars of South and Southeast Asia.

New year traditions

The traditional throwing of water is meant as a symbol of washing all of the bad away and is sometimes filled with fragrant herbs when celebrated in the traditional manner.thaiworldview.htm

Controversy

"Celebrate Singapore"

In 2014 "Celebrate Singapore", a large two-day Songkran-style water festival, was planned for Singapore and the event was promoted as the "largest water festival party in Singapore". However, controversy emerged when the Tourism Authority of Thailand (TAT) Deputy Governor for Tourism Products, Vilaiwan Twichasri, claimed that Thailand holds exclusive rights to celebrate Songkran and planned to consult with officials at the Department of Intellectual Property, Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of Culture to discuss a potential lawsuit; the Deputy Governer's view was supported by numerous Thai citizens on social media websites.

Public nudity

Two Thai people were arrested during the 2014 celebration, as they had revealed their breasts in public in Pitsanulok province. Images of the nudity were disseminated on the Internet and condemnation was expressed in response. The pair was charged with indecent exposure, fined THB500 each and were taken to a local shrine to seek forgiveness from spirits. As of 15 April, a third person was being traced for exposing his penis in public in the same province.

In other calendars

Songkran occurs at the same time as that given by Bede for festivals of Eostre—and Easter weekend occasionally coincides with Songkran (most recently 1979, 1990, and 2001, but not again until 2085.)

Accidents


Police statistics show that the death toll from road accidents doubles during the annual Songkran holiday. According to the figures, between 2009 and 2013 there were about 27 road deaths per day during non-holiday periods and an average of 52 road deaths per day during Songkran. Thailand has the second-highest traffic fatality rate in the world, with 44 deaths per 100,000 residents, according to researchers at the University of Michigan Transportation Research Institute. Approximately 70% of the accidents that occurred during the long holiday period were motorcycle accidents. About 10,000 people per year die in motorcycle accidents—both the drivers and passengers.
During the 2014 Songkran festivities, 204 deaths and 2,142 injuries occurred by the end of the third day. Drunk driving and speeding were the most significant causes of accidents, in which motorcycles and pickup trucks were mostly involved. 





 | publisher = bigmango.info
 | title = Songkran in Bangkok – The World's Biggest Water Fight... EVER!
 | url = 
 | accessdate = 2013-04-15}}
 | publisher = airticketonsale.com
 | title = The Festival That Drenches You Out of Nowhere and How to Enjoy It
 | url = 
 | accessdate = 2014-04-01}}

Further reading


