[[Isaac Asimov]]

CATEGORIES: 1919 births, 1992 deaths, People from Shumyachsky District, Russian Jews, Soviet emigrants to the United States, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American science fiction writers, American science writers, Alternate history writers, American atheists, American biochemists, American essayists, American humorists, Jewish American writers, American memoirists, American mystery writers, American non-fiction environmental writers, American non-fiction writers, American writers of Russian descent, American skeptics, Boston University faculty, Columbia University alumni, Columbia University School of General Studies alumni, Columbia School of Engineering and Applied Science alumni, Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences, Futurians, Historians of astronomy, Historians of science, Critics of religions, Hugo Award winning writers, Humor researchers, Isaac Asimov, Jewish atheists, New York Democrats, Nebula Award winners, People from Brooklyn, Science fiction fans, Science Fiction Hall of Fame inductees, SFWA Grand Masters, World federalists, Worldcon Guests of Honor, Fellows of the Committee for Skeptical Inquiry, Jewish American novelists, United States Army soldiers, American military personnel of World War II, Yiddish-speaking people, Mensans, 20th-century American novelists, American male novelists, Jewish skeptics, Cardiovascular disease deaths in New York, Deaths from surgical complications, AIDS-related deaths in New York, People with HIV/AIDS, American humanists

Isaac Asimov (
Asimov is widely considered a master of hard science fiction and, along with Robert A. Heinlein and Arthur C. Clarke, he was considered one of the "Big Three" science fiction writers during his lifetime. He wrote hundreds of short stories, including the social science fiction "Nightfall", which in 1964 was voted by the Science Fiction Writers of America the best short science fiction story of all time. Asimov wrote the Lucky Starr series of juvenile science-fiction novels using the pen name Paul French.' And I did. I choose Paul French and..."
The prolific Asimov also wrote mysteries and fantasy, as well as much nonfiction. Most of his popular science books explain scientific concepts in a historical way, going as far back as possible to a time when the science in question was at its simplest stage. He often provides nationalities, birth dates, and death dates for the scientists he mentions, as well as etymologies and pronunciation guides for technical terms. Examples include Guide to Science, the three-volume set Understanding Physics, and Asimov's Chronology of Science and Discovery, as well as works on astronomy, mathematics, the Bible, William Shakespeare's writing, and chemistry.
Asimov was a long-time member and vice president of Mensa International, albeit reluctantly; he described some members of that organization as "brain-proud and aggressive about their IQs".[ref]
