[[Charles R. Drew]]

CATEGORIES: African-American scientists, Amherst College alumni, Accidental deaths, Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons alumni, People from Washington, D.C., Road accident deaths in North Carolina, McGill University alumni, 1904 births, 1950 deaths, Spingarn Medal winners, African-American physicians

Charles Richard Drew (June 3, 1904 – April 1, 1950) was an American physician, surgeon, and medical researcher. He researched in the field of blood transfusions, developing improved techniques for blood storage, and applied his expert knowledge to developing large-scale blood banks early in World War II.  This allowed medics to save thousands of lives of the Allied forces.

Early years

Drew was born in 1904 into an African-American middle-class family in Washington, D.C. His father, Richard, was a carpet layer and his mother, Nora Burrell, was a  teacher. Drew won an athletics scholarship to Amherst College in Massachusetts,Biography of Drew from PBS website of the special "Red Gold" where he graduated in 1926.  An outstanding athlete at Amherst,Drew was awarded for his "athletic prowess" biography from Charles R. Drew University; a picture of Drew in his football uniform is available from the website of the National Medical Library Drew also joined Omega Psi Phi fraternity.  He attended medical school at McGill University in Montreal, Canada, receiving his M.D. in 1933 as well as a Master of Surgery degree,Charles Drew page at blackinventor. Retrieved 2011-06-26. and ranked 2nd in his class of 127 students.  A few years later, Drew did graduate work at Columbia University, where he earned his Doctor of Medical Science degree, becoming the first African American to do so.

Academic career

In 1941, Drew's distinction in his profession was recognized when he became the first African American surgeon selected to serve as an examiner on the American Board of Surgery. Other sources put the date as late as 1943, e.g., PBS's Red Gold.  Drew had a lengthy research and teaching career and became a chief surgeon.

Blood Plasma for Great Britain Project

In late 1940, before the US entered World War II and just after earning his doctorate, Drew was recruited by John Scudder to help set up and administer an early prototype program for blood storage and preservation.  He was to collect, test, and transport large quantities of blood plasma for distribution in Great Britain. Drew went to New York to direct the United States' Blood for Britain project. The Blood for Britain project was a project to aid British soldiers and civilians by giving US blood to Great Britain.
Drew created a central location for the blood collection process where donors could go to give blood. He made sure all blood plasma was tested before it was shipped out. He ensured that only skilled personnel handled blood plasma to avoid the possibility of contamination. The Blood for Britain program operated successfully for five months, with total collections of almost 15,000 people donating blood, and with over 5,500 vials of blood plasma. As a result, the Blood Transfusion Betterment Association applauded Drew for his work. Out of his work came the American Red Cross Blood Bank.

Death

Beginning in 1939, Drew traveled to Tuskegee, Alabama to attend the annual free clinic at the John A. Andrew Memorial Hospital. He was pronounced dead a half hour after he first received medical attention. Drew's funeral was held on April 5, 1950, at the Nineteenth Street Baptist Church in Washington,DC.
Despite a popular myth to the contrary, once repeated on an episode of the hit TV series M*A*S*H, Drew's death was not the result of his having been refused medical care because of his skin color.

Personal life

In 1939, Drew married Minnie Lenore Robbins, a professor of home economics at Spelman College whom he had met earlier that year. His daughter Charlene Drew Jarvis was the president of Southeastern University from 1996 until 2009. (2004-06-04). Legacy and Memory of Charles Drew Lives On. The American National Red Cross. Retrieved 2007-04-01.

Legacy

Numerous schools and health-related facilities, as well as other institutions, have been named in honor of Dr. Drew.

Medical and higher education

K-12 schools

Dr. Charles Drew Elementary School, San Francisco, Ca.



Further reading




