[[Tom Van Flandern]]

CATEGORIES: American astronomers, Fringe physics, 1940 births, 2009 deaths

Thomas C Van Flandern (June 26, 1940 – January 9, 2009) was an American astronomer and author specializing in celestial mechanics. Van Flandern had a career as a professional scientist, but was noted as an outspoken proponent of non-mainstream views related to astronomy, physics, and extra-terrestrial life. He also published the non-mainstream Meta Research Bulletin. He died of colon cancer in Seattle, Washington.

Biography

While in High School, Van Flandern helped start the Cleveland branch of Operation Moonwatch, an amateur science program initiated by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory to track satellites.Kingsport News May 17, 1961 "Reports Activity" page 10The Anderson Herald May 17, 1961 "Cincy Moonwatchers Report on Satellites" page 2
Van Flandern graduated from Xavier University cum laude with a B.S. in Mathematics in 1962 and was awarded a teaching fellowship at Georgetown University.
Van Flandern worked at the USNO until 1983,USNO Staff Directory for Nautical Almanac Office, November 1977  His espousal of highly non-mainstream beliefs, particularly the exploded planet hypothesis, eventually led to his separation from the USNO. He later said, "This forced me to the "fringes", areas of astronomy not accepted as credible by experts of the field". 62, 2004.
Following his separation from the USNO, Van Flandern started a business organizing eclipse viewing expeditions, and promoting his non-mainstream views in a newsletter and web site.  Shortly after his death in 2009, Van Flandern's friend and associate David Dunham proposed that asteroid 52266 be named in his honor.

Mainstream scientific work

During the mid-1970s, Van Flandern believed that lunar observations gave evidence of variation in Newton's gravitational constant (G), consistent with a speculative idea that had been put forward by Paul Dirac. In 1974, his essay "A Determination of the Rate of Change of G" was awarded second place by the Gravity Research Foundation.
However, in later years, with new data available, Van Flandern himself admitted his findings were flawed, and the conclusions were contradicted by more accurate findings based on radio measurements with the Viking landers.
Following claims by David Dunham in 1978 to have detected satellites for some asteroids (notably 532 Herculina) by examining the light patterns during stellar occultations,Satellite of Minor Planet 532 Herculina Discovered During Occultation. David W. Dunham, The Minor Planet Bulletin, Volume 6, p.13–14 (December 1978) Van Flandern and others began to report similar observations. C., Tedesco, E. F. & Binzel, R. P. in Asteroids (ed. Gehrels, T.) 443–465 (Univ. Ariz. Press, Tucson, 1979). However, the reported findings were subsequently called into question by high resolution imaging from the Hubble telescope, which failed to detect satellites for the specific asteroids examined by Dunham and Van Flandern.
Van Flandern and Henry Fliegel developed a compact algorithm to calculate a Julian date from a Gregorian date. They described this in a letter to the editor of a computing magazine in 1968.  This was available for use in business applications.
With Kenneth Pulkkinen, he published "Low precision formulae for planetary positions", in the Astrophysical Journal Supplement in 1979. According to Van Flandern's obituary, the paper set a record for the number of reprints requested from that journal.

Non-mainstream science and beliefs

Van Flandern described in his book"Dark Matter, Missing Planets, New Comets", Van Flandern (1993) how he had become increasingly dissatisfied with the mainstream view of science by the early 1980s.  He wrote
In his book, and also in his newsletter and web site, Van Flandern alleged that experimental evidence is incompatible with mainstream scientific theories, but that mainstream scientists refuse to acknowledge this to avoid jeopardizing their funding.  He espoused a set of principles for assessing ideas, and dubbed theories that he deemed compliant with these principles as "Deep Reality Physics."  He claimed that mainstream scientific theories, especially the prevailing theories regarding the big bang, solar system formation, relativity, and electrodynamics, are incompatible with his principles, and advocated his own replacement theories. Notably, he contended that some features on the surface of Mars were created artificially, likely by an extra-terrestrial civilization that had fled its original home planet which, Van Flandern believed, had been a moon of an exploded planet where the asteroid belt is now located. His views have not found acceptance within the mainstream scientific community.

Exploding Planets

In 1976, while Van Flandern was employed by the USNO, he had began to promote the belief (first suggested by Olbers in the 1800sSee the Wikipedia article on Phaeton (hypothetical planet).) that major planets sometimes explode.org/solar%20system/eph/eph2000. If gravitational fields are continually regenerated, as in LeSage particle models of gravity xvi, then all masses are continually absorbing energy from this universal flux." In his book Van Flandern described the negative reception of his ideas about exploding planets among mainstream scientists.  Van Flandern also speculated that the origin of the human species may well have been on the planet Mars, which he believed was once a moon of a now-exploded "Planet V".

Le Sage's theory of gravitation and the speed of gravity

Van Flandern supported Le Sage's discredited theory of gravitation, according to which gravity is the result of a flux of invisible "ultra-mundane corpuscles" impinging on all objects from all directions at superluminal speeds. He gave public lectures in which he claimed that these particles could be used as a limitless source of free energy, and to provide superluminal propulsion for spacecraft.  He also speculated that the ultra-mundane flux caused the explosion of a major planet once located between Mars and Jupiter.
In 1998 Van Flandern wrote a paper

Face on Mars

Van Flandern was a prominent advocate of the belief that certain geological features seen on Mars, especially the "face at Cydonia", are not of natural origin, but were produced by intelligent extra-terrestrial life, probably the inhabitants of a major planet once located where the asteroid belt presently exists, and which Van Flandern believed had exploded 3.2 million years ago.
When it was first imaged, and into the 21st century, the "Face" is near universally accepted to be an optical illusion, an example of pareidolia, and theories that it was an artificial artifact were considered to be pseudo-science.

Rejection of Big Bang Cosmology

Van Flandern was a vocal opponent of the Big Bang model in cosmology, and espoused instead a Steady-State cosmology.  He compiled a list of what he regarded as problems for the Big Bang model.  It began as a list of "Top 10" problems, then expanded to the "Top 30", and ultimately by 2008 had reached the "Top 60".  In 2008 he was an organizer of a conference of individuals who oppose the Big Bang cosmological models.peninsuladailynews.com/article/20080911/NEWS/809110302  According to the report of one conference participant:
However, the consensus of the scientific community is that "The Big Bang is a well-tested scientific theory which is widely accepted within the scientific community because it is the most accurate and comprehensive explanation for the full range of phenomena astronomers observe. Since its conception, abundant evidence has arisen to further validate the model."Big Bang Wikipedia article on the Big Bang theory.








