[[Amphiprioninae]]

CATEGORIES: Pomacentridae, Symbiosis

Clownfish or anemonefish are fishes from the subfamily Amphiprioninae in the family Pomacentridae. Thirty species are recognized, one in the genus Premnas, while the remaining are in the genus Amphiprion. In the wild, they all form symbiotic mutualisms with sea anemones. Depending on species, Clownfish are overall yellow, orange, or a reddish or blackish color, and many show white bars or patches. The largest can reach a length of .

Ecology and habitat

Clownfish are native to warmer waters of the Indian and Pacific oceans, including the Great Barrier Reef and the Red Sea. While most species have restricted distributions, others are widespread. Clownfish live at the bottom of shallow seas in sheltered reefs or in shallow lagoons. There are no clownfish in the Atlantic.

Diet

Clownfish are omnivorous and can feed on undigested food from their host anemones, and the fecal matter from the clownfish provides nutrients to the sea anemone. Clownfish primarily feed on small zooplankton from the water column, such as copepods and tunicate larvae, with a small portion of their diet coming from algae, with the exception of Amphiprion perideraion, which primarily feeds on algae.

Symbiosis and mutualism

Clownfish and sea anemones have a symbiotic, mutualistic relationship, each providing a number of benefits to the other. The individual species are generally highly host specific, and especially the genera Heteractis and Stichodactyla, and the species Entacmaea quadricolor are frequent clownfish partners. The sea anemone protects the clownfish from predators, as well as providing food through the scraps left from the anemone's meals and occasional dead anemone tentacles. In return, the clownfish defends the anemone from its predators, and parasites.
Clownfish, Cardinalfish and certain damselfish are among the few species of fish that can avoid the potent poison of a sea anemone. There are several theories about how they can survive the sea anemone poison:

Reproduction

In a group of clownfish, there is a strict dominance hierarchy. The largest and most aggressive female is found at the top. Only two clownfish, a male and a female, in a group reproduce through external fertilization. Clownfish are sequential hermaphrodites, meaning that they develop into males first, and when they mature, they become females. If the female clownfish is removed from the group, such as by death, one of the largest and most dominant males will become a female. The remaining males will move up a rank in the hierarchy.
Clownfish lay eggs on any flat surface close to their host anemones. In the wild, clownfish spawn around the time of the full moon. Depending on the species, clownfish can lay hundreds or thousands of eggs. The male parent guards the eggs until they hatch about six to ten days later, typically two hours after dusk.

Parental investment

Most clownfish are protandrous hermaphrodites, meaning they alternate between the male and female sexes at some point in their lives.  Anemonefish colonies usually consist of the reproductive male and female and a few juveniles, who help tend the colony.
The reproductive cycle of clownfish is often correlated with the lunar cycle.  Rates of spawning for clownfish peak at approximately the first and third quarters of the moon.  The timing of this spawn means that the eggs will hatch around the full moon or new moon periods.  One explanation for this lunar clock is that spring tides produce the highest tides during full or new moons.  Nocturnal hatching during high tide may reduce predation by allowing for a greater capacity for escape.  Namely, the stronger currents and greater water volume during high tide protects the hatchlings by effectively sweeping them to safety.  Before spawning, clownfish exhibit increased rates of anemone and substrate biting, which help prepare and clean the nest for the spawn.
In terms of parental care, male clownfish are often the caretakers of eggs.  Before making the clutch, the parents often clear an oval sized clutch varying in diameter for the spawn.  Fecundity, or reproductive rate, of the females usually ranges from 600 to 1500 eggs depending on the size of the female.  In contrast to most animal species, the female only occasionally takes responsibility for the eggs, with males expending most of the time and effort.  Male clownfish care for their eggs by fanning and guarding them for 6 to 10 days until they hatch.  Studies have shown that, in general, eggs develop more rapidly in a clutch when males fanned properly and that fanning represents a crucial mechanism of successfully developing eggs.   This suggests that males have the ability to control the success of hatching an egg clutch by investing different amounts of time and energy towards the eggs.  For example, a male could choose to fan less in times of scarcity or fan more in times of abundance.  Furthermore, males display increased alertness when guarding more valuable broods, or eggs in which paternity was guaranteed.  Females, on the other hand, display generally less preference for parental behavior than males.  All these suggest that males have increased parental investment towards the eggs compared to females.

Marine ornamentals

Clownfish make up 43% of the global marine ornamental trade, and 25% of the global trade comes from fish bred in captivity, while the majority are captured from the wild,
When a sea anemone is not available in an aquarium, the clownfish may settle in some varieties of soft corals, or large polyp stony corals. Once an anemone or coral has been adopted, the clownfish will defend it. As there is less pressure to forage for food in an aquarium, it is common for clownfish to remain within 2-4 inches of their host for their entire lifetime.

Taxonomy

In popular culture

In the 2003 animated film Finding Nemo, the main character is a clownfish. The species depicted in the film is A. ocellaris.

Gallery

Image:Amphiprion allardi.1 - Aquarium Finisterrae.
Image:Maldive_anemonefish. It is sometimes called the Black-finned anemonefish due to its black pelvic and anal fins.
Image:Pink Skunk Clownfish.
Image:Amphiprion Species.
Image:Amphiprion sandaracinos.
Image:Amphiprion clarkii.
Image:Amphiprion chrysopterus by NPS.
Image:Bicinctus4. It is, as suggested by its alternative common name Red Sea clownfish, almost entirely restricted to the Red Sea.
File:Blackandorangefalsepercs. The exact taxonomic status of the latter is unclear.
Image:Amphiprion melanopus in Entacmaea quadricolor.
Image:Mclown.1.
Image:Ocellaris clownfish.






