[[Transport in Italy]]

CATEGORIES: Transport in Italy

Italy has well developed public and private transportation options. Italian rail network is extensive, especially in the north, generally eclipsing the need for an alternative such as bus or air (both of which, however, exist to some extent). While a number of private railroads exist and provide mostly commuter-type services, the national railway, Ferrovie dello Stato, also provides sophisticated high-speed rail service that joins the major cities of Italy from Naples through northern cities such as Milan and Turin. Italy has 2507 people and 12.46 km2 (World's seventh) per km of rail track.
Italy's road network is also widespread, with a total length of about 487,700 km.
Because of its long seacoast, Italy also has a large number of harbors for the transportation of both goods and passengers. Italy has been a seafaring peninsula dating back to the days of the Etruscans and the Greeks.

Railways

Italian railway system has a length of  electrified.
The narrow gauge tracks are: 
Most of the Italian rail network is managed and operated by Ferrovie dello Stato, a state owned company. Other railway companies, mostly owned by public entities such as Regions, operate on the Italian network, generally on regional services.
Travelers who will be using the railway often during their stay in Italy might use Rail Passes, some of them can be used also in other European countries. With these passes, options are available for the number of days travelers will be using the pass within a two-month period. There are also saver passes for adults who will always be traveling together during their trip, which can save up to 20% on the passes. Foreign travelers should purchase these passes far enough in advance to allow for shipping to a home address before traveling to Italy. When using these passes dates need to be filled in for the day they are being used before boarding the trains. High speed trains require seat reservations which can be obtained at the ticket offices. Regional trains, however, do not require seat reservations and a properly filled out rail pass will suffice as a ticket.italiarail.com/rail-passes

High speed trains

High-speed rail in Italy currently consists of two lines connecting all the country's major cities. The first line connects Milan to Salerno via Bologna, Florence, Rome and Naples, the second runs from Turin to Venice via Milan, and is under construction in parts. The network is designed for a top speed of over .
Service is provided by Trenitalia and, since 2012, by NTV, the first private operator of high-speed trains.

Rapid transit

Cities with metro systems:
Cities with commuter rail systems:

Rail links with adjacent countries

Italy's main railroad passenger carrier, Trenitalia, operates trains linking Italy to France, Switzerland, Austria and Slovenia. Other companies, like Cisalpino (owned by Trenitalia and SBB), Rhätische Bahn and SNCF operate international links.
Vatican City is also linked with a railroad, occasionally used.

Stations

Italy's top ten railway stations by annual passengers are:
Stations with darker background are also served by High-speed trains

Roads

Italy is one of the countries with the most vehicles per capita, with 690 per 1000 people in 2010..

Waterways

Italy has 

Ports and harbours

|
|}

Airports

Italy is the fifth in Europe by number of passengers by air transport, with about 148 million passengers or about 10% of the European total in 2011. Most of passengers in Italy are on international flights (57%). A big share of domestic flights connect the major islands (Sardinia and Sicily) to the mainland. Domestic flights between major Italian cities as Rome and Milan still play a relevant role but are declining since the opening of the Italian high-speed rail network in recent years.
Italy has a total as of 130 airports in 2012, of which 99 have paved runways:
Airports - with unpaved runways in 2012:

Busiest airports

This is a list of the top ten busiest airports in Italy in 2009. 








