[[Napton-on-the-Hill]]

CATEGORIES: Villages in Warwickshire

Napton-on-the-Hill, (often referred to locally as just Napton), is a village and civil parish  east of Southam in Warwickshire, England.

Manor

The toponym Napton is derived from the Old English cnaepp meaning 'hilltop' and tun meaning 'settlement' in the Old English language.
The Domesday Book records that in 1086 Robert de Beaumont, Count of Meulan held the principal manor of Napton. In 1107 Henry I made de Beaumont Earl of Leicester and de Beaumont's manor at Napton became part of the honour of Leicester. When Robert de Beaumont, 4th Earl of Leicester died in 1204 leaving no male heir his estates were divided between his two sisters. Napton was included in the half that passed to his younger sister Margaret, and thereby to her husband Saer de Quincy who in 1207 was made Earl of Winchester. Napton was still part of the Honour of Winchester in 1271 but Roger de Quincy, 2nd Earl of Winchester had died in 1265 with no male heir, leaving his estates to his three daughters. In 1285 the husbands of two of these, Alexander Comyn, Earl of Buchan and William de Ferrers, 5th Earl of Derby, jointly claimed view of frankpledge over Napton. There are further references to Napton's feudal overlordship in the 14th century and in 1413.

Parish church

The oldest parts of the Church of England parish church of St Lawrence include the chancel, The north and south aisles were added in the 13th century after the transepts. The lower stages of the bell tower date from about 1300. The east window of the south transept is a later Perpendicular Gothic addition.
The south porch reuses a mixture of Early English and Perpendicular masonry and has puzzled historians. Salzman thought it could have been built either at the end of the 16th century or in the 17th century but Pevsner and Wedgwood suspected the involvement of J. Croft, the architect who restored the church in 1861. The vestry may also have been added in the 17th century and the upper stage of the tower was rebuilt early in the 18th century. After this rebuilding a ring of five bells was cast in 1731 and hung in the tower. The tenor was recast in 1874 and Eayre & Smith Ltd. rehung all the bells in 1958. The ring was increased to six bells by the addition of the treble cast by Whitechapel Bell Foundry in 1963.
St. Lawrence's is at the top of the hill, making it a local landmark and giving it commanding views over the surrounding countryside, especially from the top of the tower. St. Lawrence's parish is now part of a single Church of England benefice with the parishes of Lower Shuckburgh and Stockton,Napton-on-the-Hill - St. Lawrence, Napton-on-the-hill part of the Bridges Group of parishes.The Bridges Group
Actor Ed Bishop is buried in the churchyard.

Economic and social history

In the 14th century Napton was granted a market charter by King Edward II and throughout the Middle Ages it was one of the largest settlements in Warwickshire. However the market died out, and the population of the village today of around 1,000, is roughly the same as it was in the year 1400.
Napton had a windmill by 1543. The present stone-built tower mill is a later structure that was derelict in 1966 but has since been restored.
Napton had separate schools for girls and boys until 1948 when they were merged to form the current St. Lawrence Church of England Primary School,St Lawrence CE Primary School with Little Lawrences which moved to its current premises in 1997.

Canals

The first section of the Oxford Canal from Hawkesbury Junction was completed in 1771
The Oxford Canal's chief engineer, Samuel Simcock, designed
the canal to be a contour canal as much as possible, so he routed it around three sides of Napton Hill to minimise the number of locks needed. Even so, to climb from Napton Wharf to the summit pound at Marston Doles required eight locks around the hill (nos. 8-15) and another at Marston Doles (no. 16), that between them raise boats by a total of 
The  The boiler needed replacement as early as 1794 and an accident with the engine killed a workman in 1796.
In 1800 the Warwick and Napton Canal (W&N) was completed, joining the Oxford Canal at Napton Junction.
A century later, in autumn 1911, the canals again suffered a water shortage so the Oxford Canal brought its well at Napton back into use.
In 1928 the Grand Junction Canal took over the W&N and Warwick and Birmingham canals to form the Grand Union Canal..
The canals are now primarily a leisure facility and Napton Junction has a marina that offers moorings and narrowboats for hire.Napton Narrowboats

Amenities

Napton FC plays on Dog Lane Sports Field. It currently

Napton Festival

On 16 September 2006 the first Napton Festival was held at Holt Farm on Holt Road. The headline act was the hard rock band Girlschool. The festival was repeated in the same place in 2007, with two stages and with the Sweet and the Hollies as its main acts. In 2008 the main acts were Bad Company on the main stage and Aynsley Lister in the marquee. The 2008 festival extended to the Friday night with Jilted Generation performing in the marquee. Smaller events were held in Napton village 2009 and 2010, both headlined by Whole Lotta DC.
In 2011 the festival was held in a new site on the edge of Napton village.

Notable people

The American actor Ed Bishop (1932–2005) is buried in the parish churchyard, having lived in the village for several years.



Sources




