[[Ephedrine]]

CATEGORIES: Amphetamine alkaloids, Decongestants, World Health Organization essential medicines

Ephedrine (; not to be confused with ephedrone) is a sympathomimetic amine commonly used as a stimulant, appetite suppressant, concentration aid, decongestant, and to treat hypotension associated with anaesthesia.
Ephedrine is similar in molecular structure to the well-known drugs phenylpropanolamine and methamphetamine, as well as to the important neurotransmitter epinephrine (adrenaline). Chemically, it is an alkaloid with a phenethylamine skeleton found in various plants in the genus Ephedra (family Ephedraceae). It works mainly by increasing the activity of norepinephrine (noradrenaline) on adrenergic receptors. It is most usually marketed as the hydrochloride or sulfate salt.
The herb má huáng (麻黄, Ephedra sinica), used in traditional Chinese medicine, contains ephedrine and pseudoephedrine as its principal active constituents. The same may be true of other herbal products containing extracts from other Ephedra species.

History

Ephedrine in its natural form, known as má huáng (麻黄) in traditional Chinese medicine, has been documented in China since the Han Dynasty (206 BC – 220 AD) as an antiasthmatic and stimulant.

Chemistry

Ephedrine exhibits optical isomerism and has two chiral centres, giving rise to four stereoisomers. By convention the pair of enantiomers with the stereochemistry (1R,2S and 1S,2R) is designated ephedrine, while the pair of enantiomers with the stereochemistry (1R,2R and 1S,2S) is called pseudoephedrine.
Ephedrine is a substituted amphetamine and a structural methamphetamine analogue. It differs from methamphetamine only by the presence of a hydroxyl (OH).
The isomer which is marketed is (–)-(1R,2S)-ephedrine.
Ephedrine hydrochloride has a melting point of 187−188 °C. The Merck Index: An encyclopedia of chemicals, drugs, and biologicals, 12th edition. Whitehouse Station: Merck

Nomenclature

The dextrorotary (+)- or d- enantiomer is (1S,2R)-Ephedrine, whereas the levorotatory (−)- or l- form is (1R,2S)-Ephedrine.
In the outdated Ephedrine (in the Fisher projection then the phenylring is drawn at bottom). Patil, A. Tye and J.B. LaPidus A pharmacological study of the ephedrine isomers JPET May 1965 vol. 148, no. 2, pp. 158-168. Full PDF
Often the Pseudoephedrine.
The IUPAC names of the two enantiomers are (1R,2S)- respectively (1S,2R)-2-methylamino-1-phenylpropan-1-ol. A synonym is erythro-Ephedrine.

Agricultural sources

Ephedrine is obtained from the plant Ephedra sinica and other members of the Ephedra genus. Raw materials for the manufacture of ephedrine and traditional Chinese medicines are produced in China on a large scale. As of 2007, companies produced for export US$13 million worth of ephedrine from 30,000 tons of ephedra annually, 10 times the amount that is used in traditional Chinese medicine. 

Synthetic sources

Most of the l-ephedrine produced today for official medical use is made synthetically as the extraction and isolation process from Herba Ephedra is tedious and no longer cost effective.Chemically Synthesized Ephedrine Put Into Mass Production in China

Mechanism of action

Ephedrine is a sympathomimetic amine. The principal mechanism of its action relies on its indirect stimulation of the adrenergic receptor system, which is part of the sympathetic nervous system (SNS), by increasing the activity of noradrenaline at the post-synaptic α- and β-receptors.Guoyi Ma, et al. Pharmacological Effects of Ephedrine Alkaloids on Human {alpha}1- and {alpha}2-Adrenergic Receptor Subtypes J. Pharmacol. Exp. Ther.; nr. 322 pp. 214-221 (july 2007) PDFShigeaki Kobayashi, et al. The Sympathomimetic Actions of l-Ephedrine and d-Pseudoephedrine: Direct Receptor Activation or Norepinephrine Release? Anesth Analg 2003; 97, pp.1239-1245. L-Ephedrine, and particularly its stereoisomer norpseudoephedrine (which is also present in Catha edulis) has indirect sympathomimetic effects and due to its ability to cross the blood brain barrier, it is a CNS stimulant similar to amphetamines but less pronounced, as it releases noradrenaline and dopamine in the substantia nigra. (2006). "Dopamine-mediated actions of ephedrine in the rat substantia nigra." Brain Res. 1069 (1 ): 96-103. PMID 16386715
The presence of an N-methyl group decreases binding affinities at α-receptors, compared with norephedrine. On the other hand ephedrine binds better than N-methylephedrine, which has an additional methyl group at the N-atom. Also the steric orientation of the hydroxyl group is important for receptor binding and functional activity.

|
File:RS-Norephedrine.svg|Norephedrine
|
File:RS-Ephedrine.svg|Ephedrine
|
File:RS-N-Methylephedrine.svg|N-Methylephedrine

Medical use

Ephedrine is a potentially dangerous substance; 

Indications

In traditional Chinese medicine, má huáng has been used as an attempted treatment for asthma and bronchitis for centuries. Clinical Toxicology. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 2001. ISBN 0-7216-5485-1
Research Laboratories; 1996. ISBN 0-911910-12-3[/ref]
Both ephedrine and pseudoephedrine increase blood pressure and act as bronchodilators, with pseudoephedrine having considerably less effect.
Drew, et al. Comparison of the effects of D-(-)-ephedrine and L-(+)-pseudoephedrine on the cardiovascular and respiratory systems in man. Br J Clin Pharmacol. 1978; 6, pp 221-225. PDF
Ephedrine promotes weight loss,
Ephedrine increases performance in athletes, and has a synergistic effect with caffeine.
For many years, the US Coast Guard recommended ephedrine together with an equal 25 mg dose of promethazine to its sailors to combat seasickness. Promethazine manages nausea and ephedrine fights the ensuing drowsiness. Commonly referred to as the Coast Guard cocktail, ephedrine may still be available for prescription for this purpose.

Adverse effects

Adverse drug reactions (ADRs) are more common with systemic administration (e.g. injection or oral administration) compared to topical administration (e.g. nasal instillations). ADRs associated with ephedrine therapy include:Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary, 47th edition. London: British Medical Association and Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain; 2004. ISBN 0-85369-587-3
The neurotoxicity of l-Ephedrine is disputed.
Txsci.

Contraindications

Ephedrine should not be used in conjunction with certain antidepressants, namely SNRIs (serotonin-norepinephrine re-uptake inhibitors), as this increases the risk of the above symptoms due to excessive serum levels of norepinephrine.
Bupropion is an example of an antidepressant with an amphetamine-like structure similar to ephedrine, and it is known as an NDRI (norepinephrine-dopamine re-uptake inhibitor). It has an action which bears more resemblance to amphetamine than to fluoxetine in that its primary mode of therapeutic action involves norepinephrine and to a lesser degree dopamine, but it also releases some serotonin from presynaptic clefts. It should not be used with ephedrine as it may increase the likelihood of the above side effects.
Ephedrine should be used with caution in patients with inadequate fluid replacement, impaired adrenal function, hypoxia, hypercapnia, acidosis, hypertension, hyperthyroidism, prostatic hypertrophy, diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disease, during delivery if maternal BP > 130/80 mmHg, and lactation. Ephedrine sulfate injection DBL (Approved Product Information). Melbourne: Mayne Pharma; 2004
Contraindications for the use of ephedrine include: closed angle glaucoma, phaeochromocytoma, asymmetric septal hypertrophy (idiopathic hypertrophic subaortic stenosis), concomitant or recent (previous 14 days) monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) therapy, general anaesthesia with halogenated hydrocarbons (particularly halothane), tachyarrhythmias or ventricular fibrillation, hypersensitivity to ephedrine or other stimulants.
Ephedrine should not be used at any time during pregnancy unless specifically indicated by a qualified physician and only when other options are unavailable.

Recreational and illicit use

Anecdotal reports have suggested that ephedrine helps studying, thinking, or concentrating to a greater extent than caffeine. Some students and some white-collar workers have used ephedrine (or Ephedra-containing herbal supplements) for this purpose, as well as some professional athletes and weightlifters. It is common for many athletes to use stimulants while exercising. Such use of ephedrine has been associated with stimulant dependence, as well as deaths from heatstroke in athletes and circulatory problems such as aortic aneurysm in weightlifters, though these side effects are rare.
As a phenylethylamine, ephedrine has a similar chemical structure to amphetamines and is a methamphetamine analogue having the methamphetamine structure with a hydroxyl group at the β position. Because of ephedrine's structural similarity to methamphetamine it can be used to create methamphetamine using chemical reduction in which ephedrine's hydroxyl group is removed; this has made ephedrine a highly sought-after chemical precursor in the illicit manufacture of methamphetamine. The most popular method for reducing ephedrine to methamphetamine is similar to the Birch reduction, in that it uses anhydrous ammonia and lithium metal in the reaction. The second most popular method uses red phosphorus, iodine, and ephedrine in the reaction.
In E for EcstasySaunders, N., & Heron, L., (1993) E for Ecstasy (Paperback), N. Saunders, London. (ISBN 0950162884) (a book examining the uses of the drug MDMA in the UK)  the writer, activist and Ecstasy advocate Nicholas Saunders highlighted test results showing that certain consignments of the drug also contained ephedrine. Consignments of Ecstasy known as "Strawberry" contained what Saunders described as a "potentially dangerous combination of ketamine, ephedrine and selegiline," as did a consignment of "Sitting Duck" Ecstasy tablets.org/testing/pillstilJuly.
Through oxidation, ephedrine can be easily synthesized into methcathinone. Ephedrine is listed as a Table I precursor under the United Nations Convention Against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.doc

Detection of use

Ephedrine may be quantitated in blood, plasma or urine to monitor possible abuse by athletes, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning or assist in a medicolegal death investigation. Many commercial immunoassay screening tests directed at the amphetamines cross-react appreciably with ephedrine, but chromatographic techniques can easily distinguish ephedrine from other phenethylamine derivatives. Blood or plasma ephedrine concentrations are typically in the 20-200 µg/L range in persons taking the drug therapeutically, 300-3000 µg/L in abusers or poisoned patients and 3–20 mg/L in cases of acute fatal overdosage. The current WADA limit for ephedrine in an athlete's urine is 10 µg/L. Ephedrine-induced cardiac ischemia: exposure confirmed with a serum level. Clin. Toxicol. 41: 849-853, 2003. The World Anti-Doping Code, World Anti-Doping Agency, Montreal, Canada, 2010. urlR. Baselt, Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man, 8th edition, Biomedical Publications, Foster City, CA, 2008, pp. 542-544.

Other uses

In chemical synthesis, ephedrine is used in bulk quantities to produce chiral auxiliary groups.
Chiral Polycyclic Ketones via Desymmetrization of Dihaloolefins Giuseppe Borsato, Anthony Linden, Ottorino De Lucchi, Vittorio Lucchini, David Wolstenholme, and Alfonso Zambon J. Org. Chem.; 2007; 72(11) pp 4272 - 4275; (Note) 

Legality

Canada

In January 2002, Health Canada issued a voluntary recall of all ephedrine products containing more than 8 mg per dose, all combinations of ephedrine with other stimulants such as caffeine, and all ephedrine products marketed for weight-loss or bodybuilding indications, citing a serious risk to health. Ephedrine is still sold as an oral nasal decongestant in 8 mg pills, OTC.

USA

In 1997, the FDA proposed a regulation on ephedra (the herb from which ephedrine is obtained), which limited an ephedra dose to 8 mg (of active ephedrine) with no more than 24 mg per day."Federal Register: April 3, 2000 (Volume 65, Number 64): Dietary Supplements Containing Ephedrine Alkaloids; Withdrawal in Part In 2004, the FDA created a ban on ephedrine alkaloids that are marketed for reasons other than asthma, colds, allergies, other disease, or traditional Asian use.S. District Court for the District of Utah ruled that the FDA did not have proper evidence that low dosages of ephedrine alkaloids are actually unsafe, Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit in Denver upheld the FDA's final rule declaring all dietary supplements containing ephedrine alkaloids adulterated, and therefore illegal for marketing in the United States.ck10.gov/opinions/05/05-4151. However, purchasing is currently limited and monitored, with specifics varying from state to state.
The House passed the Combat Methamphetamine Epidemic Act of 2005 as an amendment to the renewal of the USA PATRIOT Act. Signed into law by president George W. Bush on March 6, 2006, the act amended the US Code (21 USC 830) concerning the sale of ephedrine-containing products. The federal statute included the following requirements for merchants who sell these products:
The law gives similar regulations to mail-order purchases, except the monthly sales limit is only 7.5 grams.
As a pure herb or tea, má huáng, containing ephedrine, is still sold legally in the USA.  The law restricts/prohibits its being sold as a dietary supplement(pill) or as an ingredient/additive to other products, like diet pills.

South Africa

In South Africa ephedrine was rescheduled to Schedule 6 on 27 May 2008, which makes the substance legal to possess but available via a prescription only.

Synthesis

Ephedrine can be synthesized from benzaldehyde in a few different ways. According to the first, benzaldehyde is condensed with nitroethane, giving 2-methyl-2-nitro-1-phenylethanol, which is reduced to 2-methyl-2-amino-1-phenylethanol. Gohring, Monatsh. Chem., 41, 319 (1920) The necessary L-isomer is isolated from the mixture of isomers by crystallization. Methylation of this gives ephedrine.
The second method consists of the fermentation of glucose by yeast carboligase in the presence of benzaldehyde, which during the process turns into phenylacetylcarbinol. This is reduced by hydrogen in the presence of methylamine to give the desired ephedrine.W. Klawehn, G. Hilderbrandt,  (1926)






