[[Financial Accounting Standards Board]]

CATEGORIES: Accounting organizations, Accounting in the United States, Non-profit organizations based in Connecticut, Organizations established in 1973, 1973 establishments in Connecticut

The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) is a private, not-for-profit organization whose primary purpose is to develop generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) within the United States in the public's interest. The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) designated the FASB as the organization responsible for setting accounting standards for public companies in the U.S. It was created in 1973, replacing the Committee on Accounting Procedure (CAP) and the Accounting Principles Board (APB) of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (AICPA).

Mission statement

The FASB's mission is "to establish and improve standards of financial accounting and reporting for the guidance and education of the public, including issuers, auditors, and users of financial information."Financial Accounting Standards Board (2007). Facts About FASB.  To achieve this, FASB has five goals:

Description

The FASB is not a governmental body. The SEC has legal authority to establish financial accounting and reporting standards for publicly held companies under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. Throughout its history, however, Commission policy has been to rely on the private sector for this function to the extent that the private sector demonstrates ability to fulfill the responsibility in the public interest.
The FASB is part of a structure that is independent of all other business and professional organizations. Before the present structure was created, financial accounting and reporting standards were established first by the Committee on Accounting Procedure of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants (1936–1959) and then by the Accounting Principles Board, also a part of the AICPA (1959–73). Pronouncements of those predecessor bodies remain in force unless amended or superseded by the FASB.
The FASB is subject to oversight by the Financial Accounting Foundation (FAF), which selects the members of the FASB and the Governmental Accounting Standards Board and funds both organizations. The Board of Trustees of the FAF, in turn, is selected in part by a group of organizations including:
The FASB's structure is very different from its predecessors in many ways.  The board consists of seven full-time members. Intermediate Accounting (5th Edition). McGraw-Hill/Irwin. .  These members are required to sever all ties to previous firms and institutions that they may have served prior to joining the FASB.  This is to ensure the impartiality and independence of the FASB.  All members are selected by the FAF.  They are appointed for a five-year term and are eligible for one additional five-year term.
The current members are (with current term end dates indicated):
In addition to the full-time members, there are approximately 68 staff members.  These staff are, "professionals drawn from public accounting, industry, academe, and government, plus support personnel."
In 1984, the FASB formed the Emerging Issues Task Force (EITF).  This group was formed in order to provide timely responses to financial issues as they emerged. This group includes 15 people from both the private and public sectors coupled with representatives from the FASB and an SEC observer.  As issues emerge, the task force considers them and tries to reach a consensus on what course of action to take.  If that consensus can be reached, they issue an EITF Issue and FASB doesn't get involved.  An EITF Issue is considered just as valid as a FASB pronouncement and is included in the GAAP.

Creation of the Codification

On July 1, 2009, the FASB announced the launch of its Accounting Standards Codification, declaring it to be "the single source of authoritative nongovernmental U.S. generally accepted accounting principles."  The Codification organizes the many pronouncements that constitute U.S. GAAP into a consistent, searchable format. News Release 07/1/09. Retrieved September 8, 2009. The Codification is not to be confused with the FASB's Conceptual Framework, a project begun in 1973 to develop a sound theoretical basis for the development of accounting standards in the United States.

Conceptual Framework

FASB and the International Accounting Standard Board are working closely together to develop a common Conceptual Framework. The goal is to develop standards that are objectives-based, internally consistent, and internationally converged. Currently Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 8 "Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting"  is being used in the United States. The Conceptual Framework include: measurement attributes used to measure and report economic transactions, events, and arrangements in financial statements; and accounting principles and assumptions that guide recognition, derecognition, and disclosure, as well as the classification and presentation of information in financial statements.
Fundamental qualitative characteristics, relevance and faithful representation allow for decision usefulness. Information that is capable of making a difference in decisions made by financial statement users is relevant. The three components of relevance are: 
Faithful representation is when the words and numbers accurately predict the economic substance of what they purport to represent. The three components of faithful representation are: 

Norwalk Agreement

FASB is pursuing a convergence project with the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS).  On Sept. 18, 2002, in Norwalk, Connecticut, FASB and IASB met and issued a Memorandum of Understanding. Memorandum of Understanding, "The Norwalk Agreement"..  Retrieved March 17, 2009. This document outlined plans to converge IFRS and US GAAP into one set of high quality and compatible standards.  As part of the project, FASB has begun moving a from the principle of historical cost to fair value.

Independence

In June 2009, FASB was criticized by an advisory panel of investors after making changes on mark-to-market accounting in response to political pressure. Lobbyists had obtained its permission for banks to apply a special accounting treatment for toxic assets.

FASB pronouncements

In order to establish accounting principles, the FASB issues pronouncements publicly, each addressing general or specific accounting issues. These pronouncements are:

FASB 11 Concepts



Current issues

Related associations






