[[Aker Stadion]]

CATEGORIES: Molde FK, Football venues in Norway, Sports venues in Molde, Sports venues completed in 1998, 1998 establishments in Norway

Aker Stadion, formerly known as Molde Stadion, is a football stadium located at Reknes in Molde, Norway, and is the home of Norwegian Premier League club Molde. The stadium has a capacity of 11,800 spectators.
The building was designed by architect Kjell Kosberg. It cost , most of which was paid for by club-owner Kjell Inge Røkke—after whom the ground has been nicknamed "Røkkeløkka". The main construction work took place 1997, and the stadium was inaugurated on 18 April 1998 in a league game against Lillestrøm, replacing Molde idrettspark as Molde's home ground. The stadium was nominated for the FIABCI Prix D' Excellence and awarded the City Prize in 1999. The record attendance of 13,308 was set in a league match against Rosenborg in 1998. The same year, the arena hosted its only international match, where Norway beat Saudi Arabia 6–0. The following year, when Molde reached the UEFA Champions League, the stadium was converted to an all-seater, reducing its capacity. Since May 2006, the stadium name has been sponsored by Røkke's company Aker. The field is scheduled to receive artificial turf in 2014.

History

Since 1955, Molde had been playing their home games at Molde idrettspark (at the time called Molde stadion), a municipal-owned multi-use venue.
The stadium was inaugurated on 18 April 1998, when the stadium was officially opened by Prime Minister and Molde-fan Kjell Magne Bondevik.
During the fall of 1999, Molde played two qualification games for UEFA Champions League at the stadium. Following the aggregated victories over CSKA Moscow Following entry into Champions League, the stadium was converted to an all-seater, with seats being installed on the lower sections of the short end stands. The reduced the attendance capacity permanently, because the club chose to not remove the seats afterwards.
In 2006, an agreement was made where Røkke's company Aker became the stadium name sponsor, with the stadium being renamed Aker stadion.
Molde later entered the UEFA Cup four times (renamed to Europa League in 2010), in 2000–01, 2003–04 and 2006–07, 2010–11, playing a total of eight home games, before they in 2012 again played qualification for the Champions League and Ventspils and Basel visited Aker Stadion. Molde were eliminated by Basel, but managed to qualify for the Europa League group stage and played against Heerenveen, Stuttgart, Steaua Bucuresti and Copenhagen at Aker Stadion.  
Aker Stadion has been proposed used during the annual Moldejazz, Norway's largest jazz festival, but this has been rejected several times by the festival management. The issue was intensified in 2004, when a much smaller arena was used for a quickly sold-out Stevie Wonder concert.
The club decided on 4 October 2013 to lay artificial turf on the field, which it hoped would be in place ahead of the 2014 season. The club was especially concerned with the poor surface during March, April, October and November. It also cited the possibility of hosting all trainings at the stadium and that the field could be used 2,000 instead of 130 hours per year.

Facilities

The stadium was designed by Kjell Kosberg of Kosbergs Arkitektkontorer. In addition to featuring the stadium, the complex has  The stadium was also nominated to FIABCI's Prix D' Excellence.
There are four stands in two tiers built as a continual whole and a capacity of 11,167. Prior to 1999, the lower tiers along the short sides had terraces, allowing an initial capacity of 13,308. There are 13 entrances, 52 toilets and 9 kiosks. 
The stadium is located within walking distance of the city center. There is no public transport that serves the arena, but all city and regional buses serve the city center's bus terminal, which is within walking distance. On game days, Aukra Auto operates a bus service from Aukra, while Nettbuss operates from Eidsvåg, Kleive, Batnfjordsøra and Sjøholt. Tide Sjø operates a fast ferry to Helland and Vikebukt.

Attendance

The stadium has hosted more than 10,000 spectators 30 times. One match was the international game between Norway and Saudi Arabia, which attracted 13,114 spectators. Molde FK has attracted such attendance twenty-six times in Tippeligaen, of which eight have been against Rosenborg BK and six in derbys against Aalesunds FK. In addition, two high-attendance matches have been played in Champions League and one in the Norwegian Football Cup. The all-time record dates from the 1998 derby with Rosenborg BK, which was followed by 13,308 spectators.
The following list includes the attendance for Molde FK during the home domestic league matches. It excludes cup and UEFA tournaments. In 2007, the club played in the First Division. The table includes average, minimum and maximum attendance, in addition to the attendance rank among the top-league teams.




