[[Time signal]]

CATEGORIES: Time signal radio stations, Time signals, Horology

A time signal is a visible, audible, mechanical, or electronic signal used as a reference to determine the time of day. Church bells or voices announcing hours of prayer gave way to automatically operated chimes on public clocks; however, audible signals (even signal guns) have limited range. Busy ports used a visual signal, the dropping of a ball, to allow mariners to check the chronometers used for navigation. The advent of electrical telegraphs allowed widespread and precise distribution of time signals from central observatories. Railways were among the first customers for time signals, which allowed synchronization of their operations over wide geographic areas. Special purpose radio time signal stations transmit a signal that allows automatic synchronization of clocks, and commercial broadcasters still include time signals in their programming. Today, GPS navigation radio signals are used to precisely distribute time signals over much of the world.

Audible and visible time signals

One sort of public time signal is a striking clock.  These clocks are only as good as the clockwork that activates them, but they have improved substantially since the first clocks from the 14th century.  Until modern times, a public clock such as Big Ben was the only time standard the general public needed.
When more accurate time signals were required in navigation, a number of traditional audible or visible time signals were established so navigators could check their marine chronometers.  These public time signals were formerly established in many seaport cities.

Signal guns

In Vancouver, British Columbia, a "9 O'Clock Gun" is still shot every night at 9 pm.  (This gun was brought to Stanley Park in 1894 by the Department of Fisheries originally to warn fishermen of the 6:00 pm Sunday closing of fishing.)  The 9:00 pm firing was later established as a time signal for the general population. Until a time gun was installed, the nearby Brockton Point lighthouse keeper detonated a stick of dynamite. Elsewhere in Canada, a "Noon Gun" is fired daily from the citadels in Halifax and Quebec City.
In the same manner, a noon gun has been fired in Cape Town, South Africa, since 1806. The gun is fired daily from the Lion Battery at Signal Hill.
A cannon was shot at one o'clock every weekday at Liverpool, England, at the Castle in Edinburgh, Scotland, and also at Perth in Australia to establish the time. The Edinburgh "One O'Clock Gun" is still in operation. A cannon located at the top of Santa Lucia Hill, in Santiago, Chile, is shot every noon.
In places where a cannon is used for a time signal, locals often joke that they can spot tourists because they jump in surprise while locals check their watches.

Sirens and other audible signals

In many Midwestern US cities where tornadoes are a common hazard, the emergency sirens are tested regularly at a specified time (say, noon each Saturday); while not primarily intended to mark the time, locals often check their watches when they hear this signal. In many non-seafaring communities, loud factory whistles served as public time signals before radio made them obsolete.

Visual signals

In 1861 and 1862, the Edinburgh Post Office Directory published time gun maps relating the number of seconds required for the report of the time gun to reach various locations in the city. Because light travels much faster than sound, visible signals enabled greater precision than audible ones, although audible signals could operate better under conditions of reduced visibility. The first time ball was erected at Portsmouth, England in 1829 by its inventor Robert Wauchope.164. Duke University Press, 2010 One was installed in 1833 on the roof of the Royal Observatory in Greenwich, London, and the time ball has dropped at 1pm every day since then. In New York City, the ceremony of Times Square Ball drop at New Year's Eve in Times Square is a vestige of a visual time signal.

Electrical time signals

Sandford Fleming proposed a single 24-hour clock for the entire world. At a meeting of the Royal Canadian Institute on 8 February 1879 he linked it to the anti-meridian of Greenwich (now 180°). He suggested that standard time zones could be used locally, but they were subordinate to his single world time.
Standard time came into existence in the United States on 18 November 1883.  Earlier, on 11 October 1883, the General Time Convention, forerunner to the American Railway Association, approved a plan that divided the United States into several time zones.  On that November day, the United States Naval Observatory telegraphed a signal that coordinated noon at Eastern standard time with  11 am Central,  10 am Mountain, and 9 am Pacific standard time.
A March 1905 issue of The Technical World describes the role of the United States Naval Observatory as a source of time signals:

Radio time sources

Dedicated time signal broadcasts

The telegraphic distribution of time signals was made obsolete by the use of AM, FM, shortwave radio, Internet Network Time Protocol servers as well as atomic clocks in satellite navigation systems.  Since 1905 time signals have been transmitted by radio.R. W. Burns, Communications: an international history of the formative years, IET, 2004 ISBN 0863413277 page 121 There are dedicated radio time signal stations around the world.
Time stations operating in the longwave radio band have highly predictable radio propagation characteristics, which gives low uncertainty in the received time signals. Stations operating in the shortwave band can cover wider areas with relatively low-power transmitters, but the varying distance that the signal travels increases the uncertainty of the time signal on a scale of milliseconds. McCarthy, P. Kenneth Seidelmann Time: From Earth Rotation to Atomic Physics,Wiley-VCH, 2009
ISBN 352740780, page 256[/ref]
Radio time signal stations broadcast the time in both audible and machine readable time code form that can be used as references for radio clocks and radio-controlled watches. McCarthy, P. Kenneth Seidelmann,  Time: From Earth Rotation to Atomic Physics , Wiley-VCH, 2009 ISBN 3-527-40780-4, page 256
The audio portions of the WWV and WWVH broadcasts can also be heard by telephone. The time announcements are normally delayed by less than 30 ms when using land lines from within the continental United States, and the stability (delay variation) is generally To hear these broadcasts, dial (303) 499-7111 for WWV (Colorado), and (808) 335-4363 for WWVH (Hawaii). Callers are disconnected after 2 minutes. These are not toll-free numbers; callers outside the local calling area are charged for the call at regular long distance rates.
Loran-C time signals may also be used for radio clock synchronization, by augmenting their highly accurate frequency transmissions with external measurements of the offsets of LORAN navigation signals against time standards.

Commercial broadcasts

As radio receivers became more widely available, broadcasters included time information in the form of voice announcements or automated tones to accurately indicate the hour. The BBC included time "pips" in its broadcasts from 1922.
In the United States, many information-based radio stations (full-service, all-news and news/talk) also broadcast time signals at the top of the hour. In New York, WCBS and WINS, as well as WBEN in Buffalo, New York, have distinctive top-of-the-hour tones, though the WINS signal is only approximate (several seconds error) . WINS and WBEN also have a tone at 30 minutes past the hour for those setting their clocks.
Stations using iBiquity Digital Corporation's "HD Radio" system are contractually requirediBiquity Licensing Fact Sheet 2009 (PDF). to delay their analog broadcast by about eight seconds so it remains in sync with the digital stream. Thus, network-generated time signals and service cues will also be delayed by about eight seconds. Local signals may also be delayed.
The all-news radio stations of the CBS Radio Network, of which WCBS is the flagship, air a "bong" (at a frequency of 440 Hz, the standard musical note A) that immediately precedes each top-of-the-hour network newscast. (The same bong could be heard on the CBS Television Network, at the top of the hour immediately before the beginning of any televised program, in the 1960s and 1970s.) An automated "chirp" at one second before the hour signals a switch to the radio network broadcast. As an example, KNX, the CBS Radio Network all-news station in Los Angeles, broadcasts this "bong" sound on the hour. However, due to buffering of the digital broadcast on some computers, this signal may be delayed as much as 20 seconds from the actual start of the hour (this is presumably the same situation for all CBS Radio stations, as each station's digital stream is produced and distributed in a similar manner).
Bonneville International-owned news/talk station KSL(AM-FM)  in Salt Lake City uses a "clang" that originates from the Nauvoo Bell on Temple Square in Salt Lake City which has been a staple on the station since the early 1960s.
In Canada, the national English-language non-commercial CBC Radio One network broadcasts the daily National Research Council Time Signal at 1pm Eastern Time. Its French-language counterpart, Radio-Canada, broadcasts a similar signal at noon.  Vancouver radio station CKNW also broadcasts time signals, using a chime every half-hour.
In Australia, many information-based radio stations broadcast time signals at the top of the hour and a speaking clock service is also available.  However, the former VNG dedicated time signal service has been discontinued.Alfred Kruijshoop and Marjorie Walker Introduction - Time NZ & A retrieved 23 November 2013







  | title = The Time Ball and the One O'clock Gun
  | publisher = Proudman Oceanographic Laboratory, Liverpool, UK
  | year = 2007
  | url = 
  | accessdate = 2 June 2008}}

