[[Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln]]

CATEGORIES: 1246 births, 1255 deaths, 13th-century Christian saints, 13th-century Roman Catholic martyrs, 13th-century English people, Blood libel, Antisemitism in England, Jewish English history, English Roman Catholic saints, Medieval English saints, Child saints, Folk saints

Little Saint Hugh of Lincoln (1246 – 27 August 1255) was an English boy whose death prompted a blood libel. Hugh is known as Little Saint Hugh to distinguish him from Saint Hugh of Lincoln, an adult saint. The style is often corrupted to Little Sir Hugh. Little Saint Hugh became one of the best known of the blood libel saints: generally children whose deaths were interpreted as sacrifices committed by Jews.

Events

The nine year old Hugh disappeared on 31 July, and his body was discovered in a well on 29 August. A man called John of Lexington appears to have suggested that Jews were responsible. Hugh's friends apparently claimed that Copin (or Jopin), a local Jew, had imprisoned Hugh, during which time he tortured and eventually crucified him. It was said that the body had been thrown into the well after attempts to bury it failed when the earth had expelled it. Copin was arrested and, under torture, admitted to killing the child. He later appears to have implicated the Jewish community as a whole. He was executed, and the story would have ended there were it not for a series of events that coincided with the disappearance.263-4
Some six months earlier, King Henry III had sold his rights to tax the Jews to his brother, Richard, Earl of Cornwall. Having lost this source of income, he decided that he was eligible for the Jews' money if they were convicted of crimes. As a result, some ninety Jews were arrested and held in the Tower of London, while they were charged with involvement in the ritual murder. Such accusations had become increasingly common following the circulation of the Life of Saint William of Norwich by Thomas of Monmouth, the hagiography of William of Norwich, a child-saint said to have been crucified by Jews in 1144. This narrative clearly influenced the myth that developed around Hugh.
Eighteen of the Jews were hanged for refusing to participate in the proceedings and throw themselves on the verdict of a Christian jury."The Knight's Tale of Young Hugh of Lincoln", Gavin I. Langmuir, Speculum, Vol. 47, No. 3 (July 1972), pp. 459 - 482. It was the first time ever that the civil government handed out a death sentence for ritual murder, and King Henry was able to take over their property. The remainder were pardoned and set free, most likely because Richard, who saw a potential threat to his own source of income, intervened on their behalf with his brother. 
The chronicler Matthew Paris described the supposed murder, implicating all the Jews in England:
 This year 1255 about the feast of the apostles Peter and Paul July, the Jews of Lincoln stole a boy called Hugh, who was about eight years old. After shutting him up in a secret chamber, where they fed him on milk and other childish food, they sent to almost all The cities of England in which there were Jews, and summoned some  of their sect from each city to be present at a sacrifice to take place  at Lincoln, in contumely and insult of Jesus Christ. For, as they said, they had a boy concealed for the purpose of being crucified; so a great number of them assembled at Lincoln, and then they appointed a Jew of Lincoln judge, to take the place of Pilate, by whose sentence, and with the concurrence of all, the boy was subjected to various tortures. They scourged him till the blood flowed, they crowned him with thorns, mocked him, and spat upon him; each of them also pierced him with a knife, and they made him drink gall, and scoffed  at him with blasphemous insults, and kept gnashing their teeth and  calling him Jesus, the false prophet. And after tormenting him in divers ways they crucified him, and pierced him to the heart with a spear. When the boy was dead, they took the body down from the cross, and for some reason disemboweled it; it is said for the purpose of their magic arts. 

Sainthood

Shortly after news was spread of his death, miracles were attributed to Hugh and he was rushed into sainthood.  Hugh became one of the youngest individual candidates for sainthood, with 27 July unofficially made his feast day.  Over time, however, the question of the rush to sainthood was raised, and Hugh's name was not included in Butler's Lives of the Saints (1756–1759). Today, Hugh's sainthood is abolished.  The Vatican has not officially revoked the status of sainthood for the child since he was never officially canonized and was never included in Catholic martyrology.  His traditional English feast day is not celebrated.Little Saint Hugh of LincolnHugh the Little

Cult

The Cathedral in Lincoln benefited from the episode, since Hugh was seen as a Christian martyr, and sites associated with his life became objects of pilgrimage. The legend surrounding Hugh that emerged became part of popular culture, and his story became the subject of poetry and folksongs. Geoffrey Chaucer in his Canterbury Tales makes reference to Hugh of Lincoln in "The Prioress's Tale". Pilgrims devoted to Hugh of Lincoln flocked to the city as late as the early 20th century, when a well was constructed in the former Jewish neighborhood of Jews' Court and advertised as the well in which Hugh's body was found. 
In 1955, the Anglican Church placed at the site of Little Hugh's former shrine at Lincoln Cathedral a plaque bearing these words:

Ballad of Little Sir Hugh

A ballad known as "Sir Hugh" is based on the alleged murder of Hugh of Lincoln. While playing football, Hugh loses the ball by kicking it through the window of a Jew's "castle". The "Jew's daughter" then entices Sir Hugh into her castle with an apple. She then stabs him through the heart and then dumps him in the well. Hugh's voice calls out to his mother from the well asking to be buried with a bible.
According to the notes by Cecil Sharp on a variant of the Ballad of Little Sir Hugh, the story is as follows:
Sharp then goes on to make the following observations:
In 1975 the English folk-rock group Steeleye Span recorded a version of "Little Sir Hugh" on their album Commoners Crown.  In the song, the murderer is "a lady gay" "dressed in green".





Bibliography




