[[Pyrrole]]

CATEGORIES: Pyrroles

Pyrrole is a heterocyclic aromatic organic compound, a five-membered ring with the formula C4H4NH.  It is a colourless volatile liquid that darkens readily upon exposure to air. Substituted derivatives are also called pyrroles, e.g., N-methylpyrrole, C4H4NCH3.  Porphobilinogen, a trisubstituted pyrrole, is the biosynthetic precursor to many natural products such as heme.
Pyrroles are components of more complex macrocycles, including the porphyrins of heme, the chlorins, bacteriochlorins, chlorophyll, porphyrinogens.

Properties

Pyrrole has very low basicity compared to conventional amines and some other aromatic compounds like pyridine. This decreased basicity is attributed to the delocalization of the lone pair of electrons of the nitrogen atom in the aromatic ring.  Pyrrole is a very weak base with a pKaH of about –1 to –2. Protonation results in loss of aromaticity, and is, therefore, unfavorable.
Like many amines, pyrrole slowly decomposes on exposure to air and light. It turns brown over time due to accumulation of impurities such as polypyrrole and various amine oxides. It is usually purified by distillation immediately before use.

Image:Pyrrole Pre Distillation.jpg|Impure pyrrole being distilled to separate it from colored impurities
Image:Pyrrole Post Distillation.jpg|Pure pyrrole collected from the still is now colorless and transparent to all wavelengths of visible light due to the removal of impurities

Synthesis

Pyrrole is prepared industrially by treatment of furan with ammonia in the presence of solid acid catalysts. 
One synthetic route to pyrrole involves the decarboxylation of ammonium mucate, the ammonium salt of mucic acid. The salt is typically heated in a distillation setup with glycerol as a solvent.Practical Organic Chemistry, Vogel, 1956,  Page 837, Link (12 MB)

Substituted pyrroles

Many methods exist for the organic synthesis of pyrrole derivatives. Classic "named reactions" are the Knorr pyrrole synthesis, the Hantzsch pyrrole synthesis, and the Paal–Knorr synthesis.  More specialized methods are listed here.
The starting materials in the Piloty–Robinson pyrrole synthesis are 2 equivalents of an aldehyde and hydrazine. The product is a pyrrole with specific substituents in the 3 and 4 positions. The aldehyde reacts with the diamine to an intermediate di-imine (R–C=N−N=C–R), which, with added hydrochloric acid, gives ring-closure and loss of ammonia to the pyrrole.
In one modification, propionaldehyde is treated first with hydrazine and then with benzoyl chloride at high temperatures and assisted by microwave irradiation:
In the second step, a 3,3sigmatropic reaction takes place between two intermediates.
Pyrrole can be polymerized to form polypyrrole.

Reactivity

The NH proton in pyrroles is moderately acidic with a pKa of 16.5. Pyrrole can be deprotonated with strong bases such as butyllithium and sodium hydride.  The resulting alkali pyrrolide is nucleophilic.  Treating this conjugate base with an electrophile such as methyl iodide gives N-methylpyrrole.
The resonance contributors of pyrrole provide insight to the reactivity of the compound. Like furan and thiophene, pyrrole is more reactive than benzene towards electrophilic aromatic substitution because it is able to stabilize the positive charge of the intermediate carbocation.
Pyrrole undergoes electrophilic aromatic substitution predominantly at the 2 and 5 positions.  Two such reactions that are especially significant for producing functionalized pyrroles are the Mannich reaction and the Vilsmeier-Haack reaction (depicted below),The 2-sulfenyl group in the pyrrole substrate serves as an activating group and as a protective group that can be removed with Raney nickel both of which are compatible with a variety of pyrrole substrates. 
Pyrroles react with aldehydes to form porphyrins.  For example, benzaldehyde condenses with pyrrole to give tetraphenylporphyrin. Pyrrole compounds can also participate in cycloaddition (Diels-Alder) reactions under certain conditions, such as under Lewis acid catalysis, heating, or high pressure.
Pyrrole polymerizes in light. An oxidizing agent, such as ammonium persulfate, can also be used, typically at 0 °C and in darkness to control the polymerization.

Commercial uses

Pyrrole is essential to the production of many different chemicals. N-methylpyrrole is a precursor to N-methylpyrrolecarboxylic acid, a building-block in pharmaceutical chemistry. Although there is a claim that pyrrole is used as an additive to cigarettes

Analogs and derivatives

Structural analogs of pyrrole include:
Heteroatom structural analogs of pyrrole include:
Derivatives of pyrrole include indole, a derivative with a fused benzene ring.








