[[The Slim Shady LP]]

CATEGORIES: 1999 albums, Aftermath Entertainment albums, Albums produced by Dr. Dre, Albums produced by Eminem, Eminem albums, English-language albums, Horrorcore albums, Interscope Records albums, Grammy Award for Best Rap Album

The Slim Shady LP is the second studio album and first major release from the American rapper Eminem. It was released on February 23, 1999, under Interscope Records and Dr. Dre's Aftermath Entertainment. Recorded in Ferndale, Michigan. following Eminem's recruitment by Dr. Dre and Jimmy Iovine, the album features production from Dr. Dre, the Bass Brothers, and Eminem himself.  The majority of the record's lyrical content is written from the perspective of the rapper's alter ego Slim Shady, whom the rapper created on Slim Shady EP (1997). The lyrics are noted for their over-the-top depictions of violence and heavy use of profanity.
The album was met with both critical and commercial success; critics praised Eminem for his unique lyrical style, and the record debuted at number two on the US Billboard 200 chart behind TLC's FanMail with 283,000 copies sold in its opening week. The first official single, "My Name Is", peaked at number 36 on the Billboard Hot 100. The Slim Shady LP went on to be certified quadruple-platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA). The record won a Grammy Award for Best Rap Album, and in 2003, the album was ranked number 273 on Rolling Stone magazine's list of the 500 greatest albums of all time.
The Slim Shady LP turned Eminem from an unknown rapper into a high-profile celebrity. Interscope Records awarded him with his own record label, Shady Records, and he embarked on an extensive touring schedule to promote the album.  In the summer of 1999, the rapper frequently performed on the Vans Warped Tour and in hip-hop clubs. He also became a highly controversial figure due to his lyrical content, which some perceived to be misogynistic and a negative influence on American youth. The rapper was also sued multiple times following the release of the album for reasons including slander and unauthorized sampling.

Background

Eminem, born Marshall Bruce Mathers III, began rapping at age fourteen. In 1996, his debut album Infinite, which was recorded at the Bassmint, a recording studio owned by the Bass Brothers, was released under their independent label Web Entertainment.
The disappointment of Infinite inspired Eminem to create the alter ego Slim Shady: "Boom, the name hit me, and right away I thought of all these words to rhyme with it".  Slim Shady served as Eminem's vent for his frustrations, and in the spring of 1997, he recorded the eight-song extended play Slim Shady EP.  During this time, Eminem and his girlfriend Kim Scott lived in a high-crime neighborhood with their newborn daughter Hailie, where their house was burglarized numerous times.  After being evicted from his home, Eminem traveled to Los Angeles to participate in the Rap Olympics, an annual nationwide rap battle competition.  He placed second, and the staff at Interscope Records who attended the Rap Olympics sent a copy of Slim Shady EP to company CEO Jimmy Iovine. Iovine played the tape for record producer Dr. Dre, founder of Aftermath Entertainment.  Dr. Dre recalled, "In my entire career in the music industry, I have never found anything from a demo tape or a CD. When Jimmy played this, I said, 'Find him. Now.'"  Eminem and Dr. Dre subsequently began work on his major label debut album.

Recording

The Slim Shady LP was recorded at Studio 8 at 430 8 Mile Road in Ferndale, Michigan.  Eminem, who had idolized Dr. Dre since listening to his group N.W.A as a teenager, was nervous to work with him on the album: "I didn't want to be starstruck or kiss his ass too much ... I'm just a little white boy from Detroit. I had never seen stars, let alone Dr. Dre."Bozza, 2003. p. 24  However, Eminem became more comfortable working with Dr. Dre after a series of highly productive recording sessions. p. 58  The recording process generally began with Dr. Dre creating a beat and Eminem using the tracks as a template for his freestyle raps; "Every beat he would make, I had a rhyme for", Eminem recalled. He later said in an interview that "Every time I sat down with a pen, everything was just like: fuck you, fuck this, fuck them, fuck that, fuck the world, fuck what everybody thinks. Fuck them." Much of the album was recorded when Eminem was under the influence of ecstasy; Dr. Dre described the experience by saying "We get in there, get bugged out, stay in the studio for fuckin' two days. Then you're dead for three days. Then you wake up, pop the tape in, like, 'Let me see what I've done.'"  On the first day of recording, Eminem and Dr. Dre finished "My Name Is" in an hour.  Three other songs, including "Role Model", were also recorded that day.
"'97 Bonnie & Clyde", which was formerly featured on Slim Shady EP as "Just the Two of Us", was rerecorded for The Slim Shady LP to feature his daughter Hailie's vocals.  Because the song focuses on disposing of his girlfriend's corpse, Eminem was uncomfortable with explaining the situation to Kim, and instead told her that he would be taking Hailie to Chuck E. Cheese's.  He explained, "When she found out I used our daughter to write a song about killing her, she fucking blew. We had just got back together for a couple of weeks. Then I played her the song, and she bugged the fuck out."  The song "Guilty Conscience" contains a humorous reference to an occasion in which Dr. Dre assaulted rapper Dee Barnes.  Having only known Dr. Dre for a few days, Eminem was anxious about how he would react to such a line, and to his relief, Dr. Dre "fell out of his chair laughing" upon hearing the lyric. p. 68  "Ken Kaniff", a skit involving a prank call to Eminem, featured fellow Detroit rapper Aristotle.  After a falling out between the two in the wake of Eminem's breakthrough success, Eminem instead played Ken Kaniff on skits on future albums. p. 43

Music

Lyrics

Many of the songs from The Slim Shady LP are written from the perspective of Eminem's alter ego, Slim Shady, and contain cartoonish and over-the-top depictions of violence, which he refers to as "made-up tales of trailer-park stuff".  Eminem acknowledged the accusations, and clarified, "I have a fairly salty relationship with women ... But most of the time, when I'm saying shit about women, when I'm saying 'bitches' and 'hoes', its so ridiculous that I'm taking the stereotypical rapper to the extreme. I don't hate women in general. They just make me mad sometimes.'"  Despite the record's explicit nature, Eminem refused to say the word "nigga" on the album, with the rapper noting, "It's not in my vocabulary." The Slim Shady LP begins with a "Public Service Announcement" introduction performed by producer Jeff Bass of the Bass Brothers, and serves as a sarcastic disclaimer discussing the album's explicit lyrical content.  Later in the album, a skit entitled "Paul" features a phone call from Paul Rosenberg to Eminem telling him to "tone down" his lyrics. p. 111
"Guilty Conscience" is a concept song featuring Dr. Dre.  The song focuses on a series of characters who are faced with various situations, while Dr. Dre and Eminem serve as the "angel" and "devil" sides of the characters' conscience, respectively.  The song draws inspiration from a scene in the 1978 comedy film National Lampoon's Animal House, in which a man takes advice from an angel and devil on his shoulder while considering raping an unconscious girl at a party. In the film, he ends up deciding not to go through with the rape, but in "Guilty Conscience", the outcome is unclear.  On "My Fault", Eminem tells the story of a girl who overdoses on psychedelic mushrooms at a rave. p. 49  "'97 Bonnie & Clyde" features Eminem convincing his infant daughter to assist him in disposing of his wife's corpse. It is an epilogue to the song "Kim", although "'97 Bonnie & Clyde" was released first. Eminem wrote the song at a time in which he felt that his girlfriend was keeping him from seeing his daughter.  Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic explained that "There have been more violent songs in rap, but few more disturbing, and it's not because of what it describes, it's how he describes it -- how the perfectly modulated phrasing enhances the horror and black humor of his words."  On the song "Brain Damage", Eminem discusses his childhood experiences with bullies at school.
Although many of the lyrics on the album are intended to be humorous, several songs depict Eminem's frustrations with living in poverty. When discussing The Slim Shady LP, Anthony Bozza of Rolling Stone described Eminem as "probably the only MC in 1999 who boasts low self-esteem.  His rhymes are jaw-droppingly perverse, bespeaking a minimum-wage life devoid of hope, flushed with rage and weaned on sci-fi and slasher flicks."  Eminem was inspired to write "Rock Bottom" after being fired from his cooking job at a restaurant days before his daughter's birthday.  The song bemoans human dependency on money, discussing its ability to brainwash an individual. p. 81  He illustrates his struggles to provide for his daughter, describing himself as "discouraged, hungry, and malnourished."  "If I Had" follows a similar theme, as he describes living on minimum wage and remarks that he is "tired of jobs starting off at $5.50 an hour". p. 162  In the song, he expresses his irritation with fitting the "white trash" stereotype. p. 161

Production

The album's production was handled primarily by the Bass Brothers, Dr. Dre, and Eminem.  "Cum On Everybody" contains an upbeat dance rhythm, while "My Name Is", which is built around a piano sample from British musician Labi Siffre's "I Got The", features a prominent bassline and psychedelic-style keyboards.  "I'm Shady" was originally written over a Sade track, but after hearing a sample of Curtis Mayfield's "Pusherman" in Ice-T's song "I'm Your Pusher", Eminem decided it would be more fitting to use "Pusherman". p. 84
Eminem's vocal inflection on the record has been described as a "nasal whine"; Jon Pareles of The New York Times likened his "calmly sarcastic delivery" to "the early Beastie Boys turned cynical". A skit entitled "Lounge" appears before "My Fault" featuring Eminem and the Bass Brothers imitating rat pack crooners. Jeff Bass came up with the line "I never meant to give you mushrooms" for the skit, which in turn inspired Eminem to write "My Fault". p. 75

Reception

Commercial response

In the album's first week of release, The Slim Shady LP sold 283,000 copies, debuting at number two on the Billboard 200 chart behind TLC's FanMail.
Outside of the United States, The Slim Shady LP reached number nine on the weekly Canadian Albums Chart and remained on the chart for twelve weeks.  Additionally, the album was certified double platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association for shipments of over 200,000 units.

Critical reception

The album was met with generally positive reviews, with many critics focusing on Eminem's lyrical style. Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic gave the album five stars out of five, praising the rapper's "expansive vocabulary and vivid imagination", adding that "Years later, as the shock has faded, it's those lyrical skills and the subtle mastery of the music that still resonate, and they're what make The Slim Shady LP one of the great debuts in both hip-hop and modern pop music."  David Browne of Entertainment Weekly described the album's "unapologetic outrageousness" as a reaction to the "soul positivity" of conscious hip hop, noting that "The Slim Shady LP marks the return of irreverent, wiseass attitude to the genre, heard throughout the album in its nonstop barrage of crudely funny rhymes ... Even pop fans deadened to graphic lyrics are likely to flinch."  Soren Baker of the Los Angeles Times gave the album three and a half stars out of four and stated that "He isn't afraid to say anything; his lyrics are so clever that he makes murder sound as if it's a funny act he may indulge in simply to pass the time" but lamented the "sometimes flat production that takes away from the power of Eminem's verbal mayhem."
Many reviewers commented on the album's lyrical content. Gilbert Rodman of Popular Communications states, "Eminem's music contains more than its fair share of misogynistic and homo-phobic lyrics, but simply to reduce it to these (as many critics do) doesn't help to explain Eminem. It merely invokes a platitude or a sound bite to explain him away."

Accolades

Rolling Stone ranked The Slim Shady LP number 273 on the magazine's list of "The 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" and 33 on its list of the "100 Best Albums of the '90s".

Aftermath

After the success of The Slim Shady LP, Eminem went from an unknown rapper to a high-profile celebrity. Interscope Records awarded him with his own record label, Shady Records; the first artist Eminem signed was rapper Proof. p. 123  Eminem, who had previously struggled to provide for his daughter, noted a drastic change in his lifestyle: "This last Christmas, there were so many fucking presents under the tree ... My daughter wasn't born with a silver spoon in her mouth. But she's got one now. I can't stop myself from spoiling her."
To promote The Slim Shady LP, Eminem embarked on an extensive tour schedule.  He joined the Vans Warped Tour as a last-minute replacement for Cypress Hill, a schedule that included 31 North American dates from June 25 to July 31, beginning in San Antonio and ending in Miami. p. 79 He often played a show in the afternoon on the Warped Tour, and then drove to another location to perform at a hip hop club at night. During a performance in Hartford, Connecticut near the end of the Warped Tour, Eminem slipped on a puddle of liquid and fell ten feet down off the stage, cracking several ribs. p. 125 He recalled that the stress of his newfound fame led him to drink excessively, and reflected, "I knew I had to slow it down. The fall was like a reminder." However, after receiving medical attention, he was well enough to travel to New York the following day for a performance on Total Request Live.
Eminem also became a highly controversial figure due to his lyrical content.  He was labeled as "misogynist, a nihilist and an advocate of domestic violence", and in an editorial by Billboard editor in chief Timothy White, the writer accused Eminem of "making money by exploiting the world's misery." During a radio appearance in San Francisco, Eminem reportedly angered local DJ Sista Tamu due to a freestyle about "slapping a pregnant bitch" to the extent that she broke a copy of The Slim Shady LP on-air. The rapper defended himself by saying, "My album isn't for younger kids to hear. It has an advisory sticker, and you must be eighteen to get it. That doesn't mean younger kids won't get it, but I'm not responsible for every kid out there. I'm not a role model, and I don't claim to be."

Lawsuits

On September 17, 1999, Eminem's mother, Deborah Nelson, filed a $10 million lawsuit against him for slander based on his claim that she uses drugs in the line "I just found out my mom does more dope than I do" from "My Name Is".  p. 69  After a two-year long trial, she was awarded $25,000, of which she received $1,600 after legal fees.  Eminem was not surprised that his mother had filed the lawsuit against him, referring to her as a "lawsuit queen", and alleging that "That's how she makes money. When I was five, she had a job on the cash register at a store that sold chips and soda. Other than that, I don't remember her working a day in her life."  She later filed another lawsuit against him for emotional damages suffered during the first trial, which was later dismissed.
In December 2001, DeAngelo Bailey, a janitor living in Roseville, Michigan who was made the subject of the song "Brain Damage" in which he is portrayed as a school bully, filed a $1 million lawsuit against Eminem for slander and invasion of privacy.  Bailey's attorney stated "Eminem is a Caucasian male who faced criticism within the music industry that he had not suffered through difficult circumstances growing up and he was therefore a 'pretender' in the industry ... Eminem used Bailey, his African-American childhood schoolmate, as a pawn in his effort to stem the tide of criticism."  In 1982, Eminem's mother unsuccessfully sued the Roseville school district for not protecting her son, as she claimed that attacks from bullies caused him headaches, nausea, and antisocial behavior.  Additionally, Bailey had previously admitted to bullying Eminem in the April 1999 issue of Rolling Stone.  The lawsuit was later dismissed by a judge, who, in her explanation, wrote a humorous rap verse: "Bailey thinks he's entitled to some monetary gain/Because Eminem used his name in vain."
In September 2003, 70-year-old widow Harlene Stein filed suit against Eminem and Dr. Dre on the grounds that "Guilty Conscience" contains an unauthorized sample of "Pigs Go Home" composed for the film Getting Straight by her husband, Ronald Stein, who died in 1988.  Although the album's liner notes state that the song contains an "interpolation" of "Pigs Go Home", Stein is not credited as a composer and his wife was not paid royalties for use of the song.  The lawsuit requested for 5 percent of the retail list price of 90 percent of the all copies of the record sold in America, and 2.5 percent of the retail price of 90 percent of the copies of the album sold internationally.

Track listing

Charts and certifications

Weekly charts

Certifications








Notes

Bibliography


