[[Weezer (2001 album)]]

CATEGORIES: Weezer albums, 2001 albums, Geffen Records albums, Albums produced by Ric Ocasek, Albums certified platinum by the Recording Industry Association of America

Weezer, also known as "The Green Album" due to the lime-green cover, is the third studio album by American alternative rock band Weezer, released on May 15, 2001. Produced by Ric Ocasek, it was released on Geffen Records, as were its two predecessors. This is the first, and only Weezer album to feature bassist Mikey Welsh, who replaced long-time member Matt Sharp. The musical style of Weezer is grounded in the power pop genre, featuring strong melodies, crisp vocal harmonies, and prominent guitar riffs. It is also Weezer's quickest selling album.
Weezer received generally favourable reviews. The album is often recognized as a rebirth for the band after a long hiatus following their 1996 album, Pinkerton. The album attained chart success by debuting at number four in the US and number two in Canada. The album also charted within the top ten in Norway and Sweden. Since its release in 2001, the album has sold over 1,600,000 copies in the United States.
Three singles were released from the album including "Hash Pipe", "Island in the Sun", and "Photograph". The first single, "Hash Pipe", was a worldwide modern rock hit, charting on seven different charts, despite their record label's reluctance to release it as the first single.

Background and development

Following the commercial and critical failure of Pinkerton (1996), Weezer frontman Rivers Cuomo placed the band on hiatus. He returned to Harvard University in an attempt to finish his studies, but eventually dropped out to focus on songwriting. 241. During this time, Cuomo played with a different group of musicians in a band called Homie, which was based in Boston. 242. One of the members of Homie was Mikey Welsh, a bass player who would eventually be asked to replace Matt Sharp in Weezer. 243.
By February 1998, Cuomo had quietly disbanded Homie and headed to Los Angeles to begin work on Weezer demos with Brian Bell and Patrick Wilson. 245. At this point, bassist Matt Sharp was absent from numerous Weezer rehearsals and was becoming estranged from the band. 255. 256. On April 8, 1998, Sharp announced his official exit from Weezer to devote all his energies to his band, The Rentals. 257. It was quickly announced that former Homie member Welsh would take over on bass for Weezer.265">Luerssen (2004), p. 265.[/ref]Luerssen (2004), p. 259. Frustration and creative disagreements led to a decline in rehearsals, and, in the latter half of 1998, drummer Patrick Wilson left for his home in Portland pending renewed productivity from Cuomo,Luerssen (2004), p. 266. who went into a period of admitted depression,Luerssen (2004), p. 267. during which he painted the walls of his home black and put "fiberglass insulation all over the windows and then black sheets of fiberglass so that no light could get through."
By the beginning of 1999, Weezer had once again gone their separate ways. Drummer Patrick Wilson resumed his efforts with his side-band The Special Goodness, guitarist Bell worked on his band Space Twins and Welsh toured with Juliana Hatfield. 269. Meanwhile, Cuomo focused his energy on songwriting, crafting 121 songs, nearly half of which would become demos. During this time, he isolated himself and abstained from contact with the outside world. 270. 272. Cuomo also received braces on his teeth, further damaging his self-esteem. 280. Bell would occasionally visit Cuomo and play songs with him. In turn, Cuomo would eventually reveal songs he was working on to Bell.
Unbeknownst to the band, their fanbase was connecting and growing on the internet,Luerssen (2004), p. 307. which was helping to boost the reputation and sales of Pinkerton. 281. When it was released, Pinkerton was considered a critical and commercial failure; however, in the years following the release of the album, it would gain a much more positive reputation due to word-of-mouth on message boards and various web pages. This expanding internet activity would later set the stage for the band's 2001 comeback. Renewed interaction between band members took place when Weezer was offered an extremely lucrative offer to perform in Japan in August 2000 for the Summer Sonic Festival. 285. Rehearsals for the show reinvigorated the band into talking about making a new album. 286. The band returned to performing in June 2000, playing low-key shows around Los Angeles under the pseudonym Goat Punishment, ensuring that Weezer would only perform for longtime fans who would recognize the name.
Eventually, the band started performing at higher profile gigs such as the Warped Tour. 292. Cuomo later remarked, "We went in there fully expecting to be booed and to have things thrown at us. But it was exactly the opposite, people were singing along to all the songs and just going crazy, giving us the best support. And I think that gave us the confidence we needed."Luerssen (2004), p. 293. The positive response to the Warped Tour performances led to further shows being scheduled. 295. 304. When touring began to wind down, MP3 demos captured live on the band's mobile unit and sound checks began to surface on file-sharing services and eventually for downloading on the band's official website. These songs were often referred to as Summer Songs of 2000 (commonly abbreviated as SS2K).

Recording

On October 23, Cuomo announced that the band would start recording material "with or without" a producer. 308. However, the band's record label decided to have the band employ a record producer due to the commercial failure of their self-produced album Pinkerton. The band began rehearsing and arranging both the Summer Songs of 2000 and newer material Cuomo had written at his home with engineer Chad Bamford. The band eventually decided to hire Ric Ocasek—who had also produced their debut album—as producer,Luerssen (2004), p. 310. and began sending demos to Ocasek during the summer of 2000. 309. There was much debate among the band members as to whether they should record in Los Angeles or Ocasek's New York home, with the band eventually deciding to record in Los Angeles at Cello Studios. The band continued to demo new music daily and started to weed through more than seventy-five demos, eventually homing in on twenty-five potential album tracks in anticipation of Ocasek's arrival. 311. Ocasek worked with the band to trim these down further to eighteen songs. 313.
Recording sessions for the album began in early December, with Ocasek providing creative feedback to the band by telephone. On December 27, the band embarked on what would be close to six weeks of studio work by playing songs repetitively in order to track the bass and drums parts. They also did "scratch takes" of the vocals and guitar, designed to get accurate rhythm tracks before being redone more efficiently later in the recording process. While recording the album, the band continued to perform gigs under the pseudonym Goat Punishment., John, 2004 p. 314Luerssen (2004), p. 312.
During the recording sessions, an executive at the band's label, Geffen Records, visited to observe the band's progress and expressed dissatisfaction with several tracks. This feedback eventually forced the band to discard a few of the album's possible songs. 315. The band then relocated for three weeks to a smaller studio in another part of Cello Studios where Cuomo and Bell worked on guitar takes while the entire band recorded vocal tracks. 316. Ocasek remarked, "Rivers always does his guitar parts in one take."
Mixing for the album began on January 31 by Tom Lord-Alge at South Beach Studios. 318. 321. Bell was absent from the mixing process. 319.

Packaging

The art direction of the album was handled by Chris Bilheimer with photography from Marina Chavez and Karl Koch.
The picture inside of the CD booklet is a photo of Weezer playing live, featuring (in the lower right hand corner) an overlay of the silhouettes of Mike Nelson, Tom Servo and Crow T. Robot from the television show Mystery Science Theater 3000. (Hence the liner note citation "MST3K silhouette appears courtesy of Best Brains, Inc.")Weezer (The Green Album) booklet and liner notes
This was Weezer's first album to feature a transparent CD tray. Under the CD tray of the album, the word "No" can be found on the back of the spine.
The album contains the dedication "In loving memory of Mykel and Carli." Mykel and Carli Allan were sisters devoted to developing fan clubs for up-and-coming bands.

Release and promotion

The album was met with enthusiasm from the record label. 324. "They had nothing but supportive and excited things to say about it," remarked Karl Koch. However, the album's original release date of April 17 was postponed due to executives not liking Cuomo's choice of "Hash Pipe" as the first single. Citing the song's lurid content about a transvestite prostitute as inappropriate, they suggested that "Don't Let Go" be chosen as the first single. 325. However, Cuomo continued to fight and "Hash Pipe" eventually became the album's first single. The label again tried to postpone the release date further until June, but the band convinced them to adhere to the original May 15 release date. 335.

Singles

The first single from the album was "Hash Pipe". The video for "Hash Pipe" was directed by Marcos Siega and was the first of many Weezer videos that Siega would direct., John, 2004 p. 375
The next single, "Island in the Sun", was a successful radio hit and became one of the band's biggest oversea hits. The second video received much wider airplay than the original and has become the standard video for the song.
The third and final single from the album was "Photograph", which was released to radio in early November. 388. The single peaked at number 17 on the US Modern Rock Charts. In Japan it was released as the first single instead of "Hash Pipe." The band felt the song didn't have the staying power of the previous singles,Luerssen (2004), p. 392. and thus decided to pass on a big-name director for the music video, opting instead to have Karl Koch shoot and edit a video from on-the-road footage.

Reception

Critical reception

Weezer received generally favorable reviews. At Metacritic, which assigns a rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 73 out of 100.
Not all the reviews were complimentary. Spencer Owen in Pitchfork declared that "The new self-titled Weezer album, as it turns out, is average from beginning to end.

Chart performance

In the United States, Weezer debuted at number four on the Billboard 200 on the week of May 15, 2001. In two weeks the album had sold 215,000 copies., John, 2004 p. 351 It was certified platinum on September 13, 2001.[ref]
