[[Gamer]]

CATEGORIES: Gaming, Video game culture, Video game terminology

A "gamer" is someone who plays video games or board games.  as well as those who spend a notable part of their leisure time playing or learning about games.
There are many gamer communities around the world. Many of these take the form of discussion forums and other virtual communities, as well as college or university social clubs. Stores specializing in games often serve as a meeting place to organize groups of players 

Types of gamers

In the United States, the average video game player is 30 and has been playing video games for over 12 years. The term "gamer" comprises several subgroups.

Casual gamer

A casual gamer is a player whose time or interest in playing games is limited. Casual gamers may play games designed for ease of gameplay, or play more involved games in small groupings of time, at a slower pace than hardcore gamers.  The genres that casual gamers play vary, and they might not own a specific video game console to play their games.Magrino, Tom, GameStop: Casual gamers spurring hardcore holiday sales, GameSpot, Sep 11, 2007, Accessed 3 May 2008Boyes, Emma, GDC '08: Are casual games the future?, GameSpot, Feb 18, 2008, Accessed May 3, 2008
Casual gamer demographics vary greatly from those of other video gamers, as the typical casual gamer is older and more predominantly female.
One casual gamer subset is the "fitness gamer", who plays motion-based exercise games.
The term casual gamer can be used to distinguish between play styles of level-based character advance in nonlinear games with respect to the amount of dedicated hours of play. MMORPGs may require many hours of grinding to develop a character to maximum level and reach the endgame, and are thus not typically suited for casual gaming. However, games like DOFUS, Eve Online(Specially flying to 0.0 security space.) and The Lord of the Rings Online try to balance leveling between any casual gamers and those dedicating more hours to the game.

Core gamer

A core or mid-core gamer is a player with a wider range of interests than a casual gamer and is more likely to enthusiastically play different types of games,
A number of theories have been presented regarding the rise in popularity of mid-core games.  James Hursthouse, the founder of Roadhouse Interactive credits the evolution of devices towards tablets and touch-screen interfaces, whereas Jon Radoff of Disruptor Beam compares the emergence of mid-core games to similar increases in media sophistication that have occurred in media such as television.

Hardcore gamer

Hardcore gamers extend gaming into their lifestyle and may represent the stereotypical "game geek". They are frequent purchasers of games, prefer to expend significant time on games, and are more likely to try to "master" their games by completing as many objectives as possible. Hardcore gamers may take part in video game culture such as competitions, events and conventions. Competitions may involve organized tournaments, leagues, or ranked play integrated into the game. An example of this is Major League Gaming, an electronic sports organization that often holds events for first-person shooter games such as Quake. There are many subtypes of hardcore gamers based on the style of game, gameplay preference, hardware platform, and other preferences.

Pro gamer

Professional gamers play video games and deeply study the game to master it and usually to play in competitions. Professional gamers don't necessarily play for money or earn a salary, but many do.

Newbie

"Newbie" is a slang term for a novice or newcomer to a certain game, or to gaming in general.

Retrogamer

A retrogamer is a gamer preferring playing and collecting retro games - older video games and arcade games. They may also be called classic gamers or old-school gamers, which are terms that are more prevalent in the United States. The games are played either on the original hardware, on modern hardware via console emulation, or on modern hardware via ports or compilations.

Girl gamer/Gamer girl

A girl gamer/gamer girl is any female who regularly engages in playing video games. According to a study conducted by the Entertainment Software Association in 2009, 40% of the game playing population is female, and women 18 or older now comprise 34% of all gamers. Also, the percentage of women now playing online has risen to 43%, up 4% from 2004. The same study shows that 48% of game purchasers are female. Web. 19 Nov. 2009. 
Usage of the term "girl gamer" is controversial. Some critics have advocated use of the label as a reappropriated term, while others see it as nondescriptive or  perpetuating the minority position of female gamers. Games 4 Girlz?. ABC. 16 February 2011. Some critics of the term believe there is no singular definition of a female gamer and that they are as diverse as any other group."
Girl gamers are often subject to sexual harassment while engaged in online play or tournaments."

Gaymer

Gaymer, or gay gamer, is a term used to refer to the group of people, who identify themselves as LGBT (gay, bisexual, lesbian, or transgendered) and have an active interest in video games.
The gaymers community provides a "safe place" for LGBT gamers"How Not To Address Homosexuality In Gaming", by Mike Fahey

Avatar

An avatar, username, game name, alias, gamer tag, screen name, or handle is a name (usually a pseudonym) adopted by a video gamer, used as a main preferred identification to the gaming community. Usage of user names is most prevalent in games with online multiplayer support, or at electronic sport conventions.
Similarly, a clan tag is a prefix or suffix added to a name to identify that the gamer is in a clan. Clans are generally a group of gamers who play together as a team against other clans.  They are most commonly found in online multi-player games in which one team can face off against another.  Clans can also be formed to create loosely based affiliations perhaps by all being fans of the same game or merely gamers who have close personal ties to each other.  A team tag is a prefix or suffix added to a name to identify that the gamer is in a team.  Teams are generally sub-divisions within the same clan and are regarded within gaming circuits as being a purely competitive affiliation.  These gamers are usually in an online league such as the Cyberathlete Amateur League (C.A.L.) and their parent company the Cyberathlete Professional League (C.P.L.) where all grouped players were labeled as teams and not clans.






