[[Fermi liquid theory]]

CATEGORIES: Condensed matter physics, Fermions, Electronic band structures, Enrico Fermi

Fermi liquid theory (also known as Landau–Fermi liquid theory) is a theoretical model of interacting fermions that describes the normal state of most metals at sufficiently low temperatures. The theory explains why some of the properties of an interacting fermion system are very similar to those of the Fermi gas (i.e. non-interacting fermions), and why other properties differ.
Important examples of where Fermi liquid theory has been successfully applied are most notably electrons in most metals and Liquid He-3.

Description

The key ideas behind Landau's theory are the notion of adiabaticity and the exclusion principle. (draft copy) Consider a non-interacting fermion system (a Fermi gas), and suppose we "turn on" the interaction slowly. Landau argued that in this situation, the ground state of the Fermi gas would adiabatically transform into the ground state of the interacting system.
For this system, the Green's function can be written  (near its poles) in the form
Physically, we can say that a propagating fermion interacts with its surrounding in such a way that the net effect of the interactions is to make the fermion behave as a "dressed" fermion, altering its effective mass and other dynamical properties. These "dressed" fermions are what we think of as "quasiparticles".

Similarities to Fermi gas

The Fermi liquid is qualitatively analogous to the non-interacting Fermi gas, in the following sense: The system's dynamics and thermodynamics at low excitation energies and temperatures may be described by substituting the non-interacting fermions with interacting quasiparticles, each of which carries the same spin, charge and momentum as the original particles. Physically these may be thought of as being particles whose motion is disturbed by the surrounding particles and which themselves perturb the particles in their vicinity. Each many-particle excited state of the interacting system may be described by  listing all occupied momentum states, just as in the non-interacting system. As a consequence, quantities such as the heat capacity of the Fermi liquid behave qualitatively in the same way as in the Fermi gas (e.g. the heat capacity rises linearly with temperature).

Differences from Fermi gas

The following differences to the non-interacting Fermi gas arise:

Energy

Specific heat and compressibility

Specific heat, compressibility, spin-susceptibility and other quantities show the same qualitative behaviour (e.g. dependence on temperature) as in the Fermi gas, but the magnitude is (sometimes strongly) changed.

Interactions

In addition to the mean-field interactions, some weak interactions between quasiparticles remain, which lead to scattering of quasiparticles off each other. Therefore, quasiparticles acquire a finite lifetime. However, at low enough energies above the Fermi surface, this lifetime becomes very long, such that the product of excitation energy (expressed in frequency) and lifetime is much larger than one. In this sense, the quasiparticle energy is still well-defined (in the opposite limit, Heisenberg's uncertainty relation would prevent an accurate definition of the energy).

Structure

Distribution

Electrical Resistance

Optical Response

Instabilities of the Fermi Liquid

The experimental observation of exotic phases in strongly correlated systems has triggered an enormous effort from the theoretical community to try to understand their microscopic origin. One possible route to detect instabilities of a FL is precisely the analysis done by Pomeranchuk. Due to that, the Pomeranchuk instability has been studied by several authors Actually, this is a subject of investigation, see for example:  with different techniques in the last few years and in particular, the instability of the FL towards the nematic phase was investigated for several models.

Non-Fermi liquids

The term non-Fermi liquid is used to describe a system which displays breakdown of Fermi-liquid behaviour. The simplest example of such a system is the system of interacting fermions in one-dimension, called Luttinger liquid.  Although Luttinger liquids are physically similar to Fermi liquids, the restriction to one dimension gives rise to several qualitative differences such as the absence of a quasiparticle peak in the momentum dependent spectral function and the presence of spin density waves.
Another example of such behaviour is observed at quantum critical points of certain second-order phase transitions, such as 
Understanding the behaviour of non-Fermi liquids is an important problem in condensed matter physics. Approaches towards explaining these phenomena include the treatment of marginal Fermi liquids; attempts to understand critical points and derive scaling relations; and descriptions using emergent gauge theories with techniques of holographic gauge/gravity duality.






