[[Fred Durst]]

CATEGORIES: 1970 births, American film directors, American heavy metal singers, American male singers, American music video directors, American rappers, American rock singers, American singer-songwriters, Limp Bizkit members, Living people, Musicians from Jacksonville, Florida, Musicians from North Carolina, Nu metal singers, People from Gastonia, North Carolina, Rap metal musicians, Rappers from Florida, Rappers from North Carolina, Southern hip hop musicians, Tattoo artists, Film directors from North Carolina, Singers from Florida, 20th-century American singers, 21st-century American singers

William Frederick "Fred" Durst (born August 20, 1970) is an American musician and film director from Jacksonville, Florida. He spent his formative years playing in a number of local bands in Jacksonville, Florida while mowing lawns, being a record exec and working as a tattoo artist for financial support. Durst is best known as the vocalist of the multi-platinum nu metal band Limp Bizkit, formed in 1994, with whom he has released six studio albums.
Since 2006, Durst has also become known for his work in independent films. He costarred in the film Population 436, and made his directorial debut in 2007 with the film The Education of Charlie Banks. Durst directed a second film, The Longshots, in 2008. Durst has been ranked in the Top 100 Heavy Metal Vocalists by Hit Parader (#71).

Biography

Early life

Fred Durst was born in  Jacksonville, Florida and grew up in Gastonia, North Carolina with his brother Michael, a successful business man  in Australia, then moved to Jacksonville, Florida after leaving the Navy. In the Age of 12, Gastonia is where Durst took an interest in breakdancing, hip hop, punk rock and heavy metal. He began to rap, skate, beatbox and DJ. After failing out of United States Navy bootcamp, Durst moved to Jacksonville, Florida, where he mowed lawns and worked as a tattoo artist for money, and began developing an idea for a band that combined elements of rock and hip hop.
Durst played with three other bands, Split 26, Malachi Sage, who didn't reach their goals, and 10 Foot Shindig, which Durst left to form a new band.

Formation of Limp Bizkit (1994–1998)

In 1994, Durst, Malachi Sage bassist Sam Rivers and Rivers' cousin John Otto, jammed and wrote three songs together, and Wes Borland later joined their band as a guitarist. Durst named the band Limp Bizkit because he wanted a name that would repel listeners. Limp Bizkit developed a cult following in the underground music scene, attracting crowds by word of mouth and covering George Michael's "Faith" and Paula Abdul's "Straight Up".
Later, when Korn performed in town as the opening act for Sick of It All, Durst invited Korn to his house for some drinks and tattoo the band members. Although Durst's tattoos were unimpressive, he was able to persuade Reginald Arvizu to listen to a demo by Limp Bizkit, consisting of the songs "Pollution", "Counterfeit" and "Stuck". Korn added a then-unsigned Limp Bizkit to two tours, which gave the band a new audience. DJ Lethal, formerly of the hip hop group House of Pain, joined the band as a turntablist; Durst's disagreements with Borland led the guitarist to quit and rejoin the band.
In 1997, Limp Bizkit signed with Flip, a subsidiary of Interscope Records, and released their debut album, Three Dollar Bill, Yall to minimal response. However, despite the lukewarm response to his band's album, Durst was appointed Senior Vice President of A&R at Interscope. On October 23, 1997, Durst met the band Staind, but friction quickly emerged between the two over the cover art of Staind's album. The album depicted a bloody Barbie doll on a crucifix, a buried person with a rosary protruding from its nose, and a knife impaling a Bible. This grotesque art appalled Limp Bizkit frontman Fred Durst so greatly that he attempted to remove Staind from a concert bill shortly before their performance. Durst failed, but after hearing the band play, praised their performance, telling them that they were "the best band he had seen in two years." Durst was so impressed that he signed them to Flip/Elektra, recorded a demo with the band, and co-produced their next album, Dysfunction  Durst also introduced producer Ross Robinson to the band Cold.
After Limp Bizkit finished a tour with the band Deftones, Durst and DJ Lethal were asked by Max Cavalera, formerly of the band Sepultura, to appear on "Bleed", a song from the self-titled debut of his new band Soulfly. Cavalera stated that producer Ross Robinson recommended that he work with Durst. Durst also made an appearance on Korn's album Follow the Leader. Jonathan Davis had intended to write a battle rap with B-Real of Cypress Hill, but the latter's label wouldn't let him do it, and Durst was tapped instead. Davis and Durst wrote the lyrics for "All in the Family", which featured the two vocalists trading insults. Davis and Durst would often offer suggestions for each other's lyrics; a lyric written by Durst as "tootin' on your bagpipe" was changed to "fagpipes" by Davis, who stated "I helped him bag on me better".
Durst began to take an interest in directing, and directed a music video for Limp Bizkit's single "Faith" in promotion for its appearance in the film Very Bad Things, but was unsatisfied with it, and directed a second video which paid tribute to tourmates like Primus, Deftones and Mötley Crüe, who appeared in the video.

Mainstream success and controversies (1998–2005)

Limp Bizkit achieved mainstream success with the albums Significant Other (1999) and Chocolate Starfish and the Hot Dog Flavored Water (2000). In the summer of 1999, Limp Bizkit played at the highly anticipated Woodstock '99 show in front of approximately 200,000 people. Violent action sprang up during and after their performance, including fans tearing plywood from the walls during a performance of the song "Break Stuff". Several sexual assaults, that included but were not limited to rapes, were reported in the aftermath of the concert. Durst stated during the concert, "People are getting hurt. Don't let anybody get hurt. But I don't think you should mellow out. That's what Alanis Morissette had you motherfuckers do. If someone falls, pick 'em up. We already let the negative energy out. Now we wanna let out the positive energy". Durst later stated in an interview, "I didn't see anybody getting hurt. You don't see that. When you're looking out on a sea of people and the stage is twenty feet in the air and you're performing, and you're feeling your music, how do they expect us to see something bad going on?" Les Claypool told the San Francisco Examiner, "Woodstock was just Durst being Durst. His attitude is 'no press is bad press', so he brings it on himself. He wallows in it. Still, he's a great guy."
In June 2000, Limp Bizkit performed at the WXRK Dysfunctional Family Picnic, but showed up an hour late for their set. An Interscope spokesman stated that there was confusion over the band's set time. During the band's performance, Durst criticized Creed singer Scott Stapp, calling him "an egomaniac". Creed's representatives later presented Durst with an autographed anger management manual during a later appearance on Total Request Live. In the summer, Limp Bizkit's tour was sponsored by the controversial file sharing service Napster. Durst was an outspoken advocate of file sharing.
During the 2000 MTV Video Music Awards, Durst performed Limp Bizkit's song "Livin' It Up", as a duet with Christina Aguilera. In response to the performance, Filter frontman Richard Patrick claimed that "Fred getting onstage with Christina Aguilera embarrassed us all." In response to the negative reactions to the performance, Durst remarked, "I already told you guys before, I did it all for the nookie, man."
During a 2001 tour of Australia at the Big Day Out festival in Sydney, fans rushed the stage in the mosh pit, and teenager Jessica Michalik died of asphyxiation. In court, Durst, represented by his long-time attorney, Ed McPherson, testified he had warned the concert's organizers Aaron Jackson, Will Pearce and Amar Tailor and promoter Vivian Lees of the potential dangers of such minimal security.
In 2002, Durst was tapped to write songs for Britney Spears, and later said that he was in a relationship with her. However, Spears denied Durst's claims. In a 2009 interview, he explained that "I just guess at the time it was taboo for a guy like me to be associated with a gal like her."
In March, Limp Bizkit participated on the Summer Sanitarium Tour, headlined by Metallica.
In May 2005, The Unquestionable Truth (Part 1) was released. Sammy Siegler took over drumming duties for the band for much of the album. At Durst's insistence, the album was released as an underground album, without any advertising or promotion.[ref]
[/ref]

Film career (2006 onward)

While Limp Bizkit was on hiatus, Durst began working in independent films. In 2006, Durst costarred in the film Population 436. His directorial debut, The Education of Charlie Banks was released the following year. The film, which starred Jesse Eisenberg, Chris Marquette and Jason Ritter, received mixed reviews; Rotten Tomatoes, a review aggravate, assigned the film a "Tomatometer" score of 46%. The website's consensus stated, "Unevenness and earnestness mire this otherwise sweet, surprising coming of age drama."

Limp Bizkit reunion, making of new album (2009-Present)

In 2009, the original lineup of Limp Bizkit reunited and began touring. Durst announced that they had begun to record a new album, which would be titled Gold Cobra.

Discography

Singles

As lead artist

=As featured artist=

Filmography






