[[Huey P. Newton]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, 1989 deaths, 1989 murders in the United States, 20th-century African-American activists, African-American philosophers, African-Americans' civil rights activists, American humanists, American Marxists, American philosophers, American sociologists, Members of the Black Panther Party, Burials at Evergreen Cemetery (Oakland, California), COINTELPRO targets, Deaths by firearm in California, People murdered by African-American organized crime, Murdered African-American people, People from Monroe, Louisiana, People murdered in California, People from Oakland, California, Maoist theorists, African-American history in Oakland, California, American revolutionaries, American socialists, American murder victims, American anti-fascists, American Maoists, American dissidents

{{Infobox person
| name         = Huey P. Newton
| image        = Huey Newton HS Yearbook.jpeg
| image_size   =
| alt          =
| caption      =
| birth_name   = Huey Percy Newton
| birth_date   = 
| birth_place  = Monroe, Louisiana, US
| death_date = 
| death_place = Oakland, California, US
| residence    =
| other_names  =
| ethnicity    = African-American
| education    = University of California, Santa Cruz (Bachelor's Degree) (PhD)
| alma_mater   = University of California, Santa Cruz, (1980)
| occupation   = Activist
| years_active = 1966–87
| employer     =
| organization =
| known_for    = Co-founder of the Black Panther Party
| notable_works = Revolutionary Suicide
| style        =
| party        = Black Panther Party
| spouse       = Gwen Fontaine (1974–1983)
Fredrika Newton (1984–1989)
| partner      =
| children     =
| parents      ={{Plainlist|
| relatives    =

Huey Percy Newton (February 17, 1942 – August 22, 1989) was an African-American political and urban activist who, along with Bobby Seale, co-founded the Black Panther Party in 1966. Newton had a long series of confrontations with law enforcement, including several convictions, while he participated in political activism. He continued to pursue an education, eventually earning a Ph.D. in Social Science. Newton spent time in prison for manslaughter and was involved in a shooting that killed a police officer. In 1989 he was shot and killed in Oakland, California by a member of the Black Guerrilla Family.

Biography

Background

Newton was born in Monroe, Louisiana. He was the youngest of seven children of Armelia Johnson and Walter Newton, a sharecropper and Baptist lay preacher. His parents named him after former Governor of Louisiana Huey Long.
In 1945, the family migrated to Oakland, California as part of the second wave of the Great Migration of African Americans out of the South to the Midwest and West. The Newton family was quite poor and often relocated throughout the San Francisco Bay Area during Newton's childhood. But, he said  his family was close-knit, and he never went without food and shelter as a child. Growing up in Oakland, Newton stated that "he was made to feel ashamed of being black." In his autobiography, Revolutionary Suicide, he wrote, 
 "During those long years in Oakland public schools, I did not have one teacher who taught me anything relevant to my own life or experience. Not one instructor ever awoke in me a desire to learn more or to question or to explore the worlds of literature, science, and history. All they did was try to rob me of the sense of my own uniqueness and worth, and in the process nearly killed my urge to inquire." 
Newton graduated from Oakland Technical High School in 1959, without being able to read. He later taught himself to read, going on to read The Republic by Plato as his first book.
Newton supported himself in college by burglarizing homes in the Oakland and Berkeley Hills areas, and by committing other petty crimes. Newton once wrote that he began his law studies to become a better criminal, although he said that he had been a "big-time fool" for having such narrow ambitions.

Founding of the Black Panther Party

As a student at Merritt College in Oakland, Newton became involved in politics in the Bay Area. He joined the Afro-American Association, became a prominent member of Phi Beta Sigma fraternity, Beta Tau chapter; and played a role in getting the first African-American history course adopted as part of the college's curriculum. He read the works of Karl Marx, Vladimir Lenin, Frantz Fanon, Malcolm X, Mao Zedong, and Che Guevara. During his time at Merritt College, Newton and Bobby Seale organized the Black Panther Party for Self Defense in October 1966. Based on a casual conversation, Seale became Chairman and Newton became Minister of Defense.
The Black Panther Party was an African-American left-wing organization working for the right of self-defense for African Americans in the United States. The Party achieved national and international renown through their deep involvement in the Black Power movement and in politics of the 1960s and 1970s.
Newton adopted what he termed "revolutionary humanism".
Newton would frequent pool halls, campuses, bars and other locations deep in the Black community where people gathered, to organize and recruit for the Panthers. Newton wrote in his autobiography, "I tried to transform many of the so-called criminal activities going on in the street into something political, although this had to be done gradually." He attempted to channel these "daily activities for survival" into significant community actions. Eventually, however, the illicit activities of a few members would be superimposed on the social program work performed by the Panthers, and this mischaracterization would lose them support in both the white and black communities.
Newton and the Panthers started a number of social programs in Oakland, including founding the Oakland Community School, which provided high-level education to 150 children from impoverished urban neighborhoods. Other Panther programs included the Free Breakfast for Children Program and others that offered dances for teenagers and training in martial arts. According to Oakland County Supervisor John George: "Huey could take street-gang types and give them a social consciousness".
In 1982, Newton was accused of embezzling $600,000 of state aid to the Panther-founded Oakland Community School.  In the wake of the embezzlement charges, Newton disbanded the Black Panther Party.  After six years, the embezzlement charges were dropped in March 1989, after Newton pleaded no contest to a single allegation of cashing a $15,000 state check for personal use.  Newton was sentenced to six months in jail and 18 months probation. He has also expressed support for Palestinian independence.pslweb.html

Fatal shooting of John Frey

Newton had been convicted of assault with a deadly weapon for repeatedly stabbing another man, Odell Lee, with a steak knife in mid-1964.  He served six months in prison In his autobiography, Revolutionary Suicide, Newton wrote that Heanes and Frey were opposite each other and shooting in each other's direction during the shootout.
In his book Shadow of the Panther, writer Hugh Pearson alleges that Newton, while intoxicated in the hours before he was shot and killed, claimed to have willfully killed John Frey.

Allegations of violence

On August 6, 1974, Kathleen Smith, a 17-year-old Oakland native, was shot; she died three months later. According to the prosecutor handling the case,
Newton is also alleged to have assaulted his tailor, Preston Callins, after Callins called him "Baby".  Newton posted bond after being arrested for pistol-whipping Callins. Newton was subsequently arrested a second time for the murder of Smith, but was able to post an additional $80,000 bond, thus securing his release until trial.
Newton and his girlfriend (later his wife) Gwen Fontaine then fled to Havana, Cuba, where they lived until 1977, Newton returned to the United States in 1977 to stand trial for the murder of Smith and the assault on Callins.
In October 1977 three Black Panthers attempted to assassinate Crystal Gray, a key prosecution witness in Newton's upcoming trial who had been present the day of Kathleen Smith's murder. Unbeknownst to the assailants, they attacked the wrong house and the occupant returned fire. During the shootout one of the Panthers, Louis Johnson, was killed and the other two assailants escaped. Newton denied any involvement or knowledge and said the events "might have been the result of overzealous party members".
During Newton's trial for assaulting Preston Callins, Callins changed his testimony several times and eventually told the jury that he did not know who assaulted him. Newton was acquitted of the assault in September 1978, but was convicted on two counts of illegal firearms possession.
After the assasination attempt on Crystal Gray, she declined to testify against Newton. After two trials and two deadlocked juries, the prosecution decided not to retry Newton for Smith's murder.

People's Temple

In January 1977, Peoples Temple leader Jim Jones visited Newton in Havana. Newton's cousin, Stanley Clayton, was one of the few residents of Jonestown to escape the 1978 tragedy, during which more than 900 Temple members were ordered by Jones to commit suicide.

Writing and scholarship

Newton received a bachelor's degree from University of California, Santa Cruz in 1974. He was enrolled as a graduate student in History of Consciousness at UC Santa Cruz in 1978, when he arranged to take a reading course from famed evolutionary biologist Robert Trivers, while in prison. He and Trivers became close friends. Trivers and Newton published an analysis of the role of flight crew self-deception in the crash of Air Florida Flight 90.
Newton earned a Ph.D. in history of consciousness at the University of California at Santa Cruz in 1980.
[/ref] Later, Newton's widow, Frederika Newton, would discuss her husband's often-ignored academic leanings on C-SPAN's "American Perspectives" program on February 18, 2006.

Death

Relations between Newton and factions within the Black Guerrilla Family (BGF) had been strained for nearly two decades. Former Black Panther members who became BGF members in prison had become disenchanted with Newton for his perceived abandonment of imprisoned Black Panther members and allegations of Newton's fratricide within the party.
On August 22, 1989, Newton was fatally shot in West Oakland by 24-year-old BGF member and drug dealer Tyrone Robinson shortly after Newton left a crack house.
Robinson said that Newton pulled a gun when the two met at a street corner in the neighborhood, but the police found no evidence that Newton was armed. The murder occurred in a neighborhood where Newton, as minister of defense for the Black Panthers, once organized social programs that helped destitute African Americans, such as feeding poor, young children in the community before they headed off to school.
Newton's last words, as he stood facing his killer, were, "You can kill my body, and you can take my life but you can never kill my soul. My soul will live forever!" He was then shot twice in the face by Robinson.
He was interred at Evergreen Cemetery in Oakland.

Popular culture

There are many references to Huey Newton in popular music, including in the songs "Changes" by Tupac Shakur,[ref]
[/ref] "Welcome to the Terrordome" by Public Enemy, "Queens Get the Money" by Nas, "Sunny Kim" by Andre Nickatina, "Just A Celebrity" by The Jacka, "Same Thing" by Flobots, "Dreams", "Gangbangin' 101", "Murder" and "911 Is A Joke (Cop Killa)" by The Game, "You Can't Murder Me" by Papoose, "Police State" by Dead Prez, "Propaganda" by Dead Prez "We Want Freedom" by Dead Prez, "Malcolm, Garvey, Huey" by Dead Prez, "SLR" by Lupe Fiasco, "Bill Gates Freestyle" by Fabolous, "Wake Up" by Black the Ripper, "The Martyr" by Immortal Technique, "Lick Shots" by Immortal Technique, "Huey Newton" by Wiz Khalifa & Currensy, "HiiiPoWeR" by Kendrick Lamar, "My Favorite Mutiny" by The Coup, "National Anthem" by Sir Mix-a-Lot, "Bobby Seale" by Lil Tweezii, "Dream Team" by Spearhead, From Here To Utopia Glory, "Free Huey" by The Boo Radleys, "Free Lance" by HD of Bearfaced, "When Will They Shoot?" by Ice Cube, "Pacific Heights" by Pep Love, "No Time for Love" (aka "If They Come in the Morning") by Jack Warshaw, "Million Man March" by Lowkey, "Huey Newton" by St. Vincent on her eponymous fourth album, Married With Children episode Rites of Passage in which "Marcy" tells what was happening when she turned 18.
In the comic strip and cartoon show The Boondocks, the main character Huey Freeman, a ten-year-old African-American revolutionary, is named after Newton; another reference comes when Freeman starts an independent newspaper, dubbing it the Free Huey World Report.
In 1996, A Huey P. Newton Story was performed on stage by veteran actor Roger Guenveur Smith. The one-man play later was made into an award-winning 2001 film directed by Spike Lee.

Works





Further reading




