[[VANK]]

CATEGORIES: Organisations based in South Korea, Foreign relations of South Korea, Internet-based activism, Anti-Japanese sentiment in Korea

VANK, an acronym for Voluntary Agency Network of Korea, is an internet-based South Korean organization made up of 60,000 Korean volunteers and 15,000 international members. According to its website, VANK members are Cyber Diplomats to introduce Korea to the world and World Changers to solve global issues wisely to change the world. VANK hopes that Korea will be the hub of Asia and to be the gateway to northeast Asia.Founder's letter Founder tells how and why he set up VANK.

Activities

VANK is organized for the purpose of uniting cyber diplomats who want build up friendship with foreign friends by exchanging sincere letters and sharing dream and visions before promoting Korea. Young Koreans are volunteering to share their sincere friendship via the internet with those interested in their nation. Examples of campaigns they have conducted include spreading the story of the ancient kingdom of Goguryeo,
VANK publishes reading materials, postcards, maps, and videos to introduce Korea to foreigners. VANK's self-built online database and published books with information about Korea are acknowledged by overseas universities as recommended learning resources about Korea. Korean cooking classes available for expats October 26, 2010 Korea Herald Korea's Cyber Vigilantes foreignpolicy
VANK aims to change information that they believe are wrong about Korea's geographic names or about Korean history.Organization corrects South Korea errors UPI, 15-DEC-06

Donation

VANK is an independent non-governmental and private organisation. According to VANK, they do not receive money from any organisation or corporation, and are run by donations.Interview of VANK

Criticism

VANK has been accused of promoting Korea at the expense of Japan. Critics claim that VANK has attempted to discount Japan and Japanese culture, manipulate history during and after World War II and have other countries believe in distorted perspectives related to Korean-Japanese history that are biased towards Korea.
An About." Sea of Japan vs. East Sea, About.








