[[Ideology of Tintin]]

CATEGORIES: Tintin

Hergé started drawing his comics series The Adventures of Tintin in 1929 for Le Petit Vingtième, the children's section of the Belgian newspaper Le Vingtième Siècle, run by the Abbé Norbert Wallez, an avid supporter of social Catholicism, a right-wing movement. During World War II, Tintin appeared in the Brussels daily pro-German Le Soir; after the war he appeared in his own Tintin magazine (founded by a member of the Resistance, Raymond Leblanc) until Hergé's death in 1983.
As a young artist Hergé was influenced by his mentors, specifically the Abbé Wallez, who encouraged Hergé to use Tintin as a tool for Catholic propaganda to influence Belgian children. This shows in his earlier works within the Tintin series. As a result, European stereotypes pervade Hergé's early catalogue. A breakthrough came in 1934,  when the cartoonist was introduced to Zhang Chongren, a Chinese student, who explained Chinese politics, culture, language, art, and philosophy to him, which Hergé used to great effect in The Blue Lotus. From this point onward, the artist developed ideologically, amidst the collapse of his country and the Second World War, and so did the series: the general trend of the postwar stories is to become more progressive and universalist. Though, the very last frame of the last completed adventure suggests a cynical view that the poor will suffer, no matter who rules the state.

First albums

The first Tintin book, Tintin in the Land of the Soviets, was crafted on the orders of Hergé's superiors, to be anti-Soviet propaganda of limited outlook. Nonetheless, Hergé worked willingly: "I was sincerely convinced of being on the right path", he said later.  His only source was Moscou sans voiles ("Moscow without veils"), a book written in 1928 by Joseph Douillet, former consul of Belgium in the USSR. In this book, appearing not much more than a decade after the October Revolution, Douillet denounced the communist system for producing poverty, famine, and terror. The secret police maintained order and the propaganda deceived foreigners. Nonetheless, the anti-totalitarian theme of this first book would persist throughout the series.
Hergé wanted the second book to take place in the United States, which fascinated him. Wallez disagreed: he distrusted the USA, the country of Protestantism, liberalism, of easy money, and of gangsters. Instead, he asked Hergé to draw a book about the Belgian Congo: the colony needed white workers at the time. 29-30
Tintin in the Congo reflected the dominant colonialist ideology at that time.  As put by Hergé in a later interview, "This was in 1930.  All I knew about the Congo was what people were saying about it at the time: 'The Negroes are big children, it's fortunate for them that we're there, etc'". 74
The paternalistic description of the indigenous people of Belgian Congo was more naive than racist, and Hergé developed an important theme of Tintin in this book: international trafficking. 31

Turn-around from Tintin in America (1931–1932) to The Black Island (1937–1938)

With his next book, Hergé could finally send Tintin to the United States. "Tintin in America" (1932) represents a significant change in tone.  The story was, like the previous ones, very caricatured, because of Hergé's limited knowledge of the country: America was the land of Al Capone, cowboys and gigantism. But Hergé also took the defense of the Native Americans (whom he called "Red Indians"), African Americans and blue-collar workers.  He criticized lynching, the theft of Native American land, and American business rapacity.
Even more striking is the fifth book, The Blue Lotus (1934–1935), set in China.  For this story Hergé was put in touch with Zhang Chongren, a Chinese student then studying in Brussels, whose name may have been the basis for the name of character Chang Chong-Chen. Hergé was very concerned with portraying the country accurately, and the adventure can be read as anti-imperialist.  It criticizes Japanese and Western involvement in China, including the international concessions and the Japanese invasion of Manchuria, and shows with great disapproval Westerners making racist or ignorant remarks about the Chinese. The Japanese themselves are portrayed with little sympathy; most of those shown are soldiers or government agents involved in the invasion of Manchuria.
The Broken Ear (1935–1936) is set mainly in the fictional South American republic of San Theodoros and takes a critical view of western businessmen conspiring to provoke a war over what they think will be profitable oil fields.  They go about this using bribery, corruption, and the sale of arms to both sides.  It then simply requires a border confrontation to be blown out of proportion in order to begin the conflict, much like the Mukden Incident shown in The Blue Lotus. The war over the Grand Chapo oil plains was based on the Chaco War of the early 1930s.  It also depicted the Shuar indigenous people, famous for their tsantsas ("shrunken heads").
At first glance, The Black Island (1937–1938) is a simple thriller with Tintin in pursuit of money forgers, with the chase to Scotland giving it a feel of Alfred Hitchcock's movie version of The Thirty-Nine Steps. Dr. Müller is a German villain and can be read as a clear parody of the Germans at the time.

The Second World War

Several stories were influenced by the menace of a second world war, and then by the war itself and the Nazi occupation of Belgium.
Despite the fact that Hergé was in favor of the neutrality of Belgium, King Ottokar's Sceptre (1938–1939) could be read as anti-Nazi: Müsstler (a possible contraction of Mussolini and Hitler) is the leader of a conspiracy that seeks to merge the kingdom of Syldavia with its old enemy Borduria.  The story could have been influenced by the Anschluss in Austria in 1938. Müsstler is the head of the Steel Guard, a name implying a pro-fascist paramilitary group which were common in Europe between the wars. An actual fascist and anti-Semitic group called the Iron Guard was very active in Romania in the years leading up to the Second World War. The Romanian Iron Guard was often in violent conflict with the King of Romania, King Carol II, who they accused of corruption and being influenced by his Jewish mistress. The leader of the Iron Guard, Codreanu, was executed shortly thereafter for treason by the Romanian government. The Iron Guard briefly formed the government in 1940 under Horia Sima after the King's abdication but Hitler ended up backing the more conservative General Antonescu in January 1941 and the Iron Guard was eliminated from government and purged. Thus, in the foreign policy of the Third Reich the Romanian monarchy and other authoritarian figures were supported over the local fascist party.
The early and unfinished version of Land of Black Gold (1939–1940) alluded to the mobilization of Nazi war power. This unfinished adventure is set in the British Mandate of Palestine with British soldiers and officials. The beginning of the war and the defeat of Belgium prevented Hergé from finishing this version, though it did come out in 1950. He later rewrote it, setting the action in the fictional Arab Kingdom of Khemed and replacing the conflict between Arabs and Jews by a civil conflict between two Arab factions. 86-89
During the war, Hergé worked for Le Soir, a newspaper which collaborated with the German occupiers. To avoid controversy during the Nazi occupation of Belgium, Tintin's adventures now focused mainly on non-political issues such as drug smuggling (The Crab with the Golden Claws), intrigue and treasure hunts (The Secret of the Unicorn and Red Rackham's Treasure), and a mysterious curse (The Seven Crystal Balls).
Somewhat controversial though, was The Shooting Star, which was about a race between two crews trying to reach a meteorite which had landed in the Arctic.  Hergé chose the subject to be as fantastic as possible, to avoid trouble from the censors.  Nonetheless politics intruded in that the crew Tintin joined was composed of Europeans from Axis or neutral countries, while their underhanded rivals were Americans. Tintin also flies in a German plane in the book (an Arado Ar 196).
Most damaging of all for Hergé was that these stories were published in Le Soir, a collaborationist newspaper.  After the war he and other members of its staff faced lengthy investigations into their wartime allegiances.  Hergé expressed his regrets in an 1973 interview: "I recognise that I myself believed that the future of the West could depend on the New Order. For many, democracy had proved a disappointment, and the New Order brought new hope.  In light of everything which has happened, it is of course a huge error to have believed for an instant in the New Order". March 1973

Post-war

The post-war stories are less controversial, developing several recurring themes:
In the first edition of The Red Sea Sharks, the black victims speak pidgin French and seem rather simple-minded. Hergé rewrote their dialogue in later editions. 107
The last controversial album is Tintin and the Picaros, which has been seen both as left-wing and right-wing. In it, Tintin goes through profound changes.  For the first time, Tintin seems to be flesh and blood, and perhaps even has weaknesses; for instance, he is at first uncharacteristically unwilling to travel to San Theodoros, where his friends have been falsely accused of espionage.  At the end he intervenes dramatically through revolution. But as Benoît Peeters puts it, "it is quite clear that this is no real revolution but a palace coup. Tapioca is backed by Borduria, Alcazar by the International Banana Company; as for ordinary people, they remain impoverished in the shantytowns."Benoît Peeters, Tintin and the World of Hergé, 1988, p. 127

Sexism

Hergé has also been accused of sexism, due to the almost complete lack of female characters in his books. The only woman character of importance is Bianca Castafiore, who is portrayed to be foolish and nearly oblivious to all negative reactions to her behaviour – though she does show loyalty, presence of mind and quick wit when hiding Tintin and Haddock from Colonel Sponsz in The Calculus Affair.
Hergé himself denied being a misogynist, saying that "for me, women have nothing to do in a world like Tintin's, which is the realm of male friendship". 93
Other reasons were because he believed that sentimentality had little to do in Tintin's stories, which are mainly about men getting into all sorts of "misadventures rather than adventures", and wherein "mocking women would not be nice". He also felt that a man slipping on a banana skin, providing he does not break a leg, is much funnier than if it happened to a woman. As a female interviewer put it, "It has nothing to do with the misogynist world of the boy scout,"Interview with Hergé available on youtube referring to the fact that Hergé was a scout in his youth.

Tintin and the Jews

Some aspects of Tintin's adventures have resulted in accusations of antisemitism being levelled at Hergé,Hergé, Creator of Tintin: Antisemitism for all Ages, Benjamin Ivry, The Jewish Daily Forward, 17 November 2009 accusations that are often connected to his work during World War II  for Le Soir, a newspaper that collaborated with the Nazis during the German occupation of Belgium.
Before the war, there were some instances of sinister Jewish-looking figures in Tintin's adventures. In The Broken Ear (1935–7), Tintin questions a shopkeeper who is selling copies of the fetish he is looking for: the man wears a kippah, speaks in broken French and rubs his hands with "invisible soap".
As the war began, the first version of Land of Black Gold (1939–40) was being published. This version was set in the British Mandate of Palestine and featured Jewish Zionist terrorists led by a Rabbi. The story was suspended due to its political nature, but completed after the war.
