[[The Mark, Tom and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!)]]

CATEGORIES: Blink-182 albums, MCA Records live albums, English-language live albums, Albums produced by Jerry Finn, 2000 live albums, Live pop punk albums, Albums certified gold by the Recording Industry Association of America, Albums certified platinum by the Canadian Recording Industry Association, Albums certified platinum by the Australian Recording Industry Association

The Mark, Tom and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!) is a live album by the American rock band Blink-182. Produced by Jerry Finn, the album was released on November 7, 2000 through MCA Records. Recorded over two nights at performances in the band's home of California in November 1999, The Mark, Tom and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!) primarily features songs from the band's third album, Enema of the State (1999), as well as selected tracks from previous albums Dude Ranch (1997) and Cheshire Cat (1995).
"Man Overboard", a studio track and outtake from the band's Enema of the State sessions, accompanies the release and was issued as its lead single, peaking at number two on Billboard Modern Rock Tracks chart. Although the album was promoted as a limited edition release, the record came back into print in 2006 due to popular demand.

Background

The Mark, Tom and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back!) was recorded at Bill Graham Civic Auditorium in San Francisco, California and November 5, 1999 at Universal Amphitheatre in Universal City, California on the group's Loserkids Tour. p. 79-80 The colorful, cartoonish album artwork contains several characters illustrated on previous Blink-182 releases, including aliens, the dancing bunny, wizards and a caricature of Enema of the State cover model Janine Lindemulder alongside caricatures of bassist Mark Hoppus, guitarist Tom DeLonge and drummer Travis Barker. p. 79-80 The LP was initially meant to be a strictly limited-edition release (although one million copies were pressed), but nonetheless, the album came back into print in 2006 due to popular demand. p. 79-80
"Man Overboard", the only studio track for the album, was initially written and demoed for blink-182's previous album, Enema of the State. The band entered the studio to record a final version of the song in mid-2000.
Following "Man Overboard", the album returns to a live environment with 29 hidden tracks collectively known as Words of Wisdom. These document examples of Mark and Tom's stage banter towards one another. Their toilet humor jokes are something the band is renowned for and are exampled here. The album also features previously unreleased material, including toilet humor songs, such as "Family Reunion" (released on Short Music for Short People in 1999), "Blow Job" and "The Country Song".
"Dick Lips" is censored as "Rich Lips", and "Blow Job" is censored as "Blew Job" on the track listing on the back cover, however they are written correctly on the inside of the American edition. The adult-themed songs were omitted from listening booths at various mainstream music stores such as HMV.

Release and reception

The album debuted at number eight on the U.S. Billboard 200 chart, with first-week sales of 110,000 copies. 
Melody Maker observed that the album, "obeys the First Three Laws Of Rock: have a good time; maintain the generation gap; keep it simple." In the USA, Spin were similarly instant in their appreciation of the release, and weren't afraid to enjoy the "self-deprecating one-liners about boobies, boners and crooked wieners."Shooman, 2010. p. 79-80 Allmusic wrote that "in the midst of teen pop mediocrity and post-grunge rollickers, it's good to see a band such as blink-182 enjoying its time on top of the world,"The Mark, Tom and Travis Show (The Enema Strikes Back) - Allmusic but not all reviews were positive, however: British magazine NME described the album as "the tragic sound of three men so desperately trying to avoid growing up."NME Album Reviews - The Mark, Tom & Travis Show: The Enema Strikes Back - NME.COM
Consequence of Sound retrospectively reviewed the album in 2008, writing that "If you yourself were not into the band, you know someone who was, and the tour that this recording is from sold out many large venues for a good reason. They knew how to write catchy punk rock with more on stage energy than I have seen to date."Consequence of Sound

Track listing

Personnel

Charts

Weekly charts

Certifications

Release history



 | last = Hoppus
 | first = Anne
 | authorlink =
 | coauthors =
 | title = Blink-182: Tales from Beneath Your Mom
 | date = October 1, 2001
