[[John Sculley]]

CATEGORIES: 1939 births, Apple Inc. executives, Brown University alumni, Living people, Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania alumni, St. Mark's School (Massachusetts) alumni, Amateur radio people, Silicon Valley people, Businesspeople from the San Francisco Bay Area

John Sculley III (born April 6, 1939) is an American businessman, entrepreneur and investor in high-tech startups. Sculley was  vice-president (1970–1977) and president of PepsiCo (1977–1983), until he became CEO of Apple on April 8, 1983, a position he held until leaving in 1993. In May 1987, Sculley was named Silicon Valley's top-paid executive, with an annual salary of US$2.2M.
Sales at Apple increased from $800 million to $8 billion under Sculley's management, although many attribute this success to Sculley merely joining at an opportune time when Steve Jobs' vision and creations had begun to skyrocket.The New York Times: "New Strategy Set by Apple" Others say that the "two clashed over management styles and priorities, Jobs focusing on future innovation and Sculley more on current product lines and profitability." But Sculley ultimately was forced to step down as Apple CEO because he was opposed to licensing Macintosh software and was talking to Goldman-Sachs about splitting Apple into two companies. When Sculley left in May 1993, Apple had $2 billion in cash and $200 million in debt.
John Sculley is recognized worldwide as an expert in marketing, in part because of his early successes at PepsiCo, notably his introduction of the Pepsi Challenge, which allowed the company to gain market share from primary rival Coca Cola.), Inflexion Point, Mobeam, OpenPeak, x10 Credit, Pivot Acquisition Corp., nextSource, and WorldMate. Through their family investment office, Sculley Brothers, John Sculley and his brothers Arthur and David are investing in US health care because they see innovation in healthcare delivery services as an opportunity for their marketing skills and experience. Among their healthcare investments are Watermark Medical, MDLIVE, Audax Health Solutions, Misfit Wearables, and Modernizing Medicine.

Early life

John Sculley was born in New York City. Five days later, he was one of the first infants to fly the Atlantic Ocean to his mother's home country, Bermuda, where his family first settled in 1624. John and his brothers spent much of their childhood in Bermuda before moving back to New York. He attended high school at St. Mark's School in Southborough, Massachusetts. He ultimately received a bachelor's degree in architectural design from Brown University and an MBA from the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
Sculley overcame a stutter early in his life.

Career

1967–82 : Pepsi-Cola

Sculley joined the Pepsi-Cola division of PepsiCo in 1967 as a trainee, where he participated in a six-month training program at a bottling plant in Pittsburgh. In 1970, at the age of 30, Sculley became the company's youngest marketing vice-president.
As vice-president of marketing at Pepsi, Sculley initiated one of the company's first consumer-research studies, an extended in-home product test in which 350 families participated. As a result of the research, Pepsi decided to launch new, larger and more varied packages of their soft drinks. In 1970, Pepsi set out to dethrone Coca-Cola as the market leader of the industry, in what would eventually become known as the Cola Wars.
Pepsi began spending more on marketing and advertising, typically paying between US$200,000 and $300,000 for each television spot, while most companies spent between $15,000 and $75,000. With the Pepsi Generation campaign, Pepsi aimed to overturn Coca-Cola's classic marketing.
At Pepsi, Sculley also took the position of managing PepsiCo's International Food Operations division, shortly after he visited a failing potato-chip factory in Paris. PepsiCo's Food division was their only money-losing division, with revenues of US$83 million and losses of $16 million. To make the food division profitable, Sculley hired new managers from Frito-Lay and improved product quality, as well as improving accounts and establishing financial controls.Sculley, Odyssey: Pepsi to Apple, pg 68
Sculley was best known at Pepsi for the Pepsi Challenge, an advertising campaign he started in 1975 to compete against Coca Cola to gain market share, using heavily-advertised taste tests. It claimed based on Sculley's own research that Pepsi-Cola tasted better than Coca-Cola. The Pepsi Challenge included a series of television advertisements that first aired in the early 1970s, featuring lifelong Coca-Cola drinkers participating in blind taste tests. Pepsi's soft drink was always chosen as the preferred product by the participant; however, these tests have been criticized as being biased. The Pepsi Challenge was mostly targeted at the Texas market, because Pepsi had a significantly low market share there at the time. The campaign was successful, significantly increasing Pepsi's market share in that state. At the time the Pepsi Challenge was started, Sculley was senior vice-president of United States sales and marketing operations at Pepsi.Michael S Malone. Infinite Loop. New York: Doubleday Business, 1999.
In 1977, Sculley was named Pepsi's youngest-ever president.

1983–93: Apple Inc.

Apple lured Sculley away from Pepsi in order to apply his marketing skills to the personal computer market. Steve Jobs successfully sealed the deal after he made his legendary pitch to John: "Do you want to sell sugared water for the rest of your life? Or do you want to come with me and change the world?"
The Lisa computer, an innovative model designed by a team initially led by Jobs, shipped in January 1983, and had disastrous sales. When Jobs' Macintosh, the first of a new series of models with a pioneering black-and-white graphical user interface, shipped in January 1984, Sculley raised the initial price to $2,495 from the originally planned $1,995, using the additional money for higher profit margins and expensive advertising campaigns.
At the peak of Macintosh success Apple made an attempt to move unsold inventory of Lisa computers by renaming it "Macintosh XL" and positioning as top-of-the-line pro Macintosh model. Since it lacked user-friendliness of Macintosh, this idea had little success.
At this point, a power struggle between Jobs and Sculley was becoming readily apparent. Jobs became "non-linear": he kept meetings running past midnight, sent out lengthy faxes, then called new meetings at 7 am. Growing Apple with the Macintosh: The Sculley years, Low End Mac, February 22, 2006. The Apple board of directors instructed Sculley to "contain" Jobs and limit his ability to launch expensive forays into untested products. Rather than submit to Sculley's direction, Jobs attempted to oust him from his leadership role at Apple. Sculley found out about Jobs's plans and called a board meeting at which Apple's board of directors sided with Sculley and removed Jobs from his managerial duties. Jobs resigned from Apple and founded NeXT Inc. the same year.
Under the direction of Sculley, who had learned several painful lessons after introducing the bulky Macintosh Portable in 1989, Apple introduced the PowerBook in 1991. The same year, Apple introduced System 7, a major upgrade to the operating system, which added color to the interface and introduced new networking capabilities. It remained the architectural basis for Mac OS until 2001. The success of the PowerBook and other products brought increasing revenue. For some time, it appeared that Apple could do no wrong, introducing fresh new products and generating increasing profits in the process. The magazine MacAddict named the period between 1989 and 1991 as the "first golden age" of the Macintosh.
Microsoft threatened to discontinue Microsoft Office for the Macintosh if Apple did not license parts of the Macintosh graphical user interface to use in the Windows operating system. Under pressure, Sculley agreed, a decision which later affected the Apple v. Microsoft lawsuit. About that time, Sculley coined the term personal digital assistant (PDA) referring to the Apple Newton, one of the world's first PDAs which, as it turned out, was several years ahead of its time.Ciber, Technology Milestone: Apple Newton 1993
In the early 1990s, at enormous expense, Sculley led Apple to port its operating system to run on a new microprocessor, the PowerPC.  Sculley later acknowledged this was his greatest mistake, indicating that he should instead have targeted the dominant Intel architecture.
In 1987, Sculley made several famous predictions in a Playboy interview.

1994–present

Since leaving Apple, Sculley has invested in and been actively involved with a number of successful businesses: He was a founding investor in MetroPCS, formerly General Wireless, and helped guide the company's brand marketing; MetroPCS is now a multi-billion dollar public company on the New York Stock Exchange. He built NFO Research from $25 million to $550 million in revenue, and sold it to IPG for $850 million. He helped launch and advised Hotwire.com, and PeoplePC - each of which became billion dollar market cap public companies in the 1990s. In 1995, Sculley and his two brothers, Arthur and David, formed a family office they call "Sculley Brothers," which is a privately owned portfolio of family investments, not an outside investor fund. Arthur Sculley is a former CEO of JP Morgan Private Bank; David Sculley is a former CEO of HJ Heinz USA. Other successful companies that Sculley Brothers helped create include Profession Sportscare, Intralinks, CreditTrade, Country Gourmet Soups, Buy.
Sculley turned his attention briefly to politics in the early 1990s on behalf of Republican Tom Campbell, who in 1992 was running in California for a United States Senate seat.  Sculley hosted a fund-raiser for Campbell at his ranch in Woodside. Sculley had become acquainted with Hillary Clinton, serving with her on a national education council. When Bill Clinton ran for president, Sculley supported him. Sculley sat next to Hillary Clinton during the President's first State of the Union address in January 1993.
In 1994, Sculley signed on as CEO with Spectrum Information Technologies, a US$100 million wireless communications company. Unbeknownst to Sculley, at the time he joined the company, it was under investigation for fraud by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC). Four months later, Sculley learned of the fraud investigation and resigned, filing a lawsuit against Spectrum president Peter Caserta for damaging his reputation.
In 1997, Sculley co-founded PopTech with Bob Metcalfe and several other dignitaries from the technology industry.
In 2002, Sculley endorsed and invested in the Wine Clip, In the same year, John Sculley became a Venture Partner at Rho Ventures.
Before speaking at the Silicon Valley 4.0 conference, Sculley was interviewed by CNET in October 2003, where he explained the mistakes he made at Apple concerning the Apple Newton and HyperCard. Also in 2003, Sculley was interviewed by the BBC for the television documentary The World's Most Powerful episode Steve Jobs vs. Bill Gates, discussing his time at Apple during the 1980s as CEO. In 2010, he was interviewed for Cult of Mac on the topics of Steve Jobs and design.
Sculley has spoken at PopTech since its opening in 1997 every year except for 2005.
in 2007 Sculley co-founded the data company Zeta Interactive with business partner David A. Steinberg, and in January 2014 the data analytics firm XL Marketing, rebranded and incorporated its resources into Zeta, re-launching it as a Big Data-Driven Marketing firm.  On January 30, 2014, Sculley was a panelist at a forum organized by Zeta, which featured ad executives, marketers and NFL executive to discuss the changes in the way companies market and reach consumers since Sculley's time at Apple in 1984 when the computer company featured what became one of the first iconic Super Bowl ads - the 1984 commercial.

Personal life

John Sculley has three children and six grandchildren. He currently lives with his wife, Diane Gibbs Poli, in Palm Beach, Florida.

In popular culture

Sculley is portrayed by actor Matthew Modine in the 2013 film Jobs, based on the life of Steve Jobs.

Further reading






