[[Life extension]]

CATEGORIES: Ageing, Life extension, Demography, Emerging technologies, Population, Futurology, Anti-aging substances, Transhumanism

Life extension science, also known as anti-aging medicine, indefinite life extension, experimental gerontology, and biomedical gerontology, is the study of slowing down or reversing the processes of aging to extend both the maximum and average lifespan. Some researchers in this area, and "life extensionists", "immortalists" or "longevists" (those who wish to achieve longer lives themselves), believe that future breakthroughs in tissue rejuvenation with stem cells, molecular repair, and organ replacement (such as with artificial organs or xenotransplantations) will eventually enable humans to have indefinite lifespans (agerasia) through complete rejuvenation to a healthy youthful condition.
The sale of putative anti-aging products such as nutrition, physical fitness, skin care, hormone replacements, vitamins, supplements and herbs is a lucrative global industry, with the US market generating about $50 billion of revenue each year. Some medical experts state that the use of such products has not been proven to affect the aging process, and many claims of anti-aging medicine advocates have been roundly criticized by medical experts, including the American Medical Association.
However, it has not been shown that the goal of indefinite human lifespans itself is necessarily unfeasible; some animals such as hydra,  planarian flatworms, and certain jellyfish do not die of old age. Not your father's planarian: a classic model enters the era of functional genomics. Nat Rev Genet 3:210-219. PMID 11972158Bavestrello, Giorgio; Christian Sommer and Michele Sarà (1992). Bi-directional conversion in Turritopsis nutricula (Hydrozoa). Scientia Marina 56 (2–3): 137–140Martínez DE (1998). Mortality patterns suggest lack of senescence in hydra. Exp Gerontol 33(3):217-225. PMID 9615920 The ethical ramifications of life extension are debated by bioethicists.

Public opinion

Life extension is a controversial topic due to fear of overpopulation and possible effects on society.fightaging.php Religious people are no more likely to oppose life extension than the unaffiliated, though some variation exists between religious denominations. Blacks and Hispanics are more likely to support life extension than white people. Biogerontologist Aubrey De Grey counters the overpopulation critique by pointing out that the therapy could postpone or eliminate menopause, allowing women to space out their pregnancies over more years and thus decreasing the yearly population growth rate.project-syndicate.
A Spring 2013 Pew Research poll in the United States found that 38% of Americans would want life extension treatments, and 56% would reject it. However it also found that 68% believed most people would want it and that only 4 percent consider an "ideal lifespan" to be more than 120 years.

Average and maximum lifespans

During the process of aging, an organism accumulates damage to its macromolecules, cells, tissues and organs. Specifically, aging is characterized as and thought to be caused by "genomic instability, telomere attrition, epigenetic alterations, loss of proteostasis, deregulated nutrient sensing, mitochondrial dysfunction, cellular senescence, stem cell exhaustion, and altered intercellular communication."López-Otín C, Blasco MA, Partridge L, Serrano M, Kroemer G (2013). The hallmarks of aging. Cell 153(6):1194-1217. Review. PMID 23746838 Oxidation damage to cellular contents caused by free radicals is believed to contribute to aging as well. Free Radicals in Biology and Medicine. Oxford University Press, USA, ISBN 019856869X,  ISBN 978-0198568698Holmes GE, Bernstein C, Bernstein H (1992). Oxidative and other DNA damages as the basis of aging: a review. Mutat Res 275(3-6):305-315. Review. PMID 1383772
The longest a human has ever been proven to live is 122 years, the case of Jeanne Calment who was born in 1875 and died in 1997, whereas the maximum lifespan of a wildtype mouse, commonly used as a model in research on aging, is about three years.informatics.org/mgihome/other/mouse_facts1.
Average lifespan in a population is lowered by infant and child mortality, which are frequently linked to infectious diseases or nutrition problems. Later in life, vulnerability to accidents and age-related chronic disease such as cancer or cardiovascular disease play an increasing role in mortality. Extension of expected lifespan can often be achieved by access to improved medical care, vaccinations, good diet, exercise and avoidance of hazards such as smoking.
Maximum lifespan is determined by the rate of aging for a species inherent in its genes and by environmental factors. Widely recognized methods of extending maximum lifespan in model organisms such as nematodes, fruit flies, and mice include caloric restriction, gene manipulation, and administration of pharmaceuticals. Aging biology: a new frontier for drug discovery. Expert Opin Drug Discov 7(3):217-229. Review. PMID 22468953 Another technique uses evolutionary pressures such as breeding from only older members or altering levels of extrinsic mortality. The evolution of late life. Ageing Res Rev. 5(1):14-32. PMID 16085467Stearns SC, Ackermann M, Doebeli M, Kaiser M (2000). Experimental evolution of aging, growth, and reproduction in fruitflies. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 97(7):3309-3313. PMID 10716732
Theoretically, extension of maximum lifespan in humans could be achieved by reducing the rate of aging damage by periodic replacement of damaged tissues, molecular repair or rejuvenation of deteriorated cells and tissues, reversal of harmful epigenetic changes, or the enhancement of telomerase enzyme activity. Aging, rejuvenation, and epigenetic reprogramming: resetting the aging clock. Cell 148(1-2):46-57. Review. PMID 22265401Johnson AA, Akman K, Calimport SR, Wuttke D, Stolzing A, de Magalhães JP (2012). The role of DNA methylation in aging, rejuvenation, and age-related disease. Rejuvenation Res 15(5):483-494. Review. PMID 23098078 Research geared towards life extension strategies in various organisms is currently under way at a number of academic and private institutions.

Current anti-aging strategies and issues

Diets and supplements

Much life extension research focuses on nutrition—diets or supplements—as a means to extend lifespan, although few of these have been systematically tested for significant longevity effects. The many diets promoted by anti-aging advocates are often contradictory. A dietary pattern with some support from scientific research is caloric restriction.
Preliminary studies of caloric restriction on humans using surrogate measurements have provided evidence that caloric restriction may have powerful protective effect against secondary aging in humans. Caloric restriction in humans may reduce the risk of developing Type 2 diabetes and atherosclerosis. More research is needed.
The free-radical theory of aging suggests that antioxidant supplements, such as Vitamin C, Vitamin E, Q10, lipoic acid, carnosine, and N-acetylcysteine, might extend human life. However, combined evidence from several clinical trials suggest that β-Carotene supplements and high doses of Vitamin E increase mortality rates. Simonetti, MD; Christian Gluud, MD, DrMedSci in JAMA. 2007;297:842-857.  Other substances proposed to extend lifespan include oxytocin, insulin, human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG), and erythropoietin (EPO). Resveratrol is a sirtuin stimulant that appears to extend lifespan in simple organisms such as nematodes
Some supplements, including the minerals selenium may also extend life span in mice.
There are many traditional herbs purportedly used to extend the health-span, including a Chinese tea called Jiaogulan (Gynostemma pentaphyllum), dubbed "China's Immortality Herb."

Hormone treatments

The anti-aging industry offers several hormone therapies. Some of these have been criticized for possible dangers to the patient and a lack of proven effect. For example, the American Medical Association has been critical of some anti-aging hormone therapies.
Although some recent clinical studies have shown that low-dose growth hormone (GH) treatment for adults with GH deficiency changes the body composition by increasing muscle mass, decreasing fat mass, increasing bone density and muscle strength, improves cardiovascular parameters (i.e. decrease of LDL cholesterol), and affects the quality of life without significant side effects, Furthermore, mouse models lacking the insulin-like growth factor also live especially long and have low levels of growth hormone.

=Insulin like growth factor (IGF-1) restriction=

People suffering from a rare condition known as Laron syndrome have a mutation in the gene that makes the receptor for growth hormone. It is theorised that this mutation may hold a key to life extension.


Scientific controversy regarding anti-aging nutritional supplementation and medicine

Some critics dispute the portrayal of aging as a disease. For example, Leonard Hayflick, who determined that fibroblasts are limited to around 50 cell divisions, reasons that aging is an unavoidable consequence of entropy. Hayflick and fellow biogerontologists Jay Olshansky and Bruce Carnes have strongly criticized the anti-aging industry in response to what they see as unscrupulous profiteering from the sale of unproven anti-aging supplements.

Ethics and politics of anti-aging nutritional supplementation and medicine

Politics relevant to the substances of life extension pertain mostly to communications and availability.
In the United States, product claims on food and drug labels are strictly regulated. The First Amendment (freedom of speech) protects third-party publishers' rights to distribute fact, opinion and speculation on life extension practices. Manufacturers and suppliers also provide informational publications, but because they market the substances, they are subject to monitoring and enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission (FTC), which polices claims by marketers. What constitutes the difference between truthful and false claims is hotly debated and is a central controversy in this arena.

Consumer motivations for using anti-aging products

Research by Sobh and Martin (2011) suggests that people buy anti-aging products to obtain a hoped-for self (e.g., keeping a youthful skin) or to avoid a feared-self (e.g., looking old). The research shows that when consumers pursue a hoped-for self, it is expectations of success that most strongly drive their motivation to use the product. The research also shows why doing badly when trying to avoid a feared self is more motivating than doing well. Interestingly, when product use is seen to fail it is more motivating than success when consumers seek to avoid a feared-self. S. Martin (2011), "Feedback Information and Consumer Motivation. The Moderating Role of Positive and Negative Reference Values in Self-Regulation", European Journal of Marketing, 45 (6), 963-986.

Proposed strategies of life extension

Anti-aging drugs

There are a number of drugs intended to slow the aging process currently being researched. One type of research is related to the observed effects a calorie restriction diet, which has been shown to extend lifespan in some animals[ref]Rozalyn M. Anderson,
Dhanansayan Shanmuganayagam1,and Richard Weindruchhtt "Caloric Restriction and Aging: Studies in Mice and Monkeys", Journal of Toxicological Pharmacology.  Based on that research, there have been attempts to develop drugs that will have the same effect on the aging process as a caloric restriction diet, which are known as Caloric restriction mimetic drugs. Drugs that have been studied for possible longevity effects on laboratory animals because of a possible CR-mimic effect include Rapamycin,David E. Harrison, Randy Strong,Zelton Dave Sharp, James F. Nelson, Clinton M. Astle1, Kevin Flurkey1, Nancy L. Nadon, J. Erby Wilkinson6, Krystyna Frenke, Christy S. Carter, Marco Pahor, Martin A. Javors, Elizabeth Fernandez, & Richard A. Miller "Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice", Nature, 460, p. 392-395, 2009.  "Identification of Potential Caloric Restriction Mimetics by Microarray Profiling.", Physiological Genomics. 2005 Nov 17;23(3):343-50. Epub 2005 Sep 27.  and Resveratrol. Barger,Tsuyoshi Kayo,James M. Vann, et al. "A Low Dose of Dietary Resveratrol Partially Mimics Caloric Restriction and Retards Aging Parameters in Mice " 
Two drugs that may have potential benefits of combating age-related maladies are  Resveratrol and Rapamycin. These drugs are considered to be the forefront drugs in anti-aging research. Before these drugs had been tested, the best-characterized anti-aging therapy was,and still is, calorie restriction or CR. In some studies calorie restriction has been shown to extend the life of mice,yeast, and rhesus monkeys significantly. 2009. Metabolic and behavioral compensations in response to caloric restriction: implications for the maintenance of weight loss" PLoS One 4: e4377. 2007. Caloric restriction in humans. Exp Gerontol 42: 709–12. However, a more recent study has shown that in contrast, calorie restriction has not improved the survival rate in rhesus monkeys., et al. "Impact of caloric restriction on health and survival in rhesus monkeys from the NIA study." Nature 489.7415 (2012): 318-321. Long-term human trials of CR are now being done.
Resveratrol was first thought to be an activator of sirtuins, a family of deacetylases, that would promote anti aging effects without having to restrict caloric intake. 2003. Small molecule activators of sirtuins extend Saccharomyces cerevisiae lifespan" Nature 425: 191–6. However, recent replication studies have failed to show that Resveratrol increases the life span in yeast or mice and that Resveratrol may not activate sirtuins that are biologically beneficial to age reduction. 2007. Effects of resveratrol on lifespan in Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans" Mech Ageing Dev 128: 546–52. 2009. Resveratrol is not a direct activator of SIRT1 enzyme activity. Chem Biol Drug Des 74: 619–24. 2005. Mechanism of human SIRT1 activation by resveratrol" J Biol Chem 280: 17187–95. 2005. Substrate-specific activation of sirtuins by resveratrol" J Biol Chem 280: 17038–45. 
Another study was done showing that Resveratrol activates or inhibits fifteen or more different enzymes. 2008. Resveratrol: one molecule, many targets" IUBMB Life 60: 323–32. Of those enzymes, one stands out with potential for reducing age-related disease. AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) has shown to increase life span of nematodes and prevent obesity in mice. 2008. Chronic activation of AMPactivated protein kinase-alpha1 in liver leads to decreased adiposity in mice" Biochem Biophys Res Commun 370: 248–53. Although Resveratrol has not been proven to extend the life-span of mammals at the current doses tested, Resveratrol could be used to access some of the same molecular pathways that CR does. Several examples would include diet induced obesity, some cancers, cardiovascular disease, and neurodegenerative diseases. 2008. Clin Interv Aging 3: 331–9.
While Resveratrol has not been proven to increase life span, Rapamycin has shown much more promise.  Rapamycin is shown to increase longevity by inhibiting the target of rapamycin kinase (TOR) the same way CR does. 2009. Aging is RSKy business" Science 326: 55–6. Study systems including yeast, nematodes, flies, and mammals, have shown that reduction of TOR signaling will result in an increased life span. 2009. The TOR pathway comes of age" Biochim Biophys Acta 1790: 1067–74. 2009. Rapamycin fed late in life extends lifespan in genetically heterogeneous mice" Nature 460: 392–5. Additionally, Rapamycin has similar effects of Resveratrol in protecting against several cancers, cardiovascular, and neurodegenerative diseases.  Rapamycin also has been shown to act as an immunosuppressant, however more testing is needed to show if the life extending dose comes at the cost of an impaired immune system.
Resveratrol and Rapamycin have both shown protection against cancers, cardiovascular disease, and neurodegenerative diseases in multiple study systems.  Rapamycin looks to have more potential in life span extension than Resveratrol, but may come at a price of immune system impairment. Clinical trials are now being performed to see if Rapamycin or Resveratrol will have anti-aging effects in humans.
Other attempts to create anti-aging drugs have taken different research paths.  One notable direction of research has been research into the possibility of using the enzyme telomerase in order to counter the process of telomere shortening."Telomeres and Telomerase Basic Science Implications for Aging", American Geriatrics Society, Volume 49, Issue 8, Pages 1105-1109, August 200    However, there are potential dangers in this, since some research has also linked telomerase to cancer and to tumor growth and formation.aacrjournals.full

Nanotechnology

Future advances in nanomedicine could give rise to life extension through the repair of many processes thought to be responsible for aging. K. Eric Drexler, one of the founders of nanotechnology, postulated cell repair machines, including ones operating within cells and utilizing as yet hypothetical molecular computers, in his 1986 book Engines of Creation. Raymond Kurzweil, a futurist and transhumanist, stated in his book The Singularity Is Near that he believes that advanced medical nanorobotics could completely remedy the effects of aging by 2030.

Cloning and body part replacement

Some life extensionists suggest that therapeutic cloning and stem cell research could one day provide a way to generate cells, body parts, or even entire bodies (generally referred to as reproductive cloning) that would be genetically identical to a prospective patient. Recently, the US Department of Defense initiated a program to research the possibility of growing human body parts on mice. Proponents of body part replacement and cloning contend that the required biotechnologies are likely to appear earlier than other life-extension technologies.
The use of human stem cells, particularly embryonic stem cells, is controversial. Opponents' objections generally are based on interpretations of religious teachings or ethical considerations.  Proponents of stem cell research point out that cells are routinely formed and destroyed in a variety of contexts. Use of stem cells taken from the umbilical cord or parts of the adult body may not provoke controversy.
The controversies over cloning are similar, except general public opinion in most countries stands in opposition to reproductive cloning. Some proponents of therapeutic cloning predict the production of whole bodies, lacking consciousness, for eventual brain transplantation.

Cryonics

For cryonicists (advocates of cryopreservation), storing the body at low temperatures after death may provide an "ambulance" into a future in which advanced medical technologies may allow resuscitation and repair. They speculate cryogenic temperatures will minimize changes in biological tissue for many years, giving the medical community ample time to cure all disease, rejuvenate the aged and repair any damage that is caused by the cryopreservation process.
Many cryonicists do not believe that legal death is "real death" because stoppage of heartbeat and breathing—the usual medical criteria for legal death—occur before biological death of cells and tissues of the body. Even at room temperature, cells may take hours to die and days to decompose. Although neurological damage occurs within 4–6 minutes of cardiac arrest, the irreversible neurodegenerative processes do not manifest for hours.
No mammal has been successfully cryopreserved and brought back to life, with the exception of frozen human embryos. Resuscitation of a postembryonic human from cryonics is not possible with current science. Some scientists still support the idea based on their expectations of the capabilities of future science.

Strategies for Engineered Negligible Senescence (SENS)

Another proposed life extension technology would combine existing and predicted future biochemical and genetic techniques. SENS proposes that rejuvenation may be obtained by removing aging damage via the use of stem cells and tissue engineering, removal of telomere-lengthening machinery, allotopic expression of mitochondrial proteins, targeted ablation of cells, immunotherapeutic clearance, and novel lysosomal hydrolases.
While many biogerontologists find these ideas "worthy of discussion"Pontin, Jason (July 11, 2006). "Is Defeating Aging Only A Dream?". Technology Review. "Invincible Man". Washington Post. and SENS conferences feature important research in the field,Fourth SENS Conference (2009). Over 140 Accepted Abstracts. Cambridge, England, September 3–7th, 2009. SENS4 Conference Coverage From Ouroboros. FightAging. some contend that the alleged benefits are too speculative given the current state of technology, referring to it as "fantasy rather than science".

Genetic modification

Gene therapy, in which artificial genes are integrated with an organism to replace mutated or otherwise deficient genes, has been proposed as a future strategy to prevent aging.
In 2012, Israeli researchers from Bar-Ilan University exhibited an increase in lifespan of male mice by over-expression of the SIRT6 gene.  In these transgenic mice, levels of proteins involved in the 'insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1)' pathway, which has been previously linked to longevity, were affected by SIRT6 expression.
Scientists at the Buck Institute combined mutations in two pathways well known for lifespan extension and report a synergistic five-fold extension of longevity in the nematode C. elegans. 
The mutations inhibited key molecules involved in insulin signaling (IIS) and the nutrient signaling pathway Target of Rapamycin (TOR). Single mutations in TOR (in this case RSKS-1) usually result in a 30 percent lifespan extension, while mutations in IIS (Daf-2) often result in a doubling of lifespan in the worms. Added together they give a synergistic five-fold increase in lifespan (instead of the expected 130%). The two mutations set off a positive feedback loop in specific tissues that amplified lifespan. Basically these worms lived to the human equivalent of 400 to 500 years.
A large number of other distinct genetic modifications affecting autophagy, lipid metabolism, reproduction, and other processes have been reported to extend lifespan in model organisms. Autophagy - An Emerging Anti-Aging Mechanism. J Clin Exp Pathol Suppl 4. pii: 006. Review. PMID 23750326Lapierre LR, Hansen M (2012). Lessons from C. elegans: signaling pathways for longevity. Trends Endocrinol Metab 23(12):637-44 Review. PMID 22939742

Fooling genes

In The Selfish Gene, Richard Dawkins describes an approach to life-extension that involves "fooling genes" into thinking the body is young.

Reversal of informational entropy

According to some lines of thinking, the ageing process is routed into a basic reduction of biological complexity, and thus loss of information. In order to reverse this loss, gerontologist Marios Kyriazis suggested that it is necessary to increase input of actionable and meaningful information both individually (into individual brains), This technique enhances overall biological function through up-regulation of immune, hormonal, antioxidant and other parameters, resulting in improved age-repair mechanisms. Working in parallel with natural evolutionary mechanisms that can facilitate survival through increased fitness, Kyriazis claims that the technique may lead to a reduction of the rate of death as a function of age, i.e. indefinite lifespan.net/articles/entry/the-global-brain-and-its-role-in-human-immortality

Mind uploading

One hypothetical future strategy that, as some suggest, "eliminates" the complications related to a physical body, involves the copying or transferring of a conscious mind from a biological brain to a non-biological computer system or computational device. The basic idea is to scan the structure of a particular brain in detail, and then construct a software model of it that is so faithful to the original that, when run on appropriate hardware, it will behave in essentially the same way as the original brain. Whether or not an exact copy of one's mind constitutes actual life extension is matter of debate.

History of life extension and the life extension movement

In 1970, the American Aging Association was formed under the impetus of Denham Harman, originator of the free radical theory of aging. Harman wanted an organization of biogerontologists that was devoted to research and to the sharing of information among scientists interested in extending human lifespan.
In 1976, futurists Joel Kurtzman and Philip Gordon wrote No More Dying. The Conquest Of Aging And The Extension Of Human Life, (ISBN 0-440-36247-4) the first popular book on research to extend human lifespan. Subsequently, Kurtzman was invited to testify before the House Select Committee on Aging, chaired by Claude Pepper of Florida, to discuss the impact of life extension on the Social Security system.
Saul Kent published The Life Extension Revolution (ISBN 0-688-03580-9) in 1980 and created a nutraceutical firm called the Life Extension Foundation, a non-profit organization that promotes dietary supplements. The Life Extension Foundation publishes a periodical called Life Extension Magazine. The 1982 bestselling book Life Extension: A Practical Scientific Approach (ISBN 0-446-51229-X) by Durk Pearson and Sandy Shaw further popularized the phrase "life extension".
In 1983, Roy Walford, a life-extensionist and gerontologist, published a popular book called Maximum Lifespan. In 1988, Walford and his student Richard Weindruch summarized their research into the ability of calorie restriction to extend the lifespan of rodents in The Retardation of Aging and Disease by Dietary Restriction (ISBN 0-398-05496-7). It had been known since the work of Clive McCay in the 1930s that calorie restriction can extend the maximum lifespan of rodents. But it was the work of Walford and Weindruch that gave detailed scientific grounding to that knowledge. Walford's personal interest in life extension motivated his scientific work and he practiced calorie restriction himself. Walford died at the age of 80 from complications caused by amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
Money generated by the non-profit Life Extension Foundation allowed Saul Kent to finance the Alcor Life Extension Foundation, the world's largest cryonics organization. The cryonics movement had been launched in 1962 by Robert Ettinger's book, The Prospect of Immortality. In the 1960s, Saul Kent had been a co-founder of the Cryonics Society of New York. Alcor gained national prominence when baseball star Ted Williams was cryonically preserved by Alcor in 2002 and a family dispute arose as to whether Williams had really wanted to be cryopreserved.
Regulatory and legal struggles between the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and the Life Extension Foundation included seizure of merchandise and court action. In 1991, Saul Kent and Bill Faloon, the principals of the Foundation, were jailed. The LEF accused the FDA of perpetrating a "Holocaust" and "seeking gestapo-like power" through its regulation of drugs and marketing claims.
In 1992, the American Academy of Anti-Aging Medicine (A4M) was formed to create what it considered an anti-aging medical specialty distinct from geriatrics, and to hold trade shows for physicians interested in anti-aging medicine. The American Board of Medical Specialties recognizes neither anti-aging medicine nor the A4M's professional standing.
In 2003, Doubleday published "The Immortal Cell: One Scientist's Quest to Solve the Mystery of Human Aging," by Michael D. West. West emphasised the potential role of embryonic stem cells in life extension.
In 2013, Google announced Calico, a new company based in San Francisco that will focus on aging through new technologies, lead by Arthur D. Levinson.blogspot.html

Ethics and politics of life extension

Though many scientists state

Leon Kass (chairman of the US President's Council on Bioethics from 2001 to 2005) has questioned whether potential exacerbation of overpopulation problems would make life extension unethical. He states his opposition to life extension with the words:

John Harris, former editor-in-chief of the Journal of Medical Ethics, argues that as long as life is worth living, according to the person himself, we have a powerful moral imperative to save the life and thus to develop and offer life extension therapies to those who want them. Enhancing Evolution: The ethical case for making better people. Princeton University Press, New Jersey, 2007.
Transhumanist philosopher Nick Bostrom has argued that any technological advances in life extension must be equitably distributed and not restricted to a privileged few.

Aging as a disease

Most mainstream medical organizations and practitioners do not consider aging to be a disease. David Sinclair says: "I don't see aging as a disease, but as a collection of quite predictable diseases caused by the deterioration of the body". In response to the universality of aging, David Gems notes that it is as misleading as arguing that Basenji are not dogs because they do not bark. "Tragedy and delight: the ethics of decelerated ageing." Phil Trans R Soc B. 2011; 366:108-112. Because of the universality of aging he calls it a 'special sort of disease'. Robert M. Perlman, coined the terms 'aging syndrome' and 'disease complex' in 1954 to describe aging. "The aging syndrome." J Am Geriatr Soc. 1954; 2:123-129.
The discussion whether aging should be viewed as a disease or not has important implications. It would stimulate pharmaceutical companies to develop life extension therapies and in the United States of America, it would also increase the regulation of the anti-aging market by the FDA. Anti-aging now falls under the regulations for cosmetic medicine which are less tight than those for drugs. "Anti-aging medicine: can consumers be better protected? Gerontologist. 2004; 44:304-310.





Further reading

Books

Scientific journals




