[[Milos]]

CATEGORIES: Milos, Populated places in Milos (regional unit), Municipalities of the South Aegean

Milos (in Greek, Μήλος, older spelling Μῆλος Melos), is a volcanic Greek island in the Aegean Sea, just north of the Sea of Crete. Milos is the southwesternmost island in the Cyclades group.
The island is famous for the statue of Aphrodite (the "Venus de Milo", now in the Louvre), and also for statues of the Greek god Asclepius (now in the British MuseumBritish Museum Collection  The Municipality of Milos also includes the uninhabited offshore islands of Antimilos and Akradies. The combined land area is  and the 2001 census population was 4,977 inhabitants.

History

Obsidian from Milos was a commodity as early as 13,000 years ago. Milos natural glass used for razor sharp "stone tools" was transported well before farming began and later: "There is no early farming village in the Near East that doesn't get obsidian".C. Renferew The material was transported for thousands of miles. However the mining of obsidian did not lead to the development of permanent habitation or manufacturing on the island. Instead, those in search of obsidian arrived by boat, beaching it in a suitable cove and cutting pieces of the volcanic glass from the quarries.
The position of Milos, between mainland Greece and Crete, and its possession of obsidian, made it an important centre of early Aegean civilization. Milos lost its arms-making importance when bronze became the preferred material for the manufacture of weapons.Chalk and Jonassohn, 65
The first settlement at Phylakopi (Greek Φυλακωπή) arose in the Bronze Age, flourishing as the extraction of obsidian was in the decline. The first settlers were tuna fishermen. Lying on the north-east coast, excavations by the British School of Archeology revealed a town wall and a Minoan palace with some important and very interesting wall paintings. "The famous fresco of the flying fishFlying fish found in the ruins of the principal house or palace at Phylakopi, with its delicate coloring and graphic observation of nature in the graceful movement of the fish, seems to be the work of a Cretan artist, who probably was summoned to Milos for the purpose."CAH pg. 448 Part of the site has been washed away by the sea.
The antiquities found were of three main periods, all preceding the Mycenaean age of Greece. Much pottery was found, including examples of a peculiar style, with decorative designs, mostly floral, and also considerable deposits of obsidian. There are some traditions of a Phoenician occupation of Milos.
In historical times, the island was occupied by Dorians from Laconia. In the 6th century BC, it again produced a remarkable series of vases, of large size, with mythological subjects and orientalizing ornamentation, and also a series of terra-cotta reliefs (Melian Reliefs).

Conflict with Athens

The Greek historian Thucydides wrote in his History of the Peloponnesian War of how, in 416 BCE, Athens  attacked Melos for refusing to submit tribute and refusing to join Athens' alliance against Sparta.
The invasion of Melos occurred during the second phase of the Peloponnesian War (431 to 404 BCE). The Melians claimed Spartan descent but had remained neutral throughout this conflict. In 426 BCE, Athens had prosecuted a brief perfunctory operation on the island but had withdrawn quickly because they were at the time involved in open conflict with Sparta. In 425 BCE Athens claimed suzerainty over Melos and had demanded tribute. Shelton, www.com The second attack on Melos occurred five years after Athens and Sparta had signed a peace agreement and some historians like Bosworth believe that Athens' campaign against Melos in 416 BCE was motivated by imperial expansion.
In the summer of 416 BCE the Athenians landed an army of over 3,000 soldiers on the island, led by the generals Cleomedes and Tisias.  They sent diplomats to negotiate a surrender, offering to spare the Melians if they joined the Athenian-dominated Delian League and paid tribute to Athens. The Melians rejected the ultimatum. The Athenians laid siege to the city and withdrew most of their troops from the island to fight elsewhere.  For months the Melians withstood the siege, but with reinforcements from Athens and the help of traitors within Melos, the Athenians took the city that winter. In the aftermath, as was common in ancient history with resisted sieges, the Athenians executed all the adult men they caught, and sold the women and children into slavery. They then settled 500 of their own colonists on the island. History of the Peloponnesian War, Chapter 17.
The next year, the Athenian tragedian Euripides wrote Trojan Women, which explored the hardships of conquest on women, set in the legendary past of the Trojan War.
When Athens was defeated by Sparta at the end of the Peloponnesian War, the Melian survivors, who had been resettled by Sparta, were restored to their homes by the Spartan general Lysander.

Medieval Period

During the Frankish period the island formed part of the Duchy of Naxos, except for the few years (1341–1383) when it was a separate lordship under Marco Sanudo and his daughter.
In 1566 the Venetians handed over the island to the Ottoman Turks, who were to rule it until 1830.

Geography

Milos is the southwesternmost island in the Cyclades,  broad. In one of the caves on the south coast, the heat from the volcano is still great, and on the eastern shore of the harbour, there are hot sulphurous springs.
Antimelos or Antimilos,  south-east of Kimolos. It was the subject of dispute between the Milians and Kimolians. It is now uninhabited.
The harbour town is Adamantas; from this there is an ascent to the plateau above the harbour, on which are situated Plaka, the chief town, and Kastro, rising on a hill above it, and other villages. The ancient town of Milos was nearer to the entrance of the harbour than Adamas, and occupied the slope between the village of Trypiti and the landing-place at Klima. Here is a theatre of Roman date and some remains of town walls and other buildings, one with a fine mosaic excavated by the British school at Athens in 1896. Numerous fine works of art have been found on this site, notably the Aphrodite in Paris, the Asclepius in London, and the Poseidon and the archaic Apollo in Athens. Other villages include Triovasalos, Peran Triovasalos, Pollonia and Zefyria (Kampos).

Climate

Milos has a Mediterranean climate (Köppen climate classification Csa) with mild, rainy winters and warm to hot dry summers.
 
 

Natural resources

Bentonite, perlite, pozzolana and small quantities of kaolin are actively collected via strip mine or open-pit mine techniques in Milos and sold all over the world. In the past, baryte, sulfur, millstones and gypsum were also mined; in fact, Pliny notes that Milos was the most abundant source of sulfur in the ancient world.C. 2011. Sulfur. Encyclopedia of Earth, eds. A.J. 15 52). The Melian earth was employed as a pigment by ancient artists. Milos was a source of obsidian during the Neolithic ages for the Aegean and Mediterranean. Orange, olive, cypress, tamarisk, juniper (Juniperus oxycedrus) and arbutus trees grow throughout the island, which, however, is too dry to have any profusion of vegetation. Vines, cotton and barley are the main crops.

The beaches of Milos Island

There are about 70 beaches on Milos Island. Hivadolimni Beach is the longest at about . The rest of the beaches are starting from (North): Sarakiniko Beach, Papafragas, Kapros, Pachena, Alogomantra, Konstantinos, Mitakas, Mantrakia, Firopotamos, Nerodafni, Lakida, Plathiena, Fourkovouni, Areti, Pollonia, Gourado and Filakopi. (South): Firiplaka, Paliochori, Provatas, Tsigrado, Agia Kyriaki, Psaravolada, Kleftiko, Gerontas, Gerakas, Agios Sostis, Mouchlioti, Katergo, Spathi, Firligos, Pialothiafes, Kalamos, Krotiraki, Psathi, Svoronou and Sakelari. (West): Agios Ioannis, Cave of Sikia, Agathia, Triades and Ammoudaraki. (East): Voudia, Thalassa, Paliorema, Tria Pagidia and Thiafes. (In the Bay Area): Hivadolimni, Lagada, Papikinou, Fatourena, Klima, Skinopi and Patrikia. The North and South and  bay beaches are tourist attractions. The east beaches are very quiet, and those to the  west are also quiet beaches.

Demographics

Historical population

Notable people

Sister island

Gallery

File:Vassilacchi Aliense.JPG|Antonio Vassilacchi, painter born on Milos in 1556
File:MilosTournefort1718.jpg|Milos, 1718
File:Prophm.jpg|The tallest peak of Milos (2,440 feet high)
File:Thalassitra on the Castle, Plaka.jpg|Thalassitra church at Plaka, Milos
File:White Tephra Sarakiniko Beach Milos Greece 2.jpg|White volcanic tephra at Sarakiniko beach
File:Pirates Lair (5025391933).jpg|The lair of the Saracen pirates in Sarakiniko beach
File:Pirates Lair (5026007564).jpg|Inside the lair of the pirates
File:Gerekas 001.jpg|Gerakas Beach
File:GEREKAS002.jpg|The salty slide of Gerakas Beach
File:Ark005.jpg|The Arkoudes (Bear Rocks) off the coast of Milos





Notes

  | vnum = 0102-03=
  | name = Mílos
  | accessdate = 2009-01-01 }}
  | last1 = Chalk | first1 = Frank
  | last2 = Jonassohn | first2 = Kurt
