[[To Sir, with Love]]

CATEGORIES: 1967 films, 1960s drama films, British films, British drama films, British teen films, British coming-of-age films, English-language films, Films directed by James Clavell, Screenplays by James Clavell, Columbia Pictures films, High school films, Films about educators, Pinewood Studios films, Films set in London, Films shot in London

To Sir, with Love is a 1967 British drama film starring Sidney Poitier that deals with social and racial issues in an inner-city school. James Clavell directed and wrote the film's screenplay, based on the semi-autobiographical novel To Sir, With Love by E. R. Braithwaite.
The film's title song "To Sir With Love", sung by Lulu, reached number one on the U.S. pop charts, and ultimately was Billboard magazine's No. 1 pop single for the year, 1967.  The movie ranked number 27 on Entertainment Weekly list of the 50 Best High School Movies.
A made-for-television sequel, To Sir, with Love II, was released nearly three decades later, with Poitier reprising his starring role.

Plot

Mark Thackeray (Poitier), an unemployed engineer, applies for a teaching position at the North Quay Secondary School in the tough East End of London. He comes from British Guiana via California.
Thackeray learns from the staff of North Quay that most of the students have been rejected from other schools, and their antics drove their last teacher to resign. The students live up to their reputation. Led by Bert Denham (Christian Roberts) and Pamela Dare (Judy Geeson), their antics progress from disruptive behaviour to distasteful pranks. Thackeray retains his calm manner but a turning point comes one morning when he discovers one of the female students has mischievously left a used sanitary towel burning in the classroom grate. He loses his temper, then informs them that from now on they will be treated as adults and allowed to discuss issues of their own choosing for the remainder of the term.  
Thackeray wins the class over, except for Denham, who continues to bait him. Thackeray suggests a class outing to a museum, which turns out to be a success.  He loses some of this new-found support when he defuses a potentially violent situation between Potter (Chris Chittell) and a gym teacher, Mr Bell. In class, he demands that Potter apologise directly to Bell for the incident even if he believes Bell was wrong. The group refuse to invite Thackeray to the class dance, and when Seales' (Anthony Villaroel, the only black student in the class) mother dies, the class takes up a collection for a wreath but refuses to accept Thackeray's donation. At this point, the headmaster advises him that he feels "the adult approach" has failed; future class outings are cancelled, and Thackeray is to take over the boys' gym classes.  Meanwhile Thackeray receives an engineer job offer in the mail.
He starts to win the students back after he beats Denham in a boxing match, but tells him that he has genuine boxing ability and suggests that Denham teach boxing to the younger students next year. Denham expresses his admiration for Thackeray to his fellow students, Thackeray wins back their respect and is invited to the class dance.  
At the dance Barbara Pegg (Lulu) announces a "ladies' choice" dance and Pamela singles out Thackeray as her partner. The class present him with a gift, while Lulu sings the movie theme. Thackeray is too moved for words and retires to his classroom.
Two youths rush into the classroom, and upon seeing Thackeray they begin mocking his gift and joking that they will be in his class next year. Thackeray realises that he has a job to do and he tears up the job offer letter, signifying that he is going to stay on at the school. He realises how affectionate he feels towards the children and understands he can never part from them.

Cast

Reception

Upon its U.S. release, Bosley Crowther began his review by contrasting the film with Poitier's role and performance in the 1955 film The Blackboard Jungle; unlike that earlier film, Crowther says "a nice air of gentility suffuses this pretty color film, and Mr. Poitier gives a quaint example of being proper and turning the other cheek. Although he controls himself with difficulty in some of his confrontations with his class, and even flares up on one occasion, he never acts like a boor, the way one of his fellow teachers (played by Geoffrey Bayldon) does. Except for a few barbed comments by the latter, there is little intrusion of or discussion about the issue of race: It is as discreetly played down as are many other probable tensions in this school. To Sir, with Love comes off as a cozy, good-humored and unbelievable little tale."
Halliwell's Film and Video Guide describes it as "sentimental non-realism" and quotes a Monthly Film Bulletin review (possibly contemporary with its British release), which claims that "the sententious script sounds as if it has been written by a zealous Sunday school teacher after a particularly exhilarating boycott of South African oranges". 
The Time Out Film Guide says that it "bears no resemblance to school life as we know it" and the "hoodlums miraculous reformation a week before the end of term (thanks to teacher Poitier) is laughable". 1098. Although agreeing with the claims about the film's sentimentality, and giving it a mediocre rating, the Virgin Film Guide asserts: "What makes this such as enjoyable film is the mythic nature of Poitier's character. He manages to come across as a real person, while simultaneously embodying everything there is to know about morality, respect and integrity."The Seventh Virgin Film Guide, London: Virgin Publishing, 1998, p. 729. Published by Cinebooks in the US. The "mediocre rating" claim is based on the authors giving the film three out of five stars.
The movie premiered and became a hit one month before another film about troubled schools, Up the Down Staircase, appeared.
To Sir, with Love holds a 92% "Fresh" rating on the review aggregate website Rotten Tomatoes.

Soundtrack

The soundtrack album features music by Lulu, The Mindbenders, and incidental music by Ron Grainer. The original album was released on Fontana Records. It was re-released onto CD in 1995. Allmusic rated it three stars out of five.
The title song was a Cash Box Top 100 number-one single for three weeks.

Accolades

Awards

Nominations






