[[Euston railway station]]

CATEGORIES: Railway termini in London, Railway stations in Camden, Former London and North Western Railway stations, Railway stations opened in 1837, Railway stations served by London Overground, Railway stations served by Virgin Trains, Railway stations served by First ScotRail, Railway stations served by London Midland, DfT Category A stations, Network Rail managed stations, British Transport Police stations, Richard Seifert buildings, Architectural controversies

Euston railway station or London Euston  It is the southern terminus of the West Coast Main Line, the main gateway to the West Midlands, the North West, North Wales and part of Scotland. Its most important long-distance destinations are Birmingham, Manchester, Liverpool and Glasgow.
It is connected to Euston tube station and near Euston Square tube station on the London Underground. It is a short walk from King's Cross Station, the southern terminus of the East Coast Main Line, and St Pancras International Station for the Midland Main Line and Eurostar to France and Belgium. These stations are all in Travelcard Zone 1.
It is the gateway to Ireland via Holyhead and ferry to Dún Laoghaire, for Dublin.  Until the 1960s the station was a terminus of the most-frequented London to Belfast route via Carlisle and the Beeching Axe-closed Castle Douglas and Dumfries Railway to Stranraer.

History

It was the first inter-city railway station in London, opened on 20 July 1837 as the terminus of the London and Birmingham Railway. The original building was demolished in the 1960s and replaced with the present one, built in the international modern style.
The site was selected in the early 1830s by George and Robert Stephenson, engineers of the London and Birmingham Railway. The area was then mostly farmland at the edge of the expanding city of London. The station was named after Euston Hall in Suffolk, the ancestral home of the Dukes of Grafton, who were the main landowners in the area. Objections to the station by local farmers meant that, when the Act authorising construction of the line was passed in 1833, the terminus was at Chalk Farm. These objections were overcome, and in 1835 an Act authorising construction of the station was passed, and construction went ahead.
The station and railway have been owned by the London and Birmingham Railway (1837–1845), the London and North Western Railway (1846–1922), the London, Midland and Scottish Railway (1923–1947), British Railways (1948–1994), Railtrack (1994–2001) and Network Rail (2001–present)

Old building

The original station was built by William Cubitt. 41. It was designed by the classically trained architect Philip Hardwickwww.co. Initially it had only two platforms, one for departures and one for arrivals. Also designed by Hardwick was a 72 ft (22 m)-high Doric propylaeum, the largest ever built, erected at the entrance as a portico, which became known as the Euston Arch.
Until 1844 trains were pulled up the incline to Camden Town by cables because the London and Birmingham Railway's Act of Parliament prohibited the use of locomotives in the Euston area; this prohibition is said to have been in response to concerns of local prominent residents as to the noise and smoke emitted by locomotives toiling up the incline.
The station grew rapidly over the following years as traffic increased. It was greatly expanded in the 1840s, with the opening in 1849 of the spectacular Great Hall, designed by Hardwick's son Philip Charles Hardwick in classical style. It was  high, with a coffered ceiling and a sweeping double flight of stairs leading to offices at its northern end. Architectural sculptor John Thomas contributed eight allegorical statues representing the cities served by the line.  The station was on Drummond Street, further from Euston Road than the front of the modern complex, which now terminates at the side of the station but then ran across the front.motco. A short road called Euston Grove ran from Euston Square towards the arch. Two hotels, the Euston Hotel and the Victoria Hotel, flanked the northern half of this approach.
As traffic grew, the station required further expansion. Two platforms were added in the 1870s with new service roads and entrances, and four in the 1890s, bringing the total to 15, one of them for parcels traffic.
Apart from the lodges on Euston Road and statues now on the forecourt, few relics of the old station survive. The National Railway Museum's collection at York includes a commemorative plaque and E.H. Bailey's statue of George Stephenson, both from the Great Hall; the entrance gates; and an 1846 turntable discovered during demolition.

File:Euston Station - The Great Hall.jpg|The Great Hall
File:Euston Station - 1851 - from Project Gutenberg - eText 13271.jpg|Euston Arch (ca 1851)
File:LNWR War Memorial 2.jpg|LNWR War Memorial
File:LNWR lodge Euston right.jpg|LNWR Portland stone entrance lodge
File:British Railways in Wartime - Bridge of Goodbyes- Everyday Life at Euston Station, London, England, UK, 1944 D18904.

=1930s rebuilding proposals=

By the 1930s the station had become congested, and the London, Midland and Scottish Railway (LMS) looked into the possibility of rebuilding it. They appointed the Welsh architect Percy Thomas to produce some designs. He proposed a new American-inspired station that would involve removing or re-siting the arch. However, World War II intervened and the proposals were shelved.

New building

In the early 1960s it was decided that a larger station was required. Because of the restricted layout of track and tunnels at the northern end, enlargement could be accomplished only by expanding southwards over the area occupied by the Great Hall and the Arch. Amid much public outcry, the station building and the Arch were demolished in 1961–2 and replaced by a new building. Its opening in 1968 followed the electrification of the West Coast Main Line, and the new structure was intended to symbolise the coming of the "electric age". The station was built by Taylor Woodrow Construction LtdThe New Euston Station 1968 1968 British Rail information booklet to a design by BR's architects in consultation with Richard Seifert & Partners, responsible for the second phase of the complex in the late 1970s.
The station is a long, low structure with a frontage of some . The second phase consists of a bus terminal and three low-rise office towers looking out on to Melton Street and Eversholt Street. The offices were occupied by British Rail, then Railtrack, and finally Network Rail, which has now vacated all but a small portion of one of the towers. These buildings are in a functional style and the main facing material is polished dark stone, complemented by white tiles, exposed concrete and plain glazing. The station has a single large concourse, separate from the train shed. A few remnants of the older station remain: two Portland stone entrance lodges and a war memorial. A statue of Robert Stephenson by Carlo Marochetti, previously in the old ticket hall, stands in the forecourt.
There is a large statue by Eduardo Paolozzi named Piscator dedicated to German theatre director Erwin Piscator at the front of the courtyard. Other pieces of public art, including low stone benches by Paul de Monchaux around the courtyard, were commissioned by Network Rail in the 1990s.
The station has catering units and shops, a large ticket hall and an enclosed car park with over 200 spaces.
The screening-off and positioning of platforms away from a spacious main concourse results in a waiting area that is protected from the elements, while areas in front of the inter-city platforms allow passengers to queue without obstructing passenger flow in the main body of the station. Passenger flow is further aided by the positioning of the main departure indicator board to encourage passengers to gather away from platform entrances, and by a walkway under the main concourse that provides a direct link from commuter platforms 8 to 11 to the Underground station.
The lack of daylight on the platforms compares unfavourably with the glazed trainshed roofs of traditional Victorian railway stations, but the use of the space above as a parcels depot
The station has 18 platforms: platforms 8 to 11 are used primarily for London Overground and London Midland commuter services, and have automatic ticket gates. Two platforms are extra long to accommodate the 16-car Caledonian Sleeper.

File:Euston station MMB 21.jpg|Euston station and associated offices
File:Euston station signage.jpg|Station signage
File:Euston Station from above - 06.JPG|The trainshed from above

Architectural controversy

Euston's 1960s style of architecture has been described as "hideous", Michael Palin, explorer and travel writer, in his contribution to Great Railway Journeys titled "Confessions of a Trainspotter", likened it to "a great bath, full of smooth, slippery surfaces where people can be sloshed about efficiently".
Access to parts of the station is difficult for the disabled. The ramps from the concourse down to platform level are too steep for unassisted wheelchairs, but the introduction of lifts in May 2010 made the taxi rank and underground station easily accessible from the concourse.
The demolition of the original buildings in 1962 has been described as "one of the greatest acts of Post-War architectural vandalism in Britain" and is believed to have been approved by the Prime Minister, Harold Macmillan (Con), who was the first of a line of Prime Ministers who championed motorway building. The replacement trainshed has a low, flat roof, making no attempt to match the airy style of London's major 19th century trainsheds. The attempts made to preserve the earlier building, championed by the later Poet Laureate Sir John Betjeman, led to the formation of The Victorian Society and heralded the modern conservation movement. Retrieved 9 September 2007. This movement saved the nearby high Gothic St Pancras Station when it was threatened with demolition by British Rail in 1966, ultimately leading to its renovation in 2007 as the terminus of HS1 to the Continent.
The demolition of the original building is often compared to the 1963 demolition of New York Penn Station, which similarly alerted preservationists in New York City to the importance of saving historic buildings.

1973 IRA attack

Extensive but superficial damage was caused by an IRA bomb that exploded close to a snack bar at approximately 1:10pm on 10 September 1973, injuring eight people. The Metropolitan Police had received a three-minute warning and were unable to evacuate the station completely, but British Transport Police were able to evacuate much of the area just prior to the explosion, thereby reducing casualties. In 1974, the mentally-ill Judith Ward was convicted of this and other crimes despite the evidence against her being highly suspect. She was acquitted in 1992, and the actual culprit has not been apprehended. Retrieved 27 February 2007.

Privatisation

Ownership of the station transferred from British Rail to Railtrack plc in 1994, passing to Network Rail in 2002 following the failure of Railtrack.
In 2005 Network Rail was reported to have long-term aspirations to redevelop the station, removing the 1960s buildings and providing a great deal more commercial space by using the "air rights" above the platforms.
In December 2005 Network Rail announced as part of the redevelopment plans to create a subway link to Euston Square tube station, currently separated by a five-minute walk along Euston Road.alwaystouchout.com/project/125 – Euston to Euston Square subway link

2007 rebuilding announcement

On 5 April 2007, British Land announced that it had won the tender to demolish and rebuild the station, spending some £250m of its overall redevelopment budget of £1bn for the area. The number of platforms will increase from 18 to 21.
Sydney & London Properties, project manager to the Euston Estate Limited Partnership, launched a Vision Masterplan in May 2008 with the aim of stimulating debate about the future of the station and the surrounding neighbourhood.– "Vision of Euston Station in the future"

2011 redesign announcement

In September 2011 plans for demolition were cancelled and Aedas was appointed to give the station a makeover.

Usage

It is the sixth-busiest terminus in London by entries and exits.

High Speed 2

On 11 March 2010 the Secretary of State for Transport announced that Euston was the preferred southern terminus of the proposed High Speed 2 line to Birmingham and the north.
The station would have 24 platforms serving both high-speed and classic lines. These would be at a low level while the flats demolished by the extension would be replaced by significant building work above. The underground station would also be rebuilt and connected to Euston Square tube station. When High Speed 2 is extended beyond Birmingham, the Mayor's office believes it will be necessary to build the proposed Crossrail 2 line via Euston to relieve 10,000 extra passengers forecast to arrive during an average day.High Speed Rail: Investing in Britain's Future Consultation, Department for Transport, February 2011.
In order to relieve pressure on Euston during and after the rebuilding for High Speed 2, HS2 Ltd has proposed the withdrawal of London Overground trains between Euston and 

Services

Four train operating companies use Euston, with the following services in trains per hour:
Virgin Trains operates Intercity West Coast services from platforms 1–7 and 12–18:
London Midland operates regional, commuter and outer suburban services from platforms 8-15 and 17.
London Overground operates local commuter services, usually from platform 9.
First ScotRail operates two nightly Caledonian Sleepers to Scotland.
|route=First ScotRail Lowland Caledonian Sleeper
|col= }}






London Underground

Euston station is directly above and connected to Euston tube station, on the Victoria line and the Northern line (both Bank and Charing Cross branches) of the London Underground. Euston Square tube station on the Circle line, Hammersmith & City line and Metropolitan line is a five-minute walk away along Euston Road.
If High Speed 2 goes ahead, Transport for London (TfL) plans to change the safeguarded route for the proposed Chelsea–Hackney line to include Euston between Tottenham Court Road and King's Cross St Pancras. As part of the rebuilding work for High Speed 2, it is proposed to integrate Euston and Euston Square into a single tube station.








