[[Dave Matthews]]

CATEGORIES: Dave Matthews, 1967 births, Living people, 20th-century American singers, 21st-century American singers, Alumni of St Stithians College, American agnostics, American humanitarians, American male singers, American pacifists, American Quakers, American record producers, American rock guitarists, American rock singers, Dave Matthews Band members, Grammy Award-winning artists, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Musicians from Virginia, People from Charlottesville, Virginia, People from Johannesburg, People from Yorktown, New York, South African agnostics, South African emigrants to the United States, South African guitarists, South African humanitarians, South African male singers, South African pacifists, South African Quakers, South African record producers, South African rock musicians

David John "Dave" Matthews (born January 9, 1967)

Early life

David John Matthews was born  in Johannesburg, South Africa, the third of four children of parents John and Valerie Matthews. At two years old, Matthews' family moved to Yorktown Heights in Westchester County, New York, where his father, a physicist, started working for IBM.Nevin Martell, The Dave Matthews Band: Music for the People (New York: Simon and Schuster, 2004), 3–4
In 1974, the family moved to Cambridge, England, for a year before returning to New York, where his father died from lung cancer in 1977. Biographer Nevin Martell argues that Dave's father's death may be an impetus for his "carpe diem" lyrics. The family moved back to Johannesburg, South Africa, in 1977.
Upon Matthews' graduation from St Stithians College high school in 1985, he was faced with conscription into the South African military just as civil disobedience to the practice was becoming widespread.Whitefield, Fredricka (2005). "Profiles of U2 and The Dave Matthews Band" CNN.com (accessed May 3, 2006)
Matthews moved to New York in 1986 where he worked for IBM for a short time, In 1991, he hatched the idea to form his own band.
Dave had originally envisioned someone else singing his songs but decided to use his own vocals. 
In early 1994, Matthews' older sister, Anne, who lived in South Africa, was murdered by her husband, who subsequently committed suicide, on or around January 27 of that year. The event had a drastic effect on Matthews' outlook on life and was referenced in a few of his songs. On January 29, 1994, he performed with Tim Reynolds at The Wetlands in New York, where he dedicated that performance "to her Anne's memory". Dave Matthews Band's Under the Table and Dreaming, released later that year, was dedicated to her. Anne Matthews was survived by her two children who, upon her death, traveled to America, where Dave and his younger sister, Jane, took responsibility for their upbringing (his sister is the namesake of DMB's song, "The Song that Jane Likes").

Music

Matthews focused primarily on songwriting and performances with the Dave Matthews Band from 1990 to 2003. Since that period, he has occasionally ventured outside the band in various solo performances and records.
Matthews sang on the track "Sing Along" on Blue Man Group's second album The Complex in 2003.
Dave has close friendship with banjoist Béla Fleck,
Matthews played a cover of Neil Young's song, "The Needle and the Damage Done" at the 2010 tribute, MusiCares Person of the Year honoring Young on January 29, 2010.
The Dave Matthews band opened for The Rolling Stones on their Bridges to Babylon Tour-1997-1998, and Matthews sang "Wild Horses", and "Memory Motel" alongside vocalist Mick Jagger.

Acting

Before he was known as a musician, Dave Matthews was an amateur actor, appearing onstage in several productions at Charlottesville's Offstage Theatre and Live Arts theater In 2005 he played in Because of Winn-Dixie (film) as Otis, a man who works at a pet store and plays guitar.
In 2007, Matthews appeared briefly in the movie I Now Pronounce You Chuck and Larry, where he plays a homosexual salesman. He was also in three 2011 movies, The Other Side with Giovanni Ribisi and Jason Lee, In The Woods, starring Debra Winger and Terrence Howard, and the Adam Sandler comedy Just Go With It.
In 2007, Matthews guest starred in the Fox drama series House in the episode "Half-Wit". He played a piano-playing musical savant who ended up having half of his brain removed in order to recover from his epilepsy, but at the expense of his musical abilities. Dave had a piano double for the complex pieces, but played the simpler pieces himself.
The fifth time Matthews appeared as musical guest on Saturday Night Live in November 2009 (which was also the fourth time the Dave Matthews Band appeared on the show), he made an appearance as Ozzy Osbourne in a skit called "The Mellow Show." Bill Hader impersonated Matthews in the same skit.
Matthews was also a cast member and performer in the popular music documentary, Before the Music Dies.

Other activities

In 2011, Matthews collaborated with wine maker Steve Reeder in creating the Dreaming Tree Wines.
In April 2012, Matthews was credited as producer on a documentary, "Last Call at the Oasis", directed by Jessica Yu.
In 1999, Matthews purchased more than ten acres of land in Albemarle County, VA, known as Blenheim Farm, to preserve its historical significance. He later decided to plant grapes on the property, since it is located within both the Virginia and Monticello viticultural areas. Blenheim Vineyards was founded in 2000, and currently produces 5,500 cases of wine per year, including their signature Petit Verdot and several special edition wines which have featured unique labels with drawings by Matthews himself.
In early 2013, Matthews participated in a jam session at Blade Studios in Shreveport, Louisiana with Jakob Dylan, Charlie Sexton, Blade studios co-owner Brady Blade, and Sexton's brother Will.  This eventually led to the formation of a band called The Nauts with Matthews, Dylan, Blade, and the Sexton brothers as members.

Personal life

Dave Matthews married longtime girlfriend Jennifer Ashley Harper in 2000. The couple has twin daughters, Stella Busina and Grace Anne, born in 2001, and a son, August Oliver, born in 2007. They reside in Seattle, Washington.

Politics

Matthews published an Internet video prior to the 2000 U.S. Presidential election, urging viewers to vote without advocating any candidate. He mentioned only Ralph Nader by name, and updated fans about the recording sessions for Everyday. Although his music often explores political and social issues, Matthews refrained from public campaigning for Presidential candidates until 2004. He cast his support strongly with Democratic nominee John Kerry, performing at political events including the Vote for Change tour.
Matthews also supported Barack Obama for President in 2008, both in the primaries and in the general election.
On September 21, 2009, Matthews stated that some of President Barack Obama's harsher critics were motivated by his race, and stated that he "sees it racism everywhere" in the United States.
On May 10, 2012, Matthews entertained a sellout crowd at the Paramount Theatre in Seattle, Washington, where President Obama was hosting a campaign fundraiser.

Equipment

(Spring/Summer 2009 DMB Tour & Summer/Fall 2010 DMB Tour)

Awards and accolades

Grammy Awards

ASCAP Film and Television Music Awards

Discography

Studio albums

Digital downloads

Two shows have been released as part of the Dave Matthews Band's DMBlive series available only for online download.

Live albums with Tim Reynolds

Live Trax Vol. 23
Live Trax Vol. 24

Singles

Other charted songs

Guest singles

Music videos

Collaborations



Further reading




