[[Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester]]

CATEGORIES: House of Windsor, Princes of the United Kingdom, People educated at Eton College, Alumni of Magdalene College, Cambridge, Bailiffs Grand Cross of the Order of St John, Dukes of Gloucester, Earls of Ulster (1928), People from East Northamptonshire (district), 1944 births, Living people, Royal Air Force air marshals, Fellows of the Society of Antiquaries of London, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St. Olav, Commanders Grand Cross of the Order of the Polar Star, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Crown of Tonga, Recipients of the Star of the Solomon Islands, Bands of the Order of the Aztec Eagle

Prince Richard, Duke of Gloucester,  (Richard Alexander Walter George; born 26 August 1944) is the youngest grandchild of King George V and Queen Mary. He has been Duke of Gloucester since his father's death in 1974. He is currently 23rd in the line of succession to the British throne and the first person in line who is not a descendant of King George VI. The Duke of Gloucester carries out royal engagements on behalf of his cousin, Queen Elizabeth II.

Early life

Prince Richard was born on 26 August 1944 at Hadley CommonRoyal Children by Charles Kidd & Patrick Montague-Smith in Hertfordshire. His father was Prince Henry, Duke of Gloucester, the third son of King George V and Queen Mary. His mother was Princess Alice, Duchess of Gloucester (née Lady Alice Montagu Douglas Scott), a daughter of the 7th Duke of Buccleuch.
Richard was baptised in the private chapel of Windsor Castle on 20 October 1944 by Archbishop of Canterbury Cosmo Lang. His godparents were his paternal aunt, Queen Elizabeth, Princess Marie Louise (his cousin), the Countess of Athlone (his cousin, for whom her daughter, the Lady May Abel Smith stood proxy), the Duke of Buccleuch (his maternal uncle), the Marquess of Cambridge (his cousin), the Lady Sybil Phipps (his maternal aunt), and General the Hon Sir Harold Alexander (for whom his wife, the Lady Margaret Alexander, stood proxy). Because of the war, newspapers did not identify the precise location of the christening, saying only that it took place at "a private chapel in the country".The Times, 21 October 1944The Times, 5 August 1942
As a grandson of the British monarch in the male line, he was styled His Royal Highness Prince Richard of Gloucester at birth. At the time of his birth he was fifth in the line of succession to the throne, and second in line to his father's Dukedom, behind his brother, Prince William of Gloucester, who died in 1972 when the plane he was piloting crashed at Halfpenny Green, near Wolverhampton.
When Prince Richard was four months old, he accompanied his parents to Australia, where his father was Governor-General from 1945 to 1947. The family returned to Barnwell Manor in 1947.

Education and career

Prince Richard's early education took place at home; later, he attended school at Wellesley House in Broadstairs and Eton College. In 1963, he matriculated at Magdalene College, Cambridge to read architecture and received the degree of Bachelor of Arts in June 1966. Subsequently, he incepted as MA (Cantab) in 1971.
After earning his BA in 1966, Prince Richard joined the (then) Offices Development Group of the Ministry of Public Building and Works for a year of practical work. He returned to Cambridge in 1967, and in June 1969, he passed both parts of the exam for his Diploma in Architecture. Upon completion of his training, he went into practice as a partner in a London architectural firm.
Although he had intended to practice full-time as an architect, the death of his brother Prince William in 1972, when he crashed his plane in a flying competition, left Richard first in line to his father's dukedom and increased his family obligations and royal duties. He therefore resigned his partnership and began to represent his cousin, Elizabeth II, at royal engagements. On 10 June 1974, Prince Richard succeeded his father as Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Ulster and Baron Culloden. The Duke remains particularly interested in architecture and conservation; he became a corporate member of the Royal Institute of British Architects (RIBA) in 1972, and serves as a commissioner of the Historic Building and Monuments Commission for England (English Heritage).  He is the Royal Patron of the UK branch of the charity "Habitat for Humanity".habitatforhumanity.uk/page.aspx?pid=312
Prince Richard has published three books of photographs under the name Richard Gloucester. On Public View: a Selection of London's Open-air Sculpture, with Paul William White (London, Hutchinson, 1971); The Face of London (London, Phaidon Press, 1973); and Oxford and Cambridge, with Hermione Hobhouse (London : Macdonald General Books, 1980). A keen motorist, Prince Richard was president of the Institute of Advanced Motorists for more than 32 years. He had passed the institute's advanced test in 1965. On his appointment in 1971 it was recorded that the institute's new president was "currently driving an Austin 1300".

Royal duties

On 10 April 2008, Prince Richard was officially installed as the Founding Chancellor of the University of Worcester in a ceremony at Worcester Cathedral. In this role, the Prince officiates at degree ceremonies and major events, as well as promoting the University overseas. The Duke carried out the first of these duties on 5 and 6 November 2008 at the Graduation Award Ceremonies.
Prince Richard is also a patron of the Severn Valley Railway and the Pestalozzi International Village Trust. He shares a name with another Duke of Gloucester, King Richard III, and is the Patron of the Richard III Society.
During 2009 The Duke of Gloucester became Patron of the de Havilland Aircraft Heritage Centre in support of its bid to raise funds through private means and through a bid for Heritage Lottery Funding to help develop this learning experience, protect the priceless exhibits and improve visitor access to the oldest aviation heritage centre in Britain. It celebrated its 50th anniversary on 15 May 2009.
On 8 November 2011 he opened the new Law School Building at the University of Hertfordshire on the de Havilland campus site of the former de Havilland Aircraft factory.
As part of his role as the Chancellor of the University of Worcester, The Duke of Gloucester was present at the opening of the new University library, The Hive--Europe's first joint public and university library--which was officially opened by his cousin, The Queen, on 11 July 2012.
On 19 March 2013, Prince Richard represented The Queen at the inauguration of Pope Francis at the Vatican.
He is a member of the International Advisory Board of the Royal United Services Institute.

Marriage and family

On 8 July 1972, Prince Richard married the Danish Birgitte van Deurs, at St Andrew's Church, Barnwell, in Northamptonshire. They have three children:
Their children do not carry out royal duties. As great-grandchildren of a British Sovereign, they do not possess royal titles and are styled as the children of a duke. The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester's official residence is at Kensington Palace in London.   They have leased their private home, Barnwell Manor, since 1994.

Titles, styles, honours, and arms

Titles and styles

His title in full is: His Royal Highness Prince Richard Alexander Walter George, Duke of Gloucester, Earl of Ulster and Baron Culloden, Knight of the Most Noble Order of the Garter, Knight Grand Cross of the Royal Victorian Order, Grand Prior of the Order of St. John, Service Medal of the Order of St. John.  

Honours

See also List of honours of the British Royal Family by country

=Commonwealth honours=

| url         = 
| title       = Honours of the Duke of Gloucester
| publisher   = The Royal Household
| accessdate  =6 June 2011
| quote       = 
}}[/ref]

=Foreign honours=

=Honorary military appointments=

| url         = 
| title       = Burke's Peerage – The Royal Family – HRH The Duke of Gloucester
| publisher=Burke's Peerage & Gentry and The Origins Network.
| accessdate  =7 June 2011
}}[/ref]
 

Arms

Issue

Ancestry

Patrilineal descent

 
 








