[[Na+/K+-ATPase]]

CATEGORIES: EC 3.6.3, Transport proteins

-ATPase enzyme pumps sodium out of cells, while pumping potassium into cells.

Sodium-potassium pumps

Active transport is responsible for cells' containing relatively high concentrations of potassium ions but low concentrations of sodium ions. The mechanism responsible for this is the sodium-potassium pump, which moves these two ions in opposite directions across the plasma membrane. This was investigated by following the passage of radioactively labeled ions across the plasma membrane of certain cells. It was found that the concentrations of sodium and potassium ions on the two sides of the membrane are interdependent, suggesting that the same carrier transports both ions. It is now known that the carrier is an ATP-ase and that it pumps three sodium ions out of the cell for every two potassium ions pumped in.
The sodium-potassium pump was discovered in the 1950s by a Danish scientist, Jens Christian Skou, who was awarded a Nobel Prize in 1997. It marked an important step forward in our understanding of how ions get into and out of cells, and it has a particular significance for excitable cells such as nervous cells, which depend on this pump for responding to stimuli and transmitting impulses.

Function

The 

Resting potential

In order to maintain the cell membrane potential, cells keep a low concentration of sodium ions and high levels of potassium ions within the cell (intracellular). The sodium-potassium pump moves 3 sodium ions out and moves 2 potassium ions in, thus in total removing one positive charge carrier from the intracellular space. (Please see Mechanism for details).
The action of the sodium-potassium pump is not the only mechanism responsible for the generation of the resting membrane potential. Also, the selective permeability of the cell's plasma membrane for the different ions plays an important role. All mechanisms involved are explained in the main article on generation of the resting membrane potential.

Transport

Export of sodium from the cell provides the driving force for several secondary active transporters membrane transport proteins, which import glucose, amino acids, and other nutrients into the cell by use of the sodium gradient.
Another important task of the  and glucose, which is far more efficient than simple diffusion. Similar processes are located in the renal tubular system.

Controlling cell volume

Failure of the  pump helps to maintain the right concentrations of ions.
Furthermore, when the cell begins to swell, this automatically activates the 

Functioning as signal transducer

Within the last decade when?, many independent labs have demonstrated that, in addition to the classical ion transporting, this membrane protein can also relay extracellular ouabain-binding signalling into the cell through regulation of protein tyrosine phosphorylation. The downstream signals through ouabain-triggered protein phosphorylation events include activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signal cascades, mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) production, as well as activation of phospholipase C (PLC) and inositol triphosphate (IP3) receptor (IP3R) in different intracellular compartments.
Protein-protein interactions play a very important role in 

Controlling neuron activity states

The 

Mechanism

Regulation

Endogenous

The -ATPase. These include the ligands of the Gi-coupled GPCRs.
Note: Early studies indicated the opposite effect, but these were later found to be inaccurate due to additional complicating factors. 

Exogenous

The -ATPase can be pharmacologically modified by administrating drugs exogenously.
For instance, -ATPase found in the membrane of heart cells is an important target of cardiac glycosides (for example digoxin and ouabain), inotropic drugs used to improve heart performance by increasing its force of contraction.
Contraction of any muscle is dependent on a 100- to 10,000-times-higher-than-resting intracellular  concentration, which, as soon as it is put back again on its normal level by a carrier enzyme in the plasma membrane, and a calcium pump in sarcoplasmic reticulum, muscle relaxes.
Since this carrier enzyme ( level in the muscle, which may be the mechanism of the long-term inotropic effect of cardiac glycosides such as digoxin.

Discovery


In 1997, he received one-half of the Nobel Prize in Chemistry "for the first discovery of an ion-transporting enzyme,  -ATPase."Chemistry 1997

Genes





Additional images

 File:Blausen 0818 Sodium-PotassiumPump.
 File:Blausen 0211 CellMembrane.




