[[Greater Flamingo]]

CATEGORIES: Phoenicopteridae, Animals described in 1811, Flamingos, Birds of Europe, Fauna of East Africa, Fauna of West Africa, Birds of Azerbaijan, Birds of Kazakhstan, Birds of Botswana, Birds of Egypt, Birds of Ethiopia, Birds of India, Birds of Kenya, Birds of Namibia, Birds of Pakistan, Birds of Turkey, Birds of Western Sahara, Birds of Cameroon, Birds of Ukraine

The Greater Flamingo (Phoenicopterus roseus) is the  most widespread species of the flamingo family. It is found in parts of Africa, southern Asia (coastal regions of Pakistan and India), and southern Europe (including Spain, Albania, Turkey, Greece, Cyprus, Portugal, Italy and the Camargue region of France). Some populations  are short distance migrants, and sightings north of the breeding range are relatively frequent; however, given the species' popularity in captivity, whether or not these are truly wild individuals is a matter of some debate.  A single bird was seen on North Keeling Island (Cocos (Keeling) Islands) in 1988.

Description

File:Extinctbirds1907 P31 Leguatia gigantea0353.
File:Greater Flamingo (Phoenicopterus roseus) skeleton at the Royal Veterinary College anatomy museum.JPG|The skeleton of a Greater Flamingo
File:Phoenicopterus roseus feeding - sub-adult.ogv|A sub-adult feeding in Walvis Bay
File:Phoenicopterus roseus flight (Walvis bay).jpg|A sub-adult (top) with an adult (bottom) in flight
File:Fenix.JPG|Greater Flamingos at Faunistic Park Le Cornelle, Italy

This is the largest species of flamingo, averaging 110–150 cm (43–60 in) tall and weighing 2–4 kg (4.4–8.8 lbs). The largest male flamingos have been recorded at up to 187 cm (74 in) tall and 4.5 kg (10 lbs).tourduvalat.pdf It is closely related to the American Flamingo and Chilean Flamingo, with which it has sometimes been considered conspecific, but that treatment is now widely seen (e.g., by the American and British Ornithologists' Union) as incorrect and based on insufficient evidence. 
Like all flamingos, this species lays a single chalky-white egg on a mud mound. Most of the plumage is pinkish-white, but the wing coverts are red and the primary and secondary flight feathers are black. The bill is pink with a restricted black tip, and the legs are entirely pink. The call is a goose-like honking. Sub-adult flamingos are whitish-grey and only attain the pink coloration several years into their adult life. The coloration comes from the carotenoid pigments in the organisms that live in their feeding grounds.
The bird resides in mudflats and shallow coastal lagoons with salt water. Using its feet, the bird stirs up the mud, then sucks water through its bill and filters out small shrimp, seeds, blue-green algae, microscopic organisms and mollusks. The Greater Flamingo feeds with its head down and its upper jaw is movable and not rigidly fixed to its skull.

Lifespan

The average lifespan in captivity, according to Zoo Basel, is over 60 years.
The oldest known greater flamingo was a bird at the Adelaide Zoo in Australia who died aged at least 83 years old. The bird's exact age is not known; he was already a mature adult when he arrived in Adelaide in 1933. He was euthanized in January 2014 due to complications of old age.

Relationship with humans

Captivity

The first recorded zoo hatch was in 1959 at Zoo Basel. In Zoo Basel's breeding program over 400 birds have been hatched with an average of between 20 and 27 per year since 2000.

Because of Zoo Basel's extraordinarily successful breeding program and a lack of room, most of the hatchlings are sent to zoos around the world.  Given the history and the large number of birds hatched in Basel since 1959, it may be concluded that most of the Greater Flamingo zoo colonies around the world are related to the one at Basel.
In January, 2014, an 83-year-old Greater Flamingo, believed to be the oldest in the world, died at the Adelaide Zoo in Australia where it had lived since 1933.

Threats

In the Rann of Kutch salt marsh of India and Pakistan, Greater Flamingos are occasionally electrocuted when they sit on 1000 watt electric cables near their breeding areas. Recently 139 deaths were officially recorded in the region.

History

Roman emperors considered flamingo tongues as a delicacy.






