[[Space rock]]

CATEGORIES: Progressive rock, Space rock, Psychedelic rock, English styles of music

Space rock is a subgenre of rock music; the term originally referred to a group of early, mostly British, 1970s progressive and psychedelic rock bands such as Hawkwind, Gong and Pink Floyd,Richie Unterberger, Pink Floyd biography Allmusic characterised by slow, lengthy instrumental passages dominated by electronic organs, synthesizers, experimental guitar work and science fiction or outer space-related lyrical themes, though it was later repurposed to refer to a series of late 1980s British alternative rock bands that drew from earlier influences to create a more ambient but still melodic form of pop music.

History

Origins and emergence

Man's entry into outer space provided ample subject matter for rock and roll and R&B songs from the mid-1950s through the early 1960s. It also inspired new sounds and sound effects to be used in the music itself. A prominent early example of space rock is the 1959 concept album I Hear a New World by British producer and song writer Joe Meek. The album was inspired by the space race and concerned man's first close encounter with alien life forms. Its main instrument was a clavioline, an electronic forerunner of synthesizers.
Space rock emerged from the late 1960s psychedelic music scene in Britain, and was closely associated with the progressive rock movement of the same era.
Pink Floyd's early albums contain pioneering examples of space rock: "Lucifer Sam",A. Toc H."Nicholas Schaffner, "Saucerful of secrets: the Pink Floyd odyssey", (Dell, 1992), ISBN 0-385-30684-9, p.66. and "Interstellar Overdrive"Richie Unterberger, Interstellar Overdrive song review, Allmusic from their 1967 debut album The Piper at the Gates of Dawn are examples. Their second album A Saucerful of Secrets contained further examples: "Let There Be More Light" and "Set the Controls for the Heart of the Sun" with explicit science fiction themes, and their third, Soundtrack from the Film More (1969) had "Cirrus Minor". In early 1971, Pink Floyd began writing the song that would become known as "Echoes", from the 1971 album Meddle. The song was performed from April until September 1971, with an alternate set of lyrics, written about two planets meeting in space. Before the Meddle album released, the lyrics were changed to an aquatic theme, because of the band's concern that they were being labelled as a space rock band.
The Beatles' song "Flying" (1967), originally titled "Aerial Tour Instrumental", was a psychedelic instrumental about the sensation of flying, whether in a craft or in your own head space. Jimi Hendrix is also an early innovator of the genre, with such tracks as "Third Stone from the Sun", "1983... (A Merman I Should Turn to Be)" and "The Stars That Play with Laughing Sam's Dice". David Bowie's "Space Oddity" (1969) is, apart from Telstar,  probably the best example of a space rock song achieving mainstream recognition. The Steve Miller Band's Space Cowboy (1969) was also about space. It has a very heavy back beat in the key of F Minor and space-like sound effects from Miller's guitar.
A major album in the history of space rock was Hawkwind's Space Ritual (1973),Wilson Neate, Space Ritual review, Allmusic a two-disc live album advertised as "88 minutes of brain-damage" documenting Hawkwind's successful 1972 tour that included a liquid light show and lasers, nude dancers (notably the earth-mother figure Stacia), wild costumes and psychedelic imagery. This hard-edged concert experience attracted a motley but dedicated collection of psychedelic drug users, science-fiction fans and motorcycle riders. The science fiction author Michael Moorcock collaborated with Hawkwind on many occasions and wrote the lyrics for many of the spoken-word sections on Space Ritual.
Other examples include Flaming Youth's only album Ark 2, Arzachel's Arzachel, Mournblade's Times Running Out, and the collaborative concept album The Zodiac: Cosmic Sounds.

1990s revival

By the early 1990s, the term "space rock" came to be used when describing numerous American and British alternative rock bands of the time. Shoegazing, stoner rock/metal and noise pop genres emerged into the mainstream with the explosion of bands such as Kyuss, Slowdive, The Verve, My Bloody Valentine, Flying Saucer Attack, Loop, Ride, Shiner (band), The Flaming Lips, Failure, Year of the Rabbit, Cave In, Sun Dial, Hum, Orange Goblin, Spacemen 3, Spiritualized, and Mercury Rev. The sonic experimentation and emphasis placed on texture by these bands led them to be dubbed "space rock", although most would more readily be categorized in other genres such as shoegazing or stoner metal.
In the mid-1990s, a number of bands built on the space rock styles of Hawkwind and Gong appeared in America. Some of these bands (such as Pressurehed and Melting Euphoria) were signed to Cleopatra records, which then proceeded to release numerous space rock compilations. Starting in 1997, Daevid Allen of Gong, along with members of Hawkwind and other space rock bands, started to perform with Spirits Burning, a studio project created to celebrate space rock.
The Strange Daze festivals from 1997-2001 showcased the American space rock scene in 3 day outdoor festivals. The shows were headlined by Hawkwind and Nik Turner in 1997 and featured major players of American space rock: F/i, Alien Planetscapes, Architectural Metaphor, Quarkspace, Melting Euphoria, Pressurehed, Nucleon, Bionaut, Born to Go and others. Mr. Quimby's Beard (UK)
headlined Strangedaze 2001 and were supported whilst on their American tour by Hawkwind's Harvey Bainbridge as well as Nik Turner.
A Michigan-based space rock scene included Burnt Hair Records, Darla Records, and bands such as  Windy & Carl, Mahogany, Sweet Trip, Tomorrowland, Delta Waves, Starphase 23, Füxa, Auburn Lull, Monaural, Asha Vida, and Alison's Halo. This was a modern movement of the traditional "space rock" sound and was pinned Detroit Space Rock.

Space rock in the 21st century

Space rock bands like Hawkwind, Gong, Mr. Quimby's Beard and Nektar continue to perform live in the 2000s. Hawkwind has produced numerous offshoots with former members (such as Hawklords, Space Ritual, and Lastwind). Beside the Spirits Burning space rock collective, new collectives have appeared (such as Øresund Space Collective and Secret Saucer).
Influences from space rock can be heard in UK bands Radiohead, Amplifier, Oceansize, Porcupine Tree, Kasabian, and Mugstar as well as American bands Autolux, Hopesfall, Success & Sorrow, Lumerians, The Secret Machines, The Mars Volta, The Boxing Lesson, Cloudland Canyon, Angels & Airwaves, Tool and Zombi.
Star One's 2002 Space Metal album mixes space rock and progressive metal, and many of the songs are linked conceptually by having cult science fiction movies or TV series as their subjects.
In the past decade a space rock theme has swept through the indie music scene Hongdae of South Korea. Bands such as Rock and Roll Radio, Galaxy Express, Apollo 18, Magna Fall, among many others, have 'spacey' elements in their music. In South Korea such bands with a spacey sound & theme - are referred to in the media and among fans as 'Space Rock' or '우주갈' in Korean.
The first reported involvement of NASA and space rock came in 2009 when an off-duty worker from the shuttle program synchronised footage of a Discovery launch with the Flowers Of Hell's 'Sympathy For Vengeance' in an online video which became popular amongst staff at the Kennedy Space Center.



Notes


