[[Philo-Semitism]]

CATEGORIES: Jewish history, Jewish political status, Admiration of foreign cultures, Jewish nationalism

Philo-Semitism (also spelled philosemitism) or Judeophilia is an interest in, respect for, and appreciation of the Jewish people, their historical significance, and the positive impacts of Judaism on the world,  particularly on the part of a gentile.  It is distinct from but embodied in Christian Zionism.
Within the Jewish community philo-Semitism includes the significance of Jewish culture and the love of everything Jewish.



The concept of philo-Semitism is not new, avowed by such thinkers as 19th century philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, who described himself as a "anti-anti-Semite".
Philo-Semitism has been met by a mixed response from the Jewish community. Some warmly welcome it and argue that it must lead Jews to reconsider their identity."
Philo-Semitism is an expression of the larger phenomenon of Allophilia, admiration of foreign cultures as embodied in the more widely known Anglophilia and Francophilia. The rise of philo-Semitism has also prompted some to reconsider Jewish history, and they argue that while anti-Semitism must be acknowledged, it is wrong to reduce the history of the Jewish people to one merely of suffering (as has been fostered by well-meaning gentile philo-Semites).
Even though a non-Jew is not required to convert to Judaism or may even be advised against doing so, Halakha (Jewish religious law) does require all non-Jews to abide by certain commandments. These are the Seven Laws of Noah, and gentiles who accepts the Seven Laws in their traditional interpretation identify as Noahides.
From history, one notable example of philo-Semitism is that of the Polish king Casimir III the Great. While the Jewish emancipation wouldn't begin in other countries until toward the end of the 1700s, in Poland Jews had been granted the freedom of worship, trade and travel in 1264 by Bolesław the Pious. In 1334 Jews persecuted across Europe were invited to Poland by Casimir the Great, who, in particular, vowed to protect them as "people of the king".
Very few Jews live in East Asian countries, but are viewed in an especially positive light in some of them, partly owing to their shared wartime experiences in the Second World War. In countries such as South KoreaAlper, Tim. "Why South Koreans are in love with Judaism". The Jewish Chronicle. May 12, 2011. Retrieved February 8, 2014. and China. "Chinese: 'Jews make money'". Ynetnews. April 23, 2012. Retrieved February 8, 2014. In general, Jews are positively stereotyped as intelligent, business savvy and committed to family values and responsibility, while in the Western world, the first of the two aforementioned stereotypes more often have the negatively-interpreted equivalents of guile and greed. In South Korean primary schools the Talmud is mandatory reading. In World War II Japan put efforts into helping Jews escape demise by the Nazis, despite the fact that Japan was then a member of the Axis alliance. The Japanese diplomat Chiune Sugihara facilitated the escape of more than 6,000 Jewish refugees to Japanese territory, risking his career and his family's lives; in 1985, he was honored by the State of Israel as Righteous Among the Nations.
The Italian-American singer Madonna once called herself an "ambassador for Judaism"—during a meeting with Prime Minister of Israel Shimon Peres, where they exchanged gifts, Madonna giving him a volume of the Zohar inscribed "To Shimon Peres, the man I admire and love, Madonna". Although she herself does not practice Judaism, she has studied Kabbalah, given her son a bar mitzva celebration and taken a Hebrew name: Esther (אסתר).
The controversial term "philosemitism" arose as a pejorative in Germany to describe positive prejudice towards Jews, in other words a philosemite is a "Jew-lover" or "Jew-friend". 





Sources




