[[Stream function]]

CATEGORIES: Engineering, Fluid dynamics, Fluid mechanics

The stream function is defined for incompressible (divergence-free) flows in two dimensions – as well as in three dimensions with axisymmetry. The flow velocity components can then be expressed as the derivatives of the scalar stream function. The stream function can be used to plot streamlines, which represent the trajectories of particles in a steady flow. The two-dimensional Lagrange stream function was introduced by Joseph Louis Lagrange in 1781.
Considering the particular case of fluid dynamics, the difference between the stream function values at any two points gives the volumetric flow rate (or volumetric flux) through a line connecting the two points.
Since streamlines are tangent to the velocity vector of the flow, the value of the stream function must be constant along a streamline. The usefulness of the stream function lies in the fact that the velocity components in the x- and y- directions at a given point are given by the partial derivatives of the stream function at that point. A stream function may be defined for any flow of dimensions greater than or equal to two, however the two-dimensional case is generally the easiest to visualize and derive.
For two-dimensional potential flow, streamlines are perpendicular to equipotential lines. Taken together with the velocity potential, the stream function may be used to derive a complex potential. In other words, the stream function accounts for the solenoidal part of a two-dimensional Helmholtz decomposition, while the velocity potential accounts for the irrotational part.

Two-dimensional stream function

Definitions

which is an exact differential provided
This is the condition of zero divergence resulting from flow incompressibility. Since 
the velocity components have to be

=Definition by use of a vector potential=

The sign of the stream function depends on the definition used.
In Cartesian coordinate system this is equivalent to

=Alternative definition (opposite sign)=

Another definition (used more widely in meteorology and oceanography than the above) is
in Cartesian coordinates.
All formulations of the stream function constrain the velocity to satisfy the two-dimensional continuity equation exactly:
The last two definitions of stream function are related through the vector calculus identity

Derivation of the two-dimensional stream function

Consider two points A and B in two-dimensional plane flow. If the distance between these two points is very small: δn, and a stream of flow passes between these points with an average velocity, q perpendicular to the line AB, the volume flow rate per unit thickness, δΨ is given by:
As δn → 0, rearranging this expression, we get:
Now consider two-dimensional plane flow with reference to a coordinate system. Suppose an observer looks along an arbitrary axis in the direction of increase and sees flow crossing the axis from left to right. A sign convention is adopted such that the velocity of the flow is positive.

=Flow in Cartesian coordinates=

By observing the flow into an elemental square in an x-y  Cartesian coordinate system, we have:
where u is the velocity parallel to and in the direction of the x-axis, and v is the velocity parallel to and in the direction of the y-axis. Thus, as δn → 0 and by rearranging, we have:

=Flow in polar coordinates=

By observing the flow into an elemental square in an r–θ polar coordinate system, we have:
where vr is the radial velocity component (parallel to the r-axis), and vθ is the tangential velocity component (parallel to the θ-axis). Thus, as , by rearranging we have:

Continuity: the derivation

Consider two-dimensional plane flow within a Cartesian coordinate system. Continuity states that if we consider incompressible flow into an elemental square, the flow into that small element must equal the flow out of that element.
The total flow into the element is given by:
The total flow out of the element is given by:
Thus we have:
and simplifying to:
Substituting the expressions of the stream function into this equation, we have:

Vorticity

The stream function can be found from vorticity using the following Poisson's equation:
or

=Proof that a constant value for the stream function corresponds to a streamline=



Inline

Other


