[[George Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen]]

CATEGORIES: 1946 births, Alumni of the University of Dundee, Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Labour Party (UK) MPs, Labour Party (UK) life peers, Living people, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for Scottish constituencies, Secretaries General of NATO, People from Port Ellen, Secretaries of State for Defence (UK), UK MPs 1974–79, UK MPs 1979–83, UK MPs 1983–87, UK MPs 1987–92, UK MPs 1992–97, UK MPs 1997–2001, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of Orange-Nassau, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, Knights of the Thistle, People from Islay, Recipients of the Order of the Three Stars, 1st Class, Recipients of the Order of the Cross of Terra Mariana, 1st Class, Presidential Medal of Freedom recipients, Grand Crosses of the Order of the Star of Romania, Grand Order of King Petar Krešimir IV recipients, Commanders Crosses of the Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, People educated at Dunoon Grammar School

George Islay MacNeill Robertson, Baron Robertson of Port Ellen,  (born 12 April 1946) is a British Labour Party politician who was the tenth Secretary General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, between October 1999 and early January 2004; he succeeded Javier Solana in that position. He served as Defence Secretary for the United Kingdom from 1997 to 1999, before taking up his NATO position and becoming a life peer as Baron Robertson of Port Ellen, of Islay in Argyll and Bute.

Early life

Born in Port Ellen, Isle of Islay, Scotland, the son of a policeman, he was educated at Dunoon Grammar School and studied Economics at the Queen's College, Dundee. When he was 15 years of age, he was involved with protests against US nuclear submarines docking in Britain.The Future of NATO - C-SPAN Video Library
During Robertson's time at Queen's College it broke away from the University of St Andrews to become the University of Dundee, of which Robertson was one of the first graduates (MA, 1968). The same year he organised a 24-hour work-in by students in the university library in opposition to proposed cuts by the government in student grants.
Lord Robertson  married Sandra Wallace on 1 June 1970. They are the parents of three children: Malcolm, Martin and Rachael.
Robertson survived a serious crash in January 1977 of his car with a Navy Land Rover, which was carrying 100 lb of gelignite and a box of detonators, and hit his car head-on in the Drumochter Pass, leaving him with two wrecked knees and a broken jaw. Robertson was wearing a seat belt at the time and attributes his survival to this factor. 

Political career

Robertson first entered the House of Commons as a Labour MP in 1978, after having won the Hamilton by-election in May 1978, caused by the death of the incumbent Labour MP Alex Wilson in March of that year. He beat a strong and very well-known SNP candidate, Margo MacDonald, into second place, winning an increased majority and obtaining 51% of the overall vote. He was six times elected to Parliament, was Chairman of the Labour Party in Scotland, and was appointed to the Privy Council. 

Quote on devolution

In 1995, Robertson said that "Devolution will kill Nationalism stone dead" while he was Shadow Secretary of State for Scotland.

Dunblane libel action

Robertson's three children are former pupils of the school in Dunblane where gunman Thomas Hamilton went on the rampage in 1996, murdering 16 children and their teacher. After the massacre, Mr Robertson, a long-time resident of the town, acted as a spokesman for the victims' families. He was also a key figure in the subsequent campaign that led to the ban on handguns in Great Britain.BBC profile, 1999
In 2003, the Sunday Herald newspaper ran an article entitled "Should the Dunblane dossier be kept secret?", a reference to documents relating to the Cullen Inquiry into the massacre which are to remain classified for 100 years. In a discussion board on the newspaper's website, anonymous contributors claimed that Robertson had signed a recommendation for a gun licence for Thomas Hamilton in his capacity as Hamilton's MP. In fact, Robertson had never been the gunman's MP, and the claims were totally unfounded. Robertson sued the Sunday Herald and the paper settled by paying him a five-figure sum plus costs.  A subsequent action by Robertson, related to the terms of the newspaper's apology, was unsuccessful. The first case became an important test case as to whether publishers can be held responsible for comments posted on their websites.

Independence referendum interventions

Lord Robertson has been issuing warnings about the consequences for the UK if Scotland votes Yes to independence.
In an article in the Washington Post, he warned: "The residual United Kingdom would still be a major player in the world, but upon losing a third of its land mass, 5 million of its population and a huge amount of credibility, its global standing would inevitably diminish."
In a speech to the Brookings Institution on 8 April 2014 he said: "The loudest cheers for the break-up of Britain would be from our adversaries and from our enemies." To Lincoln and his compatriots the Union was so precious, so important, and its integrity so valuable that rivers of blood would be split to keep it together." 

After NATO

Robertson has received numerous honours (including a total of 12 Honorary doctorates from various universities). Currently he holds directorships of several notable companies in the UK, including the Weir Group, and Cable and Wireless.
In addition, Lord Robertson is a Senior Counsellor at The Cohen Group, a consulting firm in Washington D.C. that provides advice and assistance in marketing and regulatory affairs.

Career

Other former or present posts

Honours and awards





|-

|-
|-


