[[Coober Pedy]]

CATEGORIES: Mining towns in South Australia, Underground cities, Far North (South Australia)

Coober Pedy is a town in northern South Australia, 846 kilometres north of Adelaide on the Stuart Highway. According to the 2011 census, its population was 1,695 (953 males, 742 females, including 275 indigenous Australians). The town is sometimes referred to as the "opal capital of the world" because of the quantity of precious opals that are mined there. Coober Pedy is renowned for its below-ground residences, called "dugouts", which are built due to the scorching daytime heat. The name "Coober Pedy" comes from the local Aboriginal term kupa-piti, which means "white man's hole".Place Names of South Australia
Opal was found in Coober Pedy on 1 February 1915; since then the town has been supplying most of the world's gem-quality opal.  Coober Pedy today relies as much on tourism as the opal mining industry to provide the community with employment and sustainability.  Coober Pedy has over 70 opal fields and is the largest opal mining area in the world.



Aboriginal people have a long-standing connection with the area. The first European explorer to pass near the site of Coober Pedy was Scottish-born John McDouall Stuart in 1858, but the town was not established until after 1915, when opal was discovered by Wille Hutchison. By 1999, there were more than 250,000 mine shaft entrances in the area and a law discouraged large-scale mining by allowing each prospector a  claim. Australia: Journey Through a Timeless Land. National Geographic Society, 1999. p 118.
The harsh summer desert temperatures mean that many residents prefer to live in caves bored into the hillsides ("dugouts"). A standard three-bedroom cave home with lounge, kitchen, and bathroom can be excavated out of the rock in the hillside for a similar price to building a house on the surface. However, dugouts remain at a constant temperature, while surface buildings need air-conditioning, especially during the summer months, when temperatures often exceed 40 degrees Celsius (104 degrees Fahrenheit). The relative humidity rarely gets over 20% on these hot days, and the skies are usually cloud-free. The average maximum temperature is 30-32 degrees Celsius, but it can get quite cool in the winter.
Coober Pedy is a very small town, about halfway between Adelaide and Alice Springs. It has become a popular stopover point and tourist destination, especially since 1987, when the sealing of the Stuart Highway was completed.
Interesting attractions in Coober Pedy include the mines, the graveyard and the underground churches. The first tree ever seen in the town was welded together from scrap iron. It still sits on a hilltop overlooking the town.

Population

The District Council of Coober Pedy estimates the population to be around 3,500. Approximately 60% of the people are European, migrating from southern and eastern Europe after the Second World War. In all, there are more than 45 nationalities represented.

Sport and recreation

The local golf course – mostly played at night with glowing balls, to avoid daytime temperatures – is completely free of grass, and golfers take a small piece of "turf" around to use for teeing off. As a result of correspondence between the two clubs, the Coober Pedy golf club is the only club in the world to enjoy reciprocal rights at The Royal and Ancient Golf Club of St Andrews.
The town also has an Australian rules football club, the Coober Pedy Saints, who were created in 2004 and compete in the Far North Football League (formerly the Woomera & Districts Football League). Due to the town's extreme isolation, to play matches the Saints must make round trips of over 900 km to Roxby Downs, where the rest of the league's teams are located.

Climate

Coober Pedy has a desert climate (Köppen climate classification BWh). Between March and November the weather is very pleasant. Typical of a semi desert climate, the days are warm but the desert nights are cold. From December to February the weather warms up and summer temperatures range from 35°C in the shade, with occasional dust storms. The annual rainfall in this area is minimal, at around 175mm (5 inches) per annum.  

Terrain

Coober Pedy is situated upon the edge of the erosional scarp of the Stuart Ranges, on beds of sand and siltstone 30m deep and topped with a stony, treeless desert. Very little plant life exists in town due to the region's low rainfall, high cost of water, the sandstone and lack of topsoil.

Transport

The town is served by daily coach services from Adelaide. The Ghan serves the town through the Manguri Siding, 42 km from Coober Pedy, which is served by trains twice weekly in each direction. Passengers on The Ghan are not usually allowed to disembark at Manguri unless they have prearranged transport, due to the siding's isolation and the extremely cold temperatures at night. Retrieved 1 February 2011.
Coober Pedy is a gateway to the outback communities of Oodnadatta and William Creek, which are both located on the Oodnadatta Track. There is a twice-a-week mail run from Coober Pedy to these communities and other outback homesteads. It carries the mail, general freight and passengers.
Regional Express also has direct flights to Adelaide, from Coober Pedy Airport.

Oil reserves

In 2013 it was reported that a potentially very significant tight oil (oil trapped in oil-bearing shales) resource has been found near Coober Pedy in the Arckaringa Basin.finance.com/news/major-oil-discovery-outback-sa-001211636.news.au/business/companies/trillion-shale-oil-find-surrounding-coober-pedy-can-fuel-australia/story-fnda1bsz-1226560401043

In popular culture

Both the town and its hinterland, for different reasons, are very photogenic and have therefore attracted film makers. The town itself was the setting for the 2006 film Opal Dream. The town is a pivotal location in Wim Wenders' 1991 film Until the End of the World. Coober Pedy also features in the 1994 film The Adventures of Priscilla Queen of the Desert. An episode of Dirty Jobs: Down Under with Mike Rowe visited Coober Pedy and aired 29 September 2012 on Discovery Channel.
The movie "Pitch Black" starring Vin Diesel was also filmed in the area in 2000.
The town was featured in an episode of House Hunters Off the Grid called "Cave Me, Maybe in Coober Pedy, Australia" on HGTV, originally aired in the U.S.A. on April 22, 2014.








