[[Liberal Judaism]]

CATEGORIES: Progressive Jewish communal organizations, Jews and Judaism in the United Kingdom, Reform Judaism, Religious organizations established in 1902, Jewish religious movements, Progressive Judaism in the United Kingdom

Liberal Judaism (

Origins

The Liberal movement in the UK was founded in the early part of the 20th century by Lily Montagu, Claude Montefiore and others as the Jewish Religious Union (JRU).

Key figures

Key figures in the history and development of Liberal Judaism include:

Organisations

The JRU did not originally intend to be a separate denomination, but rather wished to encourage synagogues affiliated with the JRU to develop a form of authentic Judaism that was responsive to changes going on in the modern world, without going down the path of classical German Reform.

Leadership

Liberal Judaism is a national union of autonomous communities, currently chaired by Lucian J. Hudson, who has held the role since 2009.

Beliefs and practices

The beliefs of Liberal Judaism are outlined in The Affirmations of Liberal Judaism. Originally written by Rabbi John D. Rayner, the Affirmations detail the movement's common ground with other forms of Judaism, as well as establishing the ideals that differentiate it.
To quote the movement's website, "Liberal Judaism reverences Jewish tradition, and seeks to preserve the values of the Judaism of the past while giving them contemporary force. It aspires to a Judaism that is always an active force for good in the lives of Jewish individuals, families and communities today, and equally makes its contribution to the betterment of society."
The movement's chairman, Lucian Hudson announced in 2013 that Liberal Judaism is currently producing a strategic plan for the next decade. The new document will be brief, only including key information on Liberal Judaism's main objectives, priorities, roles and responsibilities.

Key issues

Liberal Judaism is distinctly more radical than Reform, aspiring to equality in line with modern values and thinking, regardless of gender or sexual orientation. It seeks to treat children with only one Jewish parent the same, regardless of the parent's gender, and celebrates same sex relationships and marriages equally with those of mixed sex couples.

Mixed faith relationships

Liberal Judaism recognises patrilineal as well as matrilineal Jewish descent.

Same-sex marriages

In 2005, Liberal Judaism became the first mainstream religious movement in the UK to publish an official liturgy for same-sex commitment ceremonies.

Position on the JFS case

In 2009, the case known as R(E) v Governing Body of JFS was brought before the High Court where a 12-year-old boy, known as M, was refused entry to the Jewish Free School (JFS) because, while his father was born a Jew and both his father and mother actively practised the Jewish faith, the mother had converted to Judaism in a non-Orthodox synagogue, which failed to meet the school's criteria for the child being Jewish.

Israel

Liberal Judaism's stance on Israel is one of territorial compromise, with the goal of a peaceful two-state solution for Israelis and Palestinians.

Considered engagement

In 2011, Liberal Judaism adopted a policy it calls "Considered Engagement".

The confirmation of Rabbi Ephraim Mirvis

When Rabbi Ephraim Mirvis was named Chief Rabbi of the United Hebrew Congregations of the Commonwealth in December 2012, Rabbi Danny Rich issued a statement welcoming the appointment of Mirvis, stressing the need for plurality among the British community, and advising that the hardest part of the job for Mirvis would be recognizing that the position "no longer represents a large section of the community."

Criticisms of Ralph Miliband in The Daily Mail

On September 27, 2013 The Daily Mail published an article about sociologist Ralph Miliband (whose sons became senior members of the British Labour Party), criticizing his Marxist ideals and calling him "the man who hated Britain."

Call for a merger between the JLC and Board of Deputies of British Jews

In October 2013, Jewish Leadership Council chief executive Jeremy Newmark announced that he was stepping down for health reasons.

Expanded religious education in the UK school system

In October 2013, the Religious Education Council of England and Wales published A Curriculum Framework for Religious Education in England, which stated that, "All children need to acquire core knowledge and understanding of the beliefs and practices of the religions and worldviews which not only shape their history and culture but which guide their own development."

The "pickling" of Judaism by the Charedi

In November 2013, the Board of Deputies of British Jews issued the 2012 statistics report for Britain's Jewish Community, which noted a "natural increase" in Britain's Jewish population, with specific emphasis on Britain's Charedi (Orthodox) community, who were responsible for four out of every ten Jewish births and more than three in ten weddings.

The response to Israel's consultation of its diaspora

In February 2014, the movement issued a policy contribution in response to Israel's consultation of its diaspora on the character of Israel as a Jewish and democratic state. In the response, lead by Hudson, Liberal Judaism stated that the Israel which it supports must "play a positive role in the world, sharing the prophetic vision and reflecting Liberal Jewish values," and reaffirmed their support of a two-state solution with a Palestinian state, as well as proposing a "permissive approach to Jewish and non-Jewish immigration."

Religious texts

These superseded the movement's previous prayerbooks,

Youth movement

LJY-Netzer (ljy-נצ"ר – Liberal Jewish Youth-Netzer) is the youth movement of Liberal Judaism, a progressive Zionist youth movement, and a branch (or snif) of Netzer Olami.








