[[Anhinga]]

CATEGORIES: Anhingidae, Birds of Central America, Birds of Cuba, Birds of Grenada, Birds of Mexico, Birds of South America, Birds of Trinidad and Tobago, Native birds of the Southeastern United States, Eastern North American migratory birds, Animals described in 1766

The Anhinga (; Anhinga anhinga), sometimes called Snakebird, Darter, American Darter, or Water Turkey, is a water bird of the warmer parts of the Americas. The word anhinga comes from the Brazilian Tupi language and means devil bird or snake bird.
It is a cormorant-like bird with an average body length of .  It is a dark-plumaged piscivore with a very long neck, and often swims with only the neck above water. When swimming in this style the name Snakebird is apparent, since only the colored neck appears above water the bird looks like a snake ready to strike. They do not have external nares (nostrils) and breathe solely through their epiglottis.
The Anhinga is placed in the darter family, Anhingidae, and is closely related to Indian (Anhinga melanogaster), African (A. rufa), and Australian (A. novaehollandiae) Darters.  Like other darters, the Anhinga hunts by spearing fishes and other small prey using its sharp, slender beak.

Distribution and migration

Anhinga species are found all over the world in warm shallow waters.
Only birds that do not live in the extreme north and south of their range migrate and do so based on temperature and available sunlight.  Anhingas will migrate towards the equator during winter but this range is "determined by the amount of sunshine to warm the chilled birds".  Although not in their usual range, anhingas have been found as far north as the states of Pennsylvania in the United States.
Kettles of anhingas often migrate with other birds and have been described as resembling black paper gliders.

Physical description and taxonomy

The A. anhinga species is a large bird and measures approximately ), sharply pointed and yellow as are the webbed feet.
Most of the male Anhinga's body is a glossy black green with the wings, base of wings, and tail being a glossy black blue.  The tip of the tail has white feathers. or light purple white.  The upper back of the body and wings is spotted or streaked with white.
The female Anhinga is similar to the male Anhinga except that it has a pale gray-buff
The hatchling starts out bald but gains tan down within a few days of hatching.  Within two weeks the tan down has been replaced by white down.  Three weeks after hatching, the first juvenile feathers appear.  Juveniles are mostly brown until first breeding after the second or third winter.
This bird is often mistaken for the Double-crested Cormorant due to its similar size and behavior.  However, the two species can be differentiated by their tails and bills.  The tail of the anhinga is wider and much longer than that of the cormorant.  The bill of the anhinga is pointed, while the bill of the cormorant has a hook-tip.

Behaviour

Unlike ducks, the Anhinga is not able to waterproof its feathers using oil produced by the uropygial gland.  Consequently, feathers can become waterlogged, making the bird barely buoyant. However, this allows it to dive easily and search for underwater prey, such as fish and amphibians. It can stay down for significant periods.
When necessary, the Anhinga will dry out its wings and feathers, with the resemblance of the semicircular full-spread shape of its group of tail feathers while drying them out, to that of true meleagrine males lending the name "water turkey" to it. It will perch for long periods with its wings spread to allow the drying process, as do cormorants. If it attempts to fly while its wings are wet, it has great difficulty getting off the water and takes off by flapping vigorously while "running" on the water.
Anhinga will often search for food in small groups.

Conservation status

The Anhinga is protected in the US under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act of 1918. global range.

File:Anhingadrying.jpg|Male drying its feathers and warming its body, Florida
File:Anhinga in tree.jpg|Showing snake-like neck and pointed beak
File:Anhinga in flight.jpg|In flight, South Carolina
File:Anhinga anhinga -Uarini, Amazonas, Brasil -juvenile-8.jpg|Juvenile in Uarini, Amazonas, Brazil
File:Anhinga anhinga (juveniles).jpg|Juveniles with white plumage
File:Anhinga anhinga -near Lake Apopka, Florida, USA -female-8.jpg|Female in Florida, USA






