[[X-COM]]

CATEGORIES: Fictional military organizations, Fictional non-governmental organizations, Video game franchises, X-COM

X-COM (sometimes stylized as X-Com) is a science fiction video game franchise featuring the titular fictional organization tasked with countering alien invasions of Earth. The series began with the hit strategy video game UFO: Enemy Unknown created by Mythos Games and MicroProse in 1994. The original line up by MicroProse included six published and at least two cancelled games, as well as two novels. The X-COM series, in particular its original entry, achieved a sizable cult following and has also influenced many other video games; including creation of a number of clones, spiritual successors, and unofficial remakes.
A reboot series entitled XCOM was published by 2K Games, beginning with the strategy video game XCOM: Enemy Unknown, developed by Firaxis Games and released in 2012 to critical and commercial success, with two more games following in 2013.

Games

X-COM games

The X-COM core series consisted of four main games published by MicroProse: UFO: Enemy Unknown (also known as X-COM: UFO Defense and originally released in 1994 for the PC, with later ports for the Amiga and Sony PlayStation), X-COM: Terror from the Deep (PC in 1995 and the PlayStation in 1996), X-COM: Apocalypse (PC, 1997) and X-COM: Interceptor (PC, 1998).
The premise of the franchise is that a mysterious alien invasion began in 1999 (a near future at the time of the first game's release). In response, a coalition of funding nations clandestinely create an elite paramilitary organization codenamed X-COM (an abbreviation of "Extraterrestrial Combat Unit") as humankind's last hope. The player is charged with leading this secret force, tasked to engage and research the alien threat. Upon finishing the game successfully, X-COM manages to capture and reverse engineer enough of the invaders' technology to decisively turn it against them. The sequels took the fight against new alien invasions underwater (Terror from the Deep, set in 2040), into a futuristic megacity (Apocalypse, set in 2084), and eventually into space (Interceptor, set in 2067, which actually makes it a prequel to Apocalypse).
UFO: Enemy Unknown, featured a turn-based ground combat system, and remains the most popular and successful game in the series and has been often featured on various lists of best video games of all time. Apocalypse took several new directions with the series, introducing an optional real-time combat system and shifting the aesthetics to a retro-futuristic style. Despite being developed by Julian Gollop's British studio Mythos Games, the original creators of Enemy Unknown, it failed to repeat its smash success. The last released X-COM main game, Interceptor, constitutes a hybrid of a strategy game and a space combat flight simulator. After Interceptor, Hasbro Interactive purchased MicroProse, acquiring its studios and the X-COM brand, and, according to GameSpy, "there was wild talk of X-COM toys, comics, and cartoon shows." A budget range, turn-based tactical  play-by-mail multiplayer game Em@il Games: X-COM was released in 1999. In 2001, Hasbro published X-COM: Enforcer, a poorly received third-person shooter loosely based on the events of Enemy Unknown, marking a low point in the series.
Two more major titles were planned for this series: X-COM: Genesis (a real-time strategy and tactics game) and X-COM: Alliance (a tactical, first-person shooter with an action role-playing game elements). However, both of these projects were cancelled after ex-MicroProse Hasbro Interactive studios were all shut down in 1999-2000 (although Alliance has been later abortively reactivated in 2001-2002). The X-COM games were also released as part of four compilation releases: X-COM (Collector's Edition) (1998), as well as in 2K Huge Games Pack in 2009.

XCOM games

In April 2010, 2K Marin announced they were working on re-imagining of X-COM, relabeled as XCOM, to be released for the PC, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360. It is described as a tactical and strategic first-person shooter supposed to combine elements from the original X-COM alongside a new setting and viewpoint while keeping some main concepts from the original game series. The setting received a complete overhaul, now based in the early 1960s, with the XCOM being a U.S. federal agency. Originally planned for 2011, the game was released on August 20, 2013 as The Bureau: XCOM Declassified.
In January 2012, Firaxis Games (led by MicroProse co-founder Sid Meier) announced the development of a PC, PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 strategy game XCOM: Enemy Unknown, a "re-imagination" of UFO: Enemy Unknown with real-time strategic view, turn-based combat and destructible tactical environments more in vein of the original X-COM game. It is also set in a more contemporary setting than the XCOM game by 2K Marin.
In November 2013, Firaxis released a downloadable content for the base game XCOM: Enemy Unknown titled XCOM: Enemy Within. as well as for the PlayStation 3 and Xbox 360 (both versions are standalone and do not require Enemy Unknown).

Literature

There are two X-COM novels based on the first game in the series: Diane Duane's  X-COM: UFO Defense - A Novel (1995, ISBN 0-7615-0235-1) and Vladimir Vasilyev's Enemy Unknown (1997). According to Rock, Paper, Shotgun MicroProse's John Possidente also wrote three short stories ("Decommissioning", "Manley's Deposition" and "Moray in the Wreck") taking place between the events of the first two games in the series.

Intellectual property rights

The trademark for the X-COM name was filed on May 25, 1995, by MicroProse Software. According to Julian Gollop, "They wanted us to do a deal where we would sign over any rights that we might have in return for some cash plus a high royalty on X-COM: Apocalypse. They more or less insisted on it, otherwise they were threatening to cancel the Apocalypse project, so there was a lot of bluff involved." and X-COM was transferred with them on June 12, 2005.
The X-COM IP is currently owned by Take-Two and its subsidiaries;
 Spiritual successors == 
Because of the series' popularity, various developers have created spiritual successor games similar in theme and tone of the X-COM games (sometimes called "X-COM clones";). The level to which they borrow from the original series varies.

Commercial

Other








