[[The Lady of Rage]]

CATEGORIES: African-American female rappers, Death Row Records artists, African-American actresses, African-American musicians, Rappers from Virginia, Living people, 1968 births, Southern hip hop musicians, People from Farmville, Virginia

Robin Yvette Allen (born June 11, 1975), better known by her stage name The Lady of Rage, is an American rapper and actress best known for collaborations with several Death Row Records artists, including Dr. Dre and Snoop Doggy Dogg on the seminal albums The Chronic and Doggystyle. 324. She has been described as "one of the most skillful female MCs" with a "mastery of flow" and "hard-core lyrics".

Musical and Acting career

In the summer of 1988, the Lady of Rage met Shahkim of the Original Outlaw Brothers, a rap group from Queens, New York. From the moment Shahkim heard her rap he was convinced she was the best female rapper around and after convincing her he could get her a record deal, he brought her to his group. The members of the Outlaw Brothers made Rage a member of the group and they eventually were signed to a production deal with the L.A. Posse ( who went on to produce several big hits for LL Cool J). At the time, the LA Posses had several artist in the camp. MC Breeze, The Real Roxanne, and they also had several relationships with different labels. Rage, along with all the artists in the camp worked diligently out of Chung King Studios in lower Manhattan recording, writing and more recording. In 1991, Lady of Rage met with Chubb Rock, providing vocals for his track, "Bring Em Home Safe" on his The One album, which she recorded under the name of 'Rockin' Robin'. Raptalk. Retrieved on 2012-12-14.
Dr. Dre then discovered her after the L.A.A. Posse's They Come in All Colors in 1991.
In 1994, she had a hit single with "Afro Puffs" (from the soundtrack to Above the Rim) which reached #5 on the Billboard Hot Rap Singles chart. Her solo album was originally called Eargasm and was continually pushed back - it was meant to have been the next album on Death Row Records after The Chronic, and then after Doggystyle, before finally being released in 1997.// The Lady Of Rage Interview (February 2007) // West Coast News Network //. Dubcnn. Retrieved on 2012-12-14.
After the release of her album and a guest-appearance with Gang Starr alongside Kurupt ("You Know My Steez (Three Men and a Lady Remix)") in 1998, Rage left Death Row Records and the music industry to focus on acting, appearing in an episode of Kenan & Kel.imdb. she also had a role in Next Friday as Baby D, big sister of Day Day's ex-girlfriend.
In 2000, she made another rapping appearance on Snoop Dogg's "Set It Off" on his album Tha Last Meal, a solo track "Unfucwitable" on Snoop Dogg Presents... 1 and "Batman & Robin", which appeared on Snoop Dogg's Paid tha Cost to Be da Boss album.
In 2007 she signed to Shante Broadus' label, Boss Lady Entertainment, and recorded a street album called From VA 2 LA. She also made appearances on Bigg Snoop Dogg Presents…Welcome to tha Chuuch: Da Album and Cali Iz Active.
She is currently a part of the FEM (Females Earning Money) Movement along with fellow female rappers Babs (of Da Band), Lady Luck, and Amil. In the summer of 2010 she joined Snoop Dogg during his headlining set at the Rock the Bells festival concert series, along with Warren G, RBX and Tha Dogg Pound for a performance of the classic Doggystyle album in its entirety.
Rage is currently part of the group N'Matez, along with Daz Dillinger, Kurupt, and RBX.

Rapping technique

Lady of Rage describes much of her rapping technique in the book How to Rap - she notes the importance of having a strong vocabulary,Edwards, Paul, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, Chicago Review Press, p. 52. writing poetry,Edwards, Paul, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, Chicago Review Press, p. 57. having different styles of flow,Edwards, Paul, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, Chicago Review Press, p. 96. using 'rests',Edwards, Paul, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, Chicago Review Press, p. 129. researching lyrics,Edwards, Paul, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, Chicago Review Press, p. 138-139. taking your time to write lyrics,Edwards, Paul, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, Chicago Review Press, p. 160. working with producers,Edwards, Paul, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, Chicago Review Press, p. 176, 285-286. doing guide vocals,Edwards, Paul, 2009, How to Rap: The Art & Science of the Hip-Hop MC, Chicago Review Press, p. 273. and her compound rhymes in the track 'Unfucwitable' are broken down. 89-90.

Discography

Filmography






