[[Pontiac (person)]]

CATEGORIES: 1720s births, 1769 deaths, 1769 crimes, Murdered Native American people, Native American leaders, Odawa people, Indigenous people of Pontiac's War, Indigenous people of the French and Indian War

Pontiac, or Obwandiyag, (c. 1720 – April 20, 1769) was an Ottawa leader who became famous for his role in Pontiac's War (1763–1766), an American Indian struggle against British military occupation of the Great Lakes region following the British victory in the French and Indian War. Pontiac's importance in the war that bears his name has been debated. Nineteenth century accounts portrayed him as the mastermind and leader of the revolt, but some subsequent scholars argued that his role had been exaggerated. Historians today generally view him as an important local leader who influenced a wider movement that he did not command.
The war began in May 1763 when Pontiac and 300 followers attempted to take Fort Detroit by surprise. His plan foiled, Pontiac laid siege to the fort, and was eventually joined by more than 900 warriors from a half-dozen tribes. Meanwhile, messengers spread the word of Pontiac's actions, and the war expanded far beyond Detroit. In July 1763, Pontiac defeated a British detachment at the Battle of Bloody Run, but he was unable to capture the fort. In October he lifted the siege and withdrew to the Illinois Country.
Although Pontiac's influence had declined around Detroit because of the unsuccessful siege, he gained stature as he continued to encourage resistance to the British. Seeking to end the war, British officials made Pontiac the focus of their diplomatic efforts. In July 1766, Pontiac made peace with British Superintendent of Indian Affairs Sir William Johnson. The attention that the British paid to Pontiac created resentment among other Native leaders, particularly because Pontiac claimed greater authority than he possessed. Increasingly ostracized, in 1769 he was assassinated by a Peoria Indian.

Early years

Contemporary documents reveal little about Pontiac before 1763. He was probably born between 1712 and 1725, perhaps at an Ottawa village on the Detroit or Maumee Rivers. The tribal affiliation of his parents is uncertain. According to an 18th-century Ottawa tradition, Pontiac's mother was an Ottawa and his father an Ojibwa, although some sources claim that one of his parents was a Miami. Pontiac was always identified as an Ottawa by people who knew him.
By 1747, Pontiac had become an Ottawa war leader, when he allied with New France against a resistance movement led by Nicholas Orontony, a Huron leader.
In one of the earliest accounts of Pontiac, the famous British frontier soldier Robert Rogers claimed to have met with Pontiac in 1760, although many details in Rogers's story are unreliable.

Pontiac's War

The French and Indian War—the North American theater of the Seven Years' War—effectively ended in 1760 with the British conquest of New France. Native American allies of the defeated French soon became dissatisfied with the trading practices of the victorious British. The architect of British Indian policy, General Jeffrey Amherst, cut back on the provisions customarily given to the Indians, which he considered to be bribes. He also restricted the distribution of gunpowder and ammunition, supplies the Indians needed for hunting and which had previously been provided by the French. Some Native people believed that the British intended to subjugate or destroy them.
By 1761, Native leaders began calling for Indians to join together, drive the British out of the region, and revive the French and Indian alliance. Contributing to the anti-British sentiment was a religious revival inspired by a Lenape prophet named Neolin, who called for Indians to reject European cultural influences and return to traditional ways.
On April 27, 1763, Pontiac held a large council about 10 miles below Fort Detroit (present-day Council Point Park in Lincoln Park, Michigan). Pontiac urged the listeners to join him in a surprise attack on Fort Detroit. On May 1, Pontiac visited the fort with 50 Ottawas in order to assess the strength of the garrison. According to a French chronicler, in a second council Pontiac proclaimed:
 It is important for us, my brothers, that we exterminate from our lands this nation which seeks only to destroy us. You see as well as I that we can no longer supply our needs, as we have done from our brothers, the French.... Therefore, my brothers, we must all swear their destruction and wait no longer. Nothing prevents us; they are few in numbers, and we can accomplish it. 
Pontiac's War began on May 7, 1763, when Pontiac and 300 followers attempted to take Fort Detroit by surprise. His plan was foiled because Major Henry Gladwin, the fort's commander, had been warned by an informer and had made preparations. Pontiac withdrew and looked for other opportunities to capture to fort, to no avail.
Pontiac continued to encourage militant resistance to British occupation among the Illinois and Wabash tribes, and to recruit French-speaking allies.

Final years

Pontiac's final years are sparsely documented.
The attention paid to Pontiac by the British Crown encouraged him to assert more power among the Indians of the region than he actually possessed. "By 1766 he was acting arrogantly and imperiously," wrote historian Richard White, "assuming powers no western Indian leader possessed."  
Pontiac was murdered on April 20, 1769, near the French town of Cahokia. Most accounts place Pontiac's murder in Cahokia, but historian Gregory Dowd wrote that the killing probably happened in a nearby Indian village.
Various rumors quickly spread about the circumstances of Pontiac's death, including one that the British had hired his assassin. According to a story recorded by historian Francis Parkman in The Conspiracy of Pontiac (1851), a terrible war of retaliation against the Peorias resulted from Pontiac's murder. Although this legend is still sometimes repeated, there is no evidence that there were any reprisals for Pontiac's murder. 335.

Legacy

Historians have differed in their assessments of Pontiac's importance. Older accounts of the war portrayed Pontiac as a savage but brilliant mastermind behind a massive "conspiracy", which was planned in advance. Historians today generally agree that Pontiac's actions at Detroit were the spark that instigated the widespread uprising, and that he helped to spread the resistance by sending emissaries urging others to join it, but he did not command it as a whole. Native leaders around Fort Pitt and Fort Niagara, for example, had long been calling for resistance to the British and were not led by Pontiac. According to historian John Sugden, Pontiac "was neither the originator nor the strategist of the rebellion, but he kindled it by daring to act, and his early successes, ambition, and determination won him a temporary prominence not enjoyed by any of the other Indian leaders."
Places named for Pontiac include Pontiac, Michigan; Pontiac, Illinois; Pontiac, Quebec; and the Pontiac Regional County Municipality in Quebec. Pontiac was also the name of a popular General Motors automobile brand, discontinued in 2010.

Notes



  | last = Chevrette
  | first = Louis
  | authorlink = 
  | year = 1974
  | title = Pontiac
