[[Box Car Racer (album)]]

CATEGORIES: 2002 debut albums, MCA Records albums, Box Car Racer albums, English-language albums, Concept albums, Albums produced by Jerry Finn

Box Car Racer is the debut and only studio album by American rock band Box Car Racer. Produced by Jerry Finn, the album was released May 21, 2002 through MCA Records. The band was essentially a side-project of Blink-182 members Tom DeLonge and Travis Barker, with David Kennedy completing the band's studio lineup; a bassist and friend of Kennedy, Anthony Celestino, toured with the band throughout late 2002. The record was the only studio effort the trio produced together, and was recorded over the course of six weeks during the winter of 2001.
The record is primarily based on DeLonge's post-hardcore influences, such as Fugazi and Refused. The sessions were particularly difficult for DeLonge, who had previously underwent back surgery. Blink-182 bassist Mark Hoppus by all accounts felt betrayed over his lack of inclusion on the project, which evolved into tensions between the two. The record is a concept album detailing the end of the world, and features dark, moody tracks mulling over confusion.
The album peaked at number twelve on the Billboard 200, and the two singles "I Feel So" and "There Is" charted on the U.S. Modern Rock Tracks. Despite receiving positive reviews on release, this is the last and only album from Box Car Racer after Delonge stated that the band "served its purpose and is now defunct."  The album has been certified  gold in Canada.

Background

Box Car Racer was conceived by Blink-182 guitarist/vocalist Tom DeLonge and formed during a break from touring. A European tour for Blink-182 in winter 2001 was delayed in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, and rescheduled dates in early 2002 were also canceled due to DeLonge's back problems. The roots for Box Car Racer began with DeLonge playing acoustic guitar during recording sessions for Blink-182's 2001 album Take Off Your Pants and Jacket and grew from there. In a 2012 interview, DeLonge likened the creative state of Blink-182 to the art of painting, in which one has several different colors but, in the case of Blink-182's previous efforts, only employs one.
According to DeLonge, the project wasn't "meant to be a real band," but rather "something to do in some spare time that was really only expected to be on the low list of the totem pole of priorities in my life, and just to have an experimental creative outlet." The unnamed project went through other names, such as The Kill, and the record was initially titled Et tu, Brute?. To complete the project he invited fellow guitarist David Kennedy, whom DeLonge had met in the San Diego music circuit years prior.

Recording and production

Box Car Racer was recorded over the course of six weeks beginning in December 2001, primarily at Signature Sound in San Diego, California. p. 92 Rather than spend "months and months refining and polishing everything for a major label and international pop market," Box Car Racer followed a closer DIY spirit. Sessions for the album commenced quickly, with the "ever-resourceful" Jerry Finn having sent one whole loud of equipment to Signature ahead of his arrival. p. 91 The material recorded on the record was formulated over the fall and when the musicians entered the studio, very little would be changed aside from certain lyrics. Barker completed recorded his drums in one day at two recording facilities in Los Angeles prior to the Signature sessions. MCA representatives dropped in on the recording sessions and were pleased with what they heard. p. 93
The creation of the Box Car Racer side project would cause great division in Blink-182, mostly between DeLonge and Hoppus. Hoppus was very interested in being a part of the project, but DeLonge did not want the record to turn into another Blink-182 album. p. 94 DeLonge contended that the invitation of Barker was to refrain from having to pay a studio drummer. Regardless, Hoppus felt betrayed on the side project and it would become an unresolved tension that followed the band for the following few years. Despite tensions between the two, Hoppus lent vocals to the track "Elevator" and shared early ideas for the next Blink-182 album.
The sessions were particularly difficult for DeLonge, who suffered chronic back pain, the result of herniated disc. p. 90 "When your back is killing you and you have to have surgery and all this stuff, it's just kind of hard to keep a focus on the happier times in your life," he said in an interview with MTV News. "You end up writing all these songs about feeling sad and confused."

Music

Box Car Racer was inspired by and is partly a tribute to bands DeLonge credits as an influence: Jawbox, Quicksand, Fugazi and Refused.  The subject matter found on Box Car Racer explores religion, the apocalypse, conspiracies and Freemasonry. The album follows a central storyline, regarding an unnamed boy during the end of the world. Only two songs deviate from the album's central storyline, the humorous "My First Punk Song", which pays tribute to early hardcore punk bands that inspired DeLonge, such as Gorilla Biscuits, and "Elevator", which was written in the aftermath of September 11 attacks. Mark Hoppus, the bassist from Blink-182, provided guest vocals on "Elevator" as did Tim Armstrong and Jordan Pundik, of Rancid and New Found Glory respectively, on "Cat Like Thief".San Diego Reader | Bands and Performers: Box Car Racer
The music of the album is much different than any previous Blink-182 album, closely following a much darker and moody tone. According to DeLonge, he used Box Car Racer as an outfit to experiment with ideas that were not "Blink-friendly".net Blink-182, in stark contrast to the themes of Box Car Racer, was known for typical sophomoric humor and toilet gags. It has been suggested that the album's music was a precursor of things to come for Blink-182, whose next album, Blink-182, also contained much darker and more atmospheric music than any previous studio recordings. During the hiatus of Blink-182, Tom DeLonge formed Angels & Airwaves, which he has called "a continuation of Box Car Racer". Angels & Airwaves has played various songs from Box Car Racer during live shows.

Release and reception

Release information

Box Car Racer was released in May 2002, charting at number 12 on the Billboard 200. The first single released from the album was the opening track, "I Feel So", the second "There Is"; the former charted the highest, shooting to number 8 the Modern Rock Tracks chart, the latter only peaking at 32. A DVD titled also titled Box Car Racer was released in November 2002, featuring special behind the scenes footage. A music video was made for each single released from the album. Both of these videos can be found on the Box Car Racer DVD.
The album received positive reviews from various official music publications and critics. A large amount of the praise came from the change in lyrical and musical direction. John McKay of IGN admitted that Tom DeLonge and Travis Barker "have more musical integrity than many would give them credit for, especially with the deep subject matter of several of the songs on the disc." In a review of the album's first single, "I Feel So", Sarah Dempster of NME called it "better than anything by Blink-182."
On the other hand, Lycia Shrum of Hybird Magazine was disappointed to hear "such radio friendly songs … instead of hard punk." AbsolutePunk called the album "far from perfect", criticizing the random inclusion of "My First Punk Song" in the middle of the album.
The album has since been certified gold in sales by the CRIA.

Legacy

Posters for the album can be seen in a shot of the 2004 film Along Came Polly, the ABC television series 8 Simple Rules, and the CBS  television series Still Standing. Tom DeLonge and David Kennedy's later band, Angels & Airwaves, recorded a song titled "Letters to God, Part II" for their 2010 album Love. An official vinyl pressing of Box Car Racer took place in July 2010. The album was limited to 2000 copies and were only available at Hot Topic.

Track listing

Personnel

Charts

Singles

Certifications




