[[Kettering University]]

CATEGORIES: Association of Independent Technological Universities, Engineering universities and colleges in Michigan, Education in Flint, Michigan, Kettering University, Universities and colleges in Michigan, Educational institutions established in 1919, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, General Motors facilities, Universities and colleges in Genesee County, Michigan, 1919 establishments in the United States, Charles F. Kettering

Kettering University (formerly General Motors Institute and GMI Engineering and Management Institute) is a university in Flint, Michigan, focusing on STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics) and Business fields. It offers bachelor's and master's degrees in engineering, math, science, and business. Kettering places a strong emphasis on experiential learning and cooperative education, with undergraduate students required to complete a minimum of seven co-op terms to graduate. It is named after inventor and former head of research for General Motors Charles Kettering.U.S. News and World Report

History

The history of Kettering University is deeply tied to the development of the American automotive industry. The school was originally founded as The School of Automobile Trades on October 20, 1919 by Albert Sobey under the direction of the Industrial Fellowship of Flint as a night school, training individuals for careers in industry. In 1923 the school became known as the Flint Institute of Technology. General Motors acquired the school on July 12, 1926, renaming it General Motors Institute of Technology. In 1932 the name of the school was shortened to General Motors Institute.
GMI focused on creating leaders for business and industry (sometimes called the West Point of IndustryKettering Fast Facts) and pioneered many educational firsts including the co-op program (following the development of this program at the University of Cincinnati in 1907), freshmen level manufacturing courses (Production Processes I & II), and automotive degree specialties. A fifth-year thesis requirement was added in 1945, along with the ability to grant degrees. The first bachelor's degree was awarded on August 23, 1946.
The co-op program required applicants to find a GM division to be their sponsor. Work and school were mixed in six-week rotations, dividing the student body into A-section and 
B-section. At any given time, when A-section was in school, B-section was at work. After six weeks, B-section would go back to school and so on. This resulted in students moving eight times per year and a 48-week school/work year. Because General Motors used the school to train its engineers, tuition was partially subsidized.
In June 1979 (the Class of 1984) co-op rotations were expanded to twelve weeks. After GM reduced operations in Flint, the company and the University separated on July 1, 1982, although GM continued to hire co-ops from GMI. The name of the institution became "GMI Engineering & Management Institute" although the letters "GMI" were retained to allow easy identification with the old General Motors Institute. New co-op employers began participating, including Magna International of Canada, and the University began charging full tuition.
On January 1, 1998 the school's name was formally changed to Kettering University in order to: 

Admissions

The 2012-2013 freshman class of 458 students was selected from 2,503 applicants with 1,469 admitted, representing 24 states and 12 foreign countries.  Students averaged a 3.62 high school GPA and an average ACT score of 27, and average SAT Math score of 616. Approximately 81% of the degree-seeking undergraduate student body is male.

Fixed-Rate Undergraduate Tuition Guarantee

In 2012, Kettering University became the first Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM) university in Michigan and one of only a handful in the nation offering a fixed-tuition guarantee for all undergraduate students beginning in 2012-13.MLive Fixed Tuition

Academic programs

Kettering University offers Bachelor of Science degrees in Applied Biology, Applied Mathematics, Applied Physics, Biochemistry, Bioinformatics, Business Administration, Chemical Engineering, Chemistry, Computer Engineering, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering, Engineering Physics, Industrial Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering.Kettering Graduate Programs Although courses differ with major, for most undergraduate programs, completion of 160 credit hours is needed for graduation.
Kettering also offers students more than 40 minors, concentrations, specialties and courses of study,Academic Programs including a pre-med program. Kettering's pre-med program also has early assurance agreements with both the Michigan State University College of Human MedicineEarly assurance - News Article - Kettering University and the Lake Erie College of Osteopathic Medicine (LECOM),Assurance agreement - News Article - Kettering University ensuring Kettering pre-med students admittance to the schools upon graduation.

Sections

Kettering is one of the few engineering schools that prepares students for the workplace through 100% participation in an experiential learning and co-op program. In addition to classwork, students spend half the year acquiring full-time professional work experience. This is broken into four rotations of 11 week terms. The student body is separated into two sections, A and B. A-Section attends classes from July to September and then from January to March, while B-Section attends classes from October to December and April to June. During the three-month periods between class terms, students work full-time with one of over 500 co-op employer partners. On average a student earns between $40,000 and $65,000 throughout their co-op experience.

Study Abroad

Kettering offers a variety of study abroad opportunities to students. Kettering students study at universities in Germany, China, Australia, and England, with 40 students studying abroad in 2011 and 63 doing so in 2012.  To promote study abroad, Kettering provides a $1,500 travel stipend to offset travel and living expenses. The Oswald Student Fellows program and the Ronald G. Greenwood Memorial Scholarship grant funds each term to qualified students.

Campus

thumb|left|Frances Willson Thompson HallKettering University consists of six buildings and nearly , some of the more notable aspects are its 25 yard pool, indoor track and numerous tennis, basketball and racquetball courts. These enhancements totaled over $7 million to construct.Whatsupdowntown
Kettering offers one of these six buildings for student housing.  Additional housing is available through Campus Village Apartments which houses only Kettering University students.  The school's Campus Center is the location of the Admissions and Public Relations offices as well as the student cafeteria.
The C.S. Mott Engineering and Science Center opened in July 2004 and contains an entire fuel cell systems and powertrain integration labs.
The Innovation Center at Kettering University, a 9,000-square-foot incubator for entrepreneurs, opened in 2010.2 million project that was the first Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) certified building in Genesee County.LEED
Kettering is also one of the few schools in the nation to have a crash safety center, in which students are able to experience crash testing and develop effective safety equipment.Kettering Facts Kettering is one of the only universities in the country that has a Haptics lab.Chemical Engineering

Student life

Forty eight percent of students live in either the 445-student residence hall or Campus Village Apartment complex adjacent to campus, capable of housing 211. Others live in Greek housing facilities or private rental properties near campus. Kettering students stay involved in over 15 Greek organizations, student government and recreational activities.College Data

Clubs

Kettering Student Government sponsors many student clubs to promote an atmosphere conducive to social interaction. Most clubs receive money from the University to operate. However, some clubs are self-financing, either because they wish to avoid the restrictions placed on the Kettering Student Government (KSG) sponsored clubs or because they are unaware that funding is available.

Greek life

The university has a very active Greek system, which is recognized as an excellent source of service opportunities and leadership training. Over 40% of the student body is currently involved in a fraternity or sorority.
Many North-American Interfraternity Conference (IFC) fraternities have chapters at Kettering as do several National Panhellenic Conference (NPC) sororities. The National Pan-Hellenic Council (NPHC) has several local chapters that are also affiliated with Kettering. IFC, NPC, and NPHC each have a school-wide council with representatives from each member organization. These councils are designed to facilitate communication between the different groups, and to facilitate relations with the University on matters such as school-wide events and membership. In addition to the recognized organizations there are several unrecognized organizations including a local Christian fraternity and a local Christian sorority.
During the first few weeks of school, freshmen are "rushed", a period of recruitment where all Greek organizations host events and attempt to recruit new members. Fraternities promote their events with signs, calendars, personal visits, and by painting the bull dog, a campus tradition.

WKUF-LP

The low-power radio station WKUF-LP is run by Kettering University students and staff. It was founded in November 2004.

Notable alumni

Kettering University has approximately 28,000 alumni.








