[[Chord progression]]

CATEGORIES: Harmony, Chord progressions

A chord progression (or harmonic progression) is a series of musical chords, or chord changes that "aims for a definite goal" of establishing (or contradicting) a tonality founded on a key, root or tonic chordArnold Schoenberg, Structural Functions of Harmony, Faber and Faber, 1983, p.1-2. and that is based upon a succession of root relationships. Music: In Theory and Practice, Vol. I, p.178. Seventh Edition. ISBN 978-0-07-294262-0. Chords and chord theory are generally known as harmony.
A chord progression can be thought of as a harmonic simultaneity succession: it offers an ongoing shift of level that is essential to many musical traditions. A change of chord, or "chord change", generally occurs on an accented beat, so that chord progressions may contribute significantly to the rhythm, meter and musical form of a piece, delineating bars, phrases and sections. This is known as harmonic rhythm.

Basics

A chord may be built upon any note of a musical scale, therefore a seven-note scale allows seven basic chords, each degree of the scale becoming the root of its own chord. B.F., 1922, Introduction p. xv A chord built upon the note A is an A chord of some type (major/minor/diminished, etc.) The harmonic function of any particular chord depends on the context of the particular chord progression in which it is found. (See Diatonic function)
The diatonic harmonization of any major scale results in three major triads. They are based on the first, fourth, and fifth scale degrees (the tonic, subdominant and dominantChadwick, 1922, p.1 – see three-chord song). These three triads include, and therefore can harmonize, every note of that scale.
The same scale also provides three relative minor chords, one related to each of the three major chords. These are based upon the sixth, second and third degrees of the major scale and stand in the same relationship to one another as do the three majors, so that they may be viewed as the first, fourth and fifth degrees of the relative minor key. Separate from these six common chords there is one degree of the scale, the seventh, that results in a diminished chord.C.H. Kitson, Elementary Harmony, Part One, O.U.P., 1920, Chapters 3-4.
In addition, extra notes may be added to any chord. If these notes are also selected from the original scale the harmony remains diatonic. If new chromatic intervals are introduced then a change of scale or modulation occurs, which may bring the sense of a change of tonal center. This in turn may lead to a resolution back to the original key, so that the entire sequence of chords helps create an extended musical form.
Although all this allows for a large number of possible progressions (depending upon the length of the progression), in practice, progressions are often limited to a few bars' length and certain progressions are favored above others: there is a certain amount of fashion in this and a chord progression may even define an entire genre.
In western classical notation, chords built on the scale are numbered with Roman numerals. A D chord will be figured I in the key of D, for example, but IV in the key of A. Minor chords are signified by lower case Roman, so that D minor in the key of C would be written ii. Other forms of chord notation have been devised, from figured bass to the chord chart. These usually allow or even require a certain amount of improvisation.

Simple progressions

Diatonic scales such as the major and minor scales lend themselves particularly well to the construction of common chords because they contain a large number of perfect fifths. Such scales predominate in those regions where harmony is an essential part of music, as, for example, in the common practice period of western classical music. In considering Arab and Indian music, where diatonic scales are used, there are also available a number of non-diatonic scales, the music has no chord changes, remaining always upon the key-chord, an attribute which has also been observed in hard rock, hip hop,J Pressing, Black Atlantic rhythm: Its computational and transcultural foundations - Music Perception, 2002  funk, disco,Dr. Tony A. Mowrer, History of Rock, Chapter 15, Funk and Disco - 
Alternation between two chords may be thought of as the most basic chord progression.  Many well-known pieces are built harmonically upon the mere repetition of two chords of the same scale.  For example, many of the more straightforward melodies in classical music consist entirely or mostly of alternation between the tonic (I) and the dominant (V, sometimes with an added seventh), as do folk songs such as "Polly Wolly Doodle"is built upon a repeated I - IV. The Isley Brothers' "Shout" uses I - vi throughout.musicnotes.asp?ppn=MN0063604

Three-chord progressions

Three-chord tunes, though, are more common, since a melody may then dwell on any note of the scale. Often the chords may be selected to fit a pre-conceived melody, but just as often it is the progression itself that gives rise to the melody.
Similar progressions abound in African popular music. They may be varied by the addition of sevenths (or other scale degrees) to any chord or by substitution of the relative minor of the IV chord to give, for example, I - ii - V.  This sequence, using the chord based on the second scale degree, is also used cadentially in a common chord progression of jazz harmony, the so-called ii-V-I turnaround, on which are based the more ornate Coltrane changes.
Such progressions provide the entire harmonic foundation of much African and American popular music, and they occur sectionally in many pieces of classical music (such as the opening bars of Beethoven's Pastoral Symphony). Any of these progressions may be transposed into any key so that, for instance, the progression I - IV - V in the key of A will be played A - D - E, while in the key of C the chords will be C - F - G.
Where such a simple sequence does not represent the entire harmonic structure of a piece, it may readily be extended for greater variety.  Frequently an opening phrase of the type I - IV - V - V, which ends on an unresolved dominant, may be "answered" by a similar version that resolves back onto the home chord, giving a structure of double the length:
Additionally, such a passage may be alternated with a different progression to give a simple binary or ternary form such as that of the popular thirty-two-bar form (see musical form).

Blues changes

The twelve bar blues and its many variants use an elongated, three-line form of the I - IV - V progression that has also generated countless hit records, including the most significant output of rock and rollers such as Chuck Berry and Little Richard. In its most elementary form (there are many variants) the chords progress as follows:
Again, blues progressions have formed the entire harmonic basis of many recorded songs but may also be confined to a single section of a more elaborate form, as frequently with The Beatles in such songs as "You Can't Do That", "I Feel Fine", and "She's A Woman".  They have also been subjected to densely chromatic elaboration, as in the Bird blues.
Steedman (1984) proposed that a set of recursive rewrite rules generate all well-formed transformations of jazz, both basic blues chord changes and slightly modified sequences (such as the "rhythm changes"). Important transformations include:

50s progression

Another common way of extending the I - IV - V sequence is by adding the chord of the sixth scale degree, giving the sequence I - vi - IV - V or I - vi - ii - V, sometimes called the 50s progression.
In fact this sequence had been in use from the earliest days of classical music (used often by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
Taken up into the pop mainstream, for example with Felice and Boudleaux Bryant's "All I Have to Do Is Dream",
It continued to be used sectionally, as in the last part of The Beatles' "Happiness Is a Warm Gun",The Beatles' Bible and also to form the harmonic basis of further new songs for decades ("Every Breath You Take" by The Police,
 

Circle progressions

Introducing the ii chord into these progressions emphasises their appeal as constituting elementary forms of circle progression.  These, named for the circle of fifths, consist of "adjacent roots in ascending fourth or descending fifth relationship"—for instance, the sequence vi - ii - V - I ascends with each successive chord to one a fourth above the previous. Such a motion, based upon close harmonic relations, offers "undoubtedly the most common and the strongest of all harmonic progressions". Music: In Theory and Practice, Vol. I, p.178. Seventh Edition. ISBN 978-0-07-294262-0.  The succession of cadences gives an impression of inevitable return to the key-note of the piece.
Short cyclical progressions may be derived by selecting a sequence of chords from the series completing a circle from the tonic through all seven diatonic chords:
This type of progression was much used by classical composers, who introduced increasingly subtle inflections.  Particularly, substitution of major for minor chords giving, for example, I - VI - II - V allowed a more sophisticated chromaticism as well as the possibility of modulation.  These harmonic conventions were taken up by American popular entertainers, giving rise to many variations on those harmonic staples of early jazz that have been dubbed the ragtime progression and the stomp progression.  All such progressions may be found used sectionally, as for example in the much-used "rhythm changes" of George Gershwin's "I Got Rhythm".

Harmonizing the scale

As well as the cyclical underpinning of chords, the ear tends to respond well to a linear thread; chords following the scale upwards or downwards.  These are often referred to as step progressions because they follow the steps of the scale, making the scale itself a bassline. In the 17th century, descending bass lines found favour for "divisions on the ground", so that Pachelbel's canon, the Bach orchestral suites (the famous Air on a G String).
At its simplest, this descending sequence may simply introduce an extra chord, either III or V, into the I - VI - IV - V type of sequence described above.  This chord allows the harmonization of the seventh step, and so of the bass line I - VII - VI....  This strategy underlies Percy Sledge's "When A Man Loves A Woman"
Ascending major progressions are not as common but many exist: the verse of "Like a Rolling Stone" ascends by steps to the fifth, I-ii-iii-IV-V (or I-ii-I/iii-IV-V) before descending again to the key-note, IV - iii - ii - I (or IV-I/iii-ii-I)—the latter being another common type of harmonization of a descending major scale.
The descending chromatic scale has also formed the basis of many progressions, from the 

Minor and modal progressions

Similar strategies to all the above work equally well in minor modes: there have been one-, two- and three-minor-chord songs, minor blues.
A notable example of a descending minor chord progression is the four-chord Andalusian cadence,
i - VII - VI - V.
Folk and blues tunes frequently use the Mixolydian scale, which has a flat seventh degree, altering the position of the three major chords to I - Flat VII-IV. For example, if the major scale of C, which gives the three chords C, F and G on the first, fourth and fifth degrees, is played with G as the tonic, then the same chords will now appear on the first, fourth and seventh degrees. These "Mixolydian" harmonies also appeared in the pop music of the 1960s, notably with The Beatles' album Help!
The minor-third step from a minor keynote up to the relative major encouraged ascending scale progressions, particularly based on an ascending pentatonic scale. Typical of the type is the sequence i - III -IV (or iv) - VI.
According to Tom Sutcliffe:
This came about partly from the similarity of the blues scale to modal scales and partly from the characteristics of the guitar and the use of parallel major chords on the pentatonic minor scale. This phenomenon is also linked to the rise in the use of power chords.

Chord progressions in classical music

Early European art music developed through embellishment of a single line of melody and classical theory still emphasizes the correct "horizontal" progress of single-note parts, sometimes known as "voice-leading". Generally, to the melody in the upper part is added first a bass line and then two inner lines to complete the chords in four-part harmony suitable for a choir or string section, terminating with cadences, avoiding some chord inversions and favoring others, maintaining an orderly and melodic conjunct, contrary and oblique motion of each part relative to the others in order to achieve unity of texture by avoidance of inappropriate intervals, parallel fifths and octaves etc. Much practice is given to the art of harmonic transition and development that is essential to classical music's use of harmony as a means of achieving unity in a large-scale form. While (as noted above) classical music has its cliche progressions, they are seldom named and discussed: perhaps only Schoenberg among the authors of popular text-books of harmony has made some attempt to do so.



Sources

Further reading




