[[James Reavis]]

CATEGORIES: American fraudsters, Forgers, People from Henry County, Missouri, People from Arizona, 1843 births, 1914 deaths, Confederate States Army soldiers, Crime in Arizona Territory

James Addison Reavis (May 10, 1843 – November 27, 1914), later using the name James Addison Peralta-Reavis, the so-called Baron of Arizona,
Under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and the Gadsden Purchase, the United States was required to recognize and honor existing land grants made by either the Spanish or Mexican governments. Reavis utilized this provision by manufacturing a fictional claim and then generating a collection of documents demonstrating how the claim came into his possession. The documents were then covertly inserted into various records archives. In his initial claim, Reavis claimed title to the grant via a series of conveyances.  When serious challenges to this claim developed, Reavis developed a second claim by marrying the purported last surviving lineal descendant of the original claim recipient.
During the course of his deception, Reavis managed to convince a number of prominent persons to support his efforts. He obtained legal and political support from Roscoe Conkling, Robert G. Ingersoll and James Broadhead. Business leaders such as Charles Crocker and John W. Mackay in turn provided financial support. Initial exposure of the fraud occurred when an unfavorable Surveyor General report caused the claim to be summarily dismissed. In response to this action, Reavis sued the U.S. government for US$11 million in damages ($). The suit in turn prompted the U.S. government to perform a detailed investigation that fully exposed the forgeries Reavis had planted in a variety of locations.

Early life

Reavis was born the second of five children to Fenton George Reavis and Mary Reavis (née Dixon) on May 10, 1843 in Henry County, Missouri near the town of Clinton.  His father was a Welshman who had immigrated to the United States in the early 1820s.
Following the outbreak of the American Civil War, Reavis enlisted in Hunter's Regiment of the Confederate Army, 8th Division of the Missouri State Guard. Several months later he went to Springfield and reenlisted in Captain Lowe's company. He used the leave to surrender to Union forces instead of getting married. Following his surrender, Reavis joined the Union Army and briefly served in an artillery regiment.
Following the war, Reavis traveled to Brazil and gained functional fluency in Portuguese.

George Willing

Reavis met George M. Willing Jr. in 1871.
It was 1867 when Willing reached Prescott to record the transaction.
Reavis suggested Willing leave the documents to allow him time to inspect them.  Willing declined the offer and instead returned the next day with an expert in Spanish land titles, William W. Gitt.
The three men began meeting for several hours each week to examine the grant paperwork.
After a couple of years, Reavis and Willing formed a partnership aimed at promoting the claim.  The two men planned to travel separately, allowing Willing to retain Reavis as a real estate expert upon his arrival.
Reavis married Ada Pope of Montevallo on May 5, 1874.

Establishing the grant

Willing arrived in Prescott in March 1874 and filed his claim in the Yavapai County Courthouse.
Reavis needed Willing's papers to continue the scheme.  He did not however immediately proceed to Arizona Territory.  In poor health from the journey and low on funds, Reavis worked as a schoolteacher in Downey, California during 1875 and 1876.  He then worked as a journalist in Northern California, serving as a correspondent for The San Francisco Examiner and San Francisco Call with occasional work for a New York City paper.
Reavis' first visit to Arizona Territory came with a May 1880 trip to Phoenix.
Under Willing, the grant had been a "floater", a grant for a certain amount of territory but lacking a fixed location. Such grants, while common, were useful as legal nuisances capable of scaring an unsophisticated land owner but of little real value.  With the center of its western boundary set near the confluence of the Salt and Gila rivers, the grant contained the towns of Phoenix, Globe, Casa Grande, Florence, and Tempe and stretched to the outskirts of Silver City, New Mexico.  Other points of interest within the grant boundaries were the Silver King Mine and a section of the Southern Pacific Railroad.
To achieve his vision, Reavis had to first clear some outstanding business issues and obtain additional documentation.
After examining the San Xavier record book, Reavis traveled to Mexico where between September to November 1881 he searched the archives in Guadalajara and Mexico City for information related to the Peralta grant.  In Mexico, he resumed the role of a newspaper correspondent looking for items of interest to Los Angeles and San Francisco readers.

First Baron of Arizona

Contained within the collection of papers Reavis had collected was the story of the Peralta grant's creation and the life history of the fictional first and second Barons of Arizona. The tale began with the birth of Don Miguel Nemecio Silva de Peralta de la Córdoba in 1708 to Don José Gaston Silva y Carrillo de Peralta de las Falces de Mendoza and Doña Francisca Maria de Garcia de la Córdoba y Muñiz de Perez.
The exact nature of the royal emissary's mission was never revealed but may have involved leaked claims of silver being found in northern Sonora.
It was not until January 3, 1758 that a suitable tract of land was located north of Mission San Xavier del Bac and a decree issue by the Viceroy, Agustín de Ahumada, granting Don Miguel the land.
Following the expulsion of the Jesuits from New Spain in 1768, Don Miguel sent a request to Charles III for reconfirmation of his grant.
Don Miguel made one attempt to settle on his land, using the ruins at Casa Grande as his base of operation.  The attempt was unsuccessful due to persistent raids from Apache.
In addition to a will,  Don Miguel created several additional documents to ensure his son would inherit his complete estate.  In 1788 Don Miguel placed a codicil in Guadalajara indicating his wishes.

First claim

After completing his work in Mexico, Reavis returned to San Francisco.  There he showed his documents to influential persons and wrote several anonymous news articles for the Examiner claiming there was "irrefutable evidence" supporting his claim on the Peralta grant.
Reavis' first official action came in October 1882, when he filed papers with the Safford, Arizona Territory probate court showing he had been assigned Willing's deeds.
The official filing of the claim came on March 27, 1883 in the Tucson office of Surveyor General J.W. Robbins.
After filing his claim, Reavis established his base of operations at Arizola. This was a location near Casa Grande containing a small set of ruins that had supposedly been used by the first Baron as La Hacienda de Peralta.
While the construction was beginning, Reavis began hiring rent collectors and agents.  He also opened negotiations with James M. Barney, owner of the Silver King Mining Company.  Arrangements for newspapers and hired publicists announcing the land grant were made, proclaiming the title was ironclad and included both water and mineral rights.
Soon after, Reavis and his agents began selling quitclaims to gullible and frightened settlers located within the claim boundaries.
Initial reaction to the notices by local residents was stunned disbelief.  Faced with this challenge, some area pioneers abandoned their homes and land instead of trying to deal with Reavis.

Collapse of the claim

Most territory residents vehemently opposed Reavis' claim and his efforts to sell quitclaims.
About the time McNeil was returning his quitclaim, the Surveyor General's office dispatched Spanish language expert Rufus C. Hopkins to Mexico.  Reavis and one of his lawyers followed Hopkins.
While Reavis and Hopkins were in Mexico, Surveyor General J.W. Robbins died from tuberculosis and was replaced by his chief clerk, Royal A. Johnson.
With the release of Hopkin's initial report, Reavis proclaimed that confirmation of his claim was just a matter of time.  He even began rumors that the U.S. government was planning to offer US$100 million to buy rights to his claim.
While this was ongoing, Reavis sought to expand his sale of quitclaims from Phoenix, where his efforts were initially focused, to the town of Florence.  The initial target of the expansion was Tom Weedin, editor of the Florence Enterprise, whom Reavis approached in January 1884.
Over the next year-and-a-half Reavis faced two lawsuits.  The first came from George Willing Sr., father of Reavis' former business partner.  The elder Willing claimed that Mary Ann Willing only possessed a life estate on her husband's property and could not have legally provided a warranty deed to Reavis.
The second suit was filed by Territorial Attorney General Clark Churchill to settle title issues with his personal land holdings.
Following the ruling in the Churchill suit, Land Office Commissioner W. A. Sparks communicated with Royal Johnson instructing the Surveyor General to halt work on verifying the Peralta grant.

Second claim

Before the collapse of his first claim, Reavis realized the complex series of conveyances on which he based his claim to the Peralta grant represented a serious weakness to his plans.  To overcome this weakness Reavis had begun the work to establish an heiress to the grant while he was still preparing his first claim.
Reavis claimed to have heard rumors of a Peralta descendant as early as his 1875 arrival in California.
After his first claim collapsed, Reavis returned to California to collect letters of introduction to influential New Yorkers from his friends and business contacts.
In December 1885, the Reavis party sailed for Europe.
Upon his return, Reavis visited New York to renew his acquaintances with various political and business leaders.
From New York the Reavis party went to California.  There Reavis obtained an affidavit from Alfred Sherwood certifying he had known Sophia and her parents since her birth, she had been born in San Diego County, California, and that she had been left in the custody of Don Jose R. C. Maso following the death of her mother and twin brother when her father had need to travel to Spain.
By the time Reavis returned to Arizona Territory in August 1887 he was using the name "James Addison Peralta-Reavis".  He went to Tucson to file a new claim on behalf of his wife, Doña Sophia Micaela Maso Reavis y Peralta de la Córdoba, third Baroness of Arizona.
Formal filing of the second claim occurred on September 2, 1887.  Included with the official copies and photographs of original wills and codicils was a photograph of the third Baroness standing before the "Inicial Monument".

Second baron and his family

Within the new filings were the following additions to the Peralta family story:
The second Baron of Arizona, Don Jesus Miguel, never took an interest in his Arizona property due to the threatening Apache presence.  He married Doña Juana Laura Ibarra, a member of a prominent Guadalajara family, in 1822.
Doña Sophia married José Ramon Carmen Maso in 1860.
In 1862, Maso was called to Spain to collect some funds owed to him and the Baron.
In California, Treadway made arrangements with Alfred Sherwood to look after the infant Sophia and Doña Carmelita Maso while he took a business trip.  During this trip, Treadway died near Sacramento, California.

Development plans for Arizona

Reaction to the new claim by Arizona residents was nearly unanimously negative, with some newspapers publishing open incitements to violence against Reavis.  
During his trip to Spain and visits to New York, Reavis had gained an understanding of government and big business finance.
Reavis formed three corporations in rapid succession in 1887, each bearing the name Casa Grande Improvement Company.
Among the development plans Reavis announced was construction of a large scale irrigation system.
By the time of the second filing, Reavis was dressing in the finest linen and broadcloth while his wife wore the products of New York and San Francisco's best dressmakers.

Fraud revealed

The U.S. Presidential election of 1888 resulted in the return of a Republican to the White House.  Following the inauguration of Benjamin Harrison, Royal Johnson was reappointed Surveyor General for Arizona Territory in July 1889.
Among the issues found in the report with the Peralta grant were:
Johnson's report was met with celebration by Arizona residents and the once demonized Surveyor General became the toast of the town.
Response in Washington to Johnson's report was more subdued.

Reavis' response

In response to Johnson's report and the subsequent dismissal of his claim, Reavis filed  suit against the United States in the Court of Claims.  The lawsuit claimed the government had taken land belonging to Reavis and his wife and sold it to settlers, the government had reserved 
At the time of filing, Reavis and his wife said they were aware that the Surveyor General had released a report but claimed to have been unable to obtain a copy.
After filing suit, Reavis went to California to locate witnesses who were familiar with the details of Sophia's youth.
In addition to details about his wife's early childhood, Reavis discovered other witnesses able to relate details about her family.  In this manner additional details were revealed about the second Baron and his activities during the 1850s.  Another revelation was the existence of a previously unknown third cousin to the third Baroness, Miguel Lauro Peralta y Vasquez.  Information discovered about this cousin showed that he had traveled through Arizona during the time period in which Willing had purchased the rights to the Peralta grant and could potentially have posed as the second Baron during the transaction.
A trip to San Bernardino in early 1892 resulted in Reavis discovering baptismal records for the Maso twins along with a record of burial of mother and newborn son.
During the second half of 1892 Reavis had hoped to perform another search for witnesses in the company of James Broadhead.  Broadhead's duties as a Congressman however forced a delay of this plan until at least mid-1893.  This delay worked for Reavis as on March 8, 1893 his wife gave birth to twin boys, named Carlos Jesús and Miguel in honor of the first and second Barons.
By 1893, Reavis began to develop financial problems.  Travel, research, and legal expenses, combined with the maintenance expenses of his various households, had consumed most of his cash.  Questions about the status of the Peralta claim in turn had dried up most new investments.
With the volume of evidence and witness testimony accumulated, James Broadhead decided that the Peralta case was proven.
Reavis went to Santa Fe, New Mexico Territory to file his final complaint in February 1893.  Land Office draftsman William Strover recalled "an express wagon drove up and unloaded an array of boxes and packages, all addressed to the court and marked 'Peralta Grant.'  When all was unpacked three large tables, placed end to end, filled with documents, ancient books,pictures, including a large oil painting of the Marquis de Peralta, in his robes as grandee of Spain.  There were documents with large leaden seals attached and signed by the king of Spain.  There was a complete history of the marquis and letters to him and from him."
After submitting his amended filing, Reavis and his family moved back to his mansion in Arizola.

Government investigation

Mathew Given Reynolds, a special attorney for the United States Court of Private Land Claims, was assigned to represent the government in Reavis' suit.
As the archives in Guadalajara were in the process of being moved, Mallet-Prevost began his search in Mexico City.  A search of the National Archives found no record of the Peralta grant but did produce copies of signatures and 18th century documents for use in later comparisons.
Mallet-Prevost was then sent to Spain, arriving in Madrid on June 12, 1894.
When Reavis later returned to the archive, the prescribed measures had been put into place.  At the end of one day Reavis discovered a document in a bundle he was searching and requested a certified copy of it.  The document was in an envelope and the paper folded.  No other documents in the bundle were folded and the document Reavis had found was not numbered as other pages in the bundle had been.
While Mallet-Prevost was at the archives in Spain, Reynolds went to California to perform background investigations on the witnesses Reavis had located.
On September 6, 1894, the government requested a judge be commissioned to take testimony.  Despite protests from Reavis' attorney, Judge Thomas C. Fuller was appointed.  Testimony was taken in Guadalajara between October 16 and October 26, 1894.
On January 5, 1895 Judge Wilbur F. Stone left New York to take evidence in Spain.

Civil suit

The trial for Reavis' civil action began on Monday June 3, 1895 at 10:00.  The first motion was from a lawyer representing a group of 106 individuals related to Miguel Peralta of Wickenburg, Arizona Territory.  These real Peralta family members had heard about the case and hoped for a portion of any settlement. In his statement to the court, the lawyer informed the court that:
Presentation of the government case began in earnest on Tuesday morning, Reavis and his counsel still not present.  First on the stand was Mallet-Prevost who testified about language and grammar problems present in some of the Peralta documents.
Tipton, the government's document analysis expert, next took the stand to discuss the 1748 
Following this, Tipton went on to problems with other original papers that had been located during the search of the Guadalajara archives.  One group of papers was located in a set of papers related to work done by the notary Diego de la Sierra between 1697 and 1698.  The Peralta papers had been inserted between two pages of a bound volume numbered 178 and 179 respectively, printed on paper that was shorter and narrower than the other pages of the book, showed evidence of being folded unlike the book's other pages, and were glued in place instead of being bound as was the rest of the volume.
Wednesday began with  Mallet-Prevost testifying on his findings during his trip to Spain.  He began with the will of Miguel de Peralta where the only mentions of the name occurred over erasures.
Reavis first appeared in court on Monday June 10, 1895.
Tuesday's court session began with Reavis taking the stand.  Beginning with an account of his early career, he described his meeting Dr. Willing and his trip to Prescott to obtain the Peralta documents.
Wednesday morning's session began with Reavis being questioned about his marriage contract to his wife, moved to details on his discovery of the "Inicial Monument", and was followed by questions about his financial transactions with the Southern Pacific Railroad and Silver King mine.
In the afternoon, questioning turned to Reavis' discovery of the baptismal and burial records in San Bernardino.
Thursday afternoon, Father P.J. Stockman, rector of the church of San Bernardino, testified the records of the baptismal of Mrs. Reavis and her twin brother and deaths of the boy and his mother were forged.
Testimony on Friday began with Tipton examining the genealogical document for the Peralta family from the first Baron's will.  His testimony showed the first and last leaves of the document to be genuine documents from the indicated period but that the pages in between were all forgeries.
This was followed by an examination of the 1742 appointment of Don Miguel Peralta as royal inspector.  It was pointed out the bottom of the document contained the line "
After adjourning for the weekend, the trial resumed on Monday June 17.  Local newspapers had reported that Mrs. Reavis had arrived from Denver on Friday afternoon and the courtroom was packed with spectators looking to see the third Baroness.
The final day of testimony came on June 18.  In an attempt to bolster his case, Reavis attempted to show that a portrait of Don Miguel Nemecio de Peralta de la Córdoba bore a strong resemblance to his twins.   Other portraits, photographs, and documents were introduced in an attempt to prove the existence of Don Miguel and his family.
The Court of Private Land Claims presented its findings on June 28, 1895.  The decision rejected the claim, finding "that the claim is wholly fictitious and fraudulent" and that the various Peralta documents had been forged and "surreptitiously introduced" into the various archives and record books where they were discovered.

Criminal trial

Some Reavis associates did not believe the court's conclusion.  Dr. A. T. Sherwood, who led an attempt to colonize the grant, told reporters, "It is impossible that any one man could have forged all the signatures in this case.  Reavis would have had to forge over 200 Spanish documents and signatures.  No man could have done it.  It is the most improbable thing conceivable."
Reavis pleaded not guilty and requested release on bail.  The court set bail and allowed him to send telegrams to his previous business associates requesting assistance.
The criminal trial began on June 27, 1896.
Upon hearing the verdict, Reavis told his lawyer that he was sure the verdict would be reversed by the Supreme Court.

Later life

Reavis was imprisoned from July 18, 1896 to April 18, 1898, earning a three-month sentence reduction for good behavior.
In 1900, Reavis began the magazine Peralta Reavis Real Life Illustrated where he promised to provide the complete inside story of the Peralta fraud.  The magazine folded after a single issue.
In June 1902, Reavis's wife filed for divorce on grounds of nonsupport.  Following the divorce little was heard from Reavis.  By 1913 he was living in a poor house in Los Angeles.
After falling out of the public eye, Reavis became the subject of multiple magazine articles.  He was even featured in an official tour book.  Among the tales manufactured about the Baron of Arizona by these sources was that Reavis had used paper bearing the watermark of a Wisconsin paper mill that did not exist until the 1870 or 1880s.  Such tales discount the skill used by Reavis in the manufacture of his forgeries and the level of inspection they received before faults were eventually discovered.
Beyond the magazines, Reavis' exploits have also been utilized in several motion pictures.  A fraudulent land claim similar to the one created by Reavis was used as a plot device in the 1939 film The Night Riders.
The mansion that Reavis built in Arizola was rediscovered by the National Park Service in 1953 following years of use as a barn by a local farmer.

Footnotes

 
  



Bibliography



  | last = Johnson
  | first = Royal A.
  | title = Adverse report of the Surveyor General of Arizona, Royal A. Johnson, upon the alleged Peralta Grant : a complete expose of its fraudulent character
  | year = 1890
