[[Institute for Advanced Study]]

CATEGORIES: Education in Mercer County, New Jersey, Mathematical institutes, Research institutes in the United States, Institute for Advanced Study, Princeton, New Jersey, Some Institutes for Advanced Study, 1930 introductions

The Institute for Advanced Study located in Princeton, New Jersey, in the United States, is an independent postdoctoral research center for theoretical research and intellectual inquiry.

Schools

There are no degree programs or experimental facilities at the Institute, and research is funded by endowments, grants, and gifts—it does not support itself with tuition or fees. Research is never contracted or directed; it is left to each individual researcher to pursue his or her own goals.
The Institute is not part of any educational institution. However, because Princeton University's science departments are less than two miles (3 km) away, informal ties and collaboration have occurred between the two institutions. In fact, the Institute was once housed within Princeton University—in the building since called Jones Hall, which was then Princeton's mathematics department—for 6 years, from its opening in 1933, until Fuld Hall was finished and opened in 1939. This helped start an incorrect impression that it was part of the University, one that has never been completely eradicated. 
The Institute has four Schools: Historical studies, mathematics, natural sciences, and social sciences. There is a permanent faculty of 28, and each year fellowships are awarded to 190 visiting members from over 100 universities and research institutions. Individuals apply to become Members at the Institute, and each of the Schools has its own application procedures and deadlines. Members are selected by the Faculty of each School from more than 1,500 applicants, and come to the Institute for periods from one term to a few years, most staying for one year. All Members, whether emerging scholars or scientists at the beginning of their careers or established researchers, are selected on the basis of their outstanding achievements and promise.

History

The Institute was founded in 1930 by Abraham Flexner, together with Louis Bamberger and Caroline Bamberger Fuld with the proceeds from their department store in Newark, New Jersey. The founding of the institute was fraught with brushes against near-disaster; the Bamberger siblings pulled their money out of the market just before the Crash of 1929, and their original intent was to express their gratitude to the state of New Jersey through the founding of a medical school. It was the intervention of their friend Abraham Flexner, the prominent education theorist, that convinced them to put their money in the service of more abstract research.Axtell, James (2007), The Making of Princeton University: From Woodrow Wilson to the Present, Princeton University Press, ISBN 0691126860

Criticism

The Institute's founding premise, that individuals with lifetime tenure and no assigned duties will produce the most outstanding scholarship, is not universally shared. For example,

In 2000, the Institute sued in federal court, seeking to compel Piet Hut, one of its tenured professors, to resign on grounds of poor productivity. While this action may have been intended to counter views such as the above by demonstrating a corrective ability, it resulted in a wave of unfavorable publicity. The case was settled out of court, and Hut remained an Institute professor.Robin Wilson, "The Professor Who Would Not Leave", The Chronicle of Higher Education, November 24, 2000
The Institute is planning to build fifteen faculty houses on land it owns near Princeton Battlefield State Park.  These plans are being opposed by the Princeton Battlefield Society and by the National Trust for Historic Preservation.  The institute has always valued residential proximity for its professors saying that they are a "community of scholars with the ability to interact at all times", while the preservationists claim that the site is of "immense historic value" and want to annex it to the adjacent park.A Battle Over Faculty Housing, New York Times, June 21, 2012 In March 2012, the Institute received unanimous approval from the Princeton Regional Planning Board to proceed with its plans.

Faculty

The Institute is or has been the academic home of Michael Atiyah, Enrico Bombieri, Shiing-Shen Chern, Noam Chomsky, Paul Dirac, Freeman J. Dyson, Albert Einstein, Clifford Geertz, Kurt Gödel, George F. Kennan, T. D. Lee, Oskar Morgenstern, J. Robert Oppenheimer, Erwin Panofsky, Atle Selberg, Stephen Smale, John von Neumann, André Weil, Hermann Weyl, Frank Wilczek, Andrew Wiles, and Edward Witten.
In addition to faculty, who have permanent appointments, scholars are appointed as "Members" of the Institute for a period of several months to several years. Some 190 members are now selected annually. This includes both younger and well-established natural scientists and social scientists. The "Community of Scholars" is a database of scholars and scientists affiliated with the Institute since its founding.ias.edu/people/cos/

Directors



Further reading




