[[Steve Jones (biologist)]]

CATEGORIES: 1944 births, Living people, People from Aberystwyth, Welsh geneticists, Welsh science writers, British television presenters, Alumni of the University of Edinburgh, Academics of University College London, Fellows of the Royal Society, Welsh humanists, British secularists

John Stephen Jones FRS (born 24 March 1944) is a Welsh geneticist and from 1995 to 1999 and 2008 to June 2010 was Head of the Department of Genetics, Evolution and Environment at University College London.  He is also a television presenter and a prize-winning author on the subject of biology, especially evolution.  He is one of the contemporary popular writers on evolution. In 1996 his writing won him the Royal Society Michael Faraday Prize "for his numerous, wide ranging contributions to the public understanding of science in areas such as human evolution and variation, race, sex, inherited disease and genetic manipulation through his many broadcasts on radio and television, his lectures, popular science books, and his regular science column in The Daily Telegraph and contributions to other newspaper media".

Early life

Jones was born in Aberystwyth, Wales, to Thomas Gwilym Jones and Lydia Anne Jones, his parents having met as students at the University of Aberystwyth. Until he was about ten years old the family were accommodated alternately at his paternal grandparents' house in New Quay, Ceredigion, and his maternal grandparents' house near Aberystwyth.  Later the family moved to the Wirral, returning to Wales for their holidays.
Jones' paternal grandfather and great grandfather were both sea captains. Jones' father, a PhD chemist, worked on detergents such as Jif. At the age of 13 to 14 years old Jones was inspired to study biology by a school teacher.

Academic career

Jones was rejected by all the Welsh universities, so he applied to the University of Edinburgh for an undergraduate degree, which had a closing date seven days later and he was accepted onto a zoology undergraduate course.  He stayed on in Edinburgh to do research for a Doctor of Philosophy degree on the ecological genetics of Cepaea, a snail whose shell is of interest to evolutionary biologists.

Personal life

Jones' life partner since 1977 has been the award-winning American documentary maker Norma Percy, they married in 2013. (John) Stephen, Who's Who 2011, A & C Black, 2011; online edn, Oxford University Press, Dec 2010 ; online edn, Oct 2010 accessed 22 May 2011
Jones is a Distinguished Supporter of the British Humanist Association. He was awarded the second Irwin Prize for Secularists of the Year by the National Secular Society on 7 October 2006. On 1 January 2011 he became President of The Association for Science Education.

Claims and opinions

Human evolution

Jones' view that in humans "Natural selection has to some extent been repealed" [ref]
</ref>
dates back at least to 1991 and has been the focus of a number of newspaper reports and radio interviews.Jones, S. (2009). Steve Jones Enlightenment Lecture - Is Human Evolution Over?. YouTube
His views are largely based on his claim that reduced juvenile mortality, decreasing age of fathers, and decreased geographical isolation of populations in Western societies reduce evolution. Both the data supporting these assertions and his views of the way these factors influence evolution in populations have been extensively criticised by other academics.

Molecular studies repeatedly show selection in humans for cognitive and physical factors: For instance for resistance to cold A. M. Hancock, V. J. Clark, Y. Qian and A. Di Rienzo. (2011). Population genetic analysis of the uncoupling proteins supports a role for UCP3 in human cold resistance. Mol Biol Evol, 28, 601-14

Private education

In an interview on the BBC Radio 5 show '5 Live Breakfast' hosted by Nicky Campbell and Shelagh Fogarty on 13 January 2009, Jones described private schools as a "cancer on the education system".BBC Radio 5 Live: Breakfast, broadcast 13 January 2009
Jones cites private schools as one of the reasons that Britain remains as socially stratified as it is. Among the advantages in private schools compared to state schools, Jones listed smaller classroom sizes, highly trained teachers, better facilities, and coaching through university interviews.

Religion

Jones, along with 54 other public figures, signed an open letter published on 15 September 2010 in The Guardian, stating their opposition to Pope Benedict XVI's state visit to the UK. Jones has also stated that creationism is "anti-science" and criticised creationists such as Ken Ham. Jones suggested in a BBC Radio Ulster interview in 2006 that Creationists should be disallowed from being medical doctors because "all of its (Creationism's) claims fly in the face of the whole of science" and he further claimed that no serious biologist can believe in biblical creation. For Jones, 'evolution is the grammar of biology'.Steve Jones - Why creationism is wrong and evolution is right, Royal Society public lecture, April 2006

Global warming

In July 2011, Jones produced a report dealing with science reporting issues at the BBC. He was critical of the BBC for giving too much space and credence to maverick views on science,

Science and the media

Jones was commissioned by the BBC trust to write a report on the organisation's science reporting, which was published in July 2011. This was broadly supportive of the BBC's accuracy, impartiality and science coverage although it also made a number of suggestions. These included better interaction of staff across the organization on science topics and in particular an end to "false balance". Jones describes "attempts to give a place to anyone, however unqualified, who claims interest can make for false balance: to free publicity to marginal opinions and not to impartiality, but its opposite". The BBC's response to the recommendations was generally positive, several of which it immediately implemented.
Jones was the 1991 Reith Lecturer on BBC Radio, with a series entitled The Language of the Genes, the basis of his 1993 book of the same name.BBC website Historic Reith Lectures
He presented In the Blood, a six-part TV series on human genetics first broadcast in 1996, see book of same name in bibliography.

Selected publications

Books

Articles

Quotations






