[[Names of Korea]]

CATEGORIES: History of Korea, Korean culture, Country name etymology, Language comparison

There are various names of Korea in use today, derived from ancient kingdoms and dynasties.  The modern English name Korea is an exonym derived from the Goryeo period and is used by both North Korea and South Korea in international contexts. In the Korean language, the two Koreas use different terms to refer to the nominally unified nation: Chosŏn (조선) in North Korea and Hanguk (한국) in South Korea.

History

The earliest records of Korean history are written in Chinese characters called Hanja. Even after the invention of hangul, Koreans generally recorded native Korean names with Hanja, by translation of meaning, transliteration of sound, or even combinations of the two. Furthermore, the pronunciations of the same character are somewhat different in Korean and the various Korean dialects, and have changed over time.
For all these reasons, in addition to the sparse and sometimes contradictory written records, it is often difficult to determine the original meanings or pronunciations of ancient names.

Ancient history

=Joseon=

Until 108 BC, northern Korea and Manchuria were controlled by Gojoseon. In contemporaneous Chinese records, it was written as ), meaning "ancient", distinguishes it from the later Joseon Dynasty. The name Joseon is also now still used as the official name of Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Possibly the Chinese characters phonetically transcribed a native Korean name, perhaps pronounced something like "Jyusin".  Some speculate that it also corresponds to Chinese references to , siksin), although these latter names probably describe the ancestors of the Jurchen.pressian.asp?article_num=40050524180253&Section=
Other scholars believe 
An early attempt to translate these characters into English gave rise to the expression "The Land of the Morning Calm" for Korea, which parallels the expression "The Land of the Rising Sun" for Japan.  While the wording is fanciful, the essence of the translation is valid.

=Han=

Around the time of Gojoseon's fall, various chiefdoms in southern Korea grouped into confederacies, collectively called the Samhan (, "Three Han"). Han is a native Korean root for "leader" or "great", as in maripgan ("king", archaic), hanabi ("grandfather", archaic), and Hanbat ("Great Field", archaic name for Daejeon).  It may be related to the Mongol/Turkic title Khan.
Han was transliterated in Chinese records as 韓 (한, han), 幹 (간, gan), 刊 (간, gan), 干 (간, gan), or 漢 (한, han), but is unrelated to the Chinese people and states also called Han, which is a different character pronounced with a different tone. (See: Transliteration into Chinese characters).

=Goryeo=

Around the beginning of the Common Era, remnants of the fallen Gojoseon were re-united and expanded by the kingdom of Goguryeo, one of the Three Kingdoms of Korea.  It, too, was a native Korean word, probably pronounced something like "Guri", transcribed with various Hanja characters: 高句麗, 高勾麗, or 高駒麗 (고구려, Goguryeo), 高麗 (고려, Goryeo), 高離 (고리, Gori), or 句麗 (구려, Guryeo).  
The source native name is thought to be either *Guru ("walled city, castle, fortress"; attested in Chinese historical documents, but not in native Korean sources) or Gauri (가우리, "center"; cf. Middle Korean  and Standard Modern Korean gaunde 가운데).
The theory that Goguryeo referenced the founder's surname has been largely discredited (the royal surname changed from Hae to Go long after the state's founding).

Revival of the names

In the south, the Samhan resolved into the kingdoms of Baekje and Silla, constituting, with Goguryeo, the Three Kingdoms of Korea. In 668, Silla unified the three kingdoms, and reigned as Unified Silla until 935.
The succeeding dynasty called itself Goryeo (
In 1392, a new dynasty established by a military coup revived the name Joseon (). The hanja were often translated into English as "morning calm/sun", and Korea's English nickname became "The Land of the Morning Calm"; however, this interpretation is not often used in the Korean language, and is more familiar to Koreans as a back-translation from English. This nickname was coined by Percival Lowell in his book, "Choson, the Land of the Morning Calm," published in 1885.
In 1897, the nation was renamed Daehan Jeguk (

20th century

When Korean Empire came under Japanese rule in 1910, the name reverted to Joseon (officially, the Japanese pronunciation Chōsen).  During this period, many different groups outside of Korea fought for independence, the most notable being the Daehan Minguk Imsi Jeongbu ( country/nation' = 'republic' in East Asian languages).
Korea became independent after World War II (1945) and the country was then divided.
In 1948, the South adopted the provisional government's name of Daehan Minguk () literally the "Chosŏn Democratic People Republic", known in English as the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.

Current usage

East Asia

=Korea=

Today, South Koreans use Hanguk to refer to just South Korea or Korea as a whole, Namhan (; "The Republic of Korea").
North Koreans use Chosŏn, Namjosŏn (; "North Chosŏn") respectively. The term Bukchosŏn, however, is rarely used in the north, although it may be found in the Song of General Kim Il-sung.
In the tourist regions in North Korea and the official meetings between South Korea and North Korea, Namcheuk (), or "Northern Side" and "Southern Side", are used instead of Namhan and Bukhan.
The Korean language is called Hangugeo () in the North.

=Chinese-speaking areas=

In Chinese-speaking areas such as mainland China, Hong Kong, Macau and Taiwan, different naming conventions on several terms have been practiced according to their political proximity to whichever Korean government although there is a growing trend for convergence.
In the Chinese language, the Korean Peninsula is usually called Cháoxiǎn Bàndǎo () may be used to specifically refer to South Koreans.
Before establishing diplomatic relations with South Korea, the People's Republic of China tended to use the historic Korean name Cháoxiǎn () colloquially.
Taiwan, on the other hand, uses the South Korean names, referring to North Korean as Běihán ().
Similarly, general usage in Hong Kong and Macau has traditionally referred to North Korea as Bak Hon ( "South Han"). Under the influence of official usage, which is itself influenced by the official usage of the People's Republic of China government, the mainland practice of naming the two Koreas differently has become more common.
In the Chinese language used in Singapore and Malaysia, North Korea is usually called Cháoxiǎn ( "South Chosŏn") less often used.
The above usage pattern does not apply for Korea-derived words. For example, Korean ginseng is commonly called Gāolì shēn ().

=Japan=

In Japan, the name preferred by each of the two sides for itself is used, so that North Korea is called Kita-Chōsen ( "Hanguk").
However, North Koreans claim the name Kita-Chōsen is derogatory, as it only refers to the northern part of Korean Peninsula, whereas the government claims the sovereignty over its whole territory. From January 2003, this policy started to be abandoned by most newspapers and TV stations, on the basis that other nations with naming issues such as South Korea (ROK) and Taiwan (ROC) are not necessarily referred to by their official names.gally.html
For Korea as a whole,  Chōsen (, Korian) may be used because a reference to a Chōsen national may be interpreted as a North Korean national instead.
The Korean language is most frequently referred to in Japan as Kankokugo (, "our language") is sometimes used by Korean residents in Japan, as well as by KBS World Radio. This term, however, may not be suitable to ethnic Japanese whose "our language" is not necessarily Korean.
In Japan, those who moved to Japan usually maintain their distinctive cultural heritages (such as the Baekje-towns or Goguryeo-villages). Ethnic Korean residents of Japan have been collectively called Zainichi Chōsenjin ( "Hanguk People in Japan").

=Mongolia=

Mongols have their own word for Korea: Солонгос (Solongos). In Mongolian solongos means "rainbows". And another theory is probably means derived from Solon tribe living in Manchuria, a tribe culturally and ethnically related to the Korean people. North and South Korea are, accordingly, Хойд Солонгос (Hoid Solongos) and Өмнөд Солонгос (Ömnöd Solongos).

Other theory:

The name of either Silla or its capital Seora-beol was also widely used throughout Northeast Asia as the ethnonym for the people of Silla, appearing ... as Solgo or Solho in the language of the medieval Jurchens and their later descendants, the Manchus respectively.

=Vietnam=

In Vietnam, people call North Korea  in usage.

Outside East Asia

=English usage=

Both South and North Korea use the name "Korea" when referring to their countries in English.
As with other European languages, English historically had a variety of names for Korea derived from  Marco Polo's rendering of Goryeo, "Cauli" (see Revival of the names above).  These included Caule, Core, Cory, Caoli, and Corai as well as two spellings that survived into the 19th century, Corea and Korea.  (The modern spelling, "Korea", first appeared in late 17th century in the travel writings of the Dutch East India Company's Hendrick Hamel.)
Despite the coexistence of the spellings "Corea" and "Korea" in 19th-century English publications, some Koreans believe that Japan, around the time of the Japanese occupation, intentionally standardised the spelling on "Korea", so that "Japan" would appear first alphabetically. "Breaking the occupation spell: Some Koreans see putdown in letter change in name." Boston Globe. 18 September 2003. Retrieved 5 July 2008. Both major English-speaking governments of the time (i.e. the United States and the United Kingdom and its Empire) used both "Korea" and "Corea" until the early part of the colonial period. However, US minister and consul general to Korea, Horace Newton Allen, used "Korea" in his works published on the country.H N Allen, MD Korean Tales: Being a Collection of Stories Translated from the Korean Folk Lore. New York: G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1889. At the official Korean exhibit at the World's Columbian Exhibition in Chicago in 1893 a sign was posted by the Korean Commissioner saying of his country's name that "'Korea' and 'Corea' are both correct, but the former is preferred.""Korea in the White City: Korea at the World's Columbian Exhibition (1893)." Transactions of the Korea Branch of the Royal Asiatic Society 77 (2002), 27. This may have had something to do with Allen's influence, as he was heavily involved in the planning and participation of the Korean exhibit at Chicago.
A shift can also be seen in Korea itself, where postage stamps issued in 1884 used the name "Corean Post" in English, but those from 1885 and thereafter used "Korea" or "Korean Post".KSS-Korbase's Korean Stamp Issuance Schedules

File:Korea 1884 stamp - 10 mun.jpg|1884 stamp reading "Corean Post"
File:Korea 1885 stamp - 25 poon (bun).jpg|1885 stamp reading "Korea"
File:Korea 1900 stamp - 2 ri.jpg|1900 stamp reading "Imperial Korean Post"

By the first two decades of the 20th century, "Korea" began to be seen more frequently than "Corea" - a change that coincided with Japan's consolidation of its grip over the peninsula. Most evidence of a deliberate name change orchestrated by Japanese authorities is circumstantial, including a 1912 memoir by a Japanese colonial official that complained of the Koreans' tendency "to maintain they are an independent country by insisting on using a C to write their country's name." However, the spelling "Corea" was occasionally used even under full colonial rule and both it and "Korea" were largely eschewed in favour of the Japanese-derived "Chosen".

=Other languages=

European languages use variations of the name "Korea" for both North and South Korea. In general, Celtic and Romance languages spell it "Corea" (or variations) since "c" represents the /k/ sound in most Romance and Celtic orthographies. However, Germanic and Slavic languages largely use variants of "Korea" since, in many of these languages, "c" represents other sounds such as /ts/. In languages using other alphabets such as Russian (Cyrillic), variations phonetically similar to "Korea" are also used for example the Russian name for Korea is Корея, romanization Koreya. Outside of Europe, most languages also use variants of "Korea", often adopted to local orthographies. "Korea" in the Jurchen Jin's national language (Jurchen) is "Sogo".

Koreans abroad

Emigrants who moved to Russia and Central Asia call themselves Goryeoin or Koryo-saram (; literally "person or people of Goryeo"), or корейцы in Russian. Many Goryeoin are living in the CIS, including an estimated 106,852 in Russia, 22,000 in Uzbekistan, 20,000 in Kyrgyzstan, 17,460 in Kazakhstan, 8,669 in Ukraine, 2,000 in Belarus, 350 in Moldova, 250 in Georgia, 100 in Azerbaijan, and 30 in Armenia.
South Korean expatriates living in the United States will refer to themselves as jaemi gyopo (, or "temporary residents in America"), or sometimes simply "gyopo" for short.

Sobriquets for Korea

In traditional Korean culture, as well as in the cultural tradition of East Asia, the land of Korea has assumed a number of sobriquets over the centuries, including:



Notes


