[[International Telecommunication Union]]

CATEGORIES: International Telecommunication Union, Organizations established in 1865, Digital divide, Organisations based in Geneva, Telecommunications for development, United Nations Development Group, United Nations specialized agencies, Radio organizations, Telecommunications organizations, Internet governance organizations

The International Telecommunication Union (ITU), originally the International Telegraph Union (), is a specialized agency of the United Nations that is responsible for issues that concern information and communication technologies.
ITU also organizes worldwide and regional exhibitions and forums, such as ITU TELECOM WORLD, bringing together representatives of government and the telecommunications and ICT industry to exchange ideas, knowledge and technology.
The ITU is active in areas including broadband Internet, latest-generation wireless technologies, aeronautical and maritime navigation, radio astronomy, satellite-based meteorology, convergence in fixed-mobile phone, Internet access, data, voice, TV broadcasting, and next-generation networks.
ITU, based in Geneva, Switzerland, is a member of the United Nations Development Group. Its membership includes 193 Member States and around 700 Sector Members and Associates.

ITU sectors

The ITU comprises three sectors, each managing a different aspect of the matters handled by the Union, as well as ITU Telecom:
A permanent General Secretariat, headed by the Secretary General, manages the day-to-day work of the Union and its sectors.

Legal framework of ITU

The basic texts of the ITU

Leadership

The ITU is headed by a Secretary-General, who is elected to a four-year term by the member states at the ITU Plenipotentiary Conference.
At the 17th ITU Plenipotentiary Conference (2006) in Antalya, Turkey, the ITU's member states elected Dr Hamadoun Touré of Mali as Secretary-General of the Union.

Directors and Secretaries-General of ITU

Membership

Membership of ITU is open to governments, which may join the Union as Member States, as well as to private organizations like carriers, equipment manufacturers, funding bodies, research and development organizations and international and regional telecommunication organizations, which can join ITU as non-voting Sector Members.
There are 193 member states of the ITU, which includes 192 UN member states (all except Palau) and the Vatican City. The most recent member state to join the ITU is South Sudan, which became a member on 14 July 2011.New Country, New Number – Country code 211 officially assigned to South Sudan ITU Pressroom, 14 July 2011
The Republic of China (Taiwan) was blocked from membership

World Summit on the Information Society

The ITU was the lead organizing agency of the World Summit on the Information Society (WSIS).

World Conference on International Telecommunications 2012 (WCIT-12)

In December 2012, the ITU facilitated The World Conference on International Telecommunications 2012 (WCIT-12) in Dubai.  WCIT-12 was a treaty-level conference to address International Telecommunications Regulations: international rules for telecommunications, including international tariffs.
In August 2012, ITU called for a public consultation on a draft document ahead of the conference. It is claimed the proposal would allow government restriction or blocking of information disseminated via the internet and create a global regime of monitoring internet communications – including the demand that those who send and receive information identify themselves. It would also allow governments to shut down the internet if there is the belief that it may interfere in the internal affairs of other states or that information of a sensitive nature might be shared.
Telecommunications ministers from 193 countries attended the conference in Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

Changes to International Telecommunication Regulations

The current regulatory structure was based on voice telecommunications, when the Internet was still in its infancy.  As the Internet has grown, organizations such as ICANN have come into existence to manage key resources such as Internet addresses and Domain Names.  Some outside the United States believe that the United States exerts too much influence over the governance of the Internet.

Proposed Changes to the Treaty And Concerns

Current proposals look to take into account the prevalence of data communications.  Proposals under consideration would establish regulatory oversight by the U.N. over security, fraud, traffic accounting as well as traffic flow, management of Internet Domain Names and IP addresses, and other aspects of the Internet that are currently governed either by community-based approaches such as Regional Internet Registries, ICANN, or largely national regulatory frameworks. International Telecommunication Regulations The move by the ITU and some countries has alarmed many within the United States and within the Internet community. Indeed some European telecommunication services have proposed a so-called "sender pays" model that would require sources of Internet traffic to pay destinations, similar to the way funds are transferred between countries using the telephone.{{cite web|last=McCullagh |first=Declan |url= |title=CNET:U.N. could tax U.S.-based Web sites, leaked docs showThe WCIT-12 activity has been attacked by Google, which has characterized it as a threat to the "..."
On 22 November 2012, the European Parliament passed a resolution urging member states to prevent ITU WCIT-12 activity that would "negatively impact the internet, its architecture, operations, content and security, business relations, internet governance and the free flow of information online". The resolution asserted that "the ITU ... is not the appropriate body to assert regulatory authority over the internet".
On 5 December 2012, the lower chamber of the United States Congress passed a resolution opposing U.N. governance of the Internet by a rare unanimous 397–0 vote. The resolution warned that "... proposals have been put forward for consideration at the WCIT-12 that would fundamentally alter the governance and operation of the Internet ... and would attempt to justify increased government control over the Internet ...", and stated that the policy of the United States is "... to promote a global Internet free from government control and preserve and advance the successful Multistakeholder Model that governs the Internet today." The same resolution had previously been passed unanimously by the upper chamber of the Congress in September.
On 14 December 2012, an amended version of the Regulations was signed by 89 of the 152 countries. Countries that did not sign included the United States, Japan, Canada, Germany, New Zealand, India and the United Kingdom. The Head of the U.S. Delegation, Terry Kramer, said "We cannot support a treaty that is not supportive of the multistakeholder model of Internet governance".
 The disagreement appeared to be over some language in the revised ITRs referring to ITU roles in addressing unsolicited bulk communications, network security, and a resolution on Internet governance that called for government participation in Internet topics at various ITU forums. (2012-12-14) On the Results at the WCIT. Public Knowledge. Retrieved on 2014-04-28.  Despite the significant number countries not signing, the ITU organisation came out with a press release: "New global telecoms treaty agreed in Dubai".   

WCIT-12 Conference Participation

The conference itself was managed by the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). While certain parts of civil society and industry were able to advise and observe, active participation was restricted to member states.








