[[Guiana Space Centre]]

CATEGORIES: Guiana Space Centre, European Space Agency, Spaceports, Buildings and structures in French Guiana, Rocket launch sites, Space program of France

The Guiana Space Centre or, more commonly, Centre spatial guyanais (CSG) is a French and European spaceport near Kourou in French Guiana. Operational since 1968, it is particularly suitable as a location for a spaceport as it fulfills the two major geographical requirements of such a site: 
The European Space Agency, the French space agency CNES (National Centre for Space Studies), and the commercial Arianespace company conduct launches from Kourou. This is the spaceport used by the ESA to send supplies to the International Space Station using the Automated Transfer Vehicle.
The location was selected in 1964 to become the spaceport of France.
When the European Space Agency (ESA) was founded in 1975, France offered to share Kourou with ESA."Installation of the Guiana Space Center in French Guiana". Guiana Space Centre official website"Europe's Spaceport". European Space Agency official website Commercial launches are bought also by non-European companies. ESA pays two thirds of the spaceport's annual budget and has also financed the upgrades made during the development of the Ariane launchers.

Facilities

Kourou is located approximately  The proximity to the equator also makes maneuvering satellites for geosynchronous orbits simpler and less costly.
The near-equatorial launch location provides an advantage for launches to low-inclination (or geostationary) Earth orbits compared to launches from spaceports at higher latitude.  For example, the eastward boost provided by the Earth's rotation is about  at the United States east coast Cape Canaveral and Kennedy Space Center spaceports which are at 28°27′N latitude in Florida.[ref]
[/ref]

ELV (CECLES/ELA-1)

Originally built in the 1960s under the name of CECLES (
The pad was demolished, and subsequently rebuilt as the first launch complex for Ariane rockets. Renamed ELA (later redesignated ELA 1), it was used for Ariane 1 and Ariane 2 and 3 launches until being retired in 1989.
It was then again refurbished for the Vega (rocket) with the first launch performed on 13 February 2012.

ELA 2

The ELA 2 pad (

ELA 3

As of 2008, ELA 3 (

ELS / Soyuz at CSG

ESA has built ELS ( for launching Russian-built Soyuz-2 rockets. The first Soyuz launch from ELS was postponed several times, but launched on October 21, 2011.SpaceflightNow's VS01 flight status page
ELS is located on the territory of Sinnamary commune,  Le Port Spatial de l'Europe (CNES)
The rocket assembly procedures will differ from ones used at Baikonur. Traditionally, the Soyuz gets fully assembled in horizontal position, then transported to a launch pad and erected for launch. In ELS the rocket solely is assembled in horizontal position, then transported and erected. A spacecraft is then transported to the pad separately and attached to the rocket. To protect from dust and wind, the launch pad will have a closed gantry. The gantry will be able to move away from the pad for launch.Soyuz User's Manual
The ELS project is being co-funded by Arianespace, ESA, and the European Union, with CNES being the prime contractor. The project has a projected cost of approximately €320 million, where €120 million are allocated for modernizing the Soyuz vehicle.
In November 2007, reports
In February 2009, ESA reported from Samara, Russia that the launchers destined for the ELS were being built.
On May 21, 2009, Russian news agency ITAR-TASS reported that the first two Soyuz-ST to be launched at ELS have been built, tested and prepared for delivery to ELS.
On August 25, 2009, the general director of the Progress design bureau Alexander Kirilin said that the first launch of the Soyuz-ST from the Kourou space center was postponed for the beginning of April 2010. He informed that the first three rockets had been built and would be shipped on November 1, 2009 by sea.
On September 13, 2010, Spaceflight Now reported that after several delays in the construction of a mobile gantry the launch pad had been finished, and the first flight of the Soyuz is expected to occur in early 2011.
On January 14, 2011, BBC reported that the Soyuz launch complex will have its qualification review in April with the expectation for the first Soyuz to lift-off sometime between 15 August and 15 September 2011.
On July 1, 2011, Space News reported that after clearance Qualification Committee a launch October 20, 2011 seems possible.
On October 21, 2011, two Galileo IOV-1 & IOV-2 satellites were launched using a Soyuz-ST rocket, in the "first Russian Soyuz vehicle ever launched from Europe's Spaceport in French Guiana."[ref]
[/ref]
On December 17, 2011, another Soyuz was launched from Kourou carrying the French space agency's Pleiades 1 A Earth imaging satellite, four ELISA electronic intelligence satellites, and the SSOT remote sensing satellite for the Chilean military.
On December 1, 2012, Pleiade 1 B, twin of the above, was put into orbit by yet another Soyuz.

Final assembly building

Astrium assembles each Ariane 5 launcher in the Launcher Integration Building. The vehicle is then delivered to the Final Assembly Building for payload integration by Arianespace.

Launch safety

Fire safety is ensured by a detachment of the Paris Fire Brigade. Security around the base is ensured by French Gendarmerie forces, assisted by the 3rd Foreign Infantry Regiment of the French Foreign Legion.
Before and during launch windows, CSG facility security is significantly enhanced by anti-personnel and anti-aircraft measures, the exact configurations of which are classified by the French military. All entrants to the launch complex are also subject to checks for proof of permission to enter the facility.
The Guiana Space Centre (as per CNES) also holds the Îles du Salut, a former penal colony including the infamous Devil's Island. Now a tourist site, the islands are under the launching trajectory for geosynchronous orbit and have to be evacuated during launches.

Early launches

Recent launches






