[[John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan]]

CATEGORIES: 1934 births, 1970s missing person cases, Coldstream Guards officers, Earls in the Peerage of Ireland, English murderers, Fugitives wanted by the United Kingdom, Missing person cases in the United Kingdom, Murder in 1974, Murder in London, People declared dead in absentia, People educated at Eton College, Year of death uncertain

Richard John Bingham, 7th Earl of Lucan (born 18 December 1934), popularly known as Lord Lucan, a British peer and suspected murderer, disappeared without trace early on 8 November 1974.  He was born into an Anglo-Irish aristocratic family in Marylebone, the elder son of The 6th Earl of Lucan and his wife, Kaitlin Elizabeth Anne Dawson.  Evacuated during the Second World War, he returned to study at Eton and from 1953 to 1955 served with the Coldstream Guards in West Germany.  Lord Lucan developed a taste for gambling and, skilled at backgammon and bridge, became an early member of the Clermont gaming club.  Although his losses often outweighed his winnings, he left his job at a London-based merchant bank and became a professional gambler. He was known as Lord Bingham from April 1949 until January 1964.
Once considered for the role of James Bond, Lucan was a charismatic man with expensive tastes; he raced power boats and drove an Aston Martin. In 1963 he married Veronica Duncan, who bore him three children.  When the marriage collapsed late in 1972, he moved out of the family home at 46 Lower Belgrave Street in London, to a property nearby.  A bitter custody battle ensued, which Lucan lost.  He began to spy on his wife and record their telephone conversations, apparently obsessed with regaining custody of the children.  This fixation, combined with his gambling losses, had a dramatic effect on his general demeanour and personal finances.
On the evening of 7 November 1974, the children's nanny, Sandra Rivett, was bludgeoned to death in the basement of the Lucan family home.  Lady Lucan was also attacked; she later identified Lucan as her assailant.  As the police began their murder investigation he telephoned his mother, asking her to collect the children, and then drove a borrowed Ford Corsair to a friend's house in Uckfield, Sussex.  Hours later, he left the property and was never seen again.  The Corsair was later found abandoned in Newhaven, its interior stained with blood and its boot containing a piece of bandaged lead pipe similar to one found at the crime scene.  A warrant for his arrest was issued a few days later and in his absence, the inquest into Rivett's death named him as her murderer, the last occasion in Britain a coroner's court was allowed to make such a determination.
Lucan's fate remains a fascinating mystery for the British public.  Hundreds of reports of his presence in various countries around the world have been made since Rivett's murder, although none have been substantiated.  Despite a police investigation and huge press interest, Lucan has not been found and is presumed dead.

Early life and education

Richard John Bingham was born on 18 December 1934 at 19 Bentinck Street, Marylebone, London, the second child and elder son of George Bingham, 6th Earl of Lucan, an Anglo-Irish peer, and his wife Kaitlin Elizabeth Anne Dawson.  A blood clot found in her lung forced his mother to remain in a nursing home, so John, as he became known, was initially cared for by the family's nurserymaid.  Aged three years, he attended a pre-prep school in Tite Street with his elder sister, Jane, but in 1939, with war approaching, the two were evacuated to Wales.  The following year, joined by their younger siblings, Sally and Hugh, the Lucan children travelled to Toronto, moving shortly thereafter to Mount Kisco, New York.  They stayed for five years with multi-millionairess Marcia Brady Tucker; John was enrolled at The Harvey School and spent summer holidays away from his siblings at a summer camp in the Adirondack Mountains.
While in the U.S., John and his siblings lived in grandeur and wanted for nothing, but on their return to England in February 1945 they were faced with the stark realities of wartime Britain.  Rationing was in effect, their former home on Cheyne Walk had been bombed and the house at 22 Eaton Square had had its windows blown out.  Despite the family's rich ancestry,
At Eton,

Career

On leaving the army in 1955 Lucan joined a London-based merchant bank, William Brandt's Sons and Co, on an annual salary of £500.  In 1960 he met Stephen Raphael, a wealthy stockbroker and skilled backgammon player.
Lucan left Brandt's in about 1960, shortly after he won £26,000 playing chemin de fer.

Personal life

Marriage

Lucan met his future wife, Veronica Duncan, early in 1963.
News of their engagement appeared in the Times and Telegraph newspapers on 14 October 1963,
The earl's daily routine consisted of breakfast at 9:00 am, coffee, dealing with the morning's letters, reading the newspapers and playing the piano.  He sometimes jogged in the park and, while he had him, took his Doberman Pinscher for walks.  Lunch at the Clermont was followed by afternoon games of backgammon.  Returning home to change into evening attire, the earl typically spent the remainder of the day at the Clermont, gambling into the early hours, watched sometimes by Veronica.
As a professional gambler he was undoubtedly a skilled player, once rated amongst the world's top ten backgammon competitors.  He won the St James's Club tournament and was Champion of the West Coast of America.  He gained the moniker "Lucky" Lucan, but as his losses easily outweighed his winnings, in reality he was anything but lucky.

Separation

Some months later Lucan moved again, to a larger rented flat in nearby Elizabeth Street.  Despite an early attempt by his wife at reconciliation, by that point all Lucan wanted from the marriage was custody of his children.  In an effort to demonstrate that Veronica was unfit to look after them, he began to spy on his family (his car was regularly seen parked in Lower Belgrave Street), later employing private investigators to perform the same task.  Lucan also canvassed doctors, who explained that his wife had not "gone mad", but was suffering from depression and anxiety.
Sawicka's time at the Lucan household ended late in March 1973.  While with two of the children near Grosvenor Place, she was confronted by Lucan and two private detectives.  They told her that the children had been made wards of court and that she must release them into his custody, which she did.  Frances was collected from school later in the day.
Thus began a bitter dispute between the two, involving many of their friends and Veronica's own sister.

Gambling

Losing the court case proved devastating for Lucan.  It had cost him an estimated £20,000 and by late 1974 his financial position was dire.  As he drank more heavily and started chain-smoking, his friends began to worry.
Despite these problems, from late October 1974 his demeanour appeared to change for the better.  His best man, John Wilbraham, remarked that Lucan's apparent obsession over regaining his children had diminished.  While having dinner with his mother he cast aside talk of his family problems and turned instead to politics.  On 6 November he met his uncle John, apparently in good spirits.
At 4:00 pm Lucan called at a chemist's on Lower Belgrave Street, close to Veronica's home, and asked the pharmacist there to identify a small capsule.  It turned out to be Limbitrol 5, a drug for the treatment of nervous disorders.  Lucan had apparently made several similar visits since he separated from his wife, although he never told the pharmacist where he got the drugs.  At 4:45 pm he called a friend, literary agent Michael Hicks-Beach, and between 6:30 pm and 7:00 pm met with him at his flat on Elizabeth Street.  Lucan wanted his help with an article on gambling he had been asked to write for an Oxford University magazine.  He drove Hicks-Beach home for about 8:00 pm, not in his Mercedes-Benz, but in "an old, dark and scruffy Ford", possibly the Ford Corsair he borrowed from Michael Stoop several weeks earlier.  At 8:30 pm he called the Clermont to check on a reservation for dinner with Greville Howard and friends.  Howard had called him at 5:15 pm and asked if he wished to come to the theatre, but Lucan had declined and made the alternative suggestion to meet at the Clermont at 11:00 pm.  He failed to arrive and did not answer his telephone when called.

Murder

Sandra Rivett

Sandra Eleanor Rivett was born on 16 September 1945, the third child of Albert and Eunice Hensby.  The family emigrated to Australia when she was two years old, but returned in 1955.  Sandra was a popular child, described at school as "intelligent, although she does not excel academically".
Sandra normally went out with her boyfriend, John Hankins, on Thursday nights, but had decided to change her night off and see him the previous day.  The two last spoke on the telephone at about 8:00 pm on 7 November.
Lucan may have called at the Chester Square home of Madelaine Florman (mother of one of Frances's schoolfriends) sometime between 10:00 pm and 10:30 pm.  Alone in the house, Florman ignored the door, but shortly afterwards she received an incoherent telephone call and put the receiver down.

Investigation

By the time Detective Chief Superintendent Roy Ranson arrived at Lower Belgrave Street early on Friday 8 November, the divisional surgeon had pronounced Sandra Rivett dead and forensic officers and photographers had been called to the property.  Other than the front door, which the first two officers on the scene had kicked in, there was no sign of a forced entry.  A blood-stained towel was found in Veronica's first-floor bedroom.  The area around the top of the basement staircase was heavily blood-stained.  A blood-stained lead pipe lay on the floor.  Pictures hanging from the staircase walls were askew and a metal banister rail was damaged.  At the foot of the stairs, two cups and saucers lay in a pool of blood.  Rivett's arm protruded from the canvas sack, which lay in a slowly expanding pool of blood.  The light fitting at the bottom of the stairs was missing its bulb; one was noted nearby, on a chair.  Blood was also found on various leaves in the adjoining rear garden.
Officers also searched 5 Eaton Row, into which Lucan had moved early in 1973, and after interviewing his mother (who had called to take the children to her home in St John's Wood), his last address at 72a Elizabeth Street.  Nothing untoward was found, although on the bed, a suit and shirt lay alongside a book on Greek shipping millionaires, and Lucan's wallet, car keys, money, driving licence, handkerchief and spectacles were on a bedside table.
After removing her corpse from the canvas sack and beginning the post mortem examination, pathologist Keith Simpson told Ranson he was certain that Rivett had been killed before her body was placed in the sack, and that in his opinion the lead pipe found at the scene could be the murder weapon.
Hours earlier, Lucan had again called his mother, at about 12:30 am.  He told her that he would be in touch later that day, but declined to speak with the police constable who had accompanied her to her flat; instead, he said he would call the police later that morning.


 
 When questioned on why she did not immediately inform the police of Lucan's presence at their home, Susan Maxwell-Scott claimed to have not seen any newspapers or television news, or listened to any radio broadcasts that might have warned her of the importance of his visit.
The Ford Corsair Lucan had been seen driving and whose details had the previous day been circulated across the country, was found on Sunday in Norman Road, Newhaven, about 
Ranson suspected a suicide, but a thorough search of Newhaven Downs was judged impossible.  A partial search was made, using tracker dogs, although all that was found were the skeletal remains of a judge who had disappeared years earlier.  Police divers searched the harbour,  A warrant for Lucan's arrest, to answer charges of murdering Sandra Rivett, and attempting to murder his wife, was issued on Tuesday 12 November 1974.  Descriptions of his appearance, already issued to police forces across the UK, were then issued to Interpol.

Forensics

The forensic examination of the lead pipes found at the murder scene and in the Corsair's boot revealed traces of blood on the pipe from 46 Lower Belgrave Street.  This proved to be a mixture of Lady Lucan's (blood group A) and Sandra Rivett's (B) blood.  Hair belonging to Veronica Lucan was also found on that pipe, but none belonging to Sandra Rivett.  The pipe found inside the car had neither blood nor hair on it.  Home Office scientists were unable to prove conclusively that both pipes were cut from the same, longer, piece of piping, although they thought it likely.  The tape wrapped around both was similar, but those too could not be conclusively linked.  The letters written to Bill Shand-Kydd were stained with blood considered to be from both women.  The letter to Michael Stoop had no blood on it, but it was later proven that the paper it was written on had been torn from a writing pad found in the Corsair's boot.
An examination of the blood stains found inside 46 Lower Belgrave Street demonstrated that Rivett had been attacked in the basement kitchen, while Lady Lucan had been attacked at the top of the basement stairs.  The bloodstains found inside the Ford Corsair were of the AB blood group; the report concluded that this might have been a mixture of blood from both women.  Hair similar to Lady Lucan's was also found inside the car.

Media reaction

By the afternoon of Friday 8 November, the newspapers' early editions carried photographs of the Lucans across their front pages, accompanied by headlines like "
Rivett's case made headlines around the world.

Inquest

The inquest into Sandra Rivett's death opened on 13 November 1974 and was led by the Coroner for Inner West London, Dr Gavin Thurston.  Two witnesses were called to the courtroom, which was packed with reporters; Roger Rivett, who confirmed that he had identified his wife's body, and the pathologist, Keith Simpson, who confirmed that Rivett had died from being hit on the head with a blunt instrument.  At Ranson's request, the hearing was then adjourned.  Further adjournments were made on 11 December and 10 March 1975, before a full inquest was scheduled for 16 June.
The hearing began with the swearing-in of the jury and introductions from various legal representatives, including a lawyer hired for Lucan by his mother.  Thurston introduced the jury to the case and explained their duties.
The landlord of "The Plumbers Arms" described how Lady Lucan had entered his bar covered "head to toe in blood" before she fell into "a state of shock".

Once the hearing had ended, Thurston made a summary of the evidence presented and told the jury their options.  At 11:45 am, their foreman announced "Murder by Lord Lucan".
Rivett's body, which had been held for several weeks following the murder, was released to her family and cremated at Croydon crematorium on 18 December 1974.  Lady Lucan did not attend, a police spokesman citing her desire not to upset the family.

Lucan's defence

Lucan's friends and family were critical of the inquest, which they felt offered a one-sided view of events.  His mother told reporters that it did not serve "any useful purpose at all".
In contrast to his defenders, the national press were almost unanimous in their condemnation of Lucan.  Their leader-writers ignored the threat of libel and identified him as Rivett's killer.

Bankruptcy and estate

As Lucan's bankruptcy proceeded, in August 1975 his creditors were informed that the missing earl had unsecured debts of £45,000 and preferential liabilities for £1,326.  His assets were estimated at £22,632.

Ultimate fate and reported sightings

The last confirmed sighting of Lucan was at about 1:15 am on 8 November 1974 as he exited the driveway of the Maxwell-Scott property, in his friend's Ford Corsair.  Since then, his whereabouts and ultimate fate remain a mystery.  Detective Chief Superintendent Roy Ranson initially claimed that Lucan had "done the honourable thing" and "fallen on his own sword", a view publicly repeated by many of Lucan's friends,
Ranson later changed his view, explaining that he considered it more likely that suicide was far from Lucan's thoughts, that a rumoured drowning at sea was implausible and that the earl had moved to southern Africa.
Lucan's disappearance has captivated the public's imagination for decades, with thousands of sightings reported across the world.
More recently, responding to claims that the two eldest Lucan children were sent to Gabon in the early 1980s so that their father might secretly watch them "from a distance", George Bingham denied ever visiting the country.  He told the Daily Mirror that he had "spent time in Namibia and South Africa" and that he has "a sworn affidavit from the Metropolitan Police and every member of my family, mother excepted, attesting to their belief that my father is dead."





Further reading




