[[Derek Jeter]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, 2006 World Baseball Classic players, 2009 World Baseball Classic players, African-American people, African-American baseball players, Albany-Colonie Yankees players, American businesspeople, American League All-Stars, American people of German descent, American people of Irish descent, Baseball players from Michigan, Baseball players from New Jersey, Columbus Clippers players, Gold Glove Award winners, Gulf Coast Yankees players, Greensboro Hornets players, Living people, Major League Baseball All-Star Game MVPs, Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award winners, Major League Baseball shortstops, Major League Baseball World Series Most Valuable Player award winners, New York Yankees players, People from Kalamazoo, Michigan, People from Marlboro Township, New Jersey, People from Pequannock Township, New Jersey, Sportspeople from New York City, People from North Arlington, New Jersey, Tampa Yankees players, Trenton Thunder players, Scranton/Wilkes-Barre RailRiders players

Derek Sanderson Jeter (; born June 26, 1974) is an American baseball shortstop who has played 19 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the New York Yankees. A five-time World Series champion, Jeter is regarded as a central figure of the Yankees during their success of the late 1990s and early 2000s due to his hitting ability, baserunning, fielding, and leadership. He is the Yankees' all-time career leader in hits (3,337), games played (2,621), stolen bases (348), and at bats (10,686). His accolades include thirteen All-Star selections, five Gold Glove Awards, five Silver Slugger Awards, two Hank Aaron Awards, and a Roberto Clemente Award. Jeter is the all-time MLB leader in hits by a shortstop, and the 28th player to reach 3,000 hits.
The Yankees drafted Jeter out of high school in 1992, and he debuted in the major leagues in 1995. The following year, he became the Yankees' starting shortstop, won the Rookie of the Year Award, and helped the team win the 1996 World Series. Jeter continued to contribute during the team's championship seasons of 1998–2000; he finished third in voting for the American League (AL) Most Valuable Player (MVP) Award in 1998, recorded multiple career-high numbers in 1999, and won both the All-Star Game MVP and World Series MVP Awards in 2000. He has consistently placed among the AL leaders in hits and runs scored for the past ten years, and since 2003 has served as the Yankees' team captain. Throughout his career, Jeter has contributed reliably to the Yankees' franchise successes. He holds many postseason records, and has a .351 batting average in the World Series. Jeter has earned the titles of "Captain Clutch" and "Mr. November" due to his postseason heroics.
Jeter has been one of the most heavily marketed athletes of his generation and is involved in several product endorsements. His personal life and relationships with celebrities have drawn the attention of the media throughout his career. Teammates and opponents alike regard Jeter as a consummate professional and one of the best players of his generation.New York Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter's greatness goes beyond the numbers - ESPN The Magazine - ESPN

Early life

Jeter was born  in Pequannock Township, New Jersey, on June 26, 1974. His father, Sanderson Charles Jeter, Ph.D., a substance abuse counselor, is African American; his mother, Dorothy, an accountant, is of Irish and German descent.
The Jeters lived in New Jersey until Derek was four years old, at which point they moved to Kalamazoo, Michigan.

High school

Jeter attended Kalamazoo Central High School, where he played baseball and basketball. Jeter posted high batting averages for the school's baseball team; he batted .557 in his sophomore year and .508 as a junior. In his senior year, he batted .508 and compiled 23 runs batted in (RBI), 21 walks, four home runs, a .637 on-base percentage (OBP), a .831 slugging percentage (SLG), 12 stolen bases (in 12 attempts), and only one strikeout.
Jeter received several honors after his senior season. These included an All-State honorable mention, distinguishing him as one of the best high school baseball players in Michigan, the Kalamazoo Area B'nai B'rith Award for Scholar Athlete, the 1992 High School Player of the Year Award from the American Baseball Coaches Association, the 1992 Gatorade High School Player of the Year award, and USA Today Jeter's baseball talents drew the attention of the University of Michigan, which offered him a baseball scholarship to attend and play college baseball for the Michigan Wolverines baseball team.

Professional career

Draft

As a scout for the Houston Astros, Hal Newhouser evaluated Jeter extensively prior to the 1992 Major League Baseball (MLB) Draft. The Astros held the first overall pick in the draft, and Newhouser, convinced that Jeter would anchor a winning team, lobbied team management to select Jeter.
The Yankees, who selected sixth, also rated Jeter highly.

Minor leagues (1992–1995)

Jeter played four seasons in minor league baseball, then known as the National Association of Professional Baseball Leagues (NAPBL). Jeter began the 1992 season with the Gulf Coast Yankees of the Rookie-level Gulf Coast League, based in Tampa, Florida. In his first professional game, Jeter failed to get a hit in seven at-bats, going 0-for-7, while striking out five times. Jeter continued to struggle during the rest of the season, batting .202 in 47 games. Manager Gary Denbo benched Jeter in the season's final game to ensure his average would not drop below .200, known in baseball as the Mendoza Line. Frustrated by his lack of success and homesick, Jeter accrued $400-per-month phone bills from daily calls to his parents.
The Yankees promoted Jeter to the Greensboro Hornets of the Class A South Atlantic League (SAL) to allow him the opportunity to accrue more at-bats. He batted .247 in his first 11 games with Greensboro, and struggled defensively, making nine errors in 48 chances. Weighing 
Jeter spent the next offseason focusing on improving his fielding. Baseball America rated Jeter among the top 100 prospects in baseball prior to the 1993 season, ranking him 44th.
Coming off his strong 1993 season, Baseball America rated Jeter as the 16th-best prospect in baseball. Jeter played for the Tampa Yankees of the Class A-Advanced Florida State League (FSL), the Albany-Colonie Yankees of the Class AA Eastern League, and the Columbus Clippers of the Class AAA International League during the 1994 season, combining to hit .344 with five home runs, 68 RBI, and steal 50 bases across the three levels.  He was honored with the Minor League Player of the Year Award by Baseball America, The Sporting News, USA Today, and Topps/NAPBL. He was also named the most valuable player of the FSL.
Considered the fourth-best prospect in baseball by Baseball America heading into the 1995 season, the Yankees projected Jeter as their starting shortstop. However, he suffered mild inflammation in his right shoulder in the Arizona Fall League after the conclusion of the 1994 regular season. As a precaution, the Yankees signed Tony Fernández to a two-year contract. With Fernández the starting shortstop, the Yankees assigned Jeter to Class AAA. During 1994–95 Major League Baseball strike, Gene Michael, the Yankees' general manager, offered Jeter the opportunity to work out for the MLB team with replacement players in spring training prior to the 1995 season. Jeter denied receiving the offer, and did not cross the picket line.

Major leagues (1995–present)

=1995–1998=

Early in the 1995 season, Fernández and infielder Pat Kelly were injured. Consequently, Jeter made his MLB debut on May 29, 1995.
After Fernández batted a disappointing .245 and appeared in only 108 games due to injuries that season, newly hired Yankees manager Joe Torre asserted that Jeter would be the starting shortstop for the 1996 season,
Rated the sixth-best prospect in baseball by Baseball America heading into the 1996 season, Jeter started on Opening Day, the first Yankee rookie to start as shortstop for the team since Tom Tresh in 1962.
The Yankees reached the 1996 postseason, and Torre batted Jeter in the leadoff spot in the lineup due to his strong performance.
Following his Rookie of the Year campaign, Jeter headlined a group considered the "new crop" of shortstops, along with Alex Rodriguez and Nomar Garciaparra, as the careers of older shortstops such as Cal Ripken, Jr., Barry Larkin, Ozzie Smith and Alan Trammell were concluding.
Prior to the 1997 season, Jeter and the Yankees agreed on a $540,000 contract with performance bonuses.
Jeter earned $750,000 for the 1998 season.

=1999–2002=

Eligible for salary arbitration for the first time before the 1999 season, the arbitrator awarded Jeter a $5 million salary.
During the 1999–2000 offseason, the Yankees negotiated with Jeter, tentatively agreeing to a seven-year, $118.5 million  contract. Steinbrenner did not want set a record for the largest contract, and delayed a response while Juan González and the Detroit Tigers negotiated on a reported eight-year, $143 million contract extension. When that agreement fell through, so did Jeter's tentative deal. To avoid arbitration, Jeter and the Yankees agreed to a one-year deal worth $10 million.
Jeter batted a team-best .339 in the 2000 regular season and added 15 home runs, 73 RBI, 119 runs scored, and 22 stolen bases. In the 2000 MLB All-Star Game, he recorded three hits, including a two-run single that gave his team the lead and victory. The performance earned him the All-Star Game MVP Award, the first time a Yankee won the award.
With one year remaining until he would become eligible for free agency, Jeter signed a ten-year, $189 million contract before the 2001 season to remain with the Yankees. Rodriguez signed a ten-year, $252 million contract with the Texas Rangers earlier in the offseason, setting the market for Jeter's negotiations. Jeter became the second-highest-paid athlete across all team sports and auto racing, trailing only Rodriguez. The $18.9 million average annual value of Jeter's contract was the third-highest in baseball, behind only Rodriguez ($25.2 million) and Manny Ramirez ($20 million).
In 2001, Jeter posted another strong season, batting .311 with 21 home runs, 74 RBI, 110 runs scored, and 27 stolen bases, making his fourth All-Star appearance. Jeter made a notable defensive assist in Game 3 of the 2001 American League Division Series against the Oakland Athletics. With Jeremy Giambi on first base, Oakland right fielder Terrence Long hit a double off Yankees pitcher Mike Mussina into the right-field corner. As Giambi rounded third base and headed for home plate, Yankees right fielder Shane Spencer retrieved the ball and made a wild throw that missed cut-off man Tino Martinez and dribbled down the first-base line. Jeter ran from shortstop to grab the ball and flipped it backhanded to catcher Jorge Posada, rather than throwing it overhand. Posada tagged Giambi out on the leg just before he crossed home plate, preserving the Yankees' one-run lead. Facing elimination, the Yankees eventually won the game, as well as the series. The play, known as "The Flip", was later voted seventh in Baseball Weekly
As a result of the September 11 attacks, the start of the playoffs was delayed and the season's end was extended past the usual October timeframe. The Yankees advanced to the 2001 World Series to face the Arizona Diamondbacks. Game 4 marked the first time that any non-exhibition MLB game had been played in the month of November. In extra innings, Jeter hit a game-winning home run off of Byung-Hyun Kim. The words "Mr. November" flashed on the scoreboard, in reference to former Yankee Reggie Jackson's nickname, "Mr. October". Despite the home run, Jeter slumped at the plate; he denied injuries were a factor, though a fall into a photographer's box trying to catch a foul ball may have aggravated an earlier hamstring injury.
Jeter batted .297, with 18 home runs, 75 RBI, 124 runs scored, 191 hits, and a career-best 32 stolen bases during the 2002 regular season. He led the majors in stolen base percentage (91.4%), getting caught only three times. He made his fifth All-Star appearance. In the 2002 postseason, the Anaheim Angels defeated the Yankees in the ALDS on their way to winning the World Series.

=2003–2008=

On Opening Day of the 2003 season, Jeter dislocated his left shoulder when he collided with Toronto Blue Jays catcher Ken Huckaby at third base.
Steinbrenner named Jeter the captain of the Yankees on June 3, 2003, following eight seasons without a captain after Don Mattingly retired in 1995. However, Jeter committed a crucial error in a Game 6 loss, and the Marlins won the series in six games.
The Yankees acquired Rodriguez from the Texas Rangers during the 2003–04 offseason. Rodriguez had won two Gold Glove Awards at shortstop
Jeter made the All-Star team and finished the season with a .292 average; 23 home runs, the second-most of his career; 78 RBI; 111 runs scored; and a career-best 44 doubles, which broke a Yankee single-season record for doubles by a shortstop, besting Tony Kubek's 38 in 1961.
In the 12th inning of a tied game on July 1, 2004 against their rivals, the Boston Red Sox, Trot Nixon hit a pop fly down the left field line. Jeter ran from his position at shortstop and made an over-the-shoulder catch. He launched himself over the third-base side railing and two rows of seats, with the incident resulting in a lacerated chin and bruised face. The Yankees went on to win the game in the bottom of the 13th inning.
Jeter was second in the AL in runs scored (122) in the 2005 season, Though Jeter batted .333 during the 2005 ALDS, the Yankees lost to the Angels.
For the 2006 season, the Yankees signed Johnny Damon to play center field and lead off, moving Jeter to the second position in the batting lineup. However, the Yankees lost to the Detroit Tigers, three-games-to-one.
Many expected Jeter would win the AL MVP Award for 2006.
Though the Yankees continued to struggle with postseason failures, Jeter remained a consistent contributor.
Jeter hit his 400th career double on June 27, 2008, He finished the season with a .300 batting average.
Jeter tied Lou Gehrig's record for hits at Yankee Stadium (1,269) with a home run off Tampa Bay Rays pitcher David Price on September 14, 2008.


=2009–present=

For the 2009 season, Yankees manager Joe Girardi switched Jeter and Damon in the batting order, with Damon moving to second and Jeter to the leadoff role.
Jeter achieved two career hit milestones in the second half of the 2009 season. On August 16, 2009, against the Seattle Mariners, Jeter doubled down the right-field line for his 2,675th hit as a shortstop, breaking Luis Aparicio's previous major league record.
In the 2009 postseason, Jeter batted .355, including .407 in the 2009 World Series, as he won his fifth World Series championship. He was named Sportsman of the Year for 2009 by Sports Illustrated,
In 2010, Jeter, along with Posada and Rivera, became the first trio of teammates in any of the four major league sports in North America (MLB, NFL, NBA, or NHL) to play in at least 16 consecutive seasons on the same team as teammates.

After the 2010 season, Jeter became a free agent for the first time in his career. At age 36, Jeter appeared to be in decline; Joe Sheehan of Baseball Prospectus suggested that Jeter, once a "good, not great" shortstop, had declined to become "below average" defensively, to the extent that he would likely need to change positions; Cashman later acknowledged that Jeter might need to shift to the outfield.
The adjustments left Jeter frustrated, as he batted .242 in the first month of the 2011 season. With Denbo, Jeter returned to the mechanics he used in his minor league days. Following his activation from the disabled list, he hit .326 with an .806 OPS in his last 64 games of the season. Jeter finished the year with a .297 batting average, 6 home runs, 61 runs batted in, 84 runs, and 16 stolen bases. He credited the turnaround to his work with Denbo; Long acknowledged that his attempt to adjust Jeter's swing did not work.
On July 9, 2011, Jeter recorded his 3,000th career hit, a home run off of David Price of the Tampa Bay Rays. Jeter finished the day with five hits in five at-bats, the second player to have five hits on the day he achieved his 3,000th hit (the first was Craig Biggio).
Fatigued from the stress of chasing 3,000 career hits and wanting to rest his calf, Jeter opted not to attend the 2011 MLB All-Star Game.
Despite continuing concerns about his age, the beginning of the 2012 season saw Jeter on a hot streak: he batted .411 through April 23.
Jeter finished the 2012 season with the most hits in MLB (216).
While rehabilitating, Jeter suffered a small crack in the area of his previous ankle fracture. As a result, Jeter began the 2013 season on the disabled list.
On November 1, 2013, Jeter re-signed to the Yankees on a one-year, $12 million contract.

World Baseball Classic

Jeter started at shortstop for the United States national baseball team in the 2006 World Baseball Classic. He hit 9-for-20 (.450) and scored five runs in six games. Only teammate Ken Griffey, Jr. (.524) and Cuba's Yoandy Garlobo (.480) had a higher batting average with a minimum of 20 at-bats.
In the 2009 World Baseball Classic, Jeter again started at shortstop. He was named captain of the United States team by manager Davey Johnson,

Player profile

Jeter is considered to be one of the most consistent baseball players of all time.

An aggressive hitter, Jeter swings at most pitches in the strike zone, and many near it. Though right-handed hitters often pull the ball into left field, Jeter's signature inside-out swing, dubbed the "Jeterian Swing",
Jeter is also known for his professionalism. In an age where professional athletes often find themselves in personal scandals, Jeter has mostly avoided major controversy in a high profile career in New York City while maintaining a strong work ethic. Due to his style of play, opponents and teammates hold Jeter in high esteem.  A clubhouse leader, Jeter defuses confrontations between teammates.

Postseason performance

Jeter is noted for his postseason performances, and has earned the titles of "Captain Clutch", and "Mr. November" due to his postseason heroics and ability to perform under pressure.

Defense

Jeter has won five Gold Glove Awards, more than all shortstops with the exception of Ozzie Smith, Luis Aparicio, Dave Concepción, Omar Vizquel, and Mark Belanger.
Despite this, Jeter's defense has been the subject of criticism from a number of sabermetricians, including Rob Neyer and the publication Baseball Prospectus.
Jeter committed 18 errors in 2007, his highest total since finishing with 24 in 2000. After the season, Yankees general manager Brian Cashman and his staff saw Jeter's defense as an area that needed to be addressed. At the Yankees' request, Jeter embarked on a rigorous training program to combat the effects of age, by focusing on lateral movement and first-step quickness.
When asked to respond to criticism of his defense, Jeter replied: "I play in New York, man. Criticism is part of the game, you take criticism as a challenge."

Career highlights

Awards

Statistical highlights

Personal life

Jeter maintains homes in Marlboro Township, New Jersey, Greenwood Lake, New York,
Jeter's personal life has been a frequent topic in gossip columns and celebrity magazines since his rookie year in 1996. He had a well-publicized relationship with pop diva Mariah Carey from 1997 to 1998. Jeter has also dated former Miss Universe Lara Dutta,
In December 2002, Yankees owner George Steinbrenner criticized Jeter for staying out until 3 a.m. at a birthday party during the 2002 season, saying that his star shortstop "wasn't totally focused" and that "it didn't sit well" with him.
During his injury shortened 2013 season, Jeter arranged a partnership with Simon & Schuster to form an imprint called Jeter Publishing. He called it "the blueprint for postcareer." It will begin publishing nonfiction books for adults, children's picture books, elementary grade fiction, and books for children who are learning to read in 2014, and could lead to film and television productions.

Appearances outside of baseball

Philanthropy

Jeter created the Turn 2 Foundation, a charitable organization, in 1996. It was established to help children and teenagers avoid drug and alcohol addiction, and to reward those who show high academic achievement.
Jeter also serves as an ambassador for Weplay, a website designed to encourage children to get involved in sports.

Endorsements

Jeter has appeared in national ad campaigns for Nike, Gatorade, Fleet Bank, Ford, VISA,
In 2006, Jeter was the second-highest paid endorser in baseball, behind Ichiro Suzuki, who received endorsement deals in Japan.

Other appearances

Jeter has appeared on television in Seinfeld and as a host on Saturday Night Live.
Video games have featured Jeter on their cover, including 2K Sports' MLB 2K5, MLB 2K6, and MLB 2K7,
Jeter appears as a character in the Broadway play Bronx Bombers.



Notes



Further reading




