[[Jumpin' Jack Flash]]

CATEGORIES: 1968 singles, 1986 singles, The Rolling Stones songs, Decca Records singles, London Records singles, Aretha Franklin songs, Leon Russell songs, Peter Frampton songs, Guns N' Roses songs, UK Singles Chart number-one singles, Number-one singles in Germany, Number-one singles in New Zealand, Songs written by Jagger/Richards, Song recordings produced by Jimmy Miller, Music videos directed by Michael Lindsay-Hogg

"Jumpin' Jack Flash" is a song by English rock band The Rolling Stones, released as a single in 1968. Called "supernatural Delta blues by way of Swinging London"  by Rolling Stone, One of the group's most popular and recognizable songs, it has featured in films and been covered by numerous performers, notably Aretha Franklin.

Inspiration and recording

Written by Mick Jagger and Keith Richards, recording on "Jumpin' Jack Flash" began during the Beggars Banquet sessions of 1968. Regarding the song's distinctive sound, guitarist Richards has said:

Richards has stated that he and Jagger wrote the lyrics while staying at Richards' country house, where they were awoken one morning by the sound of gardener Jack Dyer walking past the window. When Jagger asked what the noise was, Richards responded: "Oh, that's Jack – that's jumpin' Jack."A jumping jack is an old-fashioned toy – see Jumping jack (toy). The rest of the lyrics evolved from there. Humanities scholar Camille PagliaPaglia, Camille. (1991) Sexual Personae: Art and Decadence from Nefertiti to Emily Dickinson, New York: Vintage Books, ISBN 0-679-73579-8, p. 281 speculated that the song's lyrics might have been partly inspired by William Blake's poem "The Mental Traveller": "She binds iron thorns around his head / And pierces both his hands and feet / And cuts his heart out of his side / To make it feel both cold & heat."
Jagger said in a 1995 interview with Rolling Stone that the song arose "out of all the acid of Satanic Majesties. It's about having a hard time and getting out. Just a metaphor for getting out of all the acid things."
In his autobiography, Stone Alone, Bill Wyman has claimed that he came up with the song's distinctive main guitar riff on an organ without being credited for it.

Personnel

Single version

Live version from Get Yer Ya-Ya's Out!

"Child of the Moon "

Release and aftermath

Released on 24 May 1968, "Jumpin' Jack Flash" (backed with "Child of the Moon") reached the top of the UK Singles Chart and peaked at number three in the United States. Some early London Records US pressings of the single had a technical flaw in them: about halfway through the song's instrumental bridge, the speed of the master tape slows down for a moment, then comes back to speed. The first Rolling Stones album on which the song appeared was their 1969 compilation album, Through the Past, Darkly (Big Hits Vol. 2), one year after the single was released.  Since then, it has appeared on numerous Stones compilations, including Hot Rocks 1964–1971 (1971), 30 Greatest Hits (1977), Singles Collection: The London Years (1989), Forty Licks (2002), and GRRR! (2012).
The Rolling Stones have played "Jumpin' Jack Flash" during every tour since its release. It ranks as the song the band has played in concert most frequently, and has appeared on the concert albums Get Yer Ya-Ya's Out!, Love You Live, Flashpoint, Shine a Light, and Sweet Summer Sun: Hyde Park Live, as well as, notably, The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus (featuring the only released live performance of the song with Brian Jones). Jones is heard clearly, mixing with Richards' lead throughout the song. The intro is not usually played in concert and instead the song begins with the main riff. The open E or open D tuning of the rhythm guitar on the studio recording has also not been replicated in concert (with the possible exception of the 1968 NME awards show, no recording of which has ever surfaced). In the performance filmed for The Rolling Stones Rock and Roll Circus in December 1968, Richards used standard tuning; and ever since the band's appearance at Hyde Park on 5 July 1969, he has played it in open G tuning with a capo on the fourth fret.
In March 2005, Q magazine placed "Jumpin' Jack Flash" at number 2 in its list of the 100 Greatest Guitar Tracks. In 2004, Rolling Stone rated the song 124th on its list of the 500 Greatest Songs of All Time. VH1 placed it at 65 on its show 100 Greatest Rock Songs.

Music video

Two promotional videos were made in May 1968: one featuring a live performance, another showcasing the band  lip-syncing, with Jones, Jagger, and Watts donning makeup.

Legacy

Use in film

The song was also featured in Martin Scorsese's film Mean Streets (1973) and in  Ron Howard's Night Shift.
It provided the title of  Whoopi Goldberg's movie Jumpin' Jack Flash (1986), and was heard at the end of Terry Gilliam's Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas. In 2009, the song was included in the film The Boat That Rocked. In 2012, the song was used as the ending music of the Japanese TV drama Priceless.
There is a character named Jumpin' Jack Flash in the opening sequence of the movie Roller Boogie.
The soundtrack of the film of the same name includes two versions of the song.
The song was Jack Wilson's walk-up song during his time with the Pittsburgh Pirates.

Charts

Aretha Franklin version

In 1986, the song's title was used for the Whoopi Goldberg film  Jumpin' Jack Flash. In addition to the Rolling Stones' version of the song, the film features Aretha Franklin's cover version for which Ronnie Wood and Richards played guitar. This version is characterised by influences from the increasingly popular black music scene. Both The Rolling Stones' and Franklin's versions are on the film's original soundtrack recording.

Charts

Other cover versions

A number of other artists have also performed and recorded versions of the song:






