[[Gemütlichkeit]]

CATEGORIES: Sociological terminology, German words and phrases

Gemütlichkeit () means a situation that induces a cheerful mood, peace of mind, with connotation of belonging and social acceptance, coziness and unhurry.
Gemütlichkeit derives from gemütlich, the adjective of Gemüt, which means "heart, mind, temper, feeling" expressed by (and cognate with) English mood. This German abstract noun has been adopted into English.
The song The Bare Necessities from Disney's The Jungle Book (1967), where a cheerful Baloo explains how "a bear can rest at ease with just the bare necessities of life" was rendered as Probier's mal mit Gemütlichkeit ("consider trying Gemütlichkeit") in the German version. As to talk of "bare necessities" has a certain ring of asceticism to it, the German text seems to convey Baloo's personality even more properly than the original, in spite of not rendering the pun.
In the 1973 English contract law case Jarvis v Swans Tours Ltd, a holidaymaker sued after not receiving the Gemütlichkeit promised by the promotional literature for a package holiday to the Swiss Alps.
The word can be used in descriptions of holidays.[ref]
;
^ Gemütlichkeit PONS Online-Dictionary[/ref]  The communal connotations of Gemütlichkeit are also emphasized in some uses of the term.  For example, one academic
described it as a tradition of "public festivity" (in the form of a "mixture of music, food, and drink"), which "promoted community solidarity."  The Harlem Renaissance was then cited as of how a sense of Gemütlichkeit arises from a "mix of music, art and politics in service of community consciousness".
A less common use of Gemütlichkeit can be found in reference to the economic policy makers and analysts in the United States involved in influencing the decisions of the board of the Federal Reserve System.  With respect to the "inflation dampening effects of globalization", a Georgia Southern University professor writes that interpreting certain U.S. economic trends could "spell an end of the Gemütlichkeit — a situation in which cheap labor and money abroad as well as ever-increasing productivity at home had permitted an uninterrupted spell of controlled growth in overall prices".

Similar words in other languages

The Swedish language equivalent is gemytlig, directly derived from the German word and with the same meaning. 
The Danish word hygge  The Dutch equivalent "gezelligheid" translates back into German as gregariousness, more emphasizing the social connotations of Gemütlichkeit.
In Bulgarian, the word is commonly translated as уют 
The English word closest to gemütlich is cosy and stems from the Scottish Gaelic word còsagach which means "1 Full of holes or crevices. 2 Snug, warm, cosy, sheltered. 3 Spongy", according to the authoritative Dwelly's great Scots Gaelic - English dictionary, in other words the opposite of the often hard, cold and wet environmental conditions of Scotland. Of note, Scottish-Gaelic and Irish-Gaelic dictionaries do not list a translation for the noun Gemütlichkeit (cosiness), only for the adjective, which indicates the more moderate and descriptive value the term has in the culture of the British isles.
Nevertheless, the English author Chesterton wrote in his 1906 book on Charles Dickens, that the English word "cosiness" is not translatable. The context of the quote is a section in the first half of the seventh chapter on "English comfort": "The word "comfort" is not indeed the right word, it conveys too much of the slander of mere sense; the true word is "cosiness," a word not translatable."  Chesterton may have given German and the above mentioned Continental nationalities short shrift momentarily, as much of the beginning of that chapter is a comprehensive description of what Gemütlichkeit stands for. On the other hand, Chesterton mentioned in the same chapter a few sections earlier, that "... the thing you cannot see out of Germany is a German beer-garden", an emblem of Gemütlichkeit. Thus the sentence may either reflect Chesterton's peculiar or idiosyncratic thought process or the term "not translatable" stands for the difficulty to find a synonym, to express the emotion of cosiness or Gemütlichkeit in words, also exemplified in the radio interview of Danish visitors quoted above.
The Romanic languages with Latin roots do not have a single term expressing the many connotations of Gemütlichkeit: In French on se sent vraiment bien ici, se mettre à son aise, agréable, sympathique are equivalents in terms of the social aspects, and tranquillement would be a synonym in terms of speed to describe Gemütlichkeit.
In Turkish two words, rahat and huzur, are used for Gemütlichkeit 

References and footnotes




