[[Amber Benson]]

CATEGORIES: 1977 births, Actresses from Birmingham, Alabama, American comics writers, American film actresses, American women film directors, American film producers, American television actresses, Female comics writers, People from Alabama, Living people, American women writers, Women screenwriters, American screenwriters, American fantasy writers, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, American film directors, 21st-century American novelists, American women novelists

Amber Nicole Benson (born January 8, 1977) is an American actress, writer, film director, and film producer. She is best known for her role as Tara Maclay on the TV series Buffy the Vampire Slayer, but has also directed, produced and starred in her own films Chance (2002) and Lovers, Liars & Lunatics (2006).

Early life

Benson was born January 8, 1977 in Birmingham, Alabama, to Edward Benson, a psychiatrist,Amber Benson Biography (1977–) and Diane Benson. She has a younger sister, Danielle, who is an artist. She had a mixed Christian and Jewish upbringing (her father was Jewish and her mother was Christian).
As a child, Benson studied music and dance, and performed in the Birmingham Children's Ballet, as well as in local theater.  She attended high school (one of her classmates being Joey Fatone) in Orlando, Florida after her family moved there, in part to help Amber pursue acting opportunities, the most prominent of which was an unsold television series called Kids' News, in which Amber was to have been one of two main anchors.  The Bensons then relocated to Los Angeles, and Amber began to very quickly land roles in films and on television.

Career

Benson was 14 when she made her feature-film debut in the Steven Soderbergh-directed movie King of the Hill."Episode 18: Featuring Amber Benson", RossCarey, accessed May 24, 2011.
Benson sang in the Buffy the Vampire Slayer musical episode "Once More, with Feeling". She provided vocals for the songs "I've Got a Theory / Bunnies / If We're Together", "Under Your Spell" (her solo), "Walk Through the Fire", "Standing/Under Your Spell (Reprise)" and "Where Do We Go from Here?" In 2002, she appeared in two songs on Buffy colleague Anthony Stewart Head's album Music for Elevators. She also sang "Toucha Toucha Touch Me" (aka "Creature of the Night") at VH-1's celebrity karaoke tribute to The Rocky Horror Picture Show.
While still working on Buffy the Vampire Slayer, Benson co-wrote the movie The Theory of the Leisure Class with director Gabriel Bologna, released in 2001, and directed, produced, edited, and acted in a digital video feature called Chance (2002) which also featured her Buffy co-star James Marsters.  She also collaborated with director James Kerwin in 2003 to produce her play, Albert Hall, in Hollywood.
In 2001, Benson worked with Golden, Terry Moore, and Eric Powell of Dark Horse Comics to create the Buffy the Vampire Slayer: Willow and Tara comic book titled "WannaBlessedBe". The following year (2002), she worked with Christopher Golden and AJ (Ajit Jothikaumar) of Dark Horse Comics to create the Buffy the Vampire Slayer: Willow and Tara comic books titled Wilderness #1 and Wilderness #2. 
Benson and Christopher Golden produced began a series of animated fantasy films for the BBC with the animation studio Cosgrove Hall. Ghosts of Albion: Legacy (2003) and its sequels are available on the BBC Cult website. Benson and Golden have also collaborated on two supernatural thrillers: Ghosts of Albion: Accursed and Ghosts of Albion: Witchery. These books follow the fortunes of Tamara and William Swift, who first appeared in the BBC computer animated web movie Ghosts of Albion: Legacy.
In 2005, Benson collaborated with artist Jamie McKelvie on a short story within the Image Comics collection Four Letter Worlds. In 2006, Benson collaborated with artist Ben Templesmith on Demon Father John's Pinwheel Blues published by IDW as a four-part split-book, Shadowplay (with work by Ashley Wood and Christina Z).
In 2006, Benson released her second independent feature film Lovers, Liars & Lunatics through her own production company, Benson Entertainment. The film was shot on film and was partly financed by the sale of limited edition "Triangle" Tara Buffyverse action figure. The project, initially called "The Dirty Script," was ultimately titled Lovers, Liars and Lunatics by producer Diane Benson, Amber's mother.
In 2006, Benson also portrayed the "vegetarian" vampiress Lenore on the TV series Supernatural.
In December 2006, Benson and Golden released yet another collaboration, the short novel The Seven Whistlers which is distributed through Subterranean Press in a limited number of signed copies. In September 2007, Benson signed a three-book deal with Ginjer Buchanan of Penguin Books. Death's Daughter, was released by Ace BooksISBN 978-0-441-01694-5 on February 24, 2009; Cat's Claw,ISBN 978-0-441-01843-7 on February 23, 2010; and Serpent's Storm, in February 2011. On February 28, 2012, the fourth book in the series, How to Be Death was released.ISBN 978-1-937007-28-7
Benson is the co-director with Adam Busch of the 2010 comedy film Drones. "So, you work with an alien", 225batonrouge.com, September 25, 2008
In 2012, Benson played a young Judith Collins in the Dark Shadows audio drama "Dress Me in Dark Dreams". She guest starred in the second season of the Jane Espenson scripted romantic comedy web series, Husbands.
In June 2013, it was announced that Benson has been attached to star in the web TV series adaptation of The Morganville Vampires as Amelie, the founder of Morganville.

Activism

During the 2008 campaign season, Benson was featured in the MoveOn.'It Could Happen to You'. The video was produced, written and directed by Alex Barreto and brothers Rider Strong and Shiloh Strong who also acted in the ad with Amber. The ad won MoveOn's contest for funniest Obama ad in 2008.

Personal life

As of 2007, Benson resided in Los Angeles. She described herself as a "lapsed vegetarian". "art vs. commerce", Amber Benson's Official Blog, January 29, 2009
As of March 2009, she was dating Adam Busch, who played Warren Mears on Buffy the Vampire Slayer.  The couple have since broken up, but remain close friends.

Filmography

Books






