[[Martin Bashir]]

CATEGORIES: 1963 births, English television journalists, English Christians, British reporters and correspondents, Living people, People from Wandsworth, English people of Pakistani descent, Pakistani Christians, Alumni of the University of Winchester, Alumni of King's College London, ABC News personalities, British expatriates in the United States

Martin Bashir (born 19 January 1963) is a British journalist, who was a political commentator for MSNBC, hosting Martin Bashir, and a correspondent for NBC's Dateline NBC. He was previously an anchor for ABC's Nightline after initially gaining prominence on British television with his BBC interview with Diana, Princess of Wales, and then his series of interviews with pop musician Michael Jackson on ITV.  On December 4, 2013, Bashir resigned from his position at MSNBC after he made "ill-judged comments"Carter, Bill. Martin Bashir Resigns From MSNBC Over Palin Comments, ''New York Times, December 4, 2013. about the former Governor of Alaska and Vice Presidential candidate Sarah Palin. Martin Bashir Resigns From MSNBC, Mediaite, December 4, 2013.

Early life

Martin Bashir was born in Wandsworth, South London, to parents of Pakistani Christian origin, and grew up in Handsworth. He was educated at the state comprehensive Wandsworth School for Boys, King Alfred's College of Higher Education, Winchester (since 2004 the University of Winchester), studying English and History from 1982–1985 and King's College London. He is fluent in English, and Urdu. He identifies himself as a committed Christian.

Career

He started work as a journalist in 1986. He worked for the BBC until 1999 on programmes including Songs of Praise, Public Eye and Panorama and then he joined ITV, working on special documentary programmes and features for Tonight with Trevor McDonald.
Bashir came to wide prominence in 1995 when he interviewed (for the BBC's Panorama programme) Diana, Princess of Wales about her failed marriage to the Prince of Wales. Since then he has conducted interviews with, among others, Louise Woodward, the five suspects in the Stephen Lawrence case, Michael Barrymore, Jeffrey Archer, Major Charles Ingram, and Joanne Lees.
Bashir was employed by ABC and co-anchored their current affairs show Nightline. Along with Cynthia McFadden and Terry Moran, he took over Nightline from Ted Koppel in 2005.
In August 2010 Bashir left ABC for MSNBC where he served as a political commentator for MSNBC until December 4, 2013, as well as an occasional substitute host for Lawrence O'Donnell.  
Bashir had a role as himself in the satirical comedy film Mike Bassett: England Manager.

Michael Jackson interviews

In 2003, Bashir conducted a series of interviews with pop singer Michael Jackson, as part of a ITV documentary Living with Michael Jackson, which Uri Geller, a friend of Jackson's, had arranged. Following the broadcast, which was viewed by 14 million in the UK and 38 million in the US, Jackson complained to the Independent Television Commission and the Broadcasting Standards Commission, accusing Bashir of yellow journalism, claiming that he deliberately doctored the recordings in order to paint Jackson in an unflattering light,
In response, Jackson and his personal cameraman released a rebuttal interview, which showed Bashir complimenting Jackson for the "spiritual" quality of the Neverland Ranch. Bashir also described Jackson as a wonderful father and said that Jackson's relationship with his children "almost makes me weep".
Dieter Wiesner, the pop star's manager from 1996 to 2003, said of Bashir's documentary:

Bashir later said of Jackson during ABC's coverage of his death,


Sarah Palin comments and resignation from MSNBC

On November 15, 2013, Bashir criticized Sarah Palin for comments that she made comparing the Federal debt to slavery."MSNBC not commenting on whether further action contemplated against Bashir", Associated Press via Washington Post (November 19, 2013). Bashir attempted to counter Palin's comparison by referencing the cruel and barbaric punishment of slaves described by slave overseer Thomas Thistlewood, specifically a punishment called "Derby's dose" which involved forcing slaves to defecate or urinate into the mouth of another slave as punishment. Bashir then concluded by saying "When Mrs. Palin invokes slavery, she doesn't just prove her rank ignorance. She confirms if anyone truly qualified for a dose of discipline from Thomas Thistlewood, she would be the outstanding candidate."Williams, Rob. "Martin Bashir says Sarah Palin is an 'idiot' and suggests someone should defecate in her mouth", The Independent (November 18, 2013). 
After many complaints, Bashir apologised on November 18, stating among other things: "My words were wholly unacceptable. They were neither accurate, nor fair. They were unworthy of anyone who would claim to have an interest in politics."Coscarelli, Joe. "MSNBC Host Sorry for Saying Disgusting Thing About Sarah Palin's Mouth", New York (November 18, 2013).  On December 2, Bashir was suspended by the network and then resigned two days later. MSNBC's Martin Bashir 'on vacation' after Sarah Palin remarks, Politico, December 2, 2013.

Juju Chang comments and suspension at ABC News

Bashir had been suspended in the past at ABC News in relation to "making comments considered crude and sexist at a dinner for Asian-American journalists."  In 2008, while working as a reporter on Nightline, Bashir gave a speech to the Asian American Journalists Association convention in Chicago where he made a "tasteless" comment on the dress being worn by one of his colleagues at ABC News, Juju Chang, a reporter for 20/20.  He said, "I'm happy to be in the midst of so many Asian babes.  I'm happy that the podium covers me from the waist down." He continued and said that a speech should be "like a dress on a a beautiful woman — long enough to cover the important parts and short enough to keep your interest — like my colleague Juju's."  ABC News suspended him.  He wrote an apology to the journalist association which stated, "Upon reflection, it was a tasteless remark that I now bitterly regret. I … hope that the continuing work of the organization will not be harmed or undermined by my moment of stupidity."

Music

Bashir plays the electric bass guitar.






