[[Chloë Sevigny]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Connecticut, American female models, American film actresses, American people of French-Canadian descent, American people of Polish descent, American Roman Catholics, American stage actresses, American television actresses, Best Supporting Actress Golden Globe (television) winners, Independent Spirit Award winners, Living people, New York City nightlife, People from Darien, Connecticut, People from Springfield, Massachusetts

Chloë Stevens Sevigny (*Hear the correct pronunciation of Sevigny#.Uz7Q_-lOXIU/ Chloë Sevigny
born November 18, 1974) is an American film actress, fashion designer and former model. She was born in Springfield, Massachusetts. Sevigny gained reputation for her eclectic fashion sense and developed a broad career in the fashion industry in the mid to late-1990s, both for modeling and for her intern work at New York's Sassy Magazine, which labeled her the new "It Girl" at the time, garnering her attention within New York City's fashion scene.
Sevigny made her film debut with a leading role in the controversial film Kids (1995), written by Harmony Korine, which led to an Independent Spirit Award nomination for her performance. A long line of roles in generally well-received independent and often avant-garde films throughout the decade established Sevigny's reputation as an indie film queen. In 1999, Sevigny won eight acting awards and gained serious critical and commercial recognition for her first mainstream role in the critically lauded Boys Don't Cry, for which she also received Academy Award and Golden Globe nominations for Best Supporting Actress. Sevigny continued acting in mostly independent art house films, such as American Psycho (2000), Party Monster (2003), and Dogville (2003). Her role in the art house film The Brown Bunny (2003) caused significant controversy because of a scene where she performs unsimulated fellatio. Her films since then have included Melinda and Melinda (2004), Manderlay (2005), Zodiac (2007) and My Son, My Son, What Have Ye Done? (2009).
From 2006 to 2011, Sevigny played a leading role in the HBO television series Big Love, for which she received a Golden Globe for Best Supporting Actress in 2010. She has also played leading roles in the series Hit & Miss (2012) and American Horror Story: Asylum (2012–2013). Additionally, Sevigny has two Off-Broadway theatre credits, and has starred in several music videos. She has also designed several wardrobe collections, most recently with Manhattan's Opening Ceremony boutique.

Early life and education

Chloë Stevens Sevigny was born in Springfield, Massachusetts Sevigny would often play dress up as a child with trunks of clothing her mother would buy for her at local secondhand shops describing it as "instinctual" for her.
She was raised in a Roman Catholic household,
During her teenager years, Sevigny became something of a rebel: "I was very well-mannered, and my mother was very strict. But I did hang out at the Mobil station and smoke cigarettes."I would never want it to look as if it reflected on them. I think I was very bored, and I did just love taking hallucinogens ... But I often feel it's because I experimented when I was younger that I have no interest as an adult. I know a lot of adults who didn't, and it's much more dangerous when you start experimenting drugs as an adult." She often described herself as a "loner" and a "depressed teenager." Her only extracurricular activity was occasionally skateboarding with her older brother, and she spent most of her free time in her bedroom: "Mostly I sewed. I had nothing better to do, so I made my own clothes."
As a teenager, Sevigny would occasionally cut school in Darien to go into Manhattan. as well as a Lemonheads music video.

Career

1995–99: Early work

Sevigny encountered young screenwriter and aspiring director Harmony Korine in Washington Square Park in New York City during her senior year of high school in 1993. She ended up receiving an Independent Spirit Award nomination for Best Supporting Female.
Sevigny followed Kids with actor/director Steve Buscemi's independent film Trees Lounge (1996), starring in a relatively small role as Buscemi's object of affection. During this time, director Mary Harron (after having seen Kids) offered Sevigny a minor part in her film, I Shot Andy Warhol (1996). Harron tracked Sevigny down to the SoHo clothing store Liquid Sky, where she was working at the time. Sevigny then gave her first audition ever, but ultimately decided to turn down the part; she would later work with Harron on American Psycho (2000). Instead of taking the part in I Shot Andy Warhol, Sevigny starred in and worked as a fashion designer on Gummo (1997), In retrospection to the confronting nature of the film, Sevigny cited it as one of her favorite projects: "Young people love that movie. It's been stolen from every Blockbuster in America. It's become a cult film". The film was dedicated to Sevigny's father, who died prior to the film's release.
After Gummo, Sevigny starred in the neo-noir thriller Palmetto (1998), playing a young Florida kidnapee alongside Woody Harrelson. She then had a leading role as a Hampshire College graduate in the sardonic period piece The Last Days of Disco (1998), alongside Kate Beckinsale. The film was written and directed by cult director Whit Stillman and details the rise and fall of the Manhattan club scene in the "very early 1980s". Stillman said of Sevigny: "Chloë is a natural phenomenon. You're not directing, she's not performing—it's just real." Janet Maslin of The New York Times wrote that Sevigny "is seductively demure" in her performance as Alice.
Aside from film work, Sevigny starred in a 1998 Off-Broadway production of Hazelwood Jr. High, which tells the true story of the 1992 murder of Shanda Sharer; Sevigny played seventeen-year-old Laurie Tackett, one of four girls responsible for savagely torturing and murdering twelve-year-old Sharer. Sevigny was reportedly so emotionally disturbed after playing the role that she began attending Catholic Mass again.

1999–2003: Breakthrough

Sevigny was cast in the independent drama Boys Don't Cry (1999) after director Kimberly Peirce saw her performance in The Last Days of Disco.
Following Boys Don't Cry, Sevigny had a supporting role in American Psycho, based on the controversial 1991 novel by Bret Easton Ellis. Sevigny plays the office assistant of Patrick Bateman, played by Christian Bale, a 1980s Manhattan yuppie-turned-serial killer. The film, as was its source novel, was controversial because of its depiction of graphic violence and sexuality in an upper-class Manhattan society. Sevigny followed Julien with a small part in the drama film A Map of the World (1999), opposite Sigourney Weaver.
Between 1998 and 2000, Sevigny moved back to Connecticut to live with her mother, After spending nearly three months in France to complete Demonlover, Sevigny returned to New York to film the club kid biopic, Party Monster (2003); coincidentally, Sevigny in fact knew several of the people depicted in the film (Michael Alig and James St. James included), whom she met during her frequent trips to New York City's club scene as a teenager.
Sevigny then obtained a role in Lars von Trier's parable film Dogville (2003), playing one of the various residents of a small mountain town, alongside Nicole Kidman, Lauren Bacall, and Paul Bettany; the film received mixed reactions, and was criticized by critics Roger Ebert and Richard Roeper as being "anti-American". Sevigny re-united with former Boys Don't Cry star Peter Sarsgaard for the biographical film Shattered Glass (2003), also alongside Hayden Christensen, about the career of Stephen Glass, a journalist whose reputation is destroyed when his widespread journalistic fraud was exposed. Sevigny played a co-editor of Glass's.

2003–06: The Brown Bunny and aftermath

In 2003, Sevigny took on the lead female role in the art house film The Brown Bunny (2003), which details a lonely traveling motorcycle racer reminiscing about his former lover. The film achieved notoriety for its final scene, which involves Sevigny performing unsimulated fellatio on co-star and director Vincent Gallo.
Despite the backlash toward the film, some critics praised Sevigny's performance; Manohla Dargis of The New York Times said, "Actresses have been asked and even bullied into performing similar acts for filmmakers since the movies began, usually behind closed doors. Ms. Sevigny isn't hiding behind anyone's desk. She says her lines with feeling and puts her iconoclasm right out there where everyone can see it; she may be nuts, but she's also unforgettable."
Despite her agency's disapproval of the film (and fear that the actress might have forever tarnished her career), she continued on with various projects. Sevigny had a major supporting role as a fellow Manhattanite in Woody Allen's two-sided tragicomedy, Melinda and Melinda (2004), which Sevigny referred to as being a "pleasing" experience. She subsequently guest-starred on the popular television show Will & Grace, and a string of film roles followed, including a small role in Lars von Trier's sequel to Dogville, titled Manderlay (2005), as well as a bit part alongside Bill Murray in Broken Flowers (2005). Sevigny also played one of several lovers of New York doctor Herman Tarnower in the HBO television film Mrs. Harris (2005) alongside Annette Bening and Ben Kingsley. Sevigny then had a major role as a Catholic nun visiting Africa in one of three stories in 3 Needles (2005), an anthology dealing with the prevalence of AIDS in various parts of the world. Sevigny's performance in the film was praised; Dennis Harvey of Variety called her performance in the film "convincing", Shortly after 3 Needles, Sevigny played the lead character in the experimental indie-film Lying (2006) with Jena Malone and Leelee Sobieski, playing a pathological liar who gathers three female acquaintances for a weekend at her upstate New York country house; the film premiered at the Cannes Film Festival in 2006. She also had a leading part in Douglas Buck's 2006 remake of the Brian De Palma horror film Sisters (1973).

2006–11: Big Love

In 2006, Sevigny began her five-season run in the HBO television series Big Love, about a family of fundamentalist Mormon polygamists. She played Nicolette Grant, the conniving, shopaholic daughter of a cult leader and second wife to a polygamist husband, played by Bill Paxton. Sevigny found even more mainstream success with a role in her first big-budget production
In January 2010, Sevigny won a Golden Globe award for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film for her performance in the third season of Big Love. The series itself also received nominations in two other categories. saying she was very "exhausted" and "wasn't thinking about what she was saying"; she also apologized to the show's producers. "didn't want them to think that I was biting the hand that feeds me, because I obviously love the show and have always been nothing but positive about it. And I didn't want anybody to misunderstand me or think that I wasn't, you know, appreciative."
In March 2010, Sevigny attended the South by Southwest Film Festival in Austin for the premiere of both Barry Munday and Mr. Nice;

2011–present: Post-Big Love

In 2011, Sevigny traveled to Manchester, England to film the British six-part drama Hit & Miss where she starred as Mia, a pre-op transexual contract killer.
Sevigny also starred as a journalist in Lovelace, a biopic about pornographic film actress Linda Lovelace.
In 2013, Chloe Sevigny was featured as a satellite character, Alexandra, in the TV show Portlandia during its third season on IFC. Ifc. Retrieved on 2014-01-14. Also in 2013, Sevigny had a 5-episode guest role on The Mindy Project.
She began to star as Catherine Jensen in the crime drama Those Who Kill, which aired on the A&E Network in March 2014. The show was pulled by the network after lackluster ratings in the first two weeks. It was then re-launched on A&E's sister network, Lifetime Movie Network, on March 30, 2014. The series has received mixed to positive critical reviews.

Fashion

Sevigny has long been considered a fashion icon and regularly appears on best dressed lists. Sevigny has since released several clothing lines designed by herself, both solo and in collaboration, and has earned a title as a modern fashion icon.
In 2002, she collaborated with Tara Subkoff for the 2003 Imitation of Christ collection in New York City, serving as creative director for the series, which was referred to as being "more about performance art and cultural theory than clothes".
Critical reception of her fashion and style has been extensively written about by both designers and fashion stylists and has generally proved favorable. American designer Marc Jacobs wrote of Sevigny in 2001: "The fashion world is fascinated by her. Because not only is she talented, young and attractive, she stands out in a sea of often clichéd looking actresses." "I'll go to Resurrection or Decades and be like, 'Oh, I'm going to buy everything,' but a lot of it is extremely expensive, so I'll go to Wasteland and satisfy that urge and it's not too hard on the pocketbook. Then there's this place called Studio Wardrobe Department where everything is like three dollars".
During the 29th International Festival of Fashion and Photography, which runs from April 25 to 28, 2014, Sevigny is a judge of the fashion jury, along with Humberto Leon and Carol Lim.

Personal life

Sevigny owned an apartment in the East Village, Manhattan, which she purchased for $1.2 million in 2006 and sold in March 2013 for $1.85 million.
Her father died when she was in her early 20s, and Sevigny stated in a 2006 interview that she came from a "close-knit" family, that she speaks to her mother every day,  and that her brother lives three blocks away from her apartment. Sevigny also suffers from scoliosis, which was diagnosed when she was a child, though she never received any surgical treatment. She has stated that she practices yoga for relief from the condition. Sevigny is a practicing Roman Catholic, although she admits she rebelled against religion as a teenager. She said she began attending church services again after playing a Satan-worshipping teenage murderer in a 1998 Off-Broadway production of Hazelwood Junior High, claiming that she "got really disturbed" and "started having nightmares and thinking horrible things".
Sevigny has had various relationships with men, though in 2006 she stated to the New York Post Gossip column: "I've questioned issues of gender and sexuality since I was a teenager, and I did some experimenting."
In a 2009 interview, Sevigny reflected on her career, and said she was content with the level of stardom she had maintained: "When I was in my early 20s, I went out with a British pop star, Jarvis Cocker; of course, pop stars have much more celebrity, I think, than actors even. They're really hunted by their fans much more. I remember driving around these remote towns in Wales and kids running after us in the street. I was like, 'This is horrible!' And I saw the effect it had on him, and that's when I decided I never wanted to be a celebrity at that level, and I think that's why I've chosen to do the work that I do and just kind of work with directors that I love and try and do work that means something to me."

Filmography

Film

Television

Music videos

Awards and nominations








