[[Johns Hopkins Hospital]]

CATEGORIES: University hospitals in the United States, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Johns Hopkins Hospital, Johns Hopkins University, Hospitals in Baltimore, Maryland, Buildings and structures on the National Register of Historic Places in Baltimore, Maryland, Hospital buildings completed in 1889, Hospitals established in 1889

The Johns Hopkins Hospital is the teaching hospital and biomedical research facility of Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, located in Baltimore, Maryland. It was founded using money from a bequest by philanthropist Johns Hopkins. The Johns Hopkins Hospital and the Johns Hopkins School of Medicine are the founding institutions of modern American medicine and are the birthplace of numerous traditions including rounds, residents and housestaff.
The Johns Hopkins Hospital is widely regarded as one of the world's greatest hospitals. but regained the top position in 2013.usnews.com/health-news/best-hospitals/articles/2013/07/16/best-hospitals-2013-14-overview-and-honor-roll

Beginnings

Johns Hopkins, a Baltimore merchant and banker, left an estate of $7 million (US$137.3 million in 2013Dave Maunel's Inflation Calculator) when he died on Christmas Eve 1873 at the age of 78. In his will, he asked that his fortune be used to found two institutions that would bear his name: "Johns Hopkins University" and "The Johns Hopkins Hospital." At the time that it was made, Hopkins's gift was the largest philanthropic bequest in the history of the United States.
Toward the end of his life, Hopkins selected 12 prominent Baltimoreans to be the trustees for the project and a year before his death, sent a letter telling them that he was giving "thirteen acres of land, situated in the city of Baltimore, and bounded by Wolfe, Monument, Broadway and Jefferson streets upon which I desire you to erect a hospital." He wished for a hospital "which shall, in construction and arrangement, compare favorably with any other institution of like character in this country or in Europe" and directed his trustees to "secure for the service of the Hospital, physicians and surgeons of the highest character and greatest skill."
Most importantly, Hopkins told the trustees to "bear constantly in mind that it is my wish and purpose that the hospital shall ultimately form a part of the Medical School of that university for which I have made ample provision in my will."  By calling for this integral relationship between patient care, as embodied in the hospital, and teaching and research, as embodied in the university, Hopkins laid the groundwork for a revolution in American medicine. Johns Hopkins' vision, of two institutions in which the practice of medicine would be wedded to medical research and medical education was nothing short of revolutionary.
Initial plans for the hospital were drafted by surgeon John Shaw Billings, and the architecture designed by John Rudolph Niernsee and completed by Edward Clarke Cabot of the Boston firm of Cabot and Chandler in a Queen Anne style., Guide to Baltimore Architecture (1997) p. 203-4.  Tidewater Publishers, Centreville, Maryland ISBN 0-87033-477-8 When completed in 1889 at a cost of $2,050,000 (US$52.6 million in 2013), the hospital included what was then state-of-the art concepts in heating and ventilation to check the spread of disease.
The trustees obtained the services of four outstanding physicians, known as the "Big Four," to serve as the founding staff of the hospital when it opened on May 7, 1889. They were pathologist William Henry Welch, surgeon William Stewart Halsted, internist William Osler, and gynecologist Howard Atwood Kelly.
In 1893, Johns Hopkins University was one of the first medical schools to admit women.
Osler, the first chief of the Department of Medicine, is credited with originating the idea of a residency, whereby recently graduated doctors receive advanced training in their specialty while treating patients under supervision; then as now, residents comprise most of the medical staff of the hospital. He also introduced the idea of bringing medical students into actual patient care early in their training; at the time medical school consisted almost entirely of lectures. Osler's contribution to practical education extends to the creation of "grand rounds", the practice of leading physicians discussing the most difficult cases in front of assembled medical students, for the benefit of patients and students."
Halsted, the first chief of the Department of Surgery, established many other medical and surgical achievements at Johns Hopkins including modern surgical principles of control of bleeding, accurate anatomical dissection, complete sterility, and the first radical mastectomy for breast cancer (before this time, such a diagnosis was a virtual death sentence). His other achievements included the introduction of the surgical glove and advances in thyroid, biliary tree, hernia, intestinal and arterial aneurysm surgeries. Halsted also established the first formal surgical residency training program in the United States.
Kelly is credited with establishing gynecology as a true specialty. He created new surgical approaches to women's diseases and invented numerous medical devices, including a urinary cystoscope. He was one of the first to use radium to treat cancer.
Welch was responsible for training many of the outstanding physicians of the day, such as Walter Reed. He also founded at Hopkins the nation's first School of Public Health.
In 1912, Diamond Jim Brady donated $220,000 to the hospital, which created the James Buchanan Brady Urological Institute.
Ophthalmologist William Holland Wilmer opened the Wilmer Eye Institute in 1925, its home was completed four years later. Dr. Wilmer received an M.D. degree from the University of Virginia in 1885 and worked in New York, Washington D.C., in addition to Baltimore, where he established the institute.

Achievements

Medical achievements at Johns Hopkins include the first male-to-female sex reassignment surgery in the United States that took place in 1966 at the Hopkins Gender Identity Clinic.

Operations

The hospital occupies approximately 20 of the 60 buildings on the Johns Hopkins Medical Campus.  The complex has over 80 entrances and receives 80,000 visitors weekly.  It houses over 1,000 beds and has a staff of over 1,700 doctors with over 30,000 total employees.
In May 2012 the Johns Hopkins Hospital opened two new towers as part of a major campus redevelopment effort.  The opening of the new $1.1 billion Charlotte R. Bloomberg Children's Center tower and the new Sheikh Zayed Tower marked the highpoint of this effort. In addition to the main hospital, the system operates four other hospitals and several outpatient care facilities in the Baltimore and Washington metro areas and a children's hospital in St. Petersburg, Florida.

Rankings

The Johns Hopkins Hospital was ranked as the top overall hospital in the United States for 21 consecutive years by U.S. News & World Report until 2012, when it declined to 2nd place behind the rise of the Massachusetts General Hospital. In 2013, it was reinstated as the top hospital in the United States.

A Plan for the Future of Johns Hopkins Medicine

Johns Hopkins Medicine developed a five-year strategic plan to lead the change. The plan guides our business strategies and decisions with a focus on six strategic priorities in which we'll invest our time and resources—people, biomedical discovery, patient- and family-centered care, education, integration and performance. These six priorities are critical areas of focus for the success and sustainability of the institution. The strategic priorities and overall structure of the plan were developed during an 18-month process led by a diverse, multidisciplinary coalition of faculty and staff leaders representing all member organizations and a host of roles throughout JHM.

Dean/ CEO of Johns Hopkins Medicine

Paul B. Rothman, M.D.
Dean of the Medical Faculty
Chief Executive Officer of Johns Hopkins Medicine
Paul B. Rothman is the Frances Watt Baker, M.D., and Lenox D. Baker Jr., M.D. Dean of the Medical Faculty, vice president for medicine of The Johns Hopkins University, and CEO of Johns Hopkins Medicine. He is the 14th dean of the School of Medicine and the second CEO of Johns Hopkins Medicine.
As dean/CEO, Rothman oversees both the Johns Hopkins Health System and the School of Medicine. A rheumatologist and molecular immunologist, he came to Hopkins in July 2012 after having served as dean of the Carver College of Medicine at the University of Iowa and leader of its clinical practice plan since 2008. Previously, he served as head of internal medicine at the University of Iowa, beginning in 2004, and prior to that as vice chairman for research and founding director of the Division of Pulmonary, Allergy and Critical Care Medicine at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, where he joined the faculty in 1986.
A 1980 Phi Beta Kappa graduate of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Rothman earned his medical degree from Yale University in 1984. He then trained at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center and accepted a postdoctoral fellowship at Columbia University prior to joining its medical school faculty.
Rothman's research focused on immune system molecules known as cytokines. Specifically, he investigated the role these molecules play in the normal development of blood cells, as well as the abnormal development of these blood cell that leads to leukemia. He also studied the role of cytokines in immune system responses to asthma and allergies. His work was consistently funded by the National Institutes of Health.
His honors include a James S. McDonnell Foundation Career Development Award, a Pfizer Scholars Award, a Pew Scholar Award, a Leukemia Society of America Scholar Award and the Pharmacia Allergy Research Foundation International Award in 1997. Dr. Rothman is a member of the American Society for Clinical Investigation and is a Fellow of the American College of Physicians. He was elected to the Council of Association of American Physicians, as a Fellow of the American Association for the Advancement of Sciences and as a member of the American Clinical and Climatological Association.





Further reading




