[[Rochester, Kent]]

CATEGORIES: Rochester, Kent, Medway, Market towns in Kent, Towns in Kent, Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom, Post towns in the ME postcode area

Rochester is a town and former city in the unitary authority of Medway in South East England. It is at the lowest bridging point of the River Medway about 
Rochester, together with neighbouring Chatham, Gillingham, Strood and a number of outlying villages, makes up the Medway unitary authority area. It was, until 1998,

History

Neolithic remains have been found in the vicinity of Rochester.  The town has been variously occupied by Celts, Romans, Jutes and/or Saxons. During the Celtic period it was one of the two administrative centres of the Cantiaci tribe. During the Roman conquest of Britain a decisive battle was fought at the Medway somewhere near Rochester.  The first bridge was subsequently constructed early in the Roman period.  During the later Roman period the settlement was walled in stone. King Ethelbert of Kent (560–616) established a legal system which has been preserved in the 12th century Textus Roffensis.  In AD 604 The bishopric and cathedral were established.  During this period, from the recall of the legions until the Norman conquest, Rochester was sacked at least twice and besieged on another occasion.
The medieval period saw the building of the current cathedral (1080–1130, 1227 and 1343), the building of two castles and the establishment of a significant town.  The castle saw action in the sieges of 1215 and 1264.  The basic street plan was established, constrained by the river, Watling street, the castle and the priory.
Rochester has produced two martyrs; St John Fisher executed by Henry VIII because he refused to sanction the divorce of Catherine of Aragon and Nicholas Ridley executed by Queen Mary as an English Reformation martyr.
The city was raided by the Dutch as part of the Second Anglo-Dutch War.  The Dutch, under de Ruijter, broke through the chain at Upnor and sailed to Rochester Bridge capturing and firing the English fleet.*The Dutch Raid, published by the City of Rochester Society 1998.
The ancient City of Rochester merged with the borough of Chatham and part of the Strood Rural District in 1974 to form the Borough of Medway. It was later renamed Rochester-upon-Medway, and the city status transferred to the entire borough.  In 1998 another merger with the rest of the Medway Towns created the Medway unitary authority. The outgoing council neglected to appoint ceremonial "Charter Trustees" to continue to represent the historic Rochester area, causing Rochester to lose its city status – an error not even noticed by the council for four years, until 2002.

Military history

Rochester has for centuries been of great strategic importance through its position near the confluence of the Thames and the Medway. Its castle was built to guard the river crossing, and the Royal Dockyard at Chatham was the foundation of the Royal Navy's long period of supremacy. The town, as part of Medway, is surrounded by two circles of fortresses; the inner line built during the Napoleonic wars consists of Fort Clarence, Fort Pitt, Fort Amherst and Fort Gillingham. The outer line of "Palmerston" forts was built during the 1860s in light of the report by The Royal Commission on the Defence of the United Kingdom and consists of Fort Borstal, Fort Bridgewood, Fort Luton, and the Twydall Redoubts, with 2 additional forts on islands in the Medway, Fort Hoo and Fort Darnet.
During the First World War the Short Brothers' aircraft company manufactured the first plane to launch a torpedo, the Short Admiralty Type 184, at its seaplane factory on the River Medway not far from Rochester Castle. In the inter-war period the company established a world-wide reputation as a constructor of flying boats with aircraft such as the Singapore, Empire 'C'-Class and Sunderland. During the Second World War, Shorts also designed and manufactured the first four-engined bomber, the Stirling.
The decline in naval power and in shipbuilding in general led to the government abandoning the shipyard at Chatham in 1984, and the subsequent demise of much of the marine industry. Rochester and its neighbouring communities were hit hard by this and have experienced a painful adjustment to a post-industrial economy, with much social deprivation and unemployment resulting. On the closure of Chatham Dockyard the area saw an unprecedented surge in unemployment to 15.9%. This dropped to 3.5% in 2004.

Toponymy

The Romano-British name for Rochester was Durobrivae, later Durobrivis c.730 and Dorobrevis in 844. The two commonly cited origins of this name are that it either came from "stronghold by the bridge(s)",The Place names of Kent. Judith Glover. 1976 Batsford. 1982 Meresborough Books. ISBN 0-905270-61-4 or is the latinisation of the British word Dourbruf meaning "swiftstream".[ref]
Kelly's Directory of Rochester 1951.[/ref] Durobrivis was pronounced 'Robrivis. Bede copied down this name, c. 730, mistaking its meaning as Hrofi's fortified camp (OE Hrofes cæster). From this we get c. 730 Hrofæscæstre, 811 Hrofescester, 1086 Rovescester, 1610 Rochester. The Latinised adjective 'Roffensis' refers to Rochester.

Former City of Rochester

Rochester was recognised as a city from 1211 to 1998. On 1 April 1974, the city council was abolished, becoming part of the Borough of Medway, a local government district in the county of Kent. However, under letters patent the former city council area was to continue to be styled the "City of Rochester" to "perpetuate the ancient name" and to recall "the long history and proud heritage of the said city".

Governance

Civic history and traditions

Rochester and its neighbours, Chatham and Gillingham, form a single large urban area known as the Medway Towns with a population of about 250,000. However Rochester has always governed land on the other side of the Medway in Strood. This was known as Strood Intra; before 1835 it was about 100 yards wide and stretched to Gun Lane. In the 1835 Municipal Corporations Act the boundaries were extended to include more of Strood and Frindsbury, and part of Chatham known as Chatham Intra. In 1974, Rochester City Council was abolished and superseded by Medway Borough Council, which also included the parishes of Cuxton, Halling and Cliffe, and the Hoo Peninsula. In 1979 the borough became Rochester-upon-Medway. The Mayor of Rochester was also Admiral of the Medway and this dignity was transferred to the Mayor of Medway when that unitary authority was created, along with the Admiralty Court for the river which is constituted as a committee of the council.
Like many of the mediaeval towns of England, Rochester had municipal Freemen whose civic duties were abolished by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835. However, the working guild of Free Fishers and Dredgers continued and still have rights, duties and responsibilities on the Medway, between Sheerness and Hawkwood Stone. This authority is effected through their attendance at the Admiralty Court as the jury of Freemen responsible for the conservancy of the river through current legislation. The freedom is passed through "servitude", i.e. apprenticeship, to a working freeman. The annual ceremonial beating of the bounds on the river takes place after the court, usually on the first Saturday of July.
Rochester obtained city status in 1211, but this was lost due to an administrative error when Rochester was absorbed by the Medway unitary authority. Subsequently, the Medway unitary authority has applied for city status for Medway as a whole, rather than for Rochester. Medway applied unsuccessfully for city status in 2000 and 2002 and is applying again for the Queen's Jubilee Year in 2012 but is competing with a number of other towns for the honour.
Watling Street passes through the town, and to the south the River Medway it is bridged by the M2 motorway and the High Speed 1 railway line.

Ecclesiastical parishes

For parishes in the wider Rochester area see Strood and Frindsbury.
There may have been a church in Eastgate dedicated to St Mary the Virgin, but there is only a passing Saxon reference to it.
There were three medieval parishes: St Nicholas', St Margaret's and St Clement's.  St Clement's was in Horsewash Lane and when the last vicar died in 1538 the parish was amalgamated with St Nicholas'.  The remains of the building were finally eradicated by the building of the railway in the 1850s. St Nicholas' Church was built in 1421 alongside the cathedral to serve the people of Rochester.  The cathedral was part of the Benedictine monastery of St Andrew and hence not a parish church.
After the Reformation the cathedral was refounded as the Cathedral Church of Christ and the Blessed Virgin Mary and did not remain as a parish church.

Buildings

The town is home to a number of important historic buildings, the most prominent of which are the Guildhall, the Corn Exchange, Restoration House, Eastgate House, Rochester Castle and Rochester Cathedral. Many of the buildings in the town centre date from the 18th century or as early as the 14th century.  The chapel of St. Bartholomew's Hospital dates from the hospital's founding in 1078.

Economy

Thomas Aveling started a small business in 1850 producing and repairing agricultural plant.  In 1861 this became the firm of Aveling and Porter, which was to become the largest manufacturer of agricultural machines and steam rollers in the country.*Discovering Traction Engines, – Harold Bonnett – Shire Publications (1975) – ISBN 0-85263-318-1
There is a significant shopping district in the historic centre of Rochester.

Culture

Charles Dickens

The town was for many years the favourite of Charles Dickens, who lived nearby at Gads Hill Place, Higham, and who based many of his novels in the area. Descriptions of the town appear in Pickwick Papers, Great Expectations and (lightly fictionalised as "Cloisterham") in The Mystery of Edwin Drood. Restoration House on Crow Lane was the house on which Dickens based Miss Havisham's house in Great Expectations, Satis House. This link is celebrated in Rochester's Dickens Festival each June in the Summer Dickens Festival and December with the Dickensian Christmas Festival. The 16th-century red-brick Eastgate House once housed the town's museum. In the 1980s the museum was moved further west to the Guildhall so that Eastgate House could become the Charles Dickens Centre.
In the same decade the High Street was redecorated with Victorian-style street lights and hanging flower-baskets to give it a more welcoming atmosphere.
The Dickens Centre was ultimately unprofitable and shut in November 2004. Medway Council's Cabinet agreed proposals for the restoration and development of Eastgate House as a major cultural and tourist facility, and for the project to be recognised as a key cultural regeneration project on 7 November 2006.

Sweeps festival

Since 1980 the town has seen the revival of the historic Rochester Jack-in-the-Green May-Day dancing chimney sweeps tradition, which had died out in the early 1900s. Though not unique to Rochester (similar sweeps' gatherings were held across southern England, notably in Bristol, Deptford, Whitstable and Hastings), the Rochester revival was directly inspired by Dickens' description of the celebration in Sketches by Boz.
The festival has since grown from a small gathering of local Morris dance sides to one of the largest in the world.
The current festival begins with the awakening of the Jack-in-the-Green ceremony, atop Blue Bell Hill at sunrise on 1 May*City of Rochester upon Medway Visitors Guide 1996. and continues in Rochester High Street over the May Bank Holiday weekend.
There are numerous other festivals in Rochester apart from the Sweeps Festival. A summer Dickens Festival takes place in early June and a Christmas one in early December. The Medway Fuse Festival usually has performances in Rochester and the latest festival to take shape is the Rochester Literature Festival, the brainchild of three local writers.

Library

A new library was built alongside the Adult Education Centre, Eastgate. This enabled the registry office to move from Maidstone Road, Chatham to the Corn Exchange in Rochester High Street (where the library was housed). As mentioned in a report presented to Medway Council's community services overview and scrutiny committee on 28 March 2006, the new library opened in late summer (2006).

Media and culture

The actress Sybil Thorndike lived in Minor Cannon's row adjacent to the cathedral.  Her father was a canon of Rochester Cathedral. She was educated at the Rochester Grammar School for Girls.  A local doctors' practice, and a hall at the Rochester Grammar School are all named after her.
Rochester is the setting of the controversial 1965 Peter Watkins television film The War Game, which depicts the town's destruction by a nuclear missile. The opening sequence was shot in Chatham Town Hall, but the credits particularly thank the people of Dover, Gravesend and Tonbridge.
The 1959 James Bond Goldfinger describes Bond driving along the A2 through the Medway Towns from Strood to Chatham. Of interest is the mention of "inevitable traffic jams" on the Strood side of Rochester Bridge, the novel being written some years prior to the construction of the M2 motorway Medway bypass.
The model and actress Kelly Brook went to Delce Junior School in Rochester and later Thomas Aveling School (formerly Warren Wood Girls School) in Rochester.
The Prisoners, a rock band from 1980 to 1986, were formed in Rochester. They are part of what is known as the "Medway scene".
The University for the Creative Arts, formerly the Kent Institute of Art & Design, is on the Rochester-Chatham border.
The 2011 adventure film Ironclad (dir. Jonathan English) is based upon the 1215 siege of Rochester Castle.  There are however a few areas where the plot differs from accepted historical narrative.

Theatre

There is a small amateur theatre called 'Medway Little Theatre' on St Margaret's Banks next to Rochester High Street near the railway station. The Medway Little Theatre had a creative alliance with the Medway Theatre Club that was managed by Marion Martin at St Luke's Methodist Church on City Way in Rochester throughout 1985 and until 1988. Drama and theatre studies development were well established in Rochester because of the dedication of the Medway Theatre Club.

Newspapers

Local newspapers for Rochester include the Medway Messenger, published by the KM Group. The area also has free newspapers in the Medway Extra (KM Group) and yourmedway (KOS Media).

In 2011 Medway News and Medway Standard, both published by Kent Regional News and Media had closed down

Radio

The local commercial radio station for Rochester is KMFM Medway, owned by the KM Group. Medway is also served by community radio station Radio Sunlight. The area can also receive the county wide stations BBC Radio Kent, Heart and Gold, as well as many radio stations in Essex and Greater London.

Sport

Football is popular in Rochester, with many teams competing in a Saturday league and a Sunday league. The town's football club is Rochester United F.C., though not as well known as the nearby Gillingham F.C.. Rochester F.C. was an old football club but has been defunct for many decades. Rugby is also played; Medway RFC play their matches at Priestfields. Old Williamsonians are connected to Sir Joseph Williamson's Mathematical School.
Cricket is also popular in the town, with many teams playing in the Kent Cricket League.
Holcombe Hockey Club is one of the largest in the country, and are based at Holcombe Park. The men's and women's 1st XI are part of the England Hockey League.

Education

In 1701 Sir Joseph Williamson left a bequest to establish the Mathematical School.  Unlike earlier schools (such as King's) it was not tied to a religious establishment but was open for practical instruction.
For a full list of schools serving Rochester visit List of schools in Medway

Rochester Airport

Rochester Airport began in September 1933 when Rochester City Council purchased some land as the site for a municipal airport. One month later the aircraft manufacturers Short Brothers leased the land for test flying. By 1934–5 Short Brothers had taken over the site, and moved in some of their personnel from the existing seaplane works. The inaugural flight into Rochester was from Gravesend, John Parker flying the Short Brothers Short Scion G-ACJI.
In 1979 the lease reverted to the council. After giving thorough consideration to closing the airport, GEC (then comprising Marconi and instrument makers Elliot Automation) decided to take over management of the airport. It maintained two grass runways while releasing some land for light industrial expansion.

Transport

Rochester is on the A2, which crosses the Medway at Rochester Bridge – the route roughly follows the ancient trackway known as Watling Street, which was used by Celts, Romans and Ango-Saxons. Through road traffic is diverted onto the nearby M2 motorway.
Bus serves are operated by Arriva Southern Counties, which took over the locally-owned Maidstone and District bus company in the 1990s. Other local bus companies including Nu-Venture provide certain services, some under contract to the local council.
Rochester railway station is on the Chatham Main Line. All services are provided by Southeastern.








