[[Los Angeles Police Department]]

CATEGORIES: Los Angeles Police Department, Organizations established in 1869, Municipal police departments of California



The Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) is the police department of the city of Los Angeles, California.  With 10,023 officers and a population of 3,792,621 people as of the 2010 Census.
The LAPD has been fictionalized in numerous movies, novels and television shows throughout its history. The department has also been associated with a number of controversies, mainly concerned with racial animosity, police brutality and police corruption.

History

The first specific Los Angeles police force was founded in 1853 as the Los Angeles Rangers, a volunteer force that assisted the existing County forces. The Rangers were soon succeeded by the Los Angeles City Guards, another volunteer group.  Neither force was particularly efficient and Los Angeles became known for its violence, gambling and vice.
The first paid force was created in 1869, when six officers were hired to serve under City Marshal William C. Warren. By 1900, under John M. Glass, there were 70 officers, one for every 1,500 people. In 1903, with the start of the Civil Service, this force was increased to 200.
During World War II, under Clemence B. Horrall, the overall number of personnel was depleted by the demands of the military. Despite efforts to maintain numbers, the police could do little to control the 1943 Zoot Suit Riots.
Horrall was replaced by a retired United States Marine Corps General William A. Worton, who acted as interim chief until 1950, when William H. Parker succeeded him and would serve until his death in 1966. Parker advocated police professionalism and autonomy from civilian administration. However, the Bloody Christmas scandal in 1951 led to calls for civilian accountability and an end to alleged police brutality.
Under Parker, Inspector Daryl Gates LAPD also created the first SWAT (Special Weapons and Tactics) team in United States law enforcement.  Officer John Nelson and then-inspector Daryl Gates created the program in 1965 to deal with threats from radical organizations such as the Black Panther Party operating during the Vietnam War era.

Organization

Board of Police Commissioners

The Los Angeles Board of Police Commissioners is a five-member body of appointed officials which oversees the LAPD.
The old headquarters for the LAPD was Parker Center, named after former chief William H. Parker, which still stands at 150 N. Los Angeles St. The new headquarters is the new Police Administration Building located at 100 W. 1st St., immediately south of Los Angeles City Hall, which officially opened in October 2009.

Office of the Chief

The Office of the Chief of Police is the administrative office comprising the chief of staff, the Employee Relations Group, the Public Information Office, and RACR/COMPSTAT.  Also reporting to the chief of police is the special assistant for constitutional policing, whose office is divided into Fiscal Operations Division, Risk Management Division, Research and Planning Division, and Internal Audits and Inspections Division.  The Professional Standards Bureau, which includes the Internal Affairs Group, Special Operations Division and Force Investigation Division, also reports directly to the chief of police.
Real-time Analysis and Critical Response Division/COMPSTAT (Computer Statistics) maintains crime data. It holds regular weekly meetings within a purpose-built suite in the new Police Administration Building with the Chief of Police and senior officers. COMPSTAT is based on the NYPD CompStat unit that was created in 1994 by former LAPD Chief William Bratton, while he was still a NYPD Police Commissioner.
The Real-Time Analysis & Critical Response Division began operations in March 2006. It is composed of the Department Operations Section, which includes the Department Operations Center Unit, Department Operations Support Unit and the Incident Command Post Unit; Detective Support Section and the Crime Analysis Section.

Office of Operations

The majority of the LAPD's approximately 10,000 officers are assigned within the Office of Operations, whose primary office is located in the new Police Administration Building.
The 21 stations are grouped geographically into four command areas, each known as a "bureau." The latest areas, "Olympic" and "Topanga," were added on January 4, 2009.

=Structure chart=

=Operations - Central Bureau=

The Central Bureau is responsible for downtown Los Angeles and Eastern Los Angeles,
The Central Area (#1) station serves the majority of downtown Los Angeles, including Los Angeles City Hall, the Los Angeles Convention Center, the Staples Center, the Fashion District, and the Financial District.
The Hollenbeck Area (#4) community police station serves the easternmost portions of the city of Los Angeles, including the communities of Boyle Heights, Lincoln Heights, and El Sereno.
The Newton Area (#13) serves South Los Angeles, as well as portions of downtown Los Angeles, including part of the Fashion District.
The Northeast Area (#11) is responsible for parts of central Los Angeles including Elysian Park (Dodger Stadium), Echo Park and Silver Lake, along with the easternmost parts of Los Feliz and Hollywood, as well as the northeast Los Angeles communities of Highland Park, Eagle Rock, Atwater Village, and Glassell Park.
The Rampart Area (#2) serves regions to the west and northwest of Downtown Los Angeles including Echo Park, Pico-Union and Westlake, all together designated as the Rampart Division's patrol area. It was the Rampart Division Building, which was newly constructed at the time, that served as the home station in the Jack Webb created police drama Adam-12, although the show used the number designation (1), for Central Division.

=Operations - South Bureau=

The South Bureau oversees South Los Angeles with the exception of Inglewood
The 77th Street Area (#12) serves a portion of South Los Angeles, roughly in an area south of Vernon Avenue, west of the Harbor Freeway, north of Manchester Avenue and points west to the city limits, including the Crenshaw region.  A section of South Central Los Angeles that borders Florence, Central and Manchester Avenues to the Harbor Freeway is also part of this division.
The Harbor Area (#5) serves all of San Pedro, Wilmington and the Harbor Gateway annex south of Artesia Boulevard. This division often works with the Port of Los Angeles Police. police station, which was opened on Friday, April 25, 2009. It is located at 2175 John S. Gibson Blvd."LAPD opens new Harbor station, Los Angeles Times, April 26, 2009
The Southeast Area (#18), like the 77th Street Division, patrols a part of South Los Angeles.
The Southwest Area (#3) serves all of the city limits south of the Santa Monica Freeway, west of the Harbor Freeway, north of Vernon Avenue, and east of the Culver City/Lennox/Baldwin Hills area.

=Operations - Valley Bureau=

The Valley Bureau is the largest of the four patrol bureaus in terms of size (about 221 square miles),
The Mission Area (#19) community police station began operations in May 2005.  This was the first new station to be created in more than a quarter of a century.  The Mission Area covers the eastern half of the old Devonshire and the western half of the Foothill Divisions in the San Fernando Valley, including Mission Hills and Panorama City.
The Devonshire Area (#17) is responsible for the northwestern parts of the San Fernando Valley, including parts of Chatsworth and Northridge.
The Foothill Area (#16) patrols parts of the San Fernando Valley (including Sun Valley) and the Crescenta Valley (including  Sunland-Tujunga).
The North Hollywood Area (#15) is responsible for Studio City, Valley Village and the North Hollywood Region.
The Van Nuys Area (#9) serves the area of Van Nuys, California.
The West Valley Area (#10) is responsible for parts of the San Fernando Valley, including parts of Encino, Northridge, Reseda and Winnetka, where it is based.
The Topanga (#21) community police station began operations on January 4, 2009. It is responsible for parts of the San Fernando Valley that are within the city's 3rd Council District (represented by former officer Dennis Zine), including Woodland Hills and Canoga Park, where it is based.

=Operations – West Bureau=

The West Bureau's operations cover most of the well-known areas of Los Angeles, including Hollywood, Westwood, the Hollywood Hills area, the UCLA campus and Venice. Traffic Divisions also conduct DUI enforcement through a DUI Task Force composed mostly of motorcycle or "motor" officers.  In addition to this overt enforcement activity, the traffic detective bureau houses a Habitual Traffic Offender Unit (also known as an H2O detail), which conducts undercover surveillance of habitual DUI offenders and other criminals with suspended licenses.
The Hollywood Area (#6) community police station serves the Hollywood region, including the Hollywood Hills, Hollywood Boulevard and the Sunset Strip.
The Wilshire Area (#7) community police station serves the Mid-Wilshire "Miracle Mile" region, including Koreatown, Mid-City, Carthay, and the Fairfax District.
The Pacific Area (#14) community police station serves the southern portion of West Los Angeles, including Venice Beach, Venice and Playa del Rey. Some officers assigned to the Pacific Division are commonly assigned to work with the Los Angeles Airport Police at the Los Angeles International Airport.  Pacific Division was formerly known as "Venice Division."
The West Los Angeles Area (#8) community police station serves the northern portion of the West Side.
The Olympic (#20) community police station opened its doors on January 4, 2009, with an open house on January 17. The Olympic Area will be a small section of the Hollywood Division, and is composed of areas from Rampart and Wilshire divisions. station is located at the southeast corner of Vermont Avenue and Eleventh Street and houses 293 officers. The construction cost was $34 million.

Office of Special Operations

The Office of Special Operations is a new office that was created in 2010.  Headed by an Assistant Chief and the Assistant to the Director, which is a Commander, the office comprises the Property Division, Jail Division, the Detective Bureau, and the Counter Terrorism and Special Operations Bureau.

=Detective Bureau=

The Detective Bureau, which reports to the Director of the Office of Special Operations, consists of several divisions and sections responsible for investigating a variety of crimes.

=Counter Terrorism and Special Operations Bureau=

The Counter Terrorism and Special Operations Bureau provides the Los Angeles Police Department specialized tactical resources in support of operations during daily field activities, unusual occurrences and, especially, during serious disturbances and elevated terrorism threat conditions.
Counter Terrorism and Special Operations Bureau was created from the merger of the Counter Terrorism and Criminal Intelligence Bureau with the Special Operations Bureau in 2010.

Office of Administrative Services

The Office of Administrative Services is a new office that was created in 2010.  Headed by an Assistant Chief and the Assistant to the Director, which is a Commander, the office is divided into the Behavioral Science Services, Use of Force Review Division, Information Technology Bureau, Administrative Services Bureau, and the Personnel and Training Bureau.

Rank structure and insignia

Supervisory terminology

The following names are used to describe supervision levels within the LAPD:
‡ As detectives are considered specialists within the LAPD, they are normally considered to be separate from the uniformed line of command. The senior-most detective is therefore permitted to take charge of an incident when it is necessary for investigative purposes superseding the chain-of-command of other higher-ranking officers in attendance.

Chiefs of Police

Since 1876, there have been 56 appointed chiefs of the Los Angeles Police Department. William H. Parker was the longest serving police chief in Los Angeles Police Department history, serving for 16 years as chief.

Staffing

Limitations

The Los Angeles Police Department has suffered from chronic underfunding and under-staffing in recent years.
The Los Angeles Police Department protects its city with only one officer for every 426 residents. As a point of comparison, New York City boasts one NYPD officer for every 228 residents. For Los Angeles to have the same ratio of officers as New York City, the LAPD would need to have nearly 17,000 officers. Further points of comparison include Chicago, which has a ratio of one officer per 216 citizens and Philadelphia, whose officer per citizen ratio is 1 to 219.
In recent years, the department had been conducting a massive recruiting effort, with a goal of hiring an additional 1,500 police officers. One problem with such a drive is the lack of qualified candidates. The city has four specialized agencies, not affiliated with the LAPD directly, which serve the Port, the Airport, the City Hall, Library, and Zoo, and the Unified School District.

Union

The Los Angeles Police Protective League (LAPPL) is the labor union for LAPD officers up to the rank of lieutenant.

Demographics

Up until the Gates administration, the LAPD was predominantly white (80% in 1980), and many officers had resided outside the city limits. "ACLU Says 83% of Police Live Outside L.A." Los Angeles Times 29 March 1994: B1. Simi Valley, the Ventura County suburb that later became infamous as the site of the state trial that immediately preceded the 1992 Los Angeles riots, has long been home to a particularly large concentration of LAPD officers, almost all of them white. A 1994 ACLU study of officers' home zip codes, concluded that over 80% of police officers resided outside the city limits.
Hiring quotas began to change this during the 1980s, but it was not until the Christopher Commission reforms that substantial numbers of black, Hispanic, and Asian officers began to join the force. Minority officers can be found in both rank-and-file and leadership positions in virtually all divisions, and the LAPD is starting to reflect the general population.
The LAPD hired the first female police officer in the United States in 1910, Alice Stebbins Wells.  Through the 1950s, their duties generally consisted as working as matrons in the jail system, or dealing with troubled youths working in detective assignments.  Rarely did they work any type of field assignment and they were not allowed to promote above the rank of sergeant.
A lawsuit by a policewoman, Fanchon Blake, from the 1980s instituted court ordered mandates that the department begin actively hiring and promoting women police officers in its ranks.  The department eliminated the rank of "Policeman" from new hires at that time along with the rank of "Policewoman."  Anyone already in those positions was grandfathered in, but new hires were classified instead as "Police Officers," which continues to this day. In 2002, women made up 18.9% of the force.
In 1886, the department hired its first two black officers, Robert William Stewart and Roy Green.
According to the United States Department of Justice, in 2000, the Los Angeles Police Department was 82% male, 46% of the department was white, 33% of the department was Hispanic/Latino, 14% was African American, and 7% was Asian.

Work environment

LAPD patrol officers have a three-day 12-hour and four-day 10-hour work week schedule. The department has over 250 types of job assignments, and each officer is eligible for such assignments after two years on patrol. LAPD patrol officers almost always work with a partner, unlike most suburban departments surrounding the city of Los Angeles, which deploy officers in one-officer units in order to maximize police presence and to allow a smaller number of officers to patrol a larger area.
The department's training division has three facilities throughout the city, including Elysian Park, Ahmanson Recruit Training Center (Westchester), and the Edward Davis Training Center (Granada Hills).
From spring 2007 through the spring of 2009, new recruits could earn money through sign on bonuses ranging from $5,000 to $10,000. Those bonuses ended in 2009.
As of January 2010, the starting base salary for high school graduates was lowered to $45,226. If the applicant has at least 60 college units, with an overall GPA of 2.0 or better, the applicant will start at $47,043. If the applicant has a BA or BSc (four year) degree, the applicant will start at $48,880.

Resources

Before the early 1970s, LAPD officers were issued the six-shot double action/single action Smith & Wesson Model 14 .38 Special revolver. From the early 1970s to 1988, officers were armed with the six-shot, double action/single action Smith & Wesson Model 15 revolver, also known as the .38 "Combat Masterpiece". This was specifically designed at the request of the Los Angeles Police Department. It was a .38 caliber Smith and Wesson Model 10 variant with non-snag, high profile adjustable sights.
LAPD Model 15s were often modified by an armorer to fire double-action only, meaning officers could not cock the hammer. This was to prevent accidental discharges caused by the short, light single-action trigger pull that some officers used. Many officers and detectives also carried the Model 36 "Chief's Special" as a backup revolver, and often off-duty.
In the patrol cars, locked to a steel bar, was an Ithaca Model 37, 12-gauge shotgun, loaded with "00" (double-aught) buckshot, nine pellets to the cartridge with one round in the chamber and four in the magazine tube. The shotgun was made specifically for the Los Angeles Police Department, and was called the "L.A.P.D. Special".  The shotgun was based on the Ithaca Model 37 "Deerslayer", which was a weapon designed to hunt large game with rifled slugs.  As a consequence of being designed for use with slugs, it had rifle sights, unlike most shotguns.
The "L.A.P.D. Special" had a dull parkerized military finish instead of the more usual high gloss blue finish. The barrel was 18 and a half inches long, as opposed to the twenty inches of the civilian version. The advantages of the Ithaca Model 37 Shotgun over the Winchester, Mossberg and Remington models were that the Ithaca weighed a pound less, and could be used with equal ease by right or left-handed shooters due to the unique bottom ejection port and loading chamber it used. The Ithaca 37 is still in use today as the main shotgun carried by LAPD officers, and has been in use since the 1940s.
In response to increasing firepower carried by criminals, including fully automatic weapons and assault rifles, LAPD patrol officers were issued the Beretta 92F.  Later, officers were able to carry the Smith & Wesson Model 5906, a semi-automatic 9mm pistol, in addition to a few other approved weapons in 9mm caliber.
In response to the North Hollywood shootout of 1997, LAPD officers had the option of carrying the Smith & Wesson Model 4506 and 4566 service pistols in .45 ACP caliber.  Also due to the North Hollywood incident, qualified officers were issued patrol rifles called UPR (Urban Police Rifle) consisting mainly of AR-15 variants chambered in .223 after being certified from LAPD Urban Police Rifle School.
Until 2002, LAPD officers' standard issue pistol was the Beretta 92F/92FS. However, when William Bratton was appointed Chief of the LAPD, he allowed his officers to carry the Glock pistol, a weapon which the two previous departments he was chief at (the New York City Police Department and the Boston Police Department) carried. New officers graduating from the LAPD academy are now issued the Glock 22 or Glock 17 but can qualify in a variety of firearms.
Officers now have the choice of carrying
Beretta:
Smith & Wesson:
Glock:
The LAPD SWAT team decided to go with the Kimber Custom TLE II in 2002, renaming it the Kimber LAPD SWAT Custom II.
The LAPD recently announced that they will be incorporating a new shotgun, the Benelli M4 Super 90 and officers will go through additional training for the use of the semi-automatic shotgun and will have to privately purchase the gun if they elect to switch from the standard pump-action Remington 870.  The LAPD also has 37mm launchers and modified "beanbag" firing Remington 870s for crowd control when less than lethal force is needed.

LAPD awards, commendations, citations and medals

The department presents a number of medals to its members for meritorious service. The medals that the LAPD awards to its officers are as follows:

Bravery

The Los Angeles Police Department Medal of Valor is the highest law enforcement medal awarded to officers by the Los Angeles Police Department. The Medal of Valor is an award for bravery, usually awarded to officers for individual acts of extraordinary bravery or heroism performed in the line of duty at extreme and life-threatening personal risk.
The Liberty Award is a bravery medal for police canines killed or seriously injured in the line of duty. The award, which was inaugurated in 1990, is named after Liberty, a Metropolitan Division K-9 shot and killed in the line of duty. Liberty's handler received the Medal of Valor for the same incident. So far it has only been awarded once in the LAPD's history.
The Police Medal is an award for bravery, usually awarded to officers for individual acts of heroism in the line of duty, though not above and beyond the call of duty, as is required for the Medal of Valor.
The Police Star is an award for bravery, usually awarded to officers for performing with exceptional judgment and/or utilizing skillful tactics in order to defuse dangerous and stressful situations.
The Police Life-Saving Medal is an award for bravery, usually awarded to officers for taking action in order to rescue or attempt the rescue of either a fellow officer or any person from imminent danger.

Service

Unit citations

Ribbons

Given to any LAPD officer who saw service during the 1984 Summer Olympics from July 28 to August 12, 1984.
Given to LAPD officers who were used during the September 1987 pastoral visit of Pope John Paul II.
Given to any LAPD officer who saw service during the 1992 Los Angeles riots from April 29 to May 4, 1992.
Given to any LAPD officer who saw service during the 1994 Northridge earthquake from January 17 to January 18, 1994.
Awarded for 4000 hours of service as a Reserve Police officer.

Marksmanship Badges

The LAPD also awards Distinguished Expert, Expert, Sharpshooter, and Marksman badges to those who attain progressively higher qualification scores on its range.  Bonus pay is given to qualifiers, and some assignments may require such demonstrated weapons skill beyond that earned in basic training.

Fallen officers

Since the establishment of the Los Angeles Police Department, 201 officers have died in the line of duty. The monument is a fountain made from black granite, the base of which is inscribed with the names of the LAPD officers who have died while serving the City of Los Angeles.
The cause of deaths are as follows:
Two deaths  are unsolved,  both of off duty officers,  Fred Early shot in  1972,

Misconduct

Controversies among the LAPD include former detective Mark Fuhrman's role in the Nicole Simpson/Ron Goldman murder investigation (1994),
The widely publicized case of Christine and Walter Collins was depicted in the 2008 film Changeling.  In March 1928, Christine Collins reported her nine-year-old son, Walter, missing.  Five months later a boy named Arthur Hutchins came forth claiming to be Walter.  When Mrs. Collins tried to tell the police that the boy was not her son, she was committed to a mental institution under a Section 12 internment.  It was later determined that Walter had actually fallen victim to a child rapist/murderer in the infamous Wineville Chicken Coop Murders.  Arthur Hutchins eventually admitted that he had lied about his identity in order to get to Hollywood and meet his favorite actor, Tom Mix.
Bloody Christmas was the name given to the severe beating of seven men by officers from the Los Angeles Police Department on December 25, 1951. The attacks, which left five hispanic and two white young men with broken bones and ruptured organs, was only properly investigated after lobbying from the Mexican American community. The internal inquiry by Los Angeles Chief of Police William H. Parker resulted in eight police officers being indicted for the assaults, 54 being transferred, and 39 suspended.
In 1962, the controversial LAPD shooting of seven unarmed members of the Nation of Islam resulted in the death of Ronald Stokes, and led to protests of the LAPD led by Malcolm X and the Nation of Islam. He was released when the LAPD realized their mistake in identity. Morgan subsequently filed a civil suit against both the LAPD and the city after he was denied the opportunity to file a formal complaint against the LAPD. The lawsuit would eventually be settled in 1993, and Morgan was awarded $800,000 by the Los Angeles City Council.
In 1986, the department purchased a 14-ton armored breaching vehicle, used to smash quickly through the walls of houses of suspects.A. Police Department's 'Battering' Vehicle", Los Angeles Times, February 10, 1986. Accessed November 30, 2010. The ACLU questioned the constitutionality of the vehicle. Gates, 610 U.S. Dist. 120 (1985). Ultimately, the California Appellate Court ruled that the vehicle was unconstitutional, violating lawful search and seizure. Gates, 43rd Cal. 3rd Dist. 233 (1987).
Early in his tenure as Chief of Police, Daryl Gates re-instituted the use of the choke hold (placing an arm or flashlight over someone's throat) to subdue suspects. In 1982, however, this technique left one suspect, James Mincey, Jr. in a coma for two weeks prior to his eventual death. Wallace, "Tests Show No Drugs in Victim's Body", Los Angeles Times (May 1, 1982). Accessed on November 30, 2010. An investigation into the use of the choke hold found that sixteen people had died soon after being restrained by police choke holds. Heller, 475 U.S. 796 (1986). After the NAACP and ACLU brought this to the attention to the public, the Department discontinued the use of the choke hold. Willman, "Police Violated Chokehold Ban, Valley NAACP Official Claims", Los Angeles Times (June 24, 1982). Accessed on November 30, 2010.
In 1986, Officer Stephanie Lazarus killed her boyfriend's ex-wife. Despite her being an obvious suspect, the LAPD failed to pursue clues indicating she was the killer. In 2012, DNA evidence led to her arrest and conviction."Parents of woman killed by ex-LAPD cop Stephanie Lazarus can't sue", Los Angeles Times, 25 February 2013
The Los Angeles riots of 1992, also known as the Rodney King uprising or the Rodney King riots, began on April 29, 1992 when a jury acquitted four LAPD police officers accused in the videotaped beating of an African American Rodney King following a high-speed car pursuit on March 3, 1991. investigated the LAPD's hiring practices, as well as their handling of excessive force complaints.  However, with the election of Richard Riordan in 1992 before the verdict, the reforms recommended by Christopher were put on hold.
After seven days of jury deliberations, the jury acquitted all four officers of assault and acquitted three of the four of using excessive force. The evening after the verdict, thousands of people in the Los Angeles area rioted over the six days following the verdict. Widespread looting, assault, arson, and murder occurred, and property damages totaled one billion dollars. In all, 53 people died during the riots."The L.A. 53". By Jim Crogan. LA Weekly. April 24, 2002.
On 1 August 1988, as part of Chief Gates' ''Operation Hammer,'' directed against gangs, paramilitary teams raided four apartments at 39th Street and Dalton Avenue. According to an investigation by the department's Internal Affairs, the team leader, Captain Thomas Elfmont directed his men to "hit" the apartments "hard," to "level" them, and to leave them "uninhabitable."
The police detained 37 people, making seven arrests.  They also found six ounces of marijuana and a small amount of cocaine. The seven were beaten by the police and at the police station forced to whistle the them to the ''Andy Griffith Show''. Those who refused were beaten again. Nobody was charged with a crime. The city paid four million dollars to settle the matter. Serrano, "Reports Tell of Frenzy and Zeal in Police Raid," Los Angeles Times, November 26, 1990James Bovard, "Police Brutality: A License to Maul," Freedom Daily, Future of Freedom Foundation, April 1997
On September 4, 1988, LAPD officers raided the home of Roger Guydon looking for drugs. They found nothing. In 1991, Guydon won a $760,000 lawsuit against the city."Man awarded $760,000 in police brutality suit," Los Angeles Times, June 22, 1991. John Dentinger,"Narc, narc; diary of police raids on the wrong house," Playboy, April 1990, p. 49
In 1991, just prior to the highly public Rodney King beating, the department came under fire for brutality. One suspect, Michael Allen, was forced to lie on the ground. After verbally assaulting officers, Allen was struck, while in handcuffs, on the back of the head with a flashlight, causing Allen to go blind in one eye. After Allen had been completely subdued, officers shocked Allen with a taser. Accessed on December 1, 2010.
On 12 October 1996,  LAPD Officers Rafael Pérez and Nino Durden entered the apartment of Javier Ovando. They shot the man in the back,  paralyzing him from the waist down.  They then planted a gun on the unarmed man to make it appear he had attacked them. The two officers then perjured themselves. Ovando was sentenced to 23 years in custody based on their testimony.  Later one of the officers admitted his crime. Ovando was released and in 2000 paid $15 million for his injuries and imprisonment.
In 2008, Officer Russell Mecano offered to not arrest a woman in exchange for sex, and offered cash to another woman in exchange for sex. He was convicted and sentenced to more than 8 years.
In 2012, detective Stephanie Lazarus was sentenced to at least 27 years in prison for murdering a woman in 1986. The murder was covered up and only solved with DNA evidence.
In July and August 2012, two suspects were injured and one suspect was killed during arrest actions undertaken by LAPD officers.
On July 22, 2012, Alesia Thomas an African American, mentally disabled single mother died in the back of a police car after being kicked in the genitals, taken to the ground, hogtied and stuffed into the back of a police car by officers  in the course of an arrest on suspicion of child endangerment after leaving her children in front of LAPD's Southeast station.
On August 18, 2012, Ronald Weekley, Jr., a college student, was punched in the face while handcuffed on the ground after being stopped for riding his skateboard on the wrong side of the street.
On August 21, 2012, Michelle Jordan, a registered nurse, was repeatedly thrown to the ground in the course of being arrested after being pulled over for holding her cell phone while driving.
As a result of these events, on September 1, 2012, civil rights activists requested an emergency meeting with LAPD Chief Charlie Beck to review arrest and use-of-force policies.
On February 7, 2013, the LAPD was involved in what Chief Charlie Beck called, "...a case of mistaken identity." The Dorner case itself involved allegations of impropriety by other LAPD officers, as Dorner alleged that he had been fired for reporting brutality by his training officer. The manhunt had been triggered by Dorner's alleged attacks against LAPD and ex-LAPD personnel. In 2013, the city agreed to pay $4.2 million to settle the matter.Californai; Officers Faulted in Mistaken Shotoing, by Ian Lovett, 5 February 2014, New York Times

Rampart scandal and consent decree

Following the Rampart Division C.R.A.S.H. scandal of the late 1990s - early 2000s, the United States Department of Justice entered into a consent decree with the LAPD regarding numerous civil rights violations. Under the terms of a transitional agreement approved by Feess, the Board of Police Commissioners and the Office of Inspector General, which monitors the department on behalf of the Board of Police Commissioners, will assume responsibility for keeping tabs on the department's efforts to fully implement a few still-incomplete or recently finished reforms. If lawyers for the U.S. Department of Justice are not satisfied with the oversight by the LAPD's inspector general, the agreement allows them to object and bring the department back before Feess.
The Rampart scandal mainly surrounded the unethical and illegal actions of members of the LAPD's anti-gang unit, Community Resources Against Street Hoodlums (CRASH). In particular, Javier Ovando, an unarmed teenager, had been shot and paralyzed by then-officer Rafael Pérez. After the shooting, Pérez planted a gun on Ovando and claimed self-defense. Ovando was sent to prison, although later he was exonerated and released. By 2001, the resulting investigations would lead to more than 75 officers being investigated or charged and over 100 criminal cases being overturned due to perjury or other forms of misconduct,
The DOJ-LAPD consent decree places emphasis on the following nine major areas:
The consent decree includes several recommendations from the Rampart Board of Inquiry, and several consent decree provisions mandate the department to continue existing policies. Some of the more complex or major provisions in the decree call for the following:
There are several stakeholders in the LAPD consent decree compliance process. At the federal level, stakeholders include:
As the consent decree is a binding agreement between the city and the DOJ, the following city entities are key stakeholders:
The Consent Decree Bureau was the LAPD bureau charged with overseeing this process. Until 2009, the commanding officer of the Consent Decree Bureau, a civilian appointed by the chief of police, was Police Administrator Gerald L. Chaleff.

In popular culture

The CBS radio show Calling All Cars hired LAPD radio dispacher Jesse Rosenquist to be the voice of the dispatcher.  Rosenquist was already famous because home radios could tune into early police radio frequencies.  As the first police radio dispatcher presented to the public ear, his was the voice that actors went to when called upon for a radio dispatcher role.
The iconic television series Dragnet, with LAPD Detective Joe Friday as the primary character, was the first major media representation of the department. Real LAPD operations inspired Jack Webb to create the series and close cooperation with department officers let him make it as realistic as possible, including authentic police equipment and sound recording on-site at the police station.
Due to Dragnet's popularity, LAPD Chief Parker "became after J. Edgar Hoover, the most well known and respected law enforcement official in the nation". In the 1960s, when the LAPD under Chief Thomas Reddin expanded its community relations division and began efforts to reach out to the African-American community, Dragnet followed suit with more emphasis on internal affairs and community policing than solving crimes, the show's previous mainstay. Hayde, My Name's Friday: The Unauthorized but True Story of Dragnet and the Films of Jack Webb, Cumberland House, 2001, ISBN 1-58182-190-5, quote at p. 192.
Several prominent representations of the LAPD and its officers in television and film include Adam-12, The Rookies, Police Story, The Blue Knight, The Choirboys, Crime Wave, The Stone Killer, 10 to Midnight, Murphy's Law, Blue Streak, Blue Thunder, Boomtown, The Closer, Colors, Crash, Columbo, Dark Blue, Die Hard,
The Rookie, End of Watch, Heat, Hollywood Homicide, Hunter, Internal Affairs, Jackie Brown, L.A. Confidential, Lakeview Terrace, Law & Order: Los Angeles, Life, Major Crimes,  Numb3rs, Reservoir Dogs, The Shield, Southland, Speed, Street Kings, NCIS: Los Angeles, SWAT, Training Day and the Lethal Weapon, Rush Hour and Terminator film series. The LAPD is also featured in the video games Midnight Club II, Midnight Club: Los Angeles, True Crime: Streets of LA, L.A. Noire, L.A. Rush and Call of Juarez: The Cartel, and parodied in Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas and Grand Theft Auto V (Los Santos Police Department; Los Santos is a recreation of Los Angeles).
The LAPD has also been the subject of countless novels. Elizabeth Linington used the department as her backdrop in three different series written under three different names, perhaps the most popular being those novel featuring Detective Lieutenant Luis Mendoza, who was introduced in the Edgar-nominated Case Pending.  Joseph Wambaugh, the son of a Pittsburgh policeman, spent fourteen years in the department, using his background to write novels with authentic fictional depictions of life in the LAPD. Wambaugh also created the Emmy-winning TV anthology series Police Story. Wambaugh was also a major influence on James Ellroy, who wrote several novels about the Department set during the 1940s and 1950s, the most famous of which are probably The Black Dahlia, fictionalizing the LAPD's most famous "cold case", and L.A. Confidential, which was made into a film of the same name. Both the novel and the film chronicled mass-murder and corruption inside and outside the force during the Parker era.



Footnotes






