[[Pattani Province]]

CATEGORIES: Pattani Province, Provinces of Thailand, Gulf of Thailand

Pattani () is one of the southern provinces (changwat) of Thailand. Neighboring provinces are (from south-east clockwise) Narathiwat, Yala and Songkhla.

Geography

The Sai Khao waterfall.

History

The name Pattani is the Thai derivation of Patani (Jawi: ڤتنا). Its original name could mean 'this beach' in Patani Malay language. (In standard Malay, this would be "Pantai Ini".) Another theory is the name comes from Pathini, which can be translated as a "virgin nymph" in the Sanskrit language. Pathini was the name of the daughter of Merong Mahawangsa, founder of the preceding Langkasuka Empire. 
Historically, Pattani province was the centre of the Malay Sultanate of Patani Darul Makrif. For centuries a tributary state of Siam, Pattani has been governed by Siam since its conquest in 1785. Siamese rule was officially acknowledged by the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909 negotiated with the British Empire. Both Yala (Jala) and Narathiwat (Menara) were originally part of Patani, but were made provinces of their own during the territorial administrative reform and the creation of a united centralized Siam state.

Demographics

Pattani is one of the four provinces of Thailand where the majority of the population are Malay Muslim, making up 88% of the population. They speak the Patani Malay language, although many can also speak Thai. The Pattani Malays are very similar in ethnicity and culture to the Malays of Kelantan, Malaysia.

Symbols

The seal of the province shows the cannon called Phraya Tani,  known as Sri Pattani in Malay, which was cast in the Pattani province. It was brought to Bangkok in 1785, and is now on display in front of the Ministry of Defence in Bangkok.
The provincial flower is the Chinese hibiscus (Hibiscus rosa-sinensis), and the provincial tree the Ironwood (Hopea odorata).

Administrative divisions

Pattani is subdivided into 12 districts (amphoe), which are further subdivided into 115 communes (tambon) and 629 villages (muban).
The districts of Chana (Malay: Chenok), Thepa (Malay:Tiba) and Saba Yoi (Malay:Sebayu) were detached from Pattani and transferred to Songkhla in recent times by the Thai government.

Tourism

Sights

Ta Chi Cape  Fronting the Pattani Bay lies a sandy, beach lined peninsula that stretches far out into the gulf. Easy accessible by road it boasts a wealth of pine trees and shrubs native to this region. The seaward side offers a picturesque scenery and reasonable surf, the tip of the peninsula offers a natural protected harbor for plenty of fishing boats of which many are of the older, hand colored and wooden "Korlae" style
Somdet Phra Srinagarindra Park (สวนสมเด็จพระศรีนครินทร์) The Park is decorated with many flowers and a very beautiful landscape.
Kallayaniwatthana Institute of Arts and Culture (สถาบันวัฒนธรรมศึกษากัลยาณิวัฒนา) The institute is divided into two sections:
1. Phra Thepyanmoli (พิพิธภัณฑ์พระเทพญาณโมลี) Museum displays the history, activities, and utensils of Phra Thepyanmoli.   
2. Khatichon Witthaya Museum (พิพิธภัณฑ์คติชนวิทยา) displays the stories, case studies of the Muslim household in the Southern border provinces, local utensils, local arts and displays, ancient utensil materials in pre-historic and the beginning of community periods, history of the ancient town of Yarang, pottery, local beliefs and technology.
Pattani Central Mosque (มัสยิดกลางปัตตานี) This is the most beautiful and largest mosque in Thailand.  It is the center for religious ceremonies to be performed by the Muslim citizens in the South.  The architecture is western, with some similarity to the well known Taj Mahal of India.  With the big dome in the center, there are four surrounding small ones with two minarets.  
City Pillar Shrine (ศาลหลักเมือง) The shrine was constructed on 13 April 1951 when Phraya Rattana Phakdi was the Governor.
Krue Se Mosque (มัสยิดกรือเซะ) This mosque has round pillars which is the middle-east arts style.  An important feature is the domed roof, which has never been completed. It has been assured that this mosque was built during the reign of King Naresuan the Great (1578–1593).
Chao Mae Lim Ko Niao Graveyard (สุสานเจ้าแม่ลิ้มกอเหนี่ยว) As per the story of the legend, Lim Ko Niao, a Chinese girl which came to Pattani by ship to look for Lim To Khiam, her elder brother who had got married with the Pattani Governor's daughter, converted to Islam and ordered the construction of the Krue Se mosque. However, she was not successful in taking his brother back home.  Therefore, after putting a curse impeding the roof of the mosque to be completed, she hanged herself on a cashewnut tree near the mosque and her brother buried her at this place. 
Chao Mae Lim Ko Niao Chinese Shrine or Leng Chu Kiang Shrine (ศาลเจ้าแม่ลิ้มกอเหนี่ยวหรือศาลเจ้าเล่งจูเกียง) On the day of the 3rd lunar month every year, there is the colorful procession carrying Chao Mae's sculpture along several roads in town, walking on fire in front of the shrine, and swimming across the river near Dechanuchit Bridge. 
Hat Talokapor ( Teluk Kapur ) Beach (หาดตะโละกาโปร์) With its long white sand, line of pines and coconut trees, this beach is one of the most popular ones in Pattani. There are many Korlae boats with their unique colorful characteristics of the southern fishermen.  
Laem Ta Chi or Laem Pho (แหลมตาชี หรือ แหลมโพธิ์) This is another white-sand beach extended from Talokapor Beach.  It has been the accumulation of sand spit into the Gulf of Thailand on the north.
Dato Mosque (มัสยิดบ้านดาโต๊ะ)  This old mosque is surrounded by an Islamic community and a graveyard, it has been renovated and still serves for religious ceremonies.
Yaring Natural Study Centre (ศูนย์ศึกษาธรรมชาติป่าชายเลนยะหริ่ง) There is a 1,250 meter long wooden bridge as the walkway for study purposes of the forest. Along the natural trail, there are several species of plants, rest area and a bird-watching tower with the height of 13 meters.
Hat Panare (หาดปะนาเระ) There are many households of fishermen, Korlae and boats along the beach. Seafood selling stalls by the beach are inexpensive and their selections are plentiful.
Hat Chalalai (หาดชลาลัย) The beach is highlighted by a large pond near the pine line.
Hat Ma Ruat (หาดมะรวด) This beach is characterized by the amazing site of the aggregated small rock mountains overlapping each other.
Hat Ratcharak (หาดราชรักษ์) This beach is extended from Chalalai, Maruad, and Khae Khae Beaches.  
Hat Khae Khae (หาดแฆแฆ) "Khae Khae" is a local Malay word which means "loud noise". With its large granite rocks along the coast, the beach looks quite different from the others and is naturally reputed as the most beautiful beaches in Panare.
Palas Market (ตลาดนัดปาลัส) This venue reflects the real rural lifestyle of the southern Thai Muslims.
Hat Wasukri (หาดวาสุกรี) The beach is about 52 kilometers from Pattani and about 2 kilometers from Sai Buri.  It is in Patatimo ( Pantai Timur ) Village, Tambon Taluban.
Ban Paseyawo (บ้านปะเสยะวอ) This is a well-known venue for Korlae Boat making.  The highlighting characteristics of the Korlae is the narrowing head and tail, with unique color.  Besides the real Korlae for fishery, there are also imitations made for souvenirs.
Khao Ruesi (เขาฤาษี)  The highlight of this mount is the natural rocky formation.  Also, there are two ponds containing water which has been believed to be very holy and was used in the Coronation of many Kings.  
Yarang Ancient Town (เมืองโบราณยะรัง) The city was one of the oldest communities in the history of the southern part of Thailand.  It is believed that it was the location of the ancient kingdom of "Lanka Suka". The structure of the ancient town was the large oval shape in the area of 9 square kilometers.  
Wat Mutcharinthawapiwihan (วัดมุจลินทวาปีวิหาร) At present, its temple is still beautiful.  With the sculptures of the last 3 abbots, especially Phra Ratchaphuttharangsi, the 5th abbot.
Hat Ratchadapisek (หาดรัชดาภิเษก) Situated at Ban Sai Mo, Tambon Sai Mo, this beach is about 15 kilometers  from Pattani City, or 2 kilometers away from Nong Chik District Office. 
King Rama VII Pavilion (พลับพลาที่ประทับรัชกาลที่ 7) This Thai style pavilion was built for King Rama VII during his visit to watch the eclipse in 1929. 
Wat Chang Hai Rat Buranaram (วัดช้างให้ราษฎร์บูรณาราม) This monastery is at Ban Pa Rai, Tambon Tung Pala.
Wat Chang Hai - Royal Folk Arts and Crafts Center (ศูนย์ศิลปชีพวัดช้างให้) The center displays and sells many southern handicrafts such as batik cloth, miniature Kolae boats, handicrafts, mats, and ceramics.
Namtok Sai Khao National Park (อุทยานแห่งชาติน้ำตกทรายขาว) This evergreen forest is full of various kinds of plants, and a variety of waterfalls. The most beautiful waterfall here is called Sai Khao Waterfall.  At the end, is a waterfall which drops for 40 meters.  
Namtok Phong Phong (น้ำตกโผงโผง) With seven staged levels, this waterfall has a big pond at the lowest level.
Namtok Aran Warin (น้ำตกอรัญวาริน) Situated at Mu 4, Tambon Tung Pala.  The total distance from Pattani is about 30 kilometers.
Hat Sai Chai Bueng Ban Laweng (หาดทรายชายบึงบ้านละเวง) Chai Bueng Ban Laweng has different surroundings and nature. There is a large pond near the white beach.  Moreover, there is a local handicraft center (Ban Laweng) displaying weaving products.
Hat Bang Sai (หาดบางสาย) Located at Mu 6, Tambon Sai Thong, 74 kilometers from Pattani, this beach is about 5 kilometers in length.
Hat Pa Mai (หาดป่าไหม้) This beach is located at Mu 3, Tambon Sai Thong, an extension from Hat Bang Sai.
 Clock Tower Three Culture (หอนาฬิกาสามวัฒนธรรม) Clock Tower Three Culture is new Clock Tower in pattani 

Local products

Pattani offers many interesting locally made products such as dry squid, budu sauce, fish chips, preserved look yee, brassware, baskets, cloth, Batik,etc.

Culture

Festivals

Chak Phra Festival (ประเพณีชักพระ) This annual festival has been organized to commemorate the day that Lord Buddha came back from the heaven.  Buddhists in Amphoe Khok Pho and nearby will accompany the decorated boat procession from all temples.  The procession will be composed of beautifully dressed people.   Activities include dancing and offering food to Buddhist monks at the District Office's field for 5 days, 5 nights.
Chao Mae Lim Ko Niao Fair (งานสมโภชเจ้าแม่ลิ้มกอเหนี่ยว) This fair is celebrated annually 15 days after Chinese New Year.  Highlighting the event is the procession to carry the wooden sculpture of Chao Mae Lim Ko Niao-a goddess which is respected by the citizens of Chinese ethnicity in Pattani.  This annual fair also features extraordinary arts of endurance such as walking on fire.  Before joining the festival for 7 days, participants of the fair need to be vegetarians by having no-meat food at least 7 days before the festival.  Normally, the fair is celebrated widely by the people of Pattani and of nearby provinces.
Fishing Sports in Sai Buri (งานแข่งขันกีฬาตกปลาสายบุรี) The event is annually held on the second weekend of May at  Hat Wasukri, Amphoe Sai Buri.  Due to the long coast and the great amount of a variety of fish, this sport has become very popular and exciting.

Department








