[[Conservative Democratic Alliance]]

CATEGORIES: Political pressure groups of the United Kingdom, Conservative political pressure groups of the United Kingdom, Euroscepticism in the United Kingdom, 2002 establishments in the United Kingdom, 2008 disestablishments in the United Kingdom

The Conservative Democratic Alliance (CDA) was a political pressure group from the United Kingdom. The CDA referred to itself as the "authentic voice of conservatism".

Foundation and organisation

The CDA was formed mostly by disaffected members of the Conservative Monday Club, another right-wing pressure group, who disagreed with the club's response to the Conservative Party's severing of links with the Club in 2001.10. The The Daily Telegraph described the CDA as "a hardline offshoot of the Monday Club".The Daily Telegraph, 24 August 2004
The group was described as "ultra-right" by the Commission for Racial Equality.The Commission for Racial Equality
The group's Chairman was Michael Keith Smith, who had been a member of the Conservative Monday Club since the early 1970s,IDS and Le Fascist, Sunday Mirror, 11 November 2001 and served on its Executive Council, 1986 - 1993. 
Original members of the CDA's steering committee included:
Millson and Lauder-Frost are both former active members of the Conservative Party, the Monday Club's Executive, as well as the Western Goals Institute, and both were founder-members of the Traditional Britain Group, of which Lauder-Frost remains Vice-President.23

Politics

On 27 June 2002, The Daily Telegraph carried a letter from the CDA, signed by Mike Smith, attacking the Conservative Party and its Chairman Francis Maude for "the sleaze, double-dealing, arrogance, incompetence, Europhilia, indifference and drift with which the party is still associated. "Voters", he said, "deserve a real alternative to Blairism and his 'straight kinda guy' chicanery. Mr. Maude and his C-Changing Tories are incapable of providing it." ("C-Change" was a now-defunct Tory modernising pressure group headed by Maude.)
The CDA often criticised free-market economics and Americanisation in the United Kingdom, both of which it perceived to be after-effects of Thatcherism. That may be seen as distinguishing it from Iain Duncan Smith's Conservative Party leadership, which CDA members often criticised as neoconservative. The CDA was also fervently opposed both to the European Union and to close links with the George W. Bush administration.

Activities

The CDA held what was described as "a packed meeting of right-wingers"Daily Mirror, October 10, 2002, p.10. in a hotel at the Conservative Party conference in Bournemouth on October 11, 2002, chaired by Mike Smith, who accused Conservative Party Chief Whip David Maclean of gagging his party's MPs over the EU, declaring him "a disgrace to the party."Daily Mirror, October 10, 2002, p.10. The meeting was addressed by Roger Knapman, then leader of the United Kingdom Independence Party; Ashley Mote, then a UKIP MEP and author of Overcrowded Britain - Our Immigration Crisis Exposed (2004); John Gouriet, a founder with Norris McWhirter of the Freedom Association; Derek Turner, editor of Right Now! and the Quarterly Review magazines; Sam Swerling, a consultant solicitor, Law Lecturer and former Monday Club chairman, who described Theresa May, M.P., as "a third-rate operator", and Adrian Davies, then chairman of the Freedom Party, a barrister-at-law, who said "the ideal candidate for the Conservatives now was a black, one-legged lesbian."Daily Mirror, October 10, 2002, p.10. 
On 6 October 2004, the Conservative Democratic Alliance held another meeting as a fringe event at the Conservative Party Conference, again in Bournemouth, in tribute to Enoch Powell.
The CDA planned to field its own candidates against Conservative MPs with small majorities at the 2005 General Election,The Independent, May 18, 2002. concentrating on Oliver Letwin, the then Shadow Treasury Spokesman, and MP for West Dorset, whom they described as "simply not a Conservative at all".
In the event no candidates stood for the CDA at the 2005 General Election, and Letwin held his seat. However, CDA Chairman Michael Keith Smith stood as the United Kingdom Independence Party candidate for Portsmouth North. Both unsuccessful Tory candidate Penny Mordaunt and political commentator Richard North blamed Smith's intervention for the Tories' failure to win back the seat.Election analysis: The effect of UKIP/Veritas, Richard North, The Bruges GroupUKIP candidate wins £10,000 for internet libel
The CDA's June 2005 Summer Dinner in Fleet Street, London, was addressed by the 'metric martyr', Neil Herron, who led the campaign against the adoption of the metric system in the UK. The previous year Herron had stood as an Independent candidate in European Elections for North East England, gaining almost 40,000 votes, over 5.1%.North East England (European Parliament constituency)#cite note-10
The CDA produced a regular bulletin, and maintained a website with discussion forums (now defunct).Conservative Democratic Alliance

Controversies

An anti-Conservative Party advertisement for the CDA was published in Right Now!, containing the statement that the CDA was "horrified by Tory frontbench spokesmen advocating gay lifestyles and New Labour ideas". Andrew Hunter MP withdrew his patronage from the magazine due to the appearance of the advert, saying that he was 'appalled' by the "antics" of the CDA and that he no longer wanted to be associated with the magazine "in any way".MP severs tie with far-right magazine, by Paul Waugh, The Independent, May 17, 2002Gay Life Magazine article
Michael Keith Smith later described the advertisement, penned by former CDA supporter Peter Gibbs, as "regrettably homophobic". Smith branded the incident "an untoward event" and promised that CDA will take a more "forward-looking and inclusive role in future".
In 2002, Iain Duncan Smith expelled CDA Chairman Michael Keith Smith from the Conservative PartyTory expelled over rival election plan, by Marie Woolf, The Independent, May 18, 2002 for threatening to stand candidates against Conservatives.Looking down on Armageddon, Searchlight Magazine 
Soon afterwards, Smith resigned from the Conservative Party, and stood as a parliamentary candidate for the United Kingdom Independence Party in Portsmouth North where the Labour victory was claimed by the Conservative candidate to be a result of the UKIP candidacy,UKIP candidate wins £10,000 for internet libel a claim also made by Richard North of the Bruges Group.
As a result, the CDA Committee met in September 2008 and agreed that it would be best if the CDA was wound up. In December, Mike Smith announced on the CDA forums that the CDA would be disbanding as he himself had now come to support the Tories again and wanted to campaign for them in the run-up to the next UK general election and circulated a letter to all members and supporters saying that the CDA would be effectively replaced by the Traditional Britain Group and urging their support.traditionalbritain.org/ 
Michael Keith Smith died unexpectedly at Portchester, Fareham, Hampshire, on 3 July 2010.portsmouth.co.6404791.jp




