[[Ribot (horse)]]

CATEGORIES: 1952 racehorse births, 1972 racehorse deaths, Arc winners, British Champion Thoroughbred Sires, Thoroughbred racehorses, Italian racehorses, Racehorses trained in Italy, Racehorses bred in the United Kingdom, Undefeated racehorses, Thoroughbred family 4

Ribot (February 27, 1952 - April 28, 1972) was a British-bred Italian-trained Thoroughbred racehorse who is considered by many to be one of the greatest horses of all time. Undefeated in sixteen races, he won over all distances, from 5 furlongs (1,000m) to 1m 7f (3,000m) in three countries and on all types of track conditions. He was the best Italian two-year-old of 1954, when his three wins included the Gran Criterium. He won his first four races of 1955 in Italy before being sent to France where he won the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe. In the following year he was even better, recording wide-margin victories in both the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes and the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe.
Ribot was then retired to stud where he proved to be a highly successful breeding stallion. The performances of Ribot's progeny saw him become the leading sire in Great Britain & Ireland on three occasions (1963, 1967, 1968).

Breeding

Ribot was bred by Italy's leading Thoroughbred breeder, Federico Tesio, who personally bred six of the horses that appeared in the first three generations of Ribot's pedigree. Ribot was foaled at the English National Stud at Newmarket, Suffolk on 27 February 1952. He was sired by Tenerani an outstanding Italian racehorse whose most notable international success came when he defeated the French champion Arbar in the 1948 Goodwood Cup. Ribot's dam Romanella was a successful broodmare who also produced the Premio Regina Elena winner Rossellina and the Premio Parioli winner Raeburn.
He was described as being a "medium-sized bay with a lovely intelligent head and a perfect temperament.  The secret of his success was probably his depth through the heart and there was not a girth at Dormello to fit him."Talmadge Phelps, John and Frank, Dormello-Olgiata, 1961-1962, Derby Publishing Co., Milan, 1962 Like many of Tesio's horses, Ribot was named after an artist—in this case, the French realist Théodule-Augustin Ribot. Tesio, who also bred the undefeated and prepotent sire Nearco, did not live to see Ribot develop into a champion. After Tesio's death in May 1954, Ribot was raced by Tesio's widow Donna Lydia and  his business partner, Marchese Mario Incisa della Rocchetta.
Ribot was trained in Italy by Ugo Penco and ridden by Enrico Camici. He was nicknamed 'il cavallo super,' meaning 'the super horse'.

Racing record

1954 two-year-old season

In 1954 Ribot began his racing career by winning the Premio Tramuschio over 1,000m at San Siro Racecourse by one length. He then won the Criterium Nazionale over 1,200m at the same course by two lengths. He ended the season by running the Gran Criterium over 1,500m at San Siro. In this race Camici attempted to ride a waiting race and Ribot won narrowly by a head from Gail. In all his subsequent races he either led from the start or raced close to the leaders.

1955 three-year-old season

Ribot had been unusually small as a yearling, being nicknamed "il piccolo" (little one). As a result he was never entered in races such as the Premio Parioli and the Derby Italiano.
In 1955 Ribot won the Premio Pisa at Pisa Racecourse by six lengths and then took the Premio Emanuelle Filiberto at San Siro by 10 lengths. After a break to allow the colt to recover from a respiratory illness he won the Premio Brembo by one length from Derain, and the Premio Besana over 2,400m by 10 lengths, again beating Derain, who won the St Leger Italiano two weeks later.
In October he raced outside Italy for the first time when he contested the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe over 2400 metres at Longchamp Racecourse. Starting at odds of 9/1 took the lead early in the straight and won by three lengths from Beau Prince.

1956 four-year-old season

Ribot began his four-yer-old season with three easy wins at San Siro. He won the Premio Giulio Venino over 2000 metres by four lengths, the Premio Vittuone over 2400 metres by twelve lengths and the Premio Garbagnate over 200 metres by eight lengths from Grand Rapids. He then contested Italy's Premier weight-for-age race, the Gran Premio di Milano over 3000 metres at San Siro. He led from the start and won by eight lengths from Tissot.
In July, Ribot raced outside Italy for the second time when he was sent to England for the sixth running of the King George VI and Queen Elizabeth Stakes over one and a half miles at Ascot Racecourse. Racing on soft ground, he started the 2/5 favourite and won by five lengths from High Veldt and Todrai. His fourteenth consecutive victory saw him equal the record of the pre-War Italian champion Nearco. Ribot then returned to Milan, where he won the Premio del Piazzale over 1800 metres, winning by eight lengths from a field which included the Premio Parioli winner Magabait.
In October, Ribot returned to Paris for his second Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe. He faced a stronger field than in 1955, with the field including Talgo (Irish Derby), Tanerko, Fisherman, Career Boy, Master Boing (Washington, D.C. International) and  Oroso. Ribot took the lead on the turn into the straight and drew away from the field to win by an official margin of six lengths from Talgo. Photographs suggest that the winning margin was more like eight and a half lengths.

Stud record

Retired from racing, Ribot had an exceptionally successful career at stud. Under a one-year contract, he first stood at Lord Derby's stud in England.
Fiery on the racetrack, Ribot developed a dangerous temperament and had to be handled by the strongest stallion groom at Darby Dan Farm in Lexington, Kentucky, where he stood at stud. Ribot was so territorial that he would not tolerate the sight of other stallions and once he refused to calm down until a herd of cows was moved over a hill and out of his vision.
Originally, Ribot was leased by Darby Dan to stand in the United States for five years. After his temper surfaced, no insurance company would offer a policy to cover shipping him back to Europe. A new contract was worked out, and Ribot remained in the United States until his death. He is buried in the equine cemetery at Darby Dan, near his sons Graustark and His Majesty.
He was leading sire in Great Britain and Ireland on three occasions (1963, 1967 and 1968). His European progeny included Molvedo and Prince Royal, both winners of the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe; Ragusa, winner of the Irish Derby, St. Leger, King George VI & Queen Elizabeth Stakes, and Eclipse Stakes. In America he sired Long Look (won the Epsom Oaks), the full brothers Ribocco and Ribero, both winners of the Irish Derby and St. Leger; Boucher, the winner of the 1972 St Leger; Tom Rolfe, winner of the 1965 Preakness Stakes; Arts and Letters, winner of the 1969 Belmont Stakes; and Graustark. Ribot's son His Majesty sired the Kentucky Derby and Preakness Stakes winner Pleasant Colony, and his great grandson Alleged, by Tom Rolfe's son Hoist The Flag, emulated him by winning the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe in succssive years (1977 and 1978).Australian Stud Book: Ribot (GB) Retrieved 2010-11-19
At least 15 Ribot stallions stood in Australasia, including Arivederci, Angeluccio, Latin Lover, Boucher (USA), Dies, Ribollire, Heir Apparent, Koryo, Regent's Tale, Ruantallan, Ribotlight, and Headland. The progeny of the 15 imported stallions had won over A$7 million until late 1979.de Bourg, Ross, The Australian and New Zealand Thoroughbred, Nelson, West Melbourne, 1980, ISBN 0 17 005860 3

Honours

Timeform awarded Ribot a rating of 133 in 1955, six pounds behind the British-trained sprinter Pappa Fourway. In 1956 he was give a rating of 142, making him the highest-rated horse in Europe.
A Century of Champions, written by John Randall and Tony Morris and published by Portway Press Limited, says that photographs show Sea-Bird winning the Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe by only four and a half lengths (and not by an official six lengths). Thus, Ribot's triumph (correctly by eight and half lengths and not by an official six lengths) in the race is de facto the largest winning distance. His Timeform rating is also based on the wrong official winning distance of his Prix de l'Arc de Triomphe victory. Hence, there is reason to think that he should have been rated higher. In the same book, Randall and Morris rated Ribot the third best racehorse of the 20th century, behind Sea Bird and Secretariat. As both Sea Bird and Secretariat never raced beyond the age of three, Ribot was the highest-rated horse in absolute terms.
In La Gazzetta dello Sport's poll, Ribot was named the 4th greatest Italian athlete of the 20th century. The Premio Ribot at Capannelle Racecourse is named in his honour, and he has been named Horse of the Century in Italy.

Pedigree








