[[International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling]]

CATEGORIES: Environmental treaties, Whaling, Treaties concluded in 1946, Treaties entered into force in 1948, Whale conservation, 1948 in the environment, 1946 in Washington, D.C., Treaties of Antigua and Barbuda, Treaties of Argentina, Treaties of Austria, Treaties of Australia, Treaties of Belgium, Treaties of Belize, Treaties of Benin, Treaties of the Brazilian military government, Treaties of Bulgaria, Treaties of Cambodia, Treaties of Cameroon, Treaties of Chile, Treaties of the Republic of China (1949–71), Treaties of the People's Republic of China, Treaties of Colombia, Treaties of the Republic of the Congo, Treaties of Costa Rica, Treaties of Ivory Coast, Treaties of Croatia, Treaties of Cyprus, Treaties of the Czech Republic, Treaties of Denmark, Treaties of Dominica, Treaties of the Dominican Republic, Treaties of Ecuador, Treaties of Eritrea, Treaties of Estonia, Treaties of Finland, Treaties of the French Fourth Republic, Treaties of Gabon, Treaties of the Gambia, Treaties of West Germany, Treaties of Ghana, Treaties of Grenada, Treaties of Guatemala, Treaties of Guinea, Treaties of Guinea-Bissau, Treaties of Hungary, Treaties of Iceland, Treaties of India, Treaties of Ireland, Treaties of Israel, Treaties of Italy, Treaties of Japan, Treaties of Kenya, Treaties of Kiribati, Treaties of South Korea, Treaties of Laos, Treaties of Lithuania, Treaties of Luxembourg, Treaties of Mali, Treaties of the Marshall Islands, Treaties of Mauritania, Treaties of Mexico, Treaties of Monaco, Treaties of Mongolia, Treaties of Morocco, Treaties of Nauru, Treaties of the Netherlands, Treaties of New Zealand, Treaties of Nicaragua, Treaties of Norway, Treaties of Oman, Treaties of Palau, Treaties of Panama, Treaties of Peru, Treaties of Poland, Treaties of Portugal, Treaties of Romania, Treaties of the Soviet Union, Treaties of Saint Kitts and Nevis, Treaties of Saint Lucia, Treaties of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Treaties of San Marino, Treaties of Senegal, Treaties of Slovakia, Treaties of Slovenia, Treaties of the Solomon Islands, Treaties of the Union of South Africa, Treaties of Spain, Treaties of Suriname, Treaties of Sweden, Treaties of Switzerland, Treaties of Tanzania, Treaties of Togo, Treaties of Tuvalu, Treaties of the United Kingdom, Treaties of the United States, Treaties of Uruguay, Treaties establishing intergovernmental organizations, Animal treaties, Treaties extended to Aruba, Treaties extended to the Netherlands Antilles, Treaties extended to Greenland, Treaties extended to the Faroe Islands

The International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling is an international environmental agreement signed in 1946 in order to "provide for the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly development of the whaling industry".
It was signed by 15 nations in Washington, D.C. on 2 December 1946Key Documents. Iwcoffice. Retrieved on 23 July 2013. and took effect on 10 November 1948. Its protocol (which represented the first substantial revision of the convention and extended the definition of a "whale-catcher" to include helicopters as well as ships) was signed in Washington on 19 November 1956. The convention is a successor to the International Agreement for the Regulation of Whaling, signed in London on 8 June 1937, and the protocols for that agreement signed in London on 24 June 1938, and 26 November 1945.
The objectives of the agreement are the protection of all whale species from overhunting, the establishment of a system of international regulation for the whale fisheries to ensure proper conservation and development of whale stocks, and safeguarding for future generations the great natural resources represented by whale stocks. The primary instrument for the realization of these aims is the International Whaling Commission which was established pursuant to this convention. The commission has made many revisions to the schedule that makes up the bulk of the convention. The Commission process has also reserved for governments the right to carry out scientific research which involves killing of whales.
There have been consistent disagreement over the scope of the convention. According to the IWC:

Signatories

As of January 2014, membership consists of 89 Governments from countries around the World.int/members The initial signatory states were Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Denmark, France, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, South Africa, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States.

Withdrawals

As of January 2014, eight states that were formerly parties to the convention have withdrawn by denouncing it. These states are Canada (which withdrew on 30 June 1982), Egypt, Greece, Jamaica, Mauritius, Philippines, the Seychelles and Venezuela.state.pdf Belize, Brazil, Dominica, Ecuador, Iceland, Japan, New Zealand, and Panama have all withdrawn from the convention for a period of time after ratification but subsequently have ratified it a second time. The Netherlands, Norway, and Sweden have all withdrawn from the convention twice, only to have accepted it a third time.






