[[Federal holidays in the United States]]

CATEGORIES: Public holidays in the United States, Government of the United States

In The US, a federal holiday is an authorized holiday which has been recognized by the US government. Every year on a US federal holiday, non-essential federal government offices are closed, and every federal employee is paid for the holiday. Private-sector employees required to work on a legal holiday may receive holiday pay in addition to their ordinary wages.
Federal holidays are designated by the United States Congress in Title V of the United States Code ( Congress has authority to create holidays only for federal institutions (including federally owned properties) and employees, and for the District of Columbia. However, as a general rule other institutions, including banks, post offices, and schools, may be closed on those days.  In various parts of the country, state and city holidays may be observed in addition to the federal holidays.

List of Federal Holidays

Most of the eleven U.S. federal holidays are also state holidays. A holiday that falls on a weekend is usually observed on the closest weekday.  The official names came from the laws that define holidays for federal employees.
New Year's Day, Independence Day, Veterans Day, and Christmas are observed on the same calendar date each year. Holidays that fall on a Saturday are observed by federal employees who work a standard Monday to Friday week on the previous Friday. Federal employees who work on Saturday will observe the holiday on Saturday; Friday will be a regular work day. Holidays that fall on a Sunday are observed by federal workers the following Monday. The other holidays always fall on a particular day of the week.S. Office of Personnel Management.
Although many states recognize most or all federal holidays as state holidays, Federal law cannot compel them to do so.  Furthermore, states can recognize other days as state holidays.  As an example, the State of Texas recognizes all federal holidays except Columbus Day, and in addition recognizes the Friday after Thanksgiving, Christmas Eve, and the day after Christmas as state holidays.tsl.gov/ref/abouttx/holidays.
Private employers also cannot be required to observe federal or state holidays, the key exception being federally-chartered banks.  Some private employers, often by a union contract, pay a differential such as time-and-a-half or double-time to employees who work on some federal holidays.  However, most non-unionized private sector employees only receive their standard pay for working on a federal holiday if it is not a designated holiday at their company.

Former federal holidays

In 1975, Victory Day, also called "VJ Day" and "Victory over Japan Day" was abolished after being in place since 1948.  According to this article and other sources, some claim the holiday to be "racist" and generally encourages "hate" against Japanese Americans, and for that matter, other races from Asia.  Also, the fact that an atomic bomb was used to end the war with Japan is also cause for its abolition.  Today, only the U.S. state of Rhode Island still officially observes this day with public offices and schools being closed.

Legal holidays due to presidential proclamation

Federal law also provides for the declaration of other public holidays by the President of the United States. Generally the president will provide a reasoning behind the elevation of the day, and call on the people of the United States to observe the day "with appropriate ceremonies and activities."  Examples of Presidentially-declared holidays were the days of the funerals for former Presidents Ronald Reagan and Gerald Ford; federal government offices were closed and employees given a paid holiday.

Controversy, criticism, and social views

Some people have objected to honoring Martin Luther King, Jr. and Christopher Columbus with holidays. In particular, Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina opposed the creation of Martin Luther King Day.

Columbus Day

Wide protests by the Native American community as well as some Italian Americans support the abolition of Columbus Day, mainly due to its ideology in "forcefully" conquering and converting whole populations with another and encouraging "imperialism" and "colonization.

Proposed federal holidays

Many proposed federal holidays have come up over time.  According to an article from CBS, federal holidays are generally "expensive" and they only allow federal workers to take the day off.  As the U.S. federal government is a large employer, the holidays are expensive.  If a holiday is controversial, opposition will generally cause bills that propose such holidays to die.  Martin Luther King Jr.'s birthday, for example, was one that took much effort to pass.  And once it did pass, it took more effort for all states to eventually recognize it.
The following list is an example of holidays that have been proposed and have reasons why they are not observed at the federal level today.  Some of these holidays are observed at the state level.








