[[Canada Goose]]

CATEGORIES: Birds of Australia, Branta, Geese, Birds of Canada, Birds of Iceland, Birds of North America, Migratory birds (Western hemisphere), Birds of Europe, Game birds, British Isles coastal fauna, Animals described in 1758, Birds of Ukraine

The Canada Goose (Branta canadensis) is a goose with a black head and neck, white patches on the face, and a brown body. Native to arctic and temperate regions of North America, it also occasionally migrates to northern Europe, and has been introduced to Britain, New Zealand, and other temperate regions.

Taxonomy and etymology

The Canada Goose was one of the many species described by Carl Linnaeus in his 18th-century work Systema Naturae.
The Cackling Goose was originally considered to be the same species or a subspecies of the Canada Goose, but in July 2004 the American Ornithologists' Union's Committee on Classification and Nomenclature split the two into two species, making Cackling Goose into a full species with the scientific name Branta hutchinsii. The British Ornithologists' Union followed suit in June 2005.
The AOU has divided the many subspecies between the two species. The subspecies of the Canada Goose were listed as:
The distinctions between the two geese have led to confusion and debate among ornithologists. This has been aggravated by the overlap between the small types of Canada Goose and larger types of Cackling Goose. The old "Lesser Canada Goose" was believed to be a partly hybrid population, with the birds named taverneri considered a mixture of minima, occidentalis and parvipes. In addition, it has been determined that the Barnacle Goose is a derivative of the Cackling Goose lineage, whereas the Hawaiian Goose is derived from the Canada Goose.

Description

The black head and neck with a white "chinstrap" distinguish the Canada Goose from all other goose species, with the exception of the Barnacle Goose, but the latter has a black breast, and also grey, rather than brownish, body plumage. Some of the smaller races can be hard to distinguish from the Cackling Goose, which slightly overlap in mass. However, the Cackling Goose is usually considerably smaller, scarcely larger than a Mallard with a much shorter neck and smaller bill.
This species ranges from . This specimen is the largest wild goose ever recorded of any species.
Canada Goose is protected in Canada under the Migratory Birds Convention Act, 1994. The possession, hunting, and interfering with the activity of the animals are restricted by law.  

Distribution and habitat

This species is native to North America. It breeds in Canada and the northern United States in a variety of habitats. The Great Lakes region maintains a very large population of Canada Geese. Canada Geese occur year-round in the southern part of their breeding range, including most of the eastern seaboard and the Pacific coast. Between California and South Carolina in the southern United States and northern Mexico, Canada Geese are primarily present as migrants from further north during the winter.
By the early 20th century, over-hunting and loss of habitat in the late 19th century and early 20th century had resulted in a serious decline in the numbers of this bird in its native range. The Giant Canada Goose subspecies was believed to be extinct in the 1950s until, in 1962, a small flock was discovered wintering in Rochester, Minnesota, by Harold Hanson of the Illinois Natural History Survey.
In recent years, Canada Goose populations in some areas have grown substantially, so much so that many consider them pests for their droppings, bacteria in their droppings, noise, and confrontational behavior. This problem is partially due to the removal of natural predators and an abundance of safe, man-made bodies of water near food sources, such as those found on golf courses, in public parks and beaches, and in planned communities. Due in part to the interbreeding of various migratory subspecies with the introduced non-migratory Giant subspecies, Canada Geese are frequently a year-around feature of such urban environments. 
Contrary to its normal migration routine, large flocks of Canada Geese have established permanent residence in Esquimalt, British Columbia, on Chesapeake Bay, in Virginia's James River regions, and in the Triangle area of North Carolina (Raleigh, Durham, Chapel Hill), and nearby Hillsborough. Some Canada Geese have taken up permanent residence as far south as Florida, in places such as retention ponds in apartment complexes. Large resident populations of Canada Geese are also present in much of the San Francisco Bay Area in Northern California.

Outside North America

Canada Geese have reached northern Europe naturally, as has been proved by ringing recoveries. The birds include those of the subspecies parvipes, and possibly others. Canada Geese are also found naturally on the Kamchatka Peninsula in eastern Siberia, eastern China, and throughout Japan.
Canada Geese have also been introduced in Europe, and have established populations in Great Britain, Ireland, the Netherlands, Belgium, France, Germany, Scandinavia, and Finland. Most European populations are non-migratory, but those in more northerly parts of Sweden and Finland migrate to the North Sea and Baltic coasts.
Canada Geese were introduced as a game bird into New Zealand in 1905. They have become a problem in some areas by fouling pastures and damaging crops. They were protected under the Wildlife Act 1953 and the population was managed by Fish and Game New Zealand who culled excessive bird numbers. In 2011 the government removed the protection status, allowing anyone to kill the birds.

Behavior

Like most geese, the Canada Goose is naturally migratory with the wintering range being most of the United States. The calls overhead from large groups of Canada Geese flying in V-shaped formation signal the transitions into spring and autumn. In some areas, migration routes have changed due to changes in habitat and food sources. In mild climates from California to the Great Lakes, some of the population has become non-migratory due to adequate winter food supply and a lack of former predators.
Males exhibit agonistic behaviour both on and off breeding and nesting grounds. This behavior rarely involves interspecific killing. One documented case involved a male defending its nest from a Brant Goose that wandered into the area, the following attack lasted for one hour until the death of the Brant. The cause of death was suffocation or drowning in mud as a direct result of the Canada Goose's pecking the head of the Brant into the mud. Researchers attributed it to high hormone levels and the Brant's inability to leave the nesting area.

Diet

Canada Geese are primarily herbivores, Their diet includes green vegetation and grains. The Canada Goose eats a variety of grasses when on land. It feeds by grasping a blade of grass with the bill, then tearing it with a jerk of the head. The Canada Goose also eats beans and grains such as wheat, rice, and corn when they are available. In the water, it feeds from silt at the bottom of the body of water. It also feeds on aquatic plants, such as seaweeds. In urban areas, they are also known to pick food out of garbage bins.

Reproduction

During the second year of their lives, Canada Geese find a mate. They are monogamous, and most couples stay together all of their lives. If one dies, the other may find a new mate. The female lays from 2–9 eggs with an average of five and both parents protect the nest while the eggs incubate, but the female spends more time at the nest than the male.
Its nest is usually located in an elevated area near water such as streams, lakes, ponds and sometimes on a beaver lodge. Its eggs are laid in a shallow depression lined with plant material and down.
The incubation period, in which the female incubates while the male remains nearby, lasts for 24–28 days after laying. As the annual summer molt also takes place during the breeding season, the adults lose their flight feathers for 20–40 days, regaining flight at about the same time as their goslings start to fly.
As soon as the goslings hatch they are immediately capable of walking, swimming and finding their own food (a diet similar to the adult geese). Parents are often seen leading their goslings in a line, usually with one adult at the front, and the other at the back. While protecting their goslings, parents often violently chase away nearby creatures, from small blackbirds to lone humans that approach, after warning them by giving off a hissing sound and will then attack with bites and slaps of the wings if the threat does not retreat or has seized a gosling. Most of the species that prey on eggs will also take a gosling. Although parents are hostile to unfamiliar geese, they may form groups of a number of goslings and a few adults, called crèches.
The offspring enter the fledging stage any time from 6 to 9 weeks of age. They do not leave their parents until after the spring migration, when they return to their birthplace.

Migration

Canada Geese are known for their seasonal migrations. Most Canada Geese have staging or resting areas where they join up with others. Their autumn migration can be seen from September to the beginning of November. The early migrants have a tendency to spend less time at rest stops and go through the migration much faster. The later birds usually spend more time at rest stops.
Canada Geese fly in a distinctive V-shaped flight formation, with an altitude of 1 km (3,000 feet) for migration flight. The maximum flight ceiling of Canada Geese is unknown, but they have been reported at 9 km (29,000 feet).
Flying in the V formation has been the subject of study by researchers. The front position is rotated since flying in front consumes the most energy. Canada Geese leave the winter grounds more quickly than the summer grounds. Elevated thyroid hormones, such as T3 and T4, have been measured in geese just after a big migration. This is believed because of the long days of flying in migration the thyroid gland sends out more T4 which will help the body cope with the longer journey. The increased T4 levels are also associated with increased muscle mass (hypertrophy) of the breast muscle, also because of the longer time spent flying. It is believed that the body sends out more T4 to help the goose's body with this long task by speeding up the metabolism and temperature at which the body works.

Survival

The life span in the wild of geese that survive to adulthood ranges 10–24 years.

Predators

Known predators of eggs and goslings include coyotes, Arctic Foxes (Vulpes lagopus), Northern Raccoons (Procyon lotor), Red Foxes (Vulpes vulpes), large gulls (Larus ssp.), Common Raven (Corvus corax), American Crows (Corvus brachyrhynchos) and both Brown (Ursus arctos) and American Black Bears (Ursus americanus). W., N. K. Dawe, I. McTaggart-Cowan, J. M. Cooper, G. W. Kaiser, and M. C. E. McNall. 1990. The birds of British Columbia, Vol. 1: introduction and loons through waterfowl. R. Br. Columbia Mus. Victoria. R. 2002. Reproductive success and breeding ground banding of Atlantic Population Canada Geese in northern Québec 2001. Unpubl. rep. Atlantic Flyway Council. W. 1967. The geese of the Anderson River delta, Northwest Territories. Phd Thesis. Univ. of Alberta, Edmonton. D. and R. K. Misra. 1972. Predation on Canada Goose nests at McConnell River, Northwest Territories. J. Wildl. Manage. 36:414-422.
Once they reach adulthood, due to their large size and often aggressive behavior, Canada Geese are rarely preyed on, although prior injury may make them more vulnerable to natural predators. B. and D. G. Raveling. 1992. Mortality during the breeding season. Pages 396-422 in Ecology and management of breeding waterfowl. (Batt, B. D. J., A. D. Afton, M. G. Anderson, C. D. Ankney, D. H. Johnson, and et al., Eds.) Univ. of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis. Beyond humans, adults can be taken by CoyotesHanson, W. C. and L. L. Eberhardt. 1971. The Columbia River Canada Goose Population 1950-1970. Wildl. Monogr. 28. and Gray Wolves (Canis lupus). G. and H. G. Lumsden. 1977. Nesting ecology of Canada Geese in the Hudson Bay Lowlands of Ontario: evolution and population regulation. Fish Wildl. Res. Rep. no. 98. Ontario Min. Nat. Resour. Avian predators known to kill adults as well as young geese include Snowy Owls (Bubo scandiacus), Golden Eagles (Aquila chrysaetos) and Bald Eagles (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) and, though rarely on large adult geese, Great Horned Owls (Bubo virginianus), Peregrine Falcons (Falco peregrinus) and Gyrfalcons (Falco rusticolus). Adults are quite vigorous at displacing potential predators from the nest site, with predator prevention usually falling to the larger male of the pair. C. 1925. Life histories of North American wild fowl, Pt. 2. U.S. Natl. Mus. Bull. 130. S. 1976. Handbook of North American birds, Vol. 2: Waterfowl. Pt. 1. Yale Univ. Press, New Haven, CT. E. and L. R. Jahn. 1959. Social behavior and breeding success in Canada Geese (Branta canadensis) confined under semi-natural conditions. Auk 76:478-509. Males usually attempt to draw attention of approaching predators and will toll (mob terrestrial predators without physical contact) often in accompaniment with males of other goose species. Eagles of both species frequently cause geese to fly off in mass from some distance, though in other instances geese may seem unconcerned at perched Bald Eagles nearby. R., J. P. Dunn, and D. G. Raveling. 1994. Predator-prey interactions between eagles and Cackling Canada and Ross' geese during winter in California. Wilson Bull. 106:272-288. Canada Geese are quite wary of humans where they are regularly harvested but can otherwise become habituated to fearlessness towards humans, especially where they are fed by them. A. 1987. Effects of disturbance and hunting on the behavior of Canada Goose family groups in east central Wisconsin. J. Wildl. Manage. 51:517-522.

Habitat

Salinity plays a role in the growth and development of goslings. Moderate to high salinity concentrations without fresh water results in slower development, growth and saline-induced mortality. Goslings are susceptible to saline-induced mortality before their nasal salt glands become functional, with the majority occurring before the sixth day of life.

Disease

Canada Geese are susceptible to avian bird flus, such as H5N1. A study was carried out using the HPAI virus, a H5N1 virus, the results found that the geese are susceptible to the virus and would prove useful for monitoring the spread of the virus, attributed to the high mortality of the infected birds. The study found that prior exposure to other viruses may result in some resistance to H5N1.

Relationship with humans

In North America, non-migratory Canada Goose populations have been on the rise. The species is frequently found on golf courses, parking lots and urban parks, which would have previously hosted only migratory geese on rare occasions. Owing to its adaptability to human-altered areas, it has become the most common waterfowl species in North America. In many areas, non-migratory Canada Geese are now regarded as pests by humans. They are suspected of being a cause of an increase in high fecal coliforms at beaches.portal.pa.pt/gateway/PTARGS_0_1105191_0_0_18/State%20Parks%20Again%20Offering%20Early%20Canada%20Goose%20Hunting.
Since 1999, The United States Department of Agriculture Wildlife Services agency has been engaged in lethal culls of Canada Geese primarily in urban or densely populated areas. The agency responds to municipalities or private land owners, such as golf courses, who find the geese obtrusive or object to their waste.
Geese have a tendency to attack humans when they feel themselves or their goslings to be threatened. First the geese will stand erect, spread their wings and produce a hissing sound. Next, the geese will charge. They may then bite or attack with their wings.Division of Wildlife (Ohio) Goose Attacks
Canada Geese have been implicated in a number of bird strikes by aircraft. Their large size and tendency to fly in flocks may exacerbate their impact. In the United States, the Canada Goose is the second most damaging bird strike to airplanes, with the most damaging being turkey vultures.

Population

In 2000, the North American population for the geese was estimated to be between 4 million and 5 million birds. A 21 year study in Wichita, Kansas found the number of geese increase from 1,600 to 18,000 birds.






