[[International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry]]

CATEGORIES: Chemical nomenclature, Chemistry organizations, International scientific organizations, Organizations established in 1919, Standards organizations

The International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), on lowercase letters: iupac,  As of 1 August 2012, the Executive Director is Dr. John D. Petersen. Petersen Appointed IUPAC Executive Director. IUPAC. Retrieved on 2013-07-29.
IUPAC was established in 1919 as the successor of the International Congress of Applied Chemistry for the advancement of chemistry. Its members, the National Adhering Organizations, can be national chemistry societies, national academies of sciences, or other bodies representing chemists. There are fifty-four National Adhering Organizations and three Associate National Adhering Organizations. IUPAC's Inter-divisional Committee on Nomenclature and Symbols (IUPAC nomenclature) is the recognized world authority in developing standards for the naming of the chemical elements and compounds. Since its creation, IUPAC has been run by many different committees with different responsibilities.Pure and Applied Chemistry Editorial Advisory Board web page retrieved 15 April 2010Evaluation Committee page retrieved 15 April 2010
IUPAC is best known for its works standardizing nomenclature in chemistry and other fields of science, but IUPAC has publications in many fields including chemistry, biology and physics. Some important work IUPAC has done in these fields includes standardizing nucleotide base sequence code names; publishing books for environmental scientists, chemists, and physicists; and leading the way in improving education in science. 9 July 2009. Retrieved on 17 February 2010. Retrieved 15 April 2010 IUPAC is also known for standardizing the atomic weights of the elements through one of its oldest standing committees, the Commission on Isotopic Abundances and Atomic Weights.

Creation and history

thumb|upright|alt=A black and white image of a bald man in a dark outfit, with a bushy white beard and moustache|Friedrich August Kekulé von StradonitzThe need for an international standard for chemistry was first addressed in 1860 by a committee headed by German scientist Friedrich August Kekulé von Stradonitz. This committee was the first international conference to create an international naming system for organic compounds. The ideas that were formulated in that conference evolved into the official IUPAC nomenclature of organic chemistry. The IUPAC stands as a legacy of this meeting, making it one of the most important historical international collaborations of chemistry societies. Since this time, IUPAC has been the official organization held with the responsibility of updating and maintaining official organic nomenclature. Germany was finally admitted into IUPAC during 1929. However, Nazi Germany was removed from IUPAC during World War II.
During World War II, IUPAC was affiliated with the Allied powers, but had little involvement during the war effort itself. After the war, West Germany was allowed back into IUPAC. Since World War II, IUPAC has been focused on standardizing nomenclature and methods in science without interruption.

Committees and governance

IUPAC is governed by several committees that all have different responsibilities. The committees are as follows: Bureau, CHEMRAWN (Chem Research Applied to World Needs) Committee, Committee on Chemistry Education, Committee on Chemistry and Industry, Committee on Printed and Electronic Publications, Evaluation Committee, Executive Committee, Finance Committee, Interdivisional Committee on Terminology, Nomenclature and Symbols, Project Committee, Pure and Applied Chemistry Editorial Advisory Board. Each committee is made from members of different National Adhering Organizations from different countries.IUPAC National Adhering Organizations retrieved 15 April 2010
The steering committee hierarchy for IUPAC is as follows:IUPAC Project Committee retrieved 15 April 2010

Nomenclature

The IUPAC committee has a long history of officially naming organic and inorganic compounds as mentioned in the Creation and History section. IUPAC nomenclature is developed so that any compound can be named under one set of standard rules to avoid repeat names. The first publication, which is information from the International Congress of Applied Chemistry,IUPAC Publications List retrieved 15 April 2010 is on IUPAC nomenclature of organic compounds can be found from the early 20th century in A Guide to IUPAC Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (1900).

Organic nomenclature

IUPAC organic nomenclature has three basic parts: the substituents, carbon chain length and chemical ending. The substituents are any functional groups attached to the main carbon chain. The main carbon chain is the longest possible continuous chain. The chemical ending denotes what type of molecule it is. For example, the ending "ane" denotes a single bonded carbon chain, as in "hexane" (
Another example of IUPAC organic nomenclature is cyclohexanol:

Inorganic nomenclature

Basic IUPAC inorganic nomenclature has two main parts: the cation and the anion. The cation is the name for the positively charged ion and the anion is the name for the negatively charged ion.
An example of IUPAC nomenclature of inorganic chemistry is potassium chlorate (KClO3):

Amino acid and nucleotide base codes

IUPAC also has a system for giving codes to identify amino acids and nucleotide bases. IUPAC needed a coding system that represented long sequences of amino acids. This would allow for these sequences to be compared to try to find homologies. For example:
These codes make it easier and shorter to write down the amino acid sequences that make up proteins. The nucleotide bases are made up of purines (adenine and guanine) and pyrimidines (cytosine and thymine or uracil). These nucleotide bases make up DNA and RNA. These nucleotide base codes make the genome of an organism much smaller and easier to read.Amino Acid and Nucleotide Base Codes retrieved 15 April 2010

Publications

Non-series books

Experimental Thermodynamics book series

The Experimental Thermodynamics books series covers many topics in the fields of thermodynamics.

Series of books on analytical and physical chemistry of environmental systems

Colored cover book and website series (nomenclature)

IUPAC color codes their books in order to make each publication distinguishable.

International Year of Chemistry

IUPAC and UNESCO are the lead organizations coordinating events for the International Year of Chemistry, which took place in 2011. 3 February 2009. Retrieved on 24 April 2010. 9 July 2009. Retrieved on 24 April 2010. The International Year of Chemistry was originally proposed by IUPAC at the General Assembly in Turin, Italy. This motion was adopted by UNESCO at a meeting in 2008. This event is also being held to encourage young people to get involved and contribute to chemistry. A further reason for this event being held is to honour how chemistry has made improvements to everyone's way of life.

Current projects

IUPAC current project list








