[[Marisa Tomei]]

CATEGORIES: 1964 births, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from New York City, American film actresses, American people of Italian descent, American soap opera actresses, American stage actresses, American television actresses, Best Supporting Actress Academy Award winners, Boston University alumni, Living people, People from Brooklyn

Marisa Tomei (; born December 4, 1964) is an American stage, film, and television actress. Following her work on As The World Turns, Tomei came to prominence as a supporting cast member on The Cosby Show spinoff A Different World in 1987. After she had appeared in a few films, her breakthrough came in 1992 with the comedy My Cousin Vinny, for which she won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.
Of the many films she appeared in over the past fifteen years, her most commercially successful to date are What Women Want (2000), Anger Management (2003), and Wild Hogs (2007).

Life and career

1964–83: Early life and career beginnings

Tomei was born in Brooklyn, New York, the daughter of Patricia Adelaide "Addie" Tomei (née Bianchi), an English teacher, and Garrett A. Tomei, a trial lawyer. Both of Tomei's parents are of Italian descent. Her maternal grandmother is from Sicily, Tomei's maternal grandfather is from Tuscany, and her father is also of Tuscan descent. The Complete Idiot's Guide to Italian History and Culture. Alpha Books, 2002. ISBN 0-02-864234-1."Film professor researches how female stardom links to American views on immigration and ethnicity". University of North Texas. October 25, 2001. Tomei grew up in the Midwood neighborhood of Brooklyn. "Actress's Challenge in Change of Pace and Diction", The New York Times, August 10, 1992. Retrieved October 23, 2007. While there, she became captivated by the Broadway shows her theater-loving parents took her to and drawn to acting as a career. At Andries Hudde Junior High School, she played the part of Hedy LaRue in a school production of How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying. After graduating from Edward R. Murrow High School in 1982, she attended Boston University for a year.

1984–2002: Breakthrough and critical success

Tomei followed up As the World Turns in 1986 with a role on the sitcom A Different World as Maggie Lauten during the first season. Her film debut was a minor role in the 1984 comedy film The Flamingo Kid, with Matt Dillon. Following several small films, her breakthrough comedic performance came in the 1992 film My Cousin Vinny,
After her Oscar win, Tomei appeared as silent film star Mabel Normand in the film Chaplin, with her then-boyfriend Robert Downey Jr. playing the title character. The following year she starred in the romantic drama Untamed Heart with Christian Slater, for which they won the MTV Movie Award for Best Kiss. Tomei had won the previous year for Best Breakthrough Performance for My Cousin Vinny. The following year Tomei appeared alongside Downey again in the romantic comedy Only You. She then appeared in Nick Cassavetes's Unhook the Stars opposite Gena Rowlands. Of Tomei's performance, The New York Times wrote, "Ms. Tomei is equally fine as Mildred's younger, hot-tempered neighbor, whose raw working-class feistiness and bluntly profane vocabulary initially repel the genteel older woman."Holden, Stephen The New York Times November 1, 1996 Unhook the Stars (1996) Retrieved February 2, 2011. She received her first Screen Actor's Guild Award nomination for Outstanding Female Supporting Actor for her performance. In 1998, she received an American Comedy Award nomination for Funniest Supporting Actress for Tamara Jenkins's cult film Slums of Beverly Hills, in which she appeared alongside Natasha Lyonne and Alan Arkin. The independent film was well received by critics and the public. Tomei very charming and funny as Rita" Tomei spent several years away from high-profile roles and major motion pictures in the late 1990s, before rising again to prominence in the early 2000s.
In 2001, Tomei appeared in Todd Field's Best Picture nominee In the Bedroom opposite Sissy Spacek and Tom Wilkinson, earning several awards including a ShoWest Award for Best Supporting Actress in 2002. Variety wrote, "Tomei is winning in what is surely her most naturalistic and unaffected performance," In the Bedroom earned Tomei a second Academy Award nomination and her first Golden Globe Award nomination for Best Supporting Actress. Tomei also shared a Screen Actors Guild Award nomination for Outstanding Performance by a Cast. In 2002 she appeared in the Bollywood-inspired film The Guru and voiced the role of Bree Blackburn, the main antagonist in the animated feature film The Wild Thornberrys Movie.
During the 1990s, Tomei made several television appearances. In 1995, she made a guest appearance on the sitcom Seinfeld, playing herself in the two-part episode "The Cadillac." In the episode, George Constanza attempts to get a date with her through a friend of Elaine Benes. She also made an appearance on The Simpsons as movie star Sara Sloane, who falls in love with Ned Flanders. Former Saturday Night Live cast member Jay Mohr wrote in his book Gasping for Airtime that, as guest host in October 1994, Tomei insisted that a proposed sketch, "Good Morning Brooklyn," not be used because she did not like the idea of being stereotyped; that stand displeased the writers and performers, given the show's penchant for satirizing celebrities. Tomei did however, parody her role from My Cousin Vinny, which had considerable Brooklyn influence, in a skit (out of several recurring) spoofing the 1995 O.J. Simpson murder trial.

2003–present

In 2003, Tomei appeared in one of her biggest commercial hits, Anger Management. The following year, she appeared in the film Alfie based on the 1966 British film of the same name, opposite Jude Law. In 2005, she was featured in an ad campaign for Hanes with the slogan "Look who we've got our Hanes on now", featuring various other celebrities including Michael Jordan, Jennifer Love Hewitt, Damon Wayans, Matthew Perry and, on Spanish-language advertising, Aracely Arámbula and Pablo Montero. In 2006, Tomei had a recurring role on Rescue Me, playing Johnny Gavin's ex-wife Angie. She won a Gracie Allen Award for Supporting Actress in a Drama Series for her work in the four episodes she appeared in. The following year she appeared in the comedy Wild Hogs alongside John Travolta, Tim Allen, William H. Macy and Martin Lawrence. The film was the 13th highest-grossing movie of 2007 ($168,273,550 domestic box office). She also starred in the Sidney Lumet-directed Before the Devil Knows You're Dead opposite co-stars Philip Seymour Hoffman and Ethan Hawke. The film was released to critical acclaim.
In 2008, Tomei played Cassidy/Pam, a struggling stripper, in the Darren Aronofsky film The Wrestler opposite Mickey Rourke. She appeared in several nude dance numbers in the film. On working with Tomei, Aronofsky said, "This role shows how courageous and brave Marisa is. And ultimately she's really sexy. We knew nudity was a big part of the picture, and she wanted to be that exposed and vulnerable." Ty Burr of The Boston Globe wrote, "Tomei gives a brave and scrupulously honest performance, one that's most naked when Pam has her clothes on."Burr, Ty The Boston Globe December 25, 2008 The Wrestler film review Retrieved February 1, 2011. Variety exclaimed, "Tomei is in top, emotionally forthright form as she charts a life passage similar to Ram's."McCarthy, Todd September 5, 2008 Variety The Wrestler Retrieved February 1, 2010. For her performance she was nominated for her first BAFTA, second Golden Globe and third Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress.
In 2009, Tomei recorded the role of Mary Magdalene in Thomas Nelson's audio Bible production The Word of Promise.
Tomei was No. 18 on the 2009 FHM list of "100 Sexiest Females in the world"."FMH 100 Sexiest 2009." FHM magazine. April 2009. The following year she appeared in two films: a comedy-drama, Cyrus and a comedy, Grown Ups.
Tomei was featured in the second episode of the third season of NBC's Who Do You Think You Are?, on February 10, 2012. In the episode, she traveled to the Tuscany region of Italy and the island of Elba (part of Tuscany) to uncover the truth about the 100-year-old murder of her great-grandfather, Francesco Leopoldo Bianchi, on her mother's side of the family.

Filmography

Stage work

Tomei has also done substantial work in the theatre. She was formerly involved with the Naked Angels Theatre Company. 

Awards and nominations






