[[Kate Hudson]]

CATEGORIES: 1979 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from Los Angeles, California, American Buddhists, American expatriates in the United Kingdom, American film actresses, American film producers, American people of English descent, American people of German descent, American people of Dutch descent, American people of Hungarian-Jewish descent, American people of Italian descent, American television actresses, Best Supporting Actress Golden Globe (film) winners, Buddhists of Jewish descent, Jewish American actresses

Kate Garry Hudson (born April 19, 1979) is an American actress. She came to prominence in 2001 after winning a Golden Globe and receiving several nominations, including one for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress, for her role in Almost Famous. She then starred in the hit film How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days in 2003. She has since appeared in films such as Raising Helen (2004), The Skeleton Key (2005), You, Me and Dupree (2006), Fool's Gold (2008), The Reluctant Fundamentalist (2012) and Bride Wars (2009). She has played a recurring role on the musical comedy-drama television series Glee as Cassandra July.

Early life

Hudson was born in Los Angeles, California, the daughter of Academy Award–winning actress Goldie Hawn and Bill Hudson, an actor, comedian, and musician.
Hudson has stated that her biological father "doesn't know me from a hole in the wall", and that she considers Russell to be her father. She has four half-siblings: Emily and Zachary Hudson, from her biological father's subsequent marriage to actress Cindy Williams; Lalania Hudson, from his relationship with another woman; and Wyatt, from her mother's relationship with Russell.
Hudson is of Italian (from her paternal grandmother), English, Hungarian Jewish, German, as well as very distant Dutch descent. In 1997, she graduated from Crossroads, a college preparatory school in Santa Monica. She was accepted to New York University but chose to pursue an acting career instead of an undergraduate degree.

Career

Hudson's breakthrough was as Penny Lane in Cameron Crowe's Almost Famous (2000), for which she won the Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress and was nominated for an Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress. She had previously appeared in the lesser-known films Gossip, a teenage drama, and 200 Cigarettes, a New Year's-set comedy with a large cast of actors. Regarding her early career and success, Hudson has noted that she is a "hard worker" and did not want to be associated with her well-known parents, wishing to avoid the perception that she "rode on somebody's coattails".
In 2002, she starred in the remake of the historical romance The Four Feathers, a film which was not well received by critics or audiences. Her next film, the romantic comedy How to Lose a Guy in 10 Days, was a box office success, grossing over $100 million after its February 2003 release. Hudson subsequently appeared in several romantic comedies, including Alex and Emma and Raising Helen; the films met with varying degrees of success.
Hudson headlined a thriller called The Skeleton Key in 2005. The film, which had a production budget of $43 million, enjoyed box office success, grossing over $91.9 million worldwide ($47.9 million in North America).
In 2007, Hudson directed the short film Cutlass, one of Glamour magazine's "Reel Moments" based on readers' personal essays. Cutlass co-stars Kurt Russell, Dakota Fanning, Virginia Madsen, Chevy Chase and Kristen Stewart.
In 2008, she appeared in Fool's Gold, a romantic comedy released on February 8, and her second film to co-star Matthew McConaughey. She had been certified in scuba diving in the Great Barrier Reef for the movie's underwater scenes. Also the same year, she appeared in another romantic comedy, My Best Friend's Girl, which was released in September.
Hudson next appeared in the musical film Nine, alongside Daniel Day-Lewis, Marion Cotillard, Penélope Cruz, Nicole Kidman and Judi Dench. The film, directed by Rob Marshall, was released in December 2009. Hudson was critically acclaimed for her unknown dancing skills, showcased in a stylish 1960s inspired original piece called "Cinema Italiano", which was written specifically for the film and for Hudson's character.
She starred in the film adaptation of Jim Thompson's The Killer Inside Me. The film premiered on January 24, 2010, at the Sundance Film Festival.
In 2011, she played Darcy in Something Borrowed, based on Emily Giffin's novel of the same name.
In 2012, she made her first appearance on Glee as Cassandra July. Hudson's character is Rachel Berry's dance teacher at NYADA (New York Academy of the Dramatic Arts).

Personal life

Hudson married Chris Robinson, the frontman for The Black Crowes, on December 31, 2000 in Aspen, Colorado. The couple lived in a house that was once owned by director James Whale and traveled together during Hudson's film shoots or Robinson's music tours. Hudson gave birth to their son, Ryder Russell Robinson, in January 2004. On August 14, 2006, Hudson's publicist announced that Hudson and Robinson had separated. On November 18, 2006, Robinson filed divorce papers, citing "irreconcilable differences".
In spring 2010, Hudson began dating Muse frontman Matthew Bellamy."It's a boy! Kate Hudson welcomes her second child". msnbc. July 10, 2011. Retrieved July 10, 2011.
Hudson says that she does not enjoy seeing herself on screen, specifying that she "gets cold... shakes and... sweats" when watching her performances for the first time.
In July 2006, Hudson sued the English version of the National Enquirer after it reported she had an eating disorder, describing her as "painfully thin". Hudson said the tabloid's statements were "a blatant lie" and she was concerned about the impact the false report could have on impressionable young women.

Filmography






