[[Ubykh phonology]]

CATEGORIES: Language phonologies

Ubykh, a recently extinct Northwest Caucasian language, has the largest consonant inventory of all documented languages that do not use clicks, and also has the most disproportional ratio of phonemic consonants to vowels. It has consonants in at least eight, perhaps nine, basic places of articulation and 29 distinct fricatives, 27 sibilants, and 20 uvulars, more than any other documented language. Some Khoisan languages, such as , may have larger consonant inventories due to their extensive use of click consonants, although some analyses (see for instance Traill (1985)) view a large proportion of the clicks in these languages as clusters, which would bring them closer into line with the Caucasian languages.

Consonants

Below is an International Phonetic Alphabet representation of the Ubykh consonant inventory.
 

Notes

All but four of the 84 consonants are found in native vocabulary. The plain velars  alone accounts for over 12% of all consonants encountered in connected text, due to the presence of the phoneme in the ergative and oblique singular and plural case suffixes, the third person singular and plural ergative verbal agreement prefix, the adverbial derivative suffix, the present and imperfect tense suffixes, and in suffixes denoting several non-finite verb forms.
Very few allophones of consonants are noted, mainly because a small acoustic difference can be phonemic when so many consonants are involved. However, the alveolopalatal labialised fricatives were sometimes realised as alveolar labialised fricatives, and the uvular ejective stop  was often pronounced as a glottal stop, due to the influence of the Kabardian and Adyghe languages.
The consonant  have not been noted word-finally, but this is probably a statistical anomaly due to the rarity of these consonants, each being attested only in a handful of words.
The alveolar trill  ('to slither').

The Karacalar "dialect"

A divergent form of Ubykh spoken by Osman Güngör, an inhabitant of Karacalar, was investigated by Georges Dumézil in the 1960s (Dumézil 1965:266–269). His speech differed phonologically from "standard" Ubykh in a number of ways:

Vowels

Ubykh has very few basic phonemic vowels. Hans Vogt's (1963) analysis retains .
Even with so few vowels, there are many vowel allophones, affected by the secondary articulation of the consonants that surround them. Eleven basic phonetic vowels appear, mostly derived from the two phonemic vowels adjacent to labialised or palatalised consonants. The phonetic vowels are . In general, the following rules apply (Vogt 1963):
Other, more complex vowels have been noted as allophones: .
The vowel .
Both vowels appear without restriction finally, although when  ('hoe'). This kind of allomorphy is called a zero allomorph.




