[[Rüppell's Vulture]]

CATEGORIES: Birds of Cameroon, Gyps, Old World vultures, Animals described in 1852

Rüppell's Vulture or Rüppell's Griffon Vulture (Gyps rueppellii) is a large vulture that occurs throughout the Sahel region of central Africa. The current population of 30,000 is decreasing due to loss of habitat and other factors. Known also as Rüppell's Griffon, Rueppell's Griffon, Rüppell's Griffin Vulture, Rueppell's Vulture and other variants, Rüppell's Vulture is named in honor of Eduard Rüppell, a 19th-century German explorer, collector, and zoologist. Rüppell's Vulture is considered to be the highest-flying bird, with confirmed evidence of a flight at an altitude of 11,300 m (37,000 ft) above sea level.

Description

These are large vultures, noticeably outsizing the closely related White-backed Vulture, with which they often co-occur in the wild. Adults are Raptors of the World by Ferguson-Lees, Christie, Franklin, Mead & Burton. Houghton Mifflin (2001), ISBN 0-618-12762-3 Both genders look alike: mottled brown or black overall with a whitish-brown underbelly and thin, dirty-white fluff covering the head and neck. The base of the neck has a white collar, the eye is yellow or amber, the crop patch deep brown. Silent as a rule, they become vocal at their nest and when at a carcass, squealing a great deal.

File:Vautour de Rüppell MHNT.jpg|Egg
File:VautourCrane2.jpg| Skull
File:Gyps rueppellii -San Diego Zoo, California, USA-8a.jpg|At San Diego Zoo, California
File:Gyps_rueppellii_(Avifauna,_NL).JPG|Head of an adult Rüppell's Vulture
File:Gyps rueppellii -Mara river crossing -Africa.jpg|At a Blue Wildebeest carcass in a river

Ecology

Rüppell's Vultures are very social, roosting, nesting, and gathering to feed in large flocks. They can travel fast when needed, cruising at as much as  from a nest site to find food.
Rüppell's Vultures commonly fly at altitudes as high as 
Rüppell's Vultures have several adaptations to their diet and are specialized feeders even among the Old World vultures of Africa. They have an especially powerful build and, after the most attractive soft parts of a carcass have been consumed, they will continue with the hide, and even the bones, gorging themselves until they can barely fly. They have backward-pointing spines on the tongue to help remove meat from bone. Despite their size, power and adaptations, they are not the most dominant vulture in their range, which is considered to be the even larger Lappet-faced Vulture.homestead.html

Status

Since first being assessed by the International Union for Conservation of Nature during 1988, populations of Rüppell's Vulture have decreased. The species has been listed with an IUCN Red List status of "near threatened" since 2007 and the IUCN predicts that populations of the species will continue to decrease. During 2012 the species was given Endangered status.
Since 1992, Rüppell's Vulture has been occurring as a vagrant in Spain and Portugal, with annual records since 1997, mainly in the Cadiz / Straits of Gibraltar area, but also further north.Gutiérrez, Ricard (2003) Occurrence of Rüppell's Griffon Vulture in Europe Dutch Birding 2595): 289-303





  | ref = 
  }}



 | title = Rüppell's Vulture videos
 | publisher = The Internet Bird Collection
 | url = 
 | accessdate = November 2011
}}

