[[Loyalism]]

CATEGORIES: Society of Northern Ireland, Politics of Northern Ireland, Politics of Scotland, Scottish society, Political movements in the British Isles, Political ideologies

In general loyalism refers to an individual's allegiance toward an established government, political party, or sovereign, especially during times of war and revolt.  The most common usage of the term refers to loyalty to the British Crown.
The term loyalist was also used during the Spanish Civil War, applying to republicans who remained loyal to the Spanish Republic against Franco's rebellion.

Historical loyalism

18th century North America

In North America, the term loyalist characterised colonists who rejected the American Revolution in favour of remaining within the empire. American loyalists included royal officials, Anglican clergymen, wealthy merchants with ties to London, demobilised British soldiers, and recent arrivals (especially from Scotland), as well as many ordinary colonists. Colonists with loyalist sympathies accounted for an estimated 20% to 30% of the white colonial population of the day, compared with those described as "Patriots", who accounted for about 40% of the population. This high level of political polarisation leads some historians to believe that the American Revolution was as much a civil war as it was a war of independence from the British Crown.
British military strategy during the American Revolution relied on mobilising loyalist soldiers throughout the Thirteen Colonies. Throughout the war, the British military formed over 100Acadiensis 4 (1975): 3–45; These Loyalists are generally regarded as the founders of modern English-speaking Canada, and many of their descendants still identify themselves with the nominal hereditary title "UEL" (United Empire Loyalist) today.

18th century Ireland

The term loyalist was first used in Irish politics in the 1790s to refer to Protestant British settlers in Ireland who opposed Catholic Emancipation and Irish independence from Great Britain.

England and Wales

During the early 19th century, nearly every English and Welsh county formed a Loyalist Association of Workers in an effort to counter a perceived threat from radical societies. The first such association was founded in Westminster on 20 November 1792.

Australia

The Sydney and Parramatta Loyalist Associations, with approximately 50 members each, were formed in 1804 to counter radical societies in those counties, and subsequently helped to put down the Castle Hill convict rebellion later that year.The Military at Parramatta

Modern loyalism

Northern Ireland

Generally, the term loyalist in Northern Ireland is typified by a militant opposition to Irish republicanism, and also often to Roman Catholicism. It stresses Ulster Protestant identity and community with its own folk heroes and events, such as the misfortunes and bravery of the 36th (Ulster) Division during World War I and the activities of the Orange Order.  An Ulster loyalist is most commonly a unionist who strongly favours the political union between Great Britain and Northern Ireland, although some may also support an independent Northern Ireland. In recent times, the term has been used to refer to several loyalist paramilitary groups, such as the Ulster Defence Association (UDA), Ulster Volunteer Force (UVF) and the Loyalist Volunteer Force (LVF).
Although Irish loyalists have claimed to speak on behalf of their communities and the unionist community in general, electoral results tend to suggest that their support is minimal and exclusively based in the urban working class. The Progressive Unionist Party, a pro-Belfast Agreement loyalist party, won seats in the Northern Ireland Assembly in 1998, 2003 and 2007, but lost them in 2011.

Republic of Ireland

Loyalism in the post-partition Republic of Ireland has declined since independence. although loyalist or neo-unionist groups such as the Reform Movement, the Border Minority Group and the Loyal Irish Union are active to this day.

Scotland

The Scottish loyalist movement originated during the Industrial Revolution when a significant number of Ulster Protestants migrated to Scotland from Ireland.
Though only consisting of a small fraction of the Scottish population, Scottish loyalism has become more visible through prominent demonstrations of the beliefs of its members since the establishment of a Scottish Parliament. Scottish loyalism is visible through participation at Orange parades with supporters from Rangers, Heart of Midlothian F.C. and Airdrie United. Some loyalists in Scotland also support Ulster paramilitary groups.
Loyalists in Scotland mostly live in small working class enclaves in the major urban centres or industrial villages, notably Glasgow, Lanarkshire, Edinburgh, Renfrewshire, Fife, West Lothian and Ayrshire. There are relatively few loyalists in areas such as Aberdeen, the Scottish Borders and the Scottish Highlands.








