[[Petroicidae]]

CATEGORIES: Petroicidae, Bird families

The bird family Petroicidae includes roughly 45 species in about 15 genera. All are endemic to Australasia: New Guinea, Australia, New Zealand and numerous Pacific Islands as far east as Samoa. For want of an accurate common name, the family is often called the Australasian robins. Within the family the species are known not only as robins but as scrub-robins and flycatchers. They are, however, only distantly related to the Old World family Muscicapidae (to which other species with such names belong) and the monarch flycatchers (Monarchidae).

Characteristics

Most species have a compact build with a large, rounded head, a short, straight bill, and rounded wingtips. They occupy a wide range of wooded habitats, from subalpine to tropical rainforest, and mangrove swamps to semi-arid scrubland. All are primarily insectivorous, although a few supplement their diet with seeds. Hunting is mostly by perch and pounce, a favoured tactic being to cling sideways onto a treetrunk and scan the ground below without moving.
Social organisation is usually centered on long-term pair-bonds and small family groups. Most members of the subfamily Eopsaltrinae practice cooperative breeding, with all family members helping defend a territory and feed nestlings.
Nests are cup-shaped, usually constructed by the female, and often placed in a vertical fork of a tree or shrub. Many species are expert at adding moss, bark or lichen to the outside of the nest as camouflage, making it very difficult to spot, even when it is in a seemingly prominent location.

Systematics

Although named after true robins, the Petroicidae robins, along with many other insect-eating birds, were classified as flycatchers in a huge family Muscicapidae,Boles, p. xv before being placed in their own family or with the whistler family Pachycephalidae. 35
The relationship of the Petroicidae to other bird families is uncertain; Sibley and Alquist's DNA-DNA hybridisation studies had placed them in the Corvoidea (a large group that includes the shrikes, crows and jays, butcherbirds, woodswallows, drongos, cuckoo-shrike, fantails, monarch flycatchers and others).
In a more recent genetic study, they and several other families came out quite differently. They seem to form a distinct lineage of uncertain relationships, possibly as an early offshoot of Passerida diverging some 44 million years ago. However, all that can be said at present with reasonable certainty is that they are neither core Passerida ("advanced" songbirds) nor a very ancient songbird group.
Acknowledging their position is unclear, current consensus places them as basal Passerida.

Classification

A comprehensive review, including an analysis of the osteological characters, by Schodde and Mason in 1999 illustrated three groupings, classified as subfamilies below:
FAMILY: PETROICIDAE

File:Jacky-Winter capertee sep03.jpg|Jacky Winter (Microeca fascinans)
File:Grey Headed Robin Qld.jpg|Grey-headed Robin (Heteromyias albispecularis)
File:White-Browed Robin.jpg|White-browed Robin (Poecilodryas superciliosa)
File:Eopsaltria griseogularis.jpg|Western Yellow Robin (Eopsaltria griseogularis)
File:Hoode Robin male bowra apr07.jpg|Hooded Robin (Melanodryas cucullata)
File:070308 Stewart Island robin on Ulva.jpg|New Zealand Robin (Petroica australis)
File:Rose Robin flinders peak jun05.JPG|Rose Robin (Petroica rosea)
File:NZ North Island Robin 4.jpg|North Island Robin (Petroica longipes)
File:Mangrove robin portland08.JPG|Mangrove Robin (Peneoenanthe pulverulenta)
File:Pale-yellow_Robin_Maiala.JPG|Pale-yellow Robin (Tregellasia capito )



Cited text




