[[Battle of Long Island]]

CATEGORIES: 1776 in the United States, Conflicts in 1776, Battles of the New York Campaign, Battles involving Great Britain, Battles involving the United States, Battles involving Hesse-Kassel, New York in the American Revolution, History of Brooklyn, 1776 in New York

The Battle of Long Island, also known as the Battle of Brooklyn or the Battle of Brooklyn Heights, fought on August 27, 1776, was a defeat for the Continental Army under General George Washington and the beginning of a successful campaign that gave the British control of the strategically important city of New York. In the American Revolutionary War it was the first major battle to take place after the United States declared independence on July 4, 1776. In terms of troop size, it was the largest battle of the entire war.
After defeating the British in the Siege of Boston on March 17, 1776, General George Washington, Commander-in-Chief, brought the Continental Army to defend the port city of New York, then limited to the southern end of Manhattan Island. Washington understood that the city's harbor would provide an excellent base for the British Navy during the campaign. There he established defenses and waited for the British to attack. In July, the British, under the command of General William Howe, landed a few miles across the harbor from Manhattan on the sparsely-populated of Staten Island, where during the next month and a half they were slowly reinforced by ships in Lower New York Bay, bringing their total force to 32,000 troops. With the British fleet in control of the entrance to the harbor at The Narrows, Washington knew the difficulty in holding the city. Believing Manhattan would be the first target, he moved there the bulk of his forces.
On August 22, the British landed on the shores of Gravesend Bay in southwest Kings County, across The Narrows from Staten Island, more than a dozen miles south from the East River crossings to Manhattan. After five days of waiting, the British attacked American defenses on the Guan Heights. Unknown to the Americans, however, Howe had brought his main army around their rear and attacked their flank soon after. The Americans panicked, although a stand by 400 Maryland troops prevented most of the army from being captured. The remainder of the army retreated to the main defenses on Brooklyn Heights. The British dug in for a siege but, on the night of August 29–30, Washington evacuated the entire army to Manhattan without the loss of supplies or a single life. Washington and the Continental Army were driven out of New York entirely after several more defeats and forced to retreat through New Jersey and into Pennsylvania.

Background

Boston to New York

In the first stage of the war, the British Army was trapped in the then-peninsular city of Boston and on March 17, they abandoned it setting sail to Halifax, Nova Scotia to await reinforcements..

Strategy

Washington began moving troops to Brooklyn in early May.
Fort Defiance was also being constructed at this time, located further southwest, past Fort Box, near present day Red Hook. In addition to these new forts, a mounted battery was established on Governors Island, cannons were placed at Fort George facing Bowling Green and more cannons placed at the Whitehall Dock, which sat on the East River.. Hulks were sunk at strategic locations to deter the British from entering the East River and other waterways.
Washington had been authorized by Congress to recruit an army of up to 28,500 troops; he had only 19,000 troops when he reached in New York..
The commander of the artillery, Henry Knox, persuaded Washington to transfer 500 to 600 soldiers who lacked muskets to crew the artillery. In early June, Knox and Greene inspected the land at the north end of Manhattan and decided to establish Fort Washington. Another fort, Fort Constitution, later renamed Fort Lee, was planned for opposite from Fort Washington on the Hudson River. The forts were hoped to thwart the British ships from sailing up the Hudson.

British Arrival

On June 28 Washington learned that the British fleet had set sail from Halifax on June 9 and were heading toward New York.. The population of New York went into panic at the sight of the British ships, alarms went off and troops immediately rushed to their posts. On July 2, British troops began to land on Staten Island. The Continental regulars on the island took a few shots at the British before fleeing and the citizen's militia switched over to the British side.
On July 6, news reached New York that Congress had voted for independence four days earlier.. In their fury the crowd cut off the statue's head, severed the nose, and mounted what remained of the head on a spike outside a tavern, and the rest of the statue was dragged to Connecticut and melted down into musket balls.
On July 12, two British ships, the Phoenix and the Rose, sailed up the harbor toward the mouth of the Hudson.. The goal of the British ships was to cut off American supplies and encourage Loyalist support. The only casualties of the day were six Americans who were killed when their own cannon blew up.
The next day, July 13, General Howe attempted to open negotiations with the Americans..
Meanwhile, British ships continued to arrive..

Invasion of Long Island

At 05:10, on August 22, an advance guard of 4,000 British troops, under the command of Clinton and Cornwallis, left Staten Island to land on Long Island..
Washington received word of the landings the same day they occurred, but was informed that the number was 8,000 to 9,000 troops..
The American plan was that Putnam would direct the defenses from Brooklyn Heights while Sullivan and Stirling and their troops would be stationed on the Guan Heights..
On the British side, General Clinton learned of the almost undefended Jamaica Pass from local Loyalists.. On August 26, Clinton received word from Howe that the plan would be used, and that Clinton was to command the advance guard of the main army of 10,000 men on the march through the Jamaica Pass. While they made the night march, General James Grant's British troops along with some Hessians, a total of 4,000 men, would attack the Americans in front to distract them from the main army coming on their flank. Howe told Clinton to be ready to move out that night, August 26.

Battle

Night March

At 21:00, the British moved out.. No one, except the commanders—not even the officers—knew of the plan. Clinton led a crack brigade of light infantry with fixed bayonets in front, followed by Cornwallis who had eight battalions and 14 artillery pieces. Cornwallis was, in turn, followed by Howe and Hugh Percy with six battalions, more artillery, and baggage. The column consisted of 10,000 men who stretched out over two miles. Three Loyalist farmers led the column toward the Jamaica Pass. The British had left their campfires burning to deceive the Americans into thinking that nothing was happening. The column headed northeast until it reached what later became the village of New Lots when it headed directly north, toward the Heights.
The column had yet to run into any American troops when they reached Howard's Tavern (also known as Howard's Half-Way House), just a few hundred yards from the Jamaica Pass.. Clinton interrogated the men and they informed him that they were the only troops guarding the pass. By dawn the British were through the pass and stopped so that the troops could rest. At 09:00, they fired two heavy cannons to signal the Hessian troops below Battle Pass to begin their frontal assault against Sullivan's men deployed on the two hills flanking the pass while Clinton's troops simultaneously flanked the American positions from the east.

Grant's diversionary attack

