[[College of Saint Benedict and Saint John's University]]

CATEGORIES: College of Saint Benedict and Saint John's University, Roman Catholic universities and colleges in the United States, Men's universities and colleges in the United States, Women's universities and colleges in the United States, Educational institutions established in 1913, Council of Independent Colleges, National Association of Independent Colleges and Universities members, North Central Association of Colleges and Schools, Benedictine colleges and universities, Members of the Annapolis Group, Education in Stearns County, Minnesota, Buildings and structures in Stearns County, Minnesota, Visitor attractions in Stearns County, Minnesota, Roman Catholic Universities and colleges in Minnesota, Association of Catholic Colleges and Universities, Private universities and colleges in Minnesota

The College of Saint Benedict (CSB), for women, and Saint John's University (SJU), for men, are partnered liberal arts colleges respectively located in St. Joseph and Collegeville, Minnesota, USA. Students attend classes and activities together, and have access to the resources of both campuses. CSB/SJU are located about three and a half miles apart – the campuses are located on  of forests, prairies, and lakes.
Saint John's University has produced its own coarse-grained bread, Johnnie Bread, since 1856 and used the proceeds to fund projects such as the Abbey Church.csbsju.htm It is also the home of the famous Saint John's Bible. People come from all over the world to see its pages on display in the Hill Museum and Manuscript Library each year

Partnership

CSB and SJU are two separate institutions that share a single academic program. Men and women attend classes together on both campuses. About 4,000 students are enrolled in CSB/SJU combined. They attend coed classes taught by a joint faculty of approximately 350 professors, mostly full-time, permanent appointees.
The Institute of International Education ranks CSB/SJU among the top baccalaureate institutions in the nation for the number of students who study abroad. Additionally, the colleges enroll approximately 250 students from 50 countries, and offer 200 undergraduate courses that have a global focus.
The Benedicta Arts Center of the College of Saint Benedict is a performing arts center on campus. The BAC presents three annual performances by the Minnesota Orchestra and has recently commissioned works by Diavolo and Merce Cunningham Dance Company. The Hill Museum & Manuscript Library at SJU is home to The Saint John's Bible (the first hand-scribed bible in 500 years) and a collection of religious sculpture, paintings, prints, and artifacts. Saint John's University also includes Saint John's School of Theology Seminary, a graduate school which confers Master of Divinity and Master of Arts degrees. The school also prepares seminarians for the priesthood.

Housing

Men

First-year dorms for the men of Saint John's University include Saint Thomas Aquinas Hall (Tommy Hall) and Saint Mary Hall. There are two men per dorm room in both of these buildings. Many sophomore men at Saint John's live in three residence halls: St. Bernard (Bernie), St. Boniface (Bonnie), and St. Patrick (Pat), the latter two of which are connected. All three sophomore halls have two men per dorm room. Other housing options available for sophomores include St. Benet Hall which is attached to the Quadrangle Building (Quad), St. Joseph Hall (Joe Hall), St. Gregory House (Greg), St. Francis House (Frank), the Virgil Michel Apartments, and the first floor of Tommy. All of these are separate from the other three sophomore dorm halls. There are also housing options for juniors and seniors to live on campus, including the apartments Placid House, Maur House, Saint Vincent Court, Metten Court and the new Flynntown Apartments.

Women

First-year women at the College of Saint Benedict live in three residence halls: Corona, Aurora, and Regina. Sophomore women at the College of Saint Benedict live in three residence halls: Lottie, Brian, and Margretta. Juniors and seniors can live in the either the West Apartments (Dominica, Gable, Girgen, Schumacher, Smith, Sohler, and Westkaemper) or the East Apartments (Luetmer, McDonald, Wirth, and Zierden). There are also the College Avenue Apartments which were made available as of fall 2011. This apartment complex consists of two buildings and houses 33 students offering one-person and two-person units with private bedrooms.

Benedictine Values

In the sixth century, St. Benedict, founder of the Benedictine monastic order wrote the Rule of Saint Benedict, which contain life values modeled after Jesus.  The two campuses encourage their students to lead their lives with the values outlined by St. Benedict in mind.  The values include:
These values provide insight and support to students and alumni in building strong and caring family, civic and church communities, wherever life takes them.  

Athletics

CSB/SJU are members of the Minnesota Intercollegiate Athletic Conference (MIAC). Sports offered are:
Blazer athletics
Johnnies athletics

Blazer athletics

=Basketball=

Blazer basketball has won the MIAC championship five times in recent years and has made 15 NCAA Division III tournament appearances. Blazer basketball coach Mike Durbin is MIAC career wins leader and celebrated his 500th win in the 2008–2009 basketball season.

=Golf=

Blazer golf is coached by Daryl Schomer, who started as head coach in the 2011-2012 season. The Blazers finished in fifth place at the 2012 MIAC Championships. The Blazers shot the seventh best round of the tournament in the final round, led by a 79 from Bridget Cummings who place 11th individually. The MIAC Tournament wrapped up the Blazer's fall season, a season where they won twice and finished in the top-five four times.  By all standards, the team has shown marginal success.

=Volleyball=

Blazer volleyball had made appearances in the NCAA National Tournament 14 times, most recently in 2012, and has won the MIAC Conference Championship seven times, most recently in 2009.

Johnnies athletics

=Baseball=

The Jonnies finished the 2012 season second with a MIAC record of 14-6 and a total of 29 wins. This tied a Saint John's University record for most wins in a season. The team also qualified for the NCAA tournament for the first time since 1998. This was the third time the Johnnies were able to claim the MIAC Playoff championship.gojohnnies.aspx The head coach, Jerry Haugen, has coached the SJU baseball team for 36 seasons with a career record of 665-567-5. He is in the top 25 on the NCAA Division III most winning active coaches win list.

=Basketball=

Saint John's University tied for fifth and played in the playoffs. The SJU basketball team ended the 2012-2013 season with a loss to Augsburg in the quarterfinal round of the MIAC playoffs. Their record for the season was 74-67. Three Johnnies earned All-MIAC recognition. The head coach of this team is Jim Smith, and he has a 755-535 career record. The 2013-2014 season will be his 50th season coaching the Johnnies.Johnnies Basketball

=Cross country=

The cross country team of Saint John's finished fourth of 27 teams at the NCAA Central Regional. They followed behind St. Olaf, Central of Iowa, and Luther of Iowa. The Johnnies were ranked seventh in regular season. The 2012 SJU cross country team earned U.S. Track & Field Cross Country Coaches' Association All-Academic recognition.Johnnies Cross Country

=Football=

In 1909, the first SJU football field, called the 'Natural Bowl' was completed.  It was greatly praised as one of the most natural feeling football fields.  However just a year later, football at SJU was abolished on the grounds that it promoted "unfriendliness towards other schools".  'The Bowl' stood vacant for ten years until 1920, when the Johnnies joined the MIAC.

=Golf=

The 2012 Saint John's golf team was ranked third in the final Golf World/Nike Golf Coaches' Division III poll. They were ranked behind Oglethorpe (Ga.) and Methodist (N.C.). St. Thomas was ranked number 10. The Johnnies moved up a total of 15 spots throughout the year.Johnnies Golf

=Hockey=

The 2012-2013 SJU hockey season ended in the first round of the NCAA Division III Men's Hockey Tournament in Eau Claire, Wisconsin. The Johnnies lost to Wisconsin-Eau Claire 4-2. Wisconsin was ranked fourth and had beaten the Johnnies earlier in the season 5 to 1. SJU's record was 16-8-4 (9-4-3 MIAC).Johnnies Hockey

=Rugby=

Thomas Haigh, an instructor in the St. John's department of mathematics, founded the St. John's Rugby Club in the spring of 1968. A former St. John's Prep School student, he learned the game while an undergraduate at the University of Wisconsin.

=Soccer=

Saint John's University opened at its new soccer complex this 2013 season. The 2013 season opened at the end of August. In 2012, the Johnnies ended the soccer season with a 9-6-4 (6-2-2 MIAC) record and finished fourth.Johnnies Soccer

=Track and Field=

The SJU Track and Field team finished fifth out of eleven teams at the 2013 MIAC Indoor Track & Field Championships. They were only 1.5 points from fourth place. Kevin Horton placed second in the 200-meter dash and was awarded his second All-MIAC performance. He was only 0.05 from the conference title. Brady O'Brien earned his first All-MIAC honor when he finished second in the triple jump. Willie Versen was awarded his first All-MIAC when he won third place in the 3,000 meters.Johnnies Track

=Wrestling=

Seniors Mitch Hagen and Chris Stevermer will compete at the NCAA Division III Championships on March 15–16. Mitch Hagen is ranked fourth in the 2013 tournament. Chris Stevermer was third at regionals and is unranked in the tournament. Both competed in the tournament in 2012, but lost against higher ranked opponents. Four other Johnnies will compete in the national tournament. Ryan Arne, Ryan Michaelis, John Scepaniak, and Nick Schuler are all appearing at the national tournament for the first time.Johnnies Wrestling

Club Sports

The Nordic Ski teams at both schools were changed from intercollegiate to club teams in March 2011 due to budget concerns.
The colleges also offers a variety of other club sports including men's and women's lacrosse, rowing, Nordic skiing, ultimate frisbee, water polo, men's and women's rugby, figure skating, Australian rules football and curling.

Presidents

MaryAnn Baenninger, PhD, is the fourteenth president of the College of Saint Benedict. She became president of the college on August 1, 2004. She earned her PhD and B.A. in psychology from Temple University.
During Dr. Baenninger's time at the College of Saint Benedict, she has overseen a $82 million dollar capital campaign, the development and completion of the Gorecki Dining and Conference Center, an expansion of the Benedicta Arts Center and the development Centennial Commons.
Michael Hemesath, PhD, former Carleton College economics professor, is the thirteenth president of Saint John's University. He graduated from Saint John's in 1981 and is the first layperson appointed to a full presidential term at the school. He earned his M.A. and PhD in economics from Harvard University.

Student government

The Senate is made up of 17 members: the president, regent and three standing committees. These committees include: Student Services, Judicial Board and the Activities and Allocation Board, which is responsible for dispersing the student activity fee. The following vision is from the Saint John's Senate Constitution: We are seventeen men comprising an integral group whose mission is to address and represent student interests, concerns, and welfare as well as the mission and values of the University. Our job is to continually examine our individual roles as student leaders, as a student Senate, and how our actions affect not only students and administrators, but surrounding communities.  The Saint John's Senate (SJS) is the elected student government at Saint John's University. 
As a women's college, Saint Benedict's provides a unique opportunity for women to participate in leadership positions. Student members of the Saint Ben's Senate (SBS) serve to provide a means for expression of and action on student views and interests. A group of 16 executive board women serve on a variety of institutional committees, take on special projects and are responsible for the disbursement of the student activity fee. The Saint Ben's Senate (SBS) is the elected student government at the College of Saint Benedict. The Senates, while individually governing in the interest of their own student body, work closely together with students, faculty, staff, and university administrators to enhance all aspects of student life.

Music

The music department at the College of Saint Benedict and Saint John's University is expansive considering the size of the school. The department of music has many ensembles including four choirs, an orchestra, a wind ensemble, a jazz ensemble, and several small chamber ensembles. Many of these ensembles tour extensively both domestically and abroad. The department also presents an opera every year and recently performed a Stephen Paulus oratorio about the Holocaust entitled "To Be Certain of the Dawn", jointly with choirs and orchestra from Saint Cloud State University in Europe in May 2008. There are also several student run groups, including the a cappella group Johnnie Blend. Over half of the students at the College of Saint Benedict and Saint John's University participate in some kind of music ensemble.

Media

All student media is run independent of the CSB/SJU administration.

The Record

The official SJU newspaper since 1888, The Record became the official newspaper of CSB in 2000. The newspaper is published weekly during the fall and spring semesters and has been recognized among the best weekly college newspapers in Minnesota and the U.S. All back issues of CSB newspapers are available for full-text searching and viewing online through Vivarium, the CSB/SJU Digital Image Collection.

KJNB

The official student radio station of CSB/SJU allows students to host talk and music-oriented shows in one-hour segments. When KJNB first started out in 1954, it was located in the basement of Mary Hall. In 2001, the studio was moved to its current location in the lower level of Guild Hall in the center of campus. Broadcasts are streamed via  on closed-circuit campus TV Channel 8, and over the speakers at Sexton Dining Hall. The station has been undergoing renovation since 2013.

Channel Eight

Channel Eight is the local television station for CSB/SJU. Project Eight launched during the 2011–2012 school year, the channel has begun featuring student produced television shows along with other campus related activities such as live broadcasts of Senate meetings.

Notable alumni

</ref><ref name="catholic_peace_fellowship2007">

</ref>

Notable faculty








