[[Hypersexuality]]

CATEGORIES: Behavioural syndromes associated with physiological disturbances and physical factors, Casual sex, Human sexuality, Psychiatric diagnosis, Sexual addiction, Sexual arousal, Sexual health, Sexuality

Hypersexuality is extremely frequent or suddenly increased sexual urges or sexual activity.
Although hypersexuality can be caused by some medical conditions or medications, in most cases the cause is unknown. Mental health problems such as bipolar disorders can give rise to hypersexuality, and alcohol and some drugs can affect social and sexual inhibitions in some people. A number of theoretical models have been used to explain or treat hypersexuality. The most common one, especially in the popular media, is the sexual addiction approach, but sexologists have not reached any consensus. Alternative explanations for the condition include compulsive and impulsive behavioral models.
The International Classification of Diseases (ICD-10) of the World Health Organization includes "Excessive Sexual Drive" (coded F52.7)
The American Psychiatric Association (APA) rejected a proposal to add sexual addiction to its list of psychiatric disorders, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM).
Some authors have questioned whether it makes sense to discuss hypersexuality at all, arguing that labeling sexual urges "extreme" merely stigmatizes people who do not conform to the norms of their culture or peer group.

Epidemiology

The number of people who are hypersexual, or believe that they are hypersexual, is unknown.  Although several estimates have been published, it is not clear on what basis they were made.  The estimates asserted are usually 3–6% of the United States population.
Many proposed definitions of hypersexuality are relative to cultural or peer group norms.  Surveys of convenience samples suggest that 3–5% of high school or college age males masturbate on a daily basis. 1.9% of men ages 18–59 masturbated daily, and 1.2% masturbated more than once per day.

Etiology

There is no consensus among experts as to the causes of hypersexuality, and many etiological factors have been proposed.  Some research suggests that some cases can be linked to biochemical or physiological changes that accompany dementia. Psychological needs also complicate the biological explanation, which identifies the temporal/frontal lobe of the brain as the area for regulating libido. Persons suffering from injuries to this part of the brain are at increased risk for aggressive behavior and other behavioral problems including personality changes and socially inappropriate sexual behavior such as hypersexuality.  There are other biological factors that are associated with hypersexuality such as premenstrual changes, and the exposure to virilising hormones in childhood or in utero. Hypersexuality revisited, The Journal of
Forensic Psychiatry, 6:2,'' 255–258.[/ref] It should be noted that there can be psychological causes for this condition. Hypersexuality, in these cases, may be related to the longing for intimacy with another individual. Often, this desire is inappropriately expressed. This can be, once again, related to the condition of dementia. As this illness progresses, loss of self-esteem is often inevitable. A loss of cognitive function as a result of this disease may be compensated for through hypersexuality. M. (2003). Understanding Hypersexuality: A Behavioral Disorder of Dementia. Home Healthcare Nurse: The Journal for the Home Care and Hospice Professional, 43-47.
In research involving use of anti-androgens to reduce undesirable sexual behaviour such as hypersexuality, testosterone is deemed necessary, but not sufficient, for sexual drive. and Singh, A., "Hypersexuality Revisited", The Journal of Forensic Psychiatry Volume 6, Issue 2, 1995.  Other proposed factors include a lack of physical closeness, and forgetfulness of the recent past.
Pathogenic overactivity of the dopaminergic mesolimbic pathway in the brain—forming either psychiatrically, during mania, or pharmacologically, as a side effect of dopamine agonists, specifically D3-preferring agonists[ref]
 and has been shown to result among some in overindulgent, sometimes hypersexual, behavior.

Models and labels

Sexologists have been describing cases of hypersexuality since the late 1800s. P. (2010). Hypersexual Disorder: A proposed diagnosis for DSM-V. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 377–400. In some cases, the hypersexuality was a symptom of another medical disease, such as Klüver-Bucy syndrome or bipolar disorder, or the side effect of a medication, such as the drugs used to treat Parkinson's disease.  In other cases, the hypersexuality was reported to be the primary problem.
Sexologists have not reached a consensus over how best to describe when hypersexuality is the primary problem,Stein, D. J. (2008). Classifying hypersexual disorders: Compulsive, impulsive, and addictive models. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 31, 587–592., & Vukadinovic, Z. (2004). Sexual addiction, sexual compulsivity, sexual impulsivity or what? Toward a theoretical model. Journal of Sex Research, 41, 225–234. or if it is ever appropriate to think of these behaviors and feelings as a separate pathology. Some researchers assert that such situations represent a literal addiction;Orford, J. (1985). Excessive appetites: A psychological view of the addictions. Chichester, England: John Wiley & Sons. (1983). Out of the shadows: Understanding sexual addiction. Minneapolis, MN: CompCare. other researchers assert that such situations represent a type of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD) or "OCD-spectrum disorder"; and other researchers assert that it is a disorder of impulsivity. Moreover, some authors assert that there is no such thing as hypersexuality at allLevine, S. B. (2010). What is sexual addiction? Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 36, 261–275. and that the condition merely reflects a cultural dislike of exceptional sexual behavior. J., & McCabe, M. P. (1997). Hypersexuality: Psychopathology or normal variant of sexuality? Sexual and Marital Therapy, 12, 45–60.
Consistent with there not being any consensus over what causes hypersexuality, authors have used many different labels to refer to it, sometimes interchangeably, but often depending on which theory they favor or which specific behavior they were studying.  Contemporary names include compulsive masturbation, compulsive sexual behavior,Quadland, M. C. (1985). Compulsive sexual behavior: Definition of a problem and an approach to treatment. Journal of Sex and Marital Therapy, 11, 121–132. (1990). The obsessive–compulsive model for describing compulsive sexual behavior. American Journal of Preventive Psychiatry & Neurology, 2, 9–14. cybersex addiction, erotomania, "excessive sexual drive", hyperphilia,Money, J. (1980). Love and love sickness. The science of sex, gender difference, and pair bonding. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. hypersexuality,Miller, B. L., Cummings, J. L., & McIntyre, H. (1986). Hypersexuality and altered sexual preferences following brain injury. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 49, 867–873. (1978). Hypersexuality: Implications for a theory of dependence. British Journal of Addiction, 73, 299–310. hypersexual disorder,Krueger, R. B., & Kaplan, M. S. (2001). The paraphilic and hypersexual disorders. Journal of Psychiatric Practice, 7, 391–403. problematic hypersexuality,Kingston, D. A., & Firestone, P. (2008). Problematic hypersexuality: Review of conceptualization and diagnosis. Sexual Addiction and Compulsivity, 15, 284–310. sexual addiction, sexual compulsivity,Dodge, B., Reece, M., Cole, S. L., & Sandfort, T. G. M. (2004). Sexual compulsivity among heterosexual college students. Journal of Sex Research, 41, 343–350. sexual dependency, sexual impulsivity,Kafka, M. P. (1995b). Sexual impulsivity. In E. Hollander & D. J. Stein (Eds.), Impulsivity and aggression (pp. 201–228). Chichester, England: John Wiley. "out of control sexual behavior",Bancroft, J. (2008). Sexual behavior that is "out of control": A theoretical conceptual approach. Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 31, 593-601. and paraphilia-related disorder. P. (1994). Paraphilia-related disorders: Common, neglected, and misunderstood. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 2, 39–40. P. (2000). The paraphilia-related disorders: Nonparaphilic hypersexuality and sexual compulsivity/addiction. In S. R. Leiblum & R. C. Rosen (Eds.), Principles and practice of sex therapy (3rd ed., pp. 471–503). New York: Guilford Press. P. (2001). The paraphilia-related disorders: A proposal for a unified classification of nonparaphilic hypersexuality disorders. Sexual Addiction &Compulsivity, 8, 227–239. Other, mostly historical, names include Don Juanism, the Messalina complex,Orford, J. (1978). Hypersexuality: Implications for a theory of dependence. British Journal of Addiction, 73, 299-320. and nymphomania,., & Sagarin, E. (1965). Nymphomania: A Study of oversexed women. London: Ortolan.

Addiction model

The most commonly discussed way of understanding hypersexuality is with an addiction model.  The concept of hypersexuality as an addiction was started in the 1970s by former members of Alcoholics Anonymous who realized they experienced a similar lack of control and compulsivity with disruptive sexual behaviors as with alcoholism.  Multiple 12-step style self-help groups now exist for people who identify as sex addicts, including Sex Addicts Anonymous, Sexaholics Anonymous, Sex and Love Addicts Anonymous, and Sexual Compulsives Anonymous.

Compulsivity model

Compulsions are behaviors a person performs in order to reduce feelings of anxiety or tension.  According to this explanation of hypersexuality, persons engage in whatever sexual behavior in order to reduce feelings of tension, instead of to express sexual desire.  Because engaging in the behavior can worsen the situation causing the tension, the person experiences a longer-term increase in tension, despite the shorter-term relief, resulting in a self-perpetuating cycle., & Ravart, M. (1993). Compulsive sexual behaviour: Etiology, clinical manifestations & pharmacological treatment. The Canadian Journal of Human Sexuality, 2, 221-226. (1992). Is your patient suffering from compulsive sexual behavior? Psychiatric Annals, 22, 320–325.

Impulsivity model

Barth and Kinder (1987) argued against classifying hypersexuality as an addiction or as a compulsion, arguing instead for classifying it as an impulsivity problem. J., & Kinder, B. N. (1987). The mislabeling of sexual impulsivity. Journal of Sex & Marital Therapy, 13, 15-23.  They argued that an addiction entails a substance and withdrawal states, whereas sexual behavior has neither, and that compulsive behaviors exclude intrinsically enjoyable activities, whereas sexual behavior is intrinsically enjoyable.  Hypersexuality does, however, contain the essential elements of an impulsivity problem: (1) It pertains to the failure to resist an impulse, drive, or temptation. (2) There is an increasing sense of tension before the behavior. (3) There is an experience of either pleasure, gratification, or release at the time of committing the behavior.

Medical disorders and drugs

People who suffer from bipolar disorder may often display tremendous swings in sex drive depending on their mood. As defined in the DSM-IV-TR, hypersexuality can be a symptom of hypomania or mania in bipolar disorder or schizoaffective disorder. Pick's disease causes damage to the temporal/frontal lobe of the brain; people suffering with Pick's disease show a range of socially inappropriate behaviors.
Several neurological conditions such as Alzheimer's disease,  Hypersexuality has also been reported to result as a side-effect of some medications used to treat Parkinson's disease. P., & Schiffter, R. (1983). Hypersexuality: A complication of dopaminergic therapy in Parkinson's disease. Pharmacopsychiatria, 16, 107-110. J., Tanner, C. M., & Rajput, A. H. (1989). Hypersexuality with antiparkinsonian therapy. Clinical Neuropharmacology, 12, 375-383. Some street drugs, such as methamphetamine, may also contribute to hypersexual behavior., Purcell, D. W., Stall, R., McFarlane, M., Semaan, S., Valentine, J., et al. (2006). CDC consultation on methamphetamine use and sexual risk behavior for HIV/STD infection: Summary and suggestions. Public Health Reports, 121, 127-132.
Hypersexuality can be caused by dementia in a number of ways, including disinhibition due to organic disease, misreading of social cues, understimulation, the persistence of learned sexual behaviour after other behaviours have been lost, and the side-effects of the drugs used to treat dementia.
Other possible causes of dementia-related hypersexuality include an inappropriately expressed psychological need for intimacy and forgetfulness of the recent past. Robinson, DNS, RN, DS, FAAN. (Jan 2003). Understanding Hyper sexuality, A Behavioral Disorder of Dementia.  Home Healthcare Nurse. Vol.21, no.1.
Some patients with autism also exhibit hypersexuality. A variety of treatments have been tried for hypersexuality in autistic patients, with no clear consensus as to their applicability.

Official diagnostic status

The Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM) of the American Psychiatric Association (APA) includes an entry called Sexual Disorder Not Otherwise Specified (Sexual Disorder NOS) to apply to, among other conditions, "distress about a pattern of repeated sexual relationships involving a succession of lovers who are experienced by the individual only as things to be used."American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders (4th ed., text revision). Washington, DC: Author. A proposal to add Hypersexual Disorder to the appendix (but not the main list of official diagnoses) of the DSM is currently under consideration by the APA.
The International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD-10) of the World Health Organization (WHO), includes two relevant entries. One is "Excessive Sexual Drive" (coded F52.7), which is divided into satyriasis for males and nymphomania for females.  The other is "Excessive Masturbation" or "Onanism (excessive)" (coded F98.8).
The DSM-V work group has considered hypersexuality as a sexual disorder and has proposed the following diagnostic criteria for use in DSM-V which has been rejected but is still worth consideration. The diagnosis is as follows. You must have recurrent and intense sexual desires, sexual urges or sexual behaviours over the period of 6 months or more with 3 of the 5 following criteria; time consumed with sexual fantasies conflicts with other important goals, repetitively engaging in sexual fantasies in response to dysphoric mood states, repetitively engaging in sexual fantasies in response to stress, repetitive but unsuccessful attempts to control such behavior, and repetitively engaging in sexual behaviours with disregard for physical or emotional harm to self or others. There must also be clinically significant personal distress or negative effect on social or occupational aspects of life and the sexual behavior must not be because of an exogenous substance. Some behaviors that are specific to this disorder are masturbation, pornography, sex, cybersex, telephone sex, and going to strip clubs.
A proposal to add Sexual Addiction to the DSM system has been rejected by the APA, as not enough evidence suggested to them that the condition is analogous to substance addictions, as that name would imply.

Treatment

There does not yet exist any treatment approach uniformly endorsed by experts and/or community groups.  Most clinical authors recommend a multifaceted or multimodal approach that includes a variety of treatments, including certain classes of anti-depressants (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, or SSRIs) that reduce sex drive in some people, motivational interviewing, and individual, group, or couples' therapy (including cognitive-behavioral, psychodynamic, and relapse-prevention). S., & Krueger, R. B. (2010). Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment of hypersexuality. Journal of Sex Research, 47, 181-198. P. (2007). Paraphilia-related disorders: The evaluation and treatment of nonparaphilic hypersexuality. In S. R. Leiblum (Ed.), ''Principles and practice of sex therapy (4th ed.) (pp. 442-476). New York: Guilford.
The cognitive-behavioral treatment was first introduced to drug and alcohol addiction, one technique involved using relapse prevention; to train a set of skills, cognitive interventions and life style changes to identify and cope with stressors of relapse. Kaplan; Richard B. Krueger, "Diagnosis, assessment, and treatment of hypersexuality", The Journal of Sex Research, March–June 2010

Historical uses

Richard von Krafft-Ebing

Krafft-Ebing described several cases of extreme sexual behaviours in his seminal 1886 book, Psychopathia Sexualis. von (1886/1965). Psychopathia sexualis: A medico–forensic study (H. E. Wedeck, Trans.). New York: Putnam.  Although he also used the term "hypersexuality" in that book, he was describing conditions that would now be called premature ejaculation.






