[[Actinobacteria]]

CATEGORIES: Actinobacteria, Bacteria genera, Gram-positive bacteria

Actinobacteria are a group of Gram-positive bacteria. They were all believed to have high guanine and cytosine content in their DNA. However, recently it has been shown that several freshwater Actinobacteria actually have low G+C content. 

Although some of the largest and most complex bacterial cells belong to the Actinobacteria, the group of marine Actinomarinales has been described as possessing the smallest free-living prokaryotic cells.
Microbial diversity is a vast frontier and potential
goldmine for the biotechnology industry because it
offers countless new genes and biochemical pathways
to probe for enzymes, antibiotics and other useful
molecules[ref]Singh, D. and V.P. Agrawal 2002. Microbial Biodiversity of
Mount Sagarmatha Region. In Proceedings of
International Seminar on Mountains, March 6–8,
Kathmandu. Nepal Academy of Science and
Technology, Khumaltar, Lalitpu[/ref] The structure of the soil represents a good indicator for the biologic activity, as
soil aggregates define the most important microhabitats for microorganisms. The soil
should have enough pores, filled with gases, in order to allow the gas exchange with the
atmosphere, reducing thus the risk of formation of the anaerobic area. Within the
aerobiosis, the activity of microorganisms is much more intense, and the mineralization
processes take place in optimal conditions. 357-360[ref]AKKERMANS, A.D.L.,VAN ELSAS, J.D., DE BRUIJIN, 1995 – Molecular microbial ecology manual,
Kluywer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht The Netherlands: 75-77.[/ref]

General

Most Actinobacteria of medical or economic significance are in subclass Actinobacteridae, order Actinomycetales. While many of these cause disease in humans, Streptomyces is notable as a source of antibiotics.
Of those Actinobacteria not in Actinomycetales, Gardnerella is one of the most researched. Classification of Gardnerella is controversial, and MeSH catalogues it as both a gram-positive and gram-negative organism.
Actinomycetes, especially Streptomyces sp., are recognized as the producers of many bioactive metabolites that are useful to humans in medicine, such as antibacterials,Mahajan GB, 2012, Antibacterial agents from actinomycetes - a review. Frontiers in Bioscience (Elite Ed). 4:240-53 antifungals,Gupte, M., P. Kulkarni and B.N. Ganguli, 2002. Antifungal Antibiotics. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol.,58: 46-57 antivirals, antithrombotics, immunomodifiers, anti-tumor drugs and enzyme inhibitors; and in agriculture, including insecticides, herbicides, fungicides and growth promoting substances for plants and animals.A and M.S. J. Basic and Appl. Sci.,3:126-135  Actinomycete-derived antibiotics that are important in medicine include aminoglycosides, anthracyclines, chloramphenicol, macrolide, tetracyclines etc.
Streptomyces and other actinomycetes are major contributes to biological buffering of soils and have roles in organic matter decomposition conductive to crop productionDebananda S. Ningthoujam, SuchitraSanasam, K. Tamreihao and Salam Nimaichand, 2009,Afr. J. Microbiol. Res. 3(11) : 737-742

Phylogeny

The currently accepted taxonomy is based on the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LPSN) 
and the phylogeny is based on 16S rRNA-based LTP release 106 by The All-Species Living Tree Project All-Species Living Tree Project.

Notes:

♪ Prokaryotes where no pure (axenic) cultures are isolated or available, i. e. not cultivated or can not be sustained in culture for more than a few serial passages

♠ Strains found at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) but not listed in the List of Prokaryotic names with Standing in Nomenclature (LSPN)



Further reading




