[[Incest]]

CATEGORIES: Incest, Family law, Sex crimes, Child sexual abuse, Anthropology, Sexual acts

Incest is sexual activity between family members or close relatives.
The incest taboo is and has been one of the most widespread of all cultural taboos, both in present and in many past societies. Most modern societies have laws regarding incest or social restrictions on closely consanguineous marriages. In societies where it is illegal, consensual adult incest is seen by some as a victimless crime. Some cultures extend the incest taboo to relatives with no consanguinity such as milk-siblings, step-siblings and adoptive siblings. Third-degree relatives (such as half-aunt, half-nephew, first cousin) share 12.5% genes, and sexual relations between them is viewed differently in various cultures, from being discouraged to being socially acceptable. Ludman - 2009. The children of incestuous relationships were regarded as illegitimate, and are still so regarded in some societies today. In most cases, the parents did not have the option to marry to remove that status, as incestuous marriages were and are normally also prohibited.
A common justification given for the incest taboo is the impact inbreeding may have on children of incestuous sex. Children whose biological parents have a close genetic relationship have an increased risk of congenital disorders, death and disability at least in part due to genetic diseases caused by the inbreeding. Unintended sexual relations between genetically related persons may also arise when either or both biological parents are unknown or uncertain, as in the case of children born as a result of casual or extramarital sexual relations, anonymous sperm donation, surrogacy or adoption. On the other hand, most prohibitions on incest extend the categories of prohibited relationships to affinity relationships such as in-law relations, step relations, relations through adoption, among others. As such, the incest taboo is not solely based on inbreeding, and also applies to sexual activity between relatives (genetically related or otherwise) who cannot have children or to sexual activity between relatives where conception is not likely to occur; for example, because of the use of contraception.
In some societies, such as those of Ancient Egypt and others, brother–sister, father–daughter, and mother–son, cousin-cousin, aunt-nephew, uncle-niece, and other combinations of relations were practiced among royalty as a means of perpetuating the royal lineage. However, sexual relations with a first-degree relative (such as a parent or sibling) who share 50% DNA is almost universally forbidden., Abraham Rosman, Paula G. Rubel, Maxine Weisgrau, 2009, AltaMira Press, p. 101

Terminology

The English word incest is derived from the Latin incestus, which has a general meaning of "impure, unchaste".
It was introduced into Middle English, both in the generic Latin sense (preserved throughout the Middle English periodOED Ancrene Riwle (c. 1225) has Incest‥is bituȝe sibbe fleschliche, where either the generic or the narrow sense may be intended. See also inetymonline.
The derived adjective incestuous appears in the 16th century. F. Hoad (ed.) (1996), p. 232
Prior to the introduction of the Latin term, incest was known in Old English as sibbleger (from sibb 'kinship' + leger 'to lie') or mǣġhǣmed (from mǣġ 'kin, parent' + hǣmed 'sexual intercourse') but in time, both words fell out of use.

History

Antiquity

In ancient China, first cousins with the same surnames (i.e., those born to the father's brothers) were not permitted to marry, while those with different surnames (i.e., maternal cousins and paternal cousins born to the father's sisters) were.
Several of the Egyptian Pharaohs married their siblings and had several children with them. (for example, Tutankhamun married his half-sister Ankhesenamun.  Tutankhamun himself was the child of an incestuous union between Akhenaten and an unidentified sister-wife). It is now generally accepted that sibling marriages were widespread among all classes in Egypt during the Graeco-Roman period. Numerous papyri and the Roman census declarations attest to many husbands and wives being brother and sister, of the same father and mother. The most famous of these relationships were in the royal family, the Ptolemies; Cleopatra VII was married to her younger brother, Ptolemy XIII. Her mother and father, Cleopatra V and Ptolemy XII, had also been brother and sister.
According to  of the Hebrew Bible, the Patriarch Abraham and his wife Sarah were half-siblings, both being children of Terah, but with different mothers.
The fable of Oedipus, with a theme of inadvertent incest between a mother and son, ends in disaster and shows ancient taboos against incest as Oedipus is punished for incestuous actions by blinding himself. In the "sequel" to Oedipus, Antigone, his four children are also punished for their parents' incestuousness. Incest appears in the commonly accepted version of the birth of Adonis, when his mother, Myrrha has sex with her father Cinyras during a festival, disguised as a prostitute.
In Ancient Greece, Spartan King Leonidas I, hero of the legendary Battle of Thermopylae, was married to his niece Gorgo, daughter of his half-brother Cleomenes I. Greek law allowed marriage between a brother and sister if they had different mothers. For example, some accounts say that Elpinice was for a time married to her half-brother Cimon.
Incest is mentioned and condemned in Virgil's Aeneid Book VI:Vergil Aeneid Book VI in Latin: The descent to the Underworld. Ancienthistory.com (2010-06-15). Retrieved on 2011-10-01. hic thalamum invasit natae vetitosque hymenaeos; "This one invaded a daughter's room and a forbidden sex act".
Incestuous unions were discouraged and considered as nefas (against the laws of gods and man) in ancient Rome. In AD 295 incest was explicitly forbidden by an imperial edict, which divided the concept of incestus into two categories of unequal gravity: the incestus iuris gentium, which was applied to both Romans and non-Romans in the Empire, and the incestus iuris civilis, which concerned only Roman citizens. Therefore, for example, an Egyptian could marry an aunt, but a Roman could not. Despite the act of incest being unacceptable within the Roman Empire, Roman Emperor Caligula is rumored to have had sexual relationships with all three of his sisters (Julia Livilla, Drusilla, and Agrippina the Younger). 62. Emperor Claudius, after executing his previous wife, married his brother's daughter Agrippina the Younger, and changed the law to allow an otherwise illegal union. 66. The law prohibiting marrying a sister's daughter remained. The taboo against incest in Ancient Rome is demonstrated by the fact that politicians would use charges of incest (often false charges) as insults and means of political disenfranchisement.
In Norse mythology there are themes of brother-sister marriage, a prominent example being between Njörðr and his unnamed sister (perhaps Nerthus), parents of Freyja and Freyr. Loki in turn also accuses Freyja and Freyr of having a sexual relationship.

Middle Ages

Many European monarchs were related due to political marriages, sometimes resulting in distant cousins (and even first cousins) being married. This was especially true in the Habsburg, Hohenzollern, Savoy and Bourbon royal houses. However, relations between siblings, that may have been tolerated in other cultures, was considered abhorrent. For example, the accusation that Anne Boleyn and her brother George Boleyn had committed incest was one of the reasons that both siblings were executed in May 1536.
Incestuous marriages were also seen in the royal houses of ancient Japan and Korea,Smith, George Patrick (1998). Family Values and the New Society: Dilemmas of the 21st Century. Greenwood Publishing Group via Google Books. p. 143. Inca Peru, Ancient Hawaii, and, at times, Central Africa, Mexico, and Thailand."The Risks and Rewards of Royal Incest". National Geographic Magazine. Like the pharaohs of ancient Egypt, the Inca rulers married their sisters. Huayna Capac, for instance, was the son of Topa Inca Yupanqui and the Inca's sister and wife. The History of the Incas. Austin: University of Texas Press, 2007. .
Half-sibling marriages were found in ancient Japan such as the marriage of Emperor Bidatsu and his half-sister Empress Suiko. The Creed Of Half Japan: Historical Sketches Of Japanese Buddhism. Kessinger Publishing via Google Books. p. 180. Japanese Prince Kinashi no Karu had sexual relationships with his full sister Princess Karu no Ōiratsume, although the action was regarded as foolish. (1998). A Waka Anthology: The Gem-Glistening Cup. Stanford University Press via Google Books. p. 805. In order to prevent the influence of the other families, a half-sister of Korean Goryeo Dynasty monarch Gwangjong became his wife in the 10th century. Her name was Daemok. (2000). Generals and Scholars: Military Rule in Medieval Korea. University of Hawaii Press, p. 169. Brother-sister marriages were common during some Roman periods as some census records have shown. (1996). The Brother/Sister Hurt: Recognising the Effects of Sibling Abuse. Safer Society Press.

Prevalence and statistics

Incest between an adult and a person under the age of consent is considered a form of child sexual abuse Among women, research has yielded estimates as high as 20%.
Father-daughter incest was for many years the most commonly reported and studied form of incest."

Types

Between adults and children

Incest between an adult and a child is usually considered a form of child sexual abuseDecision-making of the District Attorney: Diverting or Prosecuting Intrafamilial Child Sexual Abuse Offenders, Lorie Fridell, Criminal Justice Policy Review, vol.4, 1990. and for many years has been the most reported form of incest. Father–daughter and stepfather–stepdaughter incest is the most commonly reported form of adult-child incest, with most of the remaining involving a mother or stepmother.
In a 1999 news story, BBC reported, "Close-knit family life in India masks an alarming amount of sexual abuse of children and teenage girls by family members, a new report suggests. Delhi organisation RAHI said 76% of respondents to its survey had been abused when they were children - 40% of those by a family member.""India's hidden incest ," BBC News, January 22, 1999.
According to the National Center for Victims of Crime a large proportion of rape committed in the United States is perpetrated by a family member:

A study of victims of father–daughter incest in the 1970s showed that there were "common features" within families before the occurrence of incest: estrangement between the mother and the daughter, extreme paternal dominance, and reassignment of some of the mother's traditional major family responsibility to the daughter. Oldest and only daughters were more likely to be the victims of incest. It was also stated that the incest experience was psychologically harmful to the woman in later life, frequently leading to feelings of low self-esteem, unhealthy sexual activity, contempt for other women, and other emotional problems. (May 21, 1977). Science News, 111 (21), 326.
Adults who as children were incestuously victimized by adults often suffer from low self-esteem, difficulties in interpersonal relationships, and sexual dysfunction, and are at an extremely high risk of many mental disorders, including depression, anxiety, phobic avoidance reactions, somatoform disorder, substance abuse, borderline personality disorder, and complex post-traumatic stress disorder.
The Goler clan in Nova Scotia is a specific instance in which child sexual abuse in the form of forced adult/child and sibling/sibling incest took place over at least three generations. On South Mountain: The Dark Secrets of the Goler Clan (Penguin Books, 1998) ISBN 0-670-87388-8  A number of Goler children were victims of sexual abuse at the hands of fathers, mothers, uncles, aunts, sisters, brothers, cousins, and each other. During interrogation by police, several of the adults openly admitted to engaging in many forms of sexual activity, up to and including full intercourse, multiple times with the children. Sixteen adults (both men and women) were charged with hundreds of allegations of incest and sexual abuse of children as young as five. In July 2012, twelve children were removed from the 'Colt' family (a pseudonym) in New South Wales, Australia, after the discovery of four generations of incest.
In Japan there is a popular misconception that mother-son incestuous contact is common, due to the manner in which it is depicted in the press and popular media.  According to Hideo Tokuoka, "When Americans think of incest, they think of fathers and daughters; in Japan one thinks of mothers and sons" due to the extensive media coverage of mother-son incest there. The Mainichi Daily News column WaiWai, by Australian journalist Ryann Connell, featured often-sensationalist stories, principally translated from and based on articles appearing in Japanese tabloids.[ref]
"Analysis of the investigative team", Mainichi Newspapers, 2008-07-20.[/ref] On June 28, 2008, The Mainichi newspaper announced punitive measures."Punitive measures over Mainichi Daily News WaiWai column announced" Mainichi Newspapers, 2008-06-28."Mainichi suspends reporter over 'vulgar' English column", BREITBART.The writer was Ryann Connell. Justin Norrie, "Japanese set the blogs on 'sleazy Australian' writer", The Age, 2008-07-05. Mainichi said, "We continued to post articles that contained incorrect information and indecent sexual content. These articles, many of which were not checked and properly investigated should not have been dispatched. We apologize deeply for causing many people trouble and for betraying the public's trust in the Mainichi Shimbun." [ref]
"Mainichi Daily News to start over again", Mainichi Daily News, 2008-07-20.[/ref]

Between childhood siblings

Childhood sibling–sibling incest is considered to be widespread but rarely reported.
Sibling-sibling incest becomes child-on-child sexual abuse when it occurs without consent, without equality, or as a result of coercion. In this form, it is believed to be the most common form of intrafamilial abuse.
Sibling abusive incest is most prevalent in families where one or both parents are often absent or emotionally unavailable, with the abusive siblings using incest as a way to assert their power over a weaker sibling.

Between consenting adults

Sexual activity between adult close relatives may arise from genetic sexual attraction. This form of incest has not been widely reported in the past, but recent evidence has indicated that this behavior does take place, possibly more often than many people realize. Internet chatrooms and topical websites exist that provide support for incestuous couples.
Proponents of incest between consenting adults draw clear boundaries between the behavior of consenting adults and rape, child molestation, and abusive incest. According to one incest participant who was quoted for an article in The Guardian:
In Slate, William Saletan drew a legal connection between gay sex and incest between consenting adults.

=Aunts, uncles, nieces or nephews=

In the Netherlands, marriage between nephews and nieces is legal, but only with the explicit permission of the Dutch Government, due to the possible risk of genetic defects among their offspring. Nephew-niece marriages predominantly occur among foreign immigrants. In November 2008, the Christian democratic (CDA) party's Scientific Institute announced that it wanted a ban on marriages between nephews and nieces.Netherlands: CDA Think-Tank Wants Drastic Measures Against 'Imported Brides'
Consensual sex between adults(persons of 18 years and older) is always lawful in the Netherlands and Belgium, even among closely related family members. Sexual acts between an adult family member and a minor are illegal, though they are not classified as incest, but as abuse of the authority such an adult has over a minor, comparable to that of a teacher, coach or priest. (Dutch)
In Florida, consensual adult sexual intercourse with someone known to be your aunt, uncle, niece or nephew constitutes a felony of the third degree. Scheb - 2008 Other states also commonly prohibit marriages between such kins. Nolan - 2011 The legality of sex with a half-aunt or half-uncle varies state by state. Ludman - 2010
In the United Kingdom, incest includes only sexual intercourse with a parent, grandparent, child or sibling  The term 'incest' however remains widely used in popular culture to describe any form of sexual activity with a relative.

=Between adult siblings=

The most public case of consensual adult sibling incest in recent years is the case of a brother-sister couple from Germany, Patrick Stübing and Susan Karolewski. Because of violent behavior on the part of the father, the brother was taken in at the age of 3 by foster parents, who adopted him later. At the age of 23 he learned about his biological parents, contacted his mother, and met her and his then 16-year-old sister for the first time. The now-adult brother moved in with his birth family shortly thereafter. After their mother died suddenly six months later, the couple became intimately close, and had their first child together in 2001. By 2004, they had four children together: Eric, Sarah, Nancy, and Sofia. The public nature of their relationship, and the repeated prosecutions and even jail time they have served as a result, has caused some in Germany to question whether incest between consenting adults should be punished at all. An article about them in Der Spiegel states that the couple are happy together. According to court records, the first three children have mental and physical disabilities, and have been placed in foster care. In April 2012, at the European Court of Human Rights, Patrick Stuebing lost his case that the conviction violated his right to a private and family life. Germany case. European Court of Human Rights.
Some societies differentiate between full sibling and half sibling relations. In ancient societies, half-sibling marriages occurred.239 Sexual relations with half-aunts or half-uncles are illegal in some US states. Ludman - 2009

=Cousin relationships=

Marriages and sexual relationships between first cousins are stigmatized as incest in some cultures, but tolerated in much of the world. Currently, 24 US states prohibit marriages between first cousins, and another seven permit them only under special circumstances.Joanna Grossman, Should the law be kinder to kissin' cousins?
The United Kingdom permits both marriage and sexual relations between first cousins. Communities such as the Dhond and the Bhittani of Pakistan clearly prefer marriages between cousins as believe they ensure purity of the descent line, provide intimate knowledge of the spouses, and ensure that patrimony will not pass into the hands of "outsiders".
Apart from the partial prohibition in the United States, there are some cultures in Asia which stigmatize cousin marriage, in some instances even marriages between second cousins or more remotely related people. This concerns notably the culture of Korea, and some Hindu communities in India. In South Korea, before 1997, anyone with the same last name and clan were prohibited from marriage. In light of this law being held unconstitutional, South Korea now only prohibits up to third cousins (see Article 809 of the Korean Civil Code). Hmong culture prohibits the marriage of anyone with the same last name - to do so would result in being shunned by the entire community, and they are usually stripped of their last name. In a review of 48 studies on the children parented by cousins, most of the babies born to cousins were healthy contrary to the popular perception, with birth defects being 4% of births for consanguineous couples as opposed to 2% for the general population.

=Defined through marriage=

Some cultures include relatives by marriage in incest prohibitions; these relationships are called affinity rather than consanguinity. For example, the question of the legality and morality of a widower who wished to marry his deceased wife's sister was the subject of long and fierce debate in the United Kingdom in the 19th century, involving, among others, Matthew Boulton).
In Islamic law, marriage among close blood relations like parents, step-parent, parents in-law, siblings, step-siblings, the children of siblings, aunts and uncles is prohibited, while first or second cousins may marry. Marrying the widow of a brother, or the sister of deceased or divorced wife is also allowed.

Inbreeding

Offspring of biologically related parents are subject to the possible impact of inbreeding. Such offspring have a higher possibility (see Coefficient of relationship) of congenital birth defects because it increases the proportion of zygotes that are homozygous, in particular for deleterious recessive alleles that produce such disorders
There may also be other deleterious effects besides those caused by recessive diseases. Thus, similar immune systems may be more vulnerable to infectious diseases (see Major histocompatibility complex and sexual selection).
A 1994 study found a mean excess mortality with inbreeding among first cousins of 4.4%.

Animals

Many mammal species, including humanity's closest primate relatives, tend to avoid mating with close relatives, especially if there are alternative partners available. However, some chimpanzees have been recorded attempting to mate with their mothers.Sexual Behaviour In Animals A. Sarkar; retrieved 29 January 2012
Livestock breeders often practice controlled breeding to eliminate undesirable characteristics within a population, which is also coupled with culling of what is considered unfit offspring, especially when trying to establish a new and desirable trait in the stock.

Laws

Laws regarding sexual activity between close relatives vary considerably between jurisdictions, and depend on the type of sexual activity and the nature of the family relationship of the parties involved, as well as the age and sex of the parties. Prohibition of incest laws may extend to restrictions on marriage rights, which also vary between jurisdictions. Most jurisdictions prohibit parent-child and sibling marriages, while other also prohibit first-cousin and uncle-niece and aunt-nephew marriages. In most places, incest is illegal, regardless of the ages of the two partners. In other countries, incestuous relationships between consenting adults (with the age varying by location) are permitted, including in the Netherlands, France and Spain. In Sweden, the only type of incestuous relationship allowed by law is that between half-siblings and they must seek government counseling before marriage. BBC. 12 March 2007. retrieved 22 January 2011

Religious views

Jewish

In three places in the Torah, there are lists of family members between whom it is prohibited to have sexual relations; each of these lists is progressively shorter. The biblical lists are not symmetrical – the implied rules for women and men are not the same. Relationships compare as follows:

Apart from the questionable case of the daughter, the first incest list in the Holiness code roughly produces the same rules as were followed in early (pre-Islamic) Arabic culture;
In the 4th century BCE, the Soferim (scribes) declared that there were relationships within which marriage constituted incest, in addition to those mentioned by the Torah. These additional relationships were termed seconds (Hebrew: sheniyyot), and included the wives of a man's grandfather and grandson.
Marriages forbidden in the Torah were regarded by the rabbis of the Middle Ages as invalid – as if they had never occurred;Shulchan 'Aruk, Eben ha-'Ezer, 16, 1 any children born to such a couple were regarded as bastards under Jewish law, and the relatives of the spouse were not regarded as forbidden relations for a further marriage.

Christian

The Catholic Church does not generally permit the marriage if a doubt exists on whether the potential spouses are related by consanguinity in any degree of the direct line or in the second degree of the collateral line. Can. 1091
Definitions of incest varied throughout history.  The Fourth Lateran Council held in 1215 attempted to codify that marriage was forbidden up to and including third cousins, though permissible beyond this for fourth cousins, third cousins once removed, etc.
In the Eastern Orthodox Church, marriages are banned between second cousins or closer and between second uncles / aunts and second nieces / nephews (between first cousins once removed) or closer. Marrying one's godparent or deceased spouse's sibling is also prohibited, although marrying one's stepchild is not - e.g. Vyacheslav Ivanov exercised his right to marry his stepdaughter after her mother's (his first wife's) death.
The Anglican Communion allows marriages up to and including first cousins.A Table of Kindred and Affinity 562

Islamic

The Quran gives specific rules regarding incest, which prohibit a man from marrying or having sexual relationships with:

The main differences (apart from relationships between a man and his daughter) are:

Zoroastrian

In Zoroastrianism, incest between parent-child or brothers-sisters is virtue. pp. 21–22, 2012. Incest is called Xvaetvadatha. Incest is performed with all the statuses. Böhlau - 1990. Friedrich Nietzsche, in his book cites that among Zoroastrians a wise priest is borne only by incest. Anaconda Verlag - 2012.

Hindu

Rigveda regard incest to be "evil". Hinduism speaks of incest in abhorrent terms. Hindus are fearful of the bad effects of incest and thus practice strict rules of both endogamy and exogamy, as well as same family tree (gotra) or bloodline (Pravara). Marriages within the gotra ("swagotra" marriages) are banned under the rule of exogamy in the traditional matrimonial system."there can be no matrimony between the sects of Gehlawat and Kadiyan as they have a "brotherhood" akin to consanguinity."Haryana panchayat takes on govt over same-gotra marriage. Indian Express. July 20, 2009 People within the gotra are regarded as kin and marrying such a person would be thought of as incest. i.e. Marriage with paternal cousins is strictly prohibited."In India these rules are reproduced in the form of that one must not marry within the Gotra, but not without the caste" Limitations of Marriage. sanathanadharma. Gotra is transferred down the male lineage while the Gotra of a female changes upon marriage. i.e., upon marriage a woman would belong to her husband's lineage.
The marriage with a person having same Gotra as of the original Gotras(lineage) is prohibited."Invasion of the Genes Genetic Heritage of India" by B. S. Ahloowalia, page. 192page 526, The Illustrated Encyclopedia of Hinduism: N-Z,  By James G. Lochtefeld, Rosen Publishing Group, 2002

Buddhist

Buddhist societies take a strong ethical stand in human affairs and sexual behavior in particular. Most variations of Buddhism decide locally about the details of incest as a wrongdoing, according to local cultural standards. Tpuuf. Retrieved on 2011-10-01. Sexual misconduct is mentioned but the definition of what constitutes misconduct sex is an individual issue.
Buddhist monks and nuns strictly forbid any type of sexual misconduct, and therefore depends on the culture of the area, not on mandate from Buddhism itself.

Non-religious views

In March 2013, Lawrence Krauss in a debate with Hamza Tzortzis, titled Islam or Atheism, which makes more sense?, stated that he did not necessarily see anything wrong with incest if it was between two consenting adults.








