[[Crispin Blunt]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, 13th/18th Royal Hussars officers, Alumni of Cranfield University, Alumni of Durham University, Conservative Party (UK) MPs, Bisexual men, Bisexual politicians, Gay politicians, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, People educated at Wellington College, Berkshire, Graduates of the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, UK MPs 1997–2001, UK MPs 2001–05, UK MPs 2005–10, UK MPs 2010–, LGBT politicians from England

Crispin Jeremy Rupert Blunt (born 15 July 1960) is a British Conservative Party politician. He is the Member of Parliament (MP) for the Reigate constituency in Surrey, and from May 2010 to September 2012 he was the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Prisons and Youth Justice within the Ministry of Justice.
He first entered the House of Commons at the 1997 general election, when he replaced the current MP Sir George Gardiner who had been deselected by the Constituency Conservative Association Executive Council.
In 2013, Blunt himself was de-selected by the Constituency Executive Council, amid rumours that this was due to his homosexuality.pinknews.co. 

Early life and career

Blunt was born in Germany, one of three sons of English parents Adrienne (née Richardson) and Major-General Peter Blunt (1923–2003).
Blunt was commissioned as an Army Officer into the 13th/18th Royal Hussars (Queen Mary's Own) and served until 1990.
He contested his first Parliamentary seat at the 1992 general election, as the Conservative Party candidate in West Bromwich East.  From 1991 to 1992, Blunt was a representative of the Forum of Private Business.

Member of Parliament

At the 1997 general election, Blunt was elected to Parliament as Member for Reigate in Surrey, replacing the long-serving strongly Eurosceptic MP Sir George Gardiner, who had been deselected by the local Conservative Party. Blunt was subsequently appointed to the House of Commons Defence Select Committee. In July 1997, he was elected as Secretary of the Conservative Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs Committee and the Conservative Middle East Council. In May 2000, he joined the House of Commons Environment, Transport and Regional Affairs Select Committee and in July 2003 he was elected Chairman of the Conservative Middle East Council, a position he still occupies.
The new Conservative Party leader Iain Duncan Smith appointed him to the Opposition front bench as Shadow Minister for Northern Ireland in September 2001. In July 2002, he was appointed as deputy to Tim Yeo, Shadow Secretary of State for Trade and Industry. On 1 May 2003 he resigned his position on the front bench, saying that Duncan Smith was a "handicap" to the Conservatives. He decided to resign at that time in the expectation that the Conservative Party would make over 500 gains in local government elections, but in the belief that these would be achieved in spite of, rather than because of, Iain Duncan Smith's leadership. Blunt timed his resignation so that it became public after the polls closed but before the results were declared. The following day he was unanimously reselected by his local party as their prospective parliamentary candidate, but in May 2003 he failed to persuade 25 of his fellow Conservative MPs to call for a vote of confidence. He accepted that no challenge for the party leadership would be immediately forthcoming and returned to the back benches. In November 2003 the challenge came and Michael Howard replaced Duncan Smith after a vote of no confidence.
He became a party whip under Howard, but on 9 June 2005 he took leave of absence from that role to support the expected leadership bid of Sir Malcolm Rifkind. However, when Rifkind was knocked out of the party leadership contest, Blunt returned to the Whips' office and wrote to all Party members in his constituency asking them to rank the remaining contenders in order of preference so he could best represent his constituents.
Blunt is a former joint chair of the Council for the Advancement of Arab-British Understanding. When the Conservative and Liberal Democrat Coalition formed the Government in 2010, Blunt was appointed as a Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Ministry of Justice. His responsibilities include: Prisons and probation, Youth justice, Criminal law and sentencing policy and Criminal justice. He is also a member of the All-Party Parliamentary Humanist Group.
In November of 2013 Mr Blunt was re-selected to stand in the 2015 general election for the Conservative Party having undergone a postal ballot of constituency members. The postal ballot was triggered when the executive council came to a vote with a majority decision not to endorse his candidacy. Having won the postal ballot Mr Blunt called for the executive council to consider their position.

Personal life

He married Victoria Jenkins in September 1990 in Kensington and they have a daughter (born March 1992) and son (born August 1994). His niece is Golden Globe-award winning actress Emily Blunt. Victoria was devastated.Public Whip Policy Comparison






