[[Final Destination (film)]]

CATEGORIES: 2000 films, 2000 horror films, Aviation films, Directorial debut films, Final Destination films, Films set in 2000, Films set in New York, Films shot in San Francisco, California, Films shot in Toronto, Films shot in Vancouver, Splatter films, American teen horror films, New Line Cinema films

Final Destination is a 2000 American horror film directed by James Wong and the first installment of the Final Destination series. The screenplay was written by Glen Morgan, Wong and Jeffrey Reddick, based on a story by Reddick. The film stars Devon Sawa, Ali Larter, Kerr Smith and Tony Todd. Sawa portrays a teenager who "cheats death" after having a premonition of himself and others perishing in a plane explosion.  He uses his premonition to save himself and a handful of other passengers, but is stalked by Death, which gradually takes the lives of the passengers who should have perished on the plane.
The film was based on a spec script written by Reddick intended for The X-Files.  Wong and Morgan, The X-Files writing partners, were interested in the script and agreed to rewrite and direct a feature film, marking Wong's film directing debut.
The film received mixed reviews from critics.  Negative reviews described the film as "dramatically flat" and "aimed at the teen dating crowd," while positive reviews praised the film for "generating a respectable amount of suspense," "playful and energized enough to keep an audience guessing," and "an unexpectedly alert teen-scream disaster chiller". The film's success spawned a media franchise, encompassing four sequels, as well as a series of novels and comic books.

Plot

Alex Browning, a teenager, boards Volée Airlines Flight 180 with his teenage classmates and teachers for their senior trip from New York City to Paris, France.  Before the Boeing 747 takes off, Alex has a premonition that the plane will suffer a catastrophic engine failure, causing the plane to explode in mid-air, killing everyone on board.  As events from his vision begin to repeat themselves in reality, he panics and attempts to stop the flight, but he is removed from the plane, along with a handful of passengers, including Clear Rivers, best friend Tod Waggner, teacher Valerie Lewton, Alex's rival Carter Horton, Carter's girlfriend Terry Chaney and student Billy Hitchcock.  None of the passengers except Clear believe in Alex's premonition until the airplane explodes on take-off, killing the remaining passengers on board.  The survivors are interrogated by two FBI agents, who suspect the students were involved in the explosion.
39 days after the explosion, the survivors attend a memorial service for the victims. After the service, a chain reaction causes Tod to accidentally strangle himself in his shower, but the accident is deemed a suicide. As Alex and Clear sneak into the funeral homes to inspect Tod's body, they meet mortician William Bludworth who tells Alex and Clear that Death is reclaiming the lives of those who escaped from the explosion. The next day, Alex and Clear discuss what the mortician informed them in town, where the rest of the survivors (Carter, Terry, Ms. Lewton and Billy) pass by. During the commotion, Terry is suddenly killed by a speeding bus and the mortician's theory is believed to be coming true.
As he watches a news report on the cause of the explosion, Alex concludes that Death is killing the survivors in the same order that they were meant to die in the explosion and finds out Ms. Lewton is next to die. He attempts to go to her to ensure she's safe, but thinking Alex is up to no good, Ms Lewton calls the FBI agents to take him in for questioning. As Alex tries to convince them of what is happening, they ask him to promise to forget all of this, but he frustratedly refuses and leaves. Nonetheless, when he gets back to Ms Lewton's house, he is too late to save her from an accidental kitchen knife impalement or the subsequent explosion of her house.  The remaining survivors (Alex, Clear, Carter, and Billy) get together in Carter's car, and Alex explains the situation as they drive through town. During the discussion, Carter fears he is next to die. Frustrated by Terry's death and having no control over his life, Carter attempts suicide by stalling his car on railroad tracks. He changes his mind at the last minute, but gets stuck when his seat belt jams.  Alex manages to save him before the train hits the car. However, Billy is decapitated by flying shrapnel from the wreckage.
Alex believes that Carter was supposed to die in the car accident but because Alex saved him, Death skipped Carter and moved on to Billy, who was meant to die after Carter. Alex realizes that Clear is next, because he and Clear had switched seats in his original premonition.  He rushes to her aid while being pursued by FBI agents. Meanwhile, Clear is trapped inside her car with a leaking gas tank, surrounded by loose live wires. Alex grabs a wire, allowing Clear to escape before the car explodes, but Alex is incapacitated.
Six months later, Alex, Clear and Carter arrive in Paris and discuss their survival.  Alex believes Death skipped Carter and Clear because he saved them, but Alex himself was never skipped.  Fearing that their struggle is now unfinished, Alex leaves and narrowly avoids being hit by a bus, which then topples a neon sign.  After Carter pushes Alex to safety, Carter asks "so who's next?"  The film ends with the neon sign toppled by the bus swinging towards Carter and killing him, implying that Death's plan is still in action.

Cast

Production

Development

The development of the film (and its subsequent franchise) began after Jeffrey Reddick took notice of the TWA Flight 800 explosion and its investigation, which gained widespread attention in the media.  "I was actually flying home to Turkey and I read this story about a woman who was on vacation and her mom called her and said, 'Don't take the flight tomorrow, I have a really bad feeling about it.' She switched flights and the plane that she would have been on crashed," said Reddick. "I thought, that's creepy - what if she was supposed to die on that flight?" Building on his idea, Reddick wrote a 14-page script entitled Flight 180 for The X-Files.
His script was ignored by "The X-Files" series creator and producer Chris Carter and his staff of writers.  However, writing partners James Wong and Glen Morgan took an interest in it. Both writers were willing to make it into a film, although they rewrote the script to comply with their standards.  "I believe that at one time or another we've all experienced a sense of prescience.  We have a hunch, a feeling, and then that hunch proves true," Wong said.  "We want to do for planes and air travel what Jaws did for sharks and swimming".
Morgain said, "The main thing they wanted about Death coming to get people is that you never saw a kind of a Michael Myers figure.  You never saw a killer.  And they liked that idea and they said, 'Okay. Go write it.' Once we had a basic story, I started cataloging the strange coincidences in my own life.  For example, I was in the Vancouver airport waiting for a flight when John Denver came on over the loudspeaker. I remember saying to myself, 'Hey, he just died in a plane crash -- that's a little weird.'  We wrote that version of that experience into the script."
Producers Craig Perry and Warren Zide from Zide/Perry Productions helped with the film's budget, because both were similarly fascinated about the idea of an invisible force executing its victims.  Perry, a fan of The X-Files, claimed that he "responded to Wong and Morgan's work for one specific reason: dread". New Line Cinema accepted financing and distributing rights for the film after Reddick came to them personally.

Casting

"One of the most important things we were looking for in casting was the actors' ability to play the subtleties - the little things that a character doesn't say or do that create the edge, the things that get under your skin and spook you," Morgan said about the auditions.
Alex Browning, the last role cast, went to Canadian actor Devon Sawa, who previously starred in the 1999 film Idle Hands.  Sawa said that when "he read the script on a plane, he found himself peeking out the window at the engine every couple of minutes" and "he went down and met Glen and Jim and he thought they were amazing and already had some great ideas". However, Morgan and Wong were undecided about casting him for the part, so they requested him to perform again as they reviewed his previous works. Morgan was astounded by Sawa's performance in Idle Hands, and Sawa was hired.
Sawa described his role as "in the beginning, Alex was kinda loopy and cotter, and you know, probably not the most popular guy in school. I think he might have been a dork, you know, doing their stuff and they had their own thing going and they're after the two beautiful girls in school, but there's no chance of that happening. I guess after the plane goes down, his world completely changes".  "Devon has an every man quality that makes him accessible," Wong said. "He doesn't appear as if he's supremely self-assured.  He's more of a regular kid who can take on the complexities of the role and become a hero". Perry was amazed by Sawa's vulnerability in acting, describing him as "a very distinctive actor. He's very loose and he's kind of a cut-up when he's not on camera, but the moment the camera's on, I'd never seen anybody to completely slide right through the moment".
Ali Larter, who starred in the 1999 film Varsity Blues, was cast as female lead Clear Rivers. "The film shows how easy it is to turn on someone, to blame someone when you're scared," Larter said. "It's also about trusting your intuitions and yourself". She defined her part as "that girl who has a lot of loss in her life and has fallen for herself, and had made a life within that. She's an artist, she lives by herself, and she's kinda holding to her grip for what the world has given her".
Seann William Scott, famous for portraying Steve Stifler in the 1999 film American Pie, was hired as class clown Billy Hitchcock.  Scott admired the film, and felt that "it's as dark and eerie as any Twilight Zone". He laughed at his role, saying that "he is lacking some social skills, he doesn't have quite a few friends, and he's like the tag-along". Scott was surprised when in the script his character was written as fat. The writers eventually changed it for Scott.
Dawson's Creek star Kerr Smith was cast as jock Carter Horton. Smith identified Carter as "your typical high school bully whose life depends on anger" and mentioned the fact that Carter feared Alex not having control of his own life.

Kristen Cloke, Morgan's wife, was cast as teacher Valerie Lewton. "I have incredible respect for them," said Cloke. "Jim's the kind of director who knows exactly what he wants. As an actor, I can find a way to get there if I know specifically what I'm going for, and Jim gives me that. The fact that he won't move on until he's got exactly what he wants creates a safe environment, which allows me to experiment and try different things".  Cloke described her part as "strong and sassy -- in control. After the crash she comes unglued, probably more than any of the kids, and it's a quick, drastic change. I had to understand the psychology of a person who can turn on a dime like that".
Newcomers Amanda Detmer and Chad E. Donella were cast as students Terry Chaney and Tod Waggner, respectively. "When I first read the script, the thing that struck me most was that the characters were well-written and the relationships between them were strong and believable," Detmer said. "That's important, because you have to care about these people in order to be worried about what might happen to them".  Detmer defined Terry as "very put-together and seems content to defer to Carter - to not make waves. But the stress of what happens affects their relationship and interestingly enough brings out a certain strength in her". On the other hand, Donella observed how similar his role was to himself. "I believe in fate. I think you come into this life with some things to accomplish and you're taken out earlier or later depending on the game plan".
Tony Todd, who played Candyman in the 1992 film Candyman, was cast as mortician William Bludworth. Morgan initially wanted Todd for the role because he felt his deep voice would give the film an eerie tone.
Additional cast members included Daniel Roebuck and Roger Guenveur Smith as FBI agents Agent Weine and Agent Schreck; Brendan Fehr, Christine Chatelain and Lisa Marie Caruk as students George Waggner, Blake Dreyer and Christa Marsh; Barbara Tyson and Robert Wisden as Barbara and Ken Browning, Alex' parents; and Forbes Angus as teacher Larry Murnau.

Filming

With Final Destination cast, filming took place on Long Island for the plane scene and Vancouver Island for the additional scenes.  Unfortunately, the cast members were filming other projects during production, so filming schedules had to be moved repeatedly in order for all of the cast to appear.  Sawa restrained his appearance in The Guilty during production, and even commented that "he had to share a trailer with Bill Pullman because it was bigger and would make him look more famous". Smith, who was a regular in Dawson's Creek, had to hold episodes for the film.
According to Detmer, her death scene (being rammed by a speeding bus) was filmed first because "it was easy but much anticipated". All death scenes were filmed using lifecasts of the actual actors. The death scenes, the memorial, the forest scene and the scenes in Paris were all filmed in Victoria. Additional scenes were filmed in Toronto and San Francisco. For the airport, the crew used Vancouver International Airport as a stand-in for John F. Kennedy International Airport, the airport mentioned in the film.

Effects

The plan behind the scenes was to create an intriguing visual signature.  To serve the subtleties of the script and to help personify death, production designer John Willet developed the concept of "skewing" the sets.  "What I've tried to do with the sets themselves, with their design and with various color choices, is to make things just a little unnatural," Willet explained.  "Nothing that calls attention to itself, but instead creates a sense of uneasiness—the unsettling feeling that something's not quite right".  To achieve this mystique, Willet designed two versions of virtually every set—one version was used before the crash and the other sets were used for scenes after the jet explodes.
"On the skewed sets I force the perspective either vertically or horizontally," Willet explained. "Nothing is square and, although you can't put your finger on it, it just makes you feel like something is not right".  Skewing was also part of the overall design for the color palette used in set decoration and costume design. "In the real world, the colors are bright and rich," Willet said. "In the skewed world, they're washed out and faded.  Nothing is obvious, and it's only in the overall effect that these subtle differences will work their magic".
The plane scene during which passengers die in mid-air was created inside a very large sound stage. The three-ton hydraulic gimbal was operated automatically.  "We spent two months building this central set piece that weighs about 45,000 pounds and holds 89 people," special effects supervisor Terry Sonderhoff explained. Used for filming the on-board sequences, it could be shifted on the gimbal to create a pitching movement of up to 45 degrees side-to-side and 60 degrees front-to-back, realistically conveying the horror of airborne engine failure.  Sawa said that "the screams of the cast inside the gimbal made it appear more real".  Wong said, "You walk into the studio and there's a huge gimbal with a plane on top and you think, 'What have I done?' I was afraid we were gonna have 40 extras vomiting."
A miniature model of the Boeing 747 airplane was created for the explosion scene.  The model, one of the most detailed miniature scenes in the film, was about 10 feet long and 7 feet wide, and the landing gear was made from all machined metals. According to visual effects supervisor Ariel Velasco Shaw, the miniature had to be launched about 40 feet up into the air to make it look like a real Boeing 747 exploded into a fireball.  If blowing up a four-foot plane, the explosion must be a minimum of eight feet in the air.  To film the explosion in detail, the crew used three cameras running 120 frames per second and one camera running 300 frames per second (if they had filmed using a real-time camera, the succession of the explosion would not be filmed in a particular order).
The train scene (in which Carter's car is smashed by the train) was one of the most difficult scenes to shoot. The car used for the crash was a replica of the original, severed in half prior to filming.  According to Sonderhoff, in order to ensure the safety of the actors, they had to make sure that there was no real sheet metal in the car.
For the death scenes, the crew used several lifecasts of the actors and chocolate syrup for fake blood.  Creating the Rube Goldberg effect for Ms. Lewton's death scene was the most difficult to plan according to the crew.  Perry said that "it was very hard to generate an atmosphere of dread, to create suspense out of scenes that are common".

Music

=Soundtrack=

No official album accompanied the motion picture.  However, six songs are featured in the film, the most prominent of which is "Rocky Mountain High" by John Denver, which is heavily highlighted throughout the film, reminding the survivors that Denver died in a plane crash.  The song is heard either before an accident or a character's demise, and is also played by a street performer (Alessandro Juliani) in French. Other songs featured in the film include "Hundred Grand" by Pete Atherton (during the Flight 180 memorial scene), "Into the Void" by Nine Inch Nails (during the café scene), "All the Candles in the World" by Jane Siberry (during Carter's car scene), and "And When I Die" by Joe 90 (during the end credits).

=Score=

Final Destination: The Complete Original Motion Picture Score was released on March 17, 2000. Wong and Morgan initially wanted Walker to score the film after having previously worked with her on their sci-fi television series Space: Above and Beyond. Walker said, "and Wong are great believers in melody and having music for the characters and situations they find themselves in. Of course, the atmosphere had to be there also, especially for a film with as much suspense building as this film has".
The score is mostly low-key, with the exception of the suspense and death scenes. It was performed by a union orchestra, obliging New Line Cinema to grant the film its own score. Walker described her score as "very theme-driven, conservative music that covers the range from bizarre animal noises with stronger visceral impact to stirring emotional music with well-defined melodies that evolve through the storytelling". The "Main Title" piece, used for the opening credits, was rare for opening a film aimed at a youth audience at the time. "What a treat for me to get to write a piece that calls you into the movie and lets you know something bad is going to happen from the get go", Walker said. According to Walker, "Main Title" consumed most of her time, due to its "dark theme and counter melody which carries throughout the score".
The score was positively received by critics.  Judge Harold Jervais of DVD Verdict wrote how "sound effects, dialogue and Walker's wonderfully creepy and effective score are mixed together to form a very pleasing, almost organic-like whole". 

Release

Box office

The film premiered on March 17, 2000, in 2,587 theaters across the United States and Canada, earning $10,015,822 on its opening weekend, with an average of $3,871 per theater. Final Destination grossed $53,331,147 in the United States and Canada on its total screening, and earned $59,549,147 in other territories, earning an overall gross of $112,880,294 internationally.

Home media

Final Destination was released on DVD on September 26, 2000, in the United States and Canada. The DVD bonus features include three audio commentaries, three deleted scenes, and two documentaries. The first commentary features Wong, Morgan, Reddick, and editor James Coblentz describing the minute subtleties included by the creative team throughout the film, which either allude to death or foreshadow the deaths in the film invisible upon initial airing.  They also discuss how the film was made and how they fought the executives of New Line Cinema over various factors.
The second commentary includes Sawa, Smith, Cloke, and Donella discussing what was involved in certain scenes and how they each were cast. The third commentary is the isolated music score of Walker included in the film's score.
Deleted scenes cover two subplots of Alex and Clear, an alternate ending where Alex dies after rescuing Clear from the live wires, Clear bearing a baby which she names Alex, and Clear and Carter finishing as the only survivors of the film.
The first documentary entitled A Look at Test Screenings runs for 13 minutes and outlines the test screening process, giving an overview of how those screenings were conducted and scored. The featurette shows video footage of the test screening audience and specific comments regarding why the deleted scenes were either cut or reshot. The second documentary, titled Premonitions, explores real-life intuitive investigator Pam Coronado, who has helped police solve many murders and missing person cases with her psychic abilities.  The featurette runs for 20 minutes. Some DVDs contain two non DVD-ROM games—Death Clock and Psychic Test—in addition to the film's theatrical trailer and filmographies of the cast and crew.

Reception

Critical response

The film received mixed reviews from critics. Review aggregator website Rotten Tomatoes reported 33% of critics gave the film positive write-ups based on 93 reviews, with an average rating of 4.7/10.

On the negative side, Stephen Holden of The New York Times said that "even by the crude standards of teenage horror, Final Destination is dramatically flat".
Robert Cashill of Newsweek remarked that the film "should be in video store bins",
In contrast, the film gathered positive reviews from top critics. Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times enjoyed the film and gave it three out of four stars, stating that "Final Destination will no doubt be a hit and inspire the obligatory sequels. Like the original Scream, this movie is too good to be the end of the road. I have visions of my own".
Despite the film's generally mixed reception, critics praised Sawa's performance as Alex.  Holden of The New York Times commented that "The disaster and Alex's premonitions set up a heavy-handed fable about death and teenage illusions of invulnerability". David Nusair of Reel Film Reviews remarked "Sawa's personable turn as the hero is matched by a uniformly effective supporting cast rife with familiar faces (i.e. Seann William Scott, Brendan Fehr, Tony Todd, etc)...," while Leydon of Variety pointed out that "Sawa is credible as the second-sighted Alex—unlike many other actors cast a teen protagonists, he actually looks like he might still be attending high school—but the supporting players are an uneven bunch". LaSalle of the San Francisco Chronicle praised Sawa and Ali Larter's pairing, saying that "Larter and Sawa, who becomes more scruffy and wild-eyed as the film progresses, make an appealing pair".

Accolades

The film had a major impact on the horror film audience, earning itself the Saturn Award for Best Horror Film in 2000. Sawa won the Saturn Award for Best Performance by a Younger Actor the same year, and Larter won the Young Hollywood Award for a Breakthrough Performance by a Female.
The film's concept was listed at #46 in Bravo's 100 Greatest Scary Moments, in which Smith represented the film.








