[[Xylitol]]

CATEGORIES: Sweeteners, Sugar alcohols, Excipients

Xylitol (
Xylitol is naturally found in low concentrations in the fibers of many fruits and vegetables, and can be extracted from various berries, oats, and mushrooms, as well as fibrous material such as corn husks and sugar cane bagasse,
or corncobs, which is hydrolyzed into xylose and catalytically hydrogenated into xylitol.  A study in rats found that xylitol had reduced or nonexistent side effects compared to other artificial sweeteners, and lower caloric value and cariogenicity than sucrose.

Production

Xylitol was discovered almost simultaneously by German and French chemists in the late 19th century, and was first popularized in Europe as a safe sweetener that would not affect insulin levels of people with diabetes.
Xylitol is produced by hydrogenation of xylose, which converts the sugar (an aldehyde) into a primary alcohol. It can also be extracted from natural sources, and is often harvested by tapping birch trees to produce birch sap.
Another method of producing xylitol is through microbial processes, including fermentative and biocatalytic processes in bacteria, fungi, and yeast cells, that take advantage of the xylose-intermediate fermentations to produce high yield of xylitol.
Its dental significance was researched in Finland in the early 1970s.  There, scientists at Turku University demonstrated dental benefits in what became known as the "Turku sugar studies".

Properties

One gram of xylitol contains 2.4 kilocalories (kcal), With a serving size of 100 grams, there are 387 calories. Xylitol has virtually no aftertaste, and is advertised as "safe for diabetics and individuals with hyperglycemia." This tolerance is attributed to the lower effect of xylitol on a person's blood sugar, compared to that of regular sugars as it has an extremely low glycemic index of 7 (glucose has a GI of 100).S. FDA

Health benefits

Dental care

Xylitol is a "tooth-friendly", nonfermentable sugar alcohol.
Early studies from Finland in the 1970s found compared to chewing sucrose-flavored gum, xylitol resulted in nearly two fewer cavities or missing teeth.  Cavity-causing bacteria prefer six-carbon sugars or disaccharides, while xylitol is non-fermentable and cannot be used as an energy source - while still being taken up into the cell (due to similar shape) and leaving no room for the six-carbon sugars, interfering with bacterial growth and reproduction.  The harmful micro-organisms are starved in the presence of xylitol, allowing the mouth to remineralize damaged teeth with less interruption.  This same property renders it unsuitable for making bread as it interferes with the ability of yeast to digest sugars.  At least six grams of xylitol per day is thought to be needed for dental efficacy.
Xylitol also inhibits the growth of Streptococcus pneumoniae, as well as the attachment of Haemophilus influenzae on the nasopharyngeal cells.
The perception of sweetness obtained from consuming xylitol initiates the body to secrete saliva that acts as a buffer system against the acidic environment created by the microorganisms in the dental plaque. Increase in salivary pH can raise the falling pH to its neutral pH within few minutes of xylitol consumption.
However, despite these promising conjectures two systematic reviews of clinical trials could not find conclusive evidence that xylitol was indeed superior to other polyols such as sorbitol
In the 33-month Xylitol for Adult Caries Trial, participants were given lozenges of either five grams of xylitol or a sucralose-sweetened placebo. While this study initially found no statistically-significant reduction in 33-month caries increment among adults at an elevated risk of developing caries,
Xylitol is categorized by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration as a food additive.
Like other sugar alcohol-sweetened products, xylitol-sweetened products are allowed to be labeled with the claim that they do not promote dental cavities.

Diabetes

Possessing approximately 33% fewer calories, xylitol is a lower-calorie alternative to table sugar. Absorbed more slowly than sugar, it does not contribute to high blood sugar levels or the resulting hyperglycemia caused by insufficient insulin response. This characteristic has also proven beneficial for people suffering from metabolic syndrome, a common disorder that includes insulin resistance, hypertension, hypercholesterolemia, and an increased risk for blood clots.

Source of energy

Xylitol consumed is absorbed incompletely and some that are unabsorbed can be used as a dietary fiber in helping to maintain gut function that consequently uses bacterial fermentation to convert xylitol to short fatty acid chains that can be utilized in energy pathways. Xylitol is also useful in recovery after heavy exercise because of its ability to efficiently convert to glucose and glycogen.

Ear infection

Xylitol chewing gum appears to decrease rates of acute otitis media in children going to daycare by 25%.

Safety

Xylitol has no known toxicity in humans. In one study, the participants consumed a diet containing a monthly average of 1.5 kg of xylitol with a maximum daily intake of 430 g with no apparent ill effects. The effect depends upon the individual. In one study of 13 children, four experienced diarrhea when consuming over 65 grams per day. Studies have reported adaptation occurs after several weeks of consumption.
As with other sugar alcohols, with the exception of erythritol, consumption in excess of one's laxation threshold (the amount of sweetener that can be consumed before abdominal discomfort sets in) can result in temporary gastrointestinal side effects, such as bloating, flatulence, and diarrhea. Adaptation, an increase of the laxation threshold, occurs with regular intake. Xylitol has a lower laxation threshold than some sugar alcohols, but is more easily tolerated than others such as mannitol and sorbitol.

Xylitol toxicity in dogs

Xylitol is well established as a life-threatening toxin to dogs.  According to the ASPCA Animal Poison Control Center, the number of cases of xylitol toxicosis in dogs has significantly increased since the first reports in 2002. Dogs that have ingested foods containing xylitol (greater than 100 milligrams of xylitol consumed per kilogram of bodyweight) have presented with low blood sugar (hypoglycemia), which can be life-threatening.



Notes and references


