[[Ridolfi plot]]

CATEGORIES: 1570 in Europe, Tudor rebellions, 1570 in England, Elizabeth I of England, Mary, Queen of Scots, Attempted coups

The Ridolfi plot was a plot in 1571 to assassinate Queen Elizabeth I of England and replace her with Mary, Queen of Scots. The plot was hatched and planned by Roberto di Ridolfi, an international banker who was able to travel between Brussels, Rome and Madrid to gather support without attracting too much suspicion.

Background

The Duke of Norfolk, a cousin to Queen Elizabeth   and the wealthiest landowner in the country, had been proposed as a possible husband for Mary since her imprisonment in 1568. This suited Norfolk, who had ambitions and felt Elizabeth persistently undervalued him.

Plot

Roberto Ridolfi, a Florentine banker and ardent Catholic, had been involved in the planning of the Northern rebellion, and had been plotting to overthrow Elizabeth as early as 1569.  With their blessing, Ridolfi set off to the Continent to gain Alba, Pius V and King Philip II's support.

List of Co-Conspirators

Ridolfi's co-conspirators, some of whom are mentioned above, played an important role in the plot to overthrow Elizabeth:
Don Guerau de Spes- Spanish ambassador to England who was expelled after the discovery of his involvement.
John Lesley- The Bishop of Ross was Mary Stuart's chief agent he arranged meetings and delivered letters for Mary during her house arrest.  
Duke of Norfolk- Thomas Howard, fourth Duke of Norfolk was the cousin of Queen Elizabeth I. He was to marry Mary Queen of Scots and they would establish Catholic Rule to the English and Scottish Thrones.  After the plot was discovered he had a day long trial that ended with his execution.  
Mary, Queen of Scots- After it became clear that Elizabeth I was not going to restore her to the throne or return her to France, Mary plotted for her freedom.  She wrote to Ridolfi denouncing the French and soliciting Spanish aid while simultaneously professing friendship and loyalty to Elizabeth I and England.  Giving her consent to the plot in March 1571, her role was to marry the Duke of Norfolk and when the troops arrived in London she would be returned to the throne.  However when the plot was uncovered, her deep involvement in the plot altered Elizabeth's opinion of Mary and Elizabeth never spoke of restoring her to the throne again.
King Phillip II- Phillip II welcomed Ridolfi to court and the council discussed the pros and cons of the plot.   He supported the overthrowing of Elizabeth and later came to support the assassination. Phillip, however, disapproved of the papal bull against Elizabeth because, according to Cyril Hamshere, he feared it would "prompt Elizabeth to take reprisals against Catholics." 
Duke of Alva- The leader of the Spanish army stationed in the Netherlands, he was to lead more than 10,000 men to Harwich or Portsmouth.  His army was to invade England and make its way to London to establish Mary on the Throne while either detaining or assassinating Elizabeth I.
Pope Pius V- Making Ridolfi his papal agent in England in 1567, Pius was not only aware of the plot but gave his written approval in a letter for Ridolfi to take to Phillip II.  

Discovery

In 1571, Elizabeth's intelligence network was sending her information about a plot against her life. By gaining the confidence of Spain's ambassador to England, John Hawkins learned the details of the conspiracy and notified the government so to arrest the plotters. She was also sent a private warning by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, who had learned of the plot against her. Charles Baillie, Ridolfi's messenger, was arrested at Dover for carrying compromising letters, and under torture revealed the plot. The Duke of Norfolk was arrested on 7 September 1571 and sent to the Tower. Still abroad when the plot was discovered, Ridolfi never returned to England; he became a Florentine senator in 1600.

Ridolfi's Role

In spite of his plot's ultimate failure, the story of Roberto Ridolfi is a surprising and memorable one. Although he played the relatively nondescript role of banker, Ridolfi nevertheless found himself at the center of a major plot to overthrow the English government. Ridolfi had been jailed in 1568 because of a rumor that he had distributed money to dissenting nobles associated with the Northern Rebellion.  The Pope did in fact give him 12,000 crowns for that purpose, but Rudolph was released in 1570 because no  evidence could be found to incriminate him.  Even after his arrest and release, Ridolfi remained a spy for the Pope. 
Ridolfi's banking connections would help him become acquainted with the Duke of Norfolk, and he became a supporter of the marriage between Norfolk and Mary, Queen of Scots, who would, if the plot was successful, rule England and reinstate Catholicism there.
After Norfolk was released from prison in August 1570, Ridolfi "picked up the broken threads of Catholic intrigue". 
The duke of Alva, the Spanish Viceroy in the Netherlands who was to lead the attack on England, felt Ridolfi was too garrulous to be the leader of a conspiracy, but Spanish Ambassador Don Gerau de Spes described Ridolfi as "A person of great truth and virtue and an intimate friend of mine." 

Modern Criticism

According to historian Cyril Hamshere, retrospective critics of the conspiracy cited a number of reasons why the Ridolfi Plot would have been doomed to fail even if it had not been discovered prematurely.  For one, the Small number of Spanish soldiers (between 6000-10000) would have been absurdly inadequate to the task of overthrowing the English government.  Nevertheless, the notion of two thrice wed royals leading England back to Catholicism is somewhat problematic.

Media representations

The Ridolfi Plot was covered in Mary Queen of Scots (1971), starring Vanessa Redgrave as Mary and Glenda Jackson as Elizabeth.
An altered and fictionalised version of the Ridolfi Plot was featured in the 1998 film Elizabeth, starring Cate Blanchett as Elizabeth.  Christopher Eccleston played Thomas Howard, Duke of Norfolk as the chief conspirator and the film omitted the involvement of Ridolfi.  In the film the conspiracy included Bishop Stephen Gardiner, a counter-reformer who had died in 1555 before Elizabeth's accession, and John Ballard, who was involved in the later Babington Plot.





Notes
Bibliography




