[[Autonomous car]]

CATEGORIES: Autonomous cars, Automotive technologies, Emerging technologies, Robotics

An autonomous car,
Autonomous vehicles sense their surroundings with such techniques as radar, lidar, GPS, and computer vision. Advanced control systems interpret sensory information to identify appropriate navigation paths, as well as obstacles and relevant signage."The beginning of the end of driving". Motor Trend. January 2013 issue. Retrieved 7 January 2013. Some autonomous vehicles update their maps based on sensory input, allowing the vehicles to keep track of their position even when conditions change or when they enter uncharted environments.
Some quasi-autonomous demonstration systems date back to the 1920s and the 1930s. 
Since the 1980s, when Mercedes-Benz and Bundeswehr University Munich built a driverless car through the EUREKA Prometheus Project,

Definition

The term "autonomous" is not a generally accepted term in science when used to describe technical artifacts. For example Wood et al. (2012), see reference below, writes "This Article generally uses the term "autonomous," instead of the term "automated." We have chosen to use the term "autonomous" because it is the term that is currently in more widespread use (and thus is more familiar to the general public). However, the latter term is arguably more accurate. "Automated" connotes control or operation by a machine, while "autonomous" connotes acting alone or independently. Most of the vehicle concepts (that we are currently aware of) have a person in the driver's seat, utilize a communication connection to the Cloud or other vehicles, and do not independently select either destinations or routes for reaching them. Thus, the term "automated" would more accurately describe these vehicle concepts".
Wood, S.P., Chang, J., Healy, T. & Wood, J. (2012). The potential regulatory challenges of increasingly autonomous motor vehicles. 52nd Santa Clara Law Review, 4, 9, pp. 1423–1502. See also 
In the United States, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) has established an official classification system:

Potential advantages

An increase in the use of autonomous cars would make possible such benefits as:

[/ref]

 Wayner describes how overnight trips could combine hotels with cars.[/ref] 

 Arth claims that this would be possible if almost all private cars requiring drivers, which are not in use and parked 90% of the time, would be traded for public self-driving taxis that would be in near-constant use.[/ref]

 Wayner describes how autonomous cars will also move packages.[/ref]

Potential obstacles

In spite of the various benefits to increased vehicle automation, some foreseeable challenges persist:

History

