[[James Spader]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Living people, Male actors from Boston, Massachusetts, American male film actors, American male television actors, American people of German descent, Outstanding Performance by a Lead Actor in a Drama Series Primetime Emmy Award winners, Phillips Academy alumni, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors

James Todd Spader (born February 7, 1960) is an American actor best known for his eccentric roles in films such as Pretty in Pink, The Pentagon Papers, Less Than Zero, Sex, Lies, and Videotape, Crash, Stargate, Secretary, and Lincoln. His most famous television roles are those of the colorful attorney Alan Shore in The Practice and its spin-off Boston Legal, for which he won three Emmy Awards, and Robert California in The Office. He currently stars as Raymond "Red" Reddington in The Blacklist, and he is set to play Ultron in Marvel Studios' upcoming film Avengers: Age of Ultron.EXCLUSIVE: 'Avengers: Age of Ultron' Casts James Spader as the Film's Legendary Villain

Early life

Spader was born in Boston, Massachusetts, the son of Jean (née Fraser) and Stoddard Greenwood "Todd" Spader, both teachers.Obituary, October 28, 2007; Massachusetts
During his early education, James Spader attended The Pike School (where his mother taught art) and enrolled in the Brooks School (where his father taught), for one year, in North Andover, Massachusetts. Spader later transferred to Phillips Academy, but dropped out of school in the eleventh grade to pursue acting at the Michael Chekhov School in New York City. Before becoming a full-time actor, Spader held a variety of jobs including being a yoga instructor, busboy, truck driver, stable boy, and railroad-car loader.

Career

Spader's first major film role was in 1981 as Brooke Shields' brother in Endless Love, and his first starring role was in Tuff Turf alongside good friend Robert Downey, Jr. However, he did not rise to stardom until 1986, when he played the rich, arrogant playboy Steff in Pretty in Pink which co-starred Molly Ringwald and Andrew McCarthy. He co-starred with McCarthy again in Mannequin, and in the film adaptation of Less Than Zero, where he played a drug dealer named Rip. Supporting roles in movies such as Baby Boom and Wall Street followed until his critical breakthrough in 1989 in Sex, Lies, and Videotape in which he played a sexual voyeur who complicates the lives of three Baton Rouge residents. For this performance, he received the Best Actor Award at the Cannes Film Festival. His roles in the early 1990s included playing a young, affluent widower opposite Susan Sarandon in the romantic drama White Palace, John Cusack's best friend in True Colors, and a poker-playing drifter who collides with Mandy Patinkin in The Music of Chance. In 1994, he starred as Egyptologist Daniel Jackson in the blockbuster sci-fi film Stargate. He played car-accident fetishist James Ballard in the controversial Canadian film Crash in 1996, and assassin Lee Woods in 2 Days in the Valley. In 1997, Spader guest starred in an episode of Seinfeld as an angry recovering alcoholic who refuses to apologize to George for making fun of him. In 2000, he played a drug-addicted detective tracking down serial killer Keanu Reeves in The Watcher. In 2002, he starred as Maggie Gyllenhaal's sadistic boss in the critically acclaimed Secretary.
From 2004 to 2008, Spader starred as the lead character Alan Shore in the television series Boston Legal, in which he reprised his role from the television series The Practice. Spader won the Emmy Award for 'Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series'James Spader Emmy Award Winner in 2004 for his portrayal on The Practice and won it again in 2005 and 2007 for Boston Legal. Even rarer, Shatner and Spader each won a second consecutive Emmy while playing the same character in two different series. Spader also won the Satellite Award for Best Actor in a Series, Comedy or Musical for Boston Legal in 2006.
In October 2006, Spader narrated China Revealed, the first episode of Discovery Channel's documentary series Discovery Atlas. Boston Legal castmate Candice Bergen would follow him in narrating France Revealed. He has also done the voice-over in several television commercials for Acura.
Spader starred as a lead character in Race, a play written and directed by David Mamet, alongside Richard Thomas, David Alan Grier and Kerry Washington. It opened on December 6, 2009"New York Production Listings." Back Stage. 24 June 2009. (accessed June 25, 2009). at the Ethel Barrymore Theatre on Broadway. The show closed on August 21, 2010 after 297 performances.James Spader Rips Into Mamet's 'Race' The New York Times May 12, 2009
In March 2011, Spader was named to star in By Virtue Fall, a film written and to be directed by Sheldon Turner. Also set to star in the film are Eric Bana, Carla Gugino, Ryan Phillippe, Treat Williams and Kim Coates. , the movie is in pre-production, and set to be released 2013.James Spader, Carla Gugino, Ryan Phillippe Join Cast of 'By Virtue Fall' The Hollywood Reporter
Spader was one of a number of prominent guest stars in "Search Committee," the final episode of season 7 of The Office. He portrayed a man named Robert California. On June 27, 2011, Ricky Gervais (an executive producer on the show) announced Spader was to join the cast on a permanent basis.rickygervais.php Spader planned to stay only through the eighth season, and while the original plan was just to do the guest appearance, executive producer Paul Lieberstein said, "those two scenes became a season."
On August 29, 2013, Marvel Studios announced that Spader will join the Avengers: Age of Ultron cast as villainous robot Ultron.  Scheduled for a 2015 release, the film is the sequel to the 2012 release The Avengers.
Spader currently stars in NBC's television series, The Blacklist, which began in September 2013. He portrays the fictional Raymond "Red" Reddington, one of the FBI's most wanted fugitives.

Personal life

Spader met his first wife, Victoria Kheel, a decorator, while working in a yoga studio, after he moved to New York in the 1980s. They married in 1987 and have two sons, Elijah and Sebastian. Spader filed for divorce from Kheel in 2004 and,  with whom he had another son in August 2008.

Filmography

Film

Television

Awards and nominations

Nominated — Saturn Award for Best Actor
Won — Cannes Film Festival: Best Actor 
Nominated — Independent Spirit Award for Best Male Lead
Nominated — Saturn Award for Best Supporting Actor
Won — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series
Nominated — Satellite Award for Best Actor – Television Series Drama
Won — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series
 Nominated — Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Drama
 Nominated — Satellite Award for Best Actor – Television Series Musical or Comedy
 Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series
 Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series
Won — Satellite Award for Best Actor – Television Series Musical or Comedy
 Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series
 Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series
Won — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series
 Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series
 Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Drama Series
Nominated — Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series
Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by an Ensemble in a Comedy Series
Nominated — Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture






