[[Seven Summits]]

CATEGORIES: Peak bagging, Seven Summits

The Seven Summits are the highest mountains of each of the seven continents. Summiting all of them is regarded as a mountaineering challenge, first postulated as such and achieved on April 30, 1985 by Richard Bass.

Definition

The Seven Summits are composed of each of the highest mountain peaks of each of the seven continents. Different lists include slight variations, but generally the same core is maintained.

Australia

The highest mountain in the Australian mainland is Mount Kosciuszko,  in the Indonesian province of Papua on the island of New Guinea which lies on the Australian continental shelf. Puncak Jaya is also known as Carstensz Pyramid.
Some sources claim Mount Wilhelm, , as the highest mountain peak in Australia, on account of Indonesia being part of Asia and Southeast Asia.) However, such a definition is political, not geophysical. The peak belongs to the Bismarck Range of Papua New Guinea.
In spite of New Zealand having dozens of significantly larger mountains than Mt. Kosciuszko, it is not known why New Zealand summits are not included in the Seven Summits.

Europe

The generally accepted highest summit is Mount Elbrus (

The Bass and Messner lists

The first Seven Summits list as postulated by Bass (The Bass or Kosciusko list) chose the highest mountain of mainland Australia, Mount Kosciuszko (

Mountaineering challenge

The mountaineering challenge to climb the Seven Summits is traditionally based on either the Bass or the Messner list. (It is assumed that most of the mountaineers who have completed the Seven Summits would have climbed Mont Blanc as well.) As of January 2010, approximately 275 climbers climbed all seven of the peaks from either the Bass or the Messner list; about 30% of those have climbed all of the eight peaks required to complete both lists.

History

Richard Bass, a businessman and amateur mountaineer, set himself the goal of climbing the highest mountain on each of the seven continents, including mainland Australia. He hired David Breashears to guide him up Mount Everest, the most difficult of his Seven, and completed his Everest summit on April 30, 1985.  He then co-authored the book Seven Summits, which covered the undertaking.
Reinhold Messner revised Bass's list by using the broader definition of Oceania and including Carstensz Pyramid  rather than Australia's Mount Kosciuszko. Pat Morrow first met Messner's challenge, finishing with climbing Carstensz Pyramid on May 7, 1986, shortly followed by Messner himself climbing Vinson on December 3, 1986. Morrow was also the first to complete all eight summits from both lists.
In 1990, Rob Hall and Gary Ball became the first to complete the "Seven Summits" in seven months. Using the Bass list, they started with Everest on May 10, 1990, and finished with Vinson on December 12, 1990, hours before the seven-month deadline.
In 1992 Junko Tabei became the first woman to complete the "Seven Summits".
Mary "Dolly" Lefever became the first American woman to climb the "Seven Summits" on March 11, 1993, when she climbed Australia's Kosciusko. She had previously climbed the others. Earlier in 1993 she had become the oldest surviving woman to have reached the summit of Mt. Everest; she was 47 years old.
In January 1996, Chris Haver became the first American to climb and ski all seven summits.
In May 2002, Susan Ershler and her husband, Phil, became the first married couple to climb the "Seven Summits" together.net, 9 November 2006
On 17 May 2006 Rhys Jones became the youngest person to complete the 7 summits (Bass list) at the age of exactly 20 years.
In October 2006 Kit Deslauriers became the first person to have skied down (parts of) all seven peaks (Bass list).
The world record for completion of the Messner and Bass list was 136 days, by Danish climber Henrik Kristiansen in 2008. Vern Tejas set the new record for the same, in 134 days. Tejas began with summiting Vinson on Jan 18 2010 and completing with McKinley on May 31. This was Vern's 9th time to complete the "Bass" Seven Summits.
In January 2010, the Spanish climber Carlos Soria Fontán completed the seven summits (Messner list), at the age of 71, after reaching the summit of Kilimanjaro. He had climbed the first one in 1968.Carlos Soria culmina las "Siete Cumbres" casi a los 71 años 
On 23 May 2010, AC Sherpa summited Mt. Everest as his last and final conquest of the Seven Summits (Bass list).  In doing this, he set a new record by climbing the seven summits within 42 climbing days. Additionally, when climbing Mt. Kilimanjaro (via Marangu) he summited in just 16 hours and 37 minutes, easily beating the previous record of 18 hours.
As of 24 December 2011, it is reported that only 118 people have climbed the Seven Summits if one assumes "full" completion of the quest requires climbing the "Eight Summits" across both the Bass and Messner lists (climbing both Carstenz Pyramid and Kosciusko in addition to the other six "undisputed" summits such as Everest). 231 persons have climbed the Messner list, while 234 have completed the Bass list. 348 have done either the Bass or Messner list.7summits.com
In 2013, Vanessa O'Brien became the fastest female to complete the Seven Summits (including Carstenz Pyramid), finishing in 10 months.

Criticism

Alpinism author Jon Krakauer (1997) wrote in Into Thin Air that it would be a bigger challenge to climb the second-highest peak of each continent, known as the Seven Second Summits—a feat that was not accomplished until January 2012. This is especially true for Asia, as K2 (8,611 m) demands greater technical climbing skills than Everest (8,848 m), while altitude-related factors such as the thinness of the atmosphere, high winds and low temperatures remain much the same. Some of those completing the seven ascents are aware of the magnitude of the challenge. In 2000, in a foreword to Steve Bell et al., Seven Summits, Morrow opined with humility "the only reason Reinhold Messner wasn't the first person to complete the seven was that he was too busy gambolling up the 14 tallest mountains in the world."Morrow, Pat "Foreword", Seven Summits, PDFf at courses.edu. Retrieved 2012-03-03.



Footnotes



  | publisher = 7summits.com
  | url=
  | title=Statistics, Facts & figures of all 7summiteers: Carstensz, Kosciuszko and combined lists.
  | accessdate=2011-12-25}} Updated until December 2011, 348 summiteers.
  | last1 = Bell
  | first1 = Steve
  | last2 = Naar
  | first2 = Ronald
  | authorlink2 = Ronald Naar
  | last3 = Groen
  | first3 = Nico
  | title = Seven Summits
