[[Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 establishments in the United Arab Emirates, Organizations established in 1981, Arab Unification, Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf, International organizations of Asia, International organizations of the Middle East, International economic organizations, Intellectual property organizations, Trade blocs, Proposed currencies, Economic integration, Supranational unions, Continental unions

The Cooperation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (
Amidst the Bahraini uprising, Saudi Arabia and the UAE sent ground troops to Bahrain in order to quell Bahraini protests. Kuwait and Oman refrained from sending troops. In December 2011, Saudi Arabia proposed that the GCC form a confederation."Saudi Arabia Seeks Union of Monarchies in Region." The New York Times, 14 May 2012.Yemen to join GCC by 2015

Founding

Established in Abu Dhabi on 25 May 1981, Persian Gulf states of Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. The unified economic agreement between the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council was signed on 11 November 1981 in Abu Dhabi. These countries are often referred to as "the GCC states".

Objectives

Among the stated objectives are:
This area has some of the fastest growing economies in the world, mostly due to a boom in oil and natural gas revenues coupled with a building and investment boom backed by decades of saved petroleum revenues. In an effort to build a tax base and economic foundation before the reserves run out, the UAE's investment arms, including Abu Dhabi Investment Authority, retain over $900 billion in assets. Other regional funds also have several hundreds of billions dollars of assets under management.
The region is also an emerging hotspot for events, including the 2006 Asian Games in Doha, Qatar. Doha also submitted an unsuccessful application for the 2016 Summer Olympic Games. Qatar was later chosen to host the 2022 FIFA World Cup.
Recently,

Logo

The logo of the GCC consists of two concentric circles. On the upper part of the larger circle, the Bismillah phrase is written in Arabic and on the lower part the Council's full name, in Arabic. The inner circle contains an embossed hexagonal shape representing the Council's six member countries. The inside of the hexagon is filled by a map encompassing the Arabian Peninsula, on which the areas of the member countries are shown in brown.

Organizations

Patent Office

The GCC Patent Office was approved in 1992 and established soon after in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Common market

A GCC common market was launched on 1 January 2008. A customs union was declared in 2003, but practical implementation has lagged behind. Indeed, shortly afterwards, Bahrain concluded a separate Free Trade Agreement with the US, in effect cutting through the GCC's agreement, and causing much friction.

Monetary Council

On 15 December 2009, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar and Saudi Arabia announced the creation of a Monetary Council, a step toward establishing a shared currency. The board of the council, which will set a timetable for establishing a joint central bank and choose a currency regime, will meet for the first time on 30 March 2010. Kuwaiti foreign minister Mohammad Sabah Al-Sabah said on 8 December 2009 that a single currency may take up to 10 years to establish. The original target was in 2010. Oman and the UAE later announced their withdrawal of the proposed currency until further notice.

Peninsula Shield Force

Amidst the Bahraini uprising, Saudi Arabia and the UAE sent ground troops to Bahrain in order to quell Bahraini protests.(ABC News Australia)Bahrain protests CNN. 2011Gulf forces intervene in Bahrain after violent clashes Daily India. Kuwait and Oman refrained from sending troops. Instead, Kuwait sent a navy unit.

Secretaries-General

Member states

There are six member states of the union:

Macro-economic trend

2014 Saudi-Qatari Rift

Qatar's support for the Muslim Brotherhood across the  MENA area have led to increasing tensions with other Gulf States.  These came to a head during a March 2014 meeting of the Gulf Cooperation Council, after which the UAE, Saudi Arabia and Bahrain announced the recall of their ambassadors to Qatar.  
Some financial economists have interpreted the 2014 Saudi-Qatari rift as the tangible political sign  of a growing economic rivalry between oil and natural gas producers, which could "have deep and long-lasting consequences" beyond the MENA area.

Related states

Since the creation of the council in 1981 its membership has not expanded, with all members being Arab monarchies.Yahoo! 
Some GCC countries have land borders with Iraq, Jordan and Yemen, and sea borders with Egypt, Somalia, Iran, Pakistan and India.

Iraq

Iraq is the only Arab country bordering the Persian Gulf that is not a member of the council. The associate membership of Iraq was discontinued in 1990 after its invasion of Kuwait in the Gulf War. In 2009, it was reported that Iraq was set to join the cartel of the GCC Chambers of Commerce.Iraq to join GCC trade federation
In 2012, Iraqi Defense Minister Saadoun al-Dulaimi stated that Iraq wants to join the GCC.Kuwait stresses necessity for Iraq to join GCC

Iran

At the December 2012 Manama summit, the GCC states called for an end to Iranian interference in their internal affairs."GCC states slam Iran interference in region." Al Jazeera. 25 December 2012.

Jordan and Morocco

In May 2011, Jordan's request to join the GCC, which had been first submitted 15 years earlier, was accepted and Morocco was invited to join the union. Although a plan for accession was being looked into, it was noted that there was no timetable for either's accession, and that discussions would continue.
As Jordan and Morocco are the only two Arab monarchies not currently in the council, the current members see them as strong potential allies. Jordan borders member Saudi Arabia and is economically connected to the Persian Gulf States. Although Morocco is not near the Persian Gulf, the Moroccan foreign minister Taeib Fassi Fihri notes that "geographical distance is no obstacle to a strong relationship".

Yemen

Yemen is () in negotiations for GCC membership, and hopes to join by 2015. Although it has no coastline on the Persian Gulf, Yemen lies in the Arabian Peninsula and shares a common culture and history with other members of the GCC. The GCC has already approved Yemen's accession to the GCC Standardization Authority, Gulf Organization for Industrial Consulting (GOIC),Yemen joined GOIC in 2009 GCC Auditing and Accounting Authority, Gulf Radio and TV Authority, GCC Council of Health Ministers, GCC Education and Training Bureau, GCC Council of Labour and Social Affairs Ministers, and Gulf Cup Football Tournament. The Council issued directives that all the necessary legal measures be taken so that Yemen would have the same rights and obligations of GCC member states in those institutions.See the Closing Statement of the Twenty-Second Session GCC the Final Communiqué of the 29th Session

Related organizations

The GCC members and Yemen are also members of the Greater Arab Free Trade Area (GAFTA). However, this is unlikely to affect the agenda of the GCC significantly as it has a more aggressive timetable than GAFTA and is seeking greater integration.








