[[Miami Fusion]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct soccer clubs in the United States, Miami Fusion F.C., Association football clubs established in 1997, Florida soccer clubs, Defunct Major League Soccer teams, Association football clubs disestablished in 2001, 1997 establishments in Florida, 2001 disestablishments in Florida

The Miami Fusion were a professional soccer team based in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. They played in Major League Soccer (MLS) for four seasons, from 1998 to 2001. Announced in 1997 as one of the league's first two expansion teams, their best season was 2001, when they won the Supporters' Shield with the best regular season finish. In 2002, after four years of lackluster ticket sales and revenues, MLS contracted the Fusion along with its other Florida-based team, the Tampa Bay Mutiny. The Fusion played their home games at Lockhart Stadium, the first soccer-specific stadium in Major League Soccer.

History

Early history

Major League Soccer announced a South Florida team in 1997 as one of its first two expansions, along with the Chicago Fire. "Fusion's Lockhart Stadium stint paved way for new MLS venues". Sun-Sentinel. Retrieved March 13, 2014.
The Fusion started their inaugural season strong. Led by star midfielder Carlos Valderrama, the Fusion drew 20,450 to their first game at Lockhart Stadium against the D.C. United, showing off the possibilities of a more intimate venue designed especially for soccer. However, fan interest waned through the year along with the team's middling performance on the field. The Fusion replaced head coach Carlos "Cacho" Cordoba with Ivo Wortmann after game 19, and the team managed a playoff spot, losing to D.C. By the end of the year their average attendance had dropped to only 10,284.
The Fusion continued to struggle both on and off the field for the next two years. After years of disagreement, the commissioner "reassigned" Carlos Valderrama back to Tampa Bay in 1999, and the team replaced head coach Ivo Wortmann with Ray Hudson mid-season in 2000.

Demise

Major League Soccer had reportedly lost an estimated $250 million during its first five years.L.S., the Sport's Future Is in the Eye of the Beholder, Nov. 11, 2005, 
The league's poor financial condition forced MLS to stop the bleeding.  During the winter break between the 2000 and 2001 seasons, reports began circulating that MLS was considering trimming the league from 12 teams back to 10 teams.com Soccernet, MLS considering weight-loss program,  Rumors began circulating that the league might pull the plug on the Fusion, even though the Fusion had a low-cost stadium lease, and an improved performance in 2001 with increased fan attendance. 15, 2001, 
MLS announced in January 2002 that it had decided to contract the two Florida franchises, the Fusion and the Tampa Bay Mutiny. Both teams were withdrawn from the league, ceased operations and folded. Major League Soccer's contraction reduced the league from 12 to 10 teams.
The league had chosen to fold the Miami Fusion, in part because the Fusion's ownership reportedly lacked financial resources, had been trying to run the Fusion on a bare-minimum budget, and had asked the League to pay some of the club's expenses. Commissioner Garber stated that the Fusion had the lowest revenue in the league, due to fewer season tickets and almost no revenue from corporate sponsorships. 9, 2002, 
Miami ownership had reportedly experienced $15 million in operating losses since Miami joined the league.com, MLS fans in several cities wait nervously for contraction decision, Dec. 27, 2001,  Many Miami residents are not originally from the area and don't necessarily identify with and support the local sports teams. Additionally, the MLS season is in the summer, which is different from the youth soccer season, making it difficult to draw youth soccer teams to attend Fusion matches, and which issues with the local summertime heat and rain. Finally, Horowitz identified a lack of corporate support for the team.

Stadium

The Fusion played their home games at Fort Lauderdale's Lockhart Stadium. They had originally intended to play at the Orange Bowl Stadium in downtown Miami, but could not reach agreement with the city of Miami, as the city wanted a 10-year lease and a prohibition on the team relocating to another South Florida stadium.
Originally constructed as a high school football and track stadium in 1959, Lockhart had hosted the Fort Lauderdale Strikers of the original North American Soccer League from 1977 to 1983, as well as other soccer games. Fusion owner Ken Horowitz spearheaded a $5 million renovation that converted Lockhart into a 20,000-seat soccer-specific stadium. The new stadium was the first of its kind in Major League Soccer; at the time all other teams played in much larger football stadiums. This innovation set a trend for similar facilities throughout the league that continues today.

Honors

Year-by-year

* Won MLS Supporters Shield

Team records

Average attendance

Average: 9,403

Notable players

Head coaches








