[[Canadian federalism]]

CATEGORIES: Federalism in Canada, Canadian Confederation, Federalism by country

Canadian federalism is concerned with the nature and historical development of federal systems within Canada. Canada is a federation with two distinct jurisdictions of political authority: the country-wide federal government and the ten provincial governments. It has three territorial governments in the far north that exercise delegated powers under the authority of the Parliament of Canada. All three jurisdictions are linked together by the Canadian Crown, from which all derive their sovereignty and authority; each government includes the Queen-in-Parliament, the Queen-in-Council, and the Queen-on-the-Bench. The federal parliament and the provincial assemblies are generally independent of one another in their respective areas of legislative authority. Shared sectors include agriculture and immigration, but most are either entirely within federal jurisdiction, such as foreign affairs and telecommunications, or entirely within provincial jurisdiction, such as education and healthcare.
The federal nature of the Canadian constitution was in response to the colonial-era diversity among the Maritimes and the Province of Canada, in particular the strong distinction between the French-speaking inhabitants of Lower Canada (Quebec) and the English-speaking inhabitants in Upper Canada (Ontario) and the Maritimes. Federalism enabled the co-existence of the French and English communities. John A. Macdonald, who became the first Prime Minister of Canada, at first opposed a federalist system of government, favouring a unitary system. He later supported the federal system after seeing the carnage of the American Civil War; he sought to avoid violent conflicts by maintaining a fusion of powers rather than a separation of powers.
The division of powers between the federal and provincial governments was initially outlined in the British North America Act, 1867 (now known as the Constitution Act, 1867), a key document within the Constitution of Canada. Federalismas the term is used in books such as 

History

Before World War I

The relationship between Canada and the provinces has changed over time, with decentralization increasing as years passed. Throughout the Macdonald era (1867–1873, 1878–1891), the Confederation was described by political scientist K.C. Wheare and historian Paul Romney as "Quasi-Federalism". This meant that the 19th century political and judicial elites read the Constitution to give the federal parliament powers that made the provinces "subordinate to Ottawa". The structure within Canada was originally intended to be the same as that which existed between the English government and the governments of the British Empire's North American colonies. The Macdonald government's use of disallowance and reservation reinforced federal supremacy.
In 1875, the Parliament established the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) as a general court of appeal. This did not, however, bar appeals of rulings from the various provincial courts of appeal directly to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
Provincial challenges in court, notably those spearheaded by Ontario Premier Sir Oliver Mowat, lead to rulings that significantly constrained federal power:
In his 1888 argument to the Privy Council in St. Catherines Milling v. The Queen, Edward Blake summarized the provinces' view of the federation:

Not all rulings went in the provinces' favour:
With the appointment of Sir Wilfrid Laurier came a new phase of Confederation that Rand Dyck refers to as "Classical Federalism". This was marked by a more equal relationship between the levels, as the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council settled several disputes in favour of the latter. The federal government's disallowance and reservation powers fell into disuse. This continued throughout the early years of the leadership of Prime Minister William Lyon Mackenzie King.

1914–1960

During the First World War, the federal government extended its power through the passage of the War Measures Act and the introduction of income taxes. In that regard, several key cases helped to define the scope of such authority:
The end of the war saw many radical developments, not all of which succeeded. In 1919's Initiatives and Referendums Reference, a Manitoba law that provided for direct legislation by way of initiatives and referendums was ruled unconstitutional by the Privy Council as only the provincial legislature could validly enact laws. As the passing of laws requires Royal assent, the provinces could not permit "the abrogation of any power which the Crown possesses through a person directly representing it". In 1926, Nadan v The King held that similar restrictions applied to Parliament.
Social and technological changes also worked their way into the scope of constitutional authority:
In 1926, the King-Byng affair resulted in a constitutional crisis that permanently affected the relationship of the Governor General of Canada with the Prime Minister of Canada.  While its key aspects were political in nature, its constitutional aspects continue to be argued.
The Statute of Westminster 1931 replaced the Colonial Laws Validity Act 1865 giving the Parliament the ability to make extraterritorial laws and to abolish appeals to the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council. Criminal appeals were abolished in 1933,Criminal Code Amendment Act, S.C. 1932–33, c. 53, s. 17 while civil appeals continued until 1949.C. 1949 (2nd. session), c. 37, s. 3 As such abolition did not affect active appeals, the last Privy Council ruling did not take place until 1959, in
Ponoka-Calmar Oils v Wakefield. Afterwards, the Supreme Court of Canada effectively became the final court of appeal.
In 1937, the last instance of reservation with respect to legislation occurred when John C. Bowen, Lieutenant Governor of Alberta, refused to give Royal Assent to three bills of the Legislative Assembly of Alberta. Two of the bills would have put the province's banks under the control of the provincial government, while a third, the Accurate News and Information Act, would have forced newspapers to print government rebuttals to stories the provincial cabinet deemed "inaccurate". All three bills were later declared unconstitutional by the Supreme Court of Canada in Reference re Alberta Statutes, and that ruling was upheld by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council.
The broader scope of the Second World War required the passage of the National Resources Mobilization Act in order to supplement the powers contained in the War Measures Act in pursuing the national war effort. The extent to which federal power could expand during time of war was further clarified in:
Additional measures were also required in order to secure control of the economy during that time:
Canada emerged from the Second World War with more association and cooperation between the federal and provincial levels of government. This led to the rise of the welfare state and the establishment of a government-funded health care system, and the federal government introduced the practice of Keynesian economics. In 1951, section 94A was inserted into the British North America Act, 1867 to allow the Canadian Parliament to make provision for pensions. VI, c. 32 (U.K.) This was later extended in 1964 to allow for supplementary benefits (including disability and survivors' benefits). II, c. 73 (U.K.) The period also saw a rise in the use of First Ministers' conferences for resolving federal-provincial issues.
The Parliament of Canada also received power to amend the Constitution, limited to matters other than those affecting the provinces, and subject to certain other constraints. 2) Act, 1949, 13 Geo. VI, c. 81 (U.K.)

1960–1982

1961 saw the last instance of a lieutenant governor reserving a bill passed by a provincial legislature, where Frank Lindsay Bastedo, Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, did so on Bill 56, An Act to Provide for the Alteration of Certain Mineral Contracts. At the time, Bastedo issued a statement that "this is a very important bill affecting hundreds of mineral contracts. It raises implications which throw grave doubts of the legislation being in the public interest. There is grave doubt as to its validity." The Act was subsequently upheld through the passage of an order in council by the federal government.
John Diefenbaker arranged for the Canadian Parliament to pass the Canadian Bill of Rights. which was the first time that such rights were placed on a statutory footing at the federal level. Lester Pearson, during his term as Prime Minister, obtained passage of major social spending programs, including:
Quebec's Quiet Revolution encouraged increased administrative decentralization within Canada, with Quebec often opting out of other federal initiatives and instituting its own. The Quebec sovereignty movement lead to the victory of the Parti Québécois in the 1976 Quebec election, prompting consideration of further loosening ties with the rest of Canada. That was rejected in the 1980 referendum on the subject.
Under the leadership of Prime Minister Pierre Trudeau, the federal government became more centralist in ideology, and Canada entered a stage of "conflictual federalism" that lasted from 1970 to 1984, generating tensions not just with Quebec, but with other provinces as well. The National Energy Program and other disputes over oil sparked a great deal of bitterness against the federal government in Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Newfoundland.

Patriation

Although Canada had achieved full status as a sovereign nation under the Statute of Westminster 1931, there was still no consensus as to a proper general amending formula for inclusion within its Constitution. Various attempts, such as the Fulton-Favreau formula in 1965 and the Victoria Charter in 1971, failed to obtain unanimous approval from both levels of government.
When negotiations with the provinces stalled once more in 1982, Pierre Trudeau threatened to take the case for patriation straight to the British parliament "without bothering to ask one premier." The federal Cabinet and Crown counsel took the position that if the British Crown{–} in council, parliament, and on the bench{–} was to exercise sovereignty over Canada, it did so at the request of the federal ministers only.
Manitoba, Newfoundland and Quebec posed reference questions to their respective courts of appeal, in which five other provinces intervened in support. In his ruling, Justice Joseph O'Sullivan of the Manitoba Court of Appeal held that the federal government's position was incorrect, as the constitutionally entrenched principle of responsible government meant that "Canada had not one responsible government but eleven." Further, officials in the United Kingdom indicated that the British parliament was under no obligation to fulfill any request for legal changes made by Trudeau, particularly if Canadian convention was not being followed. The rulings from all courts were appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada. In a decision that came to be known as the Patriation Reference,  the Court ruled that such a convention did exist, but it did not legally prevent the Parliament from unilaterally seeking to amend the Constitution without provincial consent. In addition, it was not the role of the courts to enforce constitutional conventions.
The Parliament of Canada then requested the British Parliament to approve the Constitution Act, 1982, which the latter did through passage of the Canada Act 1982. This resulted in:

After 1982

The Progressive Conservative Party of Canada under Joe Clark and Brian Mulroney favoured devolution of powers to the provinces, culminating in the failed Meech Lake and Charlottetown accords.  After a merger with the heavily devolutionist Canadian Alliance, the new Conservative Party of Canada under Stephen Harper has continued the same stance.
After the 1995 Quebec referendum on Quebec sovereignty, one of several actions by then Prime Minister Jean Chrétien was to limit the ability of the federal government to spend money in areas of provincial jurisdiction. Thus, in 1999, the federal government and all provincial governments except Quebec's agreed to the Social Union Framework Agreement, which promoted common standards for social programs across Canada. to describe this arrangement.
The frequency of First Ministers' conferences declined significantly in the early part of the 21st century, but interprovincial cooperation notably increased through meetings of the Council of the Federation established by the provincial premiers in 2003.
The court system of Canada has undertaken significant unification, arising from:
The various doctrines for constitutional interpretation saw significant clarification during the period:

The Crown

As a federal monarchy, the Canadian Crown is unitary throughout all jurisdictions in the country,

Image:Elizabeth II greets NASA GSFC employees, May 8, 2007 edit.jpg|The Queen
Image:Cansenate.jpg|The Senate
Image:parliament2.jpg|The House of Commons

Distribution of legislative powers

The federal-provincial distribution of legislative powers (also known as the division of powers) defines the scope of the power of the federal parliament of Canada and the powers of individual provincial legislatures/assemblies. These have been identified as being either exclusive to a particular level or shared.
In order to rationalize how far each jurisdiction may use its authority, certain doctrines have been devised by the courts:

Powers exclusive to Parliament

No laws have ever been passed under s. 93(4)  or s. 94.

Powers exclusive to the provincial legislatures

Concurrent powers

Taxation powers

Under the Constitution Act, 1867, taxation powers are vested in the Parliament of Canada under s. 91(3) for:

The provincial legislatures have a more restricted authority under ss. 92(2) and 92(9) for:

There has been extensive litigation as to what constitutes direct vs indirect taxation, as well as to what is a tax. In Westbank First Nation v. British Columbia Hydro and Power Authority, the SCC declared that a government levy would be in pith and substance a tax if it was "unconnected to any form of a regulatory scheme." This has resulted in situations where an imposition can be characterized as neither a valid regulatory charge nor a valid tax.
In addition, Allard Contractors Ltd. v. Coquitlam (District) has held that:

The spending power

The Parliament of Canada has power to spend money under s. 91(1A) for:

While the Supreme Court of Canada has never ruled directly on the matter, the Alberta Court of Appeal in Winterhaven Stables Limited v. Canada (Attorney General) characterized it as possessing the following nature:

This arises from the decision of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on the Unemployment Insurance Reference, where Lord Atkin observed:

In Re Canada Assistance Plan, Mr Justice Sopinka held that the simple withholding of federal money that had been previously granted to fund a matter within provincial jurisdiction does not amount to the regulation of that matter. He declared that supervision of the spending power is not a separate head of judicial review:

However, in Finlay v. Canada (Minister of Finance), Mrs Justice McLachlin indicated that the Court has yet to consider a direct challenge in the matter:

Jurisdiction over public property

Proprietorial jurisdiction of Crown property is divided between the Provincial legislatures and the Parliament of Canada. The key provisions are ss. 108, 109 and 117:

In St. Catherines Milling v. The Queen, Lord Watson noted that this did not mean that title to such property vested in one level or the other, as Crown title was indivisible:

In particular, s. 109 has been given a broad meaning:
But the power is not absolute:
The provincial power to manage Crown land did not initially extend to Manitoba, Alberta and Saskatchewan when they were created from part of the Northwest Territories, as such land continued to be vested in the federal Crown. It was vacated on some land by British Columbia upon entering Confederation. Title to this land was not vested in those provinces until the passage of the Natural Resources Acts in 1930.
The management of offshore resources is complex: while the beds of internal waters vest in the provincial Crown, beds of territorial seas vest in the federal Crown (together with management of the continental shelf and the exclusive economic zone),

Nature of the legislative power within the federal structure

Much of the distribution of power has been ambiguous, leading to disputes that have been decided by the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council and, after 1949, the Supreme Court of Canada. The fundamental nature of the Canadian constitutional structure was described by the Privy Council in 1913 as not being truly federal (unlike the United States of America or Australia):

National and provincial concerns

The preamble of section 91 of the Constitution Act, 1867 states: 'It shall be lawful for the Queen, ... to make laws for the Peace, Order, and good Government of Canada, in relation to all Matters not coming within the Classes of Subjects by this Act assigned exclusively to the Legislatures of the Provinces'. In addition to assigning powers that are not otherwise stated elsewhere (which has been very narrowly interpreted), this has led to the creation of the national emergency and national concern doctrines.
The national emergency doctrine was described by Mr Justice Beetz in Reference re Anti-Inflation Act in these words:464

The national concern doctrine is governed by the principles stated by Mr Justice Le Dain in R. v. Crown Zellerbach Canada Ltd.:

The federal government of Canada is partly limited by the powers assigned exclusively to the provincial legislatures. For example, the Canadian constitution created broad provincial jurisdiction over direct taxation, property, and civil rights. Many disputes between the two levels of government revolve around conflicting interpretations of the meaning of these two powers.
By 1896, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council arrived at a method of interpretation that has been called the "four departments doctrine", where the allocation of jurisdiction over a matter is determined, in the following order:
By the 1930s, as noted succinctly in the Fish Canneries Reference and then subsequently in the  Aeronautics Reference, the division of responsibilities between federal and provincial jurisdictions was summarized as follows by Lord Sankey:

While the Statute of Westminster 1931 declared that the Parliament of Canada possessed extraterritorial jurisdiction, the provincial legislatures did not achieve similar status. Instead, s. 92 states that "In each Province the Legislature may exclusively make Laws...".
If a provincial law affects  rights of individuals outside the province:
In addition, in The Queen (Man.) v. Air Canada, it was held that the s. 92(2) power providing for "Direct Taxation within the Province" does not extend to taxing sales occurring in flights passing over or through a province as there was no substantial connection to it, but the question as to how far provincial jurisdiction can extend into a province's airspace was expressly left undecided.

Attaining a national dimension

Federal jurisdiction therefore arises in several circumstances:
In addition, the gap approach (which is employed sparingly) identifies areas of jurisdiction arising from drafting oversights only, being things the drafters of the Constitution forgot to think about but would unambiguously have allocated to Parliament if they had. For example, federal jurisdiction to incorporate companies is inferred from the power provinces have under Section 92 for "The Incorporation of Companies with Provincial Objects."

Uniformity of federal law

Section 129 of the Constitution Act, 1867 provided for laws in effect at the time of Confederation to continue until repealed or altered by the appropriate legislative authority. Similar provisions were incorporated in the terms of union of other territories that were subsequently incorporated into Canada.
Uniformity of laws in some areas of federal jurisdiction was delayed for a significant length of time:
In addition, the provisions of the Civil Code of Lower Canada adopted in 1865 by the former Province of Canada that affected federal jurisdiction continued to be in force in Quebec (insofar as they had not been displaced by other federal Acts) until they were finally repealed on 15 December 2004.

Interplay of jurisdictions

The Supreme Court of Canada noted, "our Constitution is based on an allocation of exclusive powers to both levels of government, not concurrent powers, although these powers are bound to interact in the realities of the life of our Constitution.", par. 32 In that regard, Dickson CJ observed the complexity of that interaction:

Among notable examples of this:

The power to implement treaties

In order to understand how treaties can be entered into Canadian law, there are three significant cases that must be considered:
The reasoning behind the judgments is complex, but it is considered to break down as follows:
Even though the Statute of Westminster 1931 had made Canada fully independent in governing its foreign affairs, the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council held that s. 132 did not accordingly evolve to take that into account. As noted by Lord Atkin at the end of the judgment,

This case expressly left undecided the question as to the extent of the federal power to negotiate, sign and ratify treaties that deal with areas falling within provincial jurisdiction.
This judgment has generated extensive debate about the complications that were introduced in implementing Canada's subsequent international obligations, and the Supreme Court of Canada has indicated in several dicta that it may be ready to revisit the issue in an appropriate case.Canadian Interpretation and Construction of Maritime Conventions, at note 25

Limits on legislative power

Outside of the questions of ultra vires and compliance with the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, there are only a few absolute limits on what the Parliament of Canada and the various provincial legislatures can legislate. In the Constitution Act, 1867:

The first provision has been narrowly construed in the Canadian courts, but the second has received a broad interpretation.

Footnotes and citations

References

Acts and other instruments

Case citations

Further reading




