[[Juan María Solare]]

CATEGORIES: 20th-century classical composers, 21st-century classical composers, Argentine classical pianists, Argentine composers, 1966 births, Living people, People from Buenos Aires, Experimental composers, Cologne University of Music alumni, Electroacoustic music composers, Postmodern composers, Fluxus, Contemporary classical music performers, Hochschule für Musik und Tanz Köln alumni, Argentine pianists

Juan María Solare (born August 11, 1966) is an Argentine composer and pianist.

Education

Born in Buenos Aires, Argentina, Solare studied and received his diploma in piano (María Teresa Criscuolo), composition (Fermina Casanova, Juan Carlos Zorzi) and conducting (Mario Benzecry) at the Conservatorio Nacional de Música Carlos López Buchardo. He also studied privately with Francisco Kröpfl.
Between 1993 and 1996 he undertook postgraduate studies on Composition at the Musikhochschule in Cologne (Germany) under the guidance of Johannes Fritsch, Clarence Barlow, and Mauricio Kagel, in the frame of a scholarship of the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD). Between October 1997 and February 1999, he did postgraduate studies with Helmut Lachenmann in Stuttgart. (Between July 1998 and June 1999 he held a scholarship from the Heinrich-Strobel Foundation (Baden-Baden).) Between 1999 and 2001 studied electronic music with , Germany.
In April 2005 he obtained the title "Licenciado en Composición" (Master degree) from the Instituto Universitario Nacional del Arte (IUNA) in Buenos Aires. Since 1993 he has regularly attended and participated in seminars given by Karlheinz Stockhausen. He passed the Konzertexamen (master) in electroacoustic composition at the Musikhochschule in Cologne on 5 December 2007. Currently he is working on a PhD in music education at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid.

Teaching positions

From 1986 until 1993 he taught Harmony, Morphology, and Chamber Music at the Conservatory of Tandil (Argentina). Since January 2002 he has given piano lessons at the Musikschule Bremen (Germany). Since October 2002 he has conducted the Orquesta No Típica, a chamber music group devoted to tango at the University of Bremen. Since October 2004 he has taught piano at the Hochschule für Künste Bremen. From December 2007 to April 2008 he was Assistant Professor at the Universidad Complutense de Madrid. Since 2008 he teaches New Music Theatre at the University of Bremen, where he conducts the Ensemble Kagel.
He has given courses and lectures on contemporary music at the Institut für neue Musik und Musikerziehung (Darmstadt), the Salzburg Experimental Academy of Dance (SEAD), the Ateneo de Madrid (Nantes, France), Texas A&M University (College Station, Texas).
In addition, he teaches piano and composition privately, and has presented public seminars on tango music. He gives courses and lectures on contemporary music.

Compositions

Solare has composed around 300 works, over half of them already performed. His pieces are broadcast regularly (Radio Nacional de España, Deutsche Welle, Radio Bremen, Radio Fabrik Salzburg, Radio Universitaria São Paulo, Westdeutscher Rundfunk (WDR), Radio Berlin Brandenburg, Bayerischer Rundfunk).
In 2002 he received a commission from the CDMC (Centro para la Difusión de la Música Contemporánea, Madrid), in 2003 from the Kunststiftung NRW (Düsseldorf); in 2004 again from CDMC (Spain) and from the Landesmusikrat Bremen (Bremen Music Council), in 2011 from Eva Espoleta (Geneva). On 30 June 2004 his Concertango was premiered by the Orchestra of the Universität Bremen (cond.: Susanne Gläß).

Film music

He also composed the music for six short films:
Solare has also written music for internet animations, mainly for movies of the Catalan artist Nuria Juncosa.

As a pianist

As a pianist, his repertoire has four centers: classical music from the late Romanticism (such as Franz Liszt or Alexander Scriabin), contemporary classical (John Cage, Arnold Schoenberg), Argentine composers (including tango; Ástor Piazzolla), and his own compositions - both as soloist and in different chamber music groups, notably:
Solare has performed in cities of Argentina, Germany, the rest of Europe and USA:
His first professional recording as a pianist was in July 2006 in Geneva: together with the Saxophonist Eduardo Kohan he recorded the CD Tango Nómade.
His first solo cd appeared in January 2010: Tango Monologues.
Juan María Solare also participated with Fifteen-Minutes-of-Fame, a concert performance series with Vox Novus

As a conductor

Awards

His compositions have been awarded prizes and awards in
As a pianist, Solare received awards at the following competitions:

Jury member

Recordings

Thirteen CDs from different performers include at least one of his pieces:

Works dedicated to Juan María Solare

Solare has been dedicated pieces by several colleagues:

Publications

Some of his works have been published by  Dohr Verlag (Hamburg).
Beside his compositional and pianistic activities he also has written for diverse publications, such as the New Grove (Solare 2001), La Sibila Sevilla, Doce Notas and ABC Madrid, Pauta and L'Orfeo (Mexico), Tempo (UK), as well as for the radio stations Deutsche Welle and Südwestfunk (SWF).
About 30 of his 200 published articles (mostly in Solare's mother tongue, Spanish) can be found online.






