[[Natzweiler-Struthof]]

CATEGORIES: Vichy France, Natzweiler-Struthof

Natzweiler-Struthof was a German concentration camp located in the Vosges Mountains close to the Alsatian village of Natzwiller (German Natzweiler) in France, and the town of Schirmeck, about 50 km (31 mi) south west from the city of Strasbourg.
Natzweiler-Struthof was the only concentration camp established by the Nazis on present-day French territory, though there were French-run temporary camps such as the one at Drancy. At the time, the Elsass-Lothringen area in which it was established was administered by Germany as an integral part of the German Reich.
The writer Boris Pahor was interned in Natzweiler-Struthof and wrote his novel Necropolis based on this experience.

Operations

Natzweiler-Struthof operated between 21 May 1941 and the beginning of September 1944, when the SS evacuated the camp to Dachau. Its construction was overseen by Hans Hüttig. The camp was evacuated and sent on a "Death march" on early September 1944 with only a small SS unit keeping the camp's operations.  On 23 November 1944, this camp with its small staff was the first concentration camp in Western Europe discovered and liberated by American Allies, on the same day they reached Strasbourg. For the system of subcamps see List of subcamps of Natzweiler-Struthof.
The total number of prisoners reached an estimated 52,000 over the three years. Inmates originated from various countries, including Poland, the Soviet Union, the Netherlands, France, Germany, modern day Slovenia and Norway. The camp was specially set up for Nacht und Nebel prisoners, in most cases people of the resistance movements.
The camp also held a crematorium and a jury rigged gas chamber outside the main camp, which was not used for mass extermination. Josef Kramer, a former commandant of the camp, was executed for his crimes, including the murder of Jews in the gas chamber here.
Dr Otto Bickenbach, Dr Friedrich Bickenbach and Dr Helmut Ruehl were also accused of crimes committed at this camp. Dr Hans Eisele was also stationed in this camp for a time.
Strenuous work, medical experiments, poor nutrition and mistreatment by the SS guards resulted in a documented 4,431 deaths. Those who died at Natzweiler-Struthof included four female SOE agents executed together on 6 July 1944: Diana Rowden, Vera Leigh, Andrée Borrel and Sonya Olschanezky. Since the female prisoner-population in the camp was small, only seven SS women served in Natzweiler Struthof camp (compared to more than 600 SS men), and 15 in the Natzweiler complex of subcamps. The main duty of the female supervisors in Natzweiler was to guard the few women who came to the camp for medical experiments or to be executed. The camp also trained several female guards who went to the Geisenheim and Geislingen subcamps in western Germany.
Two Royal Air Force airmen (F/O Dennis H. Cochran, and F/L Anthony R. H. Hayter) who were involved in  "The Great Escape" and murdered by the Gestapo after re-capture, were cremated at Natzweiler.
Other inmates included the Norwegian resisters Per Jacobsen (who died there), Tor Njaa en route, and Charles Delestraint, leader of the Armée Secrète, who died later in Dachau.
Among the personnel:

Jewish skeleton collection

The Jewish skeleton collection was an attempt by the Nazis to create an anthropological display to showcase the alleged racial inferiority of the "Jewish race" and to emphasize the Jews' status as Untermenschen ("sub-humans"), in contrast to the Germanic Übermenschen ("super-humans") Aryan race which the Nazis considered to be the "Herrenvolk" (master race). The collection was to be housed at the Anatomy Institute at the Reich University of Strasbourg in the annexed region of Alsace, where the initial preparation of the corpses was performed.
The collection was sanctioned by Reichsführer of the SS Heinrich Himmler, and under the direction of August Hirt with Rudolf Brandt and Wolfram Sievers, general manager of the Ahnenerbe (this was the National Socialist scientific institute that was to research the archaeological and cultural history of the hypothesized Aryan race), being responsible for procuring and preparing the corpses.
Ultimately 87 of the inmates were shipped to Natzweiler-Struthof, 46 of these individuals were originally from Thessaloniki, Greece. The deaths of 86 of these inmates was, in the words of Hirt, "induced" at a jury rigged gassing facility at Natzweiler-Struthof and their corpses, 57 men and 29 women, were sent to Strasbourg. One male victim was shot as he fought to keep from being gassed. Josef Kramer, acting commandant of Natzweiler-Struthof (who would become the commandant at Auschwitz and the last commandant of Bergen Belsen) personally carried out the gassing of 80 of these 86 victims.  
The first part of the process for this "collection" was to make anatomical casts of the bodies prior to reducing them to skeletons. In 1944, with the approach of the allies, there was concern over the possibility that the corpses, which had not yet been defleshed, could be discovered. In September 1944 Sievers telegrammed Brandt: "The collection can be defleshed and rendered unrecognizable. This, however, would mean that the whole work had been done for nothing-at least in part-and that this singular collection would be lost to science, since it would be impossible to make plaster casts afterwards."
Two anthropologists, who were both members of the SS, Dr. Hans Fleischhacker and Bruno Beger, along with Wolf-Dietrich Wolff, were accused of making selections at Auschwitz of Jewish prisoners for Dr. Hirt's collection of 'racial types', a project which created the Jewish skeleton collection. Beger alone was found guilty, although he served no time. Also named as associated with this project are Doctor . 216
In The Names of the Numbers, He also recounts in detail the story of how he was able to determine the identities of 86 victims of Dr. 's medical experiments. Wie es gelang, die 86 Opfer eines NS-Verbrechens zu identifizieren.

Post-war criminal trials

Fritz Hartjenstein died in prison before his sentence could be carried out. The remaining two death sentences were carried out by hanging, on 11 October 1946. Those tried were:
Magnus Wochner was also implicated in the Stalag Luft III murders and was listed among the accused. Exemplary Justice
Heinrich Ganninger, adjutant and debuty of commander Fritz Hartjenstein, committed suicide in Wuppertal prison in April 1946 before his trial. He was accused of having murdered four British female spies.

Post-war history

During the night of 12–13 May 1976, neo-Nazis burned the camp museum which was subsequently rebuilt, but with the loss of important artifacts.





Further reading

Inmate accounts include:




