[[Ben Bradshaw]]

CATEGORIES: 1960 births, Alumni of the University of Sussex, Labour Party (UK) MPs, LGBT Christians, Gay politicians, Living people, Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, People from Westminster, UK MPs 1997–2001, UK MPs 2001–05, UK MPs 2005–10, UK MPs 2010–, BBC newsreaders and journalists, LGBT politicians from England

Benjamin Peter James Bradshaw (born 30 August 1960) is a British Labour Party politician who has been the Member of Parliament (MP) for Exeter since 1997. He was the Secretary of State for Culture, Media and Sport from 2009 to 2010,

Early life and career in journalism

Bradshaw is the son of a former Anglican vicar of Norwich Cathedral. Bradshaw was educated at Thorpe Grammar School, followed by the University of Sussex where he read for a degree in German. He also attended the University of Freiburg in Germany during his time at university.
Between 1982 and 1983 Bradshaw taught English at the Technikum, a school of technology in Winterthur.
Bradshaw became a reporter with the Exeter Express and Echo in 1984 and subsequently joined the Eastern Daily Press in Norwich as a reporter in 1985. In 1986 he joined the BBC with BBC Radio Devon. In 1989 he became the award winning Berlin correspondent with BBC Radio and was serving in the city at the time of the fall of the Berlin Wall. He became a reporter in 1991 with BBC Radio's The World At One programme, where he stayed until his election to Westminster. He won the Sony News Reporter Award in 1993.

Parliamentary career

Bradshaw was selected to contest the marginal parliamentary seat of Exeter at the 1997 general election after the first choice candidate, John Lloyd, was deselected by the local Labour party on instructions from Labour HQ. Lloyd had given evidence against John Harris, who was convicted of planting a bomb at a Johannesburg station, killing one and injuring others. Harris was executed on 1 April 1965. Mr Lloyd, a South African citizen at the time, was, like Harris, a member of the African Resistance Movement.
The sitting Conservative MP, John Hannam had retired and the Conservatives chose Adrian Rogers to be their candidate. This created a very interesting election campaign, Bradshaw is openly gay, and Rogers a leading member of the religious right. The campaign was vitriolic and bitter with allegations of homophobia and sin. The result, however was not close, and Bradshaw was elected as the Labour MP for Exeter with a majority of 11,705. He made his maiden speech on 4 July 1997. He was the second British MP who was openly gay when first elected,
In Parliament Bradshaw introduced the Pesticides Act in 1998, which gave more powers to inspectors. He became a Parliamentary Private Secretary to the Minister of State at the Department of Health John Denham in 2000. After the 2001 general election Bradshaw entered Tony Blair's government as the Parliamentary Under Secretary of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office.  Only days after being appointed to the Foreign Office he had to answer questions following the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001. On 6 March 2002, while answering Parliamentary Questions, Bradshaw accused George Galloway of "being not just an apologist but a mouthpiece for the Iraqi regime over many years". Galloway responded by accusing Bradshaw of being a liar, though after a suspension of the Commons sitting, both men withdrew their comments...", The Independent, 7 March 2002, as reproduced on the "Find Articles" website. Retrieved on 21 March 2008.
Bradshaw became the Deputy to the Leader of the House of Commons Robin Cook in 2002, and was an Under Secretary of State at the Department of Environment, Food and Rural Affairs from 2003 until 2006, when he was made a Minister of State at the same department. During this period, he was sent to Brussels to negotiate changes to the Common Fisheries Policy on behalf of the British in-shore fishing fleet. When questioned, on Newsnight Scotland, by Gordon Brewer, as to the progress of these negotiations, he was unwilling/unable to answer questions relating to his brief, such as the size of the Scottish inshore fishing fleet, or the catch quotas relating to particular species. On 28 June 2007 he was moved to become a Minister of State in the Department of Health and was also given the responsibility of being Minister for the South West.
In 2009, Ben Bradshaw won the Stonewall Politician of the Year Award in 2009 for his work to support equality for lesbian, gay and bisexual people.{ Stonewall 2010 On 5 February 2013 he voted in favour in the House of Commons Second Reading vote on marriage equality in Britain.{ The House of Commons.2013.
Bradshaw is a member of the Henry Jackson Society Advisory Council.

Health minister

Bradshaw has been the subject of a good deal of controversy as a Minister for Health. His responses to questioning on Radio 4 about the shortfall in NHS dentistry leading to patients unable to access NHS dentists and even resorting to treating themselves was to claim that those needing urgent treatment should go to see their GP,
He also claimed that GPs were operating "gentlemen's agreements" to ensure patients didn't move between surgeries, claims dismissed as "absolute nonsense" by doctors' leaders.
On the subject of the National Programme for IT, a scheme dogged by cost overruns, failing public confidence, delays, and doubts over its benefit to patients,
He has also been criticised for defending
His plan to introduce private management of some NHS trusts was also heavily criticised. The BMA called it a step towards privatising the NHS, Dr. Jonathan Fielden observed that there was no evidence private management was better than public sector management, commenting "How many of us have seen our Trusts bring in the management consultants, paying through the nose, only to get a half baked solution and one that the real talent in the NHS could have delivered for less?", Professor Allyson Pollock, head of the Centre for International Public Health Policy at the University of Edinburgh, said: "Bringing private management in will simply accelerate the process of privatisation of services which will have catastrophic effects for the patients and the public at large. It will mean less care for everyone, and more money for profits and shareholders.", while Nigel Edwards of the NHS Confederation, said the government had tried drafting in private sector management unsuccessfully before - at the Good Hope Hospital in Sutton Coldfield in 2003: "What it revealed is that the reason that hospitals tend to fail is often much more complicated and much more difficult than just poor management."
It was claimed in May 2009 that he exploited the MPs' expenses system by claiming the entire interest bill on a property he shares with his partner in west London.

Culture Secretary

On 5 June 2009 he was appointed Secretary of State for Culture Media and Sport. He held this position until the United Kingdom general election, 2010 and served as Shadow Culture Secretary until the Labour Party (UK) Shadow Cabinet election, 2010.
On 7 October 2010 the Labour Party announced that he had failed to be elected to one of the 19 available places in the Shadow Cabinet of newly elected leader Ed Miliband.

Personal life

On 24 June 2006, he and his partner Neal Dalgleish, who is a BBC producer, Ben Bradshaw wants the position of the Church of England over same sex marriage or partnership in the clergy clarified.  Specifically he wants to know if a member of the Church of England clergy who married a same sex partner would be disciplined or defrocked. MP urges Church of England clarity on same-sex marriage priests
Ben Bradshaw's brother is Jonathan Bradshaw, CBE, Professor of Social Policy at the University of York.





|-


