[[Jehu]]

CATEGORIES: 841 BC crimes, 9th-century BC biblical rulers, Regicides, Kings of ancient Israel, Books of Kings

Jehu () and grandson of Nimshi.
William F. Albright has dated his reign to 842–815 BC, while E. R. Thiele offers the dates 841–814 BC.; New York: Macmillan, 1951;  2d ed.; Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1965; 3rd ed.; Grand Rapids: Zondervan/Kregel, 1983). ISBN 0-8254-3825-X, 9780825438257  The principal source for the events of his reign comes from .

Proclamation as king

The reign of Jehu's predecessor, Jehoram, was marked by the Battle of Ramoth-Gilead against the army of the Arameans.  Jehoram was wounded and returned to Jezreel to recover. He was attended by Ahaziah, king of Judah, who was also his nephew. The writer of the Book of Kings tells that when the captains of the Israelite army were assembled away from the king's eyes, the prophet Elisha sent one of his students to the gathering. Elisha's student led Jehu away from the others, anointed him king in an inner chamber, and then departed (). Jehu's companions asked where he has been. When told, they enthusiastically blew their trumpets and proclaimed him their king. "Jehu." The Catholic Encyclopedia. Vol. 8. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1910. 7 Jan. 2014

Jezreel and the deaths of Jehoram and Jezebel

With a chosen band, Jehu proceeded to Jezreel. King Jehoram tried to flee, but Jehu fired an arrow which struck him in the heart. King Ahaziah managed to escape, but was mortally wounded, and died shortly after in Mageddo.
The author of Kings tells that Jehu entered the city without resistance. He saw Jehoram's mother, Jezebel, watching him with contempt from a palace window. Jehu commanded the palace eunuchs to throw her from the window. Jezebel was killed, and Jehu drove his chariot over her body. Her servants later came to bury her, only to find that dogs had eaten all but her hands, feet, and skull.
Now master of Jezreel, Jehu wrote to command the chief men in Samaria to hunt down and kill all of the royal princes. They did as ordered, and the next day he found seventy heads piled in two heaps outside the city gate. Ahab's entire family was slain."The Dynasty & Judgment on Ahab's House" - Historical Discovery - Old Testamemt. Shortly afterwards, Jehu encountered the "brothers of Ahaziah" at "the shearing-house". He slaughtered another forty-two people related to the Omrides.
Jehu's genocidal act was allegedly to honour the God of Israel since Jehoram's mother, Jezebel, had allowed pagan temples to exist in the kingdom. The biblical account frequently invokes the  "avenging the blood of Naboth" (). Jehoram's defeat at Ramoth-Gilead gave them an opportunity to throw off his burdensome rule.
Following Jehu's slaughter of the Omrides, he met Jehonadab the Rechabite, who joined him in his chariot. They entered the capital together. This indicates that at least at the beginning of his reign, Jehu was supported by the pro-Jehovah faction.).
Other than Jehu's bloody seizure of power and his tolerance for the golden calves at Dan and Bethel, little else is known of his reign. He was hard pressed by Hazael, king of the Arameans, who defeated his armies "throughout all of the territories of Israel" beyond the Jordan river, in the lands of Gilead, Gad, Reuben, and Manasseh (f).
This suggest that Jehu offered tribute to Shalmaneser III, as depicted on his Black Obelisk, in order to gain a powerful ally against the Arameans. Foreign alliances would also help validate his rebellion against King Jehoram. Bit-Khumri was used by Tiglath-pileser III for the non-Omride kings Pekah (733) & Hoshea (732),Kitchen, K A (2003) The Reliability of the Old Testament, Cambridge, Eerdmans, p24 hence House/Land/Kingdom of Omri could apply to later Israelite kings not necessarily descended from Omri.

Black Obelisk

Aside from the Hebrew Scriptures, Jehu appears in Assyrian documents, notably in the Black Obelisk where he is depicted as kissing the ground in front of Shalmaneser III (2 Kings 17:3).  In the Assyrian documents he is simply referred to as "son of Omri" (The House of Omri being an Assyrian name for the Kingdom of Israel).  This tribute is dated 841 BC.Millard, Alan (1997) Discoveries from Bible Times, Oxford, Lion, p121
It is the earliest preserved depiction of an Israelite.
According to the Obelisk, Jehu severed his alliances with Phoenicia and Judah, and became subject to Assyria.

Tel Dan Stele

The author of the Tel Dan Stele (found in 1993 and 1994) claimed to have slain both Ahaziah of Judah (who was visiting Jehoram) and Jehoram. The most likely author of this monument is Hazael of the Arameans.

Sources and Notes


