[[New England Revolution]]

CATEGORIES: New England Revolution, Soccer clubs in the United States, Association football clubs established in 1995, Massachusetts soccer clubs, 1995 establishments in Massachusetts, Foxborough, Massachusetts

The New England Revolution is an American professional soccer club based in Foxborough, Massachusetts that competes in Major League Soccer (MLS). It is one of the ten charter clubs of MLS, having competed in the league since its inception.
The club is owned by Robert Kraft, who also owns the New England Patriots. The name "Revolution" refers to the New England region's significant involvement in the American Revolution.
The Revs currently play their home matches at Gillette Stadium. The club played their home games at the adjacent and now-demolished Foxboro Stadium, from 1996 until 2001. The Revs hold the distinction of being the only original MLS team to have every league game in its history televised.
The Revolution were one of the ten original MLS franchises to compete in the league's inaugural season. However, it took them until 2007—their twelfth year of existence—to win their first trophy, the 2007 US Open Cup. The following year, they won the 2008 North American SuperLiga. The Revolution have never won an MLS Cup nor MLS Supporters' Shield, despite reaching the MLS Cup finals in 2002, 2005, 2006, and 2007; and having the second best regular season record in 2005.

History

The early years: 1996–2001

The inaugural Revolution team featured several US Men's National Team regulars returning from abroad to be part of the new league. Despite the presence of Alexi Lalas, Mike Burns, and Joe-Max Moore, however, the team was one of only two that failed to make the playoffs of the then-10-team league. The following season, the squad made the playoffs, but failed to advance past the first round. For the next five years, this would be the Revs best playoff result (which they matched in the 2000 season) as a revolving door of players and head coaches failed to make much of an impact on the fledgling league.
Attendance in these early years was high despite the team's poor on-field performances. More than 15,000 people per match regularly came to watch the Revolution play in the old Foxboro Stadium. The Revs did manage to make the final of the 2001 US Open Cup, but they lost to the Los Angeles Galaxy on a golden goal by Danny Califf. It was a harbinger of finals to come for the Revolution.

The Steve Nicol era: 2002–2011

Liverpool great Steve Nicol was appointed on a full-time basis for the 2002 season (he had previously held the position of interim head coach during 1999). Since he took over, Nicol only failed once to guide the Revolution to a playoff berth, a league-record eight straight seasons, failing for the first time in 2010. The first six of those berths (from 2002–2007) resulted in an appearance in the conference final or better, including three consecutive MLS Cup finals from 2005–2007. Since the 2008 season, the Revs have failed to go further than the first round of the playoffs. Still, Nicol was respected as one of the best coaches in the league.

=Playoff success: 2002–2007=

In his first season in charge, Nicol guided the Revs to a first-place finish in the Eastern Conference. The team advanced through the playoffs to the MLS Cup final, where they lost to the Galaxy again, this time 1–0 on a golden goal by Carlos Ruiz.
After losing in the conference finals in 2003 and 2004, the Revs repeated their 2002 feat finishing tops in the east and losing to LA 1–0 in extra time again in 2005. New England had a real chance to win their first MLS championship, in MLS Cup 2006, against the Houston Dynamo. After Taylor Twellman scored in the 113th minute, the Revs allowed an equalising header from the Dynamo's Brian Ching less than a minute later that sent the game to penalty kicks, where the Revs lost 4–3. The 2007 MLS Cup was a rematch from the previous year, though the result was the same as Houston defeated New England 2–1.
Their 2002 MLS Cup appearance granted them a spot in the 2003 CONCACAF Champions Cup, but lost their first matchup 5:3 on aggregate after playing two games on the road to LD Alajuelense. The Revolution again faced LD Alajuelense of Costa Rica in the home and away 2006 CONCACAF Champions' Cup. The "home" game was played February 22, 2006, in Bermuda despite some fans feeling that playing at Gillette Stadium in the adverse conditions of winter in New England could have been advantageous. The Revs failed to advance, as they drew 0–0 in Bermuda and lost 0–1 in Costa Rica.

=Minor trophies; rebuilding: 2007–present=

In the 2007 season, the Revs made it to two cup finals. Though they lost the MLS Cup match of that year to the Houston Dynamo (a rematch from 2006), they defeated FC Dallas to win their first-ever trophy: the 2007 US Open Cup. The victory qualified the club for the preliminary round of the newly expanded CONCACAF Champions League. Additionally, their top-four finish qualified them for SuperLiga 2008. This meant the Revolution would be competing in four different competitions (MLS, Open Cup, Champions League, and SuperLiga) during the 2008 season.
The Revolution had an excellent run in the beginning of the 2008 season. By mid-July, they were leading the overall MLS table and had finished as the number one overall seed in SuperLiga. The team won the tournament, defeating the Houston Dynamo on penalties to earn a small amount of revenge on for their successive MLS Cup defeats. Unfortunately, the team's second trophy in as many seasons would be the high point for the 2008 Revs. Fixture congestion led to a rash of injuries and general fatigue, and the team crashed out the Champions League with an embarrassing 4–0 home defeat to regional minnows Joe Public FC of Trinidad and Tobago (the tie ended 6–1 Joe Public on aggregate). The team also struggled in domestic play, limping to a third-place finish in the East and losing to the Chicago Fire in the first round of the playoffs. The Revs did manage a semifinal appearance in the 2008 Open Cup, but lost to DC United and failed to defend their 2007 title.
In 2009, the Revs continued the mediocrity that had plagued the second half of their 2008 season, losing to Chicago again in the first round of the playoffs. The team also lost to Chicago in the semifinals of the 2009 SuperLiga. 2010 started even more dismally than 2009, with the team failing to put together an unbeaten streak longer than three games until July. Despite the abysmal progress, this unbeaten streak coincided with the Revs' third consecutive SuperLiga appearance, and for the second time in three years, the team made the competition's final, but lost 2–1 to Monarcas Morelia of Mexico.
The team failed to make the playoffs in either 2010, or 2011, and at the end of the 2011 season, announced they had parted ways with manager Steve Nicol who had managed the team for 10 years
The team began to go in a different direction when they hired former player Jay Heaps as head coach.  The 2012 season was another disappointment, but the 2013 was a different story.  The team finished 3rd place in the eastern conference making the playoffs for the first time since 2009.
In the April 2014 issue of Boston Magazine, journalist Kevin Alexander named the Kraft family as "the Worst Owners in the League" in an article that contrasted the family's sparkling reputation as NFL owners with their alleged lack of interest in MLS and the Revolution.

Colors and badge

The club badge is stylized, based on the flag of the United States with some of the stars made into a soccer ball (similar to Adidas' ball for the UEFA Champions League). The overall design mirrors the 1994 FIFA World Cup logo.
The home kit is navy, and the away white, both with red detail. Therefore the colors are the same as the national team of the United States.  This is also consistent with their sister team, the National Football League's New England Patriots (also owned by Kraft and playing in the same stadium). In 2011, the Revolution announced that United Health Care would be their jersey sponsor; its logo is on the home and away jerseys.

Stadium

The Revolution has played its home games in Foxborough, Massachusetts since its inception – initially at the Foxboro Stadium and subsequently at its replacement, Gillette Stadium. It shares the stadium with the New England Patriots of the National Football League.
On June 14, 2006, MLS announced that the Revolution were hoping to build a new soccer-specific stadium. Bids have gone out to local towns around New England to see where the Revs could have a stadium built.
On August 2, 2007, the Boston Herald published an article stating that the city of Somerville and Revolution officials have held "preliminary discussions" about building a 20,000 to 25,000 seat stadium on a  However, the club also has three other sites in consideration in the event of the proposal's termination. The record attendance of the New England Revolution at Foxboro Stadium is 57,407, in a match against the Tampa Bay Mutiny in 1997.

Club culture

Supporters groups

The team's supporter's clubs are called the Midnight Riders, and the Rev Army. The name 'Midnight Riders' is in honor of the famous rides of Paul Revere and William Dawes, who announced the departure of British troops from Boston to Concord at the beginning of the American Revolution. The three groups together occupy the north stand of the stadium, which they have nicknamed "The Fort". The Fort is a general admission section and draws its name from the revolutionary theme which runs through the team and independent supporters' associations.

Rivalries

The club's main rival is widely considered to be New York Red Bulls,

Broadcasting

All Revolution matches are televised locally in high definition on Comcast SportsNet New England; nationally televised matches air on ESPN, ESPN2, and the NBC Sports Network. All matches are broadcast on radio by WBZ-FM, but this is a simulcast of the TV feed. Brad Feldman handles play-by-play on both TV and radio with Paul Mariner doing color commentary.  Matches had previously been aired on WSBK-TV in standard definition.

Players and staff

Current roster



Out on loan

Notable former players

This list of former players includes those who received international caps while playing for the team, made significant contributions to the team in terms of appearances or goals while playing for the team, or who made significant contributions to the sport either before they played for the team, or after they left. It is clearly not yet complete and all inclusive, and additions and refinements will continue to be made over time.

Head coaches

General Managers

Achievements

Record

Year-by-year

Team records

As of October 27th, 2013.kraftsportsgroup.pdf
* Active

Average attendance

regular season/playoffs






