[[De Rham cohomology]]

CATEGORIES: Cohomology theories, Differential forms, Homology theory

In mathematics, de Rham cohomology (after Georges de Rham) is a tool belonging both to  algebraic topology and to differential topology, capable of expressing basic topological information about smooth manifolds in a form particularly adapted to computation and the concrete representation of cohomology classes. It is a cohomology theory based on the existence of differential forms with prescribed properties.

Definition

The de Rham complex is the cochain complex of exterior differential forms on some smooth manifold , with the exterior derivative as the differential.
where  then says that exact forms are closed. 
The converse, however, is not in general true; closed forms need not be exact. A simple but significant case is the . We can, however, change the topology by removing just one point.
Note that, for any manifold  connected components
This follows from the fact that any smooth function on .

De Rham cohomology computed

One may often find the general de Rham cohomologies of a manifold using the above fact about the zero cohomology and a Mayer–Vietoris sequence. Another useful fact is that the de Rham cohomology is a homotopy invariant. While the computation is not given, the following are the computed de Rham cohomologies for some common topological objects:

The -sphere

For the  an open real interval. Then

The -torus

Similarly, allowing  here, we obtain

Punctured Euclidean space

Punctured Euclidean space is simply Euclidean space with the origin removed.

The Möbius strip

This follows from the fact that the Möbius strip, -sphere:

De Rham's theorem

More precisely, consider the map 
The theorem of de Rham asserts that this is an isomorphism between de Rham cohomology and singular cohomology.
The wedge product endows the direct sum of these groups with a ring structure.  A further result of the theorem is that the two cohomology rings are isomorphic (as graded rings), where the analogous product on singular cohomology is the cup product.

Sheaf-theoretic de Rham isomorphism

The de Rham cohomology is isomorphic to the Čech cohomology  are either empty or contractible to a point).
Stated another way, if , there is an isomorphism
where the left-hand side is the .

Proof

Let ). By the Poincaré lemma, the following sequence of sheaves is exact (in the category of sheaves):
This sequence now breaks up into short exact sequences
Each of these induces a long exact sequence in cohomology. Since the sheaf of .  So the long exact cohomology sequences themselves ultimately separate into a chain of isomorphisms.  At one end of the chain is the Čech cohomology and at the other lies the de Rham cohomology.

Related ideas

The de Rham cohomology has inspired many mathematical ideas, including Dolbeault cohomology, Hodge theory, and the Atiyah-Singer index theorem.  However, even in more classical contexts, the theorem has inspired a number of developments.  Firstly, the Hodge theory proves that there is an isomorphism between the cohomology consisting of harmonic forms and the de Rham cohomology consisting of closed forms modulo exact forms.  This relies on an appropriate definition of harmonic forms and of the Hodge theorem.  For further details see Hodge theory.

Harmonic forms

where .
More precisely, for a differential manifold  is defined by 
with  separately. 
If -th Betti number.

Hodge decomposition

Letting  components:
where :
A precise definition and proof of the decomposition requires the problem to be formulated on Sobolev spaces. The idea here is that a Sobolev space provides the natural setting for both the idea of square-integrability and the idea of differentiation. This language helps overcome some of the limitations of requiring compact support.








