[[Odette Hallowes]]

CATEGORIES: 1912 births, 1995 deaths, Female wartime spies, French Resistance members, French recipients of the George Cross, Members of the Order of the British Empire, French torture victims, Ravensbrück concentration camp survivors, Special Operations Executive personnel, Female resistance members of World War II, Women in World War II, Chevaliers of the Légion d'honneur

Odette Sansom Hallowes GC, MBE, Chevalier de la légion d'honneur (28 April 1912—13 March 1995) was an Allied heroine of the Second World War.

Early years

She was born Odette Marie Céline Brailly in Amiens, France, the daughter of the First World War hero, Gaston Brailly, who was killed at Verdun in 1918. At seven, she caught polio, and spent a year blind and another without the movement of her limbs.

Roy Sansom

She met an Englishman, Roy Sansom, in Boulogne, and married him in 1931, moving with him to England. The couple had three daughters: Françoise, Lily and Marianne. Roy Sansom enlisted in 1940. In the spring of 1942, the Admiralty appealed for postcards or family photographs taken on the Continent for possible war use. Hearing the broadcast, she wrote that she had photographs taken around Boulogne, on the French coast of the English Channel, but she inadvertently addressed her letter to the War Office instead of the Admiralty. As a result, she was enrolled in Special Forces of the First Aid Nursing Yeomanry (FANY) and trained by Colonel Maurice Buckmaster's Special Operations Executive to be sent into Nazi-occupied France to work with the French underground. She left her three daughters in a convent school.

Second World War activities in France

She made a landing near Cannes in 1942, where she made contact with her supervisor, Peter Churchill.  Using the code name Lise, she brought him funds and acted as his courier. Churchill's operation in France was infiltrated by Hugo Bleicher, an Abwehr counter-intelligence officer, who arrested Odette and Churchill at the Hotel de la Poste in Saint-Jorioz on 16 April 1943 and they were then sent to Fresnes Prison.com Although tortured by the Sicherheitsdienst using a red-hot poker at 84 Avenue Foch in Paris, she stuck to her cover story that Churchill was the nephew of Prime Minister Winston Churchill, and that she was his wife. The hope was that in this way their treatment would be mitigated.Undercover: The Men and Women of the SOE, Patrick Howarth, 1980

Ravensbrück

She was condemned to death in June 1943, although a time for execution was not specified, and sent to Ravensbrück concentration camp.
Odette survived the war partly thanks to her alias of "Churchill".  The British had calculated that if the Germans thought she was related to the British Prime Minister, they would want to keep her alive as a possible bargaining tool. 157  And so it turned out, for with the Allies only a few miles from Ravensbrück, Camp commandant Fritz Suhren took Sansom with him and drove with her to the US base when surrendering to the Americans.  He hoped that her supposed connections to Churchill might allow him to negotiate his way out of execution. 115
Subsequently Odette testified against the prison guards charged with war crimes at the 1946 Hamburg Ravensbrück Trials.

Further marriages

Sansom and Odette's marriage was dissolved in 1946 and she married Peter Churchill in 1947. She was divorced from Churchill in 1956 and married Geoffrey Hallowes in the same year. Hallowes outlived her and died in 2006.

Honours

She was appointed a Member of the Order of the British Empire (MBE) and was the first of three Second World War FANY members to be awarded the George Cross (gazetted 20 August 1946). In later life her mother's home was burgled and Odette's GC was stolen. After a public appeal it was returned with a note saying:
 You, Madame, appear to be a dear old lady. God bless you and your children. I thank you for having faith in me. I am not all that bad - it's just circumstances. Your little dog really loves me. I gave him a nice pat and left him a piece of meat - out of fridge. Sincerely yours, A Bad Egg.  
On 23 February 2012 the Royal Mail released a postage stamp featuring Hallowes as part its "Britons of Distinction" series.



Further reading

|first=Penny|last=Starns|publisher=The History Press |location=UK|year=2010}}.




