[[National Air and Space Museum]]

CATEGORIES: Aerospace museums, Aerospace museums in Washington, D.C., American national museums in Washington, D.C., Aviation history of the United States, Buildings and structures completed in 1976, IMAX venues, Members of the Cultural Alliance of Greater Washington, National Mall, Planetaria in the United States, Science museums in Washington, D.C., Smithsonian Institution museums, Smithsonian Institution Archives related

The National Air and Space Museum (NASM) of the Smithsonian Institution holds the largest collection of historic aircraft and spacecraft in the world in . The museum currently conducts restoration of its collection at the Paul E. Garber Preservation, Restoration, and Storage Facility in Suitland, Maryland.

Architecture

Because of the museum's close proximity to the United States Capitol, the Smithsonian wanted a building that would be architecturally impressive but would not stand out too boldly against the Capitol building. St. Louis-based architect Gyo Obata of HOK designed the museum as four simple marble-encased cubes containing the smaller and more theatrical exhibits, connected by three spacious steel-and-glass atria which house the larger exhibits such as missiles, airplanes and spacecraft.  The mass of the museum is similar to the National Gallery of Art across the National Mall, and uses the same pink Tennessee marble as the National Gallery. Hellmuth, Obata and Kassabaum also designed the Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center in Virginia.

History

The museum was originally called the National Air Museum when formed on August 12, 1946 by an act of Congress and signed into law by President Harry S. Truman.
After the establishment of the museum, there was no one building that could hold all the items to be displayed, many obtained from the United States Army and United States Navy collections of domestic and captured aircraft from World War I.  Some pieces were on display in the Arts and Industries Building, some were stored in the Aircraft Building (also known as the "Tin Shed"), a large temporary metal shed in the Smithsonian Castle's south yard. Larger missiles and rockets were displayed outdoors in what was known as Rocket Row.  The shed housed at large Martin bomber, a LePere fighter-bomber, and an Aeromarine 39B floatplane. Still, much of the collection remained in storage due to a lack of display space.
The combination of the large numbers of aircraft donated to the Smithsonian after World War II and the need for hangar and factory space for the Korean War drove the Smithsonian to look for its own facility to store and restore aircraft.  The current Garber Facility was ceded to the Smithsonian by the Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission in 1952 after the curator Paul E. Garber spotted the wooded area from the air.  Bulldozers from Fort Belvoir and prefabricated buildings from the United States Navy kept the initial costs low.
The space race in the 1950s and 1960s led to the renaming of the museum to the National Air and Space Museum, and finally congressional passage of appropriations for the construction of the new exhibition hall, which opened July 1, 1976 at the height of the United States Bicentennial festivities under the leadership of Director Michael Collins, who had flown to the Moon on Apollo 11. The Steven F. Udvar-Hazy Center opened in 2003, funded by a private donation.
The museum received COSTAR, the corrective optics instrument installed in the Hubble Space Telescope during its first servicing mission (STS-61), when it was removed and returned to Earth after Space Shuttle mission STS-125. The museum also holds the backup mirror for the Hubble which, unlike the one that was launched, was ground to the correct shape. There were once plans for it to be installed to the Hubble itself, but plans to return the satellite to Earth were scrapped after the Space Shuttle Columbia disaster in 2003; the mission was re-considered as too risky.
The Smithsonian has also been promised the International Cometary Explorer, which is currently in a solar orbit that occasionally brings it back to Earth, should NASA attempt to recover it.
The Air & Space Museum announced a two-year renovation of its main entrance hall, "Milestones of Flight" in April 2014. The renovation to the main hall (which had not received a major update since the museum opened in 1976) was funded by a $30 million donation from Boeing. The gift, which will be paid over seven years, is the largest corporate donation ever received by the Air & Space Museum. Boeing had previously given donations totaling $58 million. The hall will be renamed the "Boeing Milestones of Flight Hall". The renovation (whose total cost was not revealed) began in April 2014, and will involve the temporary removal of some exhibits before the hall is refurbished. Because some exhibits represent century-old achievements which no longer resonate with the public, some items will be moved to other locations in the museum while new exhibits are installed. The first new exhibit, a 1930s wind tunnel, will be installed in November 2014. When finished, the hall will present a "more orderly" appearance, and allow room for the placement of future new exhibits (which will include moving the filming model of the USS Enterprise from the original 1960s Star Trek television series into the hall). The renovation will also include the installation of a "media wall" and touch-screen information kiosks to allow visitors to learn about items on display. An additional gift from Boeing is funding the renovation of the "How Things Fly" children's exhibit, new museum educational programming, and the creation of an accredited course on flight and space technology for elementary and secondary school teachers. "Air and Space Museum's 'Milestones of Flight' Gallery Begins Two-Year Renovation." Washington Post. April 3, 2014. Accessed 2014-04-03.

Controversies

Controversy erupted in March 1994 over a proposed commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the atomic bombing of Japan. The centerpiece of the exhibit was the Enola Gay, the B-29 bomber that dropped the A-bomb on the Japanese city of Hiroshima. Veterans' groups, led by the Air Force Association and The Retired Officers Association, argued strongly that the exhibit's inclusion of Japanese accounts and photographs of victims politicized the exhibit and insulted U.S. airmen.
On October 8, 2011, the museum was temporarily closed after demonstrators associated with the Occupy D.C. demonstration attempted to enter the museum. Some protesters were pepper sprayed by museum security after a guard was pinned against a wall. One woman was arrested.
On December 5, 2013, Smithsonian food workers protested about a living wage.

Directors

Carl W. Mitman was the first head of the museum, under the title of Assistant to the Secretary for the National Air Museum, heading the museum from 1946 until his retirement from the Smithsonian in 1952.Finding Aids to Official Records of the Smithsonian Institution, Record Unit 330: Series 1, National Air and Space Museum, Records, 1912-1971
Directors have included Philip S. Hopkins, 1958-1964, S. Paul Johnston, 1964-1969, Frank A. Taylor (acting), 1969-1971, Michael Collins, 1971–1978,Finding Aids to Official Records of the Smithsonian Institution, Record Unit 338, National Air and Space Museum, Records, circa 1972-1989 Melvin B. Zisfein (acting), 1978-1979, Noel W. Hinners, 1979-1982, Walter J. Boyne (acting 1982–1983, director 1983-1986), James C. Tyler (acting), 1986-1987, Martin O. Harwit, 1987-1995, Donald D. Engen, 1996-1999, and John R. Dailey, 2000–present

Gallery of exhibits

The main museum on the mall includes 61 aircraft, 51 large space artifacts, over 2,000 smaller items as of June 1, 2007.

File:Needle at Air and Space Mus. at D.C.jpg| Ad Astra ("to the stars"), the sculpture at the entrance to the building
File:Mercury Friendship 7.jpg|Mercury Friendship 7 spacecraft
File:US Navy 070516-N-6724S-049 Machinist^rsquo,s Mate 3rd Class Davida Edwards examines the Apollo 11 Command  Module in the lobby of the National Air and Space Museum.jpg| Apollo 11 Command Module
File:National Air and Space Museum Rockets.S. Pershing II rockets
File:Spaceship one.jpg|SpaceShipOne 
File:BellX1.jpg|Bell X-1
File:Spirit of St. Louis1. Louis
File:PioneerH2011.jpg|Pioneer H
File:X15 566670 Air and Space.JPG|X-15
File:Apollo-soyuz.jpg| Apollo–Soyuz Test Project Display
File:Apollo 15 Space Suit David Scott.jpg|The space suit worn by David Scott on Apollo 15
File:NationalAirAndSpaceMuseum 10290004.jpg|Ballistic missiles
File:ApolloLunarModule.JPG|Apollo Lunar Module LM-2
File:~DSCN2698.JPG|Replica of lunar space suit
File:Boeing747Smithsonian.jpg|Side view of a former Northwest Boeing 747-100B
File:IMG 7723.JPG|Former Eastern Douglas DC-3
File:SmithsonianU2leftside.JPG|Lockheed U-2
File:Hindenburg Model.JPG|25-foot long model of the LZ 129 Hindenburg used in the 1975 movie, The Hindenburg
File:DouglasWorldCruiserDC.JPG| Chicago the first aircraft to fly around the world
File:Breitling Orbiter Side.

Phoebe Waterman Haas Public Observatory

Phoebe Waterman Haas Public Observatory open doors to public in 2009 as part of the celebration of the International Year of Astronomy. It has a 16-inch Boller & Chivens telescope, a Sun Gun Telescope and hydrogen-alpha (red light, to see the cromosphere) and calcium-K (purple light) telescopes. The observatory opens to public from Wednesdays through Sundays from noon to 3 P.M. and is open once a month at night time.

Fellowships

The museum has four research fellowships: Charles A. Lindbergh Chair in Aerospace History (also known as the Lindbergh Chair,) the Daniel and Florence Guggenheim Fellowship, the A. Verville Fellowship, and the Postdoctoral Earth and Planetary Sciences Fellowship.








