[[Jennifer Lopez]]

CATEGORIES: Jennifer Lopez, 1969 births, Living people, 20th-century American actresses, 21st-century American actresses, Actresses from New York City, American businesspeople in retailing, American cosmetics businesspeople, American female dancers, American dance musicians, American fashion businesspeople, American fashion designers, American film producers, American musicians of Puerto Rican descent, American philanthropists, American Roman Catholics, American television actresses, American television producers, American voice actresses, American women in business, Businesspeople from New York City, Epic Records artists, American actresses of Puerto Rican descent, Idols (TV series) judges, Island Records artists, Krav Maga practitioners, American Latin pop singers, Notaries, People from the Bronx, Singers from New York City, Spanish-language singers of the United States, Participants in American reality television series, Business executives, American hip hop singers, Women company founders

Jennifer Lynn Muñiz (née Lopez; born July 24, 1969) is an American actress, dancer, producer, and singer-songwriter. She became interested in pursuing a career in the entertainment industry following a minor role in the 1986 film My Little Girl, to the dismay of her Puerto Rican parents, who believed that it was an unrealistic career route for a Hispanic. Lopez gained her first regular high-profile job as a Fly Girl dancer on In Living Color in 1991, where she remained a regular until she decided to pursue an acting career in 1993. She received her first leading role in the Selena biopic of the same name in 1997. Lopez became the first Latina actress to earn over $1 million for a role the following year, with the film Out of Sight. She ventured into the music industry in 1999 with her debut studio album, On the 6, joining a select few in successfully converting from a film to a music career.
With the simultaneous release of her second studio album J. Her 2002 remix album, J to tha L–O! The Remixes, became the first in history to debut at number one on the US Billboard 200, while her fifth studio album, Como Ama una Mujer (2007), received the highest first-week sales for a Spanish album in the United States. With records sales of 80 million and a cumulative film gross of over $2 billion, Lopez is regarded as the most influential Hispanic performer in the United States, as well as its highest paid Latin entertainer. As of May 2012, she has an estimated net worth of $250 million.
Lopez has used her position as a global icon of pop culture to begin her own empire, consisting of various clothing lines, accessories, fragrances, a production company, television shows and a charitable foundation among other activities. She has established herself as a prominent figure in both the film and music industry, in a career spanning four decades. Lopez's public image and personal relationships have attracted worldwide media attention. Lopez's first high profile relationship was with media mogul Sean Combs, who accompanied her to the 2000 Grammy Awards where she wore the infamous Green Versace dress. She became romantically involved with actor Ben Affleck, while still married to her second husband Cris Judd. Lopez wed long-time friend Marc Anthony in 2004; the couple separated in 2011, after seven years of marriage. Lopez gave birth to their twins, Emme and Maximilian, in February 2008.

Early life

Jennifer Lynn Lopez was born on July 24, 1969, in the Castle Hill neighborhood of The Bronx, New York City, New York She excelled athletically rather than academically, competing in national track championships. In 1984, at the age of fifteen, she began dating David Cruz, her first boyfriend.
While attending her final year of high school, Lopez learned about a film casting that was seeking several teenage girls for small roles. She auditioned and was cast in My Little Girl (1986), a low-budget film co-written and directed by Connie Kaiserman. Lopez acted as Myra, a young woman at a center for troubled girls. After she finished filming her role in the film, Lopez realized that she wanted to become a "famous movie star". To please her parents, though, she enrolled in Baruch College, only to drop out after one semester. She told her parents her dream of becoming a movie star, but they insisted that it was a "really stupid" idea and that "no Latinos did that". The differences in opinions led Lopez to move out of their family home and into an apartment in Manhattan. During this period, Lopez performed in regional productions of the musicals: Jesus Christ Superstar and Oklahoma. From there, she was hired for the chorus in a Golden Musicals of Broadway, which toured Europe for five months. She was unhappy with the role, as she was the only member of the chorus to not have a solo. She later got a job on the show Synchronicity in Japan, where she acted as a dancer, singer and a choreographer.

Career

1991–96: In Living Color and early film career

Lopez was selected as a backup dancer for the New Kids on the Block in 1991 and performed with them during their performance of "Games" at the 8th Annual American Music Awards.
Lopez received her first professional acting gig in the direct-to-video drama film Lost in the Wild (1993), co-starring alongside Lindsay Wagner and Robert Loggia.

1997–2000: Breakthrough with Selena and On the 6

In February 1997, Lopez starred alongside Jack Nicholson and Stephen Dorff in the neo-noir thriller Blood and Wine.
In April, Lopez starred in the horror film Anaconda alongside Ice Cube and Jon Voight.
Lopez's debut single, "If You Had My Love", was released in May 1999, as she began to ready her first album. She joined a select few in achieving this feat, becoming the first since Vanessa Williams (1992) and Martika (1989).
Lopez, in the accompaniment of then-boyfriend Sean Combs, wore a plunging exotic green Versace silk chiffon dress on the red carpet of the 42nd Grammy Awards on February 22, 2000. The dress "had a low-cut neck that extended several inches below her navel, where it was loosely fastened with a sparkly brooch and then opened out again," exposing her midriff and then as cut along the front of the legs like a bath robe.

2001–03: Heightened success, J... Then

During the process of creating her second album, Lopez decided to tweak her image as she began to develop into a sex symbol. She changed her stage name to J.
To enhance Lopez's success in the urban market, promotion of J. J to tha L–O! The Remixes spawned two other singles, "I'm Gonna Be Alright" and "Alive", a ballad co-written by her husband at the time, Cris Judd. April 2002 saw Lopez open her restaurant, Madrè's.
In May 2002, Lopez starred in the thriller film Enough as a woman named Slim who flees her home after being abused by her husband. The film grossed a modest $52 million at the box office,
The month of her engagement to actor Ben Affleck saw the release of her third studio album, This Is Me... Then, which was dedicated to him.

2004–09: Continued film success, Rebirth and Como Ama una Mujer

In March 2004, Lopez had a minor role in the film Jersey Girl, alongside Affleck. Her character, Gertrude Steiney, dies during childbirth within the first 15 minutes of the film. From the intense media scrutiny following the couple's break-up, it was noted that "they may need to put Lopez in a coffin on the poster if they want anyone to come".
In 2004, during low-key visits to the Children's Hospital Los Angeles, which Lopez is an avid support of, she befriended eleven-year-old cancer patient Paige Patterson. Patterson attended the inaugural Noche de Niños gala for the hospital in which Lopez was presented with an award, however the morning after became even more sick and died in November 2004. Lopez has stated that Patterson made her realize why her charity work is important.
Bordertown, a film based on the Female homicides in Ciudad Juárez, made its premiere at the Cannes Film Festival on May 18, 2006. Lopez, who also acts as the film's producer, stars as Lauren Adrian, an American news reporter for the Chicago Sentinel who wants to be assigned to the Iraq front-lines to cover the war. Lopez's sixth studio album Brave, released in October, become her lowest-charting album worldwide. A five-part miniseries, Jennifer Lopez Presents: Como Ama una Mujer, based on the lyrics of Como Ama una Mujer aired on Univision from October 30 to November 27, 2007.

2010–12: Career rejuvenation, American Idol and touring

Lopez parted ways with Epic Records in February 2010, citing that she had fulfilled her contractual obligations and now wished to release her seventh studio album Love? under a new label.

L'Oreal Paris named Lopez their new Global Ambassador and the face of their brands, including EverPure hair care, Preference hair color and Youth Code skin care. Her EverSleek hair care ads made their debut in early 2011, to coincide with the release of Love? and her debut as a judge on American Idol.
In January 2012, Lopez returned as judge on the eleventh season of American Idol, earning a reported $20 million.
Lopez launched the Dance Again World Tour, her first headlining concert tour, on June 14.
Lopez's first greatest hits album, Dance Again... the Hits, was released on July 24, 2012 in the United States.

2013–present: Upcoming eighth studio album and other ventures

In January 2013, Lopez starred alongside Jason Statham in the crime thriller Parker, in which she played Leslie. Her performance earned positive reviews, with The Chicago Tribune commending the role for giving Lopez "an opportunity to be dramatic, romantic, funny, depressed, euphoric and violent. The audience stays with her all the way". "There's a big revolution going on, it's like a media and cultural revolution of Latinos here in the United States. We're realizing our power. We're realizing that we matter here."
Inspired by her gay aunt who had died, Lopez signed on as executive producer of the television series The Fosters, which is about a same sex couple raising a family.
After the conclusion of her Dance Again World Tour, Lopez began recording her eighth studio album, inspired by her travels.
Lopez has a range of upcoming acting projects. She will star in the risqué low-budget thriller The Boy Next Door, Lopez will also venture into television. NBC has ordered a 13-episode television drama, in which Lopez will executive produce and star. In the series, titled Shades of Blue, expected to air in the 2015–16 television season, she will portray a single mother and police detective who goes undercover for the FBI to investigate her own squad. Ryan Seacrest will also produce the series.NBC Orders Cop Drama Starring Jennifer Lopez to Series

Artistry

Musical style

Since the beginning of her music career, Lopez has explored various music genres including Latin pop, dance, R&B, hip hop, rock, funk, house and salsa. Ed Morales stated in The Latin Beat: The Rhythms And Roots Of Latin Music From Bossa Nova To Salsa And Beyond (2003) that her music explored both "the romantic innocence of Latin music", and hip hop.
While her first two albums included funk, dance, urban and Latin-flavored music,
Lopez has been influenced by artists such as Tina Turner, James Brown, Michael Jackson, Madonna and Barbra Streisand.

Choreography and stage

Lopez has felt an emotional connection to dance since her childhood.
In a study of the successful Latina in relation to sex and dance, author Priscilla Peña Ovalle observed in Dance and the Hollywood Latina: Race, Sex and Stardom (2011), that Lopez utilized the mythology of dance which makes the Latina star a "paradoxical figure". Ovalle wrote: "the Latina star strikes a balance: by wielding her body and its purported sexuality in familiar ways, she achieves agency in a career and nation that would otherwise exclude her and her movement."
Lopez is often noted for her choreography and high-energy provocative stage performances, which have at times caused her to receive scrutiny from the public.

Public image

Andrew Barker of Variety observes that Lopez's image is constantly evolving, opining that she exhibits "a plethora of contradictions" as a pop star. Barker wrote, "Despite a carefully cultivated image as an imperious pop empress in ludicrously expensive outfits, her signature hits bear the titles "I'm Real" and "Jenny From the Block". She managed the perilous transition from actress to music star without ever seeming to pick either as a primary gig. She established herself as an oft-provocative sex symbol while her demeanor made it abundantly clear that she's not asking you to come hither."
Lopez has been widely recognized for her sex appeal, allowing women with curvaceous figures to be accepted.

Legacy and cultural influence

Regarded as the most influential Hispanic performer in the United States, Lopez has often been credited with breaking racial barriers in the entertainment industry. The Record newspaper stated that she was responsible for the introduction of Latin presence in the film industry.
VH1 ranked Lopez at number 15 on a list of "200 Greatest Pop Culture Icons",
Famed for her distinctive fashion style, Us Weekly named Lopez "Style Icon" of the 2000s decade. Her record-breaking fragrance line has become the most successful celebrity line in the world, with sales exceeding $2 billion.prnewswire.html
In 2013 Lopez was immortalized in a Barbie doll, although the doll has been criticized by the public for lacking her signature curves.

Personal life

For over fifteen years, Lopez's personal life has attracted widespread media attention.
While working on her first album On the 6, Lopez began dating record producer and rapper Sean Combs. On December 27, 1999, the couple were arrested along with two others in connection with a shooting outside the Times Square Club in New York. They were charged with criminal possession of a weapon as well as stolen property. Lopez was soon exonerated, having had nothing to do with the crime.
Following her break-up with Affleck in January 2004, Lopez began dating long-time friend Marc Anthony (born as Marco Antonio Muñiz). The couple wed that June.
Lopez gave birth to a son, Maximilian David and a daughter, Emme Maribel, in Long Island, New York on February 22, 2008.

List of works





Bibliography

|first = Sarah
|last = Gallick
|title = J.Lo: The Secret Behind Jennifer Lopez's Rise to the Top
|series = From the Files of the National Enquirer Series
|editor = National Enquirer
|publisher = Ami Books
|year = 2003
|isbn = 1-932270-07-8
|ref = harv
}}
|first = Adam
|last = Woog
|title = Jennifer Lopez: The Great Hispanic Heritage Series
|publisher = Infobase Publishing, Inc.
|location = 
|year = 2008
|isbn =  9781438106816
|ref = harv
}}






