[[HMS Ocean (L12)]]

CATEGORIES: Helicopter carrier classes, Govan-built ships, 1995 ships, Aircraft carriers of the Royal Navy, Amphibious warfare vessels of the Royal Navy, Active aircraft carriers of the United Kingdom, Active amphibious warfare vessels of the United Kingdom, 2012 Summer Olympics

HMS ''Ocean'' of the Royal Navy is an amphibious assault ship (or landing platform helicopter) and is the sole member of her class.  She is designed to support amphibious landing operations and to support the staff of Commander UK Amphibious Force and Commander UK Landing Force. She was constructed in the mid-1990s by Kvaerner Govan Ltd on the Clyde and fitted out by VSEL at Barrow-in-Furness prior to first of class trials and subsequent acceptance in service.  She was commissioned in September 1998 at her home port HMNB Devonport, Plymouth.

Background

An invitation to tender for a new helicopter carrier was issued in February 1992., comparable to that of a Type 23 frigate. VSEL, a warship manufacturer, sub-contracted the build phase to the commercial Kværner yard in Govan, Glasgow.
The fact that VSEL's bid was £71 million lower than Swan Hunter's was the source of political controversy and led to a National Audit Office investigation to determine whether the competition was fair. The report, published on 29 July 1993, stated that although VSEL did subsidise its bid the MoD was right to award the contract to VSEL because the subsidy was much smaller than the difference between the two bids; VSEL's bid was £139.5 million compared to Swan Hunter's £210.6 million. The Times also suggested that the subsidy was as little as £10 million. The cut-price build to commercial standards means that Ocean has a projected operational life of just 20 years, significantly less than that of other warships.
Launched on 11 October 1995, she was subsequently named at Barrow by Her Majesty the Queen on 20 February 1998, prior to delivery to Devonport. In her sea trial she managed to reach a top speed of 

Role

Ocean was designed to provide the amphibious assault capabilities last offered by Albion and Bulwark whilst in the Commando role.  She can deploy an Embarked Military Force (EMF) of a Royal Marines Commando Group from 3 Commando Brigade supported by aviation and landing craft assets. The ships company includes 9 Assault Squadron from 1 Assault Group Royal Marines. HMS Ocean is also capable of limited anti-submarine warfare activities, supporting afloat training and acting as a base facility for other embarked forces including counter-terrorism units.
The air group of up to 6 Sea King HC4 medium-lift helicopters, six Lynx AH7 light-lift/anti-tank helicopters are provided by the Commando Helicopter Force, 4-6 Apache AH1 operated by the Army Air Corps and helicopters of the Royal Air Force including the Chinook. Prior to their retirement, Ocean could transport up to 15 fixed wing HarrierBBC News 30 September 1998,  aircraft of Joint Force Harrier in the ferry role, but was unable to operate as a fixed wing aircraft carrier due to her lack of the 'ski jump' that is needed to launch a fully loaded Harrier.
For the 2012 London Olympics she carried an air arm of eight Army Air Corps and Fleet Air Arm Super Lynx helicopters, four from each service, to deploy special forces and conduct other missions in relation to her security role.
4 Landing Craft Vehicle and Personnel (LCVPs) are permanently embarked and manned by 9 Assault Squadron Royal Marines.royalnavy.uk/operations-and-support/surface-fleet/assault-ships/hms-ocean/ship-s-departments/9-assault-squadron-rm/

Operational history

Just weeks after being commissioned, Ocean was undertaking the warm water element of her first-of-class trials when she was deployed on short notice to the coasts of Honduras and Nicaragua to provide humanitarian assistance in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch.
During 2000 Ocean supported Operation Palliser in Sierra Leone, joining Illustrious aiding the suppression of rebel activity with her own EMF and providing support facilities for the Spearhead battalion ashore.
On 17 February 2002, a unit of Royal Marines from Ocean accidentally landed in the San Felipe beach in the Spanish town of La Linea instead of Gibraltar causing a minor diplomatic incident as various media outlets labelled the mistake as an "invasion".
Ocean was part of a large Royal Navy task force deployed for Operation Telic, the UK contribution to the 2003 Iraq War, for which she was awarded a new battle honour "Al Faw 2003". In the helicopter assault role she was accompanied by Ark Royal.
In the summer of 2006, she was deployed as part of the task force involved in the Aurora exercises on the eastern seaboard of the United States.
In 2007, Ocean began her first long refit period. This was carried out by Devonport Management Limited at their Devonport Royal Dockyard facility and lasted around twelve months, during which period, Ark Royal took over the LPH role. Ocean sailed from Plymouth on Wednesday 24 September 2008 to start sea trials, following this major period of maintenance and upgrading work.
On 18 February 2009, Ocean sailed from Devonport as part of the Taurus 09 deployment under Commander UK Amphibious Task Group, Commodore Peter Hudson. She was joined on this deployment by landing platform dock Bulwark, as Hudson's flagship, Type 23 Frigates Argyll and Somerset and four ships of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary.
In June 2009, she took part in exercise Bersama Shield with Somerset and RFA Wave Ruler off the Malay Peninsula.
During the air travel disruption after the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption Prime Minister Gordon Brown  assigned Ocean and other units to rescue stranded travellers and army personnel across the English Channel in Operation Cunningham.
In 2010 she was deployed on a multi-purpose deployment.  This started with exercise Auriga on the eastern coast of the USA.royalnavy.uk/operations-and-support/surface-fleet/assault-ships/hms-ocean/news/hms-ocean-heads-across-the-pond-as-part-of-the-auriga-task-group  She then moved to Brazil to conduct exercise with the Brazilian marines, whilst there a defence cooperation agreement was signed on board.royalnavy.uk/operations-and-support/surface-fleet/assault-ships/hms-ocean/news/hms-ocean-departs-rio-de-janeiro-after-successful-diplomatic-visit  She then crossed the Atlantic heading for Nigeria to both participate in the Nigeria at 50 presidential fleet review and capacity building with the Nigerian navy as part of the African partnership programme.royalnavy.uk/operations-and-support/surface-fleet/assault-ships/hms-ocean/news/capacity-building-with-the-nigerian-navy
In April 2011, She was deployed as the follow on ship for the RN's Response Force Task Group (RFTG) COUGAR 11 deployment. During this deployment, she took part in Exercise Cypriot Lion
In May 2011, she was detached from the COUGAR 11 deployment of the Response Force Task Group and sent with embarked Apaches to aid operations in Libya along with the attack helicopters aboard the French amphibious assault ship Tonnerre.
On 4 May 2012 she moored at Greenwich to prepare for her role of providing logistics support, accommodation and a helicopter landing site during the London 2012 Olympic Games. The LPH role is now provided by HMS Illustrious until 2014.

Commanding Officers

 The Senior Naval Officer is an engineering officer responsible for overseeing the ship's refit period

Affiliations



Notes and references




