[[CARE (relief agency)]]

CATEGORIES: International charities, Development charities, Humanitarian aid organizations, Non-governmental organizations, Hunger relief organizations, Organizations with general consultative status to the United Nations Economic and Social Council

CARE (Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere) is a major international humanitarian agency delivering broad-spectrum emergency relief and long-term international development projects. Founded in 1945, CARE is nonsectarian, impartial, and non-governmental. It is one of the largest and oldest humanitarian aid organizations focused on fighting global poverty.  In 2013, CARE reported working in 86 countries, supporting 927 poverty-fighting projects and humanitarian aid projects, and reaching over 97 million people.
CARE's programmes in the developing world address a broad range of topics including emergency response, food security, water and sanitation, economic development, climate change, agriculture, education, and health. CARE also advocates at the local, national, and international levels for policy change and the rights of poor people. Within each of these areas, CARE focuses particularly on empowering and meeting the needs of women and girls and on promoting gender equality.
CARE International is a confederation of thirteen CARE National Members and one Affiliate Member, each of which is registered as an autonomous non-profit non-governmental organization in the country. The thirteen CARE National Members are: CARE Australia, CARE Canada, CARE Danmark, CARE Deutschland-Luxembourg, CARE France, CARE India, CARE International Japan, CARE Nederland, CARE Norge, CARE Österreich, Raks Thai Foundation (CARE Thailand), CARE International UK, and CARE USA. The CARE Affiliate Member is CARE Peru. Programs in developing countries are usually managed by a Country Office, but CARE also supports projects and may respond to emergencies in some countries where they do not maintain a full Country Office.

History

1945-1949: Origins and the CARE Package

CARE, then the Cooperative for American Remittances to Europe, was formally founded[ref]
 CARE was initially a consortium of twenty-two American charities (a mixture of civic, religious, cooperative, and labour organizations) with the purpose of delivering food aid to Europe in the aftermath of World War II.
CARE's food aid took the form of CARE Packages, which were at first delivered to specific individuals: Americans paid $10 to send a CARE Package of food to a loved one in Europe, often a family member. President Truman bought the first CARE package. CARE guaranteed delivery within four months to anyone in Europe, even if they had left their last known address, and returned a signed delivery receipt to the sender. Because European postal services were unreliable at the time these signed receipts were sometimes the first confirmation that the recipient had survived the war.
The first CARE Packages were in fact surplus "Ten-in-One" US army rations packs (designed to contain a day's meals for ten people). In early 1946 CARE purchased 2.8 million of these warehoused rations packs, originally intended for the invasion of Japan, and began advertising in America. On May 11, 1946, six months after the agency's incorporation, the first CARE Packages were delivered in Le Havre, France.  These packages contained staples such as canned meats, powdered milk, dried fruits, and fats along with a few comfort items such as chocolate, coffee, and cigarettes. (Several on the CARE Board of Directors wished to remove the cigarettes, but it was deemed impractical to open and reseal 2.8 million boxes.) 1946 also marked CARE'S first expansion out of the US with the establishment of an office in Canada.
By early 1947 the supply of "Ten-in-One" ration packs had been exhausted and CARE began assembling its own packages. These new packages were designed with the help of a nutritionist. They did not include cigarettes and were tailored somewhat by destination: Kosher packages were developed, and for example packages for England included tea rather than coffee, and packages for Italy included pasta.  By 1949 CARE offered and shipped more than twelve different packages.
Although the organization had originally intended to deliver packages only to specified individuals, within a year CARE began delivering packages addressed for example "to a teacher" or simply "to a hungry person in Europe."  These unspecified donations continued and in early 1948 CARE's Board voted narrowly to officially move towards unspecified donations and to expand into more general relief. Some founding member agencies disagreed with this shift, arguing that more general relief would be a duplication of the work of other agencies, but donors reacted favourably, contributions increased, and this decision would mark the beginning of CARE's shift towards a broader mandate.
Between the first deliveries of 1946 and the last European deliveries of 1956, millions of CARE Packages were distributed throughout Europe, over 50% of them to Germany  including many delivered as part of the Berlin airlift in response to the 1948 Soviet blockade of Berlin.
The US Agricultural Act of 1949 made surplus US agricultural products available to be shipped abroad as aid either directly by the US government or by NGOs including CARE. In 1954 Public Law 480, also known as the Food for Peace Act, further expanded the availability of surplus US food as aid. This act allowed CARE to expand its feeding programs and disaster relief operations considerably, and between 1949 and 2009 CARE used hundreds of millions of dollars' worth of surplus commodities in disaster relief and programs such as school lunch provision.

1949-1956: Transition out of Europe

Although the organization's mission had originally been focused on Europe, in July 1948 CARE opened its first non-European mission, in Japan. Deliveries to China and Korea followed, which CARE described as aid to areas "implicated by WWII."  In 1949 CARE entered the developing world for the first time, launching programs in the Philippines. Projects in India, Pakistan, and Mexico began soon after.  1949 also marked CARE's first expansion into non-food aid with the development of "self-help" packages containing tools for farming, carpentry, and other trades.  In 1953, because of its expansion to projects outside Europe, CARE changed the meaning of its acronym to "Cooperative for American Remittances to Everywhere." 
As Europe recovered economically, CARE faced the need to re-evaluate its mission: in 1955 several Board members argued that with the European recovery CARE's mandate was finished and the organization should dissolve. Other Board members however felt that CARE's mission should continue albeit with a new focus on the developing world. In July 1955 the Board of Directors voted to continue and expand CARE projects outside of Europe. Paul French, CARE's executive director at the time, resigned over the debate. Twenty-two of CARE's forty-two missions were closed, mostly in European countries, and efforts were concentrated on food distribution and emergency response in the developing world. In 1956 CARE distributed food to refugees of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956, and this would be among the last of CARE's operations in Europe for many years.

1957-1975: Transition into broader development work

With a broadened geographic focus came a broadened approach as CARE began to expand beyond its original food distribution program. In order to reflect these new broader aims, in 1959 CARE changed the meaning of its acronym a second time, becoming the "Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere".  
Reflecting this broadened scope, CARE became involved in 1961 with President John F. Kennedy's establishment of the Peace Corps. CARE was charged with selecting and training the first group of volunteers, who would later be deployed to development projects in Colombia. The Peace Corps assumed greater control over the training of Peace Corps Volunteers in subsequent missions, but CARE continued to provide country directors to the Peace Corps until CARE-Peace Corps joint projects ended in 1967.
In 1962 CARE merged with and absorbed the medical aid organization MEDICO, which it had been working closely with for several years previously. The merger considerably increased CARE's capacity to deliver health programming including trained medical personnel and medical supplies.
During this transition the original CARE Package was phased out. The last food package was delivered in 1967 and the last tools package in 1968. Over 100 million CARE Packages had been delivered worldwide since the first shipment to France. Although 1968 marked the official "retirement" of the CARE Package the format would occasionally be used again, for example in CARE's relief to the republics of the former Soviet Union and to survivors of the Bosnian War. The concept was also revived in 2011 as an online campaign encouraging donors to fill a "virtual CARE Package" with food aid and services such as education and healthcare.
1967 also marked CARE's first partnership agreement with a government: for the construction of schools in Honduras. Partnership agreements with governments led programmes to become country-wide rather than targeted only to a few communities. CARE's programmes during this era focused largely on the construction of schools and nutrition centres, and the continued distribution of food.  Nutrition centres in particular would become one of CARE's major areas of concentration, linking with school feeding programs and nutrition education aimed at new mothers.
In 1975 CARE implemented a multi-year planning system, again allowing programmes to become both broader and deeper in scope. Projects became increasingly multi-faceted, providing for example not only health education but also access to clean water and an agricultural program to improve nutrition. The multi-year planning system also increased the scope for country-wide projects and partnerships with local governments. A 1977 project for example provided for the construction of over 200 pre-schools and kindergartens throughout Chile over several years, jointly funded by CARE and the Chilean Ministry of Education.

1975-1990: From CARE to CARE International

Although CARE had opened an office in Canada in 1946, it was not until the mid-1970s that the organization truly started to become an international body. CARE Canada (initially Care of Canada) became an autonomous body in 1973. In 1976 CARE Europe was established in Bonn following the successful fund-raising campaign "Dank An CARE" (Thanks to CARE). In 1981 CARE Germany was created and CARE Europe moved its headquarters to Paris. CARE Norway had been created in 1980,   and CAREs in Italy and the UK were established. The popularity of CARE offices in Europe was attributed to the fact that many Europeans remembered receiving CARE assistance themselves between 1945 and 1955.
In 1979 planning began for the establishment of an umbrella organization to coordinate and prevent duplication among the various national CARE organizations. This new body was named CARE International and met for the first time on January 29, 1982, with CARE Canada, CARE Germany, CARE Norway, and CARE USA (formerly simply CARE) in attendance.
CARE International would expand significantly during the 1980s, with the addition of CARE France in 1983;  CARE International UK in 1985;  CARE Austria in 1986;  and CARE Australia, CARE Denmark, and CARE Japan in 1987.

1990-today: Recent history

Along with broader development work CARE's projects in the 1980s and early 1990s focused particularly on agroforestry initiatives such as reforestation and soil conservation in eastern Africa and South America. CARE also responded to a number of major emergencies during this period, notably the 1983–1985 famine in Ethiopia and the 1991-1992 famine in Somalia.
The 1990s also saw an evolution in CARE's approach to poverty. Originally CARE had viewed poverty primarily as a lack of basic goods and services such as food, clean water, and health care. As CARE's scope expanded both geographically and topically this approach was expanded to include the view that poverty was in many cases caused by social exclusion, marginalization, and discrimination. In the early 1990s CARE adopted a household livelihood security framework which included a multidimensional view of poverty as encompassing not only physical resources but also social position and human capacities. As a result of this, by 2000, CARE had adopted a rights-based approach to development.
In the early 1990s CARE also developed what would become an important model for cooperative microfinance. This model is called the Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLAs) and it began in 1991 as a pilot project run by CARE's Country Office in Niger. The pilot project was called Mata Masu Dubara (MMD) and CARE Niger developed the VSLA model by adapting the model of Accumulating Savings and Credit Associations (ASCAs). VSLAs involve groups of about 15-30 people who regularly save and borrow using a group fund. Member savings create capital that can be used for short-term loans and capital and interest is shared among the group at the end of a given period (usually about a year), at which point the groups normally re-form to begin a new cycle. Because the bookkeeping required to manage a VSLA is quite simple most groups successfully become independent (needing no outside management help) within a year and enjoy a high rate of long-term group survival. CARE has created over 40'000 VSLAs (over 1 million members total) across Africa, Asia, and Latin America and in 2008 launched Access Africa which aims to extend VSLA training to 39 African countries by 2018. The model has also been widely replicated in Africa and Asia and by other large NGOs including Oxfam, Plan International, and Catholic Relief Services.
In 1993 CARE, to reflect its international organizational structure, changed the meaning of its acronym for a third time, adopting its current name the "Cooperative for Assistance and Relief Everywhere". CARE also marked its 50th anniversary in 1994.
CARE expanded the confederation to twelve members in the early 2000s, with CARE Netherlands (formerly the Disaster Relief Agency) joining in 2001   and CARE Thailand (called the Raks Thai Foundation) joining in 2003, becoming the first CARE National Member in a developing country.
CARE's well-known "I am Powerful" campaign launched in the USA in September 2006 and was intended to bring public attention to the organization's long-standing focus on women's empowerment. CARE states that its programs focus on women and girls both because the world's poor are disproportionately female and because women's empowerment is thought to be an important driver of development. CARE also emphasizes that it considers working with boys and men an important part of women's empowerment, and that women's empowerment benefits both genders.
In 2007 CARE announced that by 2009 it would no longer accept certain types of US food aid worth some $45 million a year, arguing that these types of food aid are inefficient and harmful to local markets.   Specifically, CARE announced that it would forego all monetized food aid (surplus US food shipped to charities in the developing world  who then sell the food on the local market to finance development projects)  and all food aid intended to establish a commercial advantage for the donor, and would increase its commitment to buying food aid locally. CARE also announced that it would no longer accept USDA food through Title 1 (concessional sales) or Section 416 (surplus disposal) because these programs are intended mainly to establish a commercial advantage for US agriculture.
In 2011 CARE added its first Affiliate Member, CARE India, and in 2012 the CI board accepted CARE Peru as CARE's second Affiliate Member. CARE India became a full member in November 2013.
CARE is currently one of the only major NGOs to make their database of project evaluations publicly available, and to regularly conduct a meta-analysis of evaluation methodologies and overall organizational impact.

CARE today

CARE's structure

CARE International is a confederation of thirteen CARE National Members and one Affiliate Member, coordinated by the CARE International Secretariat. The Secretariat is based in Geneva, Switzerland, with offices in New York and in Brussels in order to liaise with the United Nations and the European institutions respectively.
Each CARE National Member is an autonomous non-governmental organization registered in the country, and each Member runs programs, fundraising, and communications activities both in its own country and in developing countries where CARE operates. There are thirteen National Members and one Affiliate Member working towards full membership. The thirteen CARE National Members and one CARE Affiliate Member are:

Programming scope

In 2013 CARE 
was active in the following countries (as well as in Member and Affiliate countries):
A total of 927 projects were carried out in these countries, with 97 million people reached. The breakdown by region was as follows:
For the fiscal year 2012, CARE reported a budget of more than 610 million Euros and a staff of 11,300 (97% of them local citizens of the country where they work).

Programming focuses

CARE programming falls into the following broad themes:

=Examples of CARE's programs worldwide=

Women and Girl's Empowerment: Marie Goretti Nyabenda from Burundi joined a CARE program called UMWIZERO assisting women to form savings and loans groups. Whereas Goretti's husband was at first reluctant to let her join, he quickly saw the benefits as the group not only saved money together and made investments, but they also helped each other in their daily chores. At the same time, CARE worked with local leaders and men to examine and challenge social norms that marginalize women. Eventually Goretti and the other women gained the respect of their husbands. Nearly three-quarters of participants were able to more greatly partake in their households decision-making and spending. And as it is often women who make decisions for their children's healthcare, schooling and nutrition, the entire family benefits from these changes. 
Maternal Health: In India, CARE facilitates mothers' group meetings to teach safe birth practices and promote health and hygiene measures. Zeba, a young woman who lost her baby through miscarriage before learning about these meetings, says: "I heard woman sharing information about their health, their pains and their happiness. I saw them talking about the danger signs for the mother and the newborn through picture cards. I kept thinking all the time, that if only I had known all this earlier, I would have not met this fate. I kept attending every meeting and learnt so much. Two months later, I was pregnant again as I could recognize the symptoms of pregnancy. I happily shared this with all at home." CARE trains traditional birth attendants so that they can learn to recognize problems in pregnancies and promote healthy practices. We also offer men's group meetings in which they learn about women's rights. 
Food Security: CARE works with families and communities to help them produce more nutritious food, develop better agricultural and environmental skills and increase their income. Our goal is to help poor people conserve their natural resources and protect their environment for their children's future. In the Sahel region, CARE has been actively helping families struggling to survive. In Niger, CARE is providing income to families so they can buy food during what is commonly known as the 'lean season,' the gap between the time people run out of food stocks and the next harvest. "It's a support that came at the right moment," says Achirou Inoussa, a 42-year-old man. People receive cash in exchange for part-time work in projects identified by their community, or as a handout in the cases where nobody in the family is able to perform manual labor. This type of project has a very tangible impact and CARE's support has fed families at a critical time. "Before this support, I couldn't; I was eating leaves," explains Maka Ali, an 80-year-old widow. "Not only can we buy millet and sorghum now, but also corn and condiments," explains Mariama Oumarou, 55. "With this support, we get to eat abundantly," explains Halima Abdou, 25. She is now able to give her children two daily meals. 
Climate Change: CARE is helping people adapt by finding new sources of income, planting different types of crop and being better prepared for disasters. CARE is also influencing national and international policies and institutions to help tackle the growing climate crisis. As the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) released the latest instalment of its Fifth Assessment Report, CARE International's Climate Change Advocacy Coordinator Sven Harmeling said: "The IPCC's findings confirm that climate change is a man-made phenomenon that has emerged from largely unequal human development patterns. Even though a small, rich segment of the global population has caused the vast majority of greenhouse gas emissions, it is the world's poorest people who are increasingly suffering from growing climate disruption. This is an extreme global injustice." CARE warns that eradicating global poverty will become a near-impossible task unless governments take urgent action to tackle the growing injustice of climate change.
Education: In Guatemala, CARE works with groups of girls to give them access to education and to train them as future community leaders. Maria Angelica Joj Yac is a 21-year-old indigenous woman who fought for the chance to be the first person to finish school in her family. Maria Angelica volunteers in her community through CARE's Education and Leadership Program, where she is trained in teaching and learning techniques and themes such as leadership, self-esteem, and children's rights and responsibilities. With a scholarship and inspiration from CARE, she was able to pay for her high school studies and keep the earnings from her job to buy 45 chickens to raise and sell. Maria Angelica knows that in order to overcome injustice in her community, girls must be educated about their rights and support one another. "I work with the girls in my community, and together we leave the confines of the home, of isolation, and of timidity, and move toward the public, especially to participate in the classroom among our peers," she explains. "What I have to do now is demonstrate that women have the same rights and opportunities in school and in the workplace. Nothing and no one will stop me from reaching my goals." 
HIV/AIDS: In Bougainville, Papua New Guinea, young adults are experiencing an HIV and AIDS epidemic that is placing their generation in danger. However, Dormatilda Gani, 23, and Bridgette Mohin, 22, are two young women who have chosen to contribute to a more positive future by volunteering to become peer educators in a CARE education program, which raises awareness of HIV and AIDS among youth to help prevent the spread and impacts of the epidemic. They attend monthly trainings on health issues and leadership skills, which they turn into education sessions for their communities to transfer the knowledge they have gained on issues such as HIV and AIDS, sexual and reproductive health and substance abuse. Dormatilda is committed to helping protect her community from the epidemic, saying "What I like about being a peer educator is public speaking and having the chance to talk to many people. Trying to build up the community. I like to be aware of HIV and AIDS and other sexual and reproductive health issues. And also it strengthens me to be strong and know my rights and just be faithful to myself." These youth are also learning vital leadership skills to play a stronger role in decision-making in their communities.
Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: When Serina learned about the benefits of building a toilet in the home she shares with her husband and eight children, nothing could stop her from completing the task. Serina is a member of a community health club facilitated by CARE in Zaka District, Zimbabwe. "I'm very happy to be a club member," Serina explains. "It helps me to learn about health and hygiene. I have learned how to keep my house clean inside and out and how to avoid the spread of diseases in our community. Now I feel happy that I can teach these things to my children." Serina's family now practices many hygiene principles that they didn't previously, and she is working to spread the knowledge among other women in her community. "I can see in the households that women are the ones that care for their families, so it's important that we are learning to live in a healthy environment. After I have gained all these skills my family is practicing good hygiene. We always remind each other to keep ourselves clean. I hope I will learn even more in the health club sessions."
Economic Development: CARE's Village Savings and Loans Associations (VSLA) allow rural poor women to pursue economic independence. Groups of about thirty people are formed, and every week members contribute savings according to a system of shares with fixed values. Members can then borrow from the revolving fund at a monthly interest rate decided by the group for the duration of 1 to 3 months. Loan amounts depend on the availability of funds, member demand and individual repayment capacity. At the end of an agreed period or 'cycle', the accumulated savings and interest earnings are shared among the membership in proportion to the amount that each member saved throughout the cycle. In Haiti, Alice tells her story: "When I went to that meeting, I was intrigued by what I learned; I decided to take a chance. I used the little money I made from my sale of mangos and bought "shares". Then later, I took out a loan, and with that, I started a small business. At first I would sell candies in front of my house. Then, with my profit I would repay the loan and expand my business, to include pasta, rice and beans. I was overjoyed when, at the end of the year, came time for the profit distribution, I never had so much money in my life. I felt confident enough to invest in something bigger. My next project was to build a house."
Emergency Response: After typhoon Haiyan hit the Philippines, CARE immediately launched an emergency response. Since the storm first hit, CARE has reached more than 200,000 people, including food relief, cash transfers to purchase food, emergency shelter supplies including tarpaulins, tools and kitchen sets, high quality shelter repair kits, an additional cash supplement for extra costs; and training on building back safer techniques. CARE is also focusing on providing livelihood assistance, helping communities recover in the months and years to come. "Imagine losing your only source of income and then losing your house at the same time. That's what too many typhoon-affected families are living with right now, which makes it incredibly difficult to recover," says Lex Kassenberg, Country Director for CARE Philippines. Overall, our relief operations are expected to reach 250,000 people.

Vision and mission statement

CARE vision statement: 
CARE mission statement: 

Networks and partnerships

CARE is a signatory to the following standards of humanitarian intervention: the Code of Conduct for The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement and NGOs in Disaster Relief, the Sphere standards, and the Humanitarian Accountability Partnership (HAP) principles and standards.
As well, CARE is a member of a number of networks aiming to improve the quality and coordination of humanitarian aid: The Emergency Capacity Building Project (ECB), The Consortium of British Humanitarian Agencies (CBHA), the Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action (ALNAP), the Steering Committee for Humanitarian Response(SHCR),  the International Council for Voluntary Agencies (ICVA), and the INGO Accountability Charter.   
CARE also regularly engages in joint advocacy campaigns with other major NGOs. The Global Campaign for Climate Change Action is one example.



[ref]
O'Keefe L, Drew J, Bailey L, Ford M. (1991) "Guide to the Records of CARE." New York Public Library.  
Morris D. (1996) A Gift From America: The First 50 Years of CARE. Longstreet Press. Atlanta, Georgia. ISBN 1-56352-285-3
Richard D. McKinzie (1975) "Oral History Interview with  Arthur Ringland " Truman Library, p1(10-11).  Available online at 
Goldberg A. (1947) "Surplus Army Rations Gone, CARE Adopts Own Packages for Hungry." The Palm Beach Post, April 17, 1947.  
Smithsonian National Museum of American History: "CARE Package" 
Henry K. (1999) "CARE International: Evolving to Meet the Challenges of the 21st Century." Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly. 28: 109
Anyango E, Esipisu E, Opoku L, Johnson S, Malkamaki M and Musoke C. (2007) "Village Savings and Loan Associations - experience from Zanzibar." Small Enterprise Development, 18:1 p11-24(14). Commissioned by DFID & Decentralized Financial Services. Available online at 
Allen H and Panetta D. (2010). "Savings Groups: What Are They?" The SEEP Network. 
CARE. (2009). Microfinance in Africa: State-of-the-Sector Report: Bringing Financial Services to Africa's Poor. 
Rangan K and Lee K. (2008). "Repositioning CARE USA" Harvard Business School. (Case Study). 
CARE International. (2011) CARE International Annual Report 2011. 
CARE International. (2011) CARE International : An Overview. 
CARE International. (2011) CARE Package: Then and Now. 
Strom S. (8 March 2011). "CARE, in Return To Roots, Will Offer Virtual Packages". The New York Times: p. 8. Retrieved 20 June 2012.nytimes.html
Barnett M (2011) Empire of Humanity: A History of Humanitarianism. Cornell University Press
CARE Norway History Page. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE France History Page. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE Australia History Page. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE International UK History Page. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE Austria History Page. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE Denmark History Page. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE Japan History Page. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE Netherlands History Page. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE USA Thailand Country Profile. Accessed June 2012. 
Hamadziripi A (2008) "Village Savings and Loans Associations in Niger:   Mata Masu Dubara Model of Remote Outreach." COADY International Institute, St Francis Xavier University. 
Dugger C (2007) "CARE Turns down Federal Funds for Food Aid" New York Times, August 16. 
CARE USA. (2006). White Paper on Food Aid Policy. 
Harrell E. (2007). CARE Turns Down US Food Aid. TIME US, August 15. 
CARE International. Structure. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE International. What We Do. Accessed June 2012. 
CARE International (2012). Humanitarian Action Fact Sheet. Accessed June 2012. 
Climate Change Information Centre.  Poverty, Environment & Climate Change Network (PECCN). Accessed June 2012.  
The Emergency Capacity Building Project (ECB), 
The Consortium of British Humanitarian Agencies (CBHA) 
Active Learning Network for Accountability and Performance in Humanitarian Action (ALNAP), 
Steering Committee for Humanitarian Response(SHCR) 
International Council for Voluntary Agencies (ICVA)  
IFRC (2011) Code of Conduct for the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement  and NGOs in Disaster Relief List of signatories. 
The Sphere project. Board Organizations. 
Humanitarian Accountability Partnership. Current Members. 
Global Campaign for Climate Change Action. Partners. 
Give Well. (2009). CARE. 
CARE International's Evaluation e-Library (EEL). 
CARE International. Who We Are. Accessed June 2012. 
INGO Accountability Charter. Charter Members. Accessed August 2012.  
World Bank. (2001) CARE Indonesia: Community Self-Financing of Water and Sanitation Systems Project. 
CARE Australia. Where we Work: Indonesia.  Retrieved September 11, 2012.
Institute of Sustainable Futures,International Water Centre. (2008). NGO Parnerships and Capacity Development in the Water and Sanitation Sector.  
USAID. (1955). Activity Report #5: A Review of Sanitation Program Evaluations in Developing Countries. 



Other CARE sites:
Photos and Videos
Reviews of CARE

