[[New River Gorge Bridge]]

CATEGORIES: U.S. Route 19, Deck arch bridges, Bridges completed in 1977, Transportation in Fayette County, West Virginia, Landmarks in West Virginia, Buildings and structures in Fayette County, West Virginia, Visitor attractions in Fayette County, West Virginia, Road bridges in West Virginia, Weathering steel, Historic American Engineering Record in West Virginia, Bridges on the U.S. Highway System, Bridges on the National Register of Historic Places in West Virginia, National Register of Historic Places in Fayette County, West Virginia

The New River Gorge Bridge is a steel arch bridge 
The roadway of the New River Gorge Bridge is  above the Arkansas River. bridges in the world, and the third highest in the United States (behind the Mike O'Callaghan – Pat Tillman Memorial Bridge over the Colorado River between Arizona and Nevada, bypassing the Hoover Dam, and the Royal Gorge Bridge). When it opened in 1977, the New River Gorge Bridge was the highest vehicular bridge in the world, a record it kept until the 2004 opening of the Millau Viaduct in France.  Several suspension bridges in China have since surpassed both of these bridges in height, with the current record holder being the Si Du River Bridge which opened in November 2009, with 1,549 feet (472 m) of clearance above the Si Du River.
In 2005, the structure gained nationwide attention when the US Mint issued the West Virginia state quarter with the bridge depicted on one side. In 2013, the bridge was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

History

Construction began on the bridge in June 1974, and completed on October 22, 1977.  It was designed by the Michael Baker Company, under the direction of Chief Engineer Clarence V. Knudsen, and executed by U.S. Steel's American Bridge Division. Final cost of construction was $37 million (approximately $4 million over bid). It is made from COR-TEN steel. The use of COR-TEN in construction presented several challenges; notable among them was ensuring that the weld-points weathered at the same rate as the rest of the steel.
Completion of the bridge cut the vehicle travel time from one side of the gorge to the other from about 45 minutes to 45 seconds.
On August 14, 2013, the bridge was listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

Tourism

The New River Gorge Bridge is within the National Park Service's New River Gorge National River area, which protects this portion of the New River Gorge. At the northern end of the bridge, the Park Service operates a visitor center; it has scenic overlooks and a staircase that descends part of the way into the gorge.
A steel catwalk two feet (60 cm) wide runs the full length of the bridge underneath the roadway.  Originally built to facilitate inspections, the catwalk is open for guided, handicapped-accessible quarter-mile "Bridge Walk" tours; visitors use safety rigging.
Since its opening, the bridge has been the centerpiece of Fayette County's "Bridge Day",  held the third Saturday of every October. This festival includes demonstrations of rappelling, ascending, and BASE jumping."BASE" is an acronym that stands for four categories of fixed objects from which one can jump: buildings, antennas, spans (bridges), and earth (cliffs).  Bungee jumping, however, has been banned during Bridge Day since 1993.
The bridge is closed to vehicular traffic during the festival. Prior to the September 11th terrorist attacks, two of the bridge's four lanes were open to traffic during the festivals. Since 2001, security concerns have caused the entire span to be closed to vehicles during these events.
The first person to jump off the New River Gorge Bridge was Burton Ervin, who lives in Cowen, West Virginia, and was a coal-mine foreman. Burton jumped on August 1, 1979, using a conventional North American Aerodynamics Mini Rig System with a 32-foot Lopo canopy.  Four BASE jumpers have died at the bridge, three of these during Bridge Day festivals,Complete Bridge Day History, My West Virginia Home websiteBASE Jumping Fatality List
 

Gallery

Image:West Virginia quarter, reverse side, 2005.
Image:NewRiverBridge West virginia.jpg|Bridge as seen from the National Park Service Visitors Center, with fog in the New River Gorge below
Image:NewRiverGorgeBridgeSpansWV.jpg|Close-up of the bridge supports
Image:New_River_Gorge_Bridge_walkway.jpg|Walkway to observation area near the Visitors Center
Image:NRGfromair.The Tunney Hunsaker Bridge is also visible.
Image:The New River Gorge Bridge.jpg|Panorama of the New River Gorge Bridge



References and notes




