[[Auchinleck Talbot F.C.]]

CATEGORIES: Association football clubs established in 1909, Football clubs in Scotland, Scottish Junior Football Association clubs, Sport in East Ayrshire, Auchinleck Talbot F.C., 1909 establishments in Scotland

Auchinleck Talbot F.C. are a Scottish football club based in Auchinleck, near Cumnock, Ayrshire. Members of the Scottish Junior Football Association, they currently compete in the SJFA West Super League Premier Division. The club are one of the most famous names in Scottish Junior football, having won its most prestigious honour, the Scottish Junior Cup, on a record ten occasions.
They play in a local derby against near neighbours and biggest rivals Cumnock Juniors.
The club colours are gold and black.

History

A public meeting was held at Kirkland's Green in Auchinleck forms a new football club in 1907. Auchinleck Talbot was formed in 1909 and are named after Lord Talbot de Maldahide, the man who gave them their Beechwood Park home.
This has been Talbot's name throughout their history although a myth sprung up that Lugar Boswell and Auchinleck played a match with the winners taking the name Boswell. This is not to say this story is untrue because both villages had senior clubs at the end of the 1800s and this could be where this story was born.
The clubs Beechwood Park is opened in 1909 with a charity match between The Old Players and The Merchant's. Talbot make their team debut the same year when they defeat the juvenile side Highhouse Rangers 4–0. Weeks later they lost their first competitive game at Cronberry Eglinton in the league. Their first win comes in September 1909 when they defeat Patna Doon Athletic in their first Scottish Cup tie.
Talbot folded in 1916 due to financial problems and the First World War but make a comeback four years later, winning the Ayrshire Cup by defeating Irvine Meadow 3–0 at Rugby Park. That same year they set a club goalscoring record in the Scottish Cup defeating Craigbank 11–0 at Beechwood a scoreline recently surpassed in 2008 when Talbot hammered Nairn St. Ninian 13–1 at Beechwood.
The club have a proud record in Junior football, with ten Scottish Junior Cup wins and since 1920, eleven league championships. They are the only club to have won the Scottish Junior Cup three times in a row. They made a remarkable achievement of winning The West of Scotland cup 9 years out of 10 between 1979 and 1989 (although they have not won it since) under Willie Knox.Auchinleck Talbot on Auchinleck web
The club opened a new stand with a friendly match against local Scottish league side Ayr United on 9 October 2005 (the senior side winning 6–2)

2009–10 Scottish Cup

As holders of the Scottish Junior Cup, Talbot qualified to play in the 2009–10 senior Scottish Cup. The club was drawn at home to Highland League side Fort William.
Two matches were required to separate Talbot and their second round opponents Huntly. On 24 October the sides drew 1–1 at Christie Park. Goals from Bryan Slavin and a last minute equaliser for Huntly from Michele Lombardi earned the Highland team a replay.
The third round tie was contested against senior opponents in the form of Second Division side Stirling Albion. Talbot lost 2–1 away with McIlroy scoring a penalty.

2011–12 Scottish Cup

On 22 November 2011, in the 2011–12 Scottish Cup fourth round, Auchinleck Talbot were paired with SPL side, and eventual Scottish Cup champions Hearts, with the tie to be played at Tynecastle on 7 January 2012. They were narrowly defeated 1–0 by Hearts with a goal from Gordon Smith in the 84th minute. Around 2,000 Talbot fans made the journey to Edinburgh.

Current squad



Honours

Scottish Junior Cup
West Superleague Premier Division
Ayrshire First Division
West of Scotland Cup
Ayrshire Cup
Ayrshire League Cup
Ayrshire District Cup
Cumnock & Doon Valley Cup
East Ayrshire Cup
Ayrshire Super Cup
Evening Times League Champions Cup






