[[Powell's Books]]

CATEGORIES: Independent bookstores of the United States, Antiquarian booksellers, Book selling websites, Companies based in Portland, Oregon, Bookstores established in 1971, Internet properties established in 1993, E-book suppliers, Online retail companies of the United States, Review websites, Privately held companies based in Oregon, Pearl District, Portland, Oregon, 1971 establishments in Oregon

Powell's Books is a chain of bookstores in Portland, Oregon, and its surrounding metropolitan area. Powell's headquarters, dubbed Powell's City of Books, claims to be the largest independent new and used bookstore in the world., about 1.6 acres of retail floor space.
The inventory for its retail and online sales is over four million new, used, rare, and out-of-print books.  Powell's buys around 3,000 used books a day.

History

20th century

Powell's was founded by Walter Powell in 1971. His son, Michael Powell, had started a bookstore in Chicago, Illinois, in 1970 which specialized in used, rare, and discounted books, primarily of an academic and scholarly nature. In 1979, Michael Powell joined his father in Portland, right after his father lost its lease; within a year, they found the location that became its current headquarters.  Michael bought the bookstore from his father in 1982.
In 1984,"Loehmann's Plaza gains 85 percent occupancy". (November 25, 1984). The Sunday Oregonian, p. D11. Powell's opened its first branch store, in a suburban shopping center named Loehmann's Plaza (later renamed Cascade Plaza),"Beaverton retail mall rechristened". (June 2, 1987). The Oregonian, p. D8. near Washington Square. The new branch was not a replica of its City of Books location; Powell was concerned that the "edgy" neighborhood of its headquarters location was limiting its customer base, so the new store was "fairly fancy" with white shelving, a tile floor, and banners over the aisles.  It was also four times the size of the typical chain bookstore.
A travel bookstore was established in 1985 on Pioneer Courthouse Square, and other stores followed, one a year for the next few years; by the early 1990s, Powell's bookstores were part of the resurgence of the independent bookstore, which collectively made 32 percent of book sales in the U.S.  The travel store closed in 2005. "Food carts at Pioneer Square may be ousted". The Oregonian, p. C1.
Powell's established its Internet presence in 1993, beginning with email and FTP-based access to its technical bookstore; it has since expanded to incorporate fiction and other genres as a traditional ecommerce site.com from its website  Their website was established in 1994, before Amazon.
The City of Books location grew to its current size after an expansion that opened in 1999; it included a new entrance facing the Pearl District which featured the "Pillar of Books", a Tenino sandstone carving depicting a stack of eight of the world's great books, on a base with the inscription  "Buy the book, read the book, enjoy the book, sell the book" in Latin.  For the year ending June 2000, Powell's revenue was $41.8 million. from fundinguniverse.com

21st century

In 2002, Powell's was cited by USA Today as one of America's 10 best bookstores. "10 Great Places to Crawl Between the Covers"
Since 2005, its website has also offered DVDs with free shipping, with an inventory of over 40,000.
In January 2008, Powell's announced plans to expand the downtown City of Books by adding as many as two floors to the store's southeast corner.  The expansion will add at least   Plans submitted to the Portland Design Commission in November 2008 called for a rooftop garden atop the new addition and an "art cube" over a redesigned main entrance.Portland Architecture: Powells Unveils Design For New Entrance to Flagship Store
In March 2010, Michael Powell confirmed plans to hand over the business to his daughter Emily as of July.  That same month, Powell's announced it would close its technical bookstore on the North Park Blocks, moving its sections on math, science, computing, engineering, construction and transportation into "Powell's Books Building 2" at the corner of 10th and Couch Street, near the main City of Books location; the consolidation was in response to a five-year decline in brick-and-mortar sales of technical books in favor of online sales.
In October 2010, Powell's announced it had bought 7,000 books from the library of author Anne Rice; Powell's offers these association copies on their website.
In June 2011, Powell's participated in Google Offers during that service's first month of operation; according to TechCrunch—which characterized Powell's as a "Portland institution"—"5,000 Powell's vouchers sold out in a matter of hours", making it "most popular deal in the month."
Starting in May 2012,

Labor relations

In 1991, following some post-holiday lay-offs, some of Powell's employees formed an organizing committee, seeking to become part of the Oregon Public Employees Union (OPEU).  They got more than 35% of the employees to sign union cards but chose not to file for a union certification election because less than 65% had signed, a threshold suggested by the OPEU. from the ILWU Local 5 website  In response to issues identified by the organizing employees, Powell's updated and expanded its employee handbook in April 1992 with changes that addressed processes for problem solving and grievances, the probation and termination procedure, and other employee assistance, among other changes.
In September 1998, email from Powell's managers announcing reductions in employee's wage increases prompted the creation of a new organizing committee of 26 employees.  They chose the International Longshore and Warehouse Union (ILWU) because they could charter their own self-governing local union which would include about 350 employees serving in a variety of jobs in all stores and in the Internet, corporate, and shipping departments. By March 1999, they filed for a union certification election with the National Labor Relations Board. A month later, by a vote of 161-155, ILWU Local 5 became official.
In September 1999, ILWU Local 5 met for the first time with Powell's management, to begin the contract bargaining process.  After some early successes, 2000 saw a slowdown in the discussions, followed by rallies, filings of unfair labor practices, an unsuccessful decertification campaign, a one-day shutdown of the shipping department (accompanied by the slashing of a van's tire), and federal mediation.  A three-year contract was finally announced in August 2000.
In February 2011 Powell's announced the layoffs of 31 employees, over 7 percent of its unionized workforce, in "response to the unprecedented, rapidly changing nature of the book industry". It was the first round of layoffs since the store's workers formed a union. A union representative said that Powell's had reduced its workforce by about 40 in the prior year through attrition, but felt that layoffs were still necessary because of a decline in sales of new books and a rise in health care costs.

List of locations

In addition to its "City of Books" location, Powell's Books also has several smaller stores: 






