[[Rey Mysterio]]

CATEGORIES: 1974 births, Living people, American male professional wrestlers, American people of Mexican descent, American professional wrestlers of Mexican descent, American Roman Catholics, Hispanic and Latino American sportspeople, The Latino World Order members, Masked wrestlers, Sportspeople from Chula Vista, California, Sportspeople from San Diego, California

Oscar Gutierrez (born December 11, 1974) is an American professional wrestler signed to WWE. Gutierrez was trained by his uncle Rey Misterio, Sr., learning the Lucha Libre high flying style that has been his trademark.
Gutierrez originally worked for Asistencia Asesoría y Administración (AAA) in Mexico, from 1992 to 1995. He wrestled in Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) from 1995 to 1996 and World Championship Wrestling (WCW) from 1996 to 2001, as Rey Misterio, Jr. or Rey Mysterio, Jr. ("Rey Misterio" is Spanish for "King Mystery") but dropped the "Junior" from his name when he began working for WWE in 2002.
Mysterio is known for having a high flying style, which helped kick-start the cruiserweight wrestling revolution in the United States in the late 1990s during his time in WCW. In WCW he won the WCW World Tag Team Championship three times, and the WCW Cruiserweight Tag Team Championship once with Billy Kidman as part of the Filthy Animals. In WWE, Mysterio is a three-time world champion, having held the World Heavyweight Championship twice and the WWE Championship once, and is currently listed as the lightest world champion in WWE history. He has also held the WWE Tag Team Championship a record-tying four times, and the WWE Intercontinental Championship twice. He also held the WCW/WWE Cruiserweight Championship a record eight times (five times in WCW, three in WWE). All totaled, he has won 21 titles between WWE and WCW. Mysterio was the 21st person to win the WWE Triple Crown Championship, and was the winner of the 2006 Royal Rumble.

Professional wrestling career

Early career

Gutierrez made his debut in Mexico on April 30, 1989 when he was only 14 years old. He was trained by his uncle Rey Misterio, Sr. and wrestled early on in Mexico where he learned the Lucha Libre high flying style that has been his trademark. He had ring names such as "La Lagartija Verde (The Green Lizard)" and "Colibrí" before his uncle gave him the name of Rey Misterio, Jr./Rey Mysterio, Jr. In 1989, Mysterio was awarded "Most Improved Wrestler" in Mexico while wrestling as Colibrí. In 1991 he received the award again, this time under the name of "Rey Misterio, Jr."

Asistencia Asesoría y Administración (1992–1995)

In Asistencia Asesoría y Administración (AAA), Mysterio feuded with Juventud Guerrera. Mysterio's uncle Misterio, Sr. also took on Guerrera in a tag match: Misterio, Sr. and Mysterio, Jr. facing Guerrera and his father Fuerza Guerrera. Mysterio commonly teamed with the similarly undersized high flyer known as Romy "Romeo" Magruder.

Extreme Championship Wrestling (1995–1996)

Mysterio signed with Paul Heyman's Extreme Championship Wrestling (ECW) in 1995. A feud between the two began, which included a two out of three falls match and a Mexican Death match. Mysterio also had a series of matches with ECW-newcomer Juventud Guerrera during the first half of 1996.

World Championship Wrestling (1996–2001)

=Cruiserweight division (1996–1999)=

Rey Mysterio, Jr. made his World Championship Wrestling (WCW) debut on June 16, 1996, at The Great American Bash, challenging Dean Malenko for the WCW Cruiserweight Championship, which Malenko retained by cheating to win. In July at Bash at the Beach, he defeated longtime rival Psicosis in a number one contender's match to earn another opportunity at the Cruiserweight title.
In early 1997, he feuded with Prince Iaukea over the WCW World Television Championship. Mysterio was defeated in his title match against Iaukea at SuperBrawl VII after Lord Steven Regal attacked him.
On the January 15, 1998, episode of WCW Thunder, Mysterio defeated Juventud to win his third Cruiserweight Championship, but lost it nine days later to Chris Jericho at Souled Out.

=Giant Killer and unmasking (1999)=

In 1999, after the two factions of nWo reformed, they demanded that the LWO disband. Mysterio refused to take off his LWO colors and was attacked by the nWo as a result. This led to a match at SuperBrawl IX where Mysterio and tag partner Konnan lost a "Hair vs. Mask match" against Kevin Nash and Scott Hall, forcing Mysterio to remove his mask. After the match, he phoned his uncle to tell him the news. Mysterio has publicly expressed his disappointment over being unmasked:

Mysterio later became a "giant killer" by defeating large opponents such as Kevin Nash, He faced Nash at Uncensored in a match where Lex Luger interfered and helped Nash in winning the match. Although he participated in several notable matches with some of the heavyweight top card wrestlers, it was made very clear to him that he would never receive a push to become a main eventer. This was due to Eric Bischoff utilizing cruiserweights as alternative, mid-card entertainment as opposed to the more conventional style that led WCW programming.
The next night on the March 15 Nitro, he defeated Billy Kidman to win his fifth Cruiserweight Championship.  On the March 22 Spring Breakout episode of Nitro, Mysterio got his first shot at the WCW World Heavyweight Championship against champion Ric Flair when the names of (allegedly) nearly everyone in the company were put into a hat and a lottery was held. El Dandy was the lottery winner, but he was injured, and Mysterio took the shot instead.  The match ended with a disqualification win for Flair, even though Arn Anderson's interference on Flair's behalf should have theoretically disqualified Flair.

=No Limit Soldiers and Filthy Animals (1999–2001)=

In mid-1999, Mysterio and Konnan joined Master P's No Limit Soldiers, and began feuding with the West Texas Rednecks. At The Great American Bash, they defeated Rednecks members Curt Hennig and Bobby Duncum, Jr. in a tag team match.
On the October 18 episode of Nitro, Mysterio and Konnan teamed up together to defeat Harlem Heat for the World Tag Team Championship. Mysterio, however, was injured during the match and was sidelined as a result. Billy Kidman substituted for Mysterio and teamed with Konnan during their title defense against Harlem Heat and The First Family, in which the Filthy Animals went on to lose the title back to Harlem Heat. Mysterio returned in early 2000 and remained a steady performer, eventually joining the New Blood faction in early 2000 opposing the Millionaire's Club.
At the beginning of 2001, the Filthy Animals feuded with Team Canada, to whom they lost in a Penalty Box match at Sin.

Return to Mexico and the independent circuit (2001–2002)

After WCW closed down, Mysterio started wrestling independently in Mexico with Billy Kidman. He made his first ever Consejo Mundial de Lucha Libre appearance, debuting in an eight-man tag team match. Mysterio wrestled a total of 10 matches in CMLL before returning to the United States. Upon his return to the USA, he worked in XWF, IWA Mid-South, and HWA, with the likes of Eddie Guerrero and CM Punk.

World Wrestling Entertainment/WWE

=Cruiserweight Champion (2002–2004)=

In June 2002, Mysterio signed with World Wrestling Entertainment (WWE), and promos that hyped his debut began airing. The "Jr." was dropped from his name and was billed simply as Rey Mysterio. At the insistence of Vince McMahon, Mysterio agreed to wear his mask again. While this angered lucha libre fans in Mexico as it violated tradition, Mysterio did receive permission from the official luche libre organizations to wear his mask again, as he had not lost his mask in a traditional mask vs. mask match.onlineworldofwrestling. However, when WWE Classics on Demand rebroadcast WCW Sin in April 2013, a match featuring Mysterio unmasked was left intact.
Mysterio made his WWE debut on the July 25, 2002, episode of SmackDown! as a fan favorite in a match against Chavo Guerrero, which Mysterio won. Shortly after the loss, Mysterio and Edge disbanded as a tag team.
On the March 6, 2003, episode of SmackDown!, Mysterio defeated Tajiri and Jamie Noble in a Triple Threat match to earn a shot at the WWE Cruiserweight Championship.

=Tag Team Champion and storyline with Eddie Guerrero (2004–2006)=

After an unsuccessful attempt at regaining the Cruiserweight Title, Mysterio formed a tag team with Rob Van Dam, and went on to win the Tag Team Championship from Kenzo Suzuki and René Dupreé on the December 9 episode of SmackDown!.
Mysterio then teamed up with Eddie Guerrero to win the Tag Team Championship back from the Bashams at No Way Out. During this time Rey had a video camera, which was called the "619 cam", during his entrance he taped members of the audience with this. In a departure from traditional booking, the new champions did not defend their title at WrestleMania 21, but instead had a match against each other which Rey won. Two months later, at ECW One Night Stand, Mysterio faced and defeated long-time rival Psicosis for the first time in nearly five years.
The match at WrestleMania was part of a storyline in which Guerrero turned on Mysterio and beat him up after abandoning him during a match against MNM for the Tag Team Championship. Then after a no disqualification match against Chavo, Eddie came out and slammed Mysterio on the steel steps, displaying Eddie's increasing frustration with being unable to defeat Mysterio. Guerrero and Mysterio continued to feud, with Guerrero threatening to reveal a secret he and Mysterio shared involving Mysterio's real life son Dominick, unless Mysterio deferred to Guerrero's authority. Guerrero later revealed that, in the storyline, he was Dominick's biological father. The storyline went that Guerrero knew Mysterio was having trouble starting his own family, so Guerrero left Dominick as a baby with Mysterio and his wife Angie to raise. In subsequent weeks, Guerrero threatened to take custody of Dominick, drawing up custody papers and having his lawyer present them to Mysterio. At SummerSlam, Mysterio defeated Guerrero in a ladder match for the custody of Dominick. Their feud ended when Guerrero gained a victory over Mysterio in a steel cage match. On November 13, 2005, Eddie Guerrero was found dead in his hotel room in Minneapolis, Minnesota. That same day at a WWE "Super Show" where SmackDown! and Raw were both taped, Mysterio gave an emotional speech about Guerrero, and in a show of respect removed his mask (though he put his head down, so no one could see his face). Mysterio went on to defeat Shawn Michaels in an interpromotional match later that night. After the match, Michaels and Mysterio hugged in the ring and Mysterio pointed up to the sky, crying, in memory of Guerrero.
Mysterio participated in the main event of Survivor Series as part of Team SmackDown! along with Randy Orton, Bobby Lashley, Batista, and John "Bradshaw" Layfield who defeated Team Raw (Shawn Michaels, Kane, The Big Show, Carlito, and Chris Masters). After Survivor Series, Mysterio faced Big Show in a match billed as "David vs. Goliath" in a SmackDown! special show. The match stemmed from Mysterio eliminating Big Show at Survivor Series, and ended as a "no contest" when Big Show's tag team partner Kane interfered in the match. Mysterio continued to feud with Raw's World Tag Team Champions, and found a tag team partner in World Heavyweight Champion Batista. They were booked to face Raw's Kane and The Big Show in a tag match at Armageddon. Before Armageddon, Batista and Mysterio defeated MNM on the December 19 episode of SmackDown! to win the Tag Team Championship in a match they both dedicated to Eddie Guerrero. Now the Tag Team Champions, Mysterio and Batista's match with Big Show and Kane was billed as "Champions vs. Champions." Mysterio and Batista lost the match when Kane pinned Mysterio after a chokeslam. On the December 30 episode of SmackDown!, MNM invoked their rematch clause, defeating Batista and Mysterio with help from Mark Henry to regain the Tag Team Championship. Mysterio and Batista lost a Steel Cage match for the title the next week, after more interference by Henry. On the January 10, 2006, episode of SmackDown!, Mysterio was involved in a 20-man battle royal for the vacant World Heavyweight Championship. He was eliminated by Mark Henry, Kurt Angle won the match, last eliminating Henry.

=World Heavyweight Champion (2006–2008)=

Mysterio was the second entrant in the 2006 Royal Rumble match. He won the match and earned a world title shot, last eliminating Randy Orton. He lasted 62 minutes, a Royal Rumble record.
Mysterio quickly moved into a feud with the United States Champion John "Bradshaw" Layfield and Mysterio. The rivalry kicked off after JBL, celebrating his U.S. Championship win, stated he deserved the World Heavyweight title. At One Night Stand, Mysterio retained the title, after he and Sabu were ruled unable to continue following a triple jump DDT through a table by Sabu. Mysterio then retained his title in a match against Mark Henry, winning by disqualification after Chavo Guerrero handed Henry a chair and Mysterio acted as if he was hit, a tactic for which Eddie Guerrero was known.
Mysterio began a feud with King Booker after Booker won a battle royal to become the number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship.
Mysterio made his in-ring return at SummerSlam, defeating Guerrero with the 619, after Guerrero obsessed over Mysterio's return as well as wanting to injure Mysterio again.
Mysterio then began a feud with Finlay, an opponent chosen by JBL.
He re-entered the world title picture when he emerged victorious in the Beat the Clock challenge for the chance to face the World Heavyweight Champion Edge at Royal Rumble.

=Championship reigns and various feuds (2008–2011)=

Mysterio made his return on the June 23, 2008, episode of Raw, as the first wrestler to be drafted in the 2008 WWE Draft from SmackDown to the Raw brand. Mysterio began a feud with Kane which lasted until November. Mysterio put his mask on the line in a singles match at No Mercy, which he won by disqualification after Kane attacked him with a steel chair. He defeated Kane again at Cyber Sunday, this time in a No Holds Barred match, and at Survivor Series, when the pair were on opposing sides in a five-on-five elimination match, won by Mysterio's team.
Mysterio participated in the 2009 Royal Rumble match, entering first and spending 49 minutes and 24 seconds in the match, before being eliminated by the Big Show. The following night on Raw, he qualified for the Elimination Chamber match for the World Heavyweight Championship at No Way Out, but was eliminated by Edge in the Chamber match. Later, Mysterio accepted John "Bradshaw" Layfield's (JBL) challenge for Layfield's Intercontinental Championship at WrestleMania XXV, which Mysterio won in 21 seconds. His win made Mysterio the twenty-first Triple Crown Champion in WWE history.
Mysterio was drafted back to SmackDown! during the 2009 WWE Draft on the April 13 episode of Raw, in the process making the Intercontinental Title exclusive to SmackDown for the first time since mid-2002. Mysterio stated that he had a prescription for the drug, but was unable to produce it in time to prevent his suspension due to being on vacation and doing a promotional tour. On the September 4 episode of SmackDown (taped on September 1), Mysterio lost the Intercontinental Championship to John Morrison.
Mysterio returned from his suspension at Hell in a Cell, teaming with former tag team partner Batista to face Jeri-Show (Chris Jericho and Big Show) for the Unified Tag Team Championships. They failed to win the titles, as Mysterio was KO punched and pinned by Big Show. The following week in a re-match, Mysterio defeated Batista in a Steel Cage match, but failed to win the championship at the Royal Rumble.
Following the Rumble, Mysterio qualified for an Elimination Chamber match for the World Heavyweight Championship at the Elimination Chamber pay-per-view. In the weeks preceding the event, Mysterio began a feud with CM Punk that also involved Punk's Straight Edge Society. During the Elimination Chamber match, Mysterio eliminated Punk, but was ultimately eliminated by John Morrison. Mysterio continued to feud with Punk, costing him a Money in the Bank qualifying match and defeating SES member Luke Gallows. During the on-screen celebration of Mysterio's daughter's ninth birthday, Punk interrupted, taunting Mysterio and challenging him to a match at WrestleMania XXVI, which Mysterio later accepted. Punk later added the stipulation that if Mysterio were to lose at WrestleMania, he would be forced to join the SES. However Mysterio defeated Punk at WrestleMania. Five days later on SmackDown, Punk challenged Mysterio to another match at Extreme Rules, with the stipulation that if Mysterio won, Punk would have his head shaved. At Extreme Rules, Mysterio lost to Punk. At Over the Limit, Mysterio faced CM Punk again with both previous stipulations in place (Mysterio's allegiance to The SES vs Punk's hair.) Mysterio defeated Punk, resulting in Punk's hair being shaved.
On the May 28 episode of SmackDown, Mysterio unsuccessfully fought The Undertaker to qualify for the World Heavyweight Championship title match at Fatal 4-Way. The Undertaker suffered a legitimate injury during the match, and a storyline was introduced to explain his absence on television, stating he had been found in a vegetative state by his brother Kane. On June 4 Mysterio won a Battle Royal to earn The Undertaker's place at Fatal 4-Way by last eliminating Kane, and went on to win the World Heavyweight Championship for the second time. At Money in the Bank, Mysterio defeated Swagger to retain the World title, however Swagger attacked him after the match. Kane, the cashed in his Money in the Bank ladder match title shot and quickly defeated Mysterio to win the World Heavyweight Championship. Kane later blamed Mysterio for The Undertaker's fictional injuries. On the July 20 episode of SmackDown, Mysterio defeated Swagger in a two out of three falls match to remain the number one contender for the World Heavyweight Championship, earning a title match against Kane at SummerSlam. Kane defeated Mysterio at SummerSlam, and The Undertaker returned to exonerate Mysterio.
On the August 20 episode of SmackDown, he lost to the debuting Alberto Del Rio by submission. At Bragging Rights, Mysterio represented Team SmackDown, and despite being attacked by teammate Del Rio, he and Edge managed to defeat the rest of Team Raw, giving Team SmackDown the victory. At Survivor Series, Mysterio led a team to victory over Team Del Rio, and at Tables, Ladders & Chairs, both were part of a fatal four-way match for the World Heavyweight Championship, won by Edge. His feud with Del Rio which culminated on the January 7, 2011, episode of SmackDown in a two out of three falls match, which Del Rio won by countout.
On the January 21 episode of SmackDown, Mysterio defeated Cody Rhodes. During the match, he broke Rhodes' nose when he hit Rhodes with a 619 with his exposed knee brace, thus sparking a feud.
In the 2011 WWE Draft, Mysterio was drafted back to Raw. On the May 9 episode of Raw, Mysterio lost a Triple Threat match to determine the number one contender for the WWE Championship. Following the match, Mysterio was attacked by R-Truth,

=Injuries and various tag teams (2011–present)=

Mysterio suffered an injury in late August 2011, and a storyline was put in place to write Mysterio off television, by blaming Alberto Del Rio.
After an absence of almost a year, Mysterio returned on the July 16, 2012, episode of Raw, saving Zack Ryder from his old rival, Alberto Del Rio.
The following night on Raw, Mysterio and Sin Cara teamed up to defeat Epico and Primo in a tag team match, after which they were attacked by the Prime Time Players (Darren Young and Titus O'Neil).
After eight months, Mysterio returned at a WWE live event on October 17, 2013, and returned to television as part of the Spanish commentary team at Hell in a Cell. On the November 18 episode of Raw, Mysterio saved CM Punk and Daniel Bryan from an attack by The Wyatt Family and The Real Americans (Jack Swagger and Antonio Cesaro), which led to a 10 man elimination tag team match at Survivor Series, but Mysterio's team lost. At TLC: Tables, Ladders and Chairs Mysterio teamed with Big Show to unsuccessfully challenge Cody Rhodes and Goldust for the WWE Tag Team Championship in a four-way match, also involving Ryback and Curtis Axel, and The Real Americans. At the Royal Rumble pay-per-view on January 26, 2014, Mysterio entered the Royal Rumble match at #30, but was eliminated by Seth Rollins. At WrestleMania XXX, Mysterio competed in the André the Giant Memorial Battle Royal but was eliminated by Cesaro.

Other media

Mysterio has been a subject of several DVDs during his wrestling career, including Rey Mysterio: 619, a 2003 documentary of Mysterio's career and personal life. WWE also produced Rey Mysterio: The Biggest Little Man, a three disc set featuring Mysterio's best matches that was released on October 23, 2007. He was also featured on the DVD Before They Were Wrestling Stars: Rey Mysterio Jr. in 2007 which featured matches from his time in Mexico. Rey Mysterio: The Life of a Masked Man  was issued on July 12, 2011. In the UK, Silver Vision released a Rey Mysterio DVD as part of their Best of WWE collection. This featured his matches from SummerSlam 2005, Wrestlemania 22, No Mercy 2006, and SummerSlam 2007.

Books

| ref=
| last1=Mysterio|first1=Rey
| last2=Roberts |first2=Jeremy
| title=Rey Mysterio: Behind the Mask
| publisher=WWE Books (Pocket Books)
| location=New York City
| date=November 2009
| pages=368pp
| nopp=y
| lastauthoramp=n}} ISBN 978-1-4165-9896-1

Music

Mysterio, along with rapper Mad One, performed the entrance song Booyaka, which Mysterio used as his theme between October 2005 and March 2006. Mysterio also performed a rap song, called "Crossing Borders", which appears on the album WWE Originals.

Personal life

Gutierrez and his wife Angie have two children: one son, Dominik, born 1997 and a daughter, Aalyah, born 2001. He is a devout Roman Catholic, frequently crossing himself before every match and bearing numerous religious tattoos on his body, most notably a cross on his chest attached to rosaries as well as other crosses and allusions to God.
On March 19, 2007, Sports Illustrated posted on its website an article in its continuing series investigating a steroid and HGH ring used by a number of professional athletes in several sports. That article mentioned several current and former WWE wrestlers, including Gutierrez who was alleged to have obtained nandrolone and stanozolol.

In wrestling

Championships and accomplishments

Luchas de Apuestas record

Notes






