[[Oliver Mowat]]

CATEGORIES: 1820 births, 1903 deaths, Attorneys General of Ontario, Lawyers in Ontario, Canadian Queen's Counsel, Canadian Presbyterians, Canadian senators from Ontario, Fathers of Confederation, Knights Grand Cross of the Order of St Michael and St George, Canadian knights, Leaders of the Ontario Liberal Party, Liberal Party of Canada senators, Lieutenant Governors of Ontario, Members of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada, Members of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada, Premiers of Ontario, People from Kingston, Ontario, Pre-Confederation Ontario people, Persons of National Historic Significance (Canada)

Sir Oliver Mowat, 

Early years

Mowat was born in Kingston, Ontario to John Mowat and Helen Levack. As a youth, he had taken up arms with the royalists during the Upper Canada Rebellion of 1837, which suggested a conservative inclination in politics. However, he did not trust the politics of Macdonald, George-Étienne Cartier, or the other leaders of the Conservative Party and instead joined the Reformers.
Before entering politics, Mowat trained as a lawyer, and, on January 27, 1836, Mowat, not yet sixteen years old, articled in the law office of John A. Macdonald.  He was called to the bar on November 5, 1841. In 1846, he married Jane Ewart, a daughter of John Ewart of Toronto. Mowat and his wife had three sons and four daughters. In 1856 Mowat was appointed Queen's Counsel.

Political career

Before Confederation

He first entered politics as an alderman of the City of Toronto in 1857. From there, he became a member of the Legislative Assembly for South Ontario.
As a member of the Legislative Assembly of the Province of Canada from 1858 to 1864, he was closely associated with George Brown and served as Provincial Secretary (1858) and Postmaster-General (1863–1864) in pre-Confederation government (the John Sandfield Macdonald administration) and was also an avid supporter of representation by population.  With Brown, he helped create what became the Ontario Liberal Party as well as the Liberal Party of Canada.
Mowat was a member of the Great Coalition government of 1864 and was a representative at that year's Quebec Conference, where he helped work out the division of powers between the federal and provincial governments. On November 14, 1864, he was appointed to the judiciary as Vice-Chancellor of the Court of Chancery of Upper Canada,which became part of the Supreme Court of Ontario in 1881 a position he held until he was appointed premier on October 25, 1872. One of the more notable cases during his time on the Court was Dickson v. Burnham in 1868, whose underlying jurisprudence would be altered during his later time as Premier, with the passage of the Rivers and Streams Act, 1884.O. 1884, c. 17

Premier and Attorney-General of Ontario

As premier in the 1880s a series of disputes with the Dominion arose over Provincial boundaries, and other matters. These court battles were won by Mowat, resulting in a weakening of the power of the federal government in provincial matters. Although Macdonald had dismissed him as "Blake's jackal," Mowat's battles with the federal government greatly decentralized Canada, giving the provinces far more power than Macdonald had intended.
He also served as his own  Attorney-General concurrently with his service as Premier, and introduced reforms such as the secret ballot in elections and the extension of suffrage beyond property owners. He also introduced laws regulating liquor and consolidated the law relating to the municipal level of government. His policies, particularly regarding liquor regulation and separate schools, routinely drew criticism from political conservatives, including the Orange Lodge and its associated newspaper, The Sentinel.
George William Ross praised Mowat's ability to read the public mind, and John Stephen Willison remarked that his political genius rose from "the fact that for so long he had a generous support from the liquor interest and a still more generous support from Prohibitionists."
His government was moderate and attempted to cut across divisions in the province between Roman Catholics and Protestants as well as between country and city. He also oversaw the northward expansion of Ontario's boundaries and the development of its natural resources, as well as the emergence of the province into the economic powerhouse of Canada.Canadian Encyclopedia

At the federal level

In 1896 the leader of the opposition, Wilfrid Laurier, convinced Mowat to enter federal politics. It was thought that the combination of a French Canadian (Laurier) and the prestige of Sir Oliver Mowat in Ontario would be a winning ticket for the Liberal party. The slogan was "Laurier, Mowat and Victory".  Victory was won, and Mowat became Minister of Justice and Senator.
In 1897 he was appointed the eighth Lieutenant Governor of Ontario and served until his death in office in 1903. He is buried in Mount Pleasant Cemetery, Toronto.

Family

Mowat's daughter, Jane Helen Mowat, married Charles Robert Webster Biggar, and their son Oliver Mowat Biggar became Canada's first Chief Electoral Officer.
Mowat was also the great-great-uncle of Canadian author Farley Mowat.

Other achievements

Mowat was knighted in 1892.
Mowat was himself the author of two small books in the field of Christian apologetics:

Legacy

After his death, Wilfrid Laurier placed Mowat's policy of sectarian tolerance second in historical importance only to his role in giving confederation "Its character as a federal compact." He credited Mowat with giving Ontario "a Government which can be cited as a model for all Governments: a Government which was honest, progressive, courageous, and tolerant."
By nature a secretive individual, he left instructions in his will that resulted in the destruction of nearly all his papers.
The Sir Oliver Mowat Collegiate Institute in Toronto was named in his honour.
Mowat was portrayed by David Onley (the 28th Lieutenant-Governor of Ontario) in the Canadian TV series Murdoch Mysteries in 2013 in the episode "The Ghost of Queens Park."



Further reading









