[[Regional Municipality of York]]

CATEGORIES: High schools in York Region, Populated places established in 1971, York Region, Municipalities in York Region

The Regional Municipality of York, also called York Region, is a regional municipality in Southern Ontario, Canada, between Lake Simcoe and Toronto. It replaced the former York County in 1971, and is part of the Greater Toronto Area and the inner ring of the Golden Horseshoe. The regional government is headquartered in Newmarket.
The 2011 census population was 1,032,524, surpassing the population mark of one million. At the Canada 2006 Census, 50,815 residents inhabited rural areas in the municipality, and 841,897 resided in urban areas. Its growth rate of 22.4% from 2001 to 2006 was the third highest amongst all census divisions in Canada, and the Government of Ontario expects its population to surpass 1.5 million residents by 2031.

Geography

York Region covers 1,762 square kilometres from Lake Simcoe in the north to the city of Toronto in the south. Its eastern border is shared with Durham Region, to the west is Peel Region, and Simcoe County is to the northwest. A detailed map of the region showing its major roads, communities and points of interest is available.
Towns and cities in York Region include:
There is also one First Nation with an Indian reserve, where the Chippewas of Georgina Island First Nation reside.
York Region's landscape includes farmlands, wetlands and kettle lakes, the Oak Ridges Moraine and over 2,070 hectares of regional forest, in addition to the built-up areas of its municipalities.

Climate

York Region is situated on a humid continental climate (Köppen Dfa/Dfb/Cfa/Cfb) with warm summers and cold winters.

Government

The region is governed by a group known as York Regional Council, which consists of 20 elected representatives from each of the constituent towns and cities in the region, including each of the nine mayors and 11 regional councillors, who are elected from the constituent municipalities as follows:
The leader of Council is referred to as "Regional Chair and CEO". Bill Fisch currently holds this office.
In October 2008, the York Regional Municipality was named one of Greater Toronto's Top Employers by Mediacorp Canada Inc.

Federal and provincial representation

York Region encompasses all or part of the federal electoral districts of Markham—Unionville, Newmarket—Aurora, Oak Ridges—Markham, Richmond Hill, Thornhill, Vaughan and York—Simcoe. The same districts are used to elect representatives federally in the Canadian House of Commons and provincially in the Legislative Assembly of Ontario.

Economy

The economy of York Region is diverse. In general, the economy includes a full range of businesses from industrial to high-tech to rural / agricultural.  New developments continually consume space year after and are especially focused along the Yonge Street corridor from Vaughan/Richmond Hill in the south to Newmarket/Aurora in the north.  There are ongoing conflicts between conservationists and developers over land use. Most contentious is the conflict use of the Oak Ridges Moraine.

Shopping

Major shopping centres located in York Region include:

Health Care

There are currently three hospitals within the Municipality of York including:
All three hospitals are part of the Local Health Integration Network (LHIN) Hospital Partnerships.
During the summer of 2011, Mackenzie Vaughan Hospital is proposed and approved by the Minister of Health and Long-Term Care, Deb Matthews, to be constructed. The hospital site is proposed within the City of Vaughan at Major Mackenzie Drive on the east side of Highway 400. Current plans include a new $80 million building.
In April 2013, Counselling Services for York Region opened Ontario's first Cognitive Behavioural Therapy Clinic. The clinic specializes in offering a specialized empirically supported form of individual and group therapy.

Transportation

The arterial road network in York Region is a grid, with most roads running north-south or east-west. This was done under the orders of British surveyor Augustus Jones during the 1790s. York Region assigned approximately 50 roads as York Regional Routes, meaning that the cost of maintaining of these roads is paid for by York Region.
The major highways in the Region are:
Former highways include:

Air transportation

Most air travel is served by Toronto Pearson International Airport, Canada's largest airport. Buttonville Municipal Airport is a regional airport in Markham, used for general aviation and business aircraft.  There are also a few unpaved airports serving the region. Hare Field is located in Holland Landing (East Gwillimbury) and Belhaven Airport is located in Georgina.

Public transportation

York Region is served by:
Until 2001, the towns of York Region operated separate public transit services, which did not connect very well with each other.  YRT was created by the Regional Government to combine five of these services:
Since 2001, bus routes have been extensively enhanced in the five communities which had pre-existing services, but YRT's services to East Gwillimbury is limited to two routes, and service to King, Georgina and Whitchurch-Stouffville are even more limited due to the relatively sparse populations in each of those towns.

Water

Water in southern York is provided by Toronto Water and Peel Region by way of 3 pumping stations and reservoirs (Bayview, Dufferin and Milliken (tank and underground reservoir)) using water from Lake Ontario.york.htm Keswick and Sutton obtain water from Lake Simcoe by way of water treatment plants. The remainder of York obtains water from a combination of water from Lake Ontario and underground wells. Some wells are maintained by the Region and the rest privately.
Water is distributed from 14 water pumping stations and stored at 37 elevated tanks and reservoirs:

List of water tanks

Treatment Plants

Education

Public schools, with classes up to grade 12, are administered by the York Region District School Board, which operates 180 schools.  In addition, the York Catholic District School Board operates 95 schools with a curriculum based in Roman Catholic doctrine.
Seneca College of Applied Arts and Technology has three campuses located in York Region, in King, Markham and Newmarket.  There is currently no university presence in York Region, however, York University is located just outside of York Region's southern border in Toronto.
In addition, there are many other religious and private schools located in the Region.  These include:

News media

York's news media is also served by the outlets based in Toronto.

Attractions

York Region has an unusual assortment of points of interest, ranging from nature reserves to pioneer-era museums, to a modern amusement park.
In Vaughan, the major attractions include the McMichael Canadian Art Collection, located in the community of Kleinburg and features works by Canadian artists including Inuit and First Nations artists.  Canada's Wonderland, which features roller coasters and other rides, concerts and fireworks shows, is also in Vaughan.
Heritage sites and historical museums in the Region include:
Following is a sample of other attractions in the area:

Protected areas

Sister city

The Region of York signed a "Twinning Agreement" with the city of Omsk, Russia, on August 28, 1997, after it signed a "Friendship Agreement" one year previous.

Demographics

The Regional Municipality of York is one of the fastest growing census divisions in Canada; from 2001 to 2006, its population increased by 22.4%. The 2009 mid-year population estimate by Statistics Canada was 1,016,379 residents. It is the third-largest census division in Ontario, next to that of Toronto and Peel Region, and seventh-largest in Canada. Its population density of 506.7 residents per square kilometre is 11th highest in Canada.
According to the Canada 2006 Census:
According to the 2006 census visible minorities comprised 37.2% of the population of York Region.
According to the Canada 2001 Census:

Adjacent census divisions





Notes




