[[Adam Oates]]

CATEGORIES: 1962 births, Living people, Adirondack Red Wings players, Boston Bruins players, Canadian ice hockey centres, Detroit Red Wings players, Edmonton Oilers players, Hockey Hall of Fame inductees, Ice hockey people from Ontario, Mighty Ducks of Anaheim players, National Hockey League All-Stars, New Jersey Devils coaches, People from Weston, Toronto, Philadelphia Flyers players, RPI Engineers men's ice hockey players, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute alumni, St. Louis Blues players, Tampa Bay Lightning coaches, Undrafted National Hockey League players, Washington Capitals coaches, Washington Capitals captains, Washington Capitals players

Adam Robert Oates (born August 27, 1962) is a Canadian former professional ice hockey player and coach. He played 19 seasons in the National Hockey League (NHL) for the Detroit Red Wings, St. Louis Blues, Boston Bruins, Washington Capitals, Philadelphia Flyers, Mighty Ducks of Anaheim and Edmonton Oilers. Known as an elite playmaker, his career total of 1,079 assists was the fifth highest total in NHL history at the time of his 2004 retirement. After retiring as a player, he served as an assistant coach for the Tampa Bay Lightning and New Jersey Devils prior to joining the Capitals as their head coach for two seasons between 2012 and 2014.
As a college player, Oates was a standout forward for the RPI Engineers. He set single-season school records for assists and points and was named an Eastern College Athletic Conference (ECAC) all-star and National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) All-American in both 1984 and 1985. He was named a tournament all-star in helping RPI win the 1985 national championship, and in 1990–91, the NHL included him in its Second All-Star Team; he played in five All-Star Games.  He holds the record for most points all-time of any NHL player who also played NCAA Hockey.  Oates was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame on November 12, 2012 along with Joe Sakic, Pavel Bure, and Mats Sundin.

Early life

Oates was born August 27, 1962, in Weston, Ontario. As the league's leading scorer, he won the Bobby Allan Award and in one game that season, set OLA Junior A single-game records of 19 assists and 29 points. Oates played one season of Senior A with the Brampton Excelsiors of Major Series Lacrosse but left the game in 1984 to focus on his hockey career.
Describing his younger self as being a "punk", Oates said he partied frequently. He dropped out of high school to focus on hockey and ended up working as a gas station attendant at 19. He returned to high school to complete his diploma when he was recruited to play for Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI).

Playing career

College

RPI's assistant coach Paul Allen noticed Oates during a 1982 OPJAHL game while scouting a different player and offered him a position on the school's team.  After scoring 42 points in 22 games in his freshman season of 1982–83, he spent the summer working with a skating instructor to improve his foot speed. In 1983–84, he set school records in points with 83 and assists with 57.  He was named to the East Coast Athletic Conference (ECAC) second all-star team and became the first RPI hockey player to earn a berth on the National Collegiate Athletic Association (NCAA) All-American team since 1965.
In 1984–85, Oates broke his own school records by recording 60 assists and 91 points. His career total of 150 assists remains a school record  Oates was voted to the ECAC's all-decade team of the 1980s. He was inducted into RPI's Athletics Hall of Fame, and was named the inaugural member of the hockey team's Ring of Honor in 2004.

Detroit and St. Louis

NHL teams took interest in Oates following his junior season; at least five teams attempted to sign him. Choosing to forgo his final year of college eligibility, Oates signed a four-year, $1.1 million contract with the Detroit Red Wings that made him the highest paid rookie in the NHL in 1985–86. Oates split the remainder of the season between Detroit and Adirondack, finishing his first NHL season with 38 games played, 9 goals and 11 assists. In the AHL, he scored 18 goals and 28 assists in 34 games. Having finished the NHL season in Detroit, he was returned to Adirondack for the AHL playoffs which the team won to take the Calder Cup championship.
Oates established himself as a full-time NHLer in 1986–87, scoring 47 points in 76 games.  He improved to 54 points in 63 games the following year despite missing a month due to a groin injury, The deal, which is now considered one of the worst in Red Wings' history, left Oates "heartbroken" to leave his first NHL club.
The Blues made Oates their first-line centre and played him alongside Brett Hull.  The pair, dubbed "Hull and Oates" as a play on the band Hall and Oates, put up prolific offensive numbers. Oates was named to the second all-star team following the season and played in the 1991 All-Star Game.
Oates signed a four-year, $3 million contract extension with the Blues prior to the 1991–92 NHL season, but after the team signed Brendan Shanahan, Garth Butcher and Ron Sutter to significant deals, felt he was underpaid.

Boston and Washington

Oates' best individual season came in his first full year in Boston.  He led the league with 97 assists in 1992–93 and finished third in overall scoring with 142 points.
A finger injury suffered during the 1994 Stanley Cup Playoffs hampered Oates throughout 1994–95 and required surgery at the season's conclusion.
Less than two weeks after his tirade, on March 1, 1997, the Bruins dealt him to the Washington Capitals.  In the trade, Oates, Bill Ranford and Rick Tocchet went to Washington in exchange for Jim Carey, Anson Carter, Jason Allison and a draft pick. Oates initially refused to report to Washington, demanding that his contract be renegotiated, but chose to join the team after a four-day holdout.
Oates became the 47th player in NHL history, and the 15th fastest, to score his 1,000th career point on October 7, 1997 against the New York Islanders.  He reached the milestone by scoring a hat trick and adding two assists for the sixth five-point game of his career. He finished the 1997–98 season as the team leader with 56 assists, and second to Peter Bondra in team scoring with 78 points.
The Capitals named Oates the ninth captain in franchise history prior to the 1999–2000 season, following the departure of his predecessor, Dale Hunter.

Philadelphia, Anaheim and Edmonton

With Washington out of playoff contention late in the 2001–02 season and with his contract expiring following the season, the Capitals dealt Oates to the Philadelphia Flyers on March 19, 2002, in exchange for goaltender Maxime Ouellet and the Flyers' first, second and third round selections in the 2002 NHL Entry Draft. The Flyers hoped that bringing Oates in would solidify their playoff chances.
The Flyers chose not to offer Oates a new contract following the loss, making him an unrestricted free agent. He signed a $3.5 million contract for the 2002–03 season, with an option for 2003–04, with the Mighty Ducks of Anaheim on July 1, 2002.
The Mighty Ducks declined their option on the 41-year-old Oates' contract, again making him a free agent. He remained unsigned six weeks into the 2003–04 season, until he agreed to a one-year contract with the Edmonton Oilers on November 17, 2003.

Playing style


Oates was one of the NHL's great playmakers, a style that he credits his father as encouraging: "It was just kind of our family talks: 'If you can be unselfish, your teammates will always like you.' And it just kind of became my role, where I was obviously trying to please my dad, growing up and becoming a playmaker out of that." Oates' father, a British immigrant, idolized Stanley Matthews, considered one of the greatest soccer players of all time and hoped that his son would adopt a pass-first mentality similar to Matthews.
He led the NHL in assists three times – 1992–93, 2000–01 and 2001–02 – and finished in the top ten on 12 occasions. He is also the only player in NHL history to centre three 50-goal scorers, helping Brett Hull, Cam Neely and Peter Bondra reach the mark.  His teammates praised his consistency, noting that Oates continued to score points at an elite level when he did not have star players as linemates.  Boston teammate Raymond Bourque suggested in 1994 that Oates was underrated: "I think a lot of people take what he does for granted. He does it in a quiet way. He's not a flashy guy. He's not looking for attention, he just goes out and does it. He's the best centerman I've been around. I never knew he was this good playing against him because I didn't see him this much." Oates was able to score himself, reaching the 20 goal mark five times, including a career high 45 in 1992–93, a season in which he led the league with 11 game-winning goals.
At the time of Oates' retirement, his 1,420 points was the 13th highest total in NHL history, and his 1,079 assists ranked 5th. He played in a total of five NHL All-Star Games and was a six-time finalist for the Lady Byng Memorial Trophy for sportsmanship and gentlemanly conduct on the ice. Oates was inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame as part of its 2012 class.

Coaching career

The Tampa Bay Lightning hired Oates as an assistant coach in the 2009–10 season where he worked with the team's offense.
The same day that he was elected to the Hockey Hall of Fame, June 26, 2012, Oates returned to Washington, where he was named the 16th head coach in franchise history, succeeding Dale Hunter who had decided not to renew his contract. 
When the NHL resumed for an abbreviated 2012–13 season, Oates and the Capitals struggled initially and won only two of their first 11 games. The team improved throughout the season, however, and went from last place in the Southeast Division to first; they won 15 of their final 19 games to win the division title.
The Capitals struggled throughout the 2013–14 season and faced increasing discontent from the fans as the team had failed to advance far into the playoffs in 16 years.

Personal life

Although Oates left RPI after three years to begin his professional hockey career, he continued his studies during the off-seasons.  He earned a Bachelor of Science degree in management from the school in 1991. While a member of the Bruins, Oates also worked for a brief time with the investment firm Boston Capital Partners. He is a co-founder of sporting apparel retailer Old Time Hockey, a company that donates a portion of all sales to the NHL emergency assistance fund.
His parents are David and Loretta, and he has two sisters: Michelle and Laurel. Oates was once engaged to model and actress Darlene Vogel, however the couple cancelled their planned 1998 marriage at the last moment. Oates and his wife, Donna, spend their summers in California.

Career statistics

Regular season and playoffs

Coaching

Awards and honours








