[[Terminator (franchise)]]

CATEGORIES: 1984 introductions, Action films by series, Apocalyptic fiction, Artificial uterus in fiction, Artificial intelligence in fiction, Cyborgs in fiction, Media franchises, Science fiction films by series, Terminator (franchise), Time travel in fiction



The Terminator series is a science fiction franchise encompassing a series of films and additional media concerning battles between Skynet's artificially intelligent machine network, and John Connor's Resistance forces and the rest of the human race.
Skynet's most well-known products in its genocidal goals are the various terminator models, such as the original "Terminator" character, portrayed by Arnold Schwarzenegger in the first film. Schwarzenegger also portrayed other Terminator characters; however, it is made clear that these are different units. The latest film in the franchise is Terminator Salvation, released in 2009 while Terminator: Genesis, the reboot of the series, is due for release in 2015.

Premise

The central theme of the franchise is the battle for survival between the human race and the self-aware artificial intelligence that is Skynet. Skynet is positioned in the first film as a U.S. strategic defense computer system by Cyberdyne Systems which becomes self-aware and, on perceiving all humans as a threat, seeks to wipe out humanity itself. It initiates a nuclear first strike against Russia, ensuring a devastating counter strike and a nuclear holocaust, wiping out much of humanity instantly. In the post-apocalyptic aftermath, Skynet builds up its own autonomous machine-based military capability, which includes the Terminators used against individual human targets, and proceeds to fight a war against the surviving elements of humanity, some of whom have organized militarily into the Resistance. At some point in this future, Skynet develops the ability of time travel, and both it and the Resistance seek to use it to win the war by preventing or forestalling their present timeline.
 Judgment Day === 
In the franchise, Judgment Day (a reference to the biblical Day of Judgment) is referred to as the date on which Skynet becomes self-aware, decides to exterminate mankind, and launches the attack on Russia. Due to the element of time travel and the consequent ability to change the future, several dates are given for Judgment Day during the franchise. In Terminator 2: Judgment Day, Sarah states that Judgment Day will occur on August 29, 1997. However, Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines shows that the Judgment Day holocaust has been postponed to July 25, 2004. In Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles, Judgment Day was delayed to April 21, 2011, due to the attack on Cyberdyne Systems in T2.
The passing of the final date for Judgment Day on April 21, 2011, prompted BBC News to pose the question, "How close were the Terminator films to the reality of 2011?", comparing how far present day technology and society had developed compared to the predictions of the franchise.

Films

The Terminator

The Terminator is a 1984 science fiction film released by Orion Pictures, co-written and directed by James Cameron and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton and Michael Biehn. It is the first work in the Terminator franchise. In the film, machines take over the world in the near future, directed by the artificial intelligence Skynet. With its sole mission to completely annihilate humanity, it develops cyborg assassins called Terminators that outwardly appear human. A man named John Connor starts the Tech-Com resistance to defeat them and free humanity. With a human victory imminent, the machines' only choice is to send a Terminator back in time to kill John's mother, Sarah Connor, before he is born, preventing the resistance from ever being founded. With the fate of humanity at stake, John sends soldier Kyle Reese back to protect his mother and ensure his own existence.
 Terminator 2: Judgment Day === 
Terminator 2: Judgment Day is the 1991 sequel to the original Terminator film released by TriStar Pictures. It is co-written, directed, and produced by James Cameron and stars Arnold Schwarzenegger, Linda Hamilton, Edward Furlong and Robert Patrick. After the machines failed to prevent John Connor from being born, they try again in 1995, this time attempting to kill him as a child with a more advanced terminator, the T-1000. As before, John sends back a protector for his younger self, a reprogrammed Terminator, identical to the one from the previous film. After eleven years of preparing for the future war, Sarah decides to use the same tactics the machines used on her: prevent Skynet from being invented by destroying Cyberdyne Systems before they create it.

Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines

Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines is the 2003 sequel to Terminator 2 released by Warner Bros. domestically and Columbia Pictures internationally, directed by Jonathan Mostow and starring Arnold Schwarzenegger, Nick Stahl, Claire Danes and Kristanna Loken. As a result of the destruction of Cyberdyne at the end of T2, the Skynet takeover has been postponed, not averted. In a last attempt to ensure a victory by the machines, a new terminator, the T-X, is sent back to kill as many of John Connor's future lieutenants as possible, including John Connor and his future wife Kate Brewster. After the future Connor is terminated by a version of his previous protector, Kate reprograms it and sends it back to save them both from the T-X.

Terminator Salvation

Terminator Salvation is the fourth installment of the Terminator film series, made by The Halcyon Company and again distributed by Warner and Columbia, and with an original release on May 21, 2009. It was written by John D. Brancato, Michael Ferris, Jonathan Nolan, and Anthony E. Zuiker, directed by McG,) and how he became the man he was in the first film.

Terminator Genesis

While Terminator Salvation was initially intended to begin a new trilogy,
By late September 2009, the rights to the franchise were once again up for sale as The Halcyon Company tried to pull itself out of bankruptcy.
By August 2010, a new Terminator film was being developed. It was not to be a direct sequel to Salvation, but rather a 3D animated reboot of the series, titled Terminator 3000 and to be shot by Hannover House. However, Pacificor had not given any official license to Hannover House to develop a film.
In February 2011, Universal Studios was considering a fifth Terminator film, with Arnold Schwarzenegger returning in the title role, Justin Lin directing, and Chris Morgan as screenwriter.
By May 2011, Megan Ellison and her production company Annapurna Pictures had won the rights at auction to make at least two more Terminator films, including Terminator 5Terminator 5 Rights Fall To Megan Ellison On December 4, 2012, the deal was finally closed, with possible merchandise to include TV projects and video games. Ellison said she and her brother David Ellison were "starting from scratch as they seek out a screenwriter to plot the end".
Paramount Pictures was negotiating to distribute the film with Laeta Kalogridis and Patrick Lussier writing the script. The film was left without a director as Justin Lin, who was originally in discussions to direct, chose to direct Fast & Furious 6 instead. By June 27, 2013, Paramount had pushed the film's released from June 26, 2015 to July 1, 2015. Twitter. Retrieved on 2013-09-27.
By September, 2013, Alan Taylor was in talks to direct the films, after Rian Johnson and Denis Villeneuve had been considered and after a deal with Ang Lee could not be reached.

=Casting=

On June 14, 2013, Arnold Schwarzenegger said he would be back for his fifth film as the Terminator/T-800,
By early November 2013, Garrett Hedlund, Tom Hardy, Taylor Kitsch, and Nicholas Hoult were being tested for the role of Kyle Reese.com/krolljvar/statuses/398999079805407232?screen_name=krolljvar'Star Wars: Episode VII,' 'Batman-Superman' and 3 Other Hot Movies Looking for Stars By the following month, Jason Clarke had entered talks to play John Connor. On April 21, 2014, Skydance post a photo on their Facebook page that filming began on the film.com/SkydanceProductions/photos/a.237424126323728.62715.233955333337274/707860455946757/?type=1&source=46

Television

Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles

A television series titled Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles aired on the Fox network, with Lena Headey as Sarah Connor and Thomas Dekker as John Connor. The series, created by Josh Friedman, centers on Sarah and John after Terminator 2 as they try to "live under the radar" after the explosion at Cyberdyne. Summer Glau plays a Terminator protecting the Connors. Executive producer James Middleton said the series would contain a link to Terminator Salvation

New series

By December 2013, Skydance Productions and Annapurna Pictures were developing a new Terminator TV series. Ashley Miller and Zack Stentz, who had worked on Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles together, were named as writers and executive producers. The series will deviate from the franchise's history at a critical moment in The Terminator (1984), and integrate with the continuity of a projected movie-series reboot.

Production team

The rights to The Terminator film franchise have passed from Hemdale Film Corporation to Carolco Pictures to C2 Pictures to The Halcyon Company to its present ownership with Annapurna Pictures.

Cast

 
  Key 

Reception

Box office performance

Critical reception

Cultural impact

The Terminator franchise has had a significant impact on popular culture, most notably James Cameron's original films, The Terminator and Terminator 2: Judgment Day. The film franchise placed #17 on the top 25 greatest film franchises of all time by IGN and is also in the top 25 grossing franchises of all time. According to Rotten Tomatoes, the Terminator franchise is the sixth highest rated franchise on the site behind the Toy Story franchise, the Dollars trilogy, The Lord of the Rings film trilogy, the Mad Max franchise, and the Star Wars trilogy, but in front of the Indiana Jones franchise.
The Terminator has been selected for preservation in the United States National Film Registry by the Library of Congress as being "Culturally, historically, or aesthetically significant."
Both films were subject to numerous pop culture references, such as the use of "I'll be back" in countless other media, including different variations of the phrase by Arnold himself in many of his subsequent films, including The Running Man,The Terminator (1984) - Connections - IMDb and several cameo appearances by Robert Patrick as the T-1000, in The Last Action Hero and Wayne's World. The Simpsons have also spoofed both films, and the T-1000 in particular, on a number of occasions.Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991) - Connections - IMDb
In terms of critical reception, the first two films also stand out. Terminator 2 is thus far the only film in the series to garner attention of the Academy Award (6 nominations and 4 wins). Total Film has rated The Terminator the 72nd best film ever made, and Terminator 2: Judgment Day the 33rd. Both films are consistently featured on IMDb's Top 250 list.IMDb Top 250 - IMDb
All four Terminator films have had very respectable box office gross, though after James Cameron left the series it saw diminishing returns in subsequent films. The Terminator made $78 million worldwide, far surpassing its $6 million budget and becoming a major sleeper hit. Terminator 2: Judgment Day grossed approximately $520 million globally, becoming a major blockbuster and the top-grossing film of 1991. Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines did not fare as well, with $433 million, making it the seventh highest-grossing film of 2003. Terminator Salvation grossed an estimated $371 million worldwide, a figure below industry expectations and the lowest of any of the sequels in the series.

The Sarah Connor Chronicles

Seasonal rankings (based on a weighted average total viewers per episode) for Terminator: The Sarah Connor Chronicles in the United States:
The series premiere in the United States was watched by 18.6 million viewers during its premiere timeslot on January 13, 2008.
The pilot episode received a rating of 11.1 from Nielsen Media Research on January 13, 2008. The mainstream press reviews were generally positive.  USA Today gave the premiere episode 3 and a half stars out of four, calling the series, "smart, tough and entertaining."

Other media

There have been several book series and comic books associated with the Terminator series. The films have been novelized as well.

Books

=Novels=

Stirling, Blackford and Allston's individual series are of separate continuity. Tiedemann's novel follows on from Blackford's. Foster, Zahn and Cox's novels form a single continuity.

=Other books=

Comics and graphic novels

In 1988, NOW Comics published an ongoing series with John Connor as the main character in 2029, after sending Kyle Reese back to 1984 to protect his mother. The seventeen issue series was followed by two limited series.
Dark Horse Comics acquired the rights in 1990 and published The Terminator (titled Tempest in trade paperbacks to distinguish itself), where a group of human soldiers and four Terminators come to the present, to respectively kill or protect the developers of Skynet. One of the Terminators is Dudley, a human doctor with cybernetic implants, and he betrays his group as he feels he can make a difference in the past.
Dark Horse published a 1992 one-shot written by James Dale Robinson and drawn by Matt Wagner. It followed a female Terminator and a resistance fighter battling for the life of another Sarah Connor: Sarah Lang, who has married artist Michael Connor and intends to kill him for his money.
Terminators have crossed over with RoboCop, Superman, and Alien vs. Predator. In the 1992 RoboCop versus The Terminator and 2000 Superman vs. The Terminator: Death to the Future, the heroes must prevent the war ravaged future.
Malibu Comics published twin series in 1995. One was a sequel to Terminator 2: Judgment Day, where Sarah and John encounter two T-800s and a female T-1000. The other was a prequel exploring how Connor sent Reese and the T-800 back in time, and the creation of the T-1000 (which took its default appearance from a captive soldier). The conclusions of both series were published in one issue.
Beckett Comics published three series to promote Terminator 3: Rise of the Machines, each consisting of two issues.
The 2007 Terminator 2: Infinity comic book series by Dynamite Entertainment (a sequel to Rise of the Machines) depicts Connor on July 17, 2009. Kate Brewster died the year before, and he is aided by a future Terminator named Uncle Bob. They create a homing signal to bring together other human survivors, beginning the resistance. The series is also tied into another one of Dynamite's publications, Painkiller Jane, for two issues. Dynamite are releasing a sequel Terminator: Revolution and at all the same time IDW Publishing are releasing a Salvation tie-in, possible because the former is based on the Terminator 2 license.Furman on Making Dynamite's Terminator Revolutionary, Comic Book Resources, October 20, 2008

Games

The franchise has been expanded with many computer and video games and other game types, where many are concerned mainly with the future war, rather than the time travel.

Rides








