[[Athabasca River]]

CATEGORIES: Athabasca, Alberta, Canadian Heritage Rivers, Fort McMurray, Jasper National Park, Rivers of Alberta, Whitecourt, Rivers of the Canadian Rockies

The Athabasca River (French: rivière Athabasca) originates from the Columbia Glacier of the Columbia Icefield in Jasper National Park in Alberta, Canada. The impressive and scenic Athabasca Falls is located upstream about  from the Jasper townsite. 
In Woods Cree, the word aðapaskāw means "where there are plants one after another",Bright, William (2004). Native American Place Names of the United States. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, pg. 52 likely a reference to the spotty vegetation along the river.  

History

Sekani, Shuswap, Kootenay, Salish, Stoney and Cree tribes hunted and fished along the river prior to the European colonization. From about 1778, the Athabasca River, the Clearwater River, which enters the Athabasca River from the east at Fort McMurray, and the Methye Portage were part of the main fur trade route from the Mackenzie River to the Great Lakes. See Canadian Canoe Routes (early).
David Thompson and Thomas the Iroquois travelled through Athabasca Pass in 1811.  In 1862, the Athabasca Springs area was crossed during the Cariboo Goldrush by the Overlander Party.

Heritage

This river was designated a Canadian Heritage River for its importance to the fur trade and the construction of railways and roads opening up the Canadian West, as well as for its natural heritage. 
 

Course

The Athabasca River originates in Jasper National Park, in an unnamed lake at the toe of the Athabasca Glacier within the Columbia Icefield, between Mount Columbia, Snow Dome, and the Winston Churchill Range, at an altitude of approximately .
The river flows along icefields and through gorges, offering wildlife habitat on its shores and adjacent marshes. Throughout its course, it flows through or adjacent to numerous national and provincial parks, including Jasper National Park, Fort Assiniboine Sandhills Wildland Provincial Park, Hubert Lake Wildland Provincial Park, La Biche River Wildland Provincial Park, Grand Rapids Wildland Provincial Park, Richardson River Dunes Wildland Provincial Park, and Wood Buffalo National Park. Its course is marked by rapids, impeding navigation southwest of Fort McMurray.
The Athabasca River travels 
Numerous communities are located on the banks of the Athabasca River, including Jasper, Brule, Entrance, Hinton, Whitecourt, Fort Assiniboine, Smith, Athabasca, Fort McMurray, and Fort MacKay.

Tributaries

Effect of oil sands

An independent study has concluded that the Athabasca River contains elevated levels of pollution downstream of the Athabasca oil sands. Testing has shown this portion of the river contains mercury, lead and 11 other toxic elements. 

Oil spills

Owing to its proximity to the Athabasca Oil Sands, the river has seen significant amounts of energy infrastructure constructed along its course. On June 6, 1970, a pipeline operated by Great Canadian Oil Sands, the precursor to Suncor and the earliest commercial extraction operation, ruptured near the banks of the river. The total spill volume was estimated by Great Canadian Oil Sands at approximately 19,000 barrels of oil. Province of Alberta, Alberta Government Committee Report on Great Canadian Oil Sands Oil Spill to Athabasca River June 6, 1970, Edmonton: Alberta Government, 1970. Page 3.

Legacy

The Canadian Heraldic Authority named the position of Athabaska Herald after the river.

Gallery

Image:GeraldineLakes.jpg|Athabasca River Valley seen from the Geraldine Lakes
Image:Athabasca_Falls_2005-06-11.jpeg|Flowing through the Athabasca Falls
Image:Jasper, Alberta, Canada, ViewFromSummit RyanShepherd.JPG|Passing by Jasper
Image:Athabasca River JNP.JPG|In Jasper National Park
Image:Athabascafrompyramid.jpg|Athabasca River valley from the Pallisades fire lookout
Image:Athabasca_at_Brule_Lake.jpg|Athabasca River at the mouth of Brûlé Lake
Image:Athabasca at windfall.JPG|Upstream from Whitecourt
Image:Alberta tar sands.jpg|Bituminous sand banks north of Fort McMurray








