[[Illustration]]

CATEGORIES: Illustration, Graphic design, Communication design

An illustration is  a visualization or a depiction made by an artist, such as a drawing, sketch, painting, photograph, or other  kind of image  of things seen, remembered or imagined, using a graphical representation. The word comes from the latin word illustra'tio,  illu'stro meaning  enlighten, irradiate. Printing is the current process for reproducing illustrations, typically with ink on paper using a printing press. Illustrations can be artistic images illustrating for example a text, poem, fashion,  magazines, stamps or a book and very often illustrations were made for children's books. The aim of an illustration is to elucidate or decorate a story, poem or piece of textual information by providing a visual representation of something described in the text. Illustrations can also represent scientific images of flora, medicine  or different processes, a biological or chemical processes or technical illustrations to give information on how to use something. Illustrations can be executed in different techniques, like watercolor, gouache, ink, oil, charcoal chalk or woodcut. Paintings are usually original works made on canvas or wood, while illustrations are printed. Illustrations are often carried out as a large-scale industrial process, and is an essential part of publishing and transaction printing.  

History

Medieval codices' illustrations were called illuminations. Johannes Gutenberg invented the printing press and independently developed a movable type system in Europe, along with innovations in casting the type based on a matrix and hand mould. He also added illustrations to his printed books, usually  woodcuts.
During the 15th century, books illustrated with woodcut illustrations became available.  The main processes used for reproduction of illustrations during the 16th and 17th centuries were engraving and etching. At the end of the 18th century, lithography allowed even better illustrations to be reproduced.
The most notable illustrator of this epoch was William Blake who rendered his illustrations in the medium of relief etching.

Early to mid 19th Century

Notable figures of the early century were John Leech, George Cruikshank, Dickens' illustrator Hablot Knight Browne, and, in France, Honoré Daumier. The same illustrators contributed to satirical and straight-fiction magazines, but in both cases the demand was for character-drawing that encapsulated or caricatured social types and classes.
The British humorous magazine Punch, which was founded in 1841 riding on the earlier success of Cruikshank's Comic Almanac (1827–1840), employed an uninterrupted run of high-quality comic illustrators, including Sir John Tenniel, the Dalziel Brothers, and Georges du Maurier, into the 20th century.  It chronicles the gradual shift in popular illustration from reliance on caricature to sophisticated topical observations.  These artists all trained as conventional fine-artists, but achieved their reputations primarily as illustrators. Punch and similar magazines such as the Parisian Le Voleur realised that good illustrations sold as many copies as written content.

Golden age of illustration

The American "golden age of illustration" lasted from the 1880s until shortly after World War I (although the active career of several later "golden age" illustrators went on for another few decades). As in Europe a few decades earlier, newspapers, mass market magazines, and illustrated books had become the dominant media of public consumption.  Improvements in printing technology freed illustrators to experiment with color and new rendering techniques.  A small group of illustrators in this time became rich and famous. The imagery they created was a portrait of American aspirations of the time. 

Technical illustration

Technical illustration is the use of illustration to visually communicate information of a technical nature. Technical illustrations can be component technical drawings or diagrams. Technical illustration in general aim "to generate expressive images that effectively convey certain information via the visual channel to the human observer". Gröller (2005). "Smart Visibility in Visualization". In: Computational Aesthetics in Graphics, Visualization and Imaging. L. Neumann et al. (Ed.) Nowadays, many illustration programs are used to create technical illustrations due the need for detailed imaging and repeated updating. Besides the commonplace 2-D Adobe Illustrator, there are many 3-D computer graphics software that are often utilized to create illustration for textbooks, especially scientific ones.
Technical illustrations generally describe and explain the subjects to a nontechnical audience. Therefore the visual image should be accurate in terms of dimensions and proportions, and should provide "an overall impression of what an object is or does, to enhance the viewer's interest and understanding".com website, Last modified: June 15, 2002. Accessed february 15, 2009.

Illustration art

Today, there is a growing interest in collecting and admiring original artwork that was used as illustrations in books, magazines, posters, blogs, etc.  Various museum exhibitions, magazines and art galleries have devoted space to the illustrators of the 
In the visual art world, illustrators have sometimes been considered less important in comparison with fine artists and graphic designers, the term "illustrative" sometimes being used as a negative critique.  But, possibly in part due to the growth of video game and graphic novel industries, as well as a recent swing in value towards illustration in magazines and other publications over photography, illustration is becoming a valued, popular, and profitable art form that can acquire a wider market than the other two, such as in Korea, Japan, Hong Kong, and the United States. Original illustration art from the best-known magazine illustrators is known to bring prices into the hundreds of thousands of US Dollars at auction. Norman Rockwell's work transcends even these high standards, with his painting "Breaking Home Ties" selling in a 2006 Sotheby's auction for USD15.4 million.Heritage Auctions search page

File:Nå, hur är det med aptiten fortsatte trollmor.jpg|John Bauer, Swedish illustrator, Troll and Princess Tuvstarr
File:John Bauer 1915.jpg| Trolls and Princess Tuvstarr in the book Bland tomtar och troll  
File:Learfourline...)
File:Alice par John Tenniel 02.png|In the book "Alice in Wonderland" the White Rabbit, by John Tenniel
File:Mr. Punch's Book of Sports (Illustration Page 166). 
File:Morgan 1.
File:Oberon, Titania and Puck with Fairies Dancing. William Blake. c.1786.jpg|William Blake, Oberon, Titania and Puck with Fairies Dancing (1786) 
File:Richard Doyle - Spurned Suitor. 

Illustration techniques

Digolo and Mazrui subcategorize illustration into the techniques, which are being applied, such as: drawing, painting, printing, and pasting. Mazrui (2005): Art & Design Forms 1 and 2, Page 51. These techniques affect the art in various ways, being chosen for the different impact the chosen medium produces. The choice can be based on the requirements of the illustration, constraints of the artist, cost, or other factors.
Various illustration techniques have been available to the artist over the centuries. The invention of paper pushed its boundaries even further. Traditional illustration focuses on reproducible ways of creating illustration and can be classified into different types:
Pen-and-ink illustration has been around in various forms. The Chinese Sumi-E can be attributed to this technique, incorporating the use of paints and dyes. Navigational maps have been produced using this technique in the 14-15th century. The Cosmographia of Sebastian Münster, describing the world in the Reformation, Page 164. The technique has not fallen out of disuse and is still popular with artists and illustrators, due to its simplicity of use, drying time, and visual impact. Modern artists use a brush, pen or quill to achieve the desired effects, samples see references. Neschetna website, Last modified: January 15, 2011. Accessed: May 20, 2011.

File:Great Egret Audubon 1821. 
File:Albin's Macaw. And exactly colour'd by the author Eleazar Albin. 
File:Audubon-castor 1854-RZ.
File:TragopanEggs.



thumb|Illustration by Alfred Schmidt (1900)  to a book of by Christian Winther .




