[[Rochester Knighthawks]]

CATEGORIES: Sports in Rochester, New York, Sports clubs established in 1995, New York lacrosse teams, Major Indoor Lacrosse League teams

The Rochester Knighthawks (sometimes abbreviated as the K-Hawks) are a professional lacrosse team in the National Lacrosse League. They play in Rochester, New York at the Blue Cross Arena at the War Memorial. The Knighthawks were previously members of the Major Indoor Lacrosse League from 1995 to 1997. They have been members of the NLL since the league's inaugural 1998 season.  They are the current league champions.
The Knighthawks reached the playoffs in each of their first 13 seasons, from 1995 to 2007. This is a league record (going back to the league's original creation, the Eagle Pro Box Lacrosse League).  The previous record was 11 straight years, held by the Philadelphia Wings.
The Knighthawks are owned by Curt Styres, formerly the owner of the Rochester Americans.

History

The Rochester Knighthawks have been one of the league's most successful franchise since its formation in the 1995 season despite playing in the leagues oldest arena and smallest market. Even with these limitations the Knighthawks have been consistently near the top of the league standings every season.
In their inaugural season they finished 3rd during the regular season and dispatched the Boston Blazers in the playoff semifinals to get to the finals as an expansion team.  As they would do three times later on, they found themselves coming up just short in the championship game, falling in overtime to the Philadelphia Wings.
Just two seasons later, the Knighthawks would find their way to the top of the MILL heap, claiming the final North American Cup before the merger with the National Lacrosse League prior to the 1998 season.  It would be ten years before the Knighthawks claimed their second title. They beat the Edmonton Rush for the 2012 Championship 9-6. The year after in 2013 they recorded the first back-to-back championships since the 2002-2003 Toronto Rock beating the Washington Stealth 11-10. 

2007 season

After starting the season a pedestrian 2-2, the Knighthawks beat Toronto Rock 19-15 in Toronto, where they had only won twice before in team history. The Knighthawks followed this victory up with 11 more, finishing the season with a franchise-record 12 regular-season-game winning streak and a 14-2 record. The Knighthawks were a perfect 8-0 at home, becoming the first team since the 2003 Bandits to post a perfect record at home.
Despite having the best overall record, they could not host the championship game due to a scheduling conflict with the Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Circus at the Blue Cross Arena.  Playing the game instead in Arizona, the Knighthawks defeated the Arizona Sting 13-11 on May 12, 2007, to win their first NLL championship.  John Grant, Jr., regular-season league MVP, was named MVP of the game.
The winning streak continued during the 2008 season, as the Knighthawks defeated the Buffalo Bandits in the opening game on January 11, 2008.

Lease issue

During the 2007 season, a dispute over concession revenues between owner Steve Donner and the Sports Management Group, operators of the Blue Cross Arena, jeopardized the continued play of the Knighthawks in Rochester. Donner claimed that the Knighthawks and the Rochester Americans of the American Hockey League had lost over $500,000 the previous two seasons, and without concession revenue sharing, he would be unable to continue to operate the teams in Rochester. An agreement was reached between the Amerks/Knighthawks SMG, and the City of Rochester on a one-year lease extension on May 11, 2007 that will allow for long-term negotiations to continue through both teams' 2008 season. Under the extension, the Amerks/Knighthawks have agreed to an independent audit of their finances and the city agreed to forgo additional luxury suite revenue from the arena and to loan the Amerks an additional $100,000, added on to a $500,000 loan that is now past-due. All parties involved will now work diligently to reach a long-term agreement by the start of the 2007–08 AHL season in October 2007.  However on June 16 2008 the Knighthawks and Americans announced a new five-year lease with the Blue Cross Arena.

Sale of team

On May 28, 2008 the National Lacrosse League's Board of Governors approved the sale of a majority stake of the Knighthawks to the President of Arrow Express Sports Curt Styres at a price of $5,575,000, the highest price paid for a team in league history. The league's approval is conditional upon whether or not the Knighthawks and Sports Management Group can secure a new lease for play at the Blue Cross Arena.  Also on June 16th 2008 the Knighthawks and Americans announced a new five-year lease with the Blue Cross Arena.com
In June 2011, the Americans and Knighthawks were split up when Terrence Pegula purchased the Americans; because Pegula also owns the rival Buffalo Bandits, he was ineligible to purchase the Knighthawks, which leaves the team in Styres's hands.

Awards and honors

NLL Hall of Fame members

Roster

All-time record

Playoff results

The Knighthawks had the overall top seed in the playoffs, but were unable to host the Championship game due to a scheduling conflict at the Blue Cross Arena.

Head coaching history

Draft history

NLL Entry Draft

First Round Selections
 
 

NLL Dispersal Draft

NLL Expansion Draft






