[[Swinburne University of Technology]]

CATEGORIES: Educational institutions established in 1908, Australian vocational education and training providers, Universities in Melbourne, TAFE Colleges in Melbourne, Astronomy institutes and departments, 1908 establishments in Australia

Swinburne University of Technology (often simply referred to as Swinburne) is an Australian public university of technology based in Melbourne, Victoria. Swinburne was founded in 1908 by the Honourable George Swinburne as the Eastern Suburbs Technical College. Its foundation campus is located in Hawthorn, a suburb of Melbourne which is located 7.5 km from the Melbourne CBD
In its first year, it enrolled 80 students in subjects including carpentry, plumbing and gas fitting. Today, Swinburne operates five campuses in two countries and has an enrolment of 60,000 students across vocational, undergraduate and postgraduate levels.Quick Facts (About Swinburne website)
In addition to its main Hawthorn campus, Swinburne has campuses in the Melbourne metropolitan area at Prahran, Wantirna and Croydon. Swinburne also has a branch campus in Sarawak, Malaysia which it has operated in partnership with the Sarawak State Government since 2000.
Internationally, Swinburne is ranked among the top 400 universities in the world by the Academic Ranking of World Universities

History

thumb|right|Swinburne's original administration building, erected in 1908, still stands at the centre of the university's Hawthorn campus. Image credit: Kelvin Rowley. In 1913, the institution changed its name to Swinburne Technical College. The Institute attained university status on 1 July 1992 following the passage of the Swinburne University of Technology Act 1992.
As a consequence of the Dawkins reforms to Australian higher education in the early 1990s, the university commenced delivery in the suburb of Prahran through a merger in 1992 with Victoria College (previously the Prahran Institute of TAFE), which stood on the site of Victoria's first training institutes, the Prahran Mechanics' Institute.
In 1997, Swinburne opened a campus at Lilydale, Victoria. In 1998, it merged with the Outer East Institute of TAFE and commenced operating from campuses at Croydon and Wantirna.
In 1999, Swinburne established the National Institute of Circus Arts (NICA).
In 2000, the university opened a campus in Sarawak, Malaysia, as a partnership between the university and the Sarawak State Government.
In January 2011, Swinburne announced that it would expand its online degree offerings through a $10 million joint venture with Seek Limited.
thumb|right|The architecturally striking Advanced Technologies Centre, at Swinburne's Hawthorn campus, opened in February 2011. Image credit: Paul Jones.In February 2011, the university opened the Advanced Technologies Centre,
Following a series of funding cuts announced by the Victorian Government to vocational education in May 2012,
The university is currently completing construction of a major new building at its Hawthorn campus, the Advanced Manufacturing and Design Centre,

Academic

Governance

Swinburne is governed by a 10-member Council, whose members include the Chancellor and Vice-Chancellor.

Rankings

Internationally, Swinburne is ranked among the top 400 universities in the world by the Academic Ranking of World Universities and the Times Higher Education World University Rankings  and in the top 500 universities in the world by the 2013 QS World University Rankings.
Swinburne also is ranked 76-100 in the world in the field of physics by the Academic Ranking of World Universities. 
The university's computer science and information technology, sociology, psychology, and communications and media subjects were ranked 151-200 in the world by the 2013 QS World University Rankings.

Faculties

Swinburne comprises three "super faculties", each of which conducts both teaching and research.

=Science, Engineering and Technology=

The Faculty of Engineering and Industrial Sciences comprises the School of Science, the School of Engineering and the School of Software and Electrical Engineering and associated research centres. 

=Health, Arts and Design=

The Faculty of Health, Arts and Design comprises the School of Health Sciences, the School of Arts, Social Sciences and Humanities and the School of Design, and associated research centres.

=Business and Enterprise=

The Faculty of Business and Enterprise comprises the Swinburne Business School and associated research centres. 

Research

Based on its research activity as assessed by the Australian Research Council, Swinburne is one of the most specialised of Australian universities.
Swinburne has 14 Research Centres with a concentration in the physical and health sciences, engineering and ICT fields:   

Vocational education

Swinburne offers vocational education (TAFE) courses in a range of areas including arts and social sciences, business and management, design, digital media, engineering, English language and study skills, environment and land management, film and television, health sciences and community care, information and communication technologies, media and communications, performing and creative arts, science, apprenticeships and traineeships.

Swinburne College

The university also operates Swinburne College, a provider of pathway education courses which prepare students for university study. Programs offered by Swinburne College include English language, foundation studies, diploma and professional year programs.

Campuses

Hawthorn

thumb|right|View of Swinburne's Hawthorn campus at night, as seen from the Advanced Technologies Centre. Image credit: Adrian MalecThe Hawthorn campus is Swinburne's main campus. It hosts a range of undergraduate and vocational courses, postgraduate programs, short courses and research.

Prahran

In 2013, Swinburne's Prahran campus hosted the university's Faculty of Design, a range of vocational programs and the National Institute of Circus Arts (NICA). In 2012, Swinburne announced that it would cease operating vocational and higher education programs at Prahran in 2014. In August 2013, NMIT announced that it had signed a Memorandum of Understanding with Swinburne to acquire the Prahran campus.

Croydon

The university's Croydon campus is a TAFE specific campus, with a focus on training in trades such as building, carpentry, electrical and plumbing.

Wantirna

Wantirna is a TAFE specific campus. It is home to the National Centre for Sustainability and a Trade Training Centre, the Knox Innovation, Opportunity and Sustainability Centre (KIOSC), which offers educational opportunities to students from schools in its local area.

Sarawak, Malaysia

The Sarawak campus is located in Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia.About Swinburne Sarawak

Architecture

File:Swinburne University of Technology, original Administration Building, shown with Aboriginal Flag, 2009.jpg|The Federation Free Style Administration Building, by John Grainger (1908)
File:Hawthorn campus library, Swinburne University of Technology, Melbourne, Australia, 2008.jpg|The Library building at Hawthorn campus, at night (1972) 
File:Swinburne University of Technology, Business and Arts Building, Hawthorn campus, 2013 (detail).jpg|The brutalist Business and Arts (BA) Building (1975)
File:Swinburne University of Technology Australian Graduate School of Entrepreneurship AGSE Building, Hawthorn Campus, 2013.png|Daryl Jackson's Australian Graduate School of Entrepreneurship (2001)
File:Swinburne University Wantirna campus health care teaching facility 2013.jpg|National Centre for Sustainability Building, Wantirna campus (2008)
File:Swinburne University, The George Building, Hawthorn campus, 2013.jpg|The George Swinburne Building, also known as 'The George' (2011) 
File:Swinburne University of Technology, Advanced Technologies Centre front entrance, Hawthorn campus, 2011.jpg|The Advanced Technologies Centre, by H2o Architects (2011)

Student life

Swinburne Student Amenities Association (SSAA)

The Swinburne Student Amenities Association (SSAA) provides services and activities at Swinburne to encourage socialisation among all students across all Swinburne campuses.
The SSAA runs orientation activities; it also organises clubs and societies to represent the student body. It provides academic advice and advocacy, along with entertainment, free lunches and other activities throughout the year.MYSSAA Swinburne Student Amenities Association

Swinburne Student Union (SSU)

Swinburne Student Union (SSU), is the independent student representative body of Swinburne University of Technology in Melbourne, Australia. Membership is opt-in for all students. SSU offers its members free printing, free breakfasts, and academic advocacy.Swinburne Student Union services

Notable alumni








