[[John Dowland]]

CATEGORIES: English composers, English madrigal composers, Composers for lute, Baroque composers, English songwriters, Renaissance composers, English lutenists, English singers, Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford, English expatriates in France, English expatriates in Denmark, Converts to Roman Catholicism, English Roman Catholics, 16th-century Roman Catholics, 17th-century Roman Catholics, People of the Tudor period, 16th-century English people, 17th-century English people, 1563 births, 1626 deaths

John DowlandWhile orthographic evidence from Dowland's time strongly suggests a pronunciation of  for the last name, there is no consensus on the correct pronunciation. See the talk page for discussion of this issue. (1563 – buried 20 February 1626) was an English Renaissance composer, singer, and lutenist. He is best known today for his melancholy songs such as "Come, heavy sleep" (the basis for Benjamin Britten's Nocturnal), "Come again", "Flow my tears", "I saw my Lady weepe" and "In darkness let me dwell", but his instrumental music has undergone a major revival, and with the 20th century's Early Music Revival has been a continuing source of repertoire for lutenists and classical guitarists.

Career and compositions

Very little is known of John Dowland's early life, but it is generally thought he was born in London. Irish historian W. H. Grattan Flood claimed that he was born in Dalkey, near Dublin, but no corroborating evidence has ever been found either for that statement or for Thomas Fuller's claim that he was born in Westminster. In 1580 Dowland went to Paris, where he was in service to Sir Henry Cobham, the ambassador to the French court, and his successor, Sir Edward Stafford., 2002), p.275 He became a Roman Catholic at this time.  Excerpt from Dowland's letter of 1595 to Sir Robert Cecil. In 1584, Dowland moved back to England where he was married. In 1588 he was admitted Mus. Bac. from Christ Church, Oxford. In 1594 a vacancy for a lutenist came up at the English court, but Dowland's application was unsuccessful - he claimed his religion led to his not being offered a post at Elizabeth I's Protestant court. However, his conversion was not publicized, and being Catholic did not prevent some other important musicians (such as William Byrd) from having a court career in England.
From 1598 Dowland worked at the court of Christian IV of Denmark,Warlock 1970, p.32 though he continued to publish in London.34  King Christian was very interested in musicWarlock 1970, p.33 and paid Dowland astronomical sums; his salary was 500 daler a year, making him one of the highest-paid servants of the Danish court.276  Though Dowland was highly regarded by King Christian, he was not the ideal servant, often overstaying his leave when he went to England on publishing business or for other reasons.  Dowland was dismissed in 1606 and returned to England; in early 1612 he secured a post as one of James I's lutenists.108 There are few compositions dating from the moment of his royal appointment until his death in London in 1626.109 While the date of his death is not known, "Dowland's last payment from the court was on 20 January 1626, and he was buried at St Ann's, Blackfriars, London, on 20 February 1626."David Greer, "John Dowland", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography Online.
Two major influences on Dowland's music were the popular consort songs, and the dance music of the day.204-5  Most of Dowland's music is for his own instrument, the lute.201 It includes several books of solo lute works, lute songs (for one voice and lute), part-songs with lute accompaniment, and several pieces for viol consort with lute.274-83 The poet Richard Barnfield wrote that Dowland's "heavenly touch upon the lute doth ravish human sense."
One of his better known works is the lute song "Flow my tears", the first verse of which runs:

He later wrote what is probably his best known instrumental work, Lachrimae, or Seaven Teares, Figured in Seaven Passionate Pavans, a set of seven pavanes for five viols and lute, each based on the theme derived from the lute song "Flow my tears".276-7 It became one of the best known collections of consort music in his time. His pavane, "Lachrymae antiquae", was also popular in the seventeenth century, and was arranged and used as a theme for variations by many composers.
Dowland's music often displays the melancholia that was so fashionable in music at that time.1 (Jan. 1983): p.6 He wrote a consort piece with the punning title "Semper Dowland, semper dolens" (always Dowland, always doleful), which may be said to sum up much of his work.goldbergweb.php
Dowland's song, "Come Heavy Sleepe, the Image of True Death", was the inspiration for Benjamin Britten's "Nocturnal after John Dowland for guitar", written in 1964 for the guitarist Julian Bream. This work consists of eight variations, all based on musical themes drawn from the song or its lute accompaniment, finally resolving into a guitar setting of the song itself.289
Richard Barnfield, Dowland's contemporary, refers to the lutenist in poem VIII of The Passionate Pilgrim (1598):

Publications

In 1597, Dowland published his First Book of Songs in London.  It was one of the most influential and important musical publications of the history of the lute.  This collection of lute-songs was set out in a way that allows performance by a soloist with lute accompaniment or various combinations of singers and instrumentalists. ed. The New Oxford History of Music, Volume IV: The Age of Humanism 1540-1630 (London: Oxford University Press, 1968), p. 203
Dowland published two books of songs after the First Book of Songs, in 1600 and 1603, as well as the Lachrymae in 1604.  He also published  a translation of the Micrologus of Andreas Ornithoparcus in 1609, originally printed in Leipzig in 1517, a rather stiff and medieval treatise, but nonetheless occasionally entertaining.39
Dowland's last, and in the opinion of most scholars, best work, A Pilgrimes Solace, was published in 1612,Warlock 1970, p.41 and seems to have been conceived more as a collection of contrapuntal music than as solo works.207

Suspicions of treason

Dowland performed a number of espionage assignments for Sir Robert Cecil in France and Denmark; his high rate of pay notwithstanding, Dowland seems to have been only a court musician.  However, we have in his own words the fact that he was for a time embroiled in treasonous Catholic intrigue in Italy,Warlock 1970 - entire letter of John Dowland to Sir Robert Cecil
whither he had travelled in the hopes of meeting and studying with Luca Marenzio, a famed madrigal composer.  Whatever his religion, however, he was still intensely loyal to the Queen, though he seems to have had something of a grudge against her for her remark that he, Dowland, "was a man to serve any prince in the world, but he was an obstinate Papist."Warlock 1970, p.25  But in spite of this, and though the plotters offered him a large sum of money from the Pope, as well as safe passage for his wife and children to come to him from England,Warlock 1970, p.26 in the end he declined to have anything further to do with their plans and begged pardon from Sir Robert Cecil and from the Queen.26-7

Private life

John Dowland was married and had children, as referenced in his letter to Sir Robert Cecil. 25, 26 However, he had long periods of separation from his family, as his wife stayed in England while he worked on the Continent. Cooper, "John Dowland," The Musical Times, Vol. 68, No. 1013 (Jul. 1, 1927), p.642
His son Robert Dowland was also a musician, working for some time in the service of the first Earl of Devonshire, and taking over his father's position of lutenist at court when John died. 105 No. 1451 (Jan. 1964): p. 25.
Dowland's melancholic lyrics and music have often been described as his attempts to develop an "artistic persona" though he was actually a cheerful person,Rooley 1983, p.6 but many of his own personal complaints, and the tone of bitterness in many of his comments, suggest that much of his music and his melancholy truly did come from his own personality and frustration. 11, No. 4 (Oct. 1983) p.519

Modern interpretations

One of the first 20th-century musicians who successfully helped reclaim Dowland from the history books was the singer-songwriter Frederick Keel.'Mr J Frederick Keel' (unsigned obituary). The Times, 16 August 1954, p 8. Keel included fifteen different Dowland pieces in his two sets of Elizabethan love songs published in 1909 and 1913,Keel, Frederick (1909, 1913). Elizabethan love songs, sets I and II. London: Boosey & Hawkes. which achieved popularity in their day. These free arrangements for piano and low or high voice were intended to fit the tastes and musical practices associated with art songs of the time.
In 1935, Australian-born composer Percy Grainger, who also had a deep interest in music made before Bach, arranged Dowland's Now, O now I needs must part for piano. Some years later, in 1953, Grainger wrote a work titled Bell Piece (Ramble on John Dowland's 'Now, O now I needs must part'), which was a version scored for voice and wind band, based on his previously mentioned transcription.
In 1951 Alfred Deller, the famous counter-tenor (1912-1979), recorded songs by Dowland, Thomas Campion, and Philip Rosseter with the label HMV (His Master's Voice) HMV C.4178 and another HMV C.4236 of Dowland's "Flow my Tears". In 1977, Harmonia Mundi also published two records of Deller singing Dowland's Lute songs (HM 244&245-H244/246).Alfred Deller (1912-1979) - A discography
Dowland's music became part of the repertoire of the early music revival with lutenist Julian Bream and tenor Peter Pears, and later with Christopher Hogwood and David Munrow and the Early Music Consort in the late 1960s and later with the Academy of Ancient Music from the early 1970s.
Jan Akkerman, guitarist of the Dutch progressive rock band Focus, recorded "Tabernakel" in 1973 (though released in 1974), an album of John Dowland songs and some original material, performed on lute.
The Collected Lute Music of John Dowland with lute tablature and keyboard notation has been transcribed and edited by Diana Poulton and Basil Lam, Faber Music Limited, London 1974.
The complete works of Dowland have been recorded in a boxed set by the Consort of Musicke.
The 1999 ECM New Series recording In Darkness Let Me Dwell features new interpretations of Dowland songs performed by tenor John Potter, lutenist Stephen Stubbs, and baroque violinist Maya Homburger in collaboration with English jazz musicians John Surman and Barry Guy.
Nigel North recorded Dowland's complete works for solo lute on four CDs between 2004 and 2007.
Elvis Costello included a recording (with Fretwork and the Composers Ensemble) of Dowland's "Can she excuse my wrongs" as a bonus track on the 2006 re-release of his The Juliet Letters.
In October 2006, Sting, who says he has been fascinated by the music of John Dowland for 25 years,Gift of a lute makes Sting party like it's 1599, June 6, 2006, The Guardian released an album featuring Dowland's songs titled Songs from the Labyrinth, on Deutsche Grammophon, in collaboration with Edin Karamazov on lute and archlute. They described their treatment of Dowland's work in a Great Performances appearance. To give some idea of the tone and intrigues of life in late Elizabethan England, Sting also recites throughout the album portions of a 1593 letter written by Dowland to Sir Robert Cecil.sting.php?uid=4694 The letter describes Dowland's travels to various points of Western Europe, then breaks into a detailed account of his activities in Italy, along with a heartfelt denial of the charges of treason whispered against him by unknown persons. Dowland most likely was suspected of this for traveling to the courts of various Catholic monarchs and accepting payment from them greater than what a musician of the time would normally have received for performing.
Other interpretations of Dowland's songs have been recorded by Windham Hill artist, Lisa Lynne, (for her CD, Maiden's Prayer) and Lise Winne (for her Wing'd With Hopes, New Interpretations of Renaissance Songs CD). Several bands, such as Die Verbannten Kinder Evas, Aesma Daeva and Qntal, have recorded albums featuring lyrics by Dowland. The countertenor Andreas Scholl sings in Crystal Tears: English consort songs with Concerto Viole of Basel. A rendition of  Dowland's "Come again" (sung by Sting) can also be found on Joshua Bell's 2009 album, At home with Friends.
In 2012, mandolinists Joseph Brent and Alon Sariel recorded an album's worth of Dowland lute music arranged for mandolin.  After a successful Kickstarter campaign, the duo's CD of the recordings, titled "An Englishman in New York," is due for release in 2013.
Also in 2012, Italian twelve-string guitar player Marco Poeta and vocalist Alessandra Losacco recorded an album called Reminiscence of John Dowland for Continuo Records.

In popular culture



Notes

Bibliography

Recordings




