[[New York Power]]

CATEGORIES: Defunct soccer clubs in the United States, Women's soccer clubs in the United States, Sports in Long Island, New York women's soccer teams, Women's United Soccer Association teams, 2000 establishments in New York, 2003 disestablishments in the United States

The New York Power was an American professional soccer team that played in the Women's United Soccer Association (WUSA), the first professional soccer league for women in the United States. The team played at Mitchel Athletic Complex in Uniondale, New York. The team played from 2001 to 2003 when the league ceased operations.

History

On February 15, 2000, it was announced that the first professional women's soccer league would be formed by a number of major U.S. media companies and individual investors in response to the successful and hugely popular U.S. women's national soccer team who had won the 1999 FIFA Women's World Cup. Time Warner Cable invested $5,000,000 for the operating rights for a team in the New York market. In addition to the upfront financial investment, league investors also provided resources for staff, facilities, and promotional efforts via cable television. 

Team name and stadium unveiled

On November 16, 2000, the league announced the names of the eight teams admitted in the league. The New York Power was announced as the team name for the New York area with games to be played at the 10,000 capacity Mitchel Athletic Complex, a multi-purpose athletic facility located in Uniondale, New York. The team name was selected by team's front office with the slogan "Get emPOWERed" used in promotional materials.

Inaugural season

The Power began play in 2001 during the inaugural season of the WUSA. The team finished the regular season with a 9-7-5 record third in the standings. They reached the semifinals in the playoffs where they faced the Bay Area CyberRays and lost 3-2. Average attendance for the club's home games during the 2001 season was 5,724. Tiffeny Milbrett was the leading scorer on the team with 16 goals on the season. She also led the team in points (35), shots (73), shots on goal (42), and game-winning goals (4). Goalkeeper Gao Hong recorded 87 saves with a 1.11 goals against average (GAA). 
2002 season=== 
During the league's second season, the Power finished last in the regular season standings with a 3-17-1 record. In July, head coach Pat Farmer was fired after the team lost many more games than it won or tied. Assistant coach and former Rutgers University coach Charles Duccilli was named head coach. The team's general manager, Susan Marenoff, said of the coaching swap, "The team needed a change ... Pat worked very hard to make the best team he could. I really think we needed a different style, and that's what we've accomplished." 

2003 season

The Power re-surged during the 2003 season to finish fifth among the league's eight teams, narrowly missing the playoffs. Goalkeeper Saskia Webber made 50 saves during her 13 appearances for the club recording a 1.52 goals against average (GAA).

Year-by-year

Players

The "founding players" of the Power were Tiffeny Milbrett, Christie Pearce and Sara Whalen of the 1999 USA Women's World Cup team. International players who played for the Power included Ann Kristin Aarones (Norway), Gro Espeseth (Norway), Gao Hong (China), Cheryl Salisbury (Australia) and Anita Rapp (Norway).
2003 Roster  
Coach: Tom Sermanni

Coaches

Awards

The New York Power received the WUSA Team Fair Play Award during the 2001 season.  Tiffeny Milbrett received the WUSA Most Valuable Player and WUSA Offensive Player of the Year the same year.  Gro Espeseth and Tiffeny Milbrett were named to the WUSA Global XI First Team in 2001. 
In 2003, Coach Tom Sermanni was one of three nominees for Coach of the Year.

League suspension

The WUSA announced on September 15, 2003 that it was suspending operations.








