[[Giro d'Italia]]

CATEGORIES: Giro d'Italia, Cycle races in Italy, Recurring sporting events established in 1909, UCI ProTour races, UCI World Tour races, 1909 establishments in Italy, Grand Tour (cycling)

The Giro d'Italia (
Along with the Tour de France and Vuelta a España, the Giro makes up cycling's prestigious three-week-long Grand Tours. Like the other Grand Tours, the modern editions of the Giro d'Italia normally consist of 21 day-long segments (stages) over a 23-day period that includes 2 rest days.
All of the stages are timed to the finish. After finishing the riders' times are compounded with their previous stage times. The rider with the lowest aggregate time is the leader of the race and gets to don the coveted pink jersey. While the general classification gathers the most attention there are other contests held within the Giro: the points classification for the sprinters, the mountains classification for the climbers, young rider classification for the riders under the age of 25, and the team classification for the competing teams. The 2013 edition of the race was won by Italian rider Vincenzo Nibali.

History

1908–1909: The idea and first race

The idea of the holding a bicycle race that navigated around Italy was first suggested when La Gazzetta dello Sport editor Tullo Morgagni sent a telegram to both the paper's owner, Emilio Costamagna, and cycling editor, Armando Cougnet, stating the need for an Italian tour.
Since the organizers lacked the funds, 25,000 lira, needed to hold the race, they consulted Primo Bongrani, an accountant at the bank Cassa di Risparmio and friend of the three organizers. Bongrani proceeded to go around Italy asking for donations to help hold the race. Bongrani's efforts were largely successful, he had procured enough money to cover the operating costs. The money that was to be given out as prizes came from a casino in San Remo after Francesco Sghirla, a former Gazzetta employee, encouraged it to contribute to the race. Even Corriere, La Gazzetta's rival, gave 3,000 lire to the race's fund.
On 13 May 1909 at 02:53 am 127 riders started the first Giro d'Italia at Loreto Place in Milan. The race was split into eight stages covering  Ganna won three individual stages and the General Classification. Ganna received 5325 lira as a winner's prize, with the last rider in the general classification receiving 300 lira. The Giro's director received only 150 lira a month, 150 lira fewer than the last-placed rider.

1910–1924: Italian domination

During these years, and up until 1950, the winners of the Giro d'Italia were exclusively of Italian descent.
The 1912 Giro d'Italia saw some big changes to how the general classification was to be run, while still being based around a point system. Luigi Ganna was the only member of Team Atala that didn't finish the race, he dropped out during the fifth stage. Galetti became the first three time winner of the Giro d'Italia.
Next year's race was the last Giro to be run with a points system.
The 1919 edition of the race navigated through the ruined parts of Northern Italy, which made it hard for the organizers. Costante Girardengo, the winner of the Giro that year, became the first rider to lead the Giro from start to finish. In route to winning the Giro, Girardengo won seven of the ten stages that comprised that year's Giro. The Giro also witnessed its first foreign rider to place on the podium in Marcel Buysse. Buysse finished third overall, just a little over an hour slower than Girardengo. Next year's Giro began with close to fifty riders and finished with just ten of those fifty riders. The first stage of the 1920 Giro d'Italia briefly went into Switzerland, which was the first time that the Giro had ever left its home country of Italy. Girardengo, the winner of the previous year's Giro, was widely believed to be the favorite, but the injuries sustained from crashes in the second stage forced him to withdraw from the race. Gaetano Belloni capitalized on Girardengo's troubles, along with Giuseppe Olivieri, the race leader after stage 1, and Carlo Galetti's withdrawals in the second stage, to win the stage and take the lead. Belloni went on to win the Giro, proving to those who called him "the Eternal Second" that he could win a race.
Costante Girardengo won the first four stages of the 1921 Giro d'Italia and led the race through the first four days. In the race's first stage, Giovanni Brunero received an illegal wheel change – Brunero took a wheel from his teammate Alfredo Sivocci – and Brunero was ultimately penalized 25 minutes. Costante Girardengo and Gaetono Belloni, along with their respective teams Maino and Bianchi, wanted Brunero to be expelled from the Giro for the illegal wheel change. Both the Maino and Bianchi squads eventually withdrew from the Giro due to their outrage with the organizer's decision to give Brunero a 25 minute penalty. Brunero went on to win the Giro d'Italia, his second one of his career.
The 1923 Giro d'Italia was dominated by Costante Girardengo, he won eight out of the ten stages that made up that year's Giro. Their choice not to participate gave the other general classification hopefuls a bigger chance to win the Giro. Giuseppe Enrici cemented his lead of the race, after his performance during the horrid weather conditions in stage eight. This was Enrici's biggest win in his career. The 1924 edition of the Giro also saw the only woman to ever compete in the history of the Giro d'Italia, Alfonsina Strada. She was eliminated from the race after the seventh stage, but the organizers allowed her to race the stages still; however she wouldn't be included in the general classification. Strada made it all the way to the Giro's finish in Milan; she finished around twenty hours slower than the winner Enrici.

1925–1935: The Binda years

The 1925 Giro d'Italia saw the emergence of a new star, Alfredo Binda. In the first stage of the race, Alfredo Binda crashed and lost a great deal of time. Binda then began to work for his teammate, Giovanni Brunero. Binda won six of the stages in the race, while leading Brunero to his record third Giro d'Italia victory.
The 1927 Giro d'Italia was dominated by Alfredo Binda. Binda first captured the lead after the fourth stage, where he distanced himself greatly from his competitors. Binda became the second person to win three Giro d'Italias in their career. That year also saw a record number of participants at 298 riders, with 126 of those reaching the finish in Milan.
In 1929 Alfredo Binda dominated once again. Binda's absence left the field open for everyone else. The eventual winner, Luigi Marchisio, gained the lead after winning the third stage of the race and held it all the way to the finish in Milan. Marchisio held a slim fifty-two second lead for the last six stages of the race to the finish in Milan. Marchisio became the youngest rider to win the Giro at 21 years, 1 month, and 13 days; his record stood for ten years before being broken by Fausto Coppi.
The famed race leader's maglia rosa, pink jersey, was introduced in the 1931 edition of the Giro. The German Hermann Buse gained the lead of the Giro from the second stage to the sixth stage, in doing so he became the first German to lead the Giro. During the seventh stage of the race, Pesenti gained the lead of the race by winning the stage by means of a solo attack. Pesenti held the lead to the end of the race.
The Mountains classification was introduced in the 1933 Giro d'Italia, along with the first individual time trial. Camusso gained the lead after his stage thirteen performance. Stage fourteen was a time trial, and Camusso was a pure climber; while Guerra on the other hand was a quality time trialist. Guerra gained close to a four minute lead over Camusso. Guerra and Camusso battled all the way to Milan, but Guerra won by a margin of fifty-one seconds over Camusso.
The 1935 edition of the Giro saw some changes to how it was run; the organizers removed the time bonuses for winning stages and the organizers first added half stages, to this Giro. This Giro also saw the last participation of Alfredo Binda and the first participation of Gino Bartali; Bartali won his first stage in this Giro, he won stage six. The eventual winner, Vasco Bergamaschi, gained the lead briefly after the first stage. He later regained the lead after the sixth stage of the race. Bergamaschi originally came to the Giro to work for his teammate, the great Costante Girardengo.

1936–1953: Bartali and Coppi battle for supremacy

Due to Italy's political stance at the time, the 1936 Giro d'Italia saw no foreign participation. and was won by Legnano, the team of the eventual winner Gino Bartali. Bartali displayed his dominance in the mountains and gained the lead after the uphill stage 8a time trial. Bartali carried the maglia rosa all the way to Milan, winning his second consecutive Giro d'Italia.
Gino Bartali, the winner of the 1936 and 1937 Giro d'Italias, was ordered by the Italian government to race the Tour de France instead of the Giro in 1938.
Bartali came to the 1940 Giro d'Italia with a strong Legnano team and high ambitions to win the overall crown.
Benito Mussolini, Italy's dictator at the time, tried to keep the bicycle races going while Italy was involved in the Second World War. The Giro consumed so much gasoline, food, and other supplies that it would hurt Italy's efforts towards the war, so the Giro that people were familiar with wasn't run. The government created a new "point series" Giro that would comprise the major one day races that were run in Italy, where the riders would earn points based on their placing in each race. Some of the notable races that comprised this "Giro" were the Milan – San Remo and the Giro di Lombardia. The new "point series" Giro was first won by Gino Bartali in 1942. The 1943 edition of the government's Giro was interrupted after Allie forces landed in Sicily and after Mussolini was deposed. After Mussolini's reign ended, bicycle racing came to a complete stop in Italy.
The Giro resumed its annual running in 1946. Bartali and Coppi returned to the Giro, but this time they were on separate teams. Coppi was put into difficulty in stage nine, where he lost a good deal of time. During the twelfth stage of the race, the route was set to pass through Pieris on the way to Trieste. In Pieris, there were some Yugoslavs who threw stones at some armed Italian guards. Gunfire erupted soon and the stage was ultimately cancelled, with close to twenty riders being escorted to Trieste. There were also riots that took place in Trieste since Yugoslavia and Italy both claimed that as part of their territory.  Bartali first gained the lead after the thirteenth stage of the race. Bartali would hold that lead to the finish in Milan without winning a stage in the race. In addition to winning the general classification, Bartali won the mountains classification.
The 1947 Giro d'Italia was the first Giro to have all competing riders be a part of a trade team, rather than some competing as independents. Magni set up his victory by being a part of the breakaway that succeeded in the race's ninth stage. Magni gained close to thirteen minutes on the favorites of the race in Bartali and Coppi. Ezio Cecchi briefly gained the lead of the race for two stages, but Magni regained the lead after the seventeenth stage which saw the race travel over the Pordoi Pass. Fausto Coppi and his team, Bianchi, suspected Magni to have received help from the spectators; Magni was ultimately given a two minute penalty. The penalty to Magni wasn't enough to prevent him from winning the race, but he did so by the slimmest of margins.
Fausto Coppi returned to the Giro in 1949 with aims to win again. In addition to the general classification, Koblet also won the mountains classification.
Almost three years after his first Giro d'Italia victory, Fiorenzo Magni won the Giro d'Italia again.
The Swiss rider Hugo Koblet gained the lead of the 1953 Giro d'Italia after the race's stage eight individual time trial. Coppi went on to win the Giro d'Italia, bringing his total to a record tying five Giro d'Italia victories.

1954–1967: Italian supremacy challenged

The 1954 Giro d'Italia saw the Swiss rider Carlo Clerici win the race and become the second non-Italian rider to win the Giro. This was Magni's third and final career Giro d'Italia victory.
The 1956 edition of the Giro was run as scheduled until the race's twenty-first stage that stretched from Merano to the summit finish on Monte Bondone, a mountain in the Dolomites.
Italian Ercole Baldini took the lead of the 1958 Giro d'Italia after winning the race's mountainous, fifteenth stage to Bosco Chiesanuova.
The 1960 Giro d'Italia saw the first French rider, Jacques Anquetil, win the Giro d'Italia.
The 1962 edition of the Giro d'Italia was marred by severe weather conditions.
Jacques Anquetil took the race lead at the 1964 Giro d'Italia after the stage five individual time trial and then held it all the way to the race's conclusion in Milan.
Felice Gimondi won the 1967 Giro d'Italia after attacking during the race's twenty first stage. Gimondi raced into Milan the next day en route to his first Giro d'Italia victory. This edition of the Giro was also the first Giro d'Italia ridden by Eddy Merckx, who won the twelfth and fourteenth stage.

1968–1996: Foreign domination

The 1968 Giro d'Italia saw two important firsts: the first tests for drug use and the first prologue.
Merckx came back the following year to liking of his sponsor. Pettersson became the first Swedish cyclist to win a Grand Tour.
Merckx returned to the Giro in 1972 and resumed his domination. He grabbed the lead after a long solo attack during the race's seventh stage and never let go of the lead.
With the absence of Merckx from the 1975 edition due to illness, the competition increased between the other riders. This was the last Giro that Merckx raced; he finished eighth overall.
Freddy Maertens and Francesco Moser dominated the early portion of the 1977 Giro d'Italia.
Bernard Hinault's Giro d'Italia was in 1980. Battaglin won the Giro after putting in a solid performance in the race's final stage, an individual time trial.
Bernard Hinault returned to the Giro in 1982.
The 1984 Giro d'Italia was a battle between Italian Francesco Moser and Frenchman Laurent Fignon.
Giuseppe Saronni led the 1986 Giro d'Italia for the majority of the race before losing it to Roberto Visentini in the Alps. Roche took the lead and wound up winning the Giro. Roche's success would not stop there during the 1987 season, he would go on to win the Tour de France and the men's road race at the World Championships to complete the Triple Crown of Cycling.
The 1988 Giro d'Italia is remembered for the fourteenth stage that contained very poor weather throughout the stage and most notably on the slopes of the Passo di Gavia.
Dutchman Erik Breukink gained the lead of the 1989 Giro d'Italia after winning the stage 10 individual time trial. Bugno led the race from start to finish – a feat that had only been done three times before in the history of the Giro d'Italia.
Franco Chioccioli reigned supreme at the 1991 Giro d'Italia. Indurain first gained the lead of the race after the hilly third stage that led into Arrezo and then held it all the way to the finish in Milan. He separated himself from his competitors during the race's two individual time trials, both of which he won. Indurain would go on to ride the Tour de France in July and win it, and in doing so completed the rare Giro-Tour double.
Indurain returned in 1993 to defend his crown. Berzin consolidated his lead with victories in the race's final two time trials en route to the overall victory.  In doing so he spoiled Indurain's hopes for a three peat.
Tony Rominger came to the 1995 Giro d'Italia in great form. Eventual winner Pavel Tonkov first gained the race lead after the mountainous thirteenth stage that ended in Prato Nevoso. Tonkov lost his slim lead to the Spaniard Abraham Olano for a two stage period, before regaining it after stage 21, which contained five climbs of high severity. Tonkov rode into Milan the next day winner of the Giro d'Italia.

1997–2007: Italians resume conquest

Pavel Tonkov returned to the Giro in 1997 with ambitions of repeating as winner. Zülle was leading the race as it entered the Dolomites. Italians Giuseppe Guerini and Marco Pantani were at the head of the race during the race's mountainous seventeenth stage; the two riders worked together to get to the stage finish in Selva di Val Gardena. Guerini won the stage while Pantani took the overall lead. Pantani went on to win the Giro and subsequently the 1998 Tour de France, thus completing the rare feat of winning the Giro d'Italia and the Tour de France in the same calendar year.
Pantani returned to the Giro in 1999 while in peak physical form. Fatigue set in with Casagrande as the race wore on and on the penultimate stage he lost the lead, and ultimately the Giro, to Stefano Garzelli.
Dario Frigo took the lead in the 2001 Giro d'Italia after the race's fourth stage.
Alessandro Petacchi was the first rider to lead the 2003 Giro d'Italia after winning the opening stage. Cunego regained the lead after the sixteenth stage and went on to win the race, while fellow Italian Alessandro Petacchi won nine out of the 21 stages.
The 2005 Giro d'Italia saw the race lead change hands multiple times within the first week of racing.
The race leader's pink jersey changed hands five times in the first week of racing in the 2007 Giro d'Italia. Andrea Noè took the lead away from Marco Pinotti after the race's tenth stage.

2008–2013: Recent years

The 2008 Giro d'Italia was led for many days by Giovanni Visconti who had gained the lead after participating in a breakaway.
The 2010 Giro d'Italia saw the lead change hands eight times during the race. Spanish rider David Arroyo was leading the race as it headed into the final mountain stages of the race. Arroyo lost the race lead to Ivan Basso after the nineteenth stage where he lost over three minutes to Basso.
The 2012 Giro d'Italia saw a battle between Canadian Ryder Hesjedal and Spaniard Joaquim Rodríguez. Hesjedal first took the lead after finishing well on the seventh stage that featured a summit finish to Rocca di Cambio.

Classifications

A few riders from each to aim to win overall but there are three further competitions to draw riders of all specialties: points, mountains, and a classification for young riders with general classification aspirations. The oldest of the four classifications is the general classification. The leader of each aforementioned classifications wears a distinctive jersey. If a rider leads more than one classification that awards, he wears the jersey of the most prestigious classification. The abandoned jersey is worn by the rider who is second in the competition.

General classification

The most sought after classification in the Giro d'Italia is the general classification. All of the stages are timed to the finish, after finishing the riders' times are compounded with their previous stage times; so the rider with the lowest aggregate time is the leader of the race. The leader is determined after each stage's conclusion. The leader of the race also has the privilege to wear the race leader's pink jersey. The jersey is presented to the leader rider on a podium in the stage's finishing town. If a rider is leading more than one classification that awards a jersey, he will wear the maglia rosa since the general classification is the most important one in the race. The lead can change after each stage. The winner of the 2013 Giro d'Italia was Vincenzo Nibali.
The color pink was chosen as the magazine that created the Giro, La Gazzetta dello Sport, printed its newspapers on pink paper. The pink jersey was added to the race in the 1931 edition and it has since become a symbol of the Giro d'Italia. The first rider to wear the pink jersey was Learco Guerra. Each team brings multiple pink jerseys in advance of the Giro in case one of their riders becomes the overall leader of the race. Riders usually try to make the extra effort to keep the jersey for as long as possible in order to get more publicity for the team and the sponsor(s) of the team. Eddy Merckx wore the jersey for 78 stages, more than any other rider in the history of the Giro d'Italia.
The general classification winner was not always determined by a time system. In the inaugural Giro d'Italia the organizers chose to have a points system over a system based around elapsed time after the scandal that engulfed the 1904 Tour de France. In addition to that, the organizers chose the point system since it would be cheaper to count the placings of the riders rather than clocking the riders during each stage. The race leader was calculated by adding up each rider's placings in each stage and the rider with the lowest total was the leader; if a rider placed second in the first stage and third in the second stage, he would have five points total. The system was modified a year later to give the riders who placed 51st or higher in a stage 51 points and keep the point distribution system the same for the riders who placed 1st through 50th in a stage. The calculation remained unmodified until 1912 where the organizers chose to have the race be centered around teams, while still keeping the point system. The next year race organizers chose to revert to the system used in 1911. In 1914, the organizers shifted to the system used nowadays, where riders would have their finishing times for each stage totaled together to determine the overall leader.
These are the time bonuses that the riders receive for crossing the lines in the first few positions:

Mountains classification

The mountains classification is the second oldest jersey awarding classification in the Giro d'Italia. The mountains classification was added to the Giro d'Italia in 1933 Giro d'Italia and was first won by Alfredo Binda. During mountain stages of the race, points are awarded to the rider who is first to reach the top of each significant climb. Points are also awarded for riders who closely follow the leader up each climb. The number of points awarded varies according to the hill classification, which is determined by the steepness and length of that particular hill.
The climbers' jersey is worn by the rider who, at the start of each stage, has the largest amount of climbing points. If a rider leads two or more of the categories, the climbers' jersey is worn by the rider in second, or third, place in that contest. At the end of the Giro, the rider holding the most climbing points wins the classification. In fact, some riders, particularly those who are neither sprinters nor particularly good at time-trialing, may attempt only to win this particular competition within the race. The Giro has four categories of mountains. They range from category 4, the easiest, to category 1, the hardest. There is also the Cima Coppi, the highest point reached in a particular Giro, which is worth more points than the race's other first-category climbs. Gino Bartali has won the mountains classification a record seven times.
The classification awarded no jersey to the leader until the 1974 Giro d'Italia, when the organizers decided to award a green jersey to the leader. The green jersey was used until 2012, when the classification's sponsor, Banca Mediolanum, renewed its sponsorship for another four years and desired the jersey to be blue rather than green. Stefano Pirazzi won the mountains classification at the 2013 Giro d'Italia.
The point distribution for the mountains is as follows:

Points classification

The points classification is the third oldest of the four jersey current awarding classifications in the Giro d'Italia. It was introduced in the 1966 Giro d'Italia and was first won by Gianni Motta. Points are given to the rider who is first to reach the end of, or determined places during, any stage of the Giro. The red jersey is worn by the rider who at the start of each stage, has the largest amount of points. The rider whom at the end of the Giro, holds the most points, wins the points competition. Each stage win, regardless of the stage's categorization, awards 25 points, second place is worth 20 points, third 16, fourth 14, fifth 12, sixth 10, and one point less per place down the line, to a single point for fifteenth. This means that a true sprinter might not always win the points classification. The classification was added to draw the participation of the sprinters. The classification has been won four times by two riders: Francesco Moser and Giuseppe Saronni. The 2013 winner of the classification was Mark Cavendish.
In addition, stages can have one or more intermediate sprints: 8, 6, 4, 3, 2, 1 points are awarded to the first six cyclists passing these lines. These points also count toward the TV classification (Traguardo Volante, or "flying sprint"), a separate award.
The first year the points classification was used, it had no jersey that was given to the leader of the classification. In the 1967 Giro d'Italia, the red jersey was added for the leader of the classification. However, in 1969 the red jersey was changed to a cyclamen (purple) colored jersey. It remained that color until 2010 when the organizers chose to change the jersey back to the color red; in a return to the original color scheme for the three minor classifications, which reflected the colors of the Italian flag.
The point distribution for the sprints are as follows:

Young rider classification

The Young rider classification is restricted to the riders that are under the age of 25. The leader of the classification is determined the same way as the general classification, with the riders' times being added up after each stage and the eligible rider with lowest aggregate time is dubbed the leader. This classification was added to the Giro d'Italia in the 1976 edition, with Alfio Vandi being the first to win the classification after placing seventh overall. The classification was not contested between the years of 1995 and 2006. The classification was reintroduced in the 2007, and has been in each Giro since. The Giro d'Italia awards a white jersey to the leader of the classification. Evgeni Berzin is the only rider in the history of the Giro d'Italia to win the young rider classification and the general classification in the same year; Berzin won both classifications in 1994. Two riders have won the young rider classification twice in their respective careers: Vladimir Poulnikov and Pavel Tonkov. In 2013 it was won by Carlos Betancur.

Team classifications

There are two team classifications that are contested at the Giro d'Italia: the Trofeo Fast Team and the Trofeo Super Team. The Trofeo Fast Team is the older of the two as it was introduced in the first Giro d'Italia. It was first won by Atala. The Trofeo Fast Team is calculate by adding the times of the best three cyclists per team on each stage were added; the leading team was the team with the lowest total time. The classification just called the team classification in each edition until the organizers changed it to the Trofeo Fast Team for the 1994 Giro d'Italia.  won the Trofeo Fast Team classification in 2013.
The Trofeo Super Team was introduced at the 1993 Giro d'Italia as the team points classification. The name Trofeo Super Team was adopted for the 1994 edition of the Giro and been used ever since. The classification was first won by Ariostea in 1993. The classification is a team points classification, with the top 20 placed riders on each stage earning points (20 for first place, 19 for second place and so on, down to a single point for 20th) for their team.  won the Trofeo Super Team classification in 2013.

Minor classifications

Other less well-known classifications, whose leaders did not receive a special jersey, are awarded during the Giro. These awards were based on points earned throughout the three weeks of the tour. Each mass-start stage had one intermediate sprint, the Traguardo Volante, or T.V. The T.V. gave bonus seconds towards the general classification, points towards the regular points classification, and also points towards the T.V. classification. This award was known by various names in previous years, and was previously time-based. In 2013 this classification was renamed to the sprints classification and was won by Rafael Andriato.
Other awards include the Combativity classification, which was a compilation of points gained for position on crossing intermediate sprints, mountain passes and stage finishes. It was won by Mark Cavendish in 2013. The Azzurri d'Italia classification is based on finishing order; however, points were only awarded for the top three finishers in each stage. It was also most recently won by Mark Cavendish. Additionally, the Trofeo Fuga Pinarello rewarded riders who took part in a breakaway at the head of the field, each rider in an escape of ten or fewer riders getting one point for each kilometre that the group stayed clear.  won the Fair Play classification after only accumulating twenty points in the 2013 edition.

Defunct classifications

In 1946 the maglia nera (black jersey) was introduced and awarded the cyclist who was last in the general classification. Riders sometimes deliberately wasted time in order to become last overall and so wear the black jersey. The classification was short lived, as it was last contested in the 1951 Giro d'Italia. The classification was won twice by Luigi Malabrocca, who won the classification in 1946 and 1947. The last winner of the maglia nera was Giovanni Pinarello.
The intergiro classification was introduced in 1989 and first won by Yugoslavian Jure Pavlič. The classification was run each year since its addition until 2005. The last winner of the classification was Stefano Zanini. Fabrizio Guidi won the classification three times, the most by any rider. Guidi won the classification in 1996, 1999, and 2000.
There was also a combination classification that was introduced in the 1985 Giro d'Italia and was first won by Urs Freuler. The classification was not brought back in the 2007 Giro d'Italia.

Types of stages

A stage is a unit of the race that covers a portion of the Giro d'Italia's route in one day. Nowadays the Giro d'Italia contains either twenty-one stages or twenty stages and a prologue, with a prologue being an individual time trial under 

Mass-start stages

Most of the stages in the race are usually mass-start stages, with the whole peloton starting together. Mass-start stages begin in different towns with a send off to gain publicity, the riders ride without racing. The riders then ride a few kilometers around the stage's start town before reaching kilometer zero, where the race director then waves a flag to start the stage's racing. Once the flag is waved there are usually attacks by the riders to form a breakaway.
Riders are permitted to touch, but not push or nudge, each other. The first to cross the line wins. On flat stages or stages with low hills, which generally predominate in the first week, this leads to spectacular mass sprints.
All riders in a group finish in the same time as the lead rider, which helps avoid dangerous mass sprints. It is not unusual for the entire field to finish in a group, taking time to cross the line but being credited with the same time. When riders fall or crash within the final 3 kilometers of a stage with a flat finish, they are awarded the same time as the group they were in before they crashed. This change encourages riders to sprint to the finish for points awards without fear of losing time to the group. The final kilometer of racing is indicated by a red banner on an arch that also reads "Arrivo."
Time bonuses were awarded in the Giro for finishing high in the stages, in the first three positions. The stage's first placed rider receives twenty seconds, second placed twelve seconds, and the third placed rider receives six seconds.

=Mountains stages=

The Giro d'Italia is known for its steep and difficult climbs. Each race features a few stages that contain many climbs of high severity. The race traditionally passes through the Alps and the Dolomites. The first Alpine pass included was the Sestriere in 1911. The Dolomites were first included in the Giro in 1937, when the race crossed over the Rolle Pass and the Passo di Costalunga. Some of the most famous mountains used in the Giro are the Passo dello Stelvio, Passo Pordoi, and the Passo di Gavia. Since 1965 the highest point in the Giro d'Italia has been dubbed the Cima Coppi in honor of the great Italian climber Fausto Coppi.
Stages in the mountains often cause major shifts in the general classification. On ordinary stages, most riders stay in the peloton to the finish; however during mountain stages, it is not uncommon for riders to lose 30 minutes or to be eliminated after finishing outside the time limit.

Individual time trials

Riders in a time trial compete individually against the clock. If the first stage of the Giro is a time trial, then order is determined by a draw to establish the team's sequence. Once the team's order is chosen, then the teams can choose the starting order. If the incumbent winner of the Giro d'Italia is participating, he will start last. The riders are given staggered start times between one and three minutes. Once the first stage has been run and the general classification standing has been established, the riders' start order is determined by the inverse standings of the general classification, with the highest ranked person going last and the lowest ranked person going first. The first time trial was in the 1933 Giro d'Italia; it was between Bologna and Ferrara, and stretched . The first time trial was won by Alfredo Binda.
The first stage in modern Giros is often a short trial, a prologue, to decide who wears pink on the opening day. To be classified as a prologue, the time trial must be shorter than  around the streets of Campione d'Italia and was won by the Frenchman Charly Grosskost. The riders raced the course in an unusual format, with the riders racing in ten groups of thirteen and the time not being counted towards their overall time.
There are usually two or three time trials, with team time trials being included in the tally, in each modern edition of the Giro d'Italia. The final time trial has sometimes been the final stage, more recently often the penultimate stage.

Team time trial

A team time trial (TTT) is a race against the clock in which each team rides alone. The order for the team time trial is determined by the inversed order of the team classification, except for the race leader's team who is always the last to start. The teams' start times are staggered by five minutes. The riders work together in the team time trial by taking turns at the front, to lift the pace and break the wind for their teammates to save them energy.  The time is that of the fifth rider of each team: riders more than a bike-length behind their team's fifth rider are awarded their own times. The TTT has been criticized for favoring strong teams and handicapping strong riders in weak teams. The most recent team time trial in the Giro was in the 2013 edition, which was won by 
The team time trial has been used often in the Giro d'Italia, in fact it has been used 20 times in the history of the Giro. The first team time trial was won by the Italian team, Legnano.

Stage towns

Each stage begins and ends in a city. Most stages have different start cities and end cities, while some stages have the same starting and ending location. Milan has hosted the most stage starts and finishes with 137 since the race traditionally finishes in Milan. In addition to that, the race used to begin in Milan during the race's early existence. Milan has hosted the most starts and finishes for Giro d'Italia stages, with Rome being a close second and many towns having hosted over 25 stages.

The start and finish of the Giro

The start of the Giro d'Italia is a big deal and cities pay lots of money to host the start or finish of a stage. For the start of the Giro itself, the cities are willing to pay much more money. The money the city and other investors put into get the start is quickly earned back. Former race director said that the cities often earn ten times the money they invested.
For nearly half a century, the Giro started and finished by Milan, the city where the headquarters of the Gazzetta dello Sport were located. The first time the race didn't start or finish in Milan was in 1911, where the start and finish were moved to Rome to celebrate the 50th anniversary of Italy's unification. With the occasional exception, the start and finish in Milan was the standard for the Giro d'Italia. However since 1960 the place of departure has changed each year. Some years (1965, 1966, 1968, 1970, 1973, 1975, 1981–1989) the finish was also changed, but in 1990 the traditional finish in Milan was restored.
In 2009, to commemorate the centennial of the event, the finish took place in Rome.[ref]

The Giro takes place mainly in Italy, but some stages have departure or conclusion locations in other countries, especially in neighboring countries such as San Marino, France, Monaco, Switzerland, Austria, and Slovenia.

Starts outside Italy

For the first 47 editions of the race, the race started in Italian soil and in 1965 the race made its first foreign start in San Marino, and has since had nine more foreign starts. Denmark put in $3.86 million to host the first three stages of the race.








