[[Washington Freedom]]

CATEGORIES: Washington Freedom, Women's soccer clubs in the United States, Soccer clubs in Washington, D.C., Women's Professional Soccer teams, United Soccer Leagues W-League teams, Women's United Soccer Association teams, Sports clubs established in 2001, 2001 establishments in the United States, 2011 disestablishments in the United States

The Washington Freedom was an American professional soccer club based in the Washington, D.C. suburb of Germantown, Maryland that participated in Women's Professional Soccer.  The Freedom was originally founded in 2001 as a member of the defunct Women's United Soccer Association.  Since 2004, the Freedom had played its home games at the Maryland SoccerPlex. In 2011, the team relocated to Boca Raton, Florida and became magicJack.

History

WUSA (2001–03)

The team played its home games at Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium in Washington, D.C., where the team offices were also located. The team's "founding players" (players from the national team allocated three to each WUSA team) were Mia Hamm, Siri Mullinix and Michelle French. The team was expected by some to be one of the best in the league but finished seventh out of the eight teams their first season.
However, this finish allowed the Freedom to select Abby Wambach as their first pick in the 2002 WUSA draft. Additional personnel changes, better performance from retained players, and a Mia Hamm improved by off-season knee surgery led to a far better finish, as Washington went undefeated in their last eight matches and finished in third place (only two points out of first). In the postseason, they won their semifinal match against the Philadelphia Charge, 1–0, and went to the Founders Cup, the WUSA championship match, which they lost, 3–2, to the Carolina Courage.
In 2003, the Freedom were just good enough to make the playoffs, clinching the fourth and final spot with two games to go. However, they would go on to beat the regular season champion Boston Breakers in the semifinals, 0–0 (3–1 penalty kick shootout), and then defeated the Atlanta Beat in the Founders Cup, 2–1, in overtime. It was the last Golden Goal in a FIFA-sanctioned first-division league before the practice was changed.

Exhibition years (2004–05)

After the WUSA folded, the Freedom maintained an existence as the Washington Freedom Soccer Club, moving their home stadium to the Maryland Soccerplex and putting together a team called the Washington Freedom Reserves, which consisted of half-a-dozen players from the WUSA days along with young local players. In 2004, they played assorted exhibition matches against college and W-League teams and participated in the WUSA Festivals.
In 2005, the roster was significantly upgraded by adding former WUSA players like Tiffany Roberts, Kylie Bivens, and Emily Janss, as well as players Ali Krieger and Joanna Lohman from the U-21 National Team. The team also brought in former star soccer players Sun Wen and Brandi Chastain as guest players for one game each. In a season of exhibition matches, almost all against W-League teams, the Freedom compiled a 7–2–2 record.

W-League (2006–08)

The team became an associate member of the W-League in 2006 and played an exhibition season based on home-and-home series against east coast W-League teams. Then, on December 7, 2006, Washington announced that they had acquired a full W-League franchise.
In 2007, playing games that mattered for the first time since 2003, the Freedom compiled a 12–1–1 record, defeated the regular season champion Ottawa Fury in the Eastern Conference championship game, then went on to beat the Atlanta Silverbacks, 3–1, in the W-League championship match.
In 2008, the Freedom went 11–1–2 in the regular season, winning the Northeast Division, then defeated the Atlanta Silverbacks, 2–1, to capture the Eastern Conference championship, but then fell to the eventual W-League champion Pali Blues, 2–0, in the W-League semifinals.

Women's Professional Soccer: The first season (2009)

When the Women's Professional Soccer league formed in 2008, the Freedom became one of the original seven teams that started play in 2009.
The coaching staff went to considerable lengths to retain as many players with past Freedom experience as possible. Wambach had played for the Freedom in 2002 and 2003, while Krieger played for the Washington Freedom Reserves in 2004 and 2005, and for the W-League team in 2007.
In the 2008 WPS International Draft, conducted on September 24, 2008, the Freedom selected Japanese striker Homare Sawa, French players Sonia Bompastor and Louisa Necib and Australian forward Lisa De Vanna.
Following that was the 2008 WPS General Draft on October 6, 2008, and all of the players selected by the Freedom were from the Freedom's 2008 W-League roster: Sarah Huffman, Becky Sauerbrunn, Lori Lindsey and Emily Janss. Lindsey had been on the Freedom roster since the final WUSA season in 2003, and Janss had been with the team since 2005.
The 2009 WPS Draft took place on January 16, 2009.  The Freedom drafted Allie Long, Alex Singer, Jill Gilbeau, Parrissa Eyorokon, Briana Scurry, Rebecca Moros, Sarah Senty, Kati Jo Spisak, Claire Zimmeck, and Christen Karniski.womensprosoccer.aspx Additionally, the Freedom received the rights to Joanna Lohman in a trade with Saint Louis Athletica.womensprosoccer.aspx All of the players except for Long, Eyorokon, and Scurry had previous experience playing for the Freedom's W-League team.
Two players were added to the roster after tryouts and training camp: Kristin DeDycker and Madison Keller.womensprosoccer.ashx Keller had experience with the Freedom going back to 2004, while DeDycker (née Warren) had played for the Atlanta Beat in the WUSA.
McLeod was intended to be the starting goalkeeper, but visa issues kept her unavailable through the first five matches of the regular season, and the Freedom had mixed success with Briana Scurry and Kati Jo Spisak in goal. Following her arrival, though, the Freedom won three out of the next six matches while only losing once.
Abby Wambach, meanwhile, was recovering from a broken leg and didn't feel fully recovered until late in the season, when she returned from national team duty having scored her 100th international goal.

Women's Professional Soccer: season two (2010)

Unlike most of the other WPS teams, the Freedom made only limited changes in the offseason.
Players did not return for several reasons. Lori Lindsey and Sarah Senty were picked up in the expansion draft by the Philadelphia Independence, one of the two new WPS teams for 2010. Lindsey had originally joined the team in 2003 during its last year in the WUSA, while Senty joined the W-League team in 2007. Ali Krieger signed a two-year contract with FFC Frankfurt, keeping her there into 2012.
The Freedom started their season solidly in April and May, with a 4–2–1 record good enough for second place. However, in July and August they went on a ten-game winless streak ending with five losses in a row that put them out of playoff position and put head coach Gabarra's job in jeopardy. Longtime assistant coach Clyde Watson resigned and former Chicago Red Stars head coach Emma Hayes was hired as a consultant.
Following the season, Gabarra announced his resignation, citing "irreconcilable differences" between himself and team management.

Women's Professional Soccer: purchase & relocation (2011)

Financial troubles that had stirred in the background during the middle of the previous season came to the front during the offseason, with the longtime team owners finally deciding to back out after ten years of supporting the club.  With multiple teams having trouble making offseason payments, the league was under threat of folding until Dan Borislow, owner of the phone service magicJack, came in to buy the Freedom.  Sweeping changes were made, including changing the team name and moving the team to Boca Raton, Florida.

Players

Most recent squad

Notable former players

This list includes players who participated in any games played by the top-level Washington Freedom team, whether competitive (WUSA, W-League, WPS) or friendly (WUSA Festivals in 2004, exhibition matches in 2004 and 2005, Hall of Fame game in 2007, etc.).

Hall of Freedom

In 2009, the Washington Freedom introduced the "Hall of Freedom", an honor bestowed upon former players and personnel "in recognition of exceptional achievements, dedication and service to the club." Current members of the Hall of Freedom are:

Current coaching staff

Year-by-year

Annual Performance record

Honors

Competition history

The Washington Freedom was one of the eight professional soccer teams that played in the Women's United Soccer Association from 2001 to 2003. The team won the WUSA Founders Cup III in their final year, shortly before the league announced on September 15, 2003, that it was suspending operations. Unique among the WUSA teams, though, the Freedom maintained a continued existence, playing exhibition seasons in 2004 and 2005, then joining the W-League in 2006 and winning the W-League Championship in 2007. The Freedom are now a part of Women's Professional Soccer that launched in April 2009.
Despite the addition of a professional team, the Freedom have maintained an elite amateur team, which currently plays in the W-League, finishing second in the league in 2009.

Logo

Image:Washington freedom logo.png|Primary logo (2001–2008)
Image:FreedomLogo09.PNG|Primary logo (2008–2011)
File:Washington Freedom 2009.PNG|Secondary Logo (2008–2011)

Head coaches

Stadia

While in the WUSA, the Washington Freedom played their home games in RFK Stadium in Washington DC.  Since the WUSA ended, the Washington Freedom has played most of their home matches at the Soccerplex in Maryland.  They have, however, continued to play some games at RFK as doubleheaders with DC United.  These include games as the Freedom Reserves in 2004,






