[[United States Grand Prix]]

CATEGORIES: United States Grand Prix, Formula One Grands Prix, Pre–World Championship Grands Prix, National Grands Prix, Recurring sporting events established in 1908

The United States Grand Prix is a motor race which has been run on and off since 1908, when it was known as the American Grand Prize. The race later became part of the Formula One World Championship.  Over 43 editions, the race has been held at ten locations, most recently in 2013 at the Circuit of the Americas in Austin, Texas.

History

Origins

=Beginnings and the Vanderbilt Cup=

Inspired by the Gordon Bennett Cup and Circuit des Ardennes races he had competed in, William Kissam Vanderbilt founded a series of road races in the United States to showcase American road racing to the world.  The Vanderbilt Cup soon became an institution on New York's Long Island, attracting American and European competitors alike.  However, the race was plagued by crowd control problems, which led to spectator deaths and injuries, and the cancellation of the 1907 event.  Upon its return for 1908, the American Automobile Association did not adopt the new Grand Prix regulations agreed upon by the Association Internationale des Automobiles Clubs Reconnus (AIACR).

=The Grand Prize era (1908–1916)=

The Savannah Automobile Club laid out a lengthened version of their stock car course, totaling 
Despite the success of the Savannah event, it was decided that the 1909 race would be held on Long Island, in conjunction with the Vanderbilt Cup.  However, only the Vanderbilt race was held, and the Grand Prize pushed back to the next year.  After the 1910 Vanderbilt Cup saw more issues, including
the deaths of 2 riding mechanics and several serious spectator injuries, the Grand Prize was cancelled once again.  A last-minute request by the Savannah club saved the race for the year, but only gave one month to prepare the course.  A shorter 
For 1912, Savannah succumbed to public pressure, and Milwaukee, Wisconsin, won the bid for the race.  A narrow, 
The Grand Prize was not held in 1913, after Long Island's bid was rejected, and Savannah refused to provide sufficient prize money.  Oval racing on board tracks had taken off in the United States, to the detriment of road racing.  For 1914, the Grand Prize and Vanderbilt Cup were staged in Santa Monica, California, on an 

=Post-war decline, Indianapolis 500 and revival (1917–1958)=

The Grand Prize was discontinued after the 1916 event.  Between a lack of European participation due to World War I and the growing American interest in oval racing, road racing fell by the wayside.  The two Santa Monica events were the only road races on the 1916 championship, and the aborted 1917 National Championship was slated to feature 8 events, all ovals and 6 of them board tracks.  The Vanderbilt Cup was revived in 1936 and 1937 and run to Grand Prix regulations, but the races were a commercial failure.
The Indianapolis 500 kept a connection to European racing, running to Grand Prix regulations between 1923 and 1930, and from 1938 until 1953. and 1936, when it was replaced by the Borg-Warner Trophy.  The race was included in the World Championship from 1950 through 1960.
Riverside International Raceway opened in Riverside, California, in 1957 and one of its first events was an SCCA National sports car race.  For 1958, the race moved to the new, professional, USAC Road Racing Championship, and was billed as the "United States Grand Prix".

Formula One

=Sebring and Riverside (1959-1960)=

Russian-born Alec Ulmann staged the first 12 Hours of Sebring endurance race, located in central Florida in 1952 and it became a round of the World Sportscar Championship in 1953.  Buoyed by the success of the 12 Hours, the Riverside sports car race and Formula Libre events at Watkins Glen and Lime Rock Park, Ulmann decided to stage a Formula One race at Sebring International Raceway in 1959.  The race was billed as the "II United States Grand Prix",  Despite providing an exciting climax to the season, the race wasn't successful from the hosts' standpoint, as the promoters barely broke even; when prize money checks bounced, Charles Moran and Briggs Cunningham paid the money to save face for their country.
Ulmann moved the race to the Riverside International Raceway in Riverside, California in 1960. Stirling Moss put on quite a show in his privately entered Lotus by winning from the pole. However, while the driver's purse was enormous (as at Sebring), the event was no better received than the previous year's due to a lack of promotion, and proximity to the successful Times Grand Prix.  Again Moran and Cunningham would pay the prize money.

=Watkins Glen (1961–1980)=

Through most of 1961, Ulmann was listed as the promoter of the USGP, and contacted organizers in Miami and Bill France of the Daytona International Speedway but was unable to reach agreements.  In August, racing promoter Cameron Argetsinger, owner of the 
Watkins Glen had hosted a series of Formula Libre events that attracted international entries.  ACCUS accepted on 28 August, leaving only six weeks to organize the event on 8 October.  Argetsinger assembled the field, but was unable to convince Scuderia Ferrari to make the trip, leaving Richie Ginther and recently crowned World Champion Phil Hill out of their home Grand Prix.  Innes Ireland took a surprise win, his first and the first for Team Lotus.  Dan Gurney's Porsche was second, and Tony Brooks was third in his final Grand Prix.  Stirling Moss, in his final Grand Prix, retired with engine problems. Unlike the previous two races, the race was well attended (over 60,000) and turned a profit. The Watkins Glen circuit had similarities to the British Brands Hatch circuit, in that a number of corners were banked and very fast and that the circuit was located in a very green part of the world.
1962 saw Briton Jim Clark win in a Lotus and the next 3 United States Grand Prix saw Briton Graham Hill win all three events, each time in a BRM. Hill's 1964 win was crucial to him as he carried a points advantage into the next and final race in Mexico. 1966 and 1967 saw Clark win, the '66 win was the only time he won that year driving a Lotus with an overweight BRM H16 engine. Both the driver's and constructor's championships were clinched by Australian Jack Brabham and his Brabham team. Clark dominated the 1967 event, leading comfortably from his teammate Hill and American Dan Gurney in an Eagle. 1968 saw Mario Andretti put his Lotus 49 on pole position in his first ever Formula One race on a track he had never seen before. Andretti retired, and Briton Jackie Stewart won the race in a Ford/Cosworth powered Matra. 1969 saw Austrian Jochen Rindt win his first Formula One race. He took advantage of Stewart's mechanical problems and Rindt had pulled a huge gap out on the rest of the field. Graham Hill had a much worse day, however- he punctured his car's rear right tire and the rubber came off the rim, and the rubber exploded, sending Hill's Lotus cartwheeling off the course, and Hill was thrown out of the car at a very awkward angle, and he badly broke both legs. 1970 was a memorable event, Brazilian newcomer Emerson Fittipaldi won the race- which was his 4th start in a Formula One race. Stewart retired his new Tyrrell and Fittipaldi, driving a Lotus, held off a charge from Mexican Pedro Rodriguez in a BRM. It was a very emotional win for Colin Chapman's Lotus team, as team leader Rindt had been killed while practicing for the Italian Grand Prix at Monza and they did not run the Canadian Grand Prix- and because the next closest championship contender Jacky Ickx did not score enough points to keep him in contention to win the driver's championship, it went posthumously went to Rindt at this race. Team Lotus also won the constructor's championship at the 1970 event.
In 1971, the course was changed considerably. The entire lower section of the track was torn up and re-drawn, and there was a whole new "boot" section which added more than a mile to the course, lengthening it to   The alterations considerably heightened the driving challenge of the track, and it became even more popular than it had been with drivers, teams and fans. Watkins Glen had been transformed from a quick, small circuit into a fast, scenic and very tough up-and-down circuit where just about every corner was banked and long; uncommonly hard driving and maximum effort was required for almost every part of a lap. 1971 was the first running on the completed full circuit (the circuit was not completed in time for previous races, so the completed short circuit was used) and it saw popular Frenchman François Cevert win his only Grand Prix for Tyrrell, and the biggest cash prize in Formula One- $267,000. 1972 saw Jackie Stewart win after Emerson Fittipaldi had already won the championship at the previous race, the Italian Grand Prix at Monza. Cevert made it a Tyrrell 1-2. The race was at this point attracting lots of entries; 30 people entered and qualified for the 1972 race.
But from 1973 to 1975, the event reached its probable low. The 1973 Grand Prix was to become a memorable event for all the wrong reasons. Stewart, who, unknown to almost everyone (even his wife Helen) had planned to retire after this race. He had already won his third driver's championship 2 races previously at Monza, and he would be running his 100th and final Grand Prix. But during qualifying, Stewart's teammate and friend Cevert started his qualifying lap. Going into the nearly flat out uphill Esses, Cevert went into the first right-hander too fast, clipped the steep curb on the left hand side, lost control, hit Watkins Glen's trademark sky blue Armco on the right side (which on both sides was (and still is) situated right next to the track) and then the Tyrrell started to spin uncontrollably. The car then struck the barrier on the left side nearly head on at 150 mph. The car vaulted and went over the barriers, and while it did this, the barriers cut Cevert in half and he was killed instantly. The Tyrrell was completely destroyed, and the right rear tire was sticking over the Armco barriers. South African up and comer Jody Scheckter tried to get him out- but it was no use; Cevert was so clearly dead. The marshals just left Cevert in the car and threw a cover over the cockpit. A distraught Stewart and his team's manager Ken Tyrrell withdrew the team, handing the constructor's championship to Lotus. The illustrious Scotsman never raced competitively again. The race, however, was an exciting one. Swede Ronnie Peterson in a Lotus beat Briton new boy James Hunt in a Hesketh-entered March to the finish by .6 of a second. American Peter Revson finished 5th at his home race at his home track. The race was a Brabham 1-2, with Argentine Carlos Reutemann winning with Brazilian Carlos Pace 2nd. 1975 saw a medium speed chicane added to the Esses to slow the cars down, but it did not ruin the flow of the track. The race however, was a politically charged event. Regazzoni held up Fittipaldi's McLaren for 6 laps, and Fittipaldi eventually lapped the Swiss. However, Regazzoni was black flagged by Clerk of the Course Berdie Martin, and this irked the ire of Ferrari team manager (now president) Luca di Montezemolo. For that year's event, an uphill chicane was placed at the Esses to slow the cars through that very fast section. The thin and wiry Montezemolo actually got into a bit of a scuffle with the large Martin; and Montezemolo withdrew Regazzoni in protest, but it wasn't a complete disaster for Ferrari- Austrian and recently crowned driver's champion Niki Lauda went on to win from Fittipaldi.
1976 saw James Hunt win crucially in a McLaren while his closest championship contender Lauda finished 3rd. At this point, Hunt was only 3 points behind Lauda for the final race at Fuji, Japan. The race also saw Jacky Ickx crash hugely at the Chute, the Belgian survived but was injured. 1977 saw rain throughout the race. Hunt won again on a very wet track as he held off home favorite Mario Andretti in a Lotus 78 to win by 2 seconds. 1978 saw the heavy-hearted circus arrive after the death of Ronnie Peterson at Monza two weeks before. Andretti had already accumulated enough points to win the Driver's Championship before coming to Watkins Glen.   Mechanical problems forced Andretti to retire early from the race, which was won by Carlos Reutemann in a Ferrari 312T3. 1979 saw Gilles Villeneuve driving for Ferrari win a very wet race after Australian Alan Jones retired after dominating much of the race.
But by this time, Watkins Glen had deteriorated from its earlier splendor. Drivers began complaining about the bumpy track surface, and the teams and press were concerned over facilities and rowdy fans.

=Other Grands Prix in the United States (1976–1988)=

In 1976, the Long Beach Grand Prix in the Los Angeles area became a Formula One event, making the United States the first nation since Italy in 1957 to hold two Grands Prix in the same season.  The United States Grand Prix West, as it was called to distinguish from the United States Grand Prix East at Watkins Glen, was held until 1983, after which CART became the headliner series.  The Caesars Palace Grand Prix in Las Vegas, Nevada was a non-starter in 1980, debuting in 1981; it would only last two years with Formula One, before CART took over the race for another two seasons.  1982 saw the inaugural Detroit Grand Prix in the center of Detroit, Michigan; making three Formula One races in the United States that year. Detroit would last until 1988, after which it too became a CART event. A one-off Dallas Grand Prix in Fair Park, Texas was held in 1984, which was plagued by problems with the track surface, exacerbated by extremely hot 104 F (40 C) weather.
A new Grand Prix in the New York City area was announced for the 1983 season, to be held either at the Meadowlands Sports Complex, Meadow Lake in Flushing Meadows, or Mitchel Field in Hempstead, Long Island (on the same site as the 1936 and 1937 Vanderbilt Cups).

=Phoenix (1989–1991)=

Plans to continue Formula One races in the Detroit area at the nearby Belle Isle Park did not materialize, and in 1989, Formula One moved to Phoenix, Arizona.
The inaugural event in 1989 was held in June, with temperatures nearing  Formula One left and did not return to the United States until 2000.

=Indianapolis (2000–2007)=

It was not until 2000 that another United States Grand Prix took place, this time at the legendary Indianapolis Motor Speedway in Indiana.  Indianapolis was rumored to have been considering a Formula One race since the USGP left Phoenix.  Many commentators questioned whether a United States Grand Prix would be held in Indianapolis again, but the 2006 United States Grand Prix was held the next year, on 2 July 2006, without controversy.
On 12 July 2007, Formula One and the Indianapolis Motor Speedway announced that the 2007 U.S. Grand Prix would be the last one held at IMS for the foreseeable future, as both sides could not agree on the terms for the event. Ultimately, the United States Grand Prix was not on the Formula One calendar for 2009.

=Austin (2012–present)=

In August 2009, Formula One president Bernie Ecclestone remarked that there was no immediate plan to return Formula One to the US, vowing "never to return" to Indianapolis.
On 25 May 2010, Austin, Texas, was awarded the race on a ten-year contract, as Ecclestone and event promoter Full Throttle Productions agreed to a deal beginning in 
On 15 November 2011, it was reported that construction of the circuit had been temporarily halted as the owners had not yet been awarded the contract to stage the race in 2012,
Reining champion Sebastian Vettel took pole for the 1st race at the Texas circuit but it was 2007 winner Lewis Hamilton who kept his unbeaten run in the USA as the two finished almost 40 seconds ahead of 3rd.
Another American race was scheduled for the 2014 season alongside the United States Grand Prix called the Grand Prix of America, which was to be held on a 3.2-mile (5.2 km) street circuit in West New York and Weehawken, New Jersey. The circuit is located right next to the New York State/New Jersey border, New York City's Manhattan borough skyline and the Hudson River. The organizers signed a 10-year contract with Formula One Management, and it was originally on the 2013 calendar, however due to financial and preparation problems it was taken off the 2013 and 2014 calendar and is now rescheduled for the 2015 season onwards.

Winners

Events which were not part of the Formula One World Championship are indicated by a pink background.
Notes:

Multiple winners (drivers)

Embolded drivers are still competing in the Formula One championship

A pink background indicates an event which was not part of the Formula One World Championship.

Multiple winners (constructors)

Embolded teams are still competing in the Formula One championship

A pink background indicates an event which was not part of the Formula One World Championship.

By year

A pink background indicates an event which was not part of the Formula One World Championship.

Title sponsors

Previous circuits used

File:Sebring International Raceway - Historical (1952).svg|Sebring (1959)
File:Circuit Riverside.svg|Riverside (1960)
File:Watkins_Glen_International_Track_Map-1960-1970.svg|Watkins Glen (1961–1970)
File:Watkins_Glen_International_Track_Map-1970-1980.svg|Watkins Glen (1971–1980)
File:Phoenix Grand Prix Route - 1989, 1990.svg|Phoenix (1989–1990)
File:Phoenix Grand Prix Route - 1991.svg|Phoenix (1991)
File:Indianapolis Motor Speedway - road course.svg|Indianapolis Motor Speedway (2000–2007)



Notes

"2012 US Grand Prix winners Trophies revealed – A sign of precision, pace and Texas", Formula1Onlive, Retrieved on 1 November 2012.






