[[Eurasian Blue Tit]]

CATEGORIES: Cyanistes, Birds of Europe, Birds of Azerbaijan, Birds of Turkey, Birds of Lithuania, Animals described in 1758, Birds of Ukraine

The Eurasian Blue Tit (Cyanistes caeruleus or Parus caeruleus) is a small passerine bird in the tit family Paridae. The bird is easily recognisable by its blue and yellow plumage, but various authorities dispute their scientific classification.
Eurasian Blue Tits, usually resident and non-migratory birds, are widespread and a common resident breeder throughout temperate and subarctic Europe and western Asia in deciduous or mixed woodlands with a high proportion of oak. They usually nest in tree holes, although they easily adapt to nest boxes where necessary. Their main rival for nests and in the search for food is the much larger Great Tit.
The Eurasian Blue Tit prefers insects and spiders for their diet. Outside the breeding season, they also eat seeds and other vegetable-based foods. The birds are famed for their skill, as they can cling to the outermost branches and hang upside down when looking for food.

Taxonomy

This species was first described by Linnaeus in his Systema naturae in 1758 as Parus caeruleus.
Most authorities retain Cyanistes as a subgenus of Parus, but the British Ornithologists' Union treats Cyanistes as a distinct genus. This is supported by mtDNA cytochrome b sequence analysis which suggests that Cyanistes is not only distinct, but not close to other tits. The African Blue Tit was formerly considered conspecific.

Subspecies

There are currently at least nine recognised subspecies:

Hybrids

Pleske's Tit (Cyanistes pleskei) is a common hybrid between this species and the Azure Tit in western Russia. The cap is usually darker than the Azure Tit, and the tail is paler than the Eurasian Blue Tit.

Description

The Eurasian Blue Tit is usually 
A typical Eurasian Blue Tit has an azure blue crown and dark blue line passing through the eye, and encircling the white cheeks to the chin, giving the bird a very distinctive appearance. The forehead and a bar on the wing are white. The nape, wings and tail are blue and the back is yellowish green. The underparts is mostly sulphur-yellow with a dark line down the abdomen - the yellowness is indicative of the number of yellowy-green caterpillars eaten, due to high levels of carotene pigments in the diet. Young Blue Tits are noticeably more yellow.

Distribution and habitat

There are currently around 20–44 million pairs in Europe.
The Eurasian Blue Tit and the related hybrids are considered native species in areas of the European continent with a mainly temperate or Mediterranean climate, and in parts of the Middle East. These areas include the United Kingdom and most of the European Union and EFTA (except Malta, where they are considered vagrant, and Iceland, where they are absent), plus: Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Georgia, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Lebanon, Libya, the Republic of Macedonia, Moldova, Montenegro, Morocco, Russia, San Marino, Serbia, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, Vatican City and Ukraine.

Behaviour and ecology

Eurasian Blue and Great Tits form mixed winter flocks, and the former are perhaps the better gymnasts in the slender twigs. A Eurasian Blue Tit will often ascend a trunk in short jerky hops, imitating a Treecreeper. As a rule the bird roosts in ivy or evergreens, but in harsh winters will nest wherever there is a suitable small hole, be it in a tree or nesting box. They are very agile and can hang from almost anywhere.
This is a common and popular European garden bird, due to its perky acrobatic performances when feeding on nuts or suet. It swings beneath the holder, calling "tee, tee, tee" or a scolding "churr".

Breeding

The Eurasian Blue Tit will nest in any suitable hole in a tree, wall, or stump, or an artificial nest box, often competing with House Sparrows or Great Tits for the site. Few birds more readily accept the shelter of a nesting box; the same hole is returned to year after year, and when one pair dies another takes possession. It is estimated by the RSPB that there are 3,535,000 breeding pairs in the UK.
The bird is a close sitter, hissing and biting at an intruding finger. In the South West of England such behaviour has earned the Eurasian Blue Tit the colloquial nickname "Little Billy Biter". When protecting its eggs it raises its crest, but this is a sign of excitement rather than anger, for it is also elevated during nuptial display. The nesting material is usually moss, wool, hair and feathers, and the eggs are laid in April or May. The number in the clutch is often very large, but seven or eight are normal, and bigger clutches are usually laid by two or even more hens. It is not unusual for a single bird to feed the chicks in the nest at a rate of one feed every ninety (90) seconds during the height of the breeding season. In winter they form flocks with other tit species.

Diet

The Eurasian Blue Tit is a valuable destroyer of pests, though it has not an entirely clean sheet as a beneficial species. It is fond of young buds of various trees, and may pull them to bits in the hope of finding insects. No species, however, destroys more coccids and aphids, the worst foes of many plants. It takes leaf miner grubs and green tortrix moths (Tortricidae). Seeds are eaten, as with all this family.

Voice

Eurasian Blue Tits use songs and calls throughout the year. Handbook of the Birds of Europe the Middle East and North Africa - The Birds of the Western Palearctic Volume VII. Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York 1993 Songs are mostly used in late winter and spring to defend the territory or to attract mates. Calls are used for multiple reasons. Vocalizations in a Belgian Blue Tit Parus c. caeruleus population. Gerfault 74, 243-69 Communication with other Eurasian Blue Tits is the most important motivation for the use of calls. They inform one another on their location in trees by means of contact-calls. They use alarm-calls to warn others (including birds of other species such as the Great Tit, the European Robin or the Treecreeper) about the presence of predators in the neighbourhood. Scolding for example is used when a ground predator (e.g. Fox, Cat or Dog), a low flying predator or a perched Owl are noticed. Reactions of Eurasian Blue Tits Parus caeruleus to Hawk Models of Different Sizes. Bird Behavior 4, 78-81 Sometimes this is followed by mobbing behaviour in which birds gather together in flocks to counter a predator. The alarm-whistle warns other birds about the proximity of a Eurasian Sparrowhawk, a Northern Goshawk, a Common Buzzard or other flying predators that form a potential danger in the air. A series of high-pitched 'zeedling' notes are given by both partners before and during copulation. The behaviour of the Great Tit (Parus Major) and some other related species. Behaviour (Suppl.) II: 1-201. The begging-call is used by juveniles to beg for food from parents.

Learning

Eurasian Blue Tits are able to culturally transmit learning to other Tit species. An example of this, dating from the 1920s, is the ability to open milk bottles with foil tops, to get at the cream underneath.

Predators and natural threats

The small size of the Eurasian Blue Tit makes it vulnerable to prey by larger birds such as Jays who catch the vulnerable fledglings when leaving the nest. The most important predator is probably the sparrowhawk, closely followed by the domestic cat. Nests may be robbed by mammals such as weasels and  red squirrels and grey squirrels in the UK.
The successful breeding of chicks is dependent on sufficient supply of green caterpillars as well as satisfactory weather. Breeding seasons may be affected badly if the weather is cold and wet between May and July, particularly if this coincides with the emergence of the caterpillars on which the nestlings are fed.

Parasites and lifespan

Eurasian Blue Tits are known to be host to feather mites, and rarely lice and flat flies. In Europe the only feather mite species known to live on the Blue Tit host is Proctophyllodes stylifer. P. stylifer however seems to be of no concern to the bird as, until now, it is only known to feed on dead feather tissue. P. stylifer lives all its developmental stages, i.e. egg, larva, protonymph, tritonymph and adult, within the plumage of the same host. The usual sites where P. stylifer is encountered are the remiges and the rectrices of the bird where they can be found tandemly positioned between the barbs of the rachis.
The Eurasian Blue Tit has an average life expectancy of one-and-a-half to three years.

Status and conservation

The Eurasian Blue Tit is classified as a Least Concern species on the IUCN Red List (version 3.1), and as a Green Status species, since 1996, by the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds in the United Kingdom.

Relationship with humans

The Eurasian Blue Tit has appeared in many stamps and ornaments. For example, the 2010 Birds of Britain series is the most recent appearance of the bird on a British stamp.

Citations

Further reading




