[[Jewish views on marriage]]

CATEGORIES: Jewish marital law, Jewish views, Judaism and sexuality, Judaism and women, Marriage, Religion and children, Sexuality and age

In traditional Judaism, marriage is viewed as a contractual bond commanded by God in which a man and a woman come together to create a relationship in which God is directly involved.

Engagement

In Jewish law, an engagement (shidukhin) is a contract between a man and a woman where they mutually promise to marry each other at some future time and the terms on which it shall take place. The promise may be made by the intending parties or by their respective parents or other relatives on their behalf.(Kiddushin 9b) The promise is formalized in a document known as the . After this reading, the mothers of the future bride and groom break a plate. Today, some sign the contract on the day of the wedding, some do it as an earlier ceremony, and some do not do it at all.
In Haredi communities, many marriages are arranged by a professional match-maker ("shadchan") who receives a "brokerage-fee" for his or her services. The parents may be actively involved in the matchmaking procedure, but the young couple is not forced to marry. The Shidduch is thus a system of arranged introductions rather than arranged marriages.

Betrothal and marriage

In Jewish law, marriage consists of two separate acts, called erusin (or kiddushin, meaning sanctification), which is the betrothal ceremony, and nissu'in or chupah, the actual ceremony for the marriage. Erusin changes the couple's interpersonal status, while nissu'in brings about the legal consequences of the change of status. In Talmudic times, these two ceremonies usually took place up to a year apart; the bride lived with her parents until the actual marriage ceremony (nissuin), which would take place in a room or tent that the groom had set up for her. Since the Middle Ages the two ceremonies have taken place as a combined ceremony performed in public.
According to the Talmud,Kiddushin 1:1 erusin involves the groom handing an object to the bride - either an object of value such as a ring, or a document stating that she is being betrothed to him. In order to be valid, this must be done in the presence of two unrelated male witnesses. After erusin, the laws of adultery apply, and the marriage cannot be dissolved without a religious divorce. After nisuin, the couple may live together.

Matrimony

Marital harmony

Marital harmony, known as "shlom bayit," is valued in Jewish tradition. The Talmud states that a man should love his wife as much as he loves himself, and honour her more than he honours himself;Sanhedrin 76b indeed, one who honours his wife was said, by the classical rabbis, to be rewarded with wealth. Tough love was frowned upon; the Talmud forbids a husband from being overbearing to his household,Gittin 6b and domestic abuse by him was also condemned. It was said of a wife that God counts her tears.
As for the wife, the greatest praise the Talmudic rabbis offered to any woman was that given to a wife who fulfils the wishes of her husband;Nedarim 66b to this end, an early midrash states that a wife should not leave the home too frequently.Shabbat 140b It was believed in classical times that God's presence dwelt in a pure and loving home.Sotah 17a

Conjugal rights and obligations

Marriage obligations and rights in Judaism are ultimately based on those apparent in the Bible, which have been clarified, defined, and expanded on by many prominent rabbinic authorities throughout history.
Traditionally, the obligations of the husband include providing for his wife. He is obligated to provide for her sustenance for her benefit, in exchange he is also entitled to her income. However, this is a right to the wife and she can release her husband of the obligation of sustaining her and she can then keep her income exclusively for herself. The document that provides for this is the ketuba. This document also gives over to the husband the right she has to marry anyone of her choosing.
The Bible itself gives the wife protections, as per Exodus 21:10, although the rabbis may have added others later. The rights of the husband and wife are described in tractate Ketubot in the Talmud, which explains how the rabbis balanced the two sets of rights of the wife and the husband.
According to the non-traditional view, in the Bible the wife is treated as a possession owned by her husband, but later Judaism imposed several obligations on the husband, effectively giving the wife several rights and freedoms; indeed, being a Jewish wife was often a more favourable situation than being a wife in many other cultures. For example, the Talmud establishes the principle that a wife is entitled, but not compelled, to the same dignity and social standing as her husband,Ketubot 48aKetubot 61a and is entitled to keep any additional advantages she had as a result of her social status before her marriage.

=In the Bible=

Biblical Hebrew has two words for "husband": ba'al (also meaning "master"), and ish (also meaning "man", parallel to isha meaning "woman" or "wife"). The words are contrasted in Hosea 2:18 (2:16 in Christian Bibles), where God speaks to Israel as though it is his wife: "On that day, says the Lord, you will call me 'my husband' (ish), and will no longer call me 'my master' (ba'al)."
Women were not isolated from society. The Bible refers to the presence of women at festive events.
A wife was also seen as being of high value, and was therefore, usually, carefully looked after. Early nomadic communities practised a form of marriage known as beena, in which a wife would own a tent of her own, within which she retains complete independence from her husband;William Robertson Smith, Kinship and Marriage in early Arabia, (1885),  167 this principle appears to survive in parts of early Israelite society, as some early passages of the Bible appear to portray certain wives as each owning a tent as a personal possession (specifically, Jael,
It was not, however, a life of complete freedom. The descriptions of the Bible suggest that a wife was expected to perform certain household tasks: spinning, sewing, weaving, manufacture of clothing, fetching of water, baking of bread, and animal husbandry.
The husband too, is indirectly implied to have some responsibilities to his wife. The Covenant Code orders men who have two wives (polygynously) to not deprive the first wife of food, of clothing, nor of sexual activity;
As a polygynous society, the Israelites did not have any laws which imposed marital fidelity on men. and these legal strictnesses.

=In the Talmud and Rabbinic Judaism=

The Talmud sets a minimum provision which a husband must provide to his wife:
Rabbinic courts could compel the husband to make this provision, if he fails to do so voluntarily.
According to prominent Jewish writers of the Middle Ages, if a man is absent from his wife for a long period, the wife should be allowed to sell her husband's property, if necessary to sustain herself.
In order to offset the husband's duty to support his wife, she was required by the Talmud to surrender all her earnings to her husband, together with any profit she makes by accident, and the right of usufruct on her property;Ketubot 46b-47b the wife was not required to do this if she wished to support herself. Although the wife always retained ownership of her property itself, if she died while still married to her husband, he was to be her heir, according to the opinion of the Talmud; this principle, though, was modified, in various ways, by the rabbis of the Middle Ages.

==Home and household==

In Jewish tradition the husband was expected to provide a home for his wife, furnished in accordance to local custom, appropriate for the husband's status; the marital couple were expected to live together in this home, although if the husband's choice of work made it difficult to do so, the Talmud excuses him from the obligation. In the Middle Ages, it was argued that if a person continued to refuse to live with their spouse, the spouse in question had sufficient grounds for divorceMaimonides, Mishneh Torah, Ishut 14:1-16Jacob ben Asher, Eben ha-'Ezer, 76-77
Most Jewish religious authorities held that a husband must allow his wife to eat at the same table as him, even if he gave his wife enough money to provide for herself. By contrast, if a husband mistreated his wife, or lived in a disreputable neighbourhood, the Jewish religious authorities would permit the wife to move to another home elsewhere, and would compel the husband to finance her life there.
Expanding on the household tasks which the Bible implies a wife should undertake, rabbinic literature requires her to perform all the housework (such as baking, cooking, washing, caring for her children, etc.), unless her marriage had given the husband a large dowry; in the latter situation, the wife was expected only to tend to supposedly affectionate tasks, such as making his bed, and serving him his food. Jewish tradition expected the husband to provide the bed linen and kitchen utensils. If the wife had young twin children, the Talmud made her husband responsible for caring for one of them.Ketubot 59b

==Clothing==

The Talmud elaborates on the biblical requirement of the husband to provide his wife with clothing, by insisting that each year he must provide each wife with 50 zuzim's-worth of clothing, including garments appropriate to each season of the year. The Talmudic rabbis insist that this annual clothing gift should include one hat, one belt, and three pairs of shoesKetubot 64b (one pair for each of the three main annual festivals: Passover,  Shabu'ot, and Sukkoth). The husband was also expected by the classical rabbis to provide his wife with jewellery and perfumes if he lived in an area where this was customary.

==Physical obligations==

The Talmud argues that a husband is responsible for the protection of his wife's body. If his wife became ill, then he would be compelled, by the Talmud, to defray any medical expense which might be incurred in relation to this; the Talmud requires him to ensure that the wife receives care. Although he technically had the right to divorce his wife, enabling him to avoid paying for her medical costs, several prominent rabbis throughout history condemned such a course of action as inhuman behaviour, even if the wife was suffering from a prolonged illness.
If the wife dies, even if not due to illness, the Talmud's stipulations require the husband to arrange, and pay for, her burial;Ketubot 46a-47b the burial must, in the opinion of the Talmud, be one conducted in a manner befitting the husband's social status, and in accordance with the local custom. Prominent rabbis of the Middle Ages clarified this, stating that the husband must make any provisions required by local burial customs, potentially including the hiring of mourners and the erection of a tombstone.
If the wife was captured, the husband was required by the Talmud and later writers to pay the ransom demanded for her release;Ketubot 51aMaimonides, Mishneh Torah, Ishut 14:18-22Jacob ben Asher, Eben ha-'Ezer, 78Joseph Karo, Shulkhan Arukh, Yoreh De'ah 252:10 there is some debate whether the husband was required only to pay up to the wife's market value as a slave,Gittin, 45a or whether he must pay any ransom, even to the point of having to sell his possessions to raise the funds. If the husband and wife were both taken captive, the historic Jewish view was that the rabbinic courts should first pay the ransom for the wife, selling some of the husband's property in order to raise the funds.

==Fidelity==

In the classical era of the rabbinic scholars the death penalty for adultery was rarely applied. It forbids conviction if
These rules made it practically impossible to convict any woman of adultery, and in nearly every case women were acquitted. However,a  Kohen (Jewish priest) was compelled to divorce his wife if she had been raped, due to the religious belief that a priest should be untainted.Yebamot 56b
Even when a woman was convicted, the punishment was comparatively mild; the death penalty (for all crimes) was abolished in 40 AD,Sanhedrin 41 and adulteresses were flogged instead. Nevertheless, the husbands of convicted adulteresses were not permitted by the Talmud to forgive their guilty wives, instead being compelled to divorce them;Sotah 6:1 according to Maimonides, a conviction for adultery nullified any right that the wife's marriage contract (Hebrew: ketubah) gave her to a compensation payment for being divorced.Sotah 5:1
As for men who committed adultery (with another man's wife), Abba ben Joseph and Abba Arika are both quoted in the Talmud as expressing abhorrence, and arguing that such men would be condemned to Gehenna.Sotah 4b

==Family purity==

The laws of "family purity" (tohorat hamishpacha) are considered an important part of an Orthodox Jewish marriage and adherence to them is (in Orthodox Judaism) regarded as a prerequisite of marriage. This involves observance of the various details of the menstrual niddah laws. Orthodox brides and grooms often attend classes on this subject prior to the wedding. The Niddah laws are regarded as an intrinsic part of marital life (rather than just associated with women). Together with a few other rules, including those about the ejaculation of semen, these are collectively termed "family purity".

==Sexual relations==

In marriage, conjugal relations are guaranteed as a fundamental right for a woman, along with food and clothing."Judaism 101: Kosher Sex Sex within marriage is the woman's right and the man's duty. If either partner refuses to participate, that person is considered rebellious and the other spouse can sue for divorce.

Child marriage

In Jewish Ashkenazi communities in the Middle Ages, girls were married off very young.Sanhedrin 76a Child marriage was possible in Judaism due to the very low marriageable age for girls. A ketannah (literally meaning "little one") was any girl between the age of 3 years and that of 12 years plus one day; The choice of a ketannah to annul a marriage, known in Hebrew as mi'un (literally meaning "refusal", "denial", "protest"), led to a true annulment, not a divorce; a divorce document (get) was not necessary,Yebamot 107a and a ketannah who did this was not regarded by legal regulations as a divorcee, in relation to the marriage.Yebamot 107a
In modern times, child marriage is extremely rare in the Jewish community; it is banned by law in most countries.

Intermarriage

Rates of marriage between Jews and non-Jews have increased in countries other than Israel (the Jewish diaspora). According to the National Jewish Population Survey 2000-01, 47% of marriages involving Jews in the United States between 1996 and 2001 were with non-Jewish partners. Jewish leaders in different branches generally agree that possible assimilation is a crisis, but they differ on the proper response to intermarriage.
There are also differences between streams on what constitutes an intermarriage, arising from their differing criteria for being Jewish in the first place. Orthodox and Conservative streams do not accept as Jewish a person whose mother is not Jewish, nor a convert whose conversion was conducted under the authority of a more liberal stream.

Marriage in Israel

In Israel, the only institutionalized form of Jewish marriage is the religious one, i.e. a marriage conducted under the auspices of the rabbinate. Specifically, marriage of Israeli Jews must be conducted according to Jewish Law (halakha), as viewed by Orthodox Judaism. One consequence is that Jews in Israel who cannot marry according to Jewish law (e.g. a kohen and a divorcée, or a Jew and one who is not halachically Jewish), cannot marry each other. This has led for calls, mostly from the secular segment of the Israeli public, for the institution of civil marriage.
Some secular-Jewish Israelis travel abroad to have civil marriages, either because they do not wish an Orthodox wedding or because their union cannot be sanctioned by halakha. These marriages are legally recognized by the State, but are not recognized by the State Rabbinate.
Marriages performed in Israel must be carried out by religious authorities of an official religion (Judaism, Islam, Christianity, or Druse), unless both parties are without religion.

Divorce

Halakha (Jewish law) allows for divorce. The document of divorce is termed a get. The final divorce ceremony involves the husband giving the get document into the hand of the wife or her agent, but the wife may sue in rabbinical court to initiate the divorce. In such a case, a husband may be compelled to give the get, if he has violated any of his numerous obligations; this was traditionally accomplished by beating and or monetary coercion. The rationale was that since he was required to divorce his wife due to his (or her) violations of the contract, his good inclination desires to divorce her, and the community helps him to do what he wants to do anyway. In this case, the wife may or may not be entitled to a payment.
Since around the 12th century, Judaism recognized the right of a wife abused physically or psychologically to a divorce.
Conservative Judaism follows halacha, though differently than Orthodox Judaism. Reform Jews usually use an egalitarian form of the Ketubah at their weddings. They generally do not issue Jewish divorces, seeing a civil divorce as both necessary and sufficient; however, some Reform rabbis encourage the couple to go through a Jewish divorce procedure. Conservative and Orthodox Judaism do not recognize civil law as overriding religious law, and thus do not view a civil divorce as sufficient. Thus, a man or woman may be considered divorced by the Reform Jewish community, but still married by the Conservative community. Orthodox Judaism usually does not recognize Reform weddings because according to Talmudic law the witnesses to the marriage must be Jews who observe halacha, which is seldom the case in reform weddings. This allows Reform Jews to become, and marry, Orthodox Jews should they choose to.

Agunah

Traditionally, when a husband fled or his whereabouts were unknown for any reason, the woman was  considered an agunah (literally "an anchored woman") and was not allowed to remarry; in traditional Judaism divorce can only be initiated by the husband.  Prior to modern communication, the death of the husband while in a distant land was a common cause of this situation.  In modern times when a husband refuses to issue a get due to money, property or custody battles, the woman who cannot remarry is considered a Michuseres Get, not an agunah.  A man in this situation would not be termed a Misarev Get (literally "a refuser of a divorce document") unless a valid Beis Din had required him to issue a Get.  The term agunah is often used in such circumstances but it is not technically accurate.
Within both the Conservative and Orthodox communities, there are efforts to avoid situations where a woman is not able to obtain a Jewish divorce from her husband.  After the fact, various Jewish and secular legal methods are used to deal with such problems. None of the legal solutions addresses the agunah problem in the case of a missing husband.

Same-sex marriage

In ancient times

The Midrash is one of the few ancient religious texts that makes reference to same-sex marriage.  The following teaching can be found twice in the Midrash:
 "Rabbi Huna said in the name of Rabbi Joseph, 'The generation of the Flood was not wiped out until they wrote גמומסיות (either sexual hymns or marriage documents) for the union of a man to a male or to an animal.'"Genesis Rabbah 26:5; Leviticus Rabbah 23:9 
Another important reference is found in the Babylonian Talmud:
 "'Ula said: Non-Jews Bnei Noach, the progeny of Noah accepted upon themselves thirty mitzvot ordered laws but they only abide by three of them: the first one is that they do not write marriage documents for male couples, the second one  is that they don't sell dead human meat by the pound in stores and the third one is that they respect the Torah.'" Chullin 92ab 

In Orthodox Judaism

Orthodox Judaism does not admit the concept of same-sex marriage. On at least one occasion, controversial Orthodox rabbi (Steve Greenberg) has officiated at a ceremony where two men became married under secular law, but not under Jewish law.

In Conservative Judaism

In June 2012, the American branch of Conservative Judaism formally approved same-sex marriage ceremonies in a 13-0 vote.Conservative Jews approve gay wedding guidelines

In Reform Judaism

In 1996 the Central Conference of American Rabbis passed a resolution approving same-sex civil marriage. However, this same resolution made a distinction between civil marriages and religious marriages; this resolution thus stated:
In 1998, an ad hoc CCAR committee on Human Sexuality issued its majority report (11 to 1, 1 abstention) which stated that the holiness within a Jewish marriage "may be present in committed same gender relationships between two Jews and that these relationships can serve as the foundation of stable Jewish families, thus adding strength to the Jewish community." The report called for CCAR to support rabbis in officiating at same-sex marriages. Also in 1998, the Responsa Committee of the CCAR issued a lengthy teshuvah (rabbinical opinion)CCARnet.
In March 2000 CCAR issued a new resolution stating that "We do hereby resolve that the relationship of a Jewish, same gender couple is worthy of affirmation through appropriate Jewish ritual, and further resolve, that we recognize the diversity of opinions within our ranks on this issue. We support the decision of those who choose to officiate at rituals of union for same-sex couples, and we support the decision of those who do not."

In Reconstructionist Judaism

The Reconstructionist Rabbinical Association (RRA) encourages its members to officiate at same-sex marriages, though it does not require its members to officiate at them.






