[[Efteling]]

CATEGORIES: Efteling, Amusement parks in the Netherlands, 1952 establishments in the Netherlands, Visitor attractions in North Brabant, Buildings and structures in North Brabant

Efteling is the largest theme park in the Netherlands and one of the oldest theme parks in the world. It's located in the town of Kaatsheuvel, in the municipality of Loon op Zand. Over the years, the park has received over 100 million visitors.
Since its opening in 1952, Efteling has evolved from a nature park with a playground and a Fairy Tale Forest into a full-sized theme park. It now caters to both children and adults with its cultural, romantic and nostalgic themes, in addition to its wide array of amusement rides. It is twice as large as the original Disneyland park in California and predates it by three years.
The park is fantasy-themed and its attractions are based on elements from ancient myths and legends, fairy tales, fables and folklore.

History

In 1950, Efteling Nature Park Foundation (Stichting Natuurpark de Efteling) was founded by the mayor of Loon op Zand, R.J. van der Heijden, filmmaker Peter Reijnders, and designer artist Anton Pieck (1895-1987).  The foundation was named after the 16th-century farm Ersteling.
Efteling officially opened on May 31, 1952,
Since 1978, the park has been expanded and grown to become one of the most popular theme parks in the world. The Efteling Resort now offers the original theme park, a hotel, a theatre, a golf course, and a holiday village. It is still owned by the Efteling Nature Park Foundation.
The Dutch climate and the integral role of natural greenery in the park's appearance and theme once prevented it from remaining open year-round. Efteling's operating season was once limited to April - October, but the park's management, in order to make the park more profitable, began experimenting with 'Winter Efteling' in 1999 (see index below for attractions closed during "Winter Efteling"15px). The seasonal event, which features holiday displays and Christmas lights, has grown increasingly popular in the 2000s and draws thousands of visitors annually.
In 2010, Efteling announced plans to remain open year round. From November through approximately February, the 'Winter Efteling' theme remains in place. However, some of the regular rides are either closed (like Wild Water Ride Piraña) or temporary closed for maintenance (like The Flying Dutchman) during this period.
Gisela Williams, a reporter for The Wall Street Journal, wrote a review of the park in early 2014. Williams praised Efteling but criticized 
an attraction called Monsieur Cannibale for containing racist depictions of Africans. Her review was later mentioned in De Telegraaf, a daily newspaper in the Netherlands, and drew several angry comments from its readership. Williams also received her first death threat for her comments about the controversial attraction.

Design

The success of Efteling has been attributed largely to its high-quality ride designs and architecture, in addition to its pleasant greenery and gardening. The park, under the aegis of its creative directors, has always had high standards. When Anton Pieck was asked to design the initial fairy tales for the Efteling, he made sure the park would live up to his personal high standards. There would be no use of cheap building materials, plastic or concrete. Pieck's illustration style, somewhat grim and dark but yet also romantic and nostalgic, was the thematic base on which most future expansions were built.
Pieck worked for Efteling until the mid-1970s, when his position as chief designer was passed on to the younger Ton van de Ven. Van de Ven had already been working for Efteling for several years and Pieck was very pleased with his work. The Haunted Castle (het Spookslot), which opened in 1978 as the park's first new large attraction, was Efteling's first to be designed entirely by Van de Ven (although he used some ideas from joint brainstorming sessions with Pieck). Later, he designed several more rides and new fairy tales, leading him to be considered by some as the world's best 'imagineer' after Disney.
Van de Ven continued his work until 2002, when he retired. A new team of imagineers is currently working on new Efteling attractions.

Divisions

The Efteling resort now comprises several divisions: the theme park (1952), the four-star Efteling Hotel (1992), the 18-hole golf course (1995), Efteling Theatre (2002), and a new holiday park with bungalows (2009). The theatre, which was once used for park shows, is to be developed in a property to house big theatre productions, which will not be included in park admissions. The hotel was operated by Golden Tulip for several years, but Efteling decided recently to manage it independently. All divisions are now profitable, although it took the golf course several years to break even. The divisions are each contained in commercial corporations, but all shares are still held by the non-profit Efteling Nature Park Foundation (Stichting Natuurpark de Efteling).

The park

Efteling currently covers approximately 160 acres (650,000 m²). This area has changed only marginally over the course of its history. However, the park's foundation owns a much larger area of land, covered mostly with young forest, some grassland, roads, and an 18-hole golf course.
The park is divided into four themed areas or 'realms'. Originally, the park was divided into four areas called North, West, East, and South, with most of the park's historical rides and attractions, like the Fairy Tale Forest, located in West. When the park reorganized its infrastructure in the late 1990s (adding the Pardoes Promenade and a central hub called Efteling Brink), it also changed the areas' names. North was changed to Reizenrijk (Travel Realm), West became Marerijk (Fairy Realm), East became Ruigrijk (Rough Realm), and South became Anderrijk (Other Realm).
Although the park was not built with these divisions in mind and the names may seem cryptic, they do make sense. Perhaps the area most suited to its name is Ruigrijk, where most fast rides like the double-loop roller coaster Python (constructed in 1981) are located. Marerijk is the home to the Fairy Tale Forest and the Fairies of the Droomvlucht, Anderrijk has some rides that are inspired by non-Western cultures (e.g. Fata Morgana and Piraña), while Reizenrijk has the Carnaval Festival ride, which travels through several different 'countries'.
Efteling was built in a rather rural area, with lots of pine trees, giving it a 'nature park' feeling. Together with its large ponds and gardens, its abundant green space is rather unusual among the world's leading theme parks.

Attractions, rides and fairy tales in Efteling and their designers

1952 - Fairy Tale Forest (Anton Pieck, Peter Reijnders, Ton van de Ven, Henny Knoet, Michel den Dulk, Karel Willemen and Pim-Martijn Sanders) 
1954 - Children's Railway (Dutch: Kinderspoor), (Pedal trains, Anton Pieck and Peter Reijnders)15px 
1954 - Anton Pieck Square (Dutch: Anton Pieckplein), (square with nostalgic rides, Anton Pieck and Michel den Dulk)  
1956 - Steam Carousel (Dutch: Carrousselpaleis) (Carousel, bought from L. Janvier) 
1969 - Efteling Steam Train Company (Dutch: Efteling Stoomtrein Maatschappij, a  narrow gauge train ride) 
1971 - Diorama (Model railway/ Diorama, Anton Pieck) 
1978 - Haunted Castle (Dutch: Spookslot) (Haunted attraction, Ton van de Ven and Anton Pieck) 
1981 - Python (double Loop Corkscrew Roller coaster, Vekoma) 15px when freezing 
1981 - Gondoletta (Tow boat ride, Ton van de Ven) 15px 
1982 - Half Moon (Dutch: Halve Maen) (Ship swing, Ton van de Ven) 
1983 - Piraña (River rafting ride, Ton van de Ven) 15px 
1984 - Carnival Festival (Dutch: Carnaval Festival) (Dark ride, Geesink) 
1984 - Polka Marina (a combination of a carousel and a mini-rollercoaster, Ton van de Ven) 
1984 - Tin Lizzies (Dutch: De Oude Tuffer) (Car ride, Ton van de Ven) 
1985 - Bob Track (Dutch: Bobbaan) (Bobsled roller coaster, Intamin Ton van de Ven) 15px  when freezing 
1986 - Fata Morgana (Dark ride, Tow boat ride,Tow Boat Ride The flexible family rideGalerie photos Efteling Ton van de Ven) 
1987 - Pagode (Observation tower, Ton van de Ven) 
1988 - Monsieur Cannibale (Teacups ride, Henny Knoet) 
1990 - The People of Laaf (Dutch: Volk van Laaf) (Ton van de Ven) 
1993 - Dreamflight (Dutch: Droomvlucht) (Dark ride, Ton van de Ven) 
1996 - The House of the Five Senses (Dutch: Het huis van de 5 zintuigen) (Park entrance, Ton van de Ven) 
1996 - Villa Volta (Madhouse, Ton van de Ven) 
1998 - Bird Rok (Dutch: Vogel Rok) (Enclosed roller coaster,  Ton van de Ven) 
2002 - PandaVision (Dutch: Pandadroom) (a 4-D film cinema, Van Doorn and associates) 
2007 - The Flying Dutchman (Dutch: De Vliegende Hollander) (Water Coaster / Dark ride, Karel Willemen) 15px when freezing 
2010 - George and the Dragon (Dutch: Joris en de Draak) (Wooden racing coaster, Karel Willemen) 
2011 - Ravelin (Dutch: Raveleijn) (Theatre, Sander de Bruijn) 
2012 - Aquanura (Musical Fountain, WET)  
2012 - The Emperor's New Clothes (Dutch: De Nieuwe Kleren van de Keizer) (Fairytale)
Future extensions: 
2015 - A dive coaster,  from the Bolliger & Mabillard company  
2016/2020 - Court of Hearts (Dutch: Hartenhof) (Dark ride, Vekoma/Sander de Bruijn and others)
Former attractions:
1953 - Rowing pond (Dutch: Roeivijver) 15px, replaced by Aquanura 
1953 - Swimming Pool (Dutch: Zwembad), closed in 1989 
1966 - Water Organ (Dutch: Waterorgel), in use as a TV studio since 2010 
1991 - Pegasus (Junior wooden roller coaster, demolished in 2009)
Other ventures operating independently from the amusement park:
1992 - Tower Realm (Dutch: Torenrijk) (Theme hotel) 
1995 - Efteling Golf course (Dutch: Golfclub Efteling) (Golf course) 
2002 - Efteling Theatre (Dutch: Efteling Theater) (Theatre, Ton van de Ven) 
2008 - Radio Efteling  (Radio station)Radio Efteling homepage 
2009 - Forest Realm (Dutch: Bosrijk) (Accommodation area, Karel Willemen)

Awards

  | last =
  | first =
  | authorlink =
  | coauthors =
  | title = Thea Classic Award: Efteling Park Netherlands
  | work =
  | publisher = Efteling
  | date =
  | url = 
  | format =
  | doi =
