[[John Hanson]]

CATEGORIES: 1721 births, 1783 deaths, American people of English descent, Colonial politicians from Maryland, Continental Congressmen from Maryland, Members of the Maryland House of Delegates, People from Charles County, Maryland, People of Maryland in the American Revolution, Signers of the Articles of Confederation

John Hanson ( – November 15, 1783) was a merchant and public official from Maryland during the era of the American Revolution. After serving in a variety of roles for the Patriot cause in Maryland, in 1779 Hanson was elected as a delegate to the Continental Congress. He signed the Articles of Confederation in 1781 after Maryland finally joined the other states in ratifying them.
In November 1781, he was elected President of the Continental Congress, and became the first president to serve a one-year term under the provisions of the Articles of Confederation. While George Washington is universally recognized by historians as the first President of the United States formed under the United States Constitution, some biographies of Hanson have made the unconventional argument that Hanson was the first holder of the office.

Early life

John Hanson was born in Port Tobacco Parish in Charles County in the Province of Maryland on April 3, 1721,
Hanson was born on a plantation called "Mulberry Grove" into a wealthy and prominent family.
John Hanson was of English ancestry; his grandfather, also named John, came to Charles County, Maryland, as an indentured servant around 1661.
Little is known about Hanson's early life; he was presumably privately tutored as was customary among the gentry of his time and place. Alexander Hanson is sometimes confused with his son, Alexander Contee Hanson, Jr. (1786–1819), who became a newspaper editor and US Senator.

Political career

Hanson's career in public service began in 1750, when he was appointed sheriff of Charles County.
Hanson changed course in 1769, apparently to better pursue his business interests. He resigned from the General Assembly, sold his land in Charles County, and moved to Frederick County in western Maryland. There he held a variety of offices, including deputy surveyor, sheriff, and county treasurer.
When relations between Great Britain and the colonies became a crisis in 1774, Hanson became one of Frederick County's leading Patriots. He chaired a town meeting that passed a resolution opposing the Boston Port Act.
With hostilities underway, Hanson chaired the Frederick County committee of observation, part of the Patriot organization that assumed control of local governance. Responsible for recruiting and arming soldiers, Hanson proved to be an excellent organizer, and Frederick County sent the first southern troops to join George Washington's army.
Hanson was elected to the newly reformed Maryland House of Delegates in 1777, the first of five annual terms.
When Hanson was elected to Congress, Maryland was holding up the ratification of the Articles of Confederation. The state, which did not have any claims on western land, refused to ratify the Articles until the other states had ceded their western land claims.

President of Congress

On November 5, 1781, Congress elected Hanson as president of the Continental Congress 
The Articles of Confederation stipulated that presidents of Congress serve one-year terms, and Hanson became the first president to do so.
In 1781, during Hanson's presidency, Ned Barnes, one of Hanson's slaves, ran away. Hanson published an advertisement in the Maryland Gazette, offering a $30 reward for Barnes' recapture. Barnes was recaptured, but he stole a horse and ran off again to be with his wife, who lived on a plantation in Charles County, Maryland.

Death and legacy

Hanson retired from public office after his one-year term as president of Congress. In poor health, he died on November 15, 1783,
In 1898, Douglas H. Thomas, a descendant of Hanson, wrote a biography promoting Hanson as the first true President of the United States. Thomas became the "driving force"
Some historians have questioned the appropriateness of Hanson's selection for the honor of representing Maryland in Statuary Hall. According to historian Gregory Stiverson, Hanson was not one of Maryland's foremost leaders of the Revolutionary era.
The idea that Hanson was the forgotten first President of the United States was further promoted in a 1932 biography of Hanson by journalist Seymour Wemyss Smith.
In 1972, Hanson was depicted on a 6-cent US postal card, which featured his name and portrait next to the word "Patriot". U.S. Route 50 between Washington D.C. and Annapolis is named the John Hanson Highway in his honor. There are also middle schools located in Oxon Hill, Maryland, and Waldorf, Maryland, named after him. A former savings bank named for him was merged in the 1990s with Industrial Bank of Washington, D.C.
In the 1970s, a descendant of Hanson, John Hanson Briscoe, served as Speaker of the Maryland House of Delegates, which passed "a measure establishing April 14 as John Hanson Day". In 2009 the John Hanson Memorial Association was incorporated in Frederick, Maryland to create the John Hanson National Memorial and to both educate Americans about Hanson as well as counter the many myths written about him. The Memorial includes a statue of President John Hanson and an interpretive setting in Frederick, Maryland, where Hanson lived between 1769 and his death in 1783. The Memorial is in the Frederick County Courthouse's courtyard at the corner of Court and West Patrick Streets. Leaders of the Memorial include President Peter Hanson Michael,  Vice President Robert Hanson and Directors John Hanson Briscoe and John C. Hanson.



Bibliography

|accessdate= January 14, 2013|year= 1979|publisher= Johns Hopkins University Press|volume= 1|location= |id= |isbn= 0-8018-1995-4 |oclc= |doi= |pages= 405–406 |ref= }}
  | last = Peterson
  | first = Audrey 
