[[UEFA European Championship]]

CATEGORIES: UEFA European Championship, Recurring sporting events established in 1960, UEFA competitions



The UEFA European Championship is the primary association football competition contested by the senior men's national teams of the members of the Union of European Football Associations (UEFA), determining the continental champion of Europe. Held every four years since 1960, in the even-numbered year between World Cup tournaments, it was originally called the UEFA European Nations Cup, changing to the current name in 1968. Starting with the 1996 tournament, specific championships are often referred to in the form "UEFA Euro year"; this format has since been retroactively applied to earlier tournaments.
Prior to entering the tournament all teams other than the host nations (which qualify automatically) compete in a qualifying process. The championship winners earn the opportunity to compete in the following FIFA Confederations Cup, but are not obliged to do so.
The 14 European Championship tournaments have been won by nine different national teams: Germany and Spain each have won three titles, France has two titles, and Soviet Union, Italy, Czechoslovakia, Netherlands, Denmark and Greece have won one title each. To date, Spain are the only side in history to have won consecutive titles, doing so in the 2008 and 2012 editions.
The most recent championship, co-hosted by Poland and Ukraine in 2012, was won by Spain, who beat Italy 4–0 at the final in Kiev. The next European Championship will be hosted in France.
The UEFA European Championship is the second most popular international football tournament after the FIFA World Cup. "Pros and Cons of Multi-hosted Euros", Soccer Newsday, 4 July 2012, Retrieved 24 March 2014."What Does Hosting the Copa America in 2016 Mean to the United States?", Bleacher Report, 25 October 2012, Retrieved 24 March 2014. 

History

Beginnings

The idea for a pan-European football tournament was first proposed by the French Football Federation's secretary-general Henri Delaunay in 1927, but it was not until 1958 that the tournament was started—three years after Delaunay's death.
Spain held the next tournament in 1964, which saw an increase in entries to the qualification tournament, with 29 entering;
The tournament format stayed the same for the 1968 tournament, hosted and won by Italy.
Belgium hosted the 1972 tournament, which West Germany won, beating the USSR 3–0 in the final, with goals coming from Gerd Müller (twice) and Herbert Wimmer at the Heysel Stadium in Brussels.
The 1976 tournament in Yugoslavia was the last in which only four teams took part in the final tournament, and the last in which the hosts had to qualify. Czechoslovakia beat West Germany in the newly introduced penalty shootout. After seven successful conversions, Uli Hoeneß missed, leaving Czechoslovakian Antonín Panenka with the opportunity to score and win the tournament. An "audacious" chipped shot,

Expansion to 8 teams

The competition was expanded to eight teams in the 1980 tournament, again hosted by Italy. It involved a group stage, with the winners of the groups going on to contest the final, and the runners-up playing in the third place play-off.
France won their first major title at home in the 1984 tournament, with their captain Michel Platini scoring 9 goals in just 5 games, including the opening goal in the final, in which they beat Spain 2–0.
West Germany hosted UEFA Euro 1988, and the Netherlands beat the hosts—and traditional rivals—2–1 in the semi-finals, which sparked vigorous celebrations in the Netherlands.
UEFA Euro 1992 was held in Sweden, and was won by Denmark, who were only in the finals because UEFA did not allow Yugoslavia to participate as some of the states constituting the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia were at a state of war with each other. This was the first tournament in which a unified Germany took part and also the first major tournament to have the players' names printed on their backs.

Expansion to 16 teams

England hosted UEFA Euro 1996, the first tournament to use the nomenclature "Euro year" and would see the number of teams taking part double to 16. This was Germany's first title as a unified nation.
UEFA Euro 2000 was the first tournament to be held by two countries, in the Netherlands and Belgium.
UEFA Euro 2004, like 1992, produced an upset: Greece, who had only qualified for one World Cup (1994) and one European Championship (1980) before, beat hosts Portugal 1–0 in the final (after having also beaten them in the opening game) with a goal scored by Angelos Charisteas in the 57th minute to win a tournament that they had been given odds of 150–1 to win before it began.
The 2008 tournament, hosted by Austria and Switzerland, marked the second time that two nations co-hosted and the first edition where the new trophy was awarded. This is their first title since the 1964 tournament. Spain were the highest scoring team with 12 goals scored and David Villa finished as the top scorer with four goals. Xavi was awarded the player of the tournament, and nine Spanish players were picked for the UEFA Euro 2008 Team of the Tournament.
The UEFA Euro 2012 tournament was co-hosted by Poland and Ukraine. thus reversing his long-held reluctance to embrace such technology; and some crowd violence in group games.

Expansion to 24 teams

The UEFA Euro 2016 tournament will be hosted by France, where 24 teams will play in this tournament. 
Although preliminary preparation of bids from Turkey, Republic of Ireland-Wales-Scotland and Azerbaijan-Georgia to host Euro 2020 had occurred, it was announced in December 2012 that the tournament would be hosted in cities across several European countries.

Trophy

The Henri Delaunay Trophy, which is awarded to the winner of the European Championship, is named in honour of Henri Delaunay, the first General Secretary of UEFA, who came up with the idea of a European championship but died five years prior to the first tournament in 1960. His son, Pierre, was in charge of creating the trophy. Since the first tournament it has been awarded to the winning team for them to keep for four years, until the next tournament.
For the 2008 tournament, the trophy was slightly remodelled to make it larger. The new trophy, which is made of sterling silver, now weighs  This version of the trophy has only ever been won by one team, Spain up to date.

Format

The competition

Before 1980, only four teams qualified for the final tournament. From 1980, eight teams competed. In 1996 the tournament expanded to 16 teams, since it was easier for European nations to qualify for the World Cup than their own continental championship; 14 of the 24 teams at the 1982, 1986 and 1990 World Cups had been European, whereas the European Championship finals still involved only eight teams.
For 2016, the competition will increase to 24 teams. In 2007, there was much discussion about an expansion of the tournament to 24 teams, started by Scotland and the Republic of Ireland, due to the increased number of football associations in Europe after the breakups of Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union, and the inclusion of Israel and Kazakhstan. The new president of UEFA, Michel Platini, was reported to be in favour of expansion which proved an accurate assumption. Whilst on 17 April 2007, UEFA's Executive Committee formally decided against expansion in 2012, Platini indicated in June 2008 that UEFA will increase participation from 16 to 24 teams in future tournaments, starting from 2016.
The competing teams are chosen by a series of qualifying games: in 1960 and 1964 through home and away play-offs; from 1968 through a combination of both qualifying groups and play-off games. The host country was selected from the four finalists after they were determined through qualifying.
Since the expansion of the final tournament starting from 1980, the host country, or countries, have been chosen beforehand and qualify automatically.

Qualifying

In order to qualify, a team must finish in one of the qualifying spots or win a play-off. After this a team proceeds to the finals round in the host country, although hosts qualify for the tournament automatically. The qualifying phase begins in the autumn after the preceding FIFA World Cup, almost two years before the finals.
The groups for qualification are drawn by a UEFA committee using seeding. Seeded teams include reigning champions, and other teams on the basis of their performance in the preceding FIFA World Cup qualifying and the last European Championship qualifying. To obtain an accurate view of the teams abilities, a ranking is produced. This is calculated by taking the total number of points won by a particular team and dividing it by the number of games played, i.e. points per game. In the case of a team having hosted one of the two previous competitions and therefore having qualified automatically, only the results from the single most recent qualifying competition are used. If two teams have equal points per game, the committee then bases their positions in the rankings on:
The qualifying phase is played in a group format, the composition of the groups is determined through means of a draw of teams from pre-defined seeded bowls. The draw takes place after the preceding World Cup's qualifying competition. For UEFA Euro 2012, the group qualifying phase consists of nine groups; six of six teams and the remainder of five teams each.
Each group is played in a league format with teams playing each other home and away. Teams then either qualify for the final tournament or to further playoffs depending on their position in the group. As with most leagues, the points are awarded as three for a win, one for a draw, and none for a loss. In the eventuality of one or more teams having equal points after all matches have been played, the following criteria are used to distinguish the sides:

Final tournament

Sixteen teams progress to the final tournament; for the 2012 tournament, they were joint hosts Poland and Ukraine, the winners and the highest ranked second placed team from the nine qualifying groups as well as the winners of four play-off matches between the runners-up of the other groups. These sixteen teams are divided equally into four groups, A, B, C and D, each consisting of four teams. The groups are drawn up by the UEFA administration, again using seeding. The seeded teams being the host nations, the reigning champions, subject to qualification, and those with the best points per game coefficients over the qualifying phase of the tournament and the previous World Cup qualifying. Other finalists will be assigned to by means of a draw, using coefficients as a basis.
The four groups are again played in a league format, where a team plays its opponents once each. The same points system is used (three points for a win, one point for a draw, no points for a defeat). A schedule for the group matches will be drawn up, but the last two matches in a group must kick off simultaneously. The winner and runner-up of each group progresses to the quarter-finals, where a knockout system is used (the two teams play each other once, the winner progresses), this is used in all subsequent rounds as well. The winners of the quarter-finals matches progress to the semi-finals, where the winners play in the final. If in any of the knockout rounds, the scores are still equal after normal playing time, extra time and penalties are employed to separate the two teams. Unlike the FIFA World Cup, this tournament no longer has a third place playoff.

Future

Bids for future tournaments

On 28 May 2010, UEFA announced that Euro 2016 will be hosted by France. France beat bids of Turkey (7–6 in voting in second voting round) and Italy, which had the least votes in first voting round. This will be the third time France have hosted the competition.
For the 2020 tournament three bids had been proposed:
In December 2012, however, UEFA announced that the 2020 tournament would be hosted in several cities in various countries across Europe.

Results

Teams reaching the final

Players records and statistics

Rainer Bonhof is the only player with three medals, and one of twelve players with two winners medals. He was in the West Germany squad in 1972 (winners), 1976 (runners-up), and 1980 (winners). He played in a final match only in 1976.
The following have played in two final matches:
The following players have won two tournaments:

Goalscorers

=Overall top goalscorers (finals tournaments)=

Still active players in Bold

=Top scorers by tournament=

=Hat-tricks=

A hat-trick is achieved when the same player scores three goals in one match. Listed in chronological order.

Most tournaments played

 Did not play a match, in the squad only
Championship victories in bold

Most matches played

Still active players in Bold

Player of the Tournament

Player of the Tournament has been awarded since 1996, after the expansion to 16 teams.

The award has always gone to a player from the winning team.

Most clean sheets achieved

Still active players in Bold. Championship year in Bold

Team summary

Participation details

For each tournament, the number of teams in each finals tournament (in brackets) are shown.

Statistics

Tournament statistics

Total and average goals

Most Goals and Highest Top Scorer in bold

Most and Fewest Avg in bold

Attendance

Winning coaches








