[[Robert H. Schuller]]

CATEGORIES: 1926 births, American evangelicals, American people of Dutch descent, American sermon writers, American spiritual writers, American television evangelists, Hope College alumni, Living people, New Thought writers, People from Garden Grove, California, People from Alton, Iowa, Reformed Church in America ministers, Writers from California, Writers from Iowa, People with cancer

Robert Harold Schuller (born September 16, 1926) is a retired American televangelist, pastor, motivational speaker, and author. He is principally known for the weekly Hour of Power television program which he began in 1970. He is also the founder of the Crystal Cathedral in Garden Grove, California, where the Hour of Power program was previously broadcast.

Early years

Schuller was born near Alton, Iowa, on September 16, 1926 to Jennie (née Beltman) and Anthony Schuller. He studied at Hope College and received a Master of Divinity degree from Western Theological Seminary in 1950. He was ordained as a minister in the Reformed Church in America. He worked at Ivanhoe Reformed Church in Riverdale, Illinois, before moving to Garden Grove, California. There he opened the Garden Grove Community Church in 1955 in a drive-in movie theater. He also built a new 300-seat chapel about four miles (6 km) from the drive-in theater. Schuller conducted a service in the chapel at 9:30 Sunday mornings and then drove his organ to the drive-in to conduct a second service there. Goliath: The Life of Robert Schuller (1992), p. 119.
As the size of the congregations grew, Schuller purchased  The dedication service was held November 5, 1961. "My Journey"
The design of the new church building enabled Schuller to preach his sermons to worshipers in 500 cars as well as to members of the congregation inside the church.
A "Tower of Hope" building was added on the north side of the drive-in church building in 1968; it rose  walnut grove that bordered the north side of the Garden Grove Community Church for the construction of the much larger "Crystal Cathedral" designed by architect Philip Johnson. The church, which has glass walls and ceiling, was dedicated on September 14, 1980.

Ministry

Schuller focuses on what he believes are the positive aspects of the Christian faith. He deliberately avoids condemning people for sin, believing that Jesus "met needs before touting creeds". Once in relationship with God, Schuller emphasizes, someone who is sowing positive faith in his heart and actions will discover that the by-product is a reduction of sin. He is known to say, "Sin is a condition before it is an action." Schuller encourages Christians (and non-Christians) to achieve great things through God and to believe in their dreams. He wrote, "If you can dream it, you can do it!"
As the Crystal Cathedral's founding pastor, Schuller was seen and heard internationally on Sundays on the world's most widely watched hour-long church service, the Hour of Power, 1500 of which were recorded. In March 2012, under new leadership, the ministry began broadcasting a shortened 30-minute version of the Hour of Power. Discovery Channel and Lifetime are airing the shortened show, but the 60-minute version is continuing on the Trinity Broadcasting Network.

Personal life

On June 15, 1950, Schuller married Arvella De Haan, a church organist, who was instrumental in developing the music department at the Crystal Cathedral and produced the Hour of Power for over 40 years.  The Schullers had one son, Robert, and four daughters, Sheila, Jeanne, Carol and Gretchen.Robert Schuller at NNDB
Schuller's son, Robert A. Schuller, and eldest daughter, Sheila Schuller Coleman, have both been senior pastors of Crystal Cathedral. His grandson Robert V. Schuller succeeded as the lead pastor of the Hour of Power in 2013.
Schuller's second daughter, Jeanne Dunn, and her husband, Paul Dunn, oversaw The Glory of Christmas and The Glory of Easter productions. Jeanne Dunn has assisted in various editorial contributions to various printed works and for Schuller's books. Her husband co-authored The Possibility Thinker's Bible and Living Debt Free with Schuller.
The third daughter, Carol Schuller Milner, was the writer, director, and producer of Creation: Once Upon All Time that debuted in 2005 to an audience of over 70,000. She co-wrote Schuller's autobiography, My Journey, and has written several other works.
The youngest daughter, Gretchen Schuller Penner, was director of programming for the ministry. Her husband, James Penner, was the producer of the Hour of Power telecast.  Both were fired in a restructuring of Crystal Cathedral Ministries in March 2012.
Arvella Schuller died on February 11, 2014.

Retirement and succession

On January 22, 2006, Schuller's son, Robert A. Schuller, assumed the role of senior pastor of the Crystal Cathedral.  On October 25, 2008, however, Schuller removed his son from that position citing "a lack of shared vision".
On June 11, 2009, Schuller announced that the church's leadership would pass to his daughter, Sheila Schuller Coleman. On July 11, 2010, he announced that he was retiring as principal pastor of the Crystal Cathedral and would become chairman of the church's board of directors.  After a year as interim senior pastor, Sheila Schuller Coleman was elevated to senior pastor in July 2010.
Coleman is the oldest of the five Schuller children and the former head of family ministries at the Crystal Cathedral. Since her brother's departure, she had been the Director of Ministry and Mission.
On October 18, 2010, Coleman announced that the Crystal Cathedral was seeking bankruptcy protection.
On July 3, 2011, it was reported in the Orange County Register that Robert H. Schuller had been ousted from the board of the Crystal Cathedral.
On March 11, 2012, Coleman told the congregation of the Crystal Cathedral that she was  leaving to start a new church.
On January 24, 2013, the decision was announced that the Crystal Cathedral's board of directors voted to make Bobby Schuller, the son of Robert A. Schuller, the new pastor for the Hour of Power television program as well as a non-voting member of the board.
Bobby Schuller, who was filling in as a guest pastor, remained an unpaid pastor until the ministry moved to a new campus, the St. Callistus Catholic Church, which occurred in June 2013. Bobby Schuller is also a teaching pastor at the Tree of Life Community Church in Orange.
In late August 2013, Schuller was diagnosed with esophageal cancer that had spread to the lymph nodes. A follow-up examination in September 2013 presented Schuller with the possibility of undergoing chemotherapy and radiation treatment that could extend his life.

Writings

Schuller has authored 37 hardcover books, six of which have made the New York Times and Publishers Weekly bestseller lists,
including:






