[[Carcassonne (board game)]]

CATEGORIES: Carcassonne (board game), Spiel des Jahres winners, Deutscher Spiele Preis winners, Tile-laying board games, Board games introduced in 2000

Carcassonne is a tile-based German-style board game for two to five players, designed by Klaus-Jürgen Wrede and published in 2000 by Hans im Glück in German and by Rio Grande Games (until 2012) and Z-Man Games (currently) It received the Spiel des Jahres and the Deutscher Spiele Preis awards in 2001.  It is named after the medieval fortified town of Carcassonne in southern France, famed for its city walls. The game has spawned many expansions and spin-offs, and several PC, console and mobile versions.

Gameplay

The game board is a medieval landscape built by the players as the game progresses.  The game starts with a single terrain tile face up and 71 others shuffled face down for the players to draw from.  On each turn a player draws a new terrain tile and places it adjacent to tiles that are already face up.  The new tile must be placed in a way that extends features on the tiles it abuts: roads must connect to roads, fields to fields, and cities to cities.
After placing each new tile, the placing player may opt to station a piece (called a "follower") on a feature of that newly placed tile. The placing player may not use a follower to claim any features of the tile that extend or connect features already claimed by another player. However, it is possible for terrain features claimed by opposing players to become "shared" by the subsequent placement of tiles connecting them.  For example, two field tiles which each have a follower can become connected into a single field by another terrain tile.
The game ends when the last tile has been placed.  At that time, all features (including fields) score points for the players with the most followers on them. The player with the most points wins the game.

Scoring

During the players' turns, cities, cloisters, and roads (but not fields) are scored when they are completed—cities and roads when they are completed (i.e. contain no unfinished edges from which they may be expanded), and cloisters when surrounded by eight tiles. At the end of the game, when there are no tiles remaining, all incomplete features are scored. Points are awarded to the players with the most followers in a feature. If there is a tie for the most followers in any given feature, all of the tied players are awarded the full number of points. In general (see table), points are awarded for the number of tiles covered by a feature; cloisters score for neighboring tiles; and fields score based on the number of abutting completed cities.
Once a feature is scored, all of the followers in that feature are returned to their owners.
|-
!style="background: #efefef" width="10%"|Feature
!style="background: #efefef" width="45%"|Completed during play
!style="background: #efefef" width="45%"|Game end
|-
| City
|2 points per tile + 2 points per pennant
|1 point per tile + 1 point per pennant
|-
|Road
|colspan="2"|1 point per tile
|-
|Cloister
|colspan="2"|1 point + 1 point for each of the surrounding tiles
|-
|Fields
|(Not scored)
|3 points for each completed city bordering the field.
|}

=Older editions=

There are two older editions of Carcassonne, differing in scoring of cities and fields. Though, until recently, the first edition scoring rules were included with English releases of Carcassonne, third edition rules[ref]
[/ref] are now included with all editions (including the Xbox 360 and travel versions), and are assumed by all expansions in all languages.
In the first and second editions of the game, completed cities covering just two tiles scored two points (one per tile) and one extra point for every pennant that resides in the city.  This exception is removed from the third edition, in which there is no difference between two-tile cities and cities of larger size.
The greatest divergence in scoring rules between the editions of Carcassonne is in scoring for fields.  In the first edition, the players with the greatest number of followers adjacent to a city were awarded four points for that city.  Thus, followers from different fields contributed to the scoring for a city, and followers on a field may contribute to the scoring for multiple cities. The second edition considered different fields separately — for each field, the players with the greatest number of followers in a field scored three points for each city adjacent to the field, although points were only scored once for any given city. The third edition removes these exceptions and brings field scoring in line with the scoring of other features.

Game interest

Carcassonne is considered to be an excellent "gateway game" by many board game players as it is a game that can be used to introduce new players to board games.  The rules are simple, no one is ever eliminated, and the play is fast.  A typical game, without any expansions, takes about 45 minutes to play.  There is a substantial luck component to the game; however, good tactics greatly improve one's chances of winning. Examples of tactical considerations include:

Box contents

The 2000 base box contains the following items:

Expansions

Several official expansions for Carcassonne have been published, which add numerous additional rules, tiles and new kinds of figures.  Together, they can more than double the length of the game. These expansions are generally compatible with each other and may be played together.

Full expansions

Mini expansions

Six stand-alone mini expansions, with each containing a tile for a seventh mini expansion.
1. Carcassonne — The Fliers (Carcassonne — Die Fluggeräte) 
2. Carcassonne — The Messages (Carcassonne — Die Depeschen)
3. Carcassonne — The Ferries (Carcassonne — Die Fähren)
4. Carcassonne — The Goldmines (Carcassonne — Die Goldminen)
5. Carcassonne — Mage & Witch (Carcassonne — Magier & Hexe)
6. Carcassonne — The Robber (Carcassonne — Die Räuber)
7. Carcassonne — Corn Circles II (Carcassonne - Die Kornkreise)

Compilations

In addition, some retailers offer bundles of expansions without unique branding.

Spinoffs

Following the success of Carcassonne, a number of games have been spun off from the main game, all sharing similar mechanics. There is also a travel-sized version of the original game, Travel Carcassonne (Reise-Carcassonne), released in 2007.
[/ref] this is a short game for younger children inspired by Carcassonne, designed by Marco Teubner.[ref]


Video games

}}[/ref] by games company Koch Media and discontinued in 2006.

Tournaments

International Carcassonne tournaments were held in Germany in 2003-2005.
The first official Carcassonne world championship was held at SPIEL in Essen, Germany, in 2006,






