[[Red-necked wallaby]]

CATEGORIES: Macropods, Animals described in 1817, Mammals of Tasmania, Mammals of South Australia, Mammals of New South Wales, Mammals of Victoria (Australia), Marsupials of Australia, Invasive mammal species

The red-necked wallaby (Macropus rufogriseus) is a medium-sized macropod marsupial (wallaby), common in the more temperate and fertile parts of eastern Australia, including Tasmania.

Description

Red-necked wallabies are distinguished by their black nose and paws, white stripe on the upper lip, and grizzled medium grey coat with a reddish wash across the shoulders. They can weigh  Red-necked wallabies may live up to 9 years.

Distribution and habitat

Red-necked wallabies are found in coastal scrub and sclerophyll forest throughout coastal and highland eastern Australia, from Bundaberg, Queensland to the South Australian border;  in Tasmania and on many of the Bass Strait islands (although it is unclear which of the islands have native populations as opposed to introduced ones); as well as an introduced population in the Canterbury region of New Zealand's South Island. In Tasmania and coastal Queensland, their numbers have expanded over the past 30 years because of a reduction in hunting pressure and the partial clearing of forest to result in a mosaic of pastures where wallabies can feed at night, alongside bushland where they can shelter by day. For reasons not altogether clear, it is less common in Victoria.

Behaviour

Red-necked wallabies are mainly solitary but will gather together when there's an abundance of resources such as food, water or shelter. When they do gather in groups, they have a social hierarchy similar to other wallaby species. A recent study has demonstrated that wallabies, as other social or gregarious mammals, are able to manage conflict via reconciliation, involving the post-conflict reunion, after a fight, of former opponents, which engage affinitive contacts., Norscia, I., 2014: Peace-Making in Marsupials: The First Study in the Red-Necked Wallaby (Macropus rufogriseus)  PLoS ONE 9(1): e86859. doi:10.1371/journal.0086859 Red-necked wallabies are mainly nocturnal. They spend most of the daytime resting.
A female's estrous lasts 33 days. During courting, the female first licks the male's neck. The male will then rub his cheek against the female's.  Then the male and female will fight briefly, standing upright like two males. After that they finally mate. A couple will stay together for one day before separating. A female bears one offspring at a time; young stay in the pouch for about 280 days, after which females and their offspring stay together for only a month. However, females may stay in the home range of their mothers for life while males leave at two years old. Also, red-necked wallabies engage in alloparental care, in which a wallaby may adopt the child of another wallaby. This is a common behavior seen in many other animal species like wolves, elephants, and fathead minnows. (December 1982). "The Evolution of Alloparental Care in Mammals and Birds". The Quarterly Review of Biology 57 (4): 405-435

Diet

Red-necked wallabies diets consists of grasses, roots, tree leaves, and weeds.

Subspecies

There are three subspecies.
The Tasmanian form, Macropus rufogriseus rufogriseus, usually known as Bennett's wallaby is smaller (as island species often are), has longer, darker, shaggier fur, and breeds in the late summer, mostly between February and April. They have adapted to living in proximity to humans and can be found grazing on lawns in the fringes of Hobart and other urban areas.
The mainland form, Macropus rufogriseus banksianus, breeds all year round. Interestingly, captive animals maintain their breeding schedules; Tasmanian females that become pregnant out of their normal season delaying birth until summer, which can be anything up to eight months later.

Introduction to other countries

There is a small colony of red-necked wallabies on the island of Inchconnachan, Loch Lomond in Argyll and Bute, Scotland. This was founded in 1975 with two pairs taken from Whipsnade Zoo, and had risen to 26 individuals by 1993.
There are also colonies in England: in the Peak District, in Derbyshire, and in the Ashdown Forest, in East Sussex. These were established c.1900. There are also other smaller groups frequently spotted in West Sussex and Hampshire.
In France, in the southern part of the Forest of Rambouillet,  west from Paris, there is a wild group of around 30 Bennett's Wallabies. This population has been present since the seventies, when some individuals escaped from the zoological park of Émancé after a storm.cerf78.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=215&Itemid=307
In 1870, several wallabies were transported from Tasmania to Christchurch, New Zealand. Two females and one male from this stock were later released about Te Waimate, the property of Waimate's first European settler.  The year 1874 saw them freed in the Hunters Hills, where over the years their population has dramatically increased. Wallabies are now resident on approximately 350,000 ha of terrain centered upon the Hunters Hills, including the Two Thumb Ranges, the Kirkliston Range and The Grampians. They are declared an animal pest in the Canterbury Region and land occupiers must contain the wallabies within specified areas.




