[[Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Transportation in Atlanta, Georgia, 1926 establishments in Georgia (U.S. state), Airports in Georgia (U.S. state), Airports established in 1926, Transportation in Clayton County, Georgia, Buildings and structures in Fulton County, Georgia, Buildings and structures in Clayton County, Georgia, Transportation in Fulton County, Georgia, College Park, Georgia

Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport  Many of the nearly one million flights are domestic flights from within the United States, where Atlanta serves as a major hub for travel throughout the Southeastern United States. The airport has 207 domestic and international gates.
Hartsfield–Jackson International Airport is a focus city for Southwest Airlines and is the primary hub of Delta Air Lines and Delta Connection partner ExpressJet; at nearly 1,000 flights a day, the Delta hub is the world's largest airline hub. The airport has international service to North America, South America, Central America, Europe, Asia, and Africa. As an international gateway to the United States, Hartsfield–Jackson ranks seventh.
The airport is located mostly in unincorporated areas in Fulton and Clayton counties.  However, the airport spills into the city limits of Atlanta,Zoning Ordinance, City of Atlanta, Georgia College Park"City Maps." City of College Park. and Hapeville."Official Zoning Map." City of Hapeville. The airport's domestic terminal is served by MARTA's Red/Gold rail line.

History

Hartsfield–Jackson had its beginnings with a five-year, rent-free lease on  that was the home of an abandoned auto racetrack named The Atlanta Speedway. The lease was signed on April 16, 1925, by Mayor Walter Sims, who committed the city to develop it into an airfield. As part of the agreement, the property was renamed Candler Field after its former owner, Coca-Cola tycoon and former Atlanta mayor Asa Candler. The first flight into Candler Field was on September 15, 1926, a Florida Airways mail plane flying from Jacksonville, Florida.  In May 1928, Pitcairn Aviation began service to Atlanta, followed in June 1930 by Delta Air Service. Later these two airlines, known as Eastern Air Lines and Delta Air Lines, respectively, would both use Atlanta as their chief hubs. (Since 2003). In Aviation Explorer. Retrieved September 14, 2010
It was a busy airport from its inception and by the end of 1930 it was third behind New York City and Chicago for regular daily flights with sixteen arriving and departing.II, p.851 (In May 1931 Atlanta had four scheduled departures.) Candler Field's first control tower opened March 1939. The March 1939 Official Aviation Guide shows fourteen weekday airline departures: ten Eastern and four Delta.
In October 1940 the U.S. government declared it a military airfield and the United States Army Air Forces operated Atlanta Army Airfield jointly with Candler Field. The Air Force used the airport primarily for servicing of transient aircraft, with many types of combat aircraft being maintained at the airport. During World War II the airport doubled in size and set a record of 1,700 takeoffs and landings in a single day, making it the nation's busiest airport in terms of flight operation. Atlanta Army Airfield closed after the war.
In 1946 Candler Field was renamed Atlanta Municipal Airport and by 1948, more than one million passengers passed through a war surplus hangar that served as a terminal building. Delta and Eastern had extensive networks from ATL, though Atlanta had no nonstop flights beyond Texas, St Louis and Chicago until 1961. Southern Airways established itself at ATL after the war and had short-haul routes around the Southeast until 1979.
On June 1, 1956 an Eastern flight to Montreal, Canada was the first international flight out of Atlanta. Atlanta's first scheduled international flight was the Delta/Pan Am interchange DC-8 to Europe starting in 1964; the first scheduled nonstop to a foreign country was Eastern's flight to Mexico City around 1972. Nonstops to Europe started in 1978 and to Asia in 1992-93.
In 1957 Atlanta saw its first jet airliner: a prototype Sud Aviation Caravelle that was touring the country arrived from Washington D.C. The first scheduled turbine airliners were Capital Viscounts in June 1956; the first scheduled jets were Delta DC-8s in September 1959.
Atlanta says ATL was the busiest airport in the country with more than two million passengers passing through in 1957 and, between noon and 2 p.m. each day, it became the busiest airport in the world. (The April 1957 OAG shows 165 weekday departures from Atlanta, including 45 between 12:05 and 2:00 PM (and 20 between 2:25 and 4:25 AM). Chicago Midway had 414 weekday departures, including 48 between 12:00 and 2:00 PM. For the year 1957 Atlanta was the ninth busiest airline airport in the country by flight count and about the same by passenger count.)
That year work began on a new terminal; on May 3, 1961, the new $21 million terminal opened.  It was the largest in the country and could handle over six million travelers a year; the first year nine and half million people passed through. long.
In 1967 the city and the airlines began work on a plan for development of Atlanta Municipal Airport. the following year.
Although Eastern was a larger airline than Delta until airline deregulation in 1978, Delta was an early adopter of the hub and spoke route system, with Atlanta as its primary hub between the Midwest and Florida, giving it an advantage in the Atlanta market. Eastern ceased operations in 1991 due to labor issues leaving Delta with the only major airline hub in Atlanta. American Airlines considered establishing an Atlanta hub around the time of Eastern's demise, but determined that Delta was already too strong there, and that the competitive environment was more favorable at Eastern's other hub in Miami.
ValuJet was established in 1993 as low-cost competition for Delta at ATL. However, its safety practices were called into question early in its life, and the airline was grounded after the 1996 crash of ValuJet Flight 592. It resumed operations in 1997 as AirTran Airways and remains the second-largest airline at ATL today. AirTran was acquired by Southwest Airlines in 2011 and Southwest plans to integrate its operations with AirTran in the future.
In May 2001 construction of a 
The fifth runway is expected to increase the capacity for landings and take-offs by 40%, from an average of 184 flights per hour to 237 flights per hour.
Along with the construction of the fifth runway, a new control tower was built to see the entire length of the runway. The new control tower is the tallest in the United States, with a height of over 
Atlanta City Council voted on October 20, 2003 to change the name from Hartsfield Atlanta International Airport to the current Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport, in honor of former mayor Maynard Jackson, who died on June 23, 2003. The council initially planned on renaming the airport solely for Mayor Jackson, but public outcry,
In April 2007 an "end-around taxiway" opened, Taxiway Victor. It is expected to save an estimated $26 million to $30 million in fuel each year by allowing airplanes landing on the northernmost runway to taxi to the gate area without preventing other aircraft from taking off. The taxiway drops about 
After the Southeastern U.S. drought of 2007, the airport (the eighth-largest water user in the state) has made changes to reduce water usage. This includes adjusting toilets, of which there are 725 commodes and 338 urinals, in addition to 601 sinks. (The two terminals alone use 917,000 gallons or about 3.5 million liters each day on average.) It also suspended the practice of using firetrucks to spray water over aircraft when the pilot made a last landing before retirement (a water salute).
The city of Macon offered to sell water to the airport, through a proposed pipeline. Many of the new high-efficiency toilets and faucets installed at the airport were made by TOTO, a Japanese company known for water conservation with two local plants in the Atlanta suburb of Morrow.
The airport today employs about 55,300 airline, ground transportation, concessionaire, security, federal government, City of Atlanta and Airport tenant employees and is the largest employment center in the U.S. state of Georgia. With a payroll of $2.4 billion, the airport has a direct and indirect economic impact of $3.2 billion on the local and regional economy and a total annual, regional economic impact of more than $19.8 billion.

Expansion and renovations

In 1999, Hartsfield–Jackson's leadership established the Development Program: "Focus On the Future" involving multiple construction projects with the intention of preparing the airport to handle a projected demand of 121 million passengers in 2015. The program was originally budgeted at $5.4 billion over a ten-year period, but the total is now revised to be at over $9 billion.

Hartsfield–Jackson Rental Car Center

The Hartsfield–Jackson Rental Car Center, which opened on December 8, 2009, houses all ten current airport rental agencies with capacity for additional companies.

Maynard H. Jackson Jr. International Terminal

In July 2003, former Atlanta mayor Shirley Franklin announced a new terminal to be named for Maynard H. Jackson, Jr.. The new international terminal would be built on the east side of the airport near International Concourse E, on a site that had been occupied by air cargo facilities and the midfield control tower. It has added twelve new gates able to hold wide-body jets, which can be converted to sixteen narrow-body gates, as well as new check-in desks and a baggage claim area solely for international carriers. Additionally, the international terminal has its own parking lot just for international passengers with over 1,100 spaces. Arriving international passengers whose final destination is Atlanta are able to keep possession of their luggage as they proceed to exit the airport. The new terminal is connected to Concourse E by the tram and also has ground transportation access via I-75.
The new terminal was slated to open in 2006; however, time and cost overruns led former Airport General Manager Ben DeCosta to cancel the design contract in August 2005. The next day, the architect sued the airport claiming "fraud" and "bad faith", blaming the airport authority for the problems. The first departure was Delta Flight #295 to Tokyo-Narita, with the first arrival being Delta Flight #177 from Dublin.

Accommodating the A380

In addition to the terminal that will expand international operations at the airport, sections of some midfield taxiways have been widened from 145 feet (44.2 m) to 162 feet (49.4 m), and a section of Runway 27R will be widened from 220 feet (67.1 m) to 250 feet (76.2m) in order to accommodate Airbus A380 operations at the airport. Air France is considering whether they will commence A380 service from Atlanta, and Korean Air began daily service from Atlanta to Seoul on September 1, 2013

Modernization of Concourse D

On June 6, 2011, Atlanta City Council awarded a contract to the joint venture of Holder/Moody/Bryson to renovate and expand Concourse D. There will be 

Layout

Hartsfield–Jackson Atlanta International Airport has a terminal and concourse space totaling 
The airport has two terminals where passengers check-in and claim bags, the Domestic Terminal and the Maynard H. Jackson Jr. International Terminal.  The Domestic Terminal is on the west side of the airport, and has facilities on both sides which are known as Terminal North and Terminal South.  The portion of the building between Terminal North and Terminal South includes the Atrium, which is a large, open seating area featuring concessionaires, a bank, conference rooms, an interfaith chapel, and offices on the upper floors with the main security checkpoint, the Ground Transportation Center and a Metropolitan Atlanta Rapid Transit Authority (MARTA) train station on other levels.  The Maynard H. Jackson Jr. International Terminal is located on the east side of the airport, and includes check-in, baggage claim, and Customs and Immigration services for international passengers.
Seven parallel concourse buildings are used for passenger boarding. The first concourse is connected to the Domestic Terminal, and is known as Concourse T (for Terminal). The remaining six concourses are designated successively by distance from the terminal as Concourses A, B, C, D, E, and F. Concourse T, and Concourses A-D are used for domestic flights, while Concourses E and F are used for international flights.  Concourse F is directly connected to the International Terminal, which includes Customs and Immigration services.  Concourse E has a designated walkway to the international terminal, and also has its own Federal Inspection station for connecting passengers.  Concourse F and the International Terminal opened in 2012.  Concourse E opened in 1994 for international flights in time for the 1996 Summer Olympic Games, which were held in Atlanta.  Prior to the opening of Concourse E, the north side of Concourse T was used for international flights.
The concourses are connected by an underground Transportation Mall, which begins at the main terminal and passes under the center of each concourse. At one time, there was a second underground walkway between Concourses B and C which connected the north end of the two concourses and  made it possible to transfer without returning to the center of the concourse. This was constructed for Eastern Airlines, which occupied these two terminals. This is now closed and the entrance at Concourse B has been replaced by a bank of arrival/departure monitors.

The Plane Train

In addition to a pedestrian walkway, which includes a series of moving walkways, connecting the concourses, the Transportation Mall also features an automated people mover called the Plane Train. The Plane Train has a station at the east end of the domestic terminal for passengers who have cleared security screening at that terminal and are entering the Transportation Mall. This station also serves as the station for Concourse T. Other stations are located at each of the six other concourses, including concourse F which is connected to the international terminal. An eighth station is located in the Baggage Claim area, directly under the Main Terminal. The people mover is the world's busiest automated system, with over 64 million riders in 2002.
The Plane Train was given its name on August 10, 2010. Previously the automated people mover had not been given an official name.

MARTA Station

Hartsfield–Jackson also has its own train station on the city's rapid transit system, MARTA. The above-ground station is inside in the main building, between the north and south terminals on the west end. The Airport train station is currently the southernmost station in the MARTA system.

Restaurant contracts

Restaurant contracts at the airport are worth about $3 billion, and complaints over the contracts fit into a historical pattern of allegations of "cronyism and political influence" at the airport. Concession company SSP America sued the City of Atlanta to challenge the methods used to award contracts, but this suit was dropped in 2012.

Terminals

All concourses are served by Delta, and the other airlines are split up between the airport's concourses as follows:

Domestic terminal

The domestic terminal is divided into two sides for ticketing, check-in, and baggage claim: Terminal South and Terminal North. Delta Air Lines and Alaska Airlines are located on Terminal South all other domestic airlines operating from Atlanta are located on Terminal North. Most domestic flights arrive and depart from within concourses T, A, B, C or D. Some domestic flights depart from concourses E & F, such as when gates at T or A–D are not available, or when an aircraft arrives as an international flight and continues as a domestic flight.

Maynard Holbrook Jackson Jr. International Terminal

All international flights arrive and depart from the international terminal, either concourse E or F. Concourse F and the new international terminal opened May 16, 2012 while concourse E previously had opened in September 1994, in anticipation of the 1996 Summer Olympics. International pre-cleared flights can arrive at concourses T & A–D. International flights can also depart from concourses T & A–D, such as when space is unavailable at concourses E or F, or when an aircraft arrives as a domestic flight and continues as an international flight. Furthermore, all international pre-cleared flights, regardless of origin, will collect their baggage at the international terminal.

Airlines and destinations

Cargo airlines



Traffic and statistics

Other facilities

The 990 Toffie Terrace hangar, a part of Hartsfield-Jackson Airport,
Before the merger, Atlantic Southeast Airlines headquartered in the hangar, then named the A-Tech Center. of adjacent land and 1,400 parking spaces for employees. The airline planned to relocate 100 employees from Macon, Georgia to the new headquarters. The Atlanta City Council and Mayor of Atlanta Shirley Franklin approved of the new 25-year ASA lease, which also gave the airline new hangar space to work on 15 to 25 aircraft in overnight maintenance; previously its aircraft were serviced at Concourse C. The airport property division stated that the hangar was built in the 1960s and renovated in the 1970s. Eastern Airlines and Delta Air Lines had previously occupied the hangar. Delta's lease originally was scheduled to expire in 2010, but the airline returned the lease to the City of Atlanta in 2005 as part of its bankruptcy settlement. The city collected an insurance settlement of almost $900,000 as a result of the cancellation.

Culture

As the dominant airport in the Southern United States, and the nation's busiest in terms of passengers handled (mainly due to being Delta's flagship hub), there is an old joke in the South which states that, upon one's death, regardless of whether one goes to Heaven or Hell one will connect in Atlanta to get there.
Scenes from the movies Due Date and Life as We Know It were filmed and had scenes take place on location at Hartsfield Airport in 2010, including the 2006 film Unaccompanied Minors and Cabin Fever.

Other notes

Air traffic controllers for tower and ground control operations refer to the letter "D" using the word "Dixie" instead of the ICAO phonetic term "Delta" to avoid confusion with Delta Air Lines aircraft (note the use of "DIXIE" for taxiway "D" in the FAA's airport diagram 2007, linked in the box at the top of this page). In the actual diagram the spot where "DIXIE" was to be found is in the "non movement area" to the left of the construction area for the new concourse.
The "Plane Train" People Mover's recorded announcements list "Concourse D as in David," rather than "Delta" or "Dixie."
The airport has 198 passenger gates making it the most of any airport.








