[[River Wye]]

CATEGORIES: River Wye, Elenydd, Forest of Dean, Tributaries of the River Severn, Severn drainage basin, Rivers of the Brecon Beacons National Park, Rivers of Gloucestershire, Rivers of Herefordshire, Rivers of Monmouthshire, Rivers of Powys, Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Gloucestershire, Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Hereford and Worcester, Sites of Special Scientific Interest in Monmouthshire, England–Wales border, River navigations in the United Kingdom

The River Wye ( The Wye is important for nature conservation and recreation.

Etymology

The Wye's Latin name is Vaga, an adjective meaning 'wandering'. The Tithe map references a Vagas Field in both Whitchurch and Chepstow.David Hancocks, Dean Archaeology No. 11, 1998 p39 ISSN: 0954-8874

Description

The source of the Wye is in the Welsh mountains at Plynlimon. It flows through or past several towns and villages including Rhayader, Builth Wells, Hay-on-Wye, Hereford (the only city on the River Wye), Ross-on-Wye, Symonds Yat, Monmouth and Tintern, meeting the Severn estuary just below Chepstow.  Its total length is  of the river from Redbrook to Chepstow forms the border between England and Wales.

Conservation

The River Wye forms two Sites of Special Scientific Interest, one covering the Upper Wye (Gwy Uchaf) above Hay-on-Wye, The criteria for inclusion of the river as an SSSI include geology, topography, flora, mammals, invertebrates, fish and birdlife, as the river and its tributaries constitute a large linear ecosystem.  The Lower Wye SSSI is itself divided into seven units of assessment set by Natural England, and administrative responsibilities are shared between the county authorities of Powys, Herefordshire, Gloucestershire, and Monmouthshire. The Wye abuts a range of other SSSIs in England and Wales, including the Upper Wye Gorge and Lower Wye Gorge.
It is also a Special Area of Conservation and one of the most important rivers in the UK for nature conservation.  It is an important migration route and wildlife corridor, as well as a key breeding area for many nationally and internationally important species.   The river supports a range of species and habitats covered by European Directives and those listed under Schedule 5 of the Wildlife and Countryside Act 1981. In Powys the river lies within the Radnorshire Environmentally Sensitive Area.   Much of the lower valley is an Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty.

Salmon

The Lower Wye has been designated as a salmonid fishery under the EC Freshwater Fish Directive. The Wye is largely unpolluted and used to be considered, the largest recorded being 59 lbs 8oz landed after a long fight by Miss Doreen Davey from the Cowpond Pool at Ballingham on 13 March 1923. The last recorded 50 lb rod-caught salmon from the Wye was taken in 1963 by Donald Parrish and weighed 51 lbs 8oz. These large spring salmon have virtually disappeared over the past two or three decades.

History

The Romans constructed a bridge of wood and stone just upstream of present day Chepstow. The River Wye was and still is navigable up to Monmouth at least since the early 14th century.  It was improved from there to a short distance below Hereford by Sir William Sandys in the early 1660s with locks to enable vessels to pass weirs.  According to Herefordshire Council Archaeology, these were flash locks. The work proved to be insufficiently substantial and in 1696 a further Act of Parliament authorised the County of Hereford to buy up and demolish the mills on the Wye and Lugg.  All locks and weirs were removed, except that at New Weir Forge below Goodrich, which survived until about 1815.  This was paid for by a tax on the County.  Weirs were removed all along the Wye in Herefordshire, making the river passable to the western boundary, and beyond it at least to Hay on Wye.  A horse towing path was added in 1808, but only up to Hereford; previously, as on the River Severn, barges were man-hauled.  Money was spent several times improving the River Lugg from Leominster to its confluence with the Wye at Mordiford, but its navigation is likely to have been difficult.  The Wye remained commercially navigable until the 1850s, when commercial traffic moved to railways.  It is still used by pleasure craft.

Navigation and sport

The Environment Agency is the navigation authority for the river. The Normal Tidal Limit (NTL) of the river is Bigsweir and navigation below this point is under the control of the Gloucester Harbour Trustees as Competent Harbour Authority. There is a public right of navigation downstream from Hay-on-Wye.   Canoes are generally permitted at and downstream of Glasbury, so long as they do not disturb anglers. 
The River Wye provides for canoeing and kayaking as it has sections suitable for all ranges of skills and free access all the way downstream from Hay to Hereford and Monmouth, and the tidal Wye to Chepstow and the Severn Estuary. There are three rowing clubs on the river at Hereford, Ross-on-Wye and Monmouth. Annual regattas are held at Ross-on-Wye and Monmouth for rowers and scullers of all abilities, next to the local rowing club.
Walkers can enjoy the Wye Valley Walk which follows the route of the River Wye from Coed Hafren, near Plynlimon, to Chepstow along a series of well-maintained way-marked paths.   A viewpoint near The Biblins on the Wye is known as 'Three Counties View', the meeting place of the counties of Herefordshire, Gloucestershire and Monmouthshire.

Tributaries

The Wye's tributaries include the river Lugg, Elan, Dulas, Irfon, Marteg, Monnow, Trothy, Ithon, Llynfi, Letton Lake, Tarennig (the Wye's first tributary) and Bidno.

Cultural references

The Romantic poet William Wordsworth includes an apostrophe to the Wye in his famous poem "Lines Written a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey" published 1798 in Lyrical Ballads 

Views of the river

File:River Wye.jpg| Ross-on-Wye, Herefordshire
File:River Wye from the chimneytops - geograph.uk - 1629309.jpg| Ross-on-Wye
File:Water transport on River Wye at Symonds Yat East - geograph.uk - 721703.jpg|Water transport at Symonds Yat
File:The River Wye at Dixton, Monmouth - geograph.uk - 604138.jpg| St Peter's Church, Dixton
File:Landscape with View on the River Wye by Thomas Jones.jpg| Landscape with View on the River Wye by Thomas Jones
File:The Wye Valley viewed from Eagle's Nest - geograph.uk - 801044.jpg| Eagle's Nest, Wyndcliff

Bridges on the river

File:The_old_railway_bridge,_Redbrook_-_geograph.uk_-_604235.jpg| The old railway bridge at Redbrook
File:Former railway bridge and viaduct, River Wye, Monmouth - geograph.uk - 1179643.jpg| Monmouth Viaduct and Duke of Beaufort Bridge at Monmouth
File:River Wye at Chepstow.JPG| Chepstow Castle and bridge
File:Brockweir Bridge, with the River Wye - geograph.uk - 358506.jpg| Brockweir Bridge
File:Biblins Bridge over the River Wye - geograph.uk - 592584.jpg| Biblins Bridge
File:Wye Bridge, Monmouth - geograph.uk - 36247.jpg| Wye Bridge, Monmouth
File:Wilton Bridge, Wilton, Ross-on-Wye - geograph.uk - 358131.jpg| Wilton Bridge, Ross on Wye
File:Chepstow Bridge with a very high tide on the Wye - geograph.uk - 346225.jpg| Chepstow Bridge at very high tide
File:Victoria Bridge, Hereford - geograph.uk - 1443692.jpg| Victoria Bridge, Hereford
File:River Wye estuary and M48 Wye road bridge.jpg| River Wye estuary and M48 Wye road bridge





Further reading




