[[Leonardo da Vinci–Fiumicino Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports established in 1961, Airports in Italy, Airports in Rome, Buildings and structures in Lazio

Fiumicino – Leonardo da Vinci International Airport ( southwest of Rome's historic city centre.
The airport serves as a hub for Alitalia, the largest Italian airline. Based on total passenger numbers, it was the sixth busiest airport in Europe and the world's 29th busiest airport in 2011. It covers an area of  and is named after Italian polymath Leonardo da Vinci, who designed a proto helicopter and a flying machine with wings.

History

The airport was officially opened on January 15, 1961, with two runways, replacing the smaller Rome Ciampino Airport, which remains in service for some low cost airlines as well as domestic and charter operations. During the 1960s, Alitalia invested heavily in the new airport, building hangars and maintenance centers; in the same period a third runway was added (16L/34R). Despite being officially opened in 1961, Leonardo da Vinci–Fiumicino Airport had actually been in use since August 20, 1960. This was to help relieve air traffic that was congesting Rome Ciampino Airport during the 1960 Olympics.
Four runways presently operate at Leonardo da Vinci airport: 16L/34R and 16R/34L (separated by a distance of ), 16C/34C (close to 16L/34R), mostly used as a taxiway or as a backup for 16L/34R, and 07/25, used only westwards for takeoffs owing to the prevailing winds.
Since 2005 the airport operates a category III B instrument landing system (ILS). Further improvement work was implemented in 2007 to enable the airport to handle 30 takeoffs/landings per hour, up from 10, in the event of thick fog.
Several projects are planned. to 55 million by 2018; and the "Masterplan Fiumicino Nord", involving four new terminals and two new runways to be built by 2044, when there are estimated to be 100 million passengers per year.

Terminals

The terminals were upgraded during the 1990s and 2000s. to build the new Pier C. In 2009, the terminals were renamed - A was renamed T1, AA was renamed T2, B and C became T3 and T5 stayed the same. In 2010, the new single baggage handling system for more efficient luggage delivery began operations.

Airlines and destinations

Scheduled

Charter

Traffic and statistics

Busiest routes from Rome-Fiumicino Airport on 2013 were the following:

Ground handling

Ground handling services were provided by Aeroporti di Roma until 1999, when it created Aeroporti di Roma Handling (to serve all airlines except for Alitalia, which continued to be handled by Aeroporti di Roma itself). Alitalia provided passenger assistance even before 1999. In 2001, Alitalia created "Alitalia Airport" and started providing ground handling for itself and other airlines. Air One created EAS and started providing third-party services as well. There are some other private handlers that provide passenger assistance, including ARE Group, Globeground Italia and ICTS Italia.
On 2 May 2006, Meridiana's passenger handling staff transferred to Alitalia Airport, and the ramp employees transferred to Alitalia Airport in February 2007 (from Aeroporti di Roma Handling).
In May 2006, Italy's Civil Aviation Authority announced that it took off the limitation of 3 ramp handlers in Rome Leonardo da Vinci airport. ARE Group and Aviapartner announced that they would create a company called Aviapartner (51% Aviapartner; 49% ARE Group) to serve Milan Malpensa and Rome Leonardo da Vinci. There are fears that luggage mishandling will go up. Ground handling deregulation has brought confusion on who does what and has decreased service levels, especially on transferring baggage.
In November 2006 Aeroporti di Roma Handling was sold to Flightcare (itself owned by Spanish company FCC), an Aviance member.

Security services

Security Services transferred from the Polizia di Stato to Aeroporti di Roma in 2000. Aeroporti di Roma created Airport Security (100%-owned) to provide these services as well as security services to airlines (in competition with other security companies such as IVRI). Airport Security is supervised by Polizia di Stato (Italian State Police), Guardia di Finanza (Italian Customs Police), Ente Nazionale Aviazione Civile (Italy's Civil Aviation Authority), and Aeroporti di Roma.

Ground transportation

Leonardo da Vinci is about  by car from Rome's historic city centre. The airport is served by a six-lane motorway and numerous buses and taxis.
Fiumicino Aeroporto railway station is served by the Leonardo Express train operated by Trenitalia, available at the airport terminal. It takes 30 minutes to get to Termini Station in a non-stop trip that is provided twice an hour. Alternatively, local trains (FL1 line) leave once every 15 minutes, stopping at all stations. However these trains do not head to Termini station. Passengers have to change at Trastevere, Ostiense (Metro Piramide) or Tuscolana. The railway opened in December 1989, with nonstop and several stop services available. 23 May 1987. 5.

Accidents and incidents

From the 1960s until the 1980s, the airport experienced significant aircraft hijackings as well as being the scene of two major terrorist attacks and the port of origin for an aircraft bombing in flight—some engendered by the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.






