[[Skipton]]

CATEGORIES: Skipton, Market towns in North Yorkshire, Civil parishes in North Yorkshire, Craven (district), Towns in North Yorkshire, Post towns in the BD postcode area

Skipton (also known as Skipton-in-Craven) is a market town and civil parish in the Craven district of North Yorkshire, England. Historically in the West Riding of Yorkshire, it is located on the course of the River Aire and the Leeds and Liverpool Canal to the south of the Yorkshire Dales,  west of York. At the 2001 Census, Skipton had a population of 14,313.

History

Skipton is recorded in the Domesday Book of 1086. It played roles in history during the English Civil War and as the site of a prisoner of war camp during the First World War.
Home to one of the oldest mills in North Yorkshire, historical documents indicate High Corn Mill The mill as it appears today is only half of what used to exist when two mills were in operation to produce corn for the whole of Skipton. The mill has been completely redesigned, from the mill grounds to the buildings themselves. The outside walls of the mill have been sandblasted and the two main buildings of the old mill have been turned into flats from 2007 onwards, with one stand-alone building yet to be redesigned, touched or Sandblasted.
Skipton was anciently distinguished by Skipton Castle, constructed in 1090 as a wooden motte-and-bailey by Robert de Romille, a Norman baron. In the 12th century William le Gros strengthened it with a stone keep to repel attacks from the Kingdom of Scotland to the north, the erection of which elevated Skipton from a poor dependent village to a burgh administered by a reeve. The protection offered by Skipton Castle during the Middle Ages encouraged the urbanisation of the surrounding area, and during times of war and disorder, attracted an influx of families.
Skipton became a prosperous market town, trading sheep and woollen goods, which also led to its naming, derived from the Old English sceap (sheep) and tun (town or village). A market stemming from its formative years still survives, albeit with significant modification. In the 19th century, Skipton emerged as a small mill town connected to the major cities by the Leeds and Liverpool Canal and its branch Thanet Canal, (known locally as 'Springs branch canal'), but during the 20th century Skipton's economy shifted to tourism, aided by its historic architecture and proximity to the Yorkshire Dales. Since 1974, Skipton has been the seat of Craven District Council. The Skipton Building Society was founded in the town.

Government

Skipton is part of the parliamentary constituency of Skipton and Ripon, which was created in 1983. The constituency has returned a Conservative MP since its inception. The seat is currently held by Julian Smith MP. Before 1983 Skipton had its own eponymous constituency.
Skipton forms part of Craven District, a Non-metropolitan district, and is home of the offices of Craven District Council. In 2007, proposals to make North Yorkshire County Council a unitary authority, removing the layer of government represented by Craven District, were rejected.
Skipton has its own town council consisting of 16 Councillors, formed by 4 members from each of the four wards within the parish boundaries, East, South and West. Skipton Town Councillors elect a Town Mayor each year at its Annual General Meeting. This year, the Town Mayor is Councillor John Kerwin-Davey.  The Town Council Offices are based on the High Street, above Barclay's Bank.

Economy

The town's major local employer is Skipton Building Society and its subsidiary companies.  The town is home to several holiday companies, including Blue Water Holidays and several cottage holiday firms. It is also a centre for recruitment, with several hundred people employed in this sector. Recruitment firms include  Medacs, JCJ, Holt and Medic International  (Healthcare Recruitment Companies), Cody (a firm for Recruitment Consultant jobs) and Justteachers (a supply teachers agency). Tourism and retail sales are also significant. The town is known as the "Gateway to the Dales", due to its close proximity to the Yorkshire Dales. Skipton has many visitors, particularly on market days (Monday, Wednesday, Friday and Saturday). As Skipton is the nearest and largest town to most of the small towns and villages within the Dales it attracts numerous shoppers. In 2008 the Academy of Urbanism voted High Street the best shopping spot in Britain. "Vibrant Yorkshire Dales town has best high street in Britain". Independent.co.uk. Retrieved on 3 July 2009. The wide main street used to host the sheep market, but now a general market is held there four days a week, and livestock is auctioned at the Auction Mart on the western edge of the town. The town has three official allotment sites.
A brewery opened in 2002. The Copper Dragon Brewery produce five different cask beers, four of which are bottled. The company's logo is a green dragon coiled around the top of a brewer's copper kettle. Copper Dragon currently has seven pubs.
Chocolatier Whittakers, now based in the town, was established in 1889 in nearby Cross Hills. Ida Whittaker began making chocolates there in 1903, taught by the wife of the vicar of Kildwick.

Culture and community

On Saturday 13 July 1901, a gala was held in Skipton to raise money for the Skipton and District Cottage Hospital, built at the time of Queen Victoria's Jubilee, held on the Brick Buildings Fields off Bailey Road. This was such a major event in the area that extra trains were provided to bring visitors to the town from miles around. After the formation of the National Health Service, with the hospital being funded from central government, the Skipton Charities Gala continued raising money for local charities and non-profit-making organisations. The gala, held every year on the second Saturday in June, starts with a procession through the town centre to Aireville Park, where live performance acts entertain the public, culminating in live music and a firework display.
The town hall in Skipton holds regular craft fairs and special events and also houses a local history museum.cravenmuseum.org
Skipton Little Theatre is located near the town centre. The Mart Theatre opened in October 2005 with funding from the European Regional Development Fund, Yorkshire Forward, Craven District Council and the Arts Council England. It provides rural theatre, events and other facilities within a functioning Auction Mart.
Skipton is twinned with the Bavarian town of Simbach.  In May 2009 the town council decided to proceed with twinning with Erquinghem-Lys in France.
Skipton has numerous public houses, two nightclubs (within one building), and restaurants including traditional fish and chips, modern British, Mexican, Indian, Greek, Chinese and Italian.
The local newspaper is the Craven Herald & Pioneer.

Transport

Skipton lies close to the junction of the A65 road (from Leeds to the Lake District) and the A59 from York to Liverpool. The north section (A65 & A59) of the £16.4 million Skipton Bypass opened in December 1981. The rest of the  bypass (A629) opened in October 1982, greatly reducing journey times to the Dales.
Skipton railway station gives access southbound to regular services for Leeds and Bradford on the electrified Airedale Line; northbound services connect to Lancaster, Morecambe and Carlisle; the latter route is along the scenic Settle-Carlisle Railway, passing over the Ribblehead Viaduct. Skipton bus station was rebuilt in 2009.
The Leeds and Liverpool Canal runs through Skipton and is a popular destination for tourists, with walking and boat hire.

Education

Primary education

Secondary education

As well as Aireville School (ages 11–16), there are two single-sex grammar schools: Ermysted's Grammar School for boys, and Skipton Girls' High School (SGHS). Both schools are selective by entrance exam and obtain comparable high A-Level scores. On the basis of the 2009 A level results Ermysted's performed 13th best in the UK and SGHS was rated 42nd.guardian.co.

Further education

Sport

Skipton is home to Skipton Town A.F.C. and Skipton LMS, both football clubs; three cricket clubs; Skipton Cricket Club, Skipton Cycling Club, Skipton Athletic Club and Skipton CI, Skipton Kashmir; and Skipton R.F.C., a rugby union club. The Coulthurst Craven Sports Centre is adjacent to the rugby club, with facilities including all-weather football pitches and squash courts. There are a number of gyms in the town and a public swimming pool.

Notable people

A number of notable people have been born in Skipton. The philosopher Henry Sidgwick was born in Skipton in 1838.
Two politicians were born in Skipton: the former Conservative MP and Chancellor of the Exchequer Iain Macleod in 1913,
The poet and author Blake Morrison was born in Skipton in 1950.
Former England cricketer and current captain of Lancashire County Cricket Club, Glen Chapple was born in Skipton in 1974.








