[[Corey Haim]]

CATEGORIES: 1971 births, 2010 deaths, Canadian people of Israeli descent, 20th-century Canadian male actors, 21st-century Canadian male actors, Burials in Canada, Canadian expatriate male actors in the United States, Canadian film producers, Canadian male child actors, Canadian male film actors, Canadian male television actors, Canadian television producers, Cardiovascular disease deaths in California, Collectors, Deaths from pneumonia, Infectious disease deaths in California, Israeli Jews, Jewish Canadian male actors, Jewish male actors, Participants in American reality television series, Male actors from Toronto, People from Thornhill, Ontario

Corey Ian Haim (December 23, 1971 – March 10, 2010)
Known as The Two Coreys, the duo became 1980s icons and appeared together in seven movies, later starring in the A&E reality show The Two Coreys.
Haim's early success led to money and fame, and he began using drugs by age fifteen.

Early life

Haim was born in Toronto, Ontario, the son of Judy, an Israeli-born data processor, and Bernie Haim, who worked in sales. When Haim was eleven, his parents divorced after eighteen years of marriage. He had an older sister, Carol, and a younger half-brother, Daniel Lee, from his father's second marriage. Haim was raised Jewish.
Growing up in Willowdale, Toronto, he was enrolled in drama lessons in improv and mime by his mother to help him overcome his shyness, and accidentally fell into the film industry after accompanying Carol to her auditions.
Haim's time at North York's Zion Heights Junior High lasted until grade 8, by which point he had begun to make a name for himself as a child actor.

Career

1980s

Haim broke into acting at the age of ten, playing the role of Larry in the Canadian children's educational comedy television series The Edison Twins, which ran from 1982 until 1986.
He made his feature film debut in 1984's thriller Firstborn, starring alongside Sarah Jessica Parker and Robert Downey, Jr. as a boy whose family comes under threat from his mother's violent boyfriend, played by Peter Weller. Haim's first day of shooting was with Weller, and he went up to compliment the older actor on his performance. Weller collared Haim, throwing him up against a wall to warn him not to speak to him after a take, and it took three assistants to separate them. Haim later admitted that he was terrified by the experience. Parker remembered Haim's staying over many times with her and her then boyfriend Downey Jr., who taught him how to apply hair mousse, saying: "He was naturally gifted and a real charmer—I adored him."
Haim recalled: 
In 1985, Haim appeared in minor roles in Secret Admirer and Murphy's Romance, alongside Sally Field, of whom he was reportedly in awe. He went on to secure the leading role in Silver Bullet, Stephen King's feature adaptation of his own lycanthropic novella, playing a paraplegic teen living in Tarker's Hill, Maine, who warns his uncle (played by Gary Busey) that their town is being terrorized by a werewolf.
Haim began to gain industry recognition, earning his first Young Artist Award as an Exceptional Young Actor starring in a Television Special or Movie of the Week for the NBC movie A Time to Live, in which he played Liza Minnelli's dying son. While rehearsing on a Montreal street, Minnelli taught Haim how to walk like someone with muscular dystrophy, despite stares from passersby. Following the shoot, Haim dated a 23-year-old woman, which strengthened his resolve to play boyfriends rather than sons. At the time, Haim's father was acting as his manager, and turned down River Phoenix's role in The Mosquito Coast on his behalf. Producer Stanley Jaffe approached him to remark on Haim's gifts, and recommended that he get an agent in Los Angeles.
Haim's breakout role came in 1986, when he starred alongside Kerri Green, Charlie Sheen, and Winona Ryder as the titular character in Lucas, a coming-of-age story about first love and teen angst, which centers on an intelligent misfit who struggles for acceptance after falling for a cheerleader. Haim turned fourteen on the set in Chicago, and fell in love with Green, who played his romantic interest in the film. Not realizing she was eighteen, he asked her out in an elevator. Haim's unrequited love for Green helped inspire his performance, with the real-life dynamics between them mirrored on-screen.
Haim was nominated for an Exceptional Performance by a Young Actor in a Feature Film – Comedy or Drama at the Young Artist Awards for his performance as Lucas, and film critic Roger Ebert gave him a glowing review: "He creates one of the most three-dimensional, complicated, interesting characters of any age in any recent movie. If he can continue to act this well, he will never become a half-forgotten child star, but will continue to grow into an important actor. He is that good." Following Lucas, Haim moved to Los Angeles, and starred in the short-lived 1987 television series Roomies alongside Burt Young.
In 1987, Haim had a featured role as Sam Emerson, the younger of two brothers, a comic-reading teen turned vampire hunter in Joel Schumacher's The Lost Boys. Though he had seen Lucas, Schumacher was not initially sold on casting Haim. The director was convinced by their first meeting. It was to become Haim's defining performance.
The Lost Boys was well received by most critics, made over $32M at the U.S. box office, and is regarded as an 80s classic. The performance earned Haim another Young Artist Award nomination, as Best Young Male Superstar in a Motion Picture.
In addition to making Haim a bona fide teen star, the film began his recurring on-screen partnership with Feldman, who became his best friend off-screen. The two young actors had previously become aware of one another when Haim auditioned for the role of Mouth in The Goonies, which Feldman secured. "The Two Coreys" ascended to become the highest paid teen stars of the 80s.
In the era of Tiger Beat and Bop, Haim was a favored cover star. He appeared to enjoy his reputation as a heartthrob, rather than trying to avoid the label like his peers River Phoenix and Johnny Depp.
Haim and Feldman capitalized on their fanbase in a slew of buddy films together, becoming an A-list team driven by teen love for their personae. Next came License to Drive, co-starring Feldman and Heather Graham, in which Haim played the lead role of Les, whose love life is crippled by a lack of a car, and who achieves his wish-fulfillment fantasy of turning his life around on one wild night. "There were some shenanigans behind the scenes," remarked director Greg Beeman of the pair's indulgences. "They would disappear sometimes, but they always showed up for work." At the time of the shoot, sixteen-year-old Haim only had a learner's permit, necessitating an adult to be concealed in the back seat of the Cadillac he drove in the movie. He did however own a car of his own, a grey 1988 Subaru XT6. The film featured Haim's signature ad-libbing at its height, of which he said: "It's one of my special things that I feel maybe I was just born with. I can turn a 'Hey, nice to see you' into 'Hey, what's up? What's goin' down, man? Good to see you' and kind of make it more real."
In the lead-up to the License To Drive premiere, Haim was receiving 2,000 fan letters a week, and spent his time trying to avoid the teenage girls besieging the house he had bought downstairs from his mother.
Haim and Feldman next teamed in the metaphysical romantic comedy Dream a Little Dream, in which Haim played Dinger, a student with moussed hair and ripped jeans who walked with a cane after his mother ran over his leg in her Volvo, but who still managed to remain confident. Four days before the shoot commenced on January 7, 1988, Haim broke his leg. Dinger's character was rewritten to accommodate his cast and resulting limp. After the cast was removed two weeks later, Haim was required to wear a false one for the remainder of the shoot. He semi-improvised his scenes in the film.
The soundtrack spawned the Billboard Hot 100 number-one single Rock On for Michael Damian, with Haim and Feldman appearing in the song's music video. By this stage, they had attained a level of pop culture fame and popularity amongst their peers which saw them become a commodity. Riding high, Haim became heavily involved in the 1980s young Hollywood party scene.
Haim was already drinking beer in his early teens on the set of Lucas in 1985, and a year later, he tried marijuana on the set of The Lost Boys. "I lived in LA in the 80s, which was not the best place to be," Haim said. "I did cocaine for about a year and a half, then it led to crack." He later said that License To Drive was his "breaking point" for becoming addicted.
On his return from a Hawaiian family vacation in May 1989, Haim told the press that he had been clean for a month after going cold turkey without the help of a substance abuse program. The film was never made.
In October 1989, Haim appeared live onstage at Knott's Berry Farm with DJ "Hollywood" Hamilton as part of a teen anti-drugs campaign. The thousand-strong audience of girls would not stop screaming and rushing the stage, and fire marshals had to escort Haim from the building amid fears for his safety. Haim later said that he was terrified of going onstage afterward, and had resolved never to go on any stage ever again. Haim's mother told Bop at the time: "It was the first time Corey realized how well-liked he is. We talked about it afterwards. He said to me, 'Wow, mom, all these girls were there for me?' I told him, 'Yes, Corey, I was sitting in the audience and all those people were there for you.'"
In November 1989, fresh out of the first of fifteen stints in rehab, Haim released a self-promotional video documentary entitled Corey Haim: Me, Myself, and I, which followed a day in his life. Heavily scripted, Haim's monologues to camera were nevertheless unfocused and suggested that he was under the influence during filming.
In a further attempt to regain his wholesome image, Haim set up a pre-recorded drug advice line for teens: 1–800 C-O-R-E-Y. He admitted on The Arsenio Hall Show that he was high while giving the advice.
Fellow Lost Boys actor Brooke McCarter began managing Haim in an effort to keep him clean. McCarter was dating Oscar-winning producer Julia Phillips, who termed the assignment "babysitting". In her memoir, Phillips recalled Haim's asking her permission to take out her daughter, and the moral conflict she experienced while smoking marijuana in front of him, saying: "Mixed feelings about Corey. Love him. Detest him too, or at least the manipulative part that knew how to make people twice his age snap to. Are you really only eighteen? Who writes your dialogue?" p 618 et seq.

1990s

In 1990, Haim co-starred with Patricia Arquette in the sci-fi actioner Prayer of the Rollerboys, performing many of his own stunts in a tale of a teen who goes undercover to expose a racist gang leader. However, as his problems with drugs continued, Haim began to lose his core audience. His performances suffered, and his film career in the 1990s declined into direct-to-video releases as his habit ruined his ability to work. Watchers director Jon Hess recalled: "Certainly people knew about his addiction. To see somebody so young and with so much talent already be chased by those demons was hard."
In 1991, Haim starred in Dream Machine, which received a direct-to-video release, as did Oh, What a Night and The Double 0 Kid, in which the young Seth Green had a role. Green recalled his experiences working with Haim:
Additional direct-to-video films included the 1992 erotic thriller Blown Away. Co-star Nicole Eggert, who was romantically involved with Haim at the time and also featured in The Double O Kid, later stated that on-set medics would facilitate his needs to keep him from withdrawing. She recalled filming with Haim during the day and spending the nights with him in the emergency room, "hooked up to an IV, begging doctors for a different prescription, then going back to work again the next day." On the shoot, Feldman accidentally punched Haim for real during a stunt.
As stories of his drug use continued to spread, Haim experienced a public fall from grace, unusual for the time in its intense press exposure. His misadventures were afforded a level of attention comparable to that of teen stars such as Lindsay Lohan in the digital media age.
In December 1992, Haim partnered in a lease-option on a 1922 Hancock Park mansion with his business manager, a party promoter named Michael Bass who had served two years in jail after a conviction for fraud. The  house was valued at $1.35M.[ref]
