[[Patricia Routledge]]

CATEGORIES: 1929 births, 20th-century English actresses, 21st-century English actresses, Actresses from Merseyside, Alumni of Bristol Old Vic Theatre School, Alumni of the University of Liverpool, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, English film actresses, English musical theatre actresses, English radio actresses, English television actresses, Laurence Olivier Award winners, Living people, People educated at Birkenhead High School Academy, People from Birkenhead, Royal National Theatre Company members, Royal Shakespeare Company members, Tony Award winners, 20th-century English singers, 21st-century English singers

Katherine Patricia Routledge, CBE (born 17 February 1929), is an English actress and singer. She is best known for her role as Hyacinth Bucket in the British television series Keeping Up Appearances, which ran from 1990 to 1995.
Routledge made her professional stage debut at the Liverpool Playhouse in 1952 and her Broadway debut in How's the World Treating You in 1966. In 1968, she won the Tony Award for Best Actress in a Musical for her role in Darling of the Day. Other theatre credits include Candide, for which she won the 1988 Olivier Award for Best Actress in a Musical.
On television, she came to prominence during the 1980s in monologues written by Victoria Wood and Alan Bennett, appearing as Kitty in Victoria Wood As Seen On TV (1985–86) and in Bennett's A Woman of No Importance (1982) and Talking Heads (1988). For the latter, she was nominated for the British Academy Television Award for Best Actress. For her role as Hyacinth in Keeping Up Appearances she received two further BAFTA nominations. She also starred as Hetty Wainthropp in the British television series Hetty Wainthropp Investigates (1995–99).
Her film roles include, To Sir, with Love with Sidney Poitier (1967) and Don't Raise the Bridge, Lower the River with Jerry Lewis (1968).

Early life and education

She was born Katherine Patricia Routledge in Tranmere, Birkenhead, then a part of Cheshire, to parents Catherine and Isaac Routledge. and during the Second World War, the family lived weeks at a time in the basement of her father's shop.
She was educated at Mersey Park Primary School, Birkenhead High School,

Career

Theatre

Routledge has had a prolific career in theatre, particularly musical theatre, in the United Kingdom and the United States. She has been a long-standing member of the Royal Shakespeare Company (RSC), appearing in such acclaimed productions as the 1983 Richard III, which starred Antony Sher in the title role. she has occasionally made forays into operetta; including portraying the title role in an acclaimed production of Jacques Offenbach's La Grande-Duchesse de Gérolstein at the 1978 Camden Festival.
Routledge made her Broadway debut in Roger Milner's outrageous comedy, How's the World Treating You, in 1966, before returning in the short-lived 1968 musical Darling of the Day,
In 1980, Routledge played Ruth in the Joseph Papp production of The Pirates of Penzance, co-starring American actor Kevin Kline and pop vocalist Linda Ronstadt, at the Delacorte Theatre in New York City's Central Park, one of a series of Shakespeare in the Park summer events. The show was a hit and transferred to Broadway the following January, with Estelle Parsons replacing Routledge. A DVD of the Central Park production, with Routledge, was released in October 2002.
She also performed in Façade at New York City's Carnegie Recital Hall.
Routledge won a Laurence Olivier Award in 1988 for her portrayal of the Old Lady in Leonard Bernstein's Candide in the London cast of the critically acclaimed Scottish Opera production. More recent work include the narrator in The Carnival of the Animals with the Nash Ensemble in 2010Nash Concert Society programme, Wigmore Hall, 16 January 2010. and the role of Myra Hess in the play Admission: One Shilling in 2011.

Film and television

Routledge's screen credits include To Sir, with Love (1967), and If It's Tuesday, This Must Be Belgium (1969).
Routledge's early television appearances included a role in Steptoe and Son, in the episode "Seance in a Wet Rag and Bone Yard" (1974), as a clairvoyant called Madame Fontana. She also appeared in Coronation Street, and as a white witch in Doctor at Large (1971). Also in 1971, Routledge played Mrs. Jennings in the BBC mini-series production of Sense and Sensibility. However, she did not come to prominence on television until she featured in monologues written for her by Alan Bennett from 1978 (A Visit from Miss Protheroe), and later Victoria Wood in the 1980s. She first appeared in Alan Bennett's A Woman of No Importance in 1982, and then as the opinionated Kitty in Victoria Wood As Seen On TV in 1985. She performed two further monologues in Bennett's Talking Heads in 1987 and 1998.
In 1990, Routledge was cast as Hyacinth Bucket in the comedy series Keeping Up Appearances. and she was later nominated for two BAFTA TV Awards in 1992 and 1993. The series ended at Routledge's request in 1995.
In 1995, Routledge accepted the lead in another long-running series, playing Hetty Wainthropp in the mystery drama Hetty Wainthropp Investigates, co-starring rising star Dominic Monaghan as her assistant and Derek Benfield as her husband. It first aired in January 1996, and ran until the autumn of 1998, with one special episode in 1999.
She has also played several real-life characters for television, including Barbara Pym, and, in a dramatised BBC Omnibus biographical documentary of 1994, Hildegard of Bingen.
In 2001, Routledge starred in Anybody's Nightmare, a fact-based television drama in which she played a piano teacher who served four years in prison for murdering her elderly aunt, but was acquitted following a retrial.

Radio and audio books

Routledge's extensive radio credits include several Alan Bennett plays and the BBC dramatisation of Carole Hayman's Ladies of Letters, in which she and Prunella Scales play retired women exchanging humorous correspondence over the course of several years.
Radio work prior to 1985 included Private Lives, Present Laughter, The Cherry Orchard, Romeo and Juliet, Alice in Wonderland, and The Fountain Overflows.
Having a distinctive voice, Routledge has also recorded and released a variety of audiobooks including unabridged readings of Wuthering Heights and Alice's Adventures in Wonderland and abridged novelisations of the Hetty Wainthropp series.
In 1966, she sang the role of Mad Margaret in Ruddigore, the title role in Iolanthe, and Melissa in Princess Ida, in a series of BBC radio Gilbert and Sullivan recordings. She took part in a studio broadcast of Tchaikovsky's opera Vakula the Smith (narrating excerpts from the work by Gogol) in 1989.

Personal life

She has never married, has no children, and  and regularly worships at Chichester Cathedral.
She was appointed OBE in 1993 and CBE in 2004. 
In 2008, Routledge received a Doctor of Letters from Lancaster University for her contribution to drama and theatre.

Filmography

Film and television work

Stage work

Awards and nominations






