[[Maiden England]]

CATEGORIES: Iron Maiden video albums, Live video albums, Iron Maiden live albums, 1989 video albums, 1994 live albums, English-language live albums, English-language video albums, Live heavy metal albums

Maiden England (re-released in 2013 as Maiden England '88) is a live video by the band Iron Maiden during their Seventh Son of a Seventh Son world tour, which was dubbed 7th Tour of a 7th Tour.
It was recorded at the NEC in Birmingham, England on 27 and 28 November 1988, released on VHS in November 1989, followed by a limited VHS/CD edition in 1994. The CD in this package does not include two songs that are in the video ("Can I Play with Madness" and "Hallowed Be Thy Name"), due to space limitations. In 2013, the full concert footage, including encores which were not featured in the original VHS, was reissued on DVD, CD and LP under the new title, Maiden England '88.
The video was directed and edited by Steve Harris, Iron Maiden's founder and bassist.

Background

After sitting in on the editing process of their music videos, and having been less involved in their previous concert video, Live After Death, the band's bassist, Steve Harris, decided that he would direct and edit their next film. According to Harris, the band decided to document the Birmingham concerts because he "wanted to film with 10 cameras so we needed to do it in a place where that amount of equipment wouldn't get in the way of the paying punters." This narrowed the band's options down to the NEC and Wembley Arena, but eventually chose the former as they were more "amenable about the idea". According to manager Rod Smallwood, Harris' briefing to the camera crew was to try and film "as the fans saw it", with Harris arguing that this would be a good way to capture the concert's atmosphere.
So that he could edit the video at his own pace, Harris bought all of the necessary equipment himself and installed it at his home in Essex, where he worked on the film for six months. Although they occasionally visited Harris to check on his progress, the rest of the band were largely uninvolved in the project, although, at his insistence,  a piece of footage showing guitarist Dave Murray mouthing the lyrics to the opening song was removed.
A DVD re-issue of the concert film was first mentioned by Iron Maiden in September 2007, with a release date set for 2008, but was later delayed.
In 2012 and 2013, Iron Maiden undertook the Maiden England World Tour, which is largely based around the original video in setlist and stage design.

Critical reception

AllMusic gave the original VHS 4 out of 5, deeming it "a strong effort", but also stating that it is "risky... because it doesn't rely on hits" and that it "doesn't have the seminal power of their own extraordinary Live After Death from four years earlier". They also gave four marks to the 2013 reissue, arguing that the additional songs "help to turn the live set into a more well-rounded listening experience", concluding that it is "a solid concert that shows one of the most influential bands in heavy metal getting down to business and bringing some epic metal to an enthralled crowd".
Classic Rock gave the 2013 DVD a score of 8 out of 10, remarking that the concert footage is "a succinct encapsulation of how great Maiden are when all the gears mesh together", concluding that "when it comes to creating a fan-pleasing effort, no one does it with quite the same degree of thought as Maiden."

Track listing

1989 VHS track listing

1994 CD track listing

2013 DVD track listing

=DVD 1=

=DVD 2=

2013 CD track listing

Personnel

Production and performance credits are adapted from the VHS cover,

Charts

VHS

DVD

Album

Certifications






