[[Inverted question and exclamation marks]]

CATEGORIES: Spanish language, Punctuation, Interrogative words and phrases

Inverted question (¿) and exclamation marks (¡) are punctuation marks used to begin interrogative and exclamatory sentences (or clauses), respectively, in written Spanish and sometimes also in languages which have cultural ties with Spanish, such as in older standards of Galician (now it is optional and not recommended) or Catalan. They can also be combined in several ways to express the combination of a question and surprise or disbelief. The initial marks are normally mirrored at the end of the sentence or clause by the common marks (?, !) used in most other languages. Unlike the ending marks, which are fully above the line in a sentence, the (¿) and (¡) are placed about halfway below the line.
Inverted marks were originally recommended by the Real Academia Española (Spanish Royal Academy) in 1754, and adopted gradually over the next century.
On computers, inverted marks are supported by various standards, including ISO-8859-1, Unicode, and HTML. They can be entered directly on keyboards designed for Spanish-speaking countries, or via alternative methods on other keyboards.

Usage

The inverted question mark (¿) is a punctuation mark written before the first letter of an interrogative sentence or clause to indicate that a question follows. It is an inverted form of the standard symbol "?" recognized by speakers of languages written with the Latin alphabet. In most languages, a single question mark is used, and only at the end of an interrogative sentence: "How old are you?" This was once true of the Spanish languages.
The inverted question mark was adopted long after the Real Academia's decision, published in the second edition of  ("How old are you?"). The Real Academia also ordered the same inverted-symbol system for statements of exclamation, using the symbols "¡" and "!". This helps to recognize questions and exclamations in long sentences.  "Do you like summer?" and "You like summer." are translated respectively as "¿Te gusta el verano?" and "Te gusta el verano." (There is no difference between the wording of a question and a statement in Spanish as there is in English.) These new rules were slowly adopted; there exist nineteenth-century books in which the writer does not use either opening symbol, neither the "¡" nor the "¿".
In sentences that are both declarative and interrogative, the clause that asks a question is isolated with the starting-symbol inverted question mark, for example:  (In case you cannot go with them, would you like to go with us?)
Some writers omit the inverted question mark in the case of a short unambiguous question such as:  Certain Catalan-language authorities, such as Joan Solà, insist that both the opening and closing question marks be used for clarity.
Some Spanish-language writers, among them Nobel laureate Pablo Neruda, refuse to use the inverted question mark. Multiple closing symbols are used for emphasis: Por qué dices eso??, instead of the standard ¿Por qué dices eso? ("Why do you say that?"). Some may also use the ending symbol for both beginning and ending, giving ?Por qué dices eso? Given the informal setting, this might be unimportant; however, teachers see this as a problem, fearing and claiming that contemporary young people are inappropriately and incorrectly extending the practice to academic homework and essays.)
Unspoken uncertainty is expressed in writing (informal notes, comics) with ¿?, and surprise with ¡!, but single interrogative ? and exclamatory ! symbols are also used.

Mixtures of question marks and exclamation points

Although it has now become rare, it is correct usage in Spanish to begin a sentence with an opening inverted exclamation mark ("¡") and end it with a question mark ("?"), or vice-versa, for statements that are questions but also have a clear sense of exclamation or surprise such as: )
Unicode 5.1 also includes "⸘" (U+2E18 INVERTED INTERROBANG), which is an inverted version of the interrobang, an uncommonly used punctuation mark used to denote both excitement and a question in just one glyph.

Computer usage

Encodings

"¡" and "¿" are both located within the Unicode Common block, and are both inherited from ISO-8859-1.  "¡" has Unicode codepoint U+00A1 (decimal entity reference &#161;) and HTML named entity reference &iexcl;.  "¿" has Unicode codepoint U+00BF (decimal entity reference &#191;) and has HTML named entity reference &iquest;.  In both cases, the "i" in the named entity reference is an initialism for "inverted". 

Input methods

"¿" is available in all keyboard layouts for Spanish-speaking countries.
Users of English (US) keyboards under Microsoft Windows can obtain the inverted question mark "¿" using the Alt code method by holding down the Alt key and pressing 0191, 6824, or 168 on the number pad and the inverted exclamation mark "¡" with number pad code 0161 or 173. In Microsoft Word, the inverted question and exclamation marks can be typed by holding down the Ctrl, Alt, and shift keys while typing a normal question or exclamation mark, or by typing either mark at the start of the sentence whilst in the Spanish language mode.
Windows users with a US keyboard layout are able to switch to the US-International layout. Among other changes, this converts the "Alt" key to the right of the space bar into the "Alt-Gr" (graphics) key. (The left Alt key remains unchanged.) When the Right-Alt key is held down and other keys are pressed, the combination produces other characters not found on the standard US keyboard. For instance, the keystroke Right-Alt-1 produces an inverted exclamation mark, while Right-Alt-/ yields the inverted question mark.
On the Mac OS X platform (or when using the "US International"/us-intl keyboard layout on Windows and Linux), "¡" and "¿" can be entered by pressing Alt (option) + 1 and Shift + Alt (option) + / respectively. With a compose key, for example,  + , they can be entered by pressing the compose key and ! or ? twice.
In LaTeX documents, the "¿" is written as ?` (question mark, backtick), and "¡" as !` (exclamation point, backtick).






