[[O'Hare International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: O'Hare International Airport, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces in Illinois, Airfields of the United States Army Air Forces Technical Service Command, Airports established in 1943, Airports in Cook County, Illinois, Airports in DuPage County, Illinois, American Airlines, Buildings and structures in Chicago, Illinois, United Airlines

Chicago O'Hare International Airport  closer to the Loop, serving as a secondary airport for low-cost carriers.
United Airlines (including United Express) is the largest airline at O'Hare, carrying over 45% of passengers. Carrying 15.2 million passengers annually, O'Hare is the second-largest passenger carrying hub for United, after Houston-Bush.unitedcontinentalholdings.php?s=20306&item=29971 American Airlines (including American Eagle) has the second largest operation at O'Hare, carrying 37.08% of passengers. O'Hare is American Airlines' second-largest hub, after Dallas/Fort Worth.
Until 2005, O'Hare was the world's busiest airport in takeoffs and landings. Until 1998, O'Hare was the busiest airport in the world in number of passengers. Mainly due to limits imposed on the airport by the federal government to reduce flight delays,
It is operated by the City of Chicago Department of Aviation. Most of O'Hare Airport is in Cook County, but a section of the southwest part of the airport is in DuPage County. The Cook County portion is located within a section of the city of Chicago contiguously connected to the rest of the city via a narrow strip of land about 

History

World War II

The airport was constructed in 1942–43 as a manufacturing plant for Douglas C-54s during World War II. The site was chosen for its proximity to the city and transportation. The two million square foot (180,000 m²) factory needed easy access to the workforce of the nation's then-second-largest city, as well as its extensive railroad infrastructure. Orchard Place was a small nearby farming community.
Douglas Company's contract ended in 1945 and though plans were proposed to build commercial aircraft, the company ultimately chose to concentrate production on the west coast. With the departure of Douglas, the airport took the name Orchard Field Airport, the source of its three-letter IATA code ORD.
In 1945, the facility was chosen by the city of Chicago as the site for a facility to meet future aviation demands. Matthew Laflin Rockwell (1915–1988) was the director of planning for the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and responsible for the site selection and design of O'Hare International Airport. He was the great grandson of Matthew Laflin, a founder and pioneer of Chicago.
In 1949, the airport was renamed "O'Hare International Airport" to honor Edward O'Hare, the U.S. Navy's first flying ace and Medal of Honor recipient in World War II. Its IATA code, "ORD", remained unchanged, however, resulting in the infrequent case of an airport's three-letter designation bearing no connection to the airport name or metropolitan area.

Commercial development

By the early 1950s, Chicago Midway International Airport, Chicago's primary airport since 1931, had become too crowded despite multiple expansions and could not handle the planned first generation of jets. The city of Chicago and the FAA began to develop O'Hare as the main airport for Chicago's future.
In 1953, while traveling to an airshow at Naval Air Station Glenview in Chicago, Illinois, Blue Angels pilot LT Harding MacKnight experienced an engine flameout in his F7U Cutlass, forcing him to make an emergency landing at NAS Glenview. Traveling with him, LT "Whitey" Feightner was redirected to make his landing at O'Hare. The runway had just been completed and was covered with peach baskets to prevent aircraft from landing until it was opened. LT Feightner was told to ignore the baskets and land on the new runway. As a result, LT Feightner's F7U became the first aircraft to land on the new runway for O'Hare International Airport.
Commercial passenger flights started in 1955 and by the following year O'Hare was served by American, BOAC, Braniff, Capital, Delta, Eastern, North Central, Pan Am, TWA and United, along with freight airlines Riddle and Slick.
Growth was slow at first. By 1957 Chicago had invested over $25 million in O'Hare, but Midway remained the world's busiest airport and airlines were reluctant to relocate all of their services to O'Hare until better highway access and other capital improvements were completed. with new hangars, terminals, parking and other facilities. The expressway link to downtown Chicago, then known as the Northwest Expressway, was completed in 1960.
Ground was broken for the main terminal complex (of which Terminals 2 and 3 remain today) April 1, 1959.
All fixed-wing scheduled airline service in Chicago moved from Midway to O'Hare by July 1962. President John F. Kennedy attended a dedication ceremony in 1963; the Northwest Expressway leading to O'Hare would be renamed in his honor later in the year after his assassination. The arrival of Midway's former traffic quickly made O'Hare the world's busiest airport, serving 10 million passengers annually. Within two years that number would double, with more people passing through O'Hare in 12 months than Ellis Island had processed in its entire existence. In late 1972, Chicago city officials reached an agreement with airlines to shift some services back to Midway in order to ease the overcrowding at O'Hare.

Pre-deregulation service

American Airlines, United Airlines and Trans World Airlines had many routes to the West Coast, Northeast and Midwest. TWA flew to Europe nonstop from O'Hare starting in 1958.
During this era international flights used Terminal 1. United, Ozark, Braniff, Eastern, Northwest, Continental and Piedmont used Terminal 2 (concourses D, E and F). In Terminal 3, Concourse G served TWA and Air Canada, and Concourses H and K served American, Delta and North Central (later merged into Republic Airlines).

Post-deregulation developments

In the 1980s, after deregulation, TWA replaced Chicago with St. Louis as its main mid-continent hub.
United and American both established nationwide hubs at the airport in the 1980s, which continue to operate today. United developed a new $500 million Terminal 1 ("The Terminal of the Future" or "Terminal of Tomorrow") designed by Helmut Jahn and A. Epstein and Sons, Delta maintained a Chicago hub for some time, and opened a new Concourse L. designed by Perkins and Will and Milton Pate & Associates, in Terminal 3 (initially known as the "Delta Flight Center") in 1983, but ultimately closed its Chicago hub in the 1990s.
Due to the construction of Terminal 1 for United, international flights were relocated to a temporary Terminal 4 from 1984 until 1993. Terminal 4 was located on the ground floor of the main parking garage; international passengers would check in there and be taken directly to their aircraft by bus. Ground for the new $618 million International Terminal was broken on July 11, 1990 with airline executives and government officials, led by Mayor Richard M. Daley and U.S. Secretary of Transportation Samuel K. Skinner, in attendance. Since the opening of Terminal 5, Terminal 4 has been changed into the airport's facility for CTA buses, hotel shuttles, and other ground transportation; the T4 designation may be used again in the future as new terminals are developed. The CTA Blue Line was extended to the airport in 1984.
Total annual passenger volume at O'Hare reached 30 million in 1968, 40 million in 1976, 60 million in 1990 and 70 million in 1997.
A $80 million renovation of Concourse G in Terminal 3 designed by Teng & Associates, Inc. commenced in the spring of 1999
Delta moved from Terminal 3 to Terminal 2 in 2009 in order to align its operations with merger partner Northwest Airlines. Continental moved from Terminal 2 to Terminal 1 in 2010 as part of its merger with United Airlines.
In 2013, the Chicago Department of Aviation appropriated a $19,500 two-year contract to use livestock, specifically goats, sheep, llamas, and burros, to assist with grounds maintenance.

United States Air Force use

The original Douglas Aircraft C-54 Skymaster transport manufacturing plant on the northeast side of the airport became a United States Air Force Air National Guard and Air Force Reserve facility after World War II. It was used by the USAF from 1947 until 1999 as O'Hare Air Reserve Station, making the airport a joint civil-military airfield during this period.
The 1993 Base Realignment and Closure (BRAC) Commission recommended the closure of O'Hare Air Reserve Station as proposed by the municipal government of the City of Chicago and the transfer of both the Illinois Air National Guard's 126th Air Refueling Wing (126 ARW) and its KC-135 aircraft, and the Air Force Reserve Command's 928th Airlift Wing (928 AW) and its C-130 aircraft to new facilities to be constructed at Scott AFB, Illinois. The 126 ARW moved from the former O'Hare Air Reserve Station at O'Hare International Airport to Scott AFB, Illinois in 1999 as recommended by the Base Realignment and Closure Commission's Report to Congress in conjunction with the closure of the Air Force Reserve Command and Air National Guard facilities at O'Hare. Instead of moving to Scott AFB, subsequent BRAC action directed that the 928 AW be inactivated and its C-130 aircraft reallocated to other Air Force, Air Force Reserve and Air National Guard units.
Following the closure of the O'Hare Air Reserve Station, the former USAF facilities were redeveloped for air cargo and general aviation. Today, Signature Flight Support services private aircraft in this area.

Accidents and incidents

1,057 fatalities have occurred as a result of accidents en route to or from Chicago O'Hare.

Terminals

O'Hare has four numbered passenger terminals with nine lettered concourses and a total of 182 aircraft gates. Two or more additional terminal buildings are envisioned; there is the possibility of a large terminal complex for the west side of the field, with access from I-90 and/or the Elgin-O'Hare Expressway, if the runway reconfiguration is completed and passenger numbers require additional terminals.
All international arrivals at O'Hare (except flights from destinations with border preclearance) arrive at Terminal 5, as the other terminals do not have Customs facilities. Some airlines, such as United Airlines, American Airlines, Iberia and Lufthansa, will deplane aircraft at Terminal 5 and then, after passengers are offloaded, taxi the planes to other terminals (Terminal 1 for United and Lufthansa, for example) for boarding. This is done at least in part to make connections for passengers transferring from domestic flights to international flights easier.

Terminal 1

Terminal 1 houses all United Airlines domestic flights as well as international departures, and also departures for a select number of Star Alliance partners, including Lufthansa and All Nippon Airways. However, because Terminal 1 lacks customs handling facilities, all international arrivals (United Airlines and Star Alliance) except from airports with Customs preclearance deplane at the international terminal (Terminal 5) and the aircraft are then towed back to Terminal 1 for departure. It has 50 gates on two concourses:
Concourses B and C are linear concourses located in separate buildings parallel to each other. Concourse B is adjacent to the airport roadway and houses passenger check-in, baggage claim and security screening on its landside and aircraft gates on its airside. Concourse C is a satellite concourse with gates on all sides, in the middle of the tarmac. The two concourses are connected by a pedestrian tunnel under the tarmac, lit with a neon light show, and an airy and very slow-tempo version of Rhapsody in Blue (the United Airlines' theme music) while moving through the walkway.
United also runs a post-security shuttle service between Concourse C (Gate C9) and Concourses E & F (Gate E2A) in Terminal 2. There are three United Clubs in Terminal 1 (two on Concourse B, and one on Concourse C) as well as a United First International Lounge and United Arrivals Suite in Concourse C.
Terminal 1 houses All Nippon Airways's Chicago office.

Terminal 2

Terminal 2 houses US Airways, Air Canada and Delta Air Lines domestic flights (Delta's flight to Paris operates from the International Terminal 5 as the gates in Terminal 2 do not accommodate the aircraft used on that route). United Express also operates a number of flights from Terminal 2, but check-in for these flights is conducted in Terminal 1. United Airlines runs a United Club in Concourse F near gate F4A, while Delta has a SkyClub on Concourse E. United Continental Holdings, the parent company of United Airlines, is currently upgrading its facilities at Terminal 2, including constructing 10 new jet bridges for its United Express flights, reconfiguration of the holding rooms, and a newly constructed United Club as a replacement of the current club.  A Concourse D previously existed and served as the concourse for AirCal, Braniff, Continental, Eastern, Northwest Orient, Piedmont and United Express until it was demolished in 1988.
Terminal 2 has 42 gates on two concourses:

Terminal 3

Terminal 3 houses the American Airlines hub, as well as departing flights for oneworld alliance carriers Air Berlin, Iberia, Japan Airlines, and Qatar Airways. Also, unaffiliated domestic low-cost carriers operate in Terminal 3. Terminal 3 has 80 gates on four concourses:
Concourse G primarily houses American Eagle operations, while concourses H and K house American mainline operations, and concourse L, the previous home of Delta, now houses AmericanConnection flights, and has three gates used for mainline operations (L1, L8, and L10) as well as for codeshare partners Alaska Airlines and Westjet. Low-cost carriers Spirit Airlines, JetBlue, Virgin America and Air Choice One operate the odd-numbered gate side of concourse L beginning at gate L3.  Qatar Airways operates out of gate L10, Japan Airlines and Iberia operate out of gate K19 and Air Berlin operates out of gate H15 . Terminal 3 has two American Airlines Admirals Clubs and a Flagship Lounge.

Terminal 5 (International Terminal)

All international arrivals at O'Hare (excluding flights from destinations with U.S. border preclearance) are processed at Terminal 5, which also handles most non-US carriers and certain domestic low-cost carriers (Delta is the only US carrier that uses Terminal 5 for its nonstop seasonal flight to Paris). Terminal 5 has 21 gates on one concourse (Concourse M).
Terminal 5 houses a number of airline lounges including the Aer Lingus Gold Circle Club, Air France Lounge, Alitalia Sala Freccia Alata, British Airways Lounge, Korean Air Lounge, SAS Business Lounge and Swiss Lounge.  It also houses U.S. Customs and Border Protection at the arrival (lower) level. Terminal 5 underwent a $26 million renovation designed by A. Epstein and Sons International, Inc., which began in July 2012, features world-class dining and retail post-security – including many Chicago-based restaurants and brands – cutting edge design, and a re-engineered layout. The project was completed on April 4, 2014.

Airlines and destinations

 United's check-in and baggage claim is located at Terminal 1 but uses Concourses E and F, which are part of Terminal 2.

Traffic and statistics

Cargo carriers

There are two main cargo areas at O'Hare that have warehouse, build-up/tear-down and aircraft parking facilities. The Southwest Cargo Area, adjacent to Irving Park Road, accommodates over 80% of the airport's all-cargo flights, divided among 9 buildings in two tiers. The North Cargo Area, which is a modest conversion of the former military base (the 1943 Douglas plant area), also receives air freighters. It is adjacent to the northern portion of Bessie Coleman Drive.
Two satellite cargo areas have warehouse and build-up/tear down facilities, but aircraft do not park at these. Freight is trucked to/from aircraft on other ramps. The South Cargo Area is along Mannheim Road. The East Cargo Area, adjacent to Terminal 5, was formerly the airport's only cargo section but has now mostly evolved into an airport support zone.
The Southwest Cargo Area partially lies in the path of one of the new runways (10C/28C). The redevelopment of the airfield will entail moving/replacing this primary cargo hub.

Facilities

Runways

On October 17, 2013 O'Hare opened Runway 10C-28C. The opening of this eighth runway marked the completion of the Phase II expansion project. O'Hare arrivals have been reconfigured to predominately use a triple arrival scheme utilizing three of the four parallel runways.
Prior to the opening of 10C-28C, the new runway, 9L/27R which opened in November 2008, O'Hare had seven runways in three roughly-parallel sets. The longest is Runway 10L–28R,  of horizontal visibility. All other runway approaches except 4L and 32L have full Category I ILS. Runway 4L is seldom used for landings and has a localizer, the horizontal guidance component of an ILS system, but does not have a glideslope, the vertical component.  Runway 32L was permanently closed to arrivals when the section south of Runway 10L/28R was closed due to 10C/28C construction.flychicago.pdf
In years past, runways at O'Hare intersected each other with the exception of 4R/22L. This creates problems in inclement weather, busy times, or high winds. There have been several near-collisions at O'Hare in recent years. The redevelopment, which essentially eliminates active runway intersections, is intended to reduce collision hazards and delays.
The field started with four clustered runways; in March 1950 all were  long around the same time. 4R/22L opened in 1971 and the new 9L/27R in 2008. In 2003 the fourth original runway (18/36) closed; its short length, lack of use, and placement no longer justified certification. Runway 18/36 is now taxiway M on airport charts.
The redevelopment, when completed, will remove the two northwest–southeast runways (14/32 L/R), construct four additional east–west runways (10C/28C, 10R/28L, 9L/27R, and 9C/27C), and extend the existing east–west runways (9R/27L and 10L/28R). The two existing northeast–southwest (4/22 L/R) runways will be retained. Currently, two of the four new runways have been constructed (9L/27R, 10C/28C), and one of the two extensions (10L/28R) has been completed.
In the earlier airfield layout runway 32L was often used for departures in a shortened configuration. Planes reached the runway at taxiway T10 (common) or taxiway N, formerly M (not common). This shortened the runway but allowed operations on runway 10L/28R to continue without restriction. The full length of the runway was available upon request, though with the extension of 10L/28R it was usually not needed. In May 2010 runway 14R/32L was permanently shortened to  and it now starts at taxiway N.
O'Hare has a voluntary nighttime (2200–0700) noise abatement program.
The runway reconfiguration at O'Hare will also improve the airport for the A380 Super-Jumbo aircraft. On July 5, 2007 the runway previously designated 9R/27L became runway 10/28. On May 2, 2013, that same runway (10/28) became 10L/28R. On August 30, 2007, runway 9L/27R became 9R/27L.
On September 25, 2008, a 
Runway 10C/28C was commissioned and opened for regular use on October 17, 2013. On October 17, 2013, airport diagrams published by the FAA depicted the runway as open.

Intra-airport transportation

Access within the airport complex can be accomplished using O'Hare's Airport Transit System (ATS), a 

Other facilities

Nippon Cargo Airlines has its Americas regional office on the O'Hare property.
A large air cargo complex on the southwest side of the field was opened in 1984, replacing most of the old cargo area, which stood where Terminal 5 now exists. This complex sits right in the middle of the footprint for new runway 10C/28C, and is to be replaced by a new facility located on the northeastern portion of the airfield.
The new North Terminal Air Traffic Control Tower was completed in September 2008 and commissioned for use on November 20, 2008.
The USO has a facility in Terminal 2 for the use of military personnel arriving or departing, as well as military recruits going to Recruit Training Command, which has a booth at O'Hare to coordinate transportation to Naval Station Great Lakes for Naval recruits arriving via airplane.

Ground transportation

Rail

=Blue Line=

Trains from the Blue Line of the Chicago Transit Authority's 'L' terminate at the airport from an underground station, accessible by pedestrian tunnels from Terminals 1, 2, and 3. The station opened on September 3, 1984. Trains run 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, providing connection via downtown Chicago to Forest Park.

=Metra=

Commuter trains from the Metra North Central Service stop at the O'Hare Transfer station, which is connected to the Airport Transit System via a shuttle bus.

Car

Road vehicles enter and exit via I-190, which branches off I-90 (the Kennedy Expressway) leading to downtown Chicago. Cars may also access the airport locally from Mannheim Road, the airport's eastern boundary. Aside from cargo access on its south side, all airport traffic travels through the east side of the airport. Local residents sometimes refer to I-190 as "the world's busiest Cul-de-sac" as a result of the one way access.

Taxi

Taxi and Limo Services also provide transportation to/from Chicago O'Hare Airport. Fares vary based on traffic, average fares from O'Hare to downtown Chicago are $30–$40.

Bus

Regional buses, taking passengers to Indiana, Iowa, and Wisconsin arrive and depart from the Bus / Shuttle Center.  It is located on the ground level of the Main Parking Garage, accessible by pedestrian tunnels from Terminals 1, 2, and 3.

Cell Phone Lot

A cell phone lot can be reached via the North Mannheim Road exit off the I-190. Signs direct drivers to the Economy Parking Lot F/Cell Phone Lot. An information display provides arrival time updates.

Statistics

Modernization plan

O'Hare's high volume and crowded schedule can lead to long delays and cancellations that, due to the airport being a major hub, can have a ripple effect on air travel across North America. Official reports rank O'Hare as one of the least punctual airports in the United States based on percentage of delayed flights. In 2004, United Airlines and American Airlines agreed to modify their flight schedules to help reduce congestion caused by clustered arrivals and departures. Because of the air traffic departing, arriving, and near the airport, air traffic controllers at O'Hare and its nearby facilities are among the leaders in the world in terms of number of controlled flights handled per hour.
City management has committed to a $6 billion capital investment plan to increase the airport's capacity by 60% and decrease delays by an estimated 79 percent. This plan was approved by the FAA in October 2005 and will involve a reconfiguration of the airfield and addition of terminal space. The plan includes the addition of four runways, the lengthening of two existing runways, and the decommissioning of two existing runways in order to give the airfield six parallel runways in a configuration similar to that used at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, Los Angeles International Airport, and other large modern hub airports. This plan was very controversial as the added improvements, at the time they were proposed, were expected to increase the airport's air traffic capacity only slightly, given existing FAA rules. Additionally, the southernmost new runway would require the city acquire additional land, which was extremely controversial as residents did not want to move.
The Modernization Plan is now being implemented; an additional runway and Air Traffic Control Tower were commissioned on November 20, 2008. The new north runway, designated 9L/27R, initially served as a foul weather arrival runway, addressing one of O'Hare's primary causes of delays, but now serves as one of three runways that can be used simultaneously for landings. An extension of Runway 10L/28R (formerly 10/28, and prior to that 9R/27L) to 
As part of Mayor Rahm Emanuel's $7.3 billion infrastructure modernization plan, announced in March 2012, the airport would receive an additional $1.4 billion over three years to hasten the completion of the modernization effort.
The modernization plan has required the acquisition of 
Flight caps in place since 2004 expired on October 31, 2008. American Airlines eliminated over 60 daily flights at O'Hare because of rising fuel prices. United announced similar cutbacks. Recent worldwide economic difficulties further complicate the forecasts for airport demand.
After initially opposing the Modernization plan, DuPage County has endorsed the plan citing the creation of jobs, commercial development, and the ability of O'Hare to regain the status as busiest airport.


Image:O'Hare International Airport (USGS) Phase1 corrected.jpg|Phase 1 (Complete, runway 18/36 was closed before)
Image:O'Hare International Airport (USGS) Phase2-corrected.png|Phase 2 (Complete)
Image:O'Hare International Airport (USGS) Phase3.png|Phase 3 (Beginning stages)
Image:O'Hare International Airport (USGS) Final.png|Final runway configuration

Resistance and alternatives

The neighboring communities of Bensenville and Elk Grove Village have been centers of resistance to the expansion plan, due to their proximity to the airport and because some of their residents and businesses would be required to relocate. Bensenville and Elk Grove Village formed the Suburban O'Hare Commission
In 1995, the Chicago/Gary Airport Compact was signed by the cities of Chicago and Gary, Indiana, creating a new administration for the Gary/Chicago International Airport just across the state line. While markedly smaller than the proposed Peotone site, this airport already has more land and a longer main runway than Midway Airport. Gary is also many miles closer than Peotone to downtown Chicago. In addition public transportation is already in place to the Loop via the South Shore Line. Indiana and the FAA have provided significant funding for a Gary runway expansion, currently under construction. However, the issue here is a large portion of the revenue that is generated would go to the state of Indiana as opposed to Chicago and the state of Illinois, the very entities the airport would mainly serve.
Chicago Rockford International Airport (RFD) in Rockford, Illinois has also marketed itself as an alternative for congestion at O'Hare. However, it is at least a 1-1/2 hour trip to Rockford from the Chicago Loop. Currently there is no direct transportation service from downtown Chicago or O'Hare to Rockford airport, but airline service at the airport continues to grow. Larry Morrissey, the current mayor of Rockford, has pushed for a high-speed rail connection between the two airports to make the Rockford airport a more convenient alternative to O'Hare.
General Mitchell International Airport (MKE) in Milwaukee has consistently attempted to increase its usage by Chicago and Northern Illinois customers. There is a direct Amtrak rail service connecting Chicago with Mitchell Airport. The trains operate seven round trips each day, taking under 75 minutes from the Chicago loop.

Popular culture

O'Hare has been referenced by many movies, TV shows and songs:








