[[Smiths Falls]]

CATEGORIES: Towns in Ontario, Municipalities in Lanark County, Populated places established in 1823

 
Smiths Falls is a town in Eastern Ontario, Canada, with a population of 8,978 at the 2011 census. It is in the census division for Lanark County, but is considered a separated town and does not participate in county government. The Rideau Canal waterway passes through the town, with four separate locks in three locations and a combined lift of over .
The town's name was sometimes alternatively spelled "Smith's Falls" or "Smith Falls", but "Smiths Falls" is now considered correct.

History

Early history

The city is named for Thomas Smyth, a United Empire Loyalist who in 1786 was granted 

Building of the Rideau Canal

At the time of  construction of the Rideau Canal a small settlement had been established around a mill operated by Abel Russell Ward, who had bought Smyth's land. Colonel By ordered the removal of Ward's mill to make way for the canal. He settled with Ward for £1,500, one of the largest claims made by mill owners on the canal.
The disruption of industry caused by the building of the canal was only temporary, and Smiths Falls grew rapidly following construction. An article in Smith's Gazetteer in 1846 described the town as a "flourishing little village pleasantly situated on the Rideau River and on the Canal, fourteen miles (21 km) from Perth. It contains about 700 inhabitants. There are fifty dwellings, two grist mills (one with four run of stones), two sawmills, one carding and fulling mill, seven stores, six groceries, one axe factory, six blacksmiths, two wheelwrights, one cabinet maker, one chair-maker, three carpenters, one gunsmith, eleven shoemakers, seven tailors, one tinsmith and two taverns."
A  drop in less than a quarter of a mile posed an obstacle to navigation at Smiths Falls. A natural depression to the south of the river was used to create a flight of three locks, known as Combined Lockstation today. The natural course of the river was dammed to create a basin upstream of the locks. At the upper end of the basin a fourth (detached) lock was constructed.
A mile below the Combined Lockstation is a flight of two locks called the Old Slys Lockstation. This station is named for the original settler at this location, William Sly. A dam and waste weir control water levels upstream of the locks.
Defensible lockmasters' houses were built at all three stations in Smiths Falls. The house at Old Slys was built in 1838 and the houses at Combined and Detached around 1842. Only the house at Combined has a second storey, which was added late in the 19th century. The defensible lockmaster's house at Detached Lockstation was torn down in 1894.

Entry of the railways

In the 1850s the major railway companies were looking to build main trunk lines linking Toronto, Kingston and Montreal.  The two major companies at the time, the Brockville & Ottawa and the Grand Trunk Railway, were competing for the easiest routes to lay track. For a number of geographical reasons, and also due to the proximity of the Rideau Canal, the town of Smiths Falls became a major focal point for both railways.  Both the Canadian Pacific and the Canadian Northern (later Canadian National) established stations in the town, however, with the creation of Via Rail, the CN station was abandoned and all passenger traffic routed though the CPR station.  The CN station has been renovated and is now home to the Smiths Falls Railway Museum of Eastern Ontario.  The railway station, along with the nearby railway bascule bridge, comprise the town's two National Historic Sites of Canada.
During World War II, Axis prisoners of war (POWs) were transported to Canadian POW camps via the railway.  It was near Smiths Falls that German soldier Oberleutnant Franz von Werra jumped from a POW train and escaped to the United States, eventually reaching his homeland.Franz von Werra  The North American premiere of the film occurred on Thursday, 6 March 1958 at the Soper Theatre in Smiths Falls.The One That Got Away

Demographics

Economy

The town is on the Rideau Canal system for recreational boating, and is served by the Smiths Falls-Montague Airport for general aviation.  It is also a major railway junction point, and its station receives regular passenger service to Ottawa and Toronto from Via Rail.
Several manufacturers were based in Smiths Falls, perhaps the most well-known being the Canadian operation of The Hershey Company which closed in December 2008.ca: Hershey confirms Smiths Falls plant will close Hershey announced they will instead open a factory in Mexico where they can have cheaper labour.  In late 2006, the plant was temporarily closed due to a case of possible salmonella contamination.ottawasun.html
The Ontario Provincial Police Eastern Region Communications Centre is also located in Smiths Falls.  Its communications operators answer emergency 9-1-1 and administrative phone lines, dispatching OPP officers as required.

Sports and recreation

In 1906, a hockey team from Smiths Falls launched an unsuccessful challenge to win the Stanley Cup.com - The Stanley Cup  Smiths Falls was home to a professional baseball team, the Smiths Falls Beavers, for one season in 1937.  The team was a part of the Canadian-American League.
The town is currently home to the Junior A hockey team Smiths Falls Bears, who play in the Central Canada Hockey League.

Education

Public education in the town is managed by the Upper Canada District School Board, while Catholic education is under the care of the Catholic District School Board of Eastern Ontario.  Each operates several elementary schools and one secondary school:

Catholic schools

Public schools

Notable people

Hospitals

General hospital facilities and services are provided by the Perth and Smiths Falls District Hospital, with a site on Cornelia Street.  Also located in Smiths Falls was the Rideau Regional Centre, which provided a residential program for mentally challenged and disabled persons from 1951 until its closure in March 2009.Koskie Minsky LLP: Rideau Regional Centre

Local media

Nearest cities






