[[Gar]]

CATEGORIES: Lepisosteidae, Fish of Central America, Fish of North America, Living fossils

In American English, the name gar (or garpike) is strictly applied to members of the Lepisosteidae, a family including seven living species of fish in two genera that inhabit fresh, brackish, and occasionally marine, waters of eastern North America, Central America, and the Caribbean islands. 609, Vista Books, 1962

Etymology

In British English, the name gar was originally used for a species of needlefish, Belone belone, found in the North Atlantic and likely taking its name from the Old English word for "spear". Confusingly, the name "garfish" is commonly used for a number of other species of the related genera Strongylura, Tylosurus and Xenentodon of the family Belonidae, as well as of some more distantly related genera in the suborder Belonoidei.fishbase.org
The genus name Lepisosteus comes from the Greek lepis meaning "scale" and osteon meaning "bone".

Distribution

The gars are members of the Lepisosteiformes (or Semionotiformes), an ancient order of "primitive" ray-finned fish; fossils from this order are known from the late Cretaceous onwards. Fossil gars are found in Europe, India, South America, and North America, indicating that in times past, these fish had a wider distribution than they do today. Gars are considered to be a remnant of a group of rather primitive bony fish that flourished in the Mesozoic, and are most closely related to the bowfin, another archaic fish now found only in North America. The many species of gar include the alligator gar, which can exceed ten feet in length.

Anatomy and morphology

Gar bodies are elongated, heavily armored with ganoid scales, and fronted by similarly elongated jaws filled with long, sharp teeth. Their tails are heterocercal, and the dorsal fins are close to the tail. As their vascularised swim bladders can function as lungs, most gars surface periodically to take a gulp of air, doing so more frequently in stagnant or warm water when the concentration of oxygen in the water is low. They also appear to surface in fast-moving rapids. As a result, they are extremely hardy and able to tolerate conditions that would kill most other fish.
All the gars are relatively large fish, but the alligator gar Atractosteus spatula is the largest, as specimens have been recorded up to , and sometimes much more. et al.: Jurassic Fishes. TFH, 1994, ISBN 0-7938-0086-2

Ecology

Gars tend to be slow-moving fish except when striking at their prey. They prefer the shallow and weedy areas of rivers, lakes, and bayous, often congregating in small groups. They are voracious predators, catching their prey with their needle-like teeth, obtained with a sideways strike of the head. They feed extensively on smaller fish and invertebrates such as crabs. Gars are found across all of North America (for example Lepisosteus osseus). Although gars are primarily found in freshwater habitats, several species enter brackish waters and a few, most notably Atractosteus tristoechus, are sometimes found in the sea. Some gars travel from lakes and rivers through sewers to get to ponds. (editor): Brackish Water Fishes, pp 322–324. TFH 2006, ISBN 0-7938-0564-3

Species

The gar family contains seven species, in two genera:
Family Lepisoteidae

Significance to humans

Gar flesh is edible, and sometimes available in markets, but unlike the sturgeon they resemble, their eggs are highly toxic to humans. Several species are traded as aquarium fish.
The hard skin and scales of the gar were used by humans. Native Americans used the scales of the gar as arrowheads, native Caribbeans used the skin for breastplates, and early American pioneers covered the blades of their plows in gar skin.






