[[Job Corps]]

CATEGORIES: Great Society programs, Government agencies established in 1964, Alternative education, Job Corps

Job Corps is a program administered by the United States Department of Labor that offers free-of-charge education and vocational training to youth ages 16 to 24.

Mission and purpose

Job Corps' mission is to "help young people ages 16 through 24 improve the quality of their lives through vocational and academic training."

History

Job Corps was initiated as the central program of the Johnson Administration's War on Poverty, part of his domestic agenda known as the Great Society. Sargent Shriver, the first Director of the Office of Economic Opportunity, modeled the program on the Depression-era Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC). Established in the 1930s as an emergency relief program, the CCC provided room, board, and employment to thousands of unemployed young people. Though the CCC was discontinued after World War II, Job Corps built on many of its methods and strategies.
The current national director of the Office of Job Corps is Grace A. Kilbane.
Since its inception in 1964 under the Economic Opportunity Act, Job Corps has served more than two million young people.

Eligibility

A person is eligible for Job Corps if he or she meets the following criteria:

Phases of career development

Applicants to the Job Corps program are identified and screened for eligibility by organizations contracted by the U.S. Department of Labor. Each student in the Job Corps goes through four stages of the program:
Outreach and Admissions (OA): This is the stage at which students visit admissions counselors and gather information, as well as prepare for and leave for their Job Corps Centers. Transportation is provided to and from the centers by Job Corps.
Career Preparation Period (CPP): This stage focuses on the assimilation of the student into the center, academic testing, health screening, and instruction on resume building and job search skills. Students are instructed on computer literacy, employability, and center life. This phase lasts for the first 30 days on center.
Career Development Period (CDP): This period is where the student receives all vocational training, drivers' education, academic instruction, and preparation for life outside of Job Corps, i.e. a repeat of CPP with an actual job search.
Career Transition Period (CTP): The period immediately after the student graduates. Career Transition Specialists outside the center assist in the graduate's job search and arrangement of living accommodations, transportation, and family support resources.

Career paths

The following Career Technical Training programs are offered by Job Corps.  However, Job Corps continually adjusts program offerings in response to labor market demand, so the below list may not been fully complete or current. 
Advanced manufacturing
Automotive and machine repair
Extension programs
Retail sales and services

Locations

There are a total of 125 Job Corps centers, including at least one in every state except New Hampshire and Wyoming, one in the District of Columbia and three in Puerto Rico.
There are six Regional Offices of Job Corps:






