[[HMS Endurance (A171)]]

CATEGORIES: Icebreakers of the United Kingdom, Survey vessels of the Royal Navy, Patrol vessels of the United Kingdom, 1990 ships, British Antarctic Survey, Ships built in Ulstein

HMS ''Endurance is an icebreaker that served as the Royal Navy ice patrol ship between 1991 and 2008. Built in Norway as MV Polar Circle, she was chartered by the Royal Navy in 1991 as HMS Polar Circle, before being purchased outright and renamed HMS Endurance'' in 1992. 
She has been out of service since 2008, when she was seriously damaged by flooding following an error during routine maintenance on a sea suction strainer. In October 2013 it was reported that she would be scrapped.

Career

MV Polar Circle was built in Norway in 1990 by Ulstein Hatlo for Rieber Shipping. The Royal Navy chartered her for eight months as HMS Polar Circle from 21 November 1991. She was bought outright and renamed HMS Endurance on 9 October 1992.
Endurance provided a sovereign presence in polar waters, performing hydrographic surveys and supporting the British Antarctic Survey in Antarctica. Her usual deployment saw her in the Southern Ocean and returning to the UK through tropical waters each year. Later, a longer, 18-month deployment was designed to maximise her time available for BAS usage.
In 1997 she made the first visit
In 2005, Endurance was chosen to carry HM The Queen and HRH The Duke of Edinburgh at the International Fleet Review as part of the Trafalgar 200 celebrations.
Although she enjoyed a varied, purposeful career as the UK's sole ice patrol vessel, Endurance

Docking in Puerto Belgrano 2006

During survey work in Antarctica in January 2006, the ship's engineering staff discovered that her rudder was apparently loose on the stock. Her work period was cut short and she returned to Mare Harbour in the Falkland Islands for further inspections. Det Norske Veritas, the ship's assurance certification company, instructed that the ship should dock at the nearest available port – the nearest large enough being Puerto Belgrano, Argentina's largest naval base, where Endurance docked in mid-March 2006. Without hotel services on board, the ship's company moved to shore-side accommodation in the city of Bahía Blanca, some twenty kilometres west of Puerto Belgrano. The rudder was removed for repairs, and once it was on the floor of the drydock, a dockers' strike followed.s crew from relieving the stranded duty watch on board. When the strike broke, the rudder was replaced and welded into position and the ship left Puerto Belgrano in early April 2006. She returned to Portsmouth via Lisbon and to drydock again for further engineering work on the rudder and stock.
In July 2007 the United Kingdom offered Endurance to supply Argentine Antarctic bases after their 

2008 near loss

In December 2008, while on an 18-month deployment, Endurance suffered extensive flooding to her machinery spaces and lower accommodation decks deck resulting in the near loss of the ship.
The Royal Navy inquiry found that the flood happened while a sea-water strainer was being cleaned, in an attempt to improve the production of fresh water. The air lines controlling a hull valve were incorrectly reconnected, resulting in the valve opening and an inability to close it. The pipe installation fell below generally accepted standards, which made reconnection of the air lines ambiguous. The inquiry also found that due to manpower constraints the ship did not have a system maintainer, and that clarity of engineering command had been lost, with no-one clearly in charge of risk-management. It was fortunate that, once without propulsion, Endurance drifted over an area shallow enough for anchors to be lowered and to hold. Otherwise, Endurance would probably have been lost by flooding or running aground. The inquiry judged that the ship's company responded well to control damage in challenging conditions.
Many of the named ship's company dispute the conclusions reached by the inquiry, citing that the alleged systemic and administrative shortcomings were known and overlooked by shore-based authorities, and that pressure was placed upon the ship to deploy for 18 months in a less-than-ready material state. Personal accounts of the ship's machinery suffering badly through high-tempo cyclic usage and poor logistic support were commonplace. Endurance completed an expensive maintenance period in Portsmouth before deploying including dry docking to fix a multitude of problems encountered during the 2006–2007 deployment. This was intended to replace the scheduled docking period programmed for 2007, which would have included a full restorative ship work package. Whatever the outcome, it remains clear that Endurance badly lacked the capability to evacuate large amounts of seawater from her main machinery space in the event of emergencies like this, something that was apparent during an earlier, undocumented engine-room flooding incident in December 2006.

Ice Patrol (TV series)

In 2009, National Geographic Channel ran a four-episode documentary series on Endurance. Five ran the same series the following year under the name Ice Patrol, with the final episode showing what happened the day the ship almost sank.

Replacement

On 9 September 2010, speculation in the press suggested it was likely that Endurance would be scrapped
On 22 March 2011, it was announced that the Royal Navy intended to hire MV Polarbjørn, to be renamed 
Endurance remains in Three Basin, Portsmouth Naval Base in a preserved condition. It was announced on 7 October 2013 that Endurance will be sold for scrap, as it is not 'economically viable' to repair the damage sustained in 2008.

Layout

Endurance is a class 1A1 Her propulsion system uses a computer-controlled variable-pitch propeller and stern and bow thrusters.
She carried two ice-modified Lynx helicopters. which were highly instrumental in the making of the BBC Documentary Series Planet Earth.

Link to Sir Ernest Shackleton

Endurance is named after the ship which Sir Ernest Shackleton used in his Antarctic expedition of 1914-1917. The names of Endurance

Gallery

File:HMS Endurance, Portsmouth.jpg|Endurance in Portsmouth
File:HMSEndurance Portsmouth2.jpg|Endurance in Portsmouth with 

Footnotes




