[[Nando's]]

CATEGORIES: Restaurants in South Africa, Restaurant franchises, Companies based in Johannesburg, Fast casual restaurants, Fast-food chains of Australia

Nando's is a South African casual dining restaurant group originating from the Mozambican–Portuguese community with a Portuguese/Mozambiquan theme.Daily Telegraph
Nando's specializes in chicken dishes with either lemon and herb, Mango and Lime, medium, hot, extra hot or extra extra hot Peri-Peri marinades (properly known as Galinha à Africana).  In some countries, Nando's has other flavour options such as Mediterranean.

History

The restaurant began in 1987 when Portuguese-Mozambican Fernando Duarte along with Robert Brozin bought a restaurant called Chickenland in Rosettenville, southern Johannesburg in South Africa.

Food

Nando's specialises in flame-grilled Peri-Peri chicken. The chicken is served in quarters, halves, wholes, and butterfly breasts (UK, Ireland and South Africa only). Nando's also serves burgers, pitas, salads, wings and wraps. In some countries, Nando's sells chicken livers, Espetada (a large stand with a skewer of chicken breast and grilled peppers) and Cataplana (a chicken and rice dish served in a traditional Portuguese copper dish).

Peri-peri

Peri-peri (piri piri, pili pili), also known as African Bird's Eye chilli, is a variety of Capsicum frutescens widely grown in East and Southern Africa. Nando's products are basted in one of four Peri-Peri flavours. Nando's has published a book about Peri-Peri called Pain and Pleasure – Peri-Peri the contrasts and contradictions of the African Bird's Eye Chilli.

Nando's sauces

Nando's manufactures a range of sauces which are sold in Nando's restaurants and in supermarkets. They include Peri-Peri sauces, marinades, cooking sauces and a Peri-Peri Essence.

Marketing

In 2010, Advertising Age magazine named Nando's as one of the world's top 30 hottest marketing brands.

Global locations

Nando's has locations in Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Botswana, Canada, Fiji, India, Ireland, Malaysia, Mauritius, Namibia, New Zealand, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Swaziland, UAE, UK, USA, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

Africa

=South African origins=

The first restaurant began in 1987 when Robert Brozin and Fernando Duarte bought a restaurant called Chickenland in Rosettenville, southern Johannesburg.

=Botswana=

Nandos has been operating in Botswana since 1993.

=Mauritius=

There are currently

=Namibia=

Nando's launched in Namibia in 1995.

=Zambia=

Nando's began operating in Zambia in 2002.

=Zimbabwe=

In Zimbabwe, there are eight restaurants in Harare, two in Bulawayo and one each in Kwekwe, Gweru and Mutare.Nando's Chicken Restaurants in Zimbabwe

Oceania

=Australia=

Nando's has been in the Australian marketplace since 1990, when the first restaurant opened in Tuart Hill in Western Australia. 

=Fiji=

There are 3 Nando's in Fiji.

=New Zealand=

Nando's opened their first store in Glenfield in 2000. 

Asia

=Bangladesh=

Nando's has been running in Bangladesh since 2007. The first restaurant was opened in Dhanmondi area. It is running there as a franchised business. All of the outlets in Bangladesh sell halal foods. Currently it is operated in the prominent locations of Dhaka and Chittagong.

=India=

Nando's opened restaurants in India in late 2010. . The Nando's in Bangalore opened on Friday, 3 December 2010 and the official press conference and press release/announcement was on Tuesday, 7 December 2010. 

=Malaysia=

In Malaysia, Nando's has been established since 1998 and currently, there are 38 restaurants in Malaysia. The latest restaurant opened at Aeons Station 18 Shopping Mall, Ipoh, Perak in April 2012.

=Pakistan=

Nando's came to Pakistan in 2001 and is one of the oldest trading markets in Asia.  Pakistan has seven Nando's outlets, four in Karachi, two in Lahore and one in Islamabad.

=Singapore=

In Singapore, Nando's opened its first restaurant on 9 May 2010, located at Bugis Junction. By 2014, the brand has opened other restaurants at Tanglin Mall, Plaza Singapura and Tampines Mall.

Europe

=United Kingdom=

In 1992, Nando's expanded to the United Kingdom, opening its first restaurant in Ealing, London. As of 10 October 2013, Nando's has 280 restaurants located across the UK, with over 100 of those in London.
In 2009, Nando's UK was awarded Three Stars (highest accolade) in the Best Companies Annual Accreditation Awards – the only entrant in the large companies' category to achieve the three star rating.
Over 50 of the UK's branches serve Halal certified chicken.
Nando's has the largest collection of South African art in the UK, with over 3,000 works displayed in their restaurants.

=Republic of Ireland=

Nando's opened in the Republic of Ireland from 2006 onawards. Its restaurants can be found in Cork and Dublin.Our Restaurants | Nandos Ireland

North America

=United States=

Nando's has fourteen restaurants in the United States: three in Washington, DC (7th Street NW, 18th Street NW and Navy Yard, Washington, D.C.); eight in Maryland (Annapolis, Baltimore, Silver Spring, Bethesda, Gaithersburg, National Harbor, Gambrills, and Hanover); and four in Virginia (Arlington, Old Town Alexandria, Woodbridge, and Gainesville).

=Canada=

Nando's has operated since 1994 in the Canadian market, with stores in the provinces of British Columbia (Vancouver, Coquitlam, Burnaby, Abbotsford, Victoria, Kamloops), Alberta (Calgary) and Ontario (Ottawa, Toronto).

Former locations

Nando's had a presence in the following countries:As of April 2013 these countries are no longer listed at 

Nando's shop

Nando's has online web stores in the United Kingdom. Customers can purchase a range of Nando's branded sauces, sprinkles and apparel. Nando's also sells their range of sauces and sprinkles through major supermarkets.

Controversial advertising

Australian illegal immigrants advertisement

In Australia, Nando's ran an advertising campaign based around the 2002 political controversy regarding the mandatory detention of illegal immigrants. The detainees had been waging a hunger strike campaign, even resorting to physically sewing their lips closed. Nando's adverts proclaimed that the strikers "decided to unsew their lips after hearing the news that with every Nando's quarter chicken combo, Nando's are giving away an extra quarter chicken free". Melbourne's Sphere Advertising said that the ad was designed to spark controversy, saying that they knew that "there's a section of our audience that's going to be uncomfortable...

Malema advertisement

During the South African national elections of 2009, Nando's made an advert lampooning African National Congress Youth League then president Julius Malema by using a puppet that resembled him. Malema's lawyers sued Nando's and the original advert was removed. However, an altered version was released, with the puppet's face pixelated and the voice altered. The puppet used in the advert was later sold at auction for R100,000 which was donated to an educational charity.

Last Dictator advertisement

In 2011 Nando's launched a "Last dictators" advert in South Africa.








