[[Bachelor of Education]]

CATEGORIES: Bachelor's degrees, Professional titles and certifications, Teacher training

A Bachelor of Education (B. This degree is comparable to a master's level degree.

North America

In North America the degree is awarded for coursework completed within a program lasting one to five years, depending on the requirements established by the place wherethe province or state in which the university is located. In Canada, a BEd degree is required for a teaching certificate.
A BEd program may have direct entry from high school; as a combined degree with another bachelor's degree (e.g., BA/BEd); or as an after-degree program where the candidate has obtained a bachelor's degree, usually, the field in which the student wishes to teach. A good rapport or previous experience with young children or teens is also a desired characteristic of applicants.
There are several streams to a Bachelor of Education, each corresponding to the particular level of instruction. In the United States, this includes elementary school education, middle school education, and high school education. Students in the elementary education stream generally study for a Liberal Studies degree. In the high school (secondary education) stream, the student specializes in one to two subject areas. Upon completion of the degree, they will prepare and eventually sit for the state's Board of Education certification examination.
A typical BEd program may include coursework in pedagogy, educational psychology, educational policy and leadership, assessment, curriculum development and lesson planning, social justice, special education, and instructional technology.

Australia

In Australia, a 4-Year Bachelor of Education degree combines practical/pedagogical study with a Major sequence in the academic discipline of Education. In the majority of Australian universities, there is usually 2 distinct types of the Bachelor of Education: Primary and Secondary. The subjects and degree programs and quite different in both degrees for e.g. for a student studying the Bachelor of Education (Primary) the focus of their degree would lie in behaviour, children, basic literacy, how children learn etc. For a student studying the Bachelor of Education (Secondary) they would therefore be teaching roughly 11-18 year old adolescents and there programs would have less focus on those kinds of areas by the Primary degree. Instead, the degree is based around the student's intending teaching subjects; usually 1 or 2. In NSW, these teaching areas provide the major focus for their degree's in their final years. They consists of: English, Mathematics, Science (Biology, Physics & Chemistry), Geography, History, Business Studies, Legal Studies, Economics, Society & Culture and Languages.
The longer duration of the course allows for more practical experiences and greater personal or professional development before teaching service.  Most Australian State Teacher-Certification bodies require either a Bachelor of Education, or an Bachelor's Degree in one or two subject areas, with a Graduate Diploma in Education as a minimum.  A B.Ed. is not to be confused with the lesser degree Bachelor of Teaching, which is usually an 'End-On' course similar but slightly longer than a Graduate Diploma in Education.
Note: In Australia, the term Undergraduate Degree is used to describe all degree's undertaken by a first-time university student and usually no pre-requisite tertiary level studies are required, mostly just the completion of Secondary High School. Postgraduate degrees are used to describe the degrees completed with a Undergraduate degree as pre-requisite.

Bangladesh

In Bangladesh, Bachelor of Education (B. B. The minimum qualification required for entry into B.A) or Bachelor of Science (BSc). Usually graduates from Arts faculty are trained to lecture subjects like history, civics, geography and languages and from Science faculty are trained to follow their lecture on mathematics, physics, chemistry and biology etc. whereas graduates from Commerce faculty trained up to lecture on accounting & finance, economics, management & marketing. After B.Ed) in the universities of Bangladesh. National Council for Teacher Education is the constitutional authority to standardize courses for the teachers in Bangladesh.
Major universities which offer B.Ed. in Bangladesh are:-

Israel

In Israel, Bachelor of Education(B. Developed unique training programs tailored contemporary trends in professional training for teaching. In addition, there are plans Sitting studies of academics and teachers complete undergraduate studies. In Israel there are a number of colleges and universities offering B.

India

In India, Bachelor of Education(B. The B. The minimum qualification required for entry into B.Ed. course is Bachelor of Arts(B.A.), Bachelor of Science (B.Sc.). While students from arts stream are trained to teach subjects like history, civics, geography and languages. The students from science stream are trained to teach mathematics, physics, chemistry and biology. After BEd, students can pursue Master in Education (M.Ed.) in Indian universities. National Council for Teacher Education is statutory body which regulates courses in teaching in India.
The Bachelor of Elementary Education (B.El.Ed.) programme is a four-year integrated professional degree programme of Elementary Teacher Education offered after the senior secondary (class XII) stage of school. Conceptualized by the Maulana Azad Centre for Elementary and Social Education (MACESE) of the Department of Education, University of Delhi and launched in the academic year 1994-95, the programme is an attempt towards fulfilling the need for professionally qualified elementary school teachers. B.El.Ed. is designed to integrate the study of subject knowledge, human development, pedagogical knowledge and communication skills. Both professional and academic options are available to students who graduate with a B.El.Ed. degree
There is a course called Diploma in Education (D.Ed.) or TCH meant for teaching in primary and nursery schools in India. However the qualification for admission to this course is pass in pre university course.
The duration of the course is still under debate. Usually it is one-year course. But an open university like Indira Gandhi National University (IGNOU) offers B. Ed course with a minimum duration of two years. The Right of Free and Compulsory Education for Children (RTE Act-2009) came into force as an act from April 2010. The act emphasis on the quality education for every child. Therefore to improve the quality in education, the quality of teachers must be a crucial factor. With a view to bring quality in education, the entry level percentage to B. Ed has been fixed at 45 percent for Scheduled Cast and Scheduled Tribes 50 percent for general.

Ireland

In the Republic of Ireland, a 4-Year Bachelor of Education degree combines practical/pedagogical study with a Major sequence in the academic discipline of Education. Modules in the Irish and English languages are compulsory.
Students study a range of Education-related subjects, including Psychology, Sociology, History, Social Policy, Professional Practice. Students also study subjects from another field or discipline as qualification for an intended teaching area or method.
The degree is available in several specialisations, including Primary, Secondary, Human Movement/Health, Music, or Early Childhood education. The longer duration of the course allows for more practical experiences and greater personal or professional development before teaching service. Teacher-Certification bodies require either a Bachelor of Education, or an Undergraduate/Bachelor's Degree in one or two subject areas, with a Diploma of Education as a minimum. A B.Ed. is not to be confused with the lesser degree Bachelor of Teaching, which is usually an 'End-On' course similar but slightly longer than a Diploma of Education.

New Zealand

The 3-year Bachelor of Education prepares graduates to teach in early childhood centres, primary and intermediate schools, and offers specialisations in these major areas. The qualification is designed to equip students with the skills, knowledge and attitudes they need to be effective teachers. Teaching placements allow students to gain invaluable experience in diverse education settings as they study. The Bachelor of Education may lead to further study for a Master of Education, Master of Educational Leadership or Master of Career Development.

Sri Lanka

The Bachelor of Education degree was first introduced by the University of Ceylon (Sri Lanka) in 1963. Prof. J. E. Jayasuriya, then Professor of Education at University of Ceylon introduced the course to meet the growing demand for professional teacher qualifications. Then the practice was to join the teaching profession with a Bachelors degree either in Arts or Sciences and after four years of teaching in a Secondary school teachers get the One year Post-Graduate Diploma in Education.
The University of Ceylon used to take only 50 -60 Post Graduate Diploma candidates at a time in an annual program. The B. B.Ed degree required a candidates to sit for 19 - 20 papers for the finals.  This happened due to combining of the Bachelors degree and the Post-graduate Diploma in Education. Only the top performing students were admitted to B. The first batch graduated in 1967.  Following this Australia introduced the B. Upali M Sedere was the first First Class holder of the B. Subsequently in 1973, the B.

United Kingdom

In the United Kingdom, where both the university system and school system are very different, the degree is awarded after a three or four year course (the course length depends on the university) which is specifically tailored to either primary education or for a limited range of secondary education subjects. It leads to Qualified Teacher Status (QTS) in England and Wales and is a teaching qualification in Scotland and Northern Ireland.
As a result of the Robbins Report on higher education (1963), the teacher training colleges were reformed as Colleges of Education. Such colleges, as in the case of those in London, became 'constituent colleges' of the Institute of Education, with their academic award being from the University of London. Students were offered an extra year of study, bringing the course up to four years in length and resulting in the award of the Bachelor of Education degree. The first Bachelors of Education graduated in 1968.org.uk
The BEd became more widespread in the early 1980s, when a bachelor's degree became a requirement for new teachers in the whole of the United Kingdom, replacing the old Certificate in Education (Cert Ed).
The BEd is not the only way of gaining Qualified Teacher Status or gaining a teaching qualification.  Other routes are as follows:

Bachelor of Science and/with Education. B.Sc.Ed

The Bachelor of Science and/with Education is a degree awarded to students who complete the four to five year course of study in the field of science (major and minor in biology, chemistry, physics, math) and Education, it is the combination of degree in science and education course (sometimes referred to double degree programs B.Ed = B.Sc. Although notionally B.Ed are two degrees, they must be taken together. There are very few universities that offer this course because it requires collaboration between the Faculty/School of Science and that of Education, to ensure that the teacher not only can work in an education institution but also in an industrial area related to science.
In Malaysia, it is one of the toughest admittance degrees for the students to get into. Students not only need a distinction result but also need to go through a psychology test, tough interviews and demos of teaching. Students who already get these courses will be given a full scholarship by the Minister of Education. Upon graduation, the students will get job offers from government and private institutions (mostly to teach for matriculation, foundation or high school students) due to deep understanding of specific science and professional teaching training. Graduates also can work in other science related industries. Bachelor of Science AND Education is totally different from Bachelor of Science IN Education.
In Singapore, the National Institute of Education, an autonomous institute of Nanyang Technological University, offers a 4year undergraduate programme, offering BSc(Ed) or BA(Ed) in its initial teacher training programmes. Students are taught pedagogical theories and principles, alongside their chosen subject majors (and minors).




