[[M3 motorway (Great Britain)]]

CATEGORIES: Motorways in England, Transport in Surrey, Transport in Hampshire, Roads in Surrey

The M3 is a motorway that runs from Sunbury-on-Thames, Surrey, to Southampton, Hampshire, a distance of approximately .  Its section from Southampton to the A34 trunk road junction (also for north Winchester) is in the north-south European route E05 (which is unsigned). The motorway is dual three-lane, except from Junction 8 (A303 road) near Basingstoke to Junction 9 near Winchester where it is dual two-lane. It was opened in sections starting in 1968 and was eventually completed in 1995 in the face of widespread opposition to the short section southeast of Winchester that passes through Twyford Down.

History

Originally approved as the "London to Basingstoke Motorway" with delays over funding for an extension to Southampton
In 1967 sections of the A33 road from Popham, Hampshire to a northeastern point of the Winchester Bypass were being widened to dual carriageway however this only partially alleviated growing congestion especially in Winchester which led to the southern phase gaining approval. Oral Questions in the House of Lords 21 June 1967 vol 283 cc1385-7

Eastern section

The eastern section, from Sunbury-on-Thames in Surrey to Popham near Basingstoke opened in sections, first the Hampshire section in 1971 and then the Surrey section in 1974. The completed road acts as a continuation of the A316 Country Way an express three-lane road from Apex Corner, Hanworth, in Greater London to Sunbury-on-Thames.

Southern section

A first public inquiry for the "M3 London to Basingstoke Motorway: Popham to Compton extension" centred on the section passing Winchester and was held in 1971 under which the ministry was instructed to reconsider and reconsult on the proposals. The earlier decision to route the motorway through or alongside the water meadows between St Catherine's Hill and the compact cathedral city was reopened and during the year-long inquiry the headmaster of Winchester College was forcibly ejected along with others for causing a disturbance.
The scope of the M3 extension was reduced to defer the difficult decision about the section around Winchester and it was built in two sections (from 'Popham to Bridget's Farm' and from 'Bridget's Farm to Bar End') in 1995. When this opened, the temporary junction to the A33 parallel route was removed. 
The section of the M3 from near Junction 12 (Eastleigh and Chandler's Ford) to the last, Junction 14 for the M27 replaced part of the A33 road which was upgraded to motorway standard and opened in 1991. 
In 2008 the busiest section of the motorway, at Chandler's Ford, carried a daily average of around 130,000 vehicles.
The southern section starts as a continuation of a single-lane avenue, Bassett Avenue and The Avenue in the City of Southampton as the M27 motorway provides alternative routes from other parts of the city, particularly its waterfront and downtown peak-hour accessway, the M271 motorway and Mountbatten Way providing dual to three lane highways starting at the northwest of the city.

Abandoned/suspended proposals

Its service station was envisaged at Basingstoke upon the motorway's completion but not built – superseded by one just north of Fleet and another north of Winchester.

Additions

An additional junction, numbered 4A, opened in April 1992 for Fleet.

Detailed route

The M3 starts at Sunbury-on-Thames in Surrey on the edge of South West London as the continuation of the A316 which has three lanes each way from Hanworth in the London Borough of Hounslow, and two from Richmond Circus. The motorway . Turning south west again, it passes Popham and, just before reaching Junction 8, where one lane becomes the A303 road, the motorway continues as a dual two lane road through open countryside and Micheldever Wood until it reaches the north of Winchester.
Taking over the  "Winchester Bypass" the M3 resumes to three lanes each way at Junction 9, continues directly south and then takes a small curve around the east of the city running through a deep cutting in Twyford Down and then proceeding south west again, crossing the South West Main Line a second time alongside the River Itchen and through the Eastleigh urban-suburban area before crossing the Eastleigh to Romsey railway line and ending at the Chilworth Roundabout on the edge of Southampton.

Road features

|date = 31 October 2003
|journal = Southern Daily Echo
|title = Myth of pilot's bridge stunt 
|url =
}}
[/ref]

Incidents

In the early morning of 25 April 1999, the drum and bass DJ and record producer known as Kemistry was killed on the M3 near Winchester by the steel body of a cat's eye, which had been dislodged by a van and flew through the windscreen of the following car in which she was a passenger. The coroner recorded a verdict of accidental death. A question was asked in the House of Lords about the safety of cat's eyes in light of the highly unusual incident, and the Highways Agency conducted an investigation into the "long-term integrity and performance" of various types of road stud.
On 1 April 2000, a zebra crossing was illegally painted across the northbound carriageway of the M3 between Junctions 4 and 4a.

Junctions

Data from driver location signs are used to provide distance and carriageway identification information.Area 3 Driver Location Signs (map) – Highway Authority, 2009

