[[Ray Wilson (musician)]]

CATEGORIES: Scottish rock singers, Scottish male singers, Genesis (band) members, 1968 births, Living people, People from Dumfries, Scottish emigrants to Poland

Raymond Wilson (born 8 September 1968, Dumfries, Scotland) is a Scottish musician, best known as vocalist in the post-grunge band Stiltskin, and in Genesis between 1996 and 1998. He has released eight solo albums (including five live albums), as well as five band releases.

Early career/Stiltskin

Wilson started off in a band called Guaranteed Pure in the 1990, which featured himself along with Paul Holmes (keyboards), Steve Wilson (guitars), John Haimes (bass) and Chris Cavanagh (drums).com/artist/guaranteed_pure They released an album called Swing Your Bag, the title track of which was included on a compilation album on the label of Fish entitled The Funny Farm Project : Outpatients '93.worldofgenesis.htm He then joined Stiltskin; they released one album and had a number one hit in the UK with the single "Inside".

Genesis

Wilson is probably best known as the lead singer of Genesis from 1996 to 1998, after Phil Collins officially departed in March 1996. Founding Genesis members Tony Banks and Mike Rutherford were handed a CD of the Stiltskin album The Mind's Eye from Virgin Records executives. They were very impressed with Wilson's vocal abilities and had their manager, Tony Smith, call him for an audition. Wilson was officially announced as the new lead singer of Genesis in early June 1997. Their only album with Wilson, ....., was released that September and became a top 10 hit worldwide, except for the U.S. where it reached #54 on the Billboard 200 album charts. The album was re-issued in 2007. Genesis toured Europe in the winter and spring of 1998, but the American leg was cancelled due to low ticket sales.  After the commercial failure of the album, the band announced they would go on an extended hiatus. In May of 2001, during an exclusive interview with Dave Negrin for website WorldofGenesis." I've never really felt that I was out of the band as such; it's just that the band doesn't exist anymore (laughs).  When I heard that, it was just after the Cut tour, about a year and a half ago. I've read some articles saying that I was fired and stuff, but to be fair to them, they didn't phone me up and say, "Ray, you're fired. We're going to carry on and we're going to get somebody else to sing." Or, "We're going to carry on and get Phil back." There was never any of that. They just said, "We've decided not to continue because the market doesn't want us." I think they didn't want to completely close the door to ever doing anything again." Wilson, R. (2001, May 29). Interview by Dave Negrin Interview. Inside the mind's eye of ray wilson: An exclusive interview. Retrieved from 

Solo career

Wilson went on to release the album Millionairhead with a solo project called Cut_. It was re-released in 2007 (remastered) including three additional songs.
In 2003 he released a solo album under his own name titled Change. The next year he released another studio album entitled The Next Best Thing, which included yet another cover of "Inside". In 2006 he released another Stiltskin album called She, and in 2007 a Stiltskin live CD featuring (amongst others) 8 of the 12 songs from She. This live CD was recorded 25 October 2006, at Harmonie, Bonn, Germany.
DJ and trance producer Armin van Buuren has produced remixes of the songs "Another Day" (retitled "Yet Another Day") and "Gypsy" from Millionairhead. Both remixes have been released on van Buuren's own albums, and "Yet Another Day" was also released as a single.

Concerts with Steve Hackett

In 2013 Ray Wilson joined Steve Hackett for his "Genesis Revisited II" Tour as a guest singer. He was featured
in a special edition of the "Genesis Revisited 2" album on the track "The Carpet Crawlers". It was the first time
since 1998 that Ray had worked with a Genesis member.

Discography

Solo releases

Guaranteed Pure

CD Artwork By Philip Paterson

Steve Hackett

Stiltskin

Genesis

Cut_

Collaborations

Personal life

Wilson is the cousin of Ian Wilson, better known as Ian Catskilkin, of the UK indie band, Art Brut.
In 2007, after a concert in Poland, Wilson met the dancer Małgorzata Mielech. After a few months of dating, he left Edinburgh and moved to Poznań in September 2008.






