[[Social Democrats, USA]]

CATEGORIES: Democratic socialist and social democratic parties and organizations in the United States, Political parties established in 1972, Social democratic parties, American social democrats, Social Democrats, USA

Social Democrats, USA (SDUSA) was the  principal association of U.S. social democrats from 1972–2005.
SDUSA was founded in 1972 when the Socialist Party of America renamed itself Social Democrats, USA.[ref]
The New York Times reported on the Convention for three other days:
SDUSA's organizational activities included sponsoring discussions and issuing position papers; it was known mainly because of its members' activities in other organizations. SDUSA included  civil-rights activists and leaders of labor unions, such as  Bayard Rustin, Norman Hill, and Tom Kahn of the AFL–CIO, and Sandra Feldman and Rachelle Horowitz of the American Federation of Teachers. SDUSA members helped to support free labor-unions; in particular, Tom Kahn organized the AFL–CIO's support of Poland's Solidarity. Penn Kemble and Carl Gershman cooperated with Republican and Democratic administrations on democracy promotion. Other members included the  philosopher Sidney Hook.  The group supports Democratic socialist anti-communism.
SDUSA ceased operations in 2005, following the death of Penn Kemble. In 2008–2009 two small organizations emerged, each proclaiming  itself to be the successor to SDUSA.

From the Socialist Party of Norman Thomas

In its 1972 Convention, the Socialist Party had two Co-Chairmen, Bayard Rustin and Charles S. Zimmerman (of the International Ladies Garment Workers' Union,Gerald Sorin, The Prophetic Minority: American Jewish Immigrant Radicals, 1880–1920. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1985; pg. 155. ILGWU) and a First National Vice Chairman, James S. Glaser, who were re-elected by acclamation. In his opening speech to the Convention, Co-Chairman Bayard Rustin called for SDUSA to organize against the  "reactionary policies of the Nixon Administration"; Rustin also criticized the "irresponsibility and élitism of the 'New Politics' liberals".
The Party changed its name to "Social Democrats, USA" by a vote of 73 to 34.[ref]
The New York Times reported on the 1972 Convention on other days, e.g.,
[/ref] Changing the name of the Socialist Party to "Social Democrats USA" was intended to be "realistic": the intention was to respond to the end of the running of actual Socialist Party candidates for office, to respond to the confusions of Americans. The New York Times observed that the Socialist Party had last sponsored a candidate for President in 1956, who received only 2,121 votes, which were cast in only 6 states. Because the Socialist Party no longer sponsored party candidates in elections, continued use of the name "Party" was "misleading" and hindered the recruiting of activists who participated in the Democratic Party, according to the majority report. The name "Socialist" was replaced by "Social Democrats" because many American associated the word "socialism" with Soviet communism. Moreover, the organization sought to distinguish itself from two small Marxist parties, the Socialist Workers Party and the Socialist Labor Party.
During the 1972 convention, the majority ("Unity Caucus") won every vote, by a ratio of two to one. The Convention elected a national committee of 33 members, with 22 seats for the majority caucus, 8 seats for the "Coalition Caucus" of Michael Harrington, 2 for the left-wing "Debs Caucus", and one for the "independent" Samuel H. Friedman. Friedman and the minority caucuses had opposed the name change.
The convention voted on and adopted proposals for its program by a two-one vote. On foreign policy, the program called for "firmness toward Communist aggression". However, on the Vietnam War, the program opposed "any efforts to bomb Hanoi into submission"; instead, it endorsed negotiating a peace agreement, which should protect Communist political cadres in South Vietnam from further military or police reprisals. Harrington's proposal for a ceasefire and immediate withdrawal of U.S. forces was defeated. Harrington complained that, after its convention, the Socialist Party had endorsed George McGovern only with a  statement loaded with "constructive criticism" and that it had not mobilized enough support for McGovern. The majority caucus's Arch Puddington replied that the California branch was especially active in supporting McGovern, while the New York branch were focusing on a congressional race.
Even before the convention, Michael Harrington had resigned as an Honorary Chairperson of the Socialist Party. Some months after the convention, he resigned his membership in SDUSA. Harrington and his supporters from the Coalition Caucus soon formed the Democratic Socialist Organizing Committee (DSOC). Many members of the Debs caucus resigned from SDUSA and formed the Socialist Party USA.

Early years

