[[Jeffrey Archer]]

CATEGORIES: 1940 births, Living people, 20th-century British novelists, 21st-century British novelists, Alumni of Brasenose College, Oxford, British novelists, British perjurers, British people convicted of perverting the course of justice, British politicians convicted of crimes, British sportsperson–politicians, Conservative Party (UK) life peers, Conservative Party (UK) MPs, English Anglicans, English politicians, Inmates of HM Prison Belmarsh, Members of the Greater London Council, Members of the United Kingdom Parliament for English constituencies, People educated at Wellington School, Somerset, People from the City of London, People from Weston-super-Mare, UK MPs 1966–70, UK MPs 1970–74, UK MPs 1974, Writers from London

Jeffrey Howard Archer, Baron Archer of Weston-super-Mare (born 15 April 1940) is an English author and former politician.
Before becoming an author, Archer was a Member of Parliament (1969–74), but resigned over a financial scandal which left him almost bankrupt.co. He was made a life peer in 1992. His political career ended with his conviction and  subsequent imprisonment (2001–03) for perjury and perverting the course of justice, which followed his second resignation. His books have sold at least 250 million copies worldwide.Some sources have suggested Archer has sold up 400 million copies, while the novelist himself claims around 330 million; see Anthony Horowitz "Jeffrey Archer interview: the saga continues", telegraph.co.uk, 7 May 2013

Life and career to 1990

Background

Jeffrey Howard Archer was born in the City of London Maternity Hospital. He was two weeks old when  his family moved to the seaside town of Weston-super-Mare, Somerset, where he spent most of his early life.  His father, William (died 1956),Nigel Farndale "Jeffrey Archer: The next chapter", The Daily Telegraph, 2 March 2008 was sixty-four when Archer was born. Early in his career, Archer gave conflicting accounts to the press of his father's supposed, but non-existent, military career."Lord Archer's tales charm audience", Bristol Post, 24 September 2011
In 1951, he won a scholarship to Wellington School, in Somerset, not Wellington College in Berkshire, as he was inclined to claim in the past.co.
After Archer left school passing O-levels in English Literature, Art, and History, he worked for a few months in a number of jobs, including training with the army and for the police. Afterwards he worked as a Physical Education teacher: first at Vicar's Hill, a Prep School in Hampshire where he taught fencing amongst other sports, and later at the independent school Dover College in Kent.

Oxford

Archer studied for three years, gaining an academic qualification in teaching awarded by the Oxford University Department for Continuing Education. The course was based at Brasenose College, Oxford, although Archer was never registered as an undergraduate student of the College. There have been claims that Archer provided false evidence of his academic qualifications, for instance the apparent citing of an American institution which was actually a bodybuilding club, in gaining admission to the course. His website includes references to his Oxford 'Principal', yet omits that he was not a full undergraduate at Oxford.
At Oxford he was successful in athletics, competing in sprinting and hurdling. It is unclear whether he was in fact eligible to compete in Varsity matches, not being a member of the College. Television coverage survives of him making false starts in a 1964 sprint race, but despite the rules Archer was not disqualified. He gained a blue in athletics and went on to run for England once and also competed for Great Britain once and was successful.
  Even as a student Jeffrey Archer was plagued with rumours of financial wrongdoing – fellow undergraduates were amazed that he owned houses and cars with personalised number plates while working part time as an Oxfam fund raiser. 
He raised money for the charity Oxfam, obtaining the support of The Beatles in a charity fundraising drive. The band accepted his invitation to visit the senior common room of Brasenose College, where they were photographed with Archer and dons of the college, although they did not play there. The critic Sheridan Morley, then a student at Merton, was present and recalled the occasion:  During this period Archer met his future wife, Mary Doreen Weeden, who was studying chemistry at St Anne's College, Oxford. They married in July 1966. She went on to specialise in solar power. 

Charity fundraising

After leaving Oxford, he continued as a charity fundraiser, working for the National Birthday Trust, a medical charity. He also began a career in politics, serving as a Conservative councillor on the Greater London Council during 1967–70.
One organisation Archer worked for, the United Nations Association, alleged discrepancies in his claims for expenses,Louise Jury "The best-selling novelist with a rare gift for inaccurate precis", The Independent on Sunday, 21 November 1999 and details appeared in the press in a scrambled form. Archer brought a defamation action against the former Conservative member of parliament Humphry Berkeley, chairman of the UNA, as the source of the allegations. The case was settled out of court after three years. Berkeley tried to persuade Conservative Central Office that Archer was unsuitable as a parliamentary candidate, but a selection meeting at Louth disregarded any doubts.
Archer set up his own fundraising and PR company, Arrow Enterprises, in 1969.

Member of Parliament

At 29, he was elected Member of Parliament (MP) for the Lincolnshire constituency of Louth, holding the seat for the Conservative Party in a by-election on 4 December 1969. Archer beat Ian Gow to the selection after winning over a substantial proportion of younger members at the selection meeting. The national party had concerns about Archer's selection, but these were dismissed by the local Conservative association after representatives made a journey to party headquarters to discuss the matter. 
Louth constituency had three key areas: Louth, Cleethorpes, and Immingham. During his time as a Member of Parliament, Archer was a regular at the Immingham Conservative Club in the most working-class part of the constituency. He took part in the "Kennedy Memorial Test" in 1970, a 50-mile running/walking race from Louth to Skegness and back. 
In Parliament, Archer was on the left of the Conservative Party, rebelling against some of his party's policies. He urged free TV licences for the elderly and was against museum charges."Museum and Galleries (Admission Charges)", Hansard, HC Deb 21 June 1971, vol 819, cc993-1067, col.1031-4 Archer voted against restoring capital punishment, saying it was barbaric and obscene. In 1971, he employed David Mellor, then needing money for his bar finals, to deal with his correspondence. He tipped Mellor to reach the cabinet. In an interview Archer said, "I hope we don't return to extremes. I'm what you might call centre-right but I've always disliked the right wing as much as I've disliked the left wing."
In 1974, he was a casualty of a fraudulent investment scheme involving Aquablast, a Canadian company, a debacle which lost Archer his first fortune. Fearing imminent bankruptcy, he stood down as an MP at the October 1974 general election. By this time the Archers were living in a large five-bedroom house in The Boltons, an exclusive street in South Kensington. As a result of the Aquablast affair, they were forced to sell the house and move into more modest accommodation for a while.
While he was a witness in the Aquablast case in Toronto in 1975, Archer was accused of taking three suits from a department store. but in the late 1990s, he finally acknowledged that he had indeed taken the suits, although he claimed that at the time he had not realised he had left the shop. No charges were brought.

Early writing career

His first book, Not a Penny More, Not a Penny Less, was picked up by the literary agent Deborah Owen and published first in the US, then eventually in Britain in the autumn of 1976. The book was a success and Archer avoided bankruptcy. A BBC Television adaptation of the book was broadcast in 1990, and a radio adaptation was aired on BBC Radio 4 in the early 1980s. 
Kane and Abel proved to be his best-selling work, reaching number one on The New York Times bestsellers list. It was made into a television mini-series by CBS in 1985, starring Peter Strauss and Sam Neill. The following year, Granada TV screened a ten-part adaptation of another Archer bestseller, First Among Equals, which told the story of four men and their quest to become Prime Minister.S. edition of the novel, the character of Andrew Fraser was eliminated, reducing the number of protagonists to three. In 1979, Archer purchased the Old Vicarage, Grantchester, a house associated with the poet Rupert Brooke. By now Archer was back in a comfortable financial position and began to hold shepherd's pie and Krug parties for prominent people at his London apartment, which overlooks the Houses of Parliament.

Return to politics: Deputy party chairman

Archer's political career revived once he became known for his novels and as a popular speaker among the Conservative grassroots. He was made deputy chairman of the Conservative Party by Margaret Thatcher in September 1985. Norman Tebbit, party chairman, had misgivings over the appointment, as did other prominent members of the party, including William Whitelaw and Ted Heath. During his tenure as deputy chairman, Archer was responsible for a number of embarrassing moments, including his statement, made during a live radio interview, that many young, unemployed people were simply unwilling to find work. At the time of Archer's comment, unemployment in the UK stood at a record 3.4 million. Archer was later forced to apologise for the remark, saying that his words had been "taken out of context". Archer resigned in October 1986 due to a scandal caused by an article in The News of the World, which led on the story "Tory boss Archer pays vice-girl" and claimed Archer had paid Monica Coghlan, a prostitute, £2,000 through an intermediary at Victoria Station to go abroad.

Daily Star libel case

The Daily Star alleged that Archer had paid for sex with Coghlan. Archer responded by suing the Daily Star. The case came to court in July 1987. Explaining the payment to Coghlan as the action of a philanthropist rather than that of a guilty man, Archer won the case and was awarded £500,000 damages. Archer stated he would donate the money to charity. This case would ultimately result in Archer's final exit from front-line politics some years later. The description the judge (Mr Justice Caulfield) gave of Mrs Archer in his jury instructions included: "Remember Mary Archer in the witness-box. Your vision of her probably will never disappear. Has she elegance? Has she fragrance? Would she have, without the strain of this trial, radiance? How would she appeal? Has she had a happy married life? Has she been able to enjoy, rather than endure, her husband Jeffrey?" The judge then went on to say of Jeffrey Archer, "Is he in need of cold, unloving, rubber-insulated sex in a seedy hotel round about quarter to one on a Tuesday morning after an evening at the Caprice?" 
By this time, according to the journalist Adam Raphael, Jeffrey and Mary Archer were living largely separate lives. The editor of the Daily Star, Lloyd Turner, was sacked six weeks after the trial by the paper's owner Lord Stevens of Ludgate. Adam Raphael soon afterwards found proof that Archer had perjured himself at the trial, but his superiors were unwilling to take the risk of a potentially costly libel case. "His guilt was writ large", The Observer, 22 July 2001

From 1990 to 2004

Novels during the John Major years

Archer has stated that he spends considerable time writing and re-writing each book. He goes abroad to write the first draft, working in blocks of two hours at a time, then writes anything up to seventeen drafts in total.

Kurdish charity and peerage

When Saddam Hussein suppressed Kurdish uprisings in 1991, Archer, with the Red Cross, set up the charity Simple Truth, a fundraising campaign on behalf of the Kurds. In May 1991, Archer organised a charity pop concert, starring Rod Stewart, Paul Simon, Sting and Gloria Estefan, who all performed free. Archer claimed that his charity had raised £57,042,000, though it was later revealed that only £3 million came from the Simple Truth concert and appeal, the rest from aid projects sponsored by the British and other governments, with significant amounts pledged before the concert. The charity would later result in further controversy. Having been previously rejected, Archer was made a life peer in 1992 as Baron Archer of Weston-super-Mare, of Mark in the County of Somerset. Prime Minister John Major recommended him largely because of Archer's role in aid to the Kurds.

Political statements in 1990s

In a speech at the 1993 Conservative conference, Archer urged then Home Secretary Michael Howard, to "Stand and deliver," saying: "Michael, I am sick and tired of being told by old people that they are frightened to open the door, they're frightened to go out at night, frightened to use the parks and byways where their parents and grandparents walked with freedom ... We say to you: stand and deliver!". He then attacked violent films and urged tougher prison conditions to prevent criminals from re-offending. He criticised the role of "do-gooders" and finished off the speech by denouncing the opposition party's law and order policies.The Times newspaper – Thursday 7 October 1993
On Question Time on 20 January 1994,Question Time, 20 January 1994, IMDb Archer stated that 18 should be the age of consent for homosexuality, as opposed to 21, which it was at the time."The guidelines: Question Time turns 30", The Guardian, 19 September 2009 Archer though was opposed to the age of consent for gay men being 16.99 Historian David Starkey was on the same edition, and said of Archer: "Englishmen like you enjoy sitting on the fence so much because you enjoy the sensation." Archer has also consistently been an opponent of a return to capital punishment. 

Allegations of insider dealings

In January 1994, Mary Archer, then a director of Anglia Television, attended a directors' meeting at which an impending takeover of Anglia Television by MAI, which owned Meridian Broadcasting, was discussed. Shortly after this, it was announced publicly that Anglia Television would be taken over by MAI. As a result the shares jumped in value, whereupon Archer sold them on behalf of his friend for a profit of £77,219. The arrangements he made with the stockbrokers meant he did not have to pay at the time of buying the shares.
An inquiry was launched by the Stock Exchange into possible insider trading. The Department of Trade and Industry, headed by Michael Heseltine, announced that Archer would not be prosecuted due to insufficient evidence. His solicitors admitted that he had made a mistake, but Archer later said that he had been exonerated.

London mayoral candidacy and perjury trial

In 1999, Archer had been selected by the Conservative Party as candidate for the London mayoral election of 2000, with the support of two former Prime Ministers, Lady Thatcher and John Major."Lord Archer - A taste for fiction", The Economist, 19 July 2001 Eight Conservative ex-Cabinet Ministers who had been in office during the Thatcher and Major governments wrote to The Daily Telegraph in support of Archer's candidacy. On 21 November, though, the News of the World published allegations that he had committed perjury in his 1987 libel case. Archer withdrew his candidacy the following day.
The basis of the allegations originated with Ted Francis, who claimed his former friend, Archer, owed him money, and with Angela Peppiatt, Archer's former personal assistant. Francis and Peppiatt claimed Archer had fabricated an alibi in the 1987 trial and were concerned that Archer was unsuitable to stand as Mayor of London. Peppiatt had kept a diary of Archer's movements, which contradicted evidence given during the 1987 trial. On 4 February 2000, Archer was expelled from the party for five years.

=Trial=

On 26 September 2000, Archer was charged with perjury and perverting the course of justice during the 1987 libel trial, and Ted Francis charged with perverting the course of justice. Simultaneously, Archer starred in a production of his own courtroom play The Accused, staged at London's Theatre Royal Haymarket. The play concerned the court trial of an alleged murderer and assigned the role of jury to the audience, which would vote on the guilt of Archer's character at the end of each performance.
The perjury trial began on 30 May 2001, a month after Monica Coghlan's death. Archer never spoke during the trial, though his wife Mary again gave evidence as she had done during the 1987 trial. When Archer's mother died on 11 July, aged 87, he was released for the day to attend the funeral. On 19 July 2001, Archer was found guilty of perjury and perverting the course of justice at the 1987 trial. He was sentenced to four years' imprisonment by Mr Justice Potts. Francis was found not guilty. Prominent journalists admitted to having accepted Archer's hospitality after he was convicted.Michael White "Political chancer with lots of fizz", The Guardian, 20 July 2001Andrew Rawnsley "Shepherd's pie and shampagne, anyone?", The Observer, 22 July 2001Simon Hoggart "Drink the Krug (but avoid the shepherd's pie)", The Guardian, 28 July 2001

=Prison=

Archer was sent to Belmarsh Prison, a Category "A" prison, but was moved to Wayland Prison, a Category "C" prison in Norfolk, on 9 August 2001. Despite automatically qualifying as a category "D" prisoner given it was a first conviction and he did not pose serious risk of harm  to the public, his status as such was suspended pending a police investigation into allegations about his Kurdish charity. He was then transferred to HM Prison North Sea Camp, an open prison, in October 2001.  From there he was let out to work at the Theatre Royal in Lincoln, and allowed occasional home visits. Media reports claimed he had been abusing this privilege by attending lunches with friends, including former Education Secretary Gillian Shephard. In September 2002 he was transferred to a Category "B" prison, Lincoln."Archer moved from open prison", BBC News, 26 September 2002 After three weeks, he was moved to the Category "D" HM Prison Hollesley Bay in Suffolk."Archer's 'Holiday Bay' Prison Move", Sky.com, 17 October 2002
During his imprisonment, Archer was visited by a number of high-profile friends, including the actor Donald Sinden
In October 2002, Archer repaid the Daily Star the £500,000 damages he had received in 1987, as well as legal costs and interest of £1.3 million.
On 21 July 2003, Archer was released on licence, after serving half of his sentence, from Hollesley Bay. As he is no longer under the whip of the Conservative Party, Archer currently sits as a non-affiliated member in the House of Lords.

Kurdish aid controversy

In July 2001, shortly after Archer was jailed for perjury, Scotland Yard began investigating allegations that millions of pounds had disappeared from his Kurdish charity. In 1991, Archer had claimed to have raised £57,042,000. In 1992, the Kurdish Disaster Fund had written to Archer, complaining: "You must be concerned that the Kurdish refugees have seen hardly any of the huge sums raised in the west in their name." Kurdish groups claimed little more than £250,000 had been received by groups in Iraq.
A British Red Cross-commissioned KPMG audit of the cash showed no donations were handled by Archer and any misappropriation was "unlikely", however KPMG also could find no evidence to support Archer's claims to have raised £31.5 million from overseas governments. The police said they would launch a "preliminary assessment of the facts" from the audit  but were not investigating the Simple Truth fund.

Since 2004

Subsequent incidents

In 2004, the government of Equatorial Guinea alleged that Archer was one of the financiers of the failed 2004 coup d'état attempt against them, citing bank details and telephone records as evidence.
On 26 February 2006, on Andrew Marr's Sunday AM programme, Archer said he had no interest in returning to front-line politics and would pursue his writing instead.

Later writing career

While in prison, Archer wrote the three-volume memoir A Prison Diary, with volumes fashioned after Dante's Divine Comedy and named after the first three prisons he was kept in.com, 14 May 2013 His prison term also served as inspiration for nine of the twelve short stories in the collection, Cat O' Nine Tales."Cat O' Nine Tales and Other Stories", Publishers Weekly, 16 April 2007
In 2011, Archer published the first of five books in The Clifton Chronicles, which follow the life of Harry Clifton from his birth in 1920, through to the finale in 2020. Only Time Will Tell tells the story of Harry from 1920 through to 1940 and was published in the UK on 12 May 2011. In March 2011 he visited New Zealand as part of a promotional tour. His stops included an interview in Auckland on Radio Live with hosts Willie Jackson and disgraced former New Zealand MP John Tamihere.

Archer in fiction

Archer was satirically portrayed as a misunderstood secret agent, saviour of Britain and mankind and "overall thoroughly good chap", by actor Damian Lewis in the BBC drama Jeffrey Archer: The Truth (2002), which received strong reviews. Script writer Guy Jenkin explained that "my Jeffrey Archer is the man who has frequently saved Britain over the last 30 years. He's beloved of all women he comes across, all men, all dogs – he's a superhero."

List of works

Kane and Abel series

Prison diaries (non-fiction)

Other novels

Plays

Short stories/collections

For children

Clifton Chronicles

Ancestry





Further reading



Interviews


