[[Jim Furyk]]

CATEGORIES: American male golfers, Arizona Wildcats men's golfers, PGA Tour golfers, Winners of men's major golf championships, Ryder Cup competitors for the United States, Golfers from Pennsylvania, Golfers from Florida, Sportspeople from Lancaster, Pennsylvania, People from Ponte Vedra Beach, Florida, 1970 births, Living people

James Michael Furyk (born May 12, 1970) is an American professional golfer, 2010 FedEx Cup champion, and 2010 PGA Tour Player of the Year. He has won one major championship, the 2003 U.S. Open.
In September 2006 he reached a career high of second in the Official World Golf Ranking.

Early life

Furyk was born in West Chester, Pennsylvania. His father Mike was an assistant pro at the Edgmont Country Club and later also spent time as a pro at West Chester Golf and Country Club as well as Hidden Springs Golf Course in Horsham. His early years were spent in the Pittsburgh suburbs learning the game from his father, who was head pro at Uniontown Country Club. He graduated from Manheim Township High School in Lancaster County in 1988, where he played basketball in addition to being a state champion golfer. He played his junior golf at Meadia Heights Golf Club just south of Lancaster city. He played college golf at the University of Arizona in Tucson, where he was an All-American twice and led the Wildcats to their first (and only) NCAA title in 1992.

Professional career

Furyk turned professional in 1992. He won the NIKE Mississippi Gulf Coast Classic on the Nike Tour in 1993. He joined the PGA Tour in 1994 and won at least one tournament each year between 1998 and 2003. At the time, this was the second-best streak of winning seasons behind Tiger Woods and he made the top ten in the Official World Golf Ranking. Furyk's biggest win to date came on June 16, 2003, when he tied the record for the lowest 72-hole score in U.S. Open history to win his first major championship.
In 2004, he only played in fourteen events after missing three months due to surgery to repair cartilage damage in his wrist; he missed six cuts and his highest finish was T6, which caused him to fall out of the top hundred on the money list. He returned to good form in 2005 and regained his top ten ranking, winning a PGA Tour event in that year and two in 2006. In the 2006 season, he finished a career-high second on the money list and won the Vardon Trophy for the first time. He also had a career-best thirteen top-10 finishes, including nine top-3s, four second-place finishes, and two victories. 
The 2010 season was a banner one for Furyk. After going more than two seasons winless, he won a career-best three tournaments on Tour in 2010: The Transitions Championship, the Verizon Heritage, and the season-ending Tour Championship. His victory in the Tour Championship also earned him the 2010 FedEx Cup after winning by one stroke.
Since 2012, Furyk has come close on several occasions to winning more titles, but to date has not done so. At the 2012 U.S. Open, Furyk led after 54 holes and was still the leader deep into the final day, before snap hooking his drive into the trees at the 16th which led to a bogey and was followed by another at the 18th. He finished in a tie for fourth, two strokes behind Webb Simpson. At the 2012 WGC-Bridgestone Invitational, Furyk led after the first three rounds and looked set to win the championship as he held a one-stroke lead going into the final hole, but a double-bogey cost him the title to Keegan Bradley.
On September 13, 2013, Furyk shot a 12-under-par 59 in the second round of the BMW Championship at Conway Farms Golf Club in Lake Forest, Illinois, becoming just the sixth player to shoot 59 in a PGA Tour event.

The swing

Furyk's trademark looping golf swing begins with a setup that has the ball at the heel of the club instead of the center, or even out at the toe.  This moves his 
As Mike Furyk describes in a Golf Digest issue in 2001, Jim Furyk's hips "underturn" during the backswing and "overturn" coming down. On the downswing, he draws the club in a large arc behind his body (viewing from his right hand side), then pastes his elbow against his right hip at impact. Golf commentator Gary McCord has said it looks like Furyk is trying to swing inside a phone booth. Another commentator David Feherty memorably described Furyk's swing as "an octopus falling out of a tree". Others have noted it reminds them of "a one-armed golfer using an axe to kill a snake in a telephone booth."

Professional wins (26)

PGA Tour wins (16)

PGA Tour playoff record (3–8)

Nike Tour wins (1)

Other wins (9)

Major championships

Wins (1)

Results timeline

DNP = Did not play

CUT = missed the half-way cut

"T" indicates a tie for a place

Green background for wins. Yellow background for top-10.

Summary

Results in World Golf Championship events

1Cancelled due to 9/11 
DNP = Did not play 
QF, R16, R32, R64 = Round in which player lost in match play 
"T" = Tied 
NT = No tournament 
Yellow background for top-10. 
Note that the HSBC Champions did not become a WGC event until 2009.

PGA Tour career summary

*As of April 20, 2014.

U.S. national team appearances

Professional








