[[Red Skelton]]

CATEGORIES: 1913 births, 1940s American radio programs, 1997 deaths, Male actors from Indiana, American clowns, American male comedians, American composers, American male film actors, American military personnel of World War II, American male radio actors, American radio personalities, American male television actors, American television personalities, Burials at Forest Lawn Memorial Park (Glendale), Burlesque performers, California Republicans, Deaths from pneumonia, Emmy Award winners, Indiana Historical Society, Indiana Republicans, Infectious disease deaths in California, Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer contract players, National Radio Hall of Fame inductees, People from Vincennes, Indiana, Male actors from Palm Springs, California, Vaudeville performers, 20th-century American male actors, Television Hall of Fame inductees

Richard Bernard "Red" Skelton (July 18, 1913September 17, 1997) was an American entertainer best known for being a national radio and television comedian between 1937 and 1971 and host of the long-running television program The Red Skelton Show. Skelton, who has stars on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for his work in radio and television, began entertaining as a youngster. His show business career included a stint as a circus clown when he was in his teens.  Skelton continued on to vaudeville,  films, radio, TV, nightclubs, and casinos, all while he pursued an entirely separate career as an artist.
He learned his comedic and pantomime skills through experience, beginning at age 10 as part of a traveling medicine show.  Skelton then worked on a showboat as the era of that form of entertainment was waning.  He worked the burlesque circuit until its comedic standards began to change, coming into vaudeville as radio and films began to replace live entertainment. Skelton's lifestyle on the road meant having very little baggage, so he had few props to perform with.  He devised routines that required only a hat, which Skelton would fashion into appropriate shapes to suit his characters.  A pantomime sketch of how different people ate doughnuts written by Skelton and his wife opened the door for him in vaudeville, in radio and in films; it even opened the door of the Oval Office. He had long and successful careers in both radio and in films, but was most eager to work in television, even when the medium was in its infancy. Skelton's enthusiasm was rewarded with a twenty year career on network television with a regular program. Despite high ratings, his television show was canceled by CBS in 1970 as the network believed more youth-oriented programs were needed to attract younger viewers and their spending power.
While his first wife, comedy writer Edna Stillwell, provided the spark for Skelton the performer, it was his second wife, Georgia Davis, who convinced him that the art work he had done as a hobby for many years was worth sharing with the public. At the time of his death, his art dealer believed that Skelton had earned more money through his paintings than from his television work.
Skelton believed his life's work was to make people laugh and wanted to be known as a clown, because he defined it as being able to do everything.  He entertained three generations of Americans during his career as a performer.  The earliest generation welcomed him to their cities and towns as a performer in various stage venues, the next into their homes on radio and television, while the younger generation was again able to welcome him personally, because Skelton focused his time and energy on personal appearance performances after he no longer had a regular television show.

Biography

Early years-the medicine show and the circus

Born in Vincennes, Indiana, Richard Skelton was the fourth son of Ida Mae (née Fields) and Joseph E. Skelton (1878–1913). Joseph, a grocer, died two months before his last child was born; he had once been a clown with the Hagenbeck-Wallace Circus.
Because of the loss of his father, young Richard went to work at the age of seven, selling newspapers to help his family, who had lost both the family store and home. Ida Skelton, who held two jobs to support her family after the death of her husband, never said that her youngest son had run away from home, but that "his destiny had caught up with him at an early age".8
By age 14, he had left school and was already a veteran performer, working in local vaudeville and on a showboat, "The Cotton Blossom", that traveled the Ohio and Missouri rivers. Skelton enjoyed his work on the riverboat, moving on only after he realized that the days of showboats would soon come to an end.

Young adult-burlesque to vaudeville

While performing in Kansas City in 1931, Skelton married Edna Stillwell, who was an usher at the old Pantages Theater. Edna, who was not interested in Skelton when they first met, changed her mind after she won a local marathon where Skelton was the emcee.  She began writing his material for marathons after their marriage. 7 At first, Skelton considered his wife to be interfering after she saw the boss when his salary was about to be cut. When she came away with not only a raise for her husband but additional considerations as well, he no longer minded Edna's intervention. Since he had left school at an early age, his wife bought textbooks and taught Skelton what he had missed. With Edna's help, Skelton received a high school equivalency degree.
The couple's hopes were to somehow find work in New York City and break into vaudeville there.  Skelton and his wife put together an act and began to get bookings for it at some of the smaller theaters. When the couple got a booking in Harwich Port, Massachusetts, some 2,000 miles from Kansas City, they were pleased to get it because it was nearer New York City, the capital of vaudeville, than they were at the time.  To get to Massachusetts, they bought a used car, borrowed five dollars from Edna's mother, and set out on the road.  By the time they arrived in St, Louis, the five dollars had become a mere fifty cents.  When Skelton suggested to his wife that they pick up empty cigarette packs for the tinfoil, Edna thought he was joking but did as he asked.  Skelton then spent the couple's fifty cents on bars of soap, which they cut into small cubes and wrapped with the smoothed-out tinfoil from the collected cigarette packs.  Red and Edna then marketed their product as fog remover for eyeglasses, selling the foil wrapped soap cubes for fifty cents each. The Skeltons were able to afford a hotel room that evening and for every night as they worked their way to Harwich Port, selling the eyeglass fog remover.
They worked for a year in Camden, New Jersey and were able to get an engagement at the Lido Club in Montreal through a friend who managed the chorus lines at New York's Roxy Theatre. Despite the language barrier and an initial rocky start, the act was a success, and brought the couple theater dates throughout Canada. While in Montreal, they ran into a New York vaudeville producer, who promised the pair a booking at Loew's State Theatre there, if Skelton could come up with a new routine for the engagement. Edna had an idea as they were having breakfast in a hotel coffee shop. Skelton and Edna devised the well-known "Doughnut Dunkers" routine, with Skelton's visual impressions of how different people ate doughnuts. The skit won him the promised Loew's State engagement and a handsome fee. 197
The Skeltons viewed this engagement as Red's big chance.  They hired New York comedy writers to prepare material for Skelton's Loew's engagement, in the belief that they needed more sophisticated jokes and skits than the ones Red had been performing.  Skelton was on the verge of failing to connect with his New York audience until he began performing his "Doughnut Dunkers" and other older routines.  In 1937, while Skelton was entertaining at the Capitol Theater in Washington, DC, President Franklin D. Roosevelt invited him to perform at a White House luncheon. During one of the official toasts, Skelton grabbed Roosevelt's glass,saying, "Careful what you drink, Mr. President.  I got rolled in a place like this once." Skelton's humor appealed to FDR and he became the master of ceremonies for Roosevelt's official birthday celebration for many years afterward.  The problem with doing the "Doughnut Dunkers" skit was that Skelton had to eat nine doughnuts at every performance. He was performing five times a day and eating 45 doughnuts. He gained almost 35 pounds rapidly and had to shelve the routine for a while until he lost the weight.

Film work

Skelton's first contact with Hollywood came in the form of a failed 1932 screen test. In 1937 he made his film debut for RKO Radio Pictures in the supporting role of a camp counselor in Having Wonderful Time.  For his MGM screen test, Skelton performed many of his well-received skits such as "Guzzler's Gin", but added some impromptu pantomimes as the cameras were rolling.  "Imitation of Movie Heroes Dying" were Skelton's impressions of how stars like George Raft, Edward G. Robinson and James Cagney met their end on film.
He was hired by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer to lend comic relief to its Dr. Kildare medical dramas, but was soon starring in comedy features as inept radio detective "The Fox" and in Technicolor musicals.
Skelton asked MGM once more for rights to pursue television when his contract was over. This time the studio was willing to grant them, making him the only major MGM personality with the privilege.

Radio, divorce and remarriage

The "Doughnut Dunkers" routine also led to Skelton's first appearance on The Rudy Vallee Show on August 12, 1937. Vallee's program had a talent show segment and those who were searching for stardom were eager to be heard on it. The show received enough fan mail after Skelton's performance to invite the comedian back two weeks after his initial appearance and again in November of that year. On October 1, 1938, Skelton replaced Red Foley as the host of Avalon Time on NBC; Edna also joined the show's cast under her maiden name.  Skelton hosted the show until late 1939. 9-11 
His work in films led to a new regular radio show offer; between films, Skelton promoted himself and MGM by appearing gratis at Los Angeles area banquets. A radio advertising agent was a guest at one of his banquet performances and recommended Skelton to one of his clients.  He went on the air with his own program, The Raleigh Cigarettes Program, on October 7, 1941. The bandleader for the show was Ozzie Nelson; his wife, Harriet, who worked under her maiden name of Hilliard, was the show's vocalist and also worked with Skelton in skits.
Skelton introduced the first two of his many characters during the show's first season. Clem Kadiddlehopper was based on a Vincennes neighbor named Carl Hopper, who was hard of hearing. Skelton's voice pattern for Clem was very much like that of the later cartoon character, Bullwinkle. They were sufficiently similar to cause Skelton to contemplate filing a lawsuit against Bill Scott, who voiced the cartoon moose. 11 The Mean Widdle Kid, or "Junior", was a young boy full of mischief, who typically did things he was told not to do. "Junior" would say things like, "If I dood it, I gets a whipping.", followed moments later by the statement, "I dood it!" Skelton performed the character at home with Edna giving him the nickname "Junior" long before it was heard by a radio audience. 199 While the phrase was Skelton's, the idea to try using the character on the radio show was Edna's.
The phrase was such a part of national culture at the time, when General Doolittle conducted the bombing of Tokyo in 1942, many newspapers used the phrase, "Doolittle Dood It" as a headline.
Skelton also added a routine he had been performing since 1928. Originally called "Mellow Cigars" by Skelton, the skit entailed an announcer who became ill as he smoked his sponsor's product. Brown and Williamson, the makers of cigarettes, asked Skelton to change some aspects of the skit; Skelton renamed the routine "Guzzler's Gin", where the announcer became inebriated while sampling and touting the imaginary sponsor's wares.
In 1942, Edna announced that she was leaving the Skelton home but would continue to manage Skelton's career and write material for him. Skelton did not realize she was serious until Edna issued a statement about the impending divorce through NBC, Skelton's radio employer.
The Skelton divorce meant that Red had lost his married man's deferment; he was once again classified as 1-A for service. He was drafted into the army in early 1944. Both MGM and his radio sponsor tried to obtain a deferment for the comedian, but to no avail. Skelton's last Raleigh radio show was on June 6, 1944, the day before he was formally inducted. Without its star, the program was discontinued, and the opportunity presented itself for the Nelsons to begin a radio show of their own, The Adventures of Ozzie and Harriet. 11-13Adir, p.201
By 1944, Skelton was engaged to actress Muriel Morris, who was also known as Muriel Chase; the couple had obtained a marriage license and told the press they intended to marry within a few days. At the last minute, the actress decided not to marry Skelton, initially saying she intended to marry a wealthy businessman in Mexico City. She later recanted the story about marrying the businessman, but continued to say that her relationship with Skelton was over. The actress further denied that the reason for the breakup was Skelton's former wife's continuing to manage her ex-husband's career. Edna Skelton stated that she had no intention of either getting in the middle of the relationship or reconciling with her former husband.
Skelton was on army furlough for throat discomfort when he married Georgia Maureen Davis in Beverly Hills, California on March 9, 1945. 
Skelton brought with him many new characters that were added to his repertoire: Bolivar Shagnasty, described as a "loudmouthed braggard", Cauliflower McPugg, a boxer who had hit the canvas too often, Deadeye, a cowboy who could not get anything right, Willie Lump-Lump, a fellow who had a few too many drinks, and San Fernando Red, who never met a scam he did not like and also had political aspirations. 14 By 1947, Skelton's musical conductor was David Rose, who would go on to television with him. Skelton had worked with Rose during his time in the army and wanted Rose to join him on the radio show when it went back on the air. 14-15
On April 22, 1947, Skelton was censored by NBC two minutes into his radio show. When he and his announcer Rod O'Connor began talking about Fred Allen being censored during his NBC show the previous week, they were silenced for 15 seconds. Comedian Bob Hope was also given the same treatment once he began referring to the censoring of Allen.
Skelton changed sponsors in 1948; Brown and Williamson, owners of Raleigh cigarettes, withdrew due to program production costs. His new sponsor was Procter & Gamble's Tide laundry detergent. The next year he changed networks, going from NBC to CBS; the Paley plan that offered stars significant tax savings if they incorporated, then sold their shows to CBS, applied to radio shows only. 16 Skelton's radio show aired on CBS until May 1953. After his network radio contract was over, Skelton signed a three year contract with Ziv Radio for a syndicated radio program in 1954.

Television and tragedy

Skelton was unable to work in television until the end of his 1951 MGM movie contract; a renegotiation to extend the pact provided permission after that point. He signed a contract for television on NBC with Procter and Gamble as his sponsor on May 4, 1951; Skelton indicated he would be performing the same characters on television as he had been doing on radio.
During the 1951–52 season, Skelton broadcast from a converted NBC radio studio. 163 The first year of the television show was done live; problems set in because there was not enough time for costume changes and also because of Skelton's being on camera for most of the half-hour. 231 This included the delivery of a commercial which was written into one of the show's skits.
Declining ratings prompted sponsor Procter & Gamble to cancel his show in the spring of 1953, with Skelton announcing that any future television shows of his would be variety shows, where he would not have the almost constant burden of performing. His comedic sketches became legendary. Sometimes during sketches, Skelton would break up or cause his guest stars to laugh, not only on the live telecasts but on taped programs as well. 

At the height of his popularity, Skelton's son, Richard, was diagnosed with leukemia and was initially given a year to live at most.
The illness and subsequent death of Richard Skelton at the age of nine left his father devastated and unable to perform for much of the 1957–58 television season. 51-71 CBS management was exceptionally understanding of Red's situation, and no talk of cancellation was ever entertained by Paley. The Skelton family also received support from the public following the announcement of Richard's illness.
Young Richard's death on May 10, 1958, was a major blow to the entire family; it came on the day before Mother's Day and ten days before he would have been ten years old.
In early 1960, Skelton purchased the old Charlie Chaplin Studios and updated it for videotape recording. 215
Skelton's season premiere for the 1960–61 television season was a tribute to the United Nations. Six hundred people from the organization, including diplomats, were invited to be part of the audience for the show. Skelton's program was entirely done in pantomime. UN representatives from 39 nations were in the studio audience. Skelton admitted that the right hat was the key to his being able to get into character. 247-248
In 1969, Skelton performed a self-written monologue about the Pledge of Allegiance. In the speech, he commented on the meaning of each phrase of the Pledge.  CBS received 200,000 requests for copies; the company subsequently released the monologue as a single recording by Columbia Records. 112-113

Off the air and bitterness

As the 1970s began, the networks began a major campaign to discontinue long-running shows that were seen as stale or lacking youth appeal. Despite Red Skelton's continued strong ratings, CBS saw his show as fitting into this category and canceled the program along with other comedy and variety shows hosted by veterans such as Jackie Gleason and Ed Sullivan. 
Skelton was bitter about CBS's cancellation for many years afterwards."Gehring, preface, xv" Believing the demographic and salary issues to be irrelevant, he bitterly accused CBS of caving in to the anti-establishment, anti-war faction at the height of the Vietnam War, saying his conservative political and social views caused them to turn against him.
Many of Skelton's television shows have survived due to kinescopes, films and videotapes and have been featured in recent years on Public Broadcasting Service (PBS) stations. In addition, a number of excerpts from Skelton's programs have been released in VHS and DVD formats. In 1980, Skelton was taken to court by 13 of his former writers over a story that his will called for the destruction of recordings of all his old television shows upon his death.
In 1984, Skelton gave a Royal Command Performance for the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds which was later shown in the US on HBO.

Death

After retirement, he had homes in Palm Springs and Anza, California. Skelton was survived by his widow, Lothian Toland Skelton, his daughter, Valentina Marie Skelton Alonso, and granddaughter Sabrina Maureen Alonso.

Art and other interests

Artwork

Skelton began producing artwork in 1943, but kept his works private for many years. He said he was inspired to try his hand at painting after visiting a large Chicago department store that had various paintings on display. Inquiring as to the price of one which Skelton described as "a bunch of blotches", he was told, "Ten thousand wouldn't buy that one." Skelton said he told the clerk he was one of the ten thousand who would not buy the painting, instead buying his own art materials. His wife, Georgia, a former art student, persuaded Skelton to have his first public showing of his work in 1964 at the Las Vegas hotel where he was entertaining at the time. 282 Shortly after Skelton died, his art dealer said he believed that Skelton made more money on his paintings than from his television work. Skelton had produced over 1,000 oil paintings of clowns at the time of his death.  When asked why his artwork focused on clowns, Skelton said at first, "I don't know why it's always clowns." He continued after thinking a moment by saying. "No, that's not true--I do know why.  I just don't feel like thinking about it..."
In Death Valley Junction, California, Skelton found a kindred spirit when he saw the artwork and pantomime performances of Marta Becket. Today, circus performers painted by Marta Becket decorate the Red Skelton Room in the Amargosa Hotel, where Skelton stayed four times in Room 22. The room is dedicated to Skelton, as explained by John Mulvihill in his essay, "Lost Highway Hotel":
 Room 22 is where Red Skelton used to stay. He visited once to catch Marta's show and, like so many others, fell victim to the Amargosa's enchantment and returned again and again. He asked Marta to illustrate his room with circus performers and though he died shortly thereafter, she did so anyway. Staying in this room, with acrobats scaling the walls and trapeze artists flying from the ceiling, is a singularly evocative experience, one I wouldn't trade for a suite at the Waldorf-Astoria. 

Other interests

Skelton was a prolific writer of both short stories and music. After sleeping only four or five hours a night, he would get up at 5 AM and begin writing stories, composing music, and painting pictures. He wrote at least one short story a week and had composed over 8,000 songs and symphonies at his death.

Fraternity and honors

Red Skelton was a Freemason, a member of Vincennes Lodge No. 1, in Indiana. He also was a member of both the Scottish and York Rite.
Skelton was made an honorary brother of Phi Sigma Kappa at Truman State University.
The Red Skelton Memorial Bridge spans the Wabash River and provides the highway link between Illinois and Indiana on U.S. Route 50 near Skelton's hometown of Vincennes, Indiana. Skelton was at the dedication ceremonies in 1963.

Legacy and tributes

Skelton was quoted as saying, "I just want to be known as a clown, because to me that's the height of my profession. It means you can do everything—sing, dance and above all, make people laugh."
In late 1965, ventriloquist Edgar Bergen, reminiscing about the entertainment business in bygone days, singled out Skelton for high praise. "It's all so very different today," said Bergen. "The whole business of comedy has changed — from 15 minutes of quality to quantity. We had a lot of very funny people around, from Charley Chase to Charlie Chaplin and Laurel and Hardy. The last one of that breed is Red Skelton."  (PDF)  In Groucho and Me, Groucho Marx called Skelton "the most unacclaimed clown in show business", and "the logical successor to Charlie Chaplin", largely because of his ability to play a multitude of characters with minimal use of dialogue and props. "With one prop, a soft battered hat," Groucho wrote, describing a performance he had witnessed, "he successfully converted himself into an idiot boy, a peevish old lady, a teetering-tottering drunk, an overstuffed clubwoman, a tramp, and any other character that seemed to suit his fancy. No grotesque make-up, no funny clothes, just Red." He added that Skelton also "plays a dramatic scene about as effectively as any of the dramatic actors."Gehring, preface, xvGroucho Marx, pp.136–7.
The Red Skelton Performing Arts Center was dedicated on Friday, February 24, 2006 on the campus of Vincennes University at a cost of $16.8 million. The building includes an 850-seat theater, classrooms, rehearsal rooms, and dressing rooms. Its grand foyer is a gallery for Red Skelton's paintings, statues, and film posters. The theater hosts Vincennes University theatrical and musical productions, special events, convocations and conventions. Work was underway as of 2009 on the Red Skelton Gallery and Education Center that will house Skelton memorabilia donated by the comedian's family.
Restoration continues at the historic Vincennes Pantheon Theatre, where Skelton performed during his youth.
The Red Skelton Museum of American Comedy opened on July 18, 2013, on Red's 100th birthday, in Vincennes, Indiana.  Red's widow Lothian, his daughter Valentina and close friend Jamie Farr were in attendance for the grand opening.
The Red Skelton Foundation also assists needy children in Vincennes with new clothing.
The Red Skelton Festival, June 14, 2008, in Vincennes, featured the "Parade of a Thousand Clowns," an Evening of Music, with Crystal Gayle, and clown seminars.

Filmography

Features

Short subjects

Bibliography

Books by Skelton

Notes






