[[Ingersoll, Ontario]]

CATEGORIES: Ingersoll, Ontario

Ingersoll is a town in Oxford County on the Thames River in southwestern Ontario, Canada. The nearest cities are Woodstock to the east and London to the west.
Ingersoll is situated north of and near Highway 401. Oxford County Road 119 (formerly Ontario Highway 19) serves the town. The local high school is Ingersoll District Collegiate Institute.
The area was well known for cheese production, and was home to the first such factory in Canada from approximately 1840. In 1866, a giant block of cheese weighing  was produced at the James Harris Cheese Factory for promotion of the town's cheese industry. The "Big Cheese" was exhibited in England and in the United States at the New York State Fair in Saratoga.
Heavy manufacturing is currently Ingersoll's largest industry, including manufacturers such as CAMI Automotive, a General Motors car manufacturing plant that was originally a joint venture with Suzuki Motors of Canada.

History

The area was first settled by Thomas Ingersoll (Laura Secord's father) who in 1793 obtained a land grant of  from Governor John Graves Simcoe. The town was originally founded as Oxford-on-the-Thames but renamed to Ingersoll in Thomas' honour by his son Charles. In 1852, the place was incorporated as the "Village of Ingersoll". Nine years later in 1861, it changed status to town.

Annual town events

Ingersoll is the host to a number of annual festivals, including the Ribfest, Harvest Festival,

Attractions

Cultural resources

Ingersoll Cheese Factory Museum and Sports Hall of Fame

Ingersoll has the distinction of having been Oxford County's cheese capital from the mid-1800s to early 1900's, producing and packaging a good deal of the county's renowned cheddar. The museum showcases the town's unique history. The Sports Hall of Fame showcases the town's athletic history. "Path of the Giants" - a 20 foot "fully round" wood carved scene by the late Wilson Johnston, depicting the pioneer trek of his ancestors, the "Dunkards" from Lancaster, Pennsylvania to Cambridge, Ontario in the 1700s. The agricultural barns were built from lumber and timbers taken from barns found in Oxford County.

Ingersoll Creative Arts Centre

This active arts centre features an exhibit gallery as well as offering classes in a variety of arts and crafts.

Ingersoll Public Library

A branch of the Oxford County Library. It is located in the Ingersoll Municipal Building. War Memorial and Honour Roll are located on the south side of the Town Centre. In the lobby is a statue and plaque to honour Thomas Ingersoll, the founder of Ingersoll.  The former library was a Carnegie library located near the corner of Thames and Charles Streets.

Ingersoll Theatre of Performing Arts

Several amateur productions are presented each year in this historic Strand Theatre, which was built in the 1950s.

Demographics

Historical figures

Historical landmarks

Norsworthy House

This Queen Anne style house is rumoured to be haunted by the ghost of Mary Jane Norsworthy who died in 1891 after nursing her children back to health from diphtheris (the Lady in Grey). Her son, Edward, was a major in WWI.

Natural areas and parks

Centennial Park

The Ingersoll Cheese Factory Museum and the Creative Arts Centre are located at this property.

Dr. Carroll's Park

Dr. Carroll's Park Cenotaph was erected by Lady Dufferin Chapter Imperial Order Daughters of the Empire in memory of the Ingersoll men who gave their lives and served the Empire in two World Wars and the Korean Conflict.
In July, the Memorial Park serves as the main venue for the annual Canterbury Folk Festival, with the main stages, seating area, beverage tents, and craft vendors located in this park, while other attractions and events take place elsewhere in the nearby downtown core.

John Lawson Park and Trail

Located on the Thames River, this park contains walking trails in a natural area.

Smith's Pond Park

It was a former mill pond used for ice harvesting in the winter. The old dam remains along with the foundation and flume. The park is a natural area with walking trails, tall grass, and a newer, smaller pond was added by splitting the flow of Harris Creek, where a fishing derby is held yearly.

Historical churches

First Baptist Church

The congregation was established in 1858. A red brick church was built in 1896 and the building was destroyed by fire after a lightning strike in 1898. The present church was rebuilt on the existing walls following the fire.

Ingersoll Christian Reformed Church

The church's original congregation came from the Netherlands in the mid 1850's. In 1955, a barn was renovated into a church on King St. but in 1973 the barn was sold and later burned in 1975. In 1976, the congregation decided to rebuild on 1.6 ha (4 ac) just west of the first church.

Peoples Revival Centre

In 1942, the congregation bought the collegiate gym and moved the complex to its present location.

Sacred Heart Roman Catholic Church

The congregation was established in 1838. The brick church building was built on the corner of Thames N. and Bell Streets in 1879, and is one of the tallest structures in the town. It was raised to parish status in 1864.

Salvation Army

The congregation was established in 1884 and the church was built in 1935.

St. James Anglican Church

The congregation was established in 1834. The present building was erected in 1868.

St. Paul's Presbyterian Church

The congregation was established in 1846. It was originally named Knox Presbyterian until the union of a number of parishes in 1889.

Trinity United Church

The original "Two Tower" church was built in 1865. The present building has only one small tower. The Methodist congregation joined the United Church in 1925.

Historical schools

Ingersoll District Collegiate Institute

The current building was constructed in 1953. The original school was demolished in 1954. A cairn and plaque mark its original location in the front parking lot.

Princess Elizabeth P.S.

It originally opened in the same years as Canada's Confederation - 1867. The current building includes the one that opened as a replacement in 1909.

Victory Memorial P.S.

Built in 1920, Victory Memorial School was named in honour of Canada's participation and victory in the First World War.

Plaques and monuments

The Big Cheese

A plaque marks the site of the factory were the giant 7,300 pound cheddar that was exhibited in New York and England to advertise Oxford County cheese was manufactured.

First Cheese Factory

Located at the Ingersoll Post Office. The first cheese factory in Canada was established in the County of Oxford in 1864. The widespread adoption of the co-operative factory system in the and other counties marked the beginning of the modern dairy industry in Eastern Canada.

Founders of Ingersoll

Located on the south east corner of the Thames St bridge. Commemorates Major Thomas Ingersoll and his son Charles who were responsible for the first major settlement of the Townships of East, West and North Oxford and who founded the community of Ingersoll in 1793.

Site of Thomas Ingersoll's log cabin

This plaque, situated on a pavilion, marks the former location of Thomas Ingersoll's log cabin, 1795.

Old town hall

The original town hall, located at King Street West and Oxford Street, was designated a historical landmark due to at least one appearance by John A. Macdonald, one of the founding fathers of Canada.  The plaque was removed when the building was demolished.

Schools

Secondary

Primary

Notable people==	
|publisher =Woodstock Sentinel Review|accessdate= March 20, 2014}}[/ref]








