[[Duane Chapman]]

CATEGORIES: 1953 births, Bounty hunters, Participants in American reality television series, American Christians, People from Denver, Colorado, American television personalities, American Pentecostals, People from Hawaii, Living people, People convicted of murder by Texas, People from Honolulu, Hawaii

Duane Lee "Dog" Chapman, Sr. (born February 2, 1953) is an American bounty hunter and a former bail bondsman. He starred in a weekly reality television program called Dog the Bounty Hunter,

Early life

Chapman was born on February 2, 1953 to Wesley Chapman and Barbara Chapman. He is the eldest of five children, with two younger sisters and two brothers. According to Chapman though, everyone is his 'brother' and he is of Native American ancestry on his mother's side and English on his father's side.
In 1976, Chapman was convicted of first degree murder and sentenced to five years in a Texas prison. He had been waiting in a car when his friend shot and killed a drug dealer during a deal to buy cannabis. Chapman served 18 months at Texas State Penitentiary in Huntsville, TX. While in prison, his first wife LaFonda divorced him and married his best friend.
During his incarceration, Chapman did field work and acted as the warden's barber. It was while serving his sentence that he was inspired by a prison guard to become a bounty hunter after he had tackled an inmate about to be shot for attempting to escape. Due to his felony conviction, Chapman is not allowed to own a firearm. He has also been barred from entering the UK.

Media career

Chapman, after decades of bounty hunting, was featured on Take This Job, a program about people with unusual occupations. This led him and the show's production company to do a spin off about his work in capturing bail fugitives. In particular Chapman's efforts in hunting down Max Factor cosmetics heir Andrew Luster, in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico.

Dog the Bounty Hunter

After Luster's jailing, Chapman was interviewed for the August 28, 2003 episode of the truTV television series Dominick Dunne's Power, Privilege, and Justice. By now Chapman's profile had come to the attention of the American public. It was during this time A&E decided to create an ongoing reality series around his bounty hunting job. On August 30, 2004, the first series of Dog the Bounty Hunter made its television debut. It was cancelled after 8 seasons in 2012.

Dog and Beth: On the Hunt

On September 25, 2012, CMT announced it had ordered a new reality series which would begin airing in April 2013.

Author

Chapman released his autobiography, You Can Run But You Can't Hide in 2007. The book debuted at #1 on the New York Times bestseller list.
His second book, Where Mercy Is Shown, Mercy Is Given was published in 2010.

Racism allegations

In early October 2007, Chapman gained negative public attention after a private phone conversation between him and his son, Tucker, was leaked to the media. The conversation was about the relationship his son was having with a black girl. Chapman was heard to be angry and used the word "nigger" in the recording. Once the tape was made public, A&E announced it was suspending production of Chapman's TV series pending an investigation.
On December 21, 2007, Roy Innis, the chairman of the Congress of Racial Equality, one of the first to call the A&E network to have the show taken off the air met with Alicia Colon of the New York Sun and Chapman. Later Innis said, "After meeting with him and his wife, Beth, and hearing his side of the story, we realized that the controversy had unjustly spiraled out of control without context. Duane has taken ownership of the damage of his words and has taken on the responsibility of being a racial healer for our country... I have been with this man several times and had extensive dialogues with him. I consider him and his wife good friends. Duane is a changed man and has a higher purpose. Popular television is a wasteland of meaningless titillation and degradation. The Dog's potential to take his celebrity and turn it into something redeeming for our culture and society is immense. It is for these reasons that we want his television show back on the air."
On February 19, 2008, A&E announced that Chapman's TV show would return to production.

Capture of Andrew Luster

On June 18, 2003, Chapman made international news by capturing Andrew Luster, who had fled the United States in the middle of his trial on charges of drugging and raping a number of women. He had been convicted in absentia on 86 counts including multiple rape charges connected to assaults in 1996, 1997 and 2000.m. ET Chapman was assisted by his "hunt team", consisting of his son Leland and Tim Chapman. The three bounty hunters captured Luster in Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, where he had been living under an assumed name. On their way to California, while still in Mexico, they were pulled over by Mexican police, and all four of them were jailed. Once the authorities confirmed Luster's identity, he was sent to California to face his 124 year sentence.
Chapman and his team, still in the Mexican jail, were initially denied bail, but after Beth alerted the media and aroused public opinion in the United States, they were granted bail. Once out of jail on bail, they followed their attorney's advice and fled the jurisdiction, thereby becoming international bail-jumpers. On September 14, 2006, days before the expiration of the statute of limitations, Chapman, along with his son Leland Chapman and associate Tim Chapman, were arrested by United States Marshals and jailed in Honolulu on behalf of the Mexican government.
The next day, September 15, 2006, Chapman appeared in a packed Honolulu courtroom with his ankles shackled. Although the judge agreed that the men were not a significant flight risk, he ordered that each wear an electronic monitoring device around the ankle.  The three men were released on bail ($300,000 for Duane Chapman, $100,000 each for Leland Chapman and Tim Chapman). They were also ordered to wear an electronic ankle bracelet for house arrest., when translated into English it became a felony (kidnapping) under American law. Mexican authorities dismissed Hart's claim as the desperate efforts of an American lawyer trying to free his client. They insisted that Chapman had, in fact, been charged with a felony. An extradition hearing was set for November 16, 2006.
Chapman has speculated that his arrest was due in part to a possible prisoner exchange agreement between the Mexican and American authorities. According to Chapman, the federal agents 'sold him out', by trading him in for a convicted Mexican drug lord. A court hearing was held on December 23, 2006. The original hearing was postponed because a report from a lower court was not yet received. The court heard both sides of the story, and then decided to recess. Then court proceedings started on January 16, 2007 and the court had up to Tuesday, February 6, 2007 but the deadline was extended.
On February 16, 2007, a Mexican Federal court ruled that there was no reason not to try him on the charge of deprivation of liberty in Mexico.
During this time, Chapman, along with his new attorney, William C. Bollard, appeared on numerous media shows. Some of these include: Larry King Live, Greta Van Susteren, Mark and Mercedez Morning Show on Mix 94.1 KMXB in Las Vegas, The Morning Show with Mike and Juliet on WFLD, Fox 6 News San Diego, The Glenn Beck Program, and THE 9 on Yahoo!. Honolulu news outlet KHNL reported on August 1, 2007 that the arrest warrant issued for Chapman and his associates might be invalidated, as a Mexican court had found that the statute of limitations regarding the arrest had expired.  The 15-page legal order was released in Spanish and was translated and verified for legal acuity. On November 5, 2007, U.S. Magistrate Judge Barry Kurren dismissed the extradition attempt, saying that even though the cases were appealed, the trio are no longer charged with any crimes.

Personal life

Chapman's first child is named Christopher Michael Hecht from a teenage relationship with Debbie White. Chapman was not aware of the child's existence, and Christopher was adopted after White's suicide. Upon reaching adulthood, Christopher was reunited with his father when his grandmother contacted Chapman to tell him he had a grown son.
Chapman married La Fonda Sue Honeycutt on April 1, 1972, in Pampa, Texas; they divorced October 27, 1977, while he was in prison. They had two children together, Duane Lee Chapman II and Leland Chapman. Although the boys were not allowed to see their father for several years, they began rebuilding a relationship when the boys were 11 and 8 years old. Later, when they began getting into trouble as teenagers, Chapman obtained custody of them.
Chapman married Anne M. Tegnell on August 22, 1979, in Colorado. They were divorced, according to court records, on August 5, 1982. Three children resulted from this marriage; Zebediah Duane Chapman, Wesley Chapman, and J.R. "James" Chapman. Zebediah died shortly after birth in 1980. Wesley and J.R. were raised by their mother in Utah.
Chapman married Lyssa Rae Brittain on June 22, 1982.
Chapman and Tawny Marie were married in 1992, but filed for divorce in 1994. Court records show they were officially divorced in 2002. Tawny had a daughter from a prior marriage but she had no children with Chapman. Chapman later said:  "Tawny coerced me into marrying her. I told her I didn't want to marry her because I liked women too much to settle down ... I knew in my heart that marrying Tawny was a mistake. She was all wrong for me ... Despite my misgivings, I married Tawny ... It was a disaster from the start."Duane Dog Chapman. You Can Run But You Can't Hide 2007, pg 138. 
Chapman met his fifth wife Alice Elizabeth "Beth" Barmore (née Smith) in 1986, when she was 19. Throughout the next decade, they had an on and off romantic relationship, even marrying others. Beth has two children from previous relationships, Dominic Davis (taken into state custody when Beth was 17 years old) and Cecily Barmore-Chapman (from her previous marriage to her first husband, who was Chapman's best friend in high school).
Recently, Duane Chapman, Beth Chapman, his sons Leland Chapman and Duane Lee Chapman II, and his daughter Lyssa Chapman all worked together as bail bondsmen and bounty hunters. Their work was the subject of the Dog the Bounty Hunter show, which ran for 8 seasons on A&E. The March 21, 2012 episode showed Duane Lee telling Beth "You want me fired, you gotta fire me," and then Leland weighed in, saying "I quit too." while Duane Lee moved to Florida.
In April 2013, Chapman's new television show, Dog and Beth: On the Hunt, debuted on CMT. The show features Chapman, his wife Beth, and their son Leland going across the country giving bail bondsmen businesses advice and assisting them with bounties. The show's pilot episode featured Chapman and Leland working together for the first time since the split in 2012.

Appearances





Official sites
Government site
News articles
Television links


