[[Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport]]

CATEGORIES: Airports in the Dallas–Fort Worth metroplex, Economy of Dallas, Texas, Economy of Fort Worth, Texas, Transportation in Tarrant County, Texas, Transportation in Dallas County, Texas, Airports established in 1953, Airports in Texas, Coppell, Texas

Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport  metroplex in the U.S. state of Texas. It is the largest hub for American Airlines, which is headquartered near the airport.
DFW has a total area of 
DFW is located in the cities of Irving, Euless, Grapevine, and Coppell, between the major cities of Dallas and Fort Worth. The members of the airport's Board of Directors are appointed by the "owner cities" of Dallas and Fort Worth, with a non-voting member chosen from the airport's four neighboring cities on a rotating basis.
As of January 2014,  DFW Airport had service to a total of 205 destinations, including 56 international and 148 U.S. domestic destinations.  With the addition of nonstop flights to Doha by Qatar Airways on July 1, 2014, DFW will serve 206 total destinations including 57 international destinations.

History

Planning

As early as 1927, before the area had an airport, Dallas proposed a joint airport with Fort Worth. Fort Worth declined the offer, and thus the two cities opened their own airports, Love Field and Meacham Field, which each had scheduled airline service.
In 1940 the Civil Aeronautics Administration earmarked $1.9 million for the construction of a Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport. American Airlines and Braniff Airways struck a deal with the city of Arlington to build an airport there, but the governments of Dallas and Fort Worth disagreed over its construction and the project was abandoned in 1942. After World War II, Fort Worth annexed the site and developed it into Amon Carter Field from Dallas Love Field. In 1960 Fort Worth purchased Amon Carter Field and renamed it Greater Southwest International Airport GSW in an attempt to compete with Dallas' airport, but GSW's traffic continued to decline relative to Dallas Love Field. By the mid-1960s Fort Worth was getting 1% of Texas air traffic while Dallas was getting 49%, which led to the virtual abandonment of GSW.
The joint airport proposal was revisited in 1961 after the FAA refused to invest more money in separate Dallas and Fort Worth airports. Although the Fort Worth airport was eventually abandoned, Dallas Love Field became congested and had no more room to expand. Following an order from the federal government in 1964 that they would unilaterally choose a site if both cities could not come to an agreement on a site, officials from the two cities finally agreed on a location for a new regional airport that was north of the abandoned GSW and almost equidistant from the two city centers. The land was purchased by both cities in 1966, and construction began in 1969.
Under the original 1967 airport design, DFW was to have pier-shaped terminals perpendicular to a central highway. In 1968, the design was revised to provide for semicircular terminals, which served to isolate loading and unloading areas from the central highway, and to provide additional room for parking in the middle of each semicircle. There were a total of thirteen such terminals in the original airport plan, but only four were initially built.Scan of airport plan

Opening and operations

DFW held an open house and dedication ceremony on September 20–22, 1973, which included the first landing of a supersonic Concorde in the United States, an Air France aircraft en route from Caracas to Paris. The attendees at the airport's dedication included former Texas Governor John Connally, Transportation Secretary Claude Brinegar, U.S. Senator Lloyd Bentsen and Texas Governor Dolph Briscoe.  The airport opened for commercial service as Dallas/Fort Worth Regional Airport on January 13, 1974, at a cost of $700 million. The name change to Dallas/Fort Worth International did not occur until 1985.
At the time of its opening, DFW had four terminals, numbered 2W, 2E, 3E and 4E. leaving Southwest Airlines as Love Field's only jet carrier.DAL79intro
Braniff International Airways was a major operator at DFW in the airport's early years, operating a hub from Terminal 2W with international flights to South America and Mexico from 1974, London from 1978 and Europe and Asia from 1979, before ceasing all operations in 1982. During the Braniff hub era, DFW was one of only four U.S. airports to have scheduled Concorde service; Braniff commenced scheduled Concorde service from Dallas to Washington from 1979 to 1980, using British Airways and Air France aircraft temporarily re-registered to Braniff while flying within the United States. British Airways later briefly flew Concorde to Dallas in 1988 as a substitute for its ordinarily scheduled DC-10 service.
Following airline deregulation, American Airlines, which had already been one of the largest carriers serving the Dallas/Fort Worth area for many years, established its first hub at DFW on June 11, 1981.
Delta Air Lines also built up a hub operation at DFW, which occupied most of Terminal 4E through the 1990s. The Delta hub peaked around 1991, when Delta had a 35% market share at DFW; its share was halved by 2004, with many former mainline routes downgraded to more frequent regional jet service in 2003. After the closing of Delta's hub, DFW offered incentives to Southwest Airlines to relocate its service to DFW from Love Field, but Southwest, as in the past, chose to stay at Love Field.
In 1989 the airport authority announced plans to rebuild the existing terminals and add two runways. After an environmental impact study was released the following year, the cities of Irving, Euless, and Grapevine sued the airport over its extension plans, a battle that was finally decided (in favor of the airport) by the US Supreme Court in 1994. The seventh runway opened in 1996. The 4 primary North-South runways (those closest to the terminals) were all lengthened from .
Terminal D, built for international flights, and Skylink, a modern bidirectional people mover system, opened in 2005.
From 2004 to 2012, DFW was one of two US Army "Personnel Assistance Points" which received US troops returning from wars in Iraq and Afghanistan for rest and recuperation. This ended on March 14, 2012 and Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport became the sole Personnel Assistance Point.

Terminals

Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport has five terminals totaling 175 gates. The airport is designed with expansion in mind, and can theoretically accommodate up to thirteen terminals totaling 260 gates, although this level of expansion is unlikely to be reached in the foreseeable future. The initial four terminals were designed by Hellmuth, Obata and Kassabaum and Brodsky, Hopf & Adler.
The terminals at DFW are semicircular (except for the newest terminal, Terminal D, which is a "square U" shape) and built around the airport's central north-south arterial road, Spur 97, also known as "International Parkway." Until the late 1990s, they were designated by a number (2 being northernmost, 4 being southernmost) and a letter suffix ("E" for East, "W" for West). This system was later scrapped, and the terminals are now lettered from A to E. Terminals A, C, and E (from north to south) are on the east side of the airport, while Terminals B and D (from north to south) are on the west side.
DFW's terminals are designed to minimize the distance between a passenger's car and airplane as well as reduce traffic around terminals. A consequence of this layout is that connecting passengers had to walk extremely long distances between gates (in order to walk from one end of the semicircular concourse to the other, one must walk the entire length; there were no shortcuts between the ends). The original people mover train (Airtrans APM, later the American Airlines TrAAin) which opened with the airport was notoriously slow (), is bi-directional, and is located inside the secured area.
DFW Airport is undergoing a $1.9 billion "Terminal Renewal and Improvement Program" (TRIP), which encompasses renovations of Terminals A, B, C and E. Work on the project began following the conclusion of Super Bowl XLV in February 2011. Terminal A was the first terminal to undergo these renovations.  Gates A6-A16 were completed in April 2013, the whole terminal should be completed sometime in 2015, and the entire TRIP project should be complete by the end of 2017.
On April 3, 2014 DFW Airport director Sean Donohue announced that Emirates Airlines would upgrade their service from the Boeing 777-200LR to the Airbus A380 from October 1, 2014.dallasnews.html/

Terminal A

American Airlines and its regional affiliate American Eagle have a large presence at Dallas/Fort Worth. The world's largest airline, as of 9 December 2013, operates its largest hub at DFW. The two airlines operate at four of the five terminals at the airport. Terminal A, previously called "Terminal 2E" when the airport was first opened, is fully occupied by American Airlines for domestic flights. Prior to the opening of Terminal D, Terminal A operated most of AA's international flights at the airport. During the late 1990s, many American Eagle flights began moving to Terminal B. Before Terminal D was opened, American Eagle flights also used a satellite terminal (named Satellite Terminal A2) near Terminal A due to gate restraints. Passengers were taken to the satellite via shuttle buses from gate A6. Satellite Terminal A2 (Gates A2A–A2N) was abandoned in 2005 when American Eagle moved all flights to Terminals B and D.
Terminal A and its parking garage has been undergoing renovation, in phases, with the first phase now complete.
An American Airlines Admirals Club is located at Gate A24.
Terminal A has 31 gates: A6–A26, A28–A29, A33–A39.

Terminal B

This terminal was originally called "Terminal 2W" when the airport first opened.  It was formerly occupied by Braniff International Airways which was the largest carrier to open DFW in 1974.  Braniff Airways was its main occupant until May 1982.  An "Inter-Faith" Chapel near United's former gates commemorates the airline.  American Eagle occupies all gates at Terminal B. AirTran Airways, Frontier Airlines, Midwest Airlines and US Airways (including the former America West Airlines) relocated to Terminal E in 2006. On December 13, 2009, United moved to Terminal E to join its new Alliance (and later Merger) partner – Continental.  At that point American Eagle became the sole operator in Terminal B.  Prior to the opening of Terminal D, all foreign flag carriers operated from this terminal.
Along with the TRIP improvements, a new 10-gate stinger concourse off of Terminal B is being constructed between gates B28 and B33 to accommodate future growth.
An American Airlines Admirals Club is located at Gate B5.
Terminal B has 49 gates: B1-B3 (FIS optional), B4-B29, B30-B39 (North Stinger), B40-B49.

Terminal C

American Airlines operates all the gates at Terminal C, originally called "Terminal 3E," for only domestic flights.  A Hyatt Regency hotel is directly adjacent to this terminal.
An American Airlines Admirals Club is located at Gate C20.
Terminal C has 31 gates: C2–C4, C6–C8, C10–C12, C14–C17, C19–C22, C24–C33, C35–C37, and C39.

International Terminal D

International Terminal D is a 
The 298-room Grand Hyatt DFW Hotel is directly connected to the terminal. Under the Airport Access Authorization to Commercial Establishments Beyond the Screen Checkpoint (AAACE) program, overnight guests at the hotel who are not flying can obtain a pass to enter the concourses to visit shops and restaurants, subject to screening by a law enforcement officer and an identity check against the government's no-fly list. Detroit Metropolitan Wayne County Airport is the only other airport participating in this program.
The eight-level parking garage has over 8,100 parking spaces and uses a Smart Technology System that lets guests know which floors are full. Air-conditioned skybridges with moving walkways and elevators connect the garage to the terminal, and an arrivals canopy roof shields pedestrians from inclement weather as they enter and exit the terminal.
An American Airlines Admirals Club is located at Gate D24.  A British Airways Lounge, a Korean Air Lounge, a Lufthansa Air Lounge, and a QANTAS Business Lounge is located at Gate D21.  An American Express Centurion Lounge is located at D17.
Terminal D has 29 gates: D6–D8, D10–D12, D14–D18, D20–D25, D27–D31, D33–D34, D36–D40.

Terminal E

Terminal E, originally called Terminal 4E, was occupied primarily by Delta Air Lines until Delta closed its hub in 2005 and retained only flights to its other hubs. Delta branded the terminal "Easy Street" and marketed this term to passengers. Today the terminal is used by all U.S.-based carriers at the airport other than American and Sun Country as well as Air Canada Express and Westjet Pre-Custom Clearance flights from Canada.
It had customs facilities that were used when Delta operated flights to Frankfurt in the early 1990s, and when Air France and Aeroméxico used to serve DFW before the International Terminal D was constructed. In the 2000s, SkyTeam partner airlines Continental and Northwest moved to gates adjacent to Delta.
Terminal E is distinctive in that it has a satellite terminal connected by an underground walkway. The satellite, previously used by Delta and later used by Delta Connection carriers, was closed when Delta closed their DFW hub in 2005. It was briefly used in 2009 to house federal workers who evacuated New Orleans International Airport during Hurricane Gustav, and was refurbished and reopened in 2013 to house US Airways and Spirit Airlines while Terminal E was renovated.dfwairport.php Terminal E is connected to the other terminals by SkyLink, but lacks a walkway to the other terminals.
A Delta SkyClub is located at Gate E10 and a United Club is located at Gate E7.
Terminal E has 35 gates: E2, E4-E18, E20-E21, E22-E30 (Satellite Terminal), E31-E38.

Terminal F (future)

A sixth terminal, to be known as Terminal F, would be located directly south of Terminal D and across International Parkway from Terminal E, in what is currently the Express South parking lot.  Skylink was designed and built to accommodate the eventual Terminal F, 

Airlines and destinations

Statistics

Top destinations

Cargo

With 578,906 tons of cargo handled in 2009, DFW was then the world's 29th busiest cargo airport.
In 2010 DFW International Airport earned the distinction of  "Best cargo airport in North America 2010" from Air Cargo World, the air freight's industry's leading publication.
In 2013 Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport handled almost sixty-five percent of all aircraft cargo in Texas.dfwairport.html?page=11&bbv=1&pcode=
Asia accounts for half of all cargo and Europe accounts for 30% of the cargo at DFW.

Cargo carriers

List of Cargo Carriers serving DFW:

Ground transportation

Within airport

Skylink replaced the original Airtrans system (part of which was later operated as American Airlines' TrAAin System), a state-of-the-art people mover at the time of the airport's opening. It served the airport for 31 years from 1974–2005 and transported a quarter of a billion passengers between DFW's four terminals and employee facilities, logging a total of  and uni-directional guideway made it impractical for connecting passenger transfers. The system was decommissioned soon after Skylink opened as a modern replacement; the old guideways were left in place throughout the airport.

To and from airport

Nearby highways

The DFW Airport Area is served by the International Parkway (partially State Highway 97 Spur), which runs through the center of the airport, connecting to the Airport Freeway (State Highway 183) on the southern side of the airport and the John W. Carpenter Freeway (State Highway 114). The International Parkway continues north of State Highway 114 carrying the State Highway 121 designation for a short while until its interchange with the Lyndon B. Johnson Freeway (I-635), where State Highway 121 continues north as the Sam Rayburn Tollway. IH 35 E is easily accessible by going north on the International Parkway.

Founders Plaza

In 1995 the airport opened Founders Plaza, an observation park dedicated to the founders of DFW Airport. The site offered a panoramic view on the south end of the airport and hosted several significant events including an employee memorial the day after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks and the airport's 30th anniversary celebration in 2004.

Other facilities

The facility at 1639 West 23rd Street is located on the airport property and in the City of Grapevine.
The DFW Airport Department of Public Safety provides the airport with its own police, fire protection, and emergency medical services.dfwairport.com/dps/

Accidents and incidents

Airport operations

The following occurred at the airfield itself, immediately after takeoff, during the final landing approach, and/or during an attempted go-around:

Flights departing from or bound for Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport

The following did not occur near the airfield itself but involved flights originating from or bound for DFW International Airport:






