[[State Anthem of Ukraine]]

CATEGORIES: National anthems, National symbols of Ukraine, Ukrainian music

The State Anthem of Ukraine  ().
A version of the current Ukrainian anthem was used during the short-lived existence of Ukrainian People's Republic, West Ukrainian People's Republic and Carpatho-Ukraine, and was once again adopted by independent Ukraine following its secession from the Soviet Union.  Before its re-adaptation a competition for a national anthem among three patriotic songs took place with one of the other songs being Za Ukrainu by Mykola Voronyi.
The lyrics constitute a slightly modified original first stanza of the patriotic poem written in 1862 by Pavlo Chubynsky, a prominent ethnographer from the region of Ukraine's capital, Kiev. In 1863, Mykhailo Verbytsky, a western Ukrainian composer and a Greek-Catholic priest composed music to accompany Chubynsky's text.net - Father Mykhailo Verbytsky The first choral performance of the piece was at the Ukraine Theatre in Lviv, in 1864.nationalanthems.info

History

Creation of Ukrainian national anthem started in the autumn of 1862 during one of Pavlo Chubynskyi's parties. Chubynskyi, a prominent ethnographer, folklorist and poet, noticed Serbian students from the Kyiv University singing a patriotic song, which mentioned tzar Dyshan and which included the line  "срце бије и крв лије за своју слободу"or "срб се бије и крв лије за своју слободу ..."Светозар Милетић. Србска песма as a refrain. He really liked that song and upon hearing it vanished quietly in another room only to reappear half an hour later with a ready-made lyrics for the song "Shche ne vmerla Ukrayina," and then promptly sang it to the music of the Serbian song.Іван Ющук. Іван Франко і національно-визвольна боротьба сербів у 70-их роках XIX ст.
Some researches believe that the Polish song ""Jeszcze Polska nie zgineła", which later became Polish state anthem, also had an influence on Chubynskyi's lyrics.Павло Чубинський писав вірші "під Шевченка" At the time, Dombrovsky March was very popular among nations that were fighting for their independence (for instance, few months after Chubynskyi wrote his lyrics, the January Uprising began. Likewise, influenced by this polish song, Slovak poet Samo Tomášik wrote a song "Hey, Slavs", which later became Yugoslavia's anthem in 1944-2003. Another popular version of this polish song, Bulgaria "Noises of Mariza" was Bulgarian anthem in 1886-1944.
The widespread use of Chybynskyi's lyrics among ukrainophils was very rapid. On October 20 of the same year that lyrics were written the head gendarm knyaz Dolhorykov gave an order to banish Chybynskyi for the "dangerous influence on the minds of commons" and sent him in exile to Arkhangelsk Governorate.com/book_view.php?id=447
The first time Chybynskyi's poem was officially published was in 1863 when it appeared in the 4th issue of Lviv's journal "Meta". Soon after poem became popular in Western Ukraine, it was noticed by Ukrainian clergy. Inspired by Pavlo Chybynskyi's poem, one of them, father Mykhailo Verbytskyi of Ukrainian Greek-Catholic Church, a prominent Ukrainian composer of his times, decided to write music for it. In 1865 Chybynskyi's poem was first published together with Verbytskyi's music sheet. The first choral performance of the piece was in 1864 at the Ukraine Theatre in Lviv.
However, Chybynskyi's poem wasn't used as a state anthem up until 1917. Still, even in 1917-1920 legislatively "Shche ne vmerla Ukrayina" was not adopted as an exclusive state anthem and as a result other anthems were also used at the time. In 1939 "Shche ne vmerla Ukrayina" was adopted as an official state anthem of Carpatho-Ukraine. 

Soviet times

When Ukraine was annexed by the Soviet Union in 1920 and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic was formed, it was immediately banned by the Soviet regime. At the dawn of the Soviet Union, when it was decided that each separate Soviet republic could have its own anthem, the poem "Sche ne vmerla Ukrayina" was rejected in order to suppress separatism amongst Ukrainians. Soviet rulers wanted the text that would state that Ukraine is a country inside the USSR that it is "equal among equals, free among the free" and it necessarily had to mention the communist party that leads Ukraine towards communism.  This task was accomplished by Pavlo Tychyna, whose version of "Zhyvy, Ykrayino, prekrasna i syl'na" was the official anthem of Ukrainian SSR from 1949 to 1991. Composer Anton Lebedynez' wrote the music for it. Nonetheless, this anthem never became popular among Ukrainians and in Soviet times, instead of the anthem of the Ukrainian SSR, the anthem of the USSR was played during nearly all official events in Ukraine.

Independence times

On January 15, 1992 the music for the State Anthem of Ukraine was adopted by Ukraine's Verkhovna Rada, which was later solidified by the Ukrainian constitution. However, the lyrics for the anthem were not officially adopted up until March 6, 2003 when Ukrainian Verkhovna Rada passed the Law on the State Anthem of Ukraine ( The law proposed to pass Mykola Verbytskyi's music and Pavlo Chybynskyi's first verse and refrain of his poem "Shche ne vmerla Ukrayina". However, the first stanza of the anthem was to be changed from "Shche ne vmerla Ukrayina, ni slava ni volia" to "Shche ne vmerla Ukrayiny, i slava i volia".
The law was passed with an overwhelming majority of 334 votes out of the total 450, with only 46 MPs voting against it. Only the members of Socialist Party of Ukraine and Communist Party of Ukraine refrained from the voting. The passing of this law finalized Article 20 of the Constitution of Ukraine. The national anthem that up until that moment had only officially consisted of Mykolo Verbytskyi's music, had henceforce also included the modified lyrics of Pavlo Chybynskyi and was legislatively adopted by the Ukrainian law.
The popularity of Ukrainian anthem has become particularly high in the wake of the mass protests  of 2004 (Orange Revolution) and 2013 (Euromaidan). Ukrainian composer Valentyn Syl'vestrov, who participated in Ukrainian protests in Kyiv, characterised Ukrainian anthem in the following way:

Lyrics

Shche ne vmerla Ukraina was sung as the de facto national anthem at the inauguration of the first President Leonid Kravchuk on December 5, 1991, but it was not until March 6, 2003 that Chybynskyi's poem officially became a part of Ukrainian national anthem.
On March 6, 2003, the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted anthem's official lyrics, opting to use only the first verse and chorus from Chybynskyi's poem, while slightly modifying its first stanza. Instead of stating "Ukraine has not yet died, neither her glory, nor her freedom" (
Article 20 of the Constitution of Ukraine (June 28, 1996) designates Verbytsky's music as the theme of the national anthem:

Chybynskyi's original lyrics

The first stanza of Chybynskyi's original poem is somewhat similar to the first stanza of national anthems of the SFR Yugoslavia/Yugoslavia, Poland, and Israel.
Original version published in 1863 (note the archaic orthography)
 
 
 Ukrainian original
Ще не вмерла Україна, 
И слава, и воля! 
Ще намъ, браття-молодці, 
Усміхнеться доля! 
Згинуть наші вороги, 
Якъ роса на сонці; 
Запануємъ, браття й ми 
У своїй сторонці. 
Наливайко, Залізнякъ 
И Тарас Трясило 
Кличуть насъ изъ-за могилъ 
На святеє діло. 
Изгадаймо славну смерть 
Лицарства-козацтва, 
Щобъ не втратить марне намъ 
Своєго юнацтва.  
Ой Богдане, Богдане  
Славний нашъ гетьмане!  
На-що віддавъ Україну  
Москалям поганимъ?!  
Щобъ вернути іі честь,  
Ляжемъ головами,  
Назовемся України  
Вірними синами!   
Наші браття Славяне  
Вже за зброю взялись;  
Не діжде ніхто, щобъ ми  
По-заду зістались.  
Поєднаймось разомъ всі,  
Братчики-Славяне:  
Нехай гинуть вороги,  
Най воля настане!  
Roman transliteration
Shche ne vmerla Ukrayina, 
Y slava, y volia 
Shche nam, brattia-molodtsi, 
Usmikhnet'sia dolia! 
Z-hynut' nashi vorohy, 
Yak rosa na sontsi; 
Zapanuiem, brattia i my 
U svoyii storontsi. 
Nalyvaiko, Zalizniak 
Y Taras Triasylo 
Klychut' nas yz-za mohyl 
Na sviateie dilo 
Yz-hadaimo slavnu smert' 
Lytsartstva-kozatstva, 
Shchob ne vtratyt' marne nam 
Svoieho iunatstva. 
Oi Bohdane, Bohdane  
Slavnyi nash het'mane!  
Na-shcho viddav Ukrainu  
Moskaliam pohanym?!  
Shchob vernuty ii chest'  
Liazhem holovamy  
Nazovemsia Ukrainy  
Virnymy synamy!  
Nashi brattia Slaviane  
Vzhe za zbroiu vzialys';  
Ne dizhde nikhto, shchob my  
Po-zadu zistalys'.  
Poiednaimos' razom vsi,  
Bratchyky-Slaviane:  
Nekhai hynut' vorohy,  
Nai volia nastane!  
English translation
Ukraine has not yet died, 
The glory and the freedom! 
Still upon us brave brothers, 
Fate shall smile! 
Our enemies will vanish 
Like dew in the sun; 
We too shall rule 
In our country. 
Nalyvaiko, Zalizniak 
And Taras Triasylo 
Call us from beyond the grave 
To the holy battle. 
Recall the famous death of 
Chivalarious Cossacks 
Not to lose vainly 
Our youth.
Oh Bohdan, Bohdan  
Our great hetman 
What for did you give Ukraine  
To wretched muscovites?!  
To return her honor,  
We lay our heads  
We shall call ourselves Ukraine's  
Faithful sons!
Our Slavic brothers  
Already took up arms  
No one shall see  
That we should stay behind.  
Unite together all,  
Brothers Slavs:  
So that enemies perish,  
And freedom comes!  

 

Draft lyricsUsed prior to 2003

Draft version of lyrics used prior to 2003 (note how the first stanza is different from the official version)
 
 
 Ukrainian original
Ще не вмерла Україна, ні слава, ні воля, 
Ще нам, браття-українці, усміхнеться доля. 
Згинуть наші вороженьки, як роса на сонці, 
Запануєм і ми, браття, у своїй сторонці. 
Станем браття, в бій кривавий, від Сяну до Дону 
В ріднім краю панувати не дамо нікому. 
Чорне море ще всміхнеться, дід Дніпро зрадіє, 
Ще на нашій Україні доленька наспіє. 
А завзяття, праця щира свого ще докаже, 
Ще ся волі в Україні піснь гучна розляже. 
За Карпати відіб'ється, згомонить степами, 
України слава стане поміж народами. 
Roman transliteration
Shche ne vmerla Ukrayina, ni slava, ni volya, 
Shche nam, brattia ukrayint'si, usmikhnet'sia dolia. 
Z-hynut' nashi vorozhen'ky, yak rosa na sontsi, 
Zapanuyem i my, brattia, u svoyiy storontsi. 
Stanem brattia, v biy kryvavyi, vid Sianu do Donu 
V ridnim kraiu panuvaty ne damo nikomu. 
Chorne more shche vsmikhnetsia, did Dnipro zradiye, 
Shche na nashiy Ukrayini dolen'ka naspiye. 
A zavziattia pratsia shchyra svoho shche dokazhe,  
Shche sia voli v Ukrayini pisn' huchna rozliazhe. 
Za Karpaty vidibiet'tsia z-homonyt' stepamy, 
Ukrayiny slava stane pomizh narodamy. 
English translation
Ukraine has not yet died, nor her glory, nor her freedom, 
Upon us, fellow Ukrainians, fate shall smile once more. 
Our enemies will vanish like dew in the sun, 
And we too shall rule, brothers, in a free land of our own. 
We'll stand, brothers, in bloody battle, from the Syan to the Don, 
We will not allow others to rule in our motherland. 
The Black Sea will smile and grandfather Dnipro will rejoice, 
For in our own Ukraine fortune shall shine again. 
Our persistence and our sincere toils will be rewarded, 
And freedom's song will throughout all of Ukraine resound. 
Echoing off the Carpathians, and across the steppes rumbling, 
Ukraine's fame and glory will be known among all nations. 

 

Official lyrics

Official version of lyrics used since 2003
 
 
 Ukrainian original
Ще не вмерла України і слава, і воля, 
Ще нам, браття молодії, усміхнеться доля. 
Згинуть наші воріженьки, як роса на сонці. 
Запануєм і ми, браття, у своїй сторонці. 
Roman transliteration
Shche ne vmerla Ukrayiny i slava, i volya, 
Shche nam, brattia molodiyi, usmikhnet'sia dolia. 
Z-hynut' nashi vorizhen'ky, yak rosa na sontsi, 
Zapanuyem i my, brattia, u svoyiy storontsi. 
English translation
Ukraine's glory has not yet died, nor her  freedom, 
Upon us, fellow compatriots, fate shall smile once more. 
Our enemies will vanish, like dew in the morning sun, 
And we too shall rule, brothers, in a free land of our own. 

 








