[[Liquorice]]

CATEGORIES: Glycyrrhiza, Spices, Sweeteners, Medicinal plants, Plants used in traditional Chinese medicine, Monoamine oxidase inhibitors, Demulcents, Plants used in Ayurveda, Plants described in 1753, Liquorice



Liquorice or licorice ()licorice. Merriam-Webster's Medical Dictionary, © 2007 Merriam-Webster, Inc. is the root of Glycyrrhiza glabra from which a somewhat sweet flavor can be extracted. The liquorice plant is a legume that is native to southern Europe and parts of Asia. It is not botanically related to anise, star anise, or fennel, which are sources of similar flavouring compounds. The word 'liquorice'/'licorice' is derived (via the Old French licoresse), from the Greek γλυκύρριζα (glukurrhiza), meaning "sweet root",γλυκύρριζα, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus from γλυκύς (glukus), "sweet"γλυκύς, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus + ῥίζα (rhiza), "root",ῥίζα, Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon, on Perseus
Description

It is a herbaceous perennial, growing to 1 m in height, with pinnate leaves about 7–15 cm  (3–6 in) long, with 9–17 leaflets. The flowers are 0.8–1.2 cm (⅓–½ in) long, purple to pale whitish blue, produced in a loose inflorescence. The fruit is an oblong pod, 2–3 cm  (1 in) long, containing several seeds., ed. (1992). New RHS Dictionary of Gardening. ISBN 0-333-47494-5 The roots are stoloniferous., ed. (1995). "The RHS encyclopedia of herbs and their uses". ISBN 1-4053-0059-0

Chemistry

The scent of liquorice root comes from a complex and variable combination of compounds, of which anethole is the most  minor component (0-3% of total volatiles). Much of the sweetness in liquorice comes from glycyrrhizin, which has a sweet taste, 30–50 times the sweetness of sugar. The sweetness is very different from sugar, being less instant, tart and lasting longer.
The isoflavene glabrene and the isoflavane glabridin, found in the roots of liquorice, are xenoestrogens.

Cultivation and uses

Liquorice grows best in deep valleys, well-drained soils, with full sun, and is harvested in the autumn, two to three years after planting.  Countries producing liquorice include Iran, Afghanistan, the People's Republic of China, Pakistan, Iraq, Azerbaijan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan and Turkey.M & F Worldwide Corp., Annual Report on Form 10-K for the Year Ended December 31, 2010.
The world's leading manufacturer of liquorice products is M&F Worldwide, which manufactures more than 70% of the worldwide liquorice flavors sold to end-users.M & F Worldwide Corp., Annual Report on Form 10-K for the Year Ended December 31, 2001.

Tobacco

Most liquorice is used as a flavoring agent for tobacco.  For example, M&F Worldwide reported in 2011 that approximately 63% of its liquorice product sales are to the worldwide tobacco industry for use as tobacco flavor enhancing and moistening agents in the manufacture of American blend cigarettes, moist snuff, chewing tobacco and pipe tobacco.  American blend cigarettes made up a larger portion of worldwide tobacco consumption in earlier years,Erik Assadourian, Cigarette Production Drops, Vital Signs 2005, at 70. and the percentage of liquorice products used by the tobacco industry was higher in the past. M&F Worldwide sold approximately 73% of its liquorice products to the tobacco industry in 2005,M & F Worldwide Corp., Annual Report on Form 10-K for the Year Ended December 31, 2005. and a consultant to M&F Worldwide's predecessor company stated in 1975 that it was believed that well over 90% of the total production of liquorice extract and its derivatives found its way into tobacco products. Cook, The Use of Licorice and Other Flavoring Material in Tobacco (Apr. 10, 1975).
Liquorice provides tobacco products with a natural sweetness and a distinctive flavor that blends readily with the natural and imitation flavoring components employed in the tobacco industry, represses harshness, and is not detectable as liquorice by the consumer.  Tobacco flavorings such as liquorice also make it easier to inhale the smoke by creating bronchodilators, which open up the lungs. Phillip Morris Inc., 127 Cal. App. 4th 1640, 1673, 26 Cal. Rptr. 3d 638, 664 (2005).  Chewing tobacco requires substantially higher levels of liquorice extract as emphasis on the sweet flavor appears highly desirable.

Food and candy

Liquorice flavour is found in a wide variety of liquorice candies or sweets.  In most of these candies the taste is reinforced by aniseed oil, and the actual content of liquorice is very low.  Liquorice confections are primarily purchased by consumers in the European Union. 
In the Netherlands, where liquorice candy ("drop") is one of the most popular forms of sweet,  only a few of the many forms that are sold contain aniseed, although mixing it with mint, menthol or with laurel is quite popular. Mixing it with ammonium chloride ('salmiak') is also popular. The most popular liquorice, known in the Netherlands as zoute drop (salty liquorice) actually contains very little salt, i.e. sodium; the online Dutch food composition database] the salty taste is probably due to ammonium chloride, and the blood pressure raising effect is due to glycyrrhizin, see below. Strong, salty candies are popular in Scandinavia.
Pontefract in Yorkshire was the first place where liquorice mixed with sugar began to be used as a sweet in the same way it is in the modern day.
Liquorice is popular in Italy (particularly in the South) and Spain in its natural form. The root of the plant is simply dug up, washed and chewed as a mouth freshener. Throughout Italy unsweetened liquorice is consumed in the form of small black pieces made only from 100% pure liquorice extract; the taste is bitter and intense. In Calabria a popular liqueur is made from pure liquorice extract. Liquorice is also very popular in Syria where it is sold as a drink.  Dried liquorice root can be chewed as a sweet. Black liquorice contains approximately 100 calories per ounce (15 kJ/g).Licorice Calories

Medicine

The compound glycyrrhizin (or glycyrrhizic acid), found in liquorice, has been proposed as being useful for liver protection in tuberculosis therapy, however evidence does not support this use which may in fact be harmful.
In traditional Chinese medicine, liquorice (मुलेठी, 甘草, شیرین بیان) is commonly used in herbal formulae to "harmonize" the other ingredients in the formula and to carry the formula to the twelve "regular meridians".
Liquorice may be useful in conventional and naturopathic medicine for both mouth ulcers
and peptic ulcers.

Toxicity

Its major dose-limiting toxicities are corticosteroid in nature, due to the inhibitory effect its chief active constituents, glycyrrhizin and enoxolone have on cortisol degradation and include: oedema, hypokalaemia, weight gain or loss and hypertension.

Gallery

Image:Glycyrrhiza glabra (chip of Spanish wood).jpg|Sliver of liquorice root
Image:Glycyrrhiza glabra (Pile of Spanish wood chips).jpg|Various liquorice root slivers
Image:Réglisse(racine).JPG|Liquorice root with bark
File:Glycyrrhiza glabra inflorescence.jpg|Inflorescence of Glycyrrhiza glabra






