[[James P. Hogan (writer)]]

CATEGORIES: 1941 births, 2010 deaths, HIV/AIDS denialism, English science fiction writers, English expatriates in the United States, Writers from London, People from Tuolumne County, California, People from Orlando, Florida, Prometheus Award winners

James Patrick Hogan (27 June 1941 – 12 July 2010) was a British science fiction author.

Biography

Hogan was born in London, England. He was raised in the Portobello Road area on the west side of London. After leaving school at the age of sixteen, he worked various odd jobs until, after receiving a scholarship, he began a five-year program at the Royal Aircraft Establishment at Farnborough covering the practical and theoretical sides of electrical, electronic, and mechanical engineering. He first married at the age of twenty. He married three more times and fathered six children.
Hogan worked as a design engineer for several companies and eventually moved into sales in the 1960s, traveling around Europe as a sales engineer for Honeywell. In the 1970s he joined the Digital Equipment Corporation's Laboratory Data Processing Group and in 1977 moved to Boston, Massachusetts to run its sales training program. He published his first novel, Inherit the Stars, in the same year to win an office bet.
He quit DEC in 1979 and began writing full-time, moving to Orlando, Florida, for a year where he met his third wife Jackie. They then moved to Sonora, California. Hogan died of a heart attack at his home in Ireland on Monday, 12 July 2010, aged 69.

Writings

Most of Hogan's fiction is hard science fiction.
Hogan's fiction also reflects anti-authoritarian social views and as such forms part of anarchist science fiction. Many of his novels have strong anarchist or libertarian themes,

Controversy

In his later years, Hogan's views tended towards those widely considered "fringe" or pseudoscientific. He was a proponent of Immanuel Velikovsky's version of catastrophism,
Hogan also espoused the idea that the Holocaust didn't happen in the manner described by mainstream historians, writing that he found the work of Arthur Butz and Mark Weber to be "more scholarly, scientific, and convincing than what the history written by the victors says."
In March 2010, in an essay defending Holocaust denier Ernst Zündel, Hogan stated that the mainstream history of the Holocaust includes "claims that are wildly fantastic, mutually contradictory, and defy common sense and often physical possibility."
James Nicoll described Hogan as having fallen victim to the "brain eater" in a 1999 Usenet post, where he commented that "engineering training provides no protection from nutty ideas."

Bibliography

Novels

Short stories

Short story collections and fixups

Omnibus editions

Compilations of novels in the "Giants series".

Non-fiction





|url= 
|title= Classic James P. Hogan Interview
|accessdate= 19 July 2010
|author=
|last= Truesdale
|first= Dave
|authorlink=
|coauthors=
|date= 18 July 2010
|publisher= Tangent Online
|quote= Interview originally appeared in Tangent No. 1, July/August 1993, and is reprinted here for the first time.
}}


