[[Hour of Power]]

CATEGORIES: Christian television, 1970s American television series, 1980s American television series, 1990s American television series, 2000s American television series

Hour of Power is a weekly American Christian television program. It was previously hosted by Sheila Schuller Coleman, her brother, Robert A. Schuller, and her father, Robert H. Schuller, who founded the program. It is broadcast from the Crystal Cathedral in Garden Grove, California. The program is normally one hour long, but some networks broadcast an edited 30 minute program. It features a large congregation, mostly Christian music with a choir (with an orchestra as well as the Crystal Cathedral organ as of March 2012) and guests who speak about how God and their Christian faith have changed their lives for the better.

History

The program first aired in 1970 as a church service of the Garden Grove Community Church. It was originally hosted by the elder Schuller; the younger Schuller co-hosted it from 1976 to 2008. thumb|right|300px|The Crystal Cathedral where The Hour of Power is broadcast
On July 9, 2008, the presidency of the church was shifted from the senior Schuller to his son-in-law Jim Coleman.
On October 26, 2008, it was announced that the elder Schuller had removed his son, Robert A. Schuller, as teaching pastor, but allowed him to remain as the Crystal Cathedral's senior pastor. Schuller senior said that he wanted to take the ministry in a different direction and for the foreseeable future would use guest speakers for the weekly services rather than his son. On November 29, 2008, the church announced that the younger Schuller had resigned.
On October 18, 2010, the board of the Crystal Cathedral filed for bankruptcy in Santa Ana, California.
On March 10, 2012, it was announced that Robert H. Schuller and his wife, Arvella, will be leaving the church. The following day, March 11, 2012, Schuller Coleman announced at the morning service that she, too, would also be leaving the church, cutting all family ties with the Crystal Cathedral and Hour of Power, stating that "This is the last Sunday we will be worshiping in this building."Los Angeles Times: "Crystal Cathedral divided as Schullers leave, changes planned", March 12, 2012. The ministry's successor, Rev. Bill Bennett, said that the ministry will continue, but now using a more traditional service.  In June, Rev. Robert V. Schuller "Bobby", the son of Robert A. Schuller, started preaching on a voluntary basis.  As of February 2013, Bobby Schuller was named as pastor for the Hour of Power.  

Broadcasts

The program airs in the United States mainly using paid programming time on Lifetime, the Trinity Broadcasting Network/The Church Channel, Oxygen, WE tv, and Ion Television in many markets, along with about 100 stations through individual contracts. The program also airs over the American Forces Network.
In Canada it is carried on VisionTV and City.
In Europe it is broadcast on CNBC Europe, VOX in Austria, Germany and Switzerland, on RTL in the Netherlands and Sky1 in Ireland and the United Kingdom.
In the Middle East it is carried on METV in Israel, Jordan, Lebanon, and Syria.
In Australia, it is seen on EXPO, Australian Christian Channel and Network Ten; the program is also broadcast weekly on radio.
It is broadcast in New Zealand on the Prime network. 
It is broadcast in Hong Kong on ATV World.
The Hour of Power telecast, filmed in the Crystal Cathedral's main sanctuary, at one point attracted 1.3 million viewers from 156 countries.
Video streams of the Hour of Power are also provided on its website.

Finances

Beginning in the late 1990s, the ministry struggled financially after it borrowed money to build a visitors' center and produce a play, Creation, which was produced by Carol Schuller Milner, one of Schuller's daughters.
2008 revenues for the program were nearly $5 million lower than revenues for 2007. As of early 2009, the church planned to sell more than $65 million worth of its Orange County property to pay off debt:



Further reading

 | author     = Ron Rokhy
 | date       = 30 June 2013
 | title      = Crystal Cathedral holds last service before relocating
 | url        = 
 | work       = NBC Southern California
 | publisher  = NBCUniversal Media, LLC
 | quote      = The Crystal Cathedral, which sold its campus to the Roman Catholic Diocese of Orange in 2011 due to financial troubles, held its final service on Sunday before swapping facilities with a nearby Catholic sanctuary.
 | accessdate = 2013-07-06
}}




