[[Heidi Fleiss]]

CATEGORIES: 1965 births, Living people, American Jews, American people convicted of tax crimes, American pimps and madams, American prisoners and detainees, American prostitutes, American television personalities, Celebrity Big Brother (UK) contestants, Criminals of Los Angeles, California, Prisoners and detainees of California

Heidi Lynne Fleiss (born December 30, 1965) is an American former madam, and also a columnist and television personality regularly featured in the 1990s in American media. She ran a prostitution ring based in Los Angeles, California, and is often referred to as the "Hollywood Madam".
As of 2012, she resides in Pahrump, Nevada.

Early life

Fleiss was born and raised in Los Angeles, California. Her parents, Paul M. Fleiss and Elissa (née Ash), are divorced. Her parents adopted Elissa's sister's daughter, Kim, then adopted Paul's sister's daughter, Amy. Both were infants at the time. Heidi was born later the same year. Paul and Elissa then had Shana (born 1967), Jason (born 1968) and Jesse Fleiss (born 1977).Heidi Fleiss's secret heartache over drowning death of brother days before entering Celebrity Big Brother house

Work in prostitution and criminal charges

At the age of 22, Fleiss began managing a prostitution ring under Madam Alex after meeting the famous Madam 90210 in 1987 via film director boyfriend Ivan Nagy. Fleiss stated in 2002 in an interview with Larry King that her relationship with Alex was "a very intense relationship" and that she "was kind of like the daughter she loved and hated, so she was abusive and loving at the same time." In the same interview, Fleiss said she was a prostitute for a short period in order to learn all aspects of the business. At the time Heidi was learning to take over Alex's business, there was a labor shortage as most of Alex's prostitutes were approaching middle age and setting their sights on retiring from prostitution. Alex tasked Heidi with revitalizing the business by recruiting a new batch of young attractive women.Interview with Larry King
By 1990, Fleiss parted with Alex and started her own prostitution ring. Fleiss has stated that she made her first "million dollars after only four months in the business" as a madam, and that on her slowest night she made $10,000."In Defense Of Prostitution"; by Heidi Fleiss as told to Nadya Labi | Million dollars in four months By 1991 and 1992, she was so successful that she began rejecting girls to work for her. In June 1993, she was arrested for multiple charges, including attempted pandering.
Federal charges were filed in 1994, and Fleiss posted $1,000,000 bail. The state trial began the same year and Fleiss was convicted. In May 1996, her state conviction was overturned, and her appeal bond was set at $200,000. Fleiss was released from the halfway house in September 1999.
Fleiss' ring reportedly had numerous famous and wealthy clients. When questioned by British TV presenter Davina McCall about revealing the names of her clients, she replied, "It's not my style."

Media appearances

In 1995, Nick Broomfield made a documentary about her prostitution ring called Heidi Fleiss: Hollywood Madam. In 2004, a made-for-TV movie was produced called Call Me: The Rise and Fall of Heidi Fleiss, in which Fleiss was portrayed by actress Jamie-Lynn Sigler.
Fleiss and reality TV personality Victoria Sellers (a friend of Fleiss since their teens, although their relationship had hit the rocks during the period Sellers was interviewed for Broomfield's documentary)Heidi Fleiss: Hollywood Madam (1995) hosted and produced an instructional DVD titled Sex Tips with Heidi Fleiss and Victoria Sellers in 2001. She is a periodic guest on Fox News programs and is currently
In January 2010, Fleiss was the third housemate to enter the final Channel 4 series of Celebrity Big Brother in the UK;)

Business interests

In 2005, Fleiss announced plans to open a brothel in Pahrump, Nevada called "Heidi Fleiss' Stud Farm".

Personal life

After completing treatment for substance abuse, Fleiss became engaged to Dennis Hof, owner of Nevada's Moonlite BunnyRanch.
Fleiss is Jewish, and has said that she is a vegetarian.
She owns an ultralight flight park in Pahrump, FAA designation NV54.
In 2003, Fleiss accused her ex-boyfriend, actor Tom Sizemore, of domestic violence. Sizemore was convicted by a California jury of domestic violence, making criminal threats, and making obscene phone calls.
Fleiss eventually moved to Pahrump, Nevada,Knapp, George. "Famous Hollywood Madam Moves to Nevada", Las Vegas Now; Accessed January 30, 2010 where she came to live in solitude in Death ValleyVideo of Celebrity Rehabe Episode 3.8 ("Acting Out") at VH1.Brean, Henry. "More Dirty Laundry", Las Vegas Review-Journal July 1, 2007 Dr. Drew Pinsky, who treated Fleiss for substance abuse, performed brain scans on her that showed significant frontal lobe dysfunction, which Pinsky surmised was behind her inability to empathize with people, and her affinity for doing so with birds. She had developed a particular closeness to a macaw called Dalton who later died. SBS TV, December 21, 2010
In 2009, Fleiss was treated for substance abuse at the Pasadena Recovery Center, which was filmed for the third season of Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew. One of her fellow patients was Sizemore, against whom her prior restraining order had lapsed. Both Fleiss and Sizemore consented to appear together on the show before filming began, and their reunion, depicted in the third episode, was amicable,Video of Celebrity Rehab with Dr. Drew, Episode 3.4 ("New Patients") at VH1.Video of Celebrity Rehab Episode 3.5 ("Loss") at VH1. She subsequently returned to rehab.

Filmography



Further reading

Bibliography

Books by Heidi Fleiss.




