[[Erica Jong]]

CATEGORIES: 1942 births, Living people, 20th-century American novelists, 21st-century American novelists, American feminist writers, American people of English-Jewish descent, American people of Polish-Jewish descent, American people of Russian-Jewish descent, American women novelists, American women poets, American women writers, Barnard College alumni, Columbia University alumni, Fiorello H. LaGuardia High School alumni, Jewish American writers, Jewish feminists, Jewish poets, Jewish women writers, LGBT rights activists from the United States, Sex-positive feminists, Writers from New York City

Erica Jong (née Mann; born March 26, 1942) is an American author and teacher best known for her fiction and poetry, and particularly for her 1973 novel Fear of Flying. The book became famously controversial for its attitudes towards female sexuality and figured prominently in the development of second-wave feminism. According to Washington Post, it has sold more than 20 million copies worldwide.

Career

A 1963 graduate of Barnard College with an MA (1965) in 18th century English Literature from Columbia University, Erica Jong is best known for her first novel, Fear of Flying (1973), which created a sensation with its frank treatment of a woman's sexual desires. Although it contains many sexual elements, the book is mainly the account of a hypersensitive young woman, in her late twenties, trying to find who she is and where she is going. It contains many psychological, humorous, descriptive elements, and rich cultural and literary references. The book tries to answer the many conflicts arising in women in late 1960s and early 1970s America, of womanhood, femininity, love, one's quest for freedom and purpose.

Personal life

Jong was born and grew up in New York City. She is the middle daughter of Seymour Mann (né Nathan Weisman, died 2004), and Eda Mirsky (born 1911). Her father was a businessman of Polish Jewish ancestry who owned a gifts and home accessories company Among her nephews is Peter Daou, who writes "The Daou Report" for salon.
Jong has been married four times. Her first two marriages, to college sweetheart Michael Werthman, and to Allan Jong, a Chinese American psychiatrist, reflect those of the narrator of Fear of Flying. Her third husband was Jonathan Fast, a novelist and social work educator, and son of novelist Howard Fast.  This marriage was described in How to Save Your Own Life and Parachutes and Kisses.  She has a daughter from her third marriage, Molly Jong-Fast.
Jong is now married to Kenneth David Burrows, a New York litigation attorney. In the late 1990s, Jong wrote an article about her current marriage in the magazine Talk.
Jong lived for three years, 1966–69, in Heidelberg, Germany, with her second husband, on an army base.  She was a frequent visitor to Venice, and wrote about that city in her novel Shylock's Daughter. 
In 2007, her literary archive was acquired by Columbia University in New York City.
Jong is mentioned in the Bob Dylan song "Highlands." Jong supports LGBT rights and legalization of same-sex marriage and she claims that 'Gay marriage is a blessing not a curse. It certainly promotes stability and family. And it's certainly good for kids.'

Bibliography

Fiction

Non-fiction

Anthology

Poetry

Awards






