[[Camberley]]

CATEGORIES: Camberley, Surrey Heath, Post towns in the GU postcode area

Camberley  Camberley's suburbs include Crawley Hill, Yorktown, Heatherside (despite being separated by the M3 motorway) and the Old Dean district.
At the 2011 census the Aldershot Urban Area (which also includes other towns, such as Aldershot, Farnborough, and Farnham) had a population of 252,937, making it the twenty-ninth largest urban area in the UK.

History

Before the 19th century, the area now occupied by Camberley was referred to as Bagshot/Frimley Heath, which was known as a haunt of highwaymen such as William Davies – known as the Golden Farmer – and Claude Duval. The land remained largely undeveloped and uncultivated due to a sandy topsoil making it unsuitable for farming. In A tour thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain, written between 1724 and 1726, Daniel Defoe described the area as barren and sterile; "a mark of the just resentment shew'd by Heaven upon the Englishmen's pride... horrid and frightful to look on, not only good for little, but good for nothing".

19th century

The town as it now stands has its roots in the building of The Royal Military College, which later became the Royal Military Academy, Sandhurst, in 1812. A settlement known as "New Town" grew in the area around the college which in 1831 was renamed Yorktown, after Prince Frederick, Duke of York and Albany. At this time, the population was 702. In 1848, the first parish church of St. Michael, Yorktown was built by Henry Woodyer, in an area formerly part of Frimley, itself only a chapelry of Ash.
Later, the Staff College was established to the east of the Academy, and a property speculator built the nearby Cambridge Hotel. The surrounding area became known as Cambridge Town, but was renamed "Camberley" in January 1877 to avoid confusion by the General Post Office with Cambridge in Cambridgeshire. The renaming of Camberley was mentioned in the 1963 film adaptation of William Golding's Lord of the Flies. The character Piggy states that the new name consisted of three parts; "Cam" taken from the original name of Cambridgetown, "ber" which means 'river', because there are many rivers in the area, and "ley" because it is a common ending for English town names in the area (as in neighbouring Frimley); to make way for the town centre redevelopment.
During the 19th century, Camberley grew in size. This was given added impetus with the arrival of the branch-line railway and railway station in 1878 and a reputation for healthy air, due to the vast number of pine trees, which were said to be good for those suffering from pulmonary disorders. By the end of the century the population had reached 8,400. Since then, the town has absorbed the original settlement of Yorktown, which is now regarded as part of Camberley.

20th century

The Southern Scott Scramble, the first known motorcycle scrambling event, took place on Camberley Heath on 29 March 1924. The event, won by A.B. Sparks, attracted a crowd in the thousands and is considered to be the first instance of what later developed in the sport of motocross. During the Second World War, the Old Dean common was used as an instruction camp of the Free French Forces. The Kremer prize was conceived in the Cambridge Hotel in Camberley in 1959 after Henry Kramer toured a Microcell factory.
The Old Dean housing estate was built in the 1950s on the "Old Dean Common" for residents of heavily bombed Surrey-area's homeless after World War II. Many of the roads on that half of the Old Dean are named after areas of London, with the others named after places on the common.
Camberley falls under the siren test area of Broadmoor Hospital, a secure mental hospital in nearby Crowthorne. The siren was installed following a public outcry at the escape of child-murderer John Thomas Straffen in April 1952. The siren is still tested every Monday at 10am.
In 1969 there was an outbreak of rabies when a dog, just released from a sixth month quarantine after returning from Germany, attacked two people on Camberley Common. The scare resulted in restriction orders for dogs and large-scale shoots to carry out the destruction of foxes and other wildlife.

21st century

After much debate and delay (plans having been discussed for over half a decade), construction started in May 2006 on a new 
In 2009 the town's households were named by Experian as having the highest CO2 footprint in the UK, estimated at 28.05 tonnes per household per year (compared to 18.36 tonnes for the lowest, South Shields).

Geography

Camberley is in the far west of Surrey, adjacent to the boundaries of Hampshire's Hart district and Berkshire's Bracknell Forest district. It lies directly between the A30 national route and M3 motorway (junction 4 exit). It is at the northern edge of the Blackwater Valley conurbation,  east of Basingstoke.
The smaller town of Frimley, being so close to Camberley, is often regarded as part of the town, although the two are, for the most part, separated by the M3 motorway. Frimley has its own town centre, a major regional hospital (Frimley Park) and extensive suburban areas. In the 19th century, Yorktown and Camberley were in the ecclesiastical parish of Frimley.
The neighbouring town of Blackwater,  to the west is also considered by some to be a suburb of Camberley, although it is in the Hart District of Hampshire and has its own town council (together with Hawley). The same could be said for Sandhurst which is home of "The Meadows" retail park and the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, all of which are in the Bracknell Forest borough of Berkshire.

Economy

Camberley's town centre is host to The Mall shopping centre, built around the Main Square. This is a late 1980s development anchored by stores such as House of Fraser. The Main Square features a large clock in the centre of the complex opposite a Primark store. The High Street has a number of shops as well as bars and clubs, many of the latter being more recent additions. There are a number of secondary shopping streets including Park Street, Princess Way and parts of London Road, including the  "Atrium" development.
Major employers include Siemens, which moved its UK headquarters to the area in 2007, Burlington Group who moved into Watchmoor Park in 2009 and Sun Microsystems, until they were taken over by Oracle in 2010, whose UK headquarters was located just across the Hampshire border in Minley next to the M3 motorway at junction 4a.guardian.co.– Contact details for Krispy Kreme

Culture

The town has its own public library, cinema and theatre and is home to the Surrey Heath Borough Council offices. The Vue cinema opened in The Atrium development in late 2008 the year after an older cinema, owned by Robin's Cinemas, and situated on London Road some distance from the town centre, burned down in 2007 after having closed in 2003.
Camberley and the Royal Military Academy Sandhurst are featured in a Doctor Who comic story entitled "The Warkeeper's Crown".

Landmarks

A familiar landmark in Camberley is the concrete pipe white elephant which is on the A30 approaching The Meadows roundabout. This was created as advertising by a pipe company which rented the premises. When they closed down, the upkeep of the elephant was written into the tenancy contract, so subsequent businesses have continued to look after it.
A brick tower was built on top of The Knoll in the 1760s, by John Norris of Blackwater. It may have been used for communications but there is no firm evidence. The remains are now known as The Obelisk.

Transport

Camberley railway station is situated south of the town centre on the Ascot to Guildford line. It is connected to Guildford, Aldershot and Ascot by South West Trains with two trains per hour in either direction.
Due to Camberley's inconvenient situation between the South Western Main Line and the Waterloo to Reading Line, and capacity and stock constraints on the latter mainline, direct services to and from London Waterloo only run at peak hours, running via Ascot and Richmond. At all other times, passengers from Camberley must change at Ascot or Ash Vale for connections to London. Additionally, nearby Farnborough station provides trains to Waterloo, Basingstoke and Portsmouth.
Nearby Blackwater station (situated perpendicular to the A30 on the border of Hampshire, Surrey and Berkshire) on the North Downs Line is operated by First Great Western, with trains running to Reading, Guildford, Redhill and Gatwick Airport.
Several bus companies operate routes through Camberley including: First Berkshire & The Thames Valley to Bracknell; Arriva Guildford & West Surrey to Guildford via Woking; Stagecoach South to Aldershot, Basingstoke and Farnborough; and Dicksons Travel to Staines and Woking.
Camberley lies on the A30 and lies between Junction 3 and Junction 4 of the M3 motorway.
There are two small airports nearby: Farnborough Airfield at Farnborough and Blackbushe Airport near Yateley. Farnborough Airfield is well known for its International Air Show. Heathrow is  away.
The A30 leaving Camberley to the north for Bagshot has a large junction named the "Jolly Farmer Roundabout" named after the Public House that stood on it.  The pub was named after a local highwayman.

Education

There are a number of schools in Camberley. Collingwood College is famous for being one of the largest in Surrey with over 2,000 pupils. Kings International College (formerly France Hill School) is also situated in Camberley. Other schools include Lyndhurst School HeatherRidge Infants School (Heatherside)
The nearest universities are Royal Holloway, University of London which is situated  to the southeast and northwest respectively.

Sport

Camberley has an active sporting scene, mainly based around clubs and sports venues such as The Arena, a leisure centre and pool facility close to the town centre.
Camberley and Farnborough Hockey Club plays men's and women's field hockey at Kings International College and draw many players from the region. The Men's 1st XI have recently secured back to back promotions and currently play in the Hampshire/Surrey – Regional Division 2.south-league. The Club in total supports 5 men's teams, 2 women's teams, a mixed team and colts teams from Under 10's to Under 18's.
Camberley Town football club currently plays in the Premier division of the Combined Counties League. The home ground is at Krooner Park, Wilton Road. Camberley rugby football club plays in the London League division 3 South West. The home ground is at the Watchetts recreation ground, Park Road.camberleyrugby.uk/rugby/rugby1.shtml
Frimley Lawn Tennis Club offer social and competitive tennis.
Camberley Chess Club plays at the Camberley Baptist Church Hall, Frimley Road, Camberley, GU15 3EN. They were 2007–8 Berkshire League champions. They also compete in several divisions of the Surrey Border League and are current holders of the Bell Trophy.
Farnborough & Camberley Cycling Club was formed by an amalgamation of the renowned Camberley Wheelers cycling club and Farnborough Cycling Club in 1969. The Camberley Wheelers had a history that went back to the 1920s or 30s. A current (June 2011) member of the FCCC joined the Camberley Wheelers in 1935.

Demography and housing

The average level of accommodation in the region composed of detached houses was 28%, the average that was apartments was 22.6%.  The remaining households not accounted for above were temporary/caravans and shared households.
The proportion of households in the civil parish who owned their home outright compares to the regional average of 35.1%.  The proportion who owned their home with a loan compares to the regional average of 32.5%.  The remaining % is made up of rented dwellings (plus a negligible % of households living rent-free).

Religion

The 2011 census showed that 63.4% of Surrey Heath residents considered themselves Christian.2011 Census: KS209EW Religion, local authorities in England and Wales Camberley has churches of several Christian denominations, mostly Anglican, many of which are members of a Churches Together group. There is also a Jehovah's Witness Kingdom Hall within the town.
A local Bengali Welfare Association has maintained an Islamic centre in Camberley since 1996. Plans to convert the former school building into a more traditional Mosque were subject to intense debate, resulting in the withdrawal of planning permission in early 2010.

Notable people






