[[Induction motor]]

CATEGORIES: Energy conversion, Electric motors, Italian inventions, AC motors

An induction or asynchronous motor is an AC electric motor in which the electric current in the rotor needed to produce torque is induced by electromagnetic induction from the magnetic field of the stator winding. An induction motor therefore does not require mechanical commutation, separate-excitation or self-excitation for all or part of the energy transferred from stator to rotor, as in universal, DC and large synchronous motors.  An induction motor's rotor can be either wound type or squirrel-cage type.
Three-phase squirrel-cage induction motors are widely used in industrial drives because they are rugged, reliable and economical. Single-phase induction motors are used extensively for smaller loads, such as household appliances like fans. Although traditionally used in fixed-speed service, induction motors are increasingly being used with variable-frequency drives (VFDs) in variable-speed service. VFDs offer especially important energy savings opportunities for existing and prospective induction motors in variable-torque centrifugal fan, pump and compressor load applications. Squirrel cage induction motors are very widely used in both fixed-speed and VFD applications.

History

In 1824, the French physicist François Arago formulated the existence of rotating magnetic fields, termed Arago's rotations, which, by manually turning switches on and off, Walter Baily demonstrated in 1879 as in effect the first primitive induction motor. Induction motor improvements flowing from these inventions and innovations were such that a 100 horsepower induction motor currently has the same mounting dimensions as a 7.5 horsepower motor in 1897.

Principle of operation

In both induction and synchronous motors, the AC power supplied to the motor's stator creates a magnetic field that rotates in time with the AC oscillations.  Whereas a synchronous motor's rotor turns at the same rate as the stator field, an induction motor's rotor rotates at a slower speed than the stator field.  The induction motor stator's magnetic field is therefore changing or rotating relative to the rotor.  This induces an opposing current in the induction motor's rotor, in effect the motor's secondary winding, when the latter is short-circuited or closed through an external impedance.  The induction machine's essential character is that it is created solely by induction instead of being separately excited as in synchronous or DC machines or being self-magnetized as in permanent magnet motors.

Synchronous speed

Slip

where
  | last = Herman
  | first = Stephen L.
  | authorlink = 
  | coauthors = 
  | title = Alternating Current Fundamentals
| edition= 8th
  | publisher = Cengage Learning
  | year = 2011
  | location = US
  | pages = 529–536
  | url = 
  | doi = 
  | id = 
  | isbn = 1-111-03913-5}}</ref>  At full rated load, slip varies from more than 5% for small or special purpose motors to less than 1% for large motors.<ref name="Peltola (no year)"></ref>  These speed variations can cause load-sharing problems when differently sized motors are mechanically connected.<ref name="Peltola (no year)"/>  Various methods are available to reduce slip, VFDs often offering the best solution.<ref name="Peltola (no year)"/>

Torque

=Standard torque=

The typical speed-torque relationship of a standard NEMA Design B polyphase induction motor is as shown in the curve at right. Suitable for most low performance loads such as centrifugal pumps and fans, Design B motors are constrained by the following typical torque ranges:

=Starting=

There are five basic types of competing small induction motor: single-phase capacitor-start, capacitor-run, split-phase and shaded-pole types, and small polyphase induction motors.
A single-phase induction motor requires separate starting circuitry to provide a rotating field to the motor.  The normal running windings within such a single-phase motor can cause the rotor to turn in either direction, so the starting circuit determines the operating direction.
In certain smaller single-phase motors, starting is done by means of a shaded pole with a copper wire turn around part of the pole. The current induced in this turn lags behind the supply current, creating a delayed magnetic field around the shaded part of the pole face. This imparts sufficient rotational field energy to start the motor. These motors are typically used in applications such as desk fans and record players, as the required starting torque is low, and the low efficiency is tolerable relative to the reduced cost of the motor and starting method compared to other AC motor designs.
Larger single phase motors have a second stator winding fed with out-of-phase current; such currents may be created by feeding the winding through a capacitor or having it receive different values of inductance and resistance from the main winding. In capacitor-start designs, the second winding is disconnected once the motor is up to speed, usually either by a centrifugal switch acting on weights on the motor shaft or a thermistor which heats up and increases its resistance, reducing the current through the second winding to an insignificant level. The capacitor-run designs keep the second winding on when running, improving torque.
Self-starting polyphase induction motors produce torque even at standstill.  Available cage induction motor starting methods include direct-on-line starting, reduced-voltage reactor or auto-transformer starting, star-delta starting or, increasingly, new solid-state soft assemblies and, of course, VFDs.
Polyphase motors have rotor bars shaped to give different speed-torque characteristics. The current distribution within the rotor bars varies depending on the frequency of the induced current. At standstill, the rotor current is the same frequency as the stator current, and tends to travel at the outermost parts of the cage rotor bars (by skin effect). The different bar shapes can give usefully different speed-torque characteristics as well as some control over the inrush current at startup.
In wound rotor motors, rotor circuit connection through slip rings to external resistances allows change of speed-torque characteristics for acceleration control and speed control purposes.

=Speed control=

Before the development of semiconductor power electronics, it was difficult to vary the frequency, and cage induction motors were mainly used in fixed speed applications. Applications such as electric overhead cranes used DC drives or wound rotor motors (WRIM) with slip rings for rotor circuit connection to variable external resistance allowing considerable range of speed control. However, resistor losses associated with low speed operation of WRIMs is a major cost disadvantage, especially for constant loads.  Large slip ring motor drives, termed slip energy recovery systems, some still in use, recover energy from the rotor circuit, rectify it, and return it to the power system using a VFD. In many industrial variable-speed applications, DC and WRIM drives are being displaced by VFD-fed cage induction motors. The most common efficient way to control asynchronous motor speed of many loads is with VFDs.
Example applications include Variable refrigerant flow compressors in high-efficiency air conditioners.[ref]
[/ref]
Barriers to adoption of VFDs due to cost and reliability considerations have been reduced considerably over the past three decades such that it is estimated that drive technology is adopted in as many as 30-40% of all newly installed motors.

Construction

The stator of an induction motor consists of poles carrying supply current to induce a magnetic field that penetrates the rotor. To optimize the distribution of the magnetic field, the windings are distributed in slots around the stator, with the magnetic field having the same number of north and south poles. Induction motors are most commonly run on single-phase or three-phase power, but two-phase motors exist; in theory, induction motors can have any number of phases. Many single-phase motors having two windings can be viewed as two-phase motors, since a capacitor is used to generate a second power phase 90° from the single-phase supply and feeds it to the second motor winding. Single-phase motors require some mechanism to produce a rotating field on startup.  Cage induction motor rotor's conductor bars are typically skewed to reduce noise.

Rotation reversal

The method of changing the direction of rotation of an induction motor depends on whether it is a three-phase or single-phase machine.  In the case of three phase, reversal is carried out by swapping connection of any two phase conductors.   In the case of a single-phase motor it is usually achieved by changing the connection of a starting capacitor from one section of a motor winding to the other. In this latter case both motor windings are similar (e.g. in washing machines).

Power factor

The power factor of induction motors varies with load, typically from around 0.85 or 0.90 at full load to as low as 0.35 at no-load, due to stator and rotor leakage and magnetizing reactances. Power factor can be improved by connecting capacitors either on an individual motor basis or, by preference, on a common bus covering several motors.  For economic and other considerations power systems are rarely power factor corrected to unity power factor.
Power capacitor application with harmonic currents requires power system analysis to avoid harmonic resonance between capacitors and transformer and circuit reactances. 19  Common bus power factor correction is recommended to minimize resonant risk and to simplify power system analysis.

Efficiency

(See also Energy savings)
Full load motor efficiency varies from about 85 to 97%, related motor losses being broken down roughly as follows:
Various regulatory authorities in many countries have introduced and implemented legislation to encourage the manufacture and use of higher efficiency electric motors. There is existing and forthcoming legislation regarding the future mandatory use of premium-efficiency induction-type motors in defined equipment. ''For more information, see: Premium efficiency and Copper in energy efficient motors.

Steinmetz equivalent circuit

(See also Equivalent circuit, Blocked rotor test, Open circuit test)
Many useful motor relationships between time, current, voltage, speed, power factor and torque can be obtained from analysis of the Steinmetz equivalent circuit (also termed T-equivalent circuit or IEEE recommended equivalent circuit), a mathematical model used to describe how an induction motor's electrical input is transformed into useful mechanical energy output.  The equivalent circuit is a single-phase representation of a multiphase induction motor that is valid in steady-state balanced-load conditions.
The Steinmetz equivalent circuit is expressed simply in terms of the following components:
Paraphrasing from Alger in Knowlton, an induction motor is simply an electrical transformer the magnetic circuit of which is separated by an air gap between the stator winding and the moving rotor winding. The equivalent circuit can accordingly be shown either with equivalent circuit components of respective windings separated by an ideal transformer or with rotor components referred to the stator side as shown in the following circuit and associated equation and parameter definition tables.
The following rule-of-thumb approximations apply to the circuit:Alger (1949), p. 711
Motor input equivalent impedance
Stator current
Rotor current referred to the stator side in terms of stator current
From Steinmetz equivalent circuit, we have
That is, air gap power is equal to electromechanical power output plus rotor copper losses
Expressing electromechanical power output in terms of rotor speed
where
For low values of slip:
For high values of slip
For maximum or breakdown torque, which is independent of rotor resistance
Corresponding slip at maximum or breakdown torque is
In foot-pound units

Linear induction motor

Linear induction motors, that work on same general principles as rotary induction motors and are frequently three-phase, are designed to produce straight line motion. Uses include magnetic levitation, linear propulsion, linear actuators, and liquid metal pumping.



Notes



Classical sources




