[[Jay Leno]]

CATEGORIES: Jay Leno, 1950 births, Living people, 20th-century American male actors, 21st-century American male actors, Male actors from New York, American male comedians, American male film actors, American male television actors, American people of Italian descent, American people of Scottish descent, American stand-up comedians, American television talk show hosts, American male voice actors, Car collectors, Emerson College alumni, Emmy Award winners, Late night television talk show hosts, Motorcycle Hall of Fame inductees, People from Andover, Massachusetts, People from New Rochelle, New York, People of Campanian descent, SEMA members, Television Hall of Fame inductees

James Douglas Muir "Jay" Leno (

Early life

Leno was born in New Rochelle, New York, in 1950. Leno grew up in Andover, Massachusetts, and obtained a Bachelor's degree in speech therapy from Emerson College, where he started a comedy club in 1973. Leno's older brother, Patrick (May 12, 1940 - October 6, 2002), was a Vietnam War veteran and worked as an attorney.

Career

Leno made his first appearance on The Tonight Show on March 2, 1977, performing a comedy routine. Retrieved June 28, 2013. Retrieved June 28, 2013. During the 1970s, Leno appeared in minor roles in several television series and films, first in the 1976 episode "J.J. in Trouble" of Good Times and the same year in the pilot of Holmes & Yo-Yo. After an uncredited appearance in the 1977 film Fun with Dick and Jane, he played more prominent parts in 1978 in American Hot Wax and Silver Bears. Other films and television series from that period include Almost Heaven (1978), "Going Nowhere" (1979) from One Day at a Time, Americathon (1979), Polyester (1981), "The Wild One" (1981) from Alice, and both "Feminine Mistake" (1979) and "Do the Carmine" (1983) from Laverne & Shirley. Leno's only starring film role was the 1989 direct-to-video Collision Course, opposite Pat Morita. He also appeared numerous times on Late Night with David Letterman. On April 3, 2013, NBC announced that Jimmy Fallon would replace Leno as host of The Tonight Show at the conclusion of the 2014 Winter Olympics.

Film

The Tonight Show

Starting in 1987, Leno was a regular substitute host for Johnny Carson on The Tonight Show. In 1992, he replaced Carson as host amid controversy with David Letterman, who had been hosting Late Night with David Letterman since 1982 (aired after The Tonight Show), and whom many had expected to be Carson's successor. The story of this turbulent transition was later turned into a book and a movie. Leno continued to perform as a stand-up comedian throughout his tenure on The Tonight Show.
In 2004, Leno signed a contract extension with NBC which would keep him as host of The Tonight Show until 2009.
During the 2007–08 Writers Guild of America strike, Leno was accused of violating WGA guidelines by writing his own monologue for The Tonight Show. While NBC and Leno claim there were private meetings with the WGA where there was a secret agreement allowing this, the WGA denied such a meeting.
In 1998, Leno competed in a tag-team match at the WCW's Road Wild pay-per-view. Since 2001, he has voiced The Crimson Chin, a recurring superhero in the Nickelodeon animated series The Fairly OddParents.
Leno said in 2008, that he was saving all of his income from The Tonight Show and living solely off his income from stand-up comedy.
On April 23, 2009, Leno checked himself into a hospital with an undisclosed illness.

=Michael Jackson trial=

During the 2005 trial of Michael Jackson over allegations of child molestation, Leno was one of few celebrities who appeared as a defense witness. In his testimony regarding a call by the accuser, Leno testified that he never called the police, that no money was asked for, and there was no coaching – but that the calls seemed unusual and scripted.
As a result, Leno was initially not allowed to continue telling jokes about Jackson or the case, which had been a fixture of The Tonight Show's opening monologue in particular. But he and his show's writers used a legal loophole by having Leno briefly step aside while stand-in comedians took the stage and told jokes about the trial. Stand-ins included Roseanne Barr, Drew Carey, Brad Garrett, and Dennis Miller among others.

Succession by Conan O'Brien and The Jay Leno Show

Because Leno's show continued to lead all late-night programming in the Nielsen ratings, the pending expiration of Leno's contract led to speculation about whether he would become a late-night host for another network after his commitment to NBC expired. and Conan O'Brien took over on June 1, 2009.
On December 8, 2008, it was reported that Leno would remain on NBC and move to a new hour-long show at 10 p.m. Eastern Time (9 p.m. Central Time) five nights a week.
Jay Leno's new show, titled The Jay Leno Show, debuted on September 14, 2009. It was announced at the Television Critics Association summer press tour that it would feature one or two celebrities, the occasional musical guest, and keep the popular "Headlines" segments, which would air near the end of the show. First guests included Jerry Seinfeld, Oprah Winfrey (via satellite), and a short sit-down with Kanye West discussing his controversy at the 2009 MTV Video Music Awards, which had occurred the night before.Jay Leno Reveals What To Expect From His New Primetime Show

Timeslot conflict and return to The Tonight Show

In their new roles, neither O'Brien nor Leno succeeded in delivering the viewing audiences the network anticipated. On January 7, 2010, multiple media outlets reported that beginning March 1, 2010, Jay Leno would move from his 10pm weeknight time slot to 11:35pm, due to a combination of pressure from local affiliates whose newscasts were suffering, and both Leno's and O'Brien's poor ratings."Future For NBC's Tonight Show Up In The Air", Los Angeles Times, January 2010."Jay Leno Heading Back To Late Night, Conan O'Brien Weighing Options". Leno's show would be shortened from an hour to 30 minutes. All NBC late night programming would be preempted by the 2010 Winter Olympics between February 15 and 26. This would move The Tonight Show to 12:05am, a post-midnight timeslot for the first time in its history. O'Brien's contract stipulated that NBC could move the show back to 12:05 a.m. without penalty (a clause put in primarily to accommodate sports preemptions). NBC ON THE HOT SEAT: Will It Be Jay AND Conan In Late Night? What's The Reason For Leno's Anti-NBC Monologue Tonight?. Retrieved 2010-01-09.
On January 10, NBC confirmed that they would move Jay Leno out of primetime as of February 12 and intended to move him to late night as soon as possible."NBC confirms move of "Leno Show"""Update: NBC Plans Leno at 11:30, Conan at 12", The New York Times, January 7, 2010. TMZ reported that O'Brien was given no advance notice of this change, and that NBC offered him two choices: an hour-long 12:05am time slot, or the option to leave the network."NBC to Conan O'Brien – The Choice Is Yours", TMZ, January 8, 2010. On January 12, O'Brien issued a press release that stated he would not continue with Tonight if it moved to a 12:05am time slot,Conan Won't Do "The Tonight Show" Following Leno, MSNBC. saying, "I believe that delaying The Tonight Show into the next day to accommodate another comedy program will seriously damage what I consider to be the greatest franchise in the history of broadcasting. The Tonight Show at 12:05 simply isn't The Tonight Show."
On January 21, it was announced that NBC had struck a deal with O'Brien. It was decided that O'Brien would leave The Tonight Show. The deal was made that O'Brien would receive a $33 million payout and that his staff of almost 200 would receive $12 million in the departure. O'Brien's final episode aired on Friday, January 22.[ref]Robert Seidman
, NBC Announces That Jay Leno Will Return To Host "The Tonight Show" Beginning March 1, tvbythenumbers.[/ref]NBC Universal Confirms Conan O'Brien Exit Deal Signed from Bloomberg via Business Week Leno returned as host of The Tonight Show following the 2010 Winter Olympics on March 1, 2010.
On July 1, 2010, Variety reported that total viewership for Jay Leno's Tonight Show had dropped from 5 million to 4 million for the second quarter of 2010, compared to the same period in 2009. Although this represented the lowest second-quarter ratings for the show since 1992, Tonight was still the most-watched late night program, ahead of ABC's Nightline (3.7 million) and David Letterman's Late Show (3.3 million).

Announcement of successor

On April 3, 2013, NBC announced that Leno would leave The Tonight Show in Spring 2014, with Jimmy Fallon his designated successor.
Leno's final show as the host of the Tonight Show was on February 6, 2014 with his final guest Billy Crystal and musical guest Garth Brooks, along with a few surprise guests including Jack Black, Kim Kardashian, Jim Parsons, Sheryl Crow, Chris Paul, Carol Burnett, and Oprah Winfrey.

Public image

Criticism of Leno

Leno has faced heated criticism and some negative publicity for his perceived role in the 2010 Tonight Show timeslot conflict."Why Some Comics Aren't Laughing at Jay Leno". The Wall Street Journal Funny or Die.
Actor and comedian Patton Oswalt was among the celebrities who openly voiced disappointment with Leno, saying, "Comedians who don't like Jay Leno now, and I'm one of them, we're not like, 'Jay Leno sucks'; it's that we're so hurt and disappointed that one of the best comedians of our generation... willfully has shut the switch off.""Patton Oswalt: Jay Leno Is Like Nixon, I Don't Like Him". The Huffington Post. Rosie O'Donnell was among O'Brien's most vocal and vehement supporters,"Rosie O'Donnell, Jimmy Kimmel slam Jay Leno over Tonight Show battle". Daily News (New York). calling Leno a "bully" and his actions "classless and kind of career-defining"."Rosie O'Donnell Has More to Say About Jay Leno". New York
Bill Zehme, the co-author of Leno's autobiography Leading with My Chin, told the Los Angeles Times, "The thing Leno should do is walk, period. He's got everything to lose in terms of public popularity by going back. People will look at him differently. He'll be viewed as the bad guy.""Taking on America's 'nice guy. Los Angeles Times. p. 2.

Support for Leno

NBC Sports chairman and former Saturday Night Live producer Dick Ebersol spoke out against all who had mocked Leno, calling them "chicken-hearted and gutless"."Taking on America's 'nice guy. Los Angeles Times.
Jeff Gaspin also defended Leno, saying, "This has definitely crossed the line. Jay Leno is the consummate professional and one of the hardest-working people in television. It's a shame that he's being pulled into this."
Fellow comedians Paul Reiser, Jerry Seinfeld and Jim Norton (a frequent contributor to The Tonight Show) also voiced support for Leno."Paul Reiser: A Teachable Moment". The Huffington Post."Seinfeld on Jay-Conan Debacle: 'I Can't Blame NBC
Responding to the mounting criticism, Leno said that NBC had assured him that O'Brien was willing to accept the proposed arrangement and that they would not let either host out of his contract."Jay Leno Tries to Make Nice, While Conan Rallies the Troops". Entertainment Weekly. Leno also said that the situation was "all business", and that all of the decisions were made by NBC. He appeared on the January 28, 2009, episode of The Oprah Winfrey Show in an attempt to repair some of the damage done to his public image.
Upon Leno's induction into the Television Hall of Fame in March 2014, comedian Bill Maher compared Leno to the State of Israel: "He's not perfect, but he's held to a standard that no one else in the world is expected to live up to other than him."Lowry, Brian (March 11, 2014). "Murdoch, Kelley, Louis-Dreyfus, Stoddard among newest honorees at Beverly Hills ceremony". Variety. Retrieved March 13, 2014.

Personal life

Leno has been married since 1980 to Mavis Leno; they have no children, by mutual agreement.
He is known for his prominent jaw, which has been described as mandibular prognathism. In the book Leading with My Chin he stated that he is aware of surgery that could reset his mandible, but does not wish to endure a prolonged healing period with his jaws wired shut.
Leno is dyslexic. "Pushed From Late Night, Leno Is Set for Prime Time" The New York Times, September 12, 2009. He claims to only need four to five hours of sleep each night.com Leno does not drink or smoke, nor does he gamble. He spends most of his free time visiting car collections or working in his private garage.
Leno said that he does not spend a penny of his money that he earns from The Tonight Show. Instead, he lives off his money from his stand-up routines.condenast.com/49910/jayleno/jay-leno-persistance-pays-off/ 
Leno reportedly earned $32 million in 2005.

Charity

In 2001, along with his wife, he donated $100,000 to the Feminist Majority's campaign to stop gender apartheid in Afghanistan, to educate the public regarding the plight of women in Afghanistan under Taliban rule. Mavis Leno is on the board of the Feminist Majority.
In 2009, he donated $100,000 to a scholarship fund at Salem State College (now Salem State University) in honor of Lennie Sogoloff, who gave Leno his start at his jazz club, Lennie's-on-the-Turnpike.
In August 2012, Leno auctioned his Fiat 500 which was sold for $385,000 with all the proceeds going to a charity that helps wounded war veterans recover by providing them temporary housing.

Love Ride

Since 1985

Vehicle collection

Leno owns approximately 886 vehicles (769 automobiles and 117 motorcycles).com He also has a website called "Jay Leno's Garage," which contains video clips and photos of his automobiles in detail, as well as other vehicles of interest to him.  Among his collection are two Doble steam cars, a sedan and a roadster that were owned by Howard Hughes.
He has a regular column in Popular Mechanics which showcases his car collection and gives advice about various automotive topics, including restoration and unique models, such as his jet-powered motorcycle and solar-powered hybrid. Leno also writes occasional "Motormouth" articles for The Sunday Times, reviewing high-end sports cars and giving his humorous take on automotive matters.
Leno opened his garage to Team Bondi, the company that developed the critically acclaimed video-game L.A. Noire, which is set in Los Angeles in the late 1940s. Leno's collection contained almost 100 cars from this period, and allowed the team to recreate their images as accurately as possible.






