[[Jell-O]]

CATEGORIES: 1845 introductions, American cuisine, Animal products, Brand name desserts, Canadian cuisine, Household brands, Kraft Foods brands, Symbols of Utah, Utah cuisine

Jell-O is a brand name belonging to Illinois-based Kraft Foods for varieties of gelatin desserts, including fruit gels, puddings and no-bake cream pies. The brand's popularity led to "jello" becoming a generic term for gelatin dessert across the U.S. and Canada.

Description

Jell-O is sold prepared (ready to eat) or in powder form, and is available in  colors and flavors. The powder contains powdered gelatin and flavorings, including sugar or artificial sweeteners. It is dissolved in hot water, then chilled and allowed to set.  Fruit, vegetables, and whipped cream can be added to make elaborate snacks that can be molded into shapes. Jell-O must be put in a refrigerator until served, and once set, it can be eaten.
There are non-gelatin pudding and pie filling products sold under the Jell-O brand. Pudding is cooked on the stove top with milk, then eaten warm or chilled until firmly set. Jell-O has an instant pudding product which is mixed with cold milk and chilled. To make pie fillings, the same products are prepared with less liquid.
Although the word Jell-O is a brand name, it is commonly used in the United States as a generic and household name for any gelatin products.

History

Early history

Gelatin, a protein produced from collagen extracted from the boiled bones, connective tissues, and other animal products, has been a component of food, particularly desserts, since the 1400s.
Gelatin was popularized in the west in the Victorian era with spectacular and complex "jelly moulds". Gelatin was sold in sheets and had to be purified, which was time-consuming.  Gelatin desserts were the province of Royalty and the relatively well-to-do. In 1845, a patent for powdered gelatin was obtained by industrialist Peter Cooper, who built the first American steam-powered locomotive, the Tom Thumb.
In 1897, in LeRoy, New York, carpenter and cough syrup manufacturer, Pearle Bixby Wait trademarked a gelatin dessert, called Jell-O. He and his wife May added strawberry, raspberry, orange and lemon flavoring to granulated gelatin and sugar.

Going mainstream

Various elements were key to Jell-O becoming a mainstream product: new technologies, such as refrigeration, powdered gelatin and machine packaging, home economics classes, and the company's marketing.
Initially Woodward struggled to sell the powdered product. Beginning in 1902, to raise awareness, Woodward's Genesee Pure Food Company placed advertisements in the Ladies' Home Journal proclaiming Jell-O to be "America's Most Famous Dessert." Jell-O was a minor success until 1904, when Genesee Pure Food Company sent armies of salesmen into the field to distribute free Jell-O cookbooks, a pioneering marketing tactic. Celebrity testimonials and recipes appeared in advertisements featuring actress Ethel Barrymore and opera singer Ernestine Schumann-Heink. Some Jell-O illustrated advertisements were painted by Maxfield Parrish.  
In 1923, the newly rechristened Jell-O Company launched D-Zerta, an artificially sweetened version of Jell-O. Two years later, Postum and Genesee merged, and in 1927 Postum acquired Clarence Birdseye's frozen foods company to form the General Foods Corporation. 
By 1930, there appeared a vogue in American cuisine for congealed salads, and the company introduced lime-flavored Jell-O to complement the  add-ins that cooks across the country were combining in these aspics and salads. Popular Jell-O recipes often included ingredients like cabbage, celery, green peppers, and even cooked pasta. 
By the 1950s, salads would become so popular that Jell-O responded with savory and vegetable flavors such as celery, Italian, mixed vegetable and seasoned tomato. These savory flavors have since been discontinued.
In 1934, sponsorship from Jell-O made comedian Jack Benny the dessert's spokesperson. At this time Post introduced a jingle (created by the agency Young & RubicamBusiness – Jell-O pulls plug on longtime ad firm 09/10/00) that would be familiar over several decades, in which the spelling "J-E-L-L-O" was (or could be) sung over a rising five-note musical theme.
In 1936, chocolate returned to the Jell-O lineup, as an instant pudding made with milk. It proved enormously popular and over time other pudding flavors were added such as vanilla, tapioca, coconut, pistachio, butterscotch, egg custard, flan and rice pudding.

Baby boom

The baby boom saw a significant increase in sales for Jell-O. Young mothers  didn't have the supporting community structures of earlier generations, so marketers were quick to promote easy-to-prepare prepackaged foods. By this time, creating a Jell-O dessert required simply boiling water, Jell-O and Tupperware molds.
New flavors were continually added and unsuccessful flavors were removed: in the 1950s and 1960s, apple, black cherry, black raspberry, grape, lemon-lime, mixed fruit, orange-banana, pineapple-grapefruit, blackberry, strawberry-banana, tropical fruit and more intense "wild" versions of the venerable strawberry, raspberry and cherry. In 1966, the Jell-O "No-Bake" dessert line was launched, which allowed a cheesecake to be made in 15 minutes. In 1971 packaged prepared pudding called Jell-O Pudding Treats were introduced.  During this period, 1-2-3 Jell-O, a gelatin dessert that separated into three layers as it cooled, was unveiled. Until 1987, 1-2-3 Jell-O was readily found in grocery stores throughout most of the United States, but the dessert is now rare. Jell-O Whip 'n Chill, a mousse-style dessert, was introduced and widely promoted; it remains available in limited areas today.

Sales decline and turnaround

In 1964, the slogan "There's always room for Jell-O" was introduced, promoting the product as a "light dessert" that could easily be consumed even after a heavy meal.
Throughout the 1960s through the 1980s, Jell-O's sales steadily decreased. Many Jell-O dishes, such as desserts and Jell-O salads, became special occasion foods rather than everyday items. Marketers blamed this decline on decreasing family sizes, a "fast-paced" lifestyle and women's increasing employment. By 1986, a market study concluded that mothers with young children rarely purchased Jell-O.
To turn things around, Jell-O hired Dana Gioia to stop the decline. The marketing team revisited the Jell-O recipes published in past cookbooks and rediscovered Jigglers, although the original recipe did not use that name. Jigglers are Jell-O snacks molded into fun shapes and eaten as finger food. Jell-O launched a massive marketing campaign, notably featuring Bill Cosby as spokesman. The campaign was a huge success, causing a significant gain.
Cosby became the company's pudding spokesperson in 1974, and continued as the voice of Jell-O for almost thirty years. Over his tenure as the mouthpiece for the company, he would help introduce new products such as frozen Jell-O Pops (in gelatin and pudding varieties); the new Sugar-Free Jell-O, which replaced D-Zerta in 1984 and was sweetened with NutraSweet; Jell-O Jigglers concentrated gummi snacks; and Sparkling Jell-O, a carbonated version of the dessert touted as the "Champagne of Jell-O." In 2010, Cosby returned as Jell-O spokesperson in an on-line web series called "OBKB."
In the 1980s, a Jell-O advertising campaign slogan reminded consumers, "Don't forget--you have to remember to make it." 
In 1990, General Foods merged into Kraft Foods by parent company Philip Morris (now the Altria Group). New flavors were continually introduced: watermelon, blueberry, cranberry, margarita and piña colada among others.  In 2001, Jell-O was declared the "Official State Snack" of Utah, with Governor Michael O. Leavitt declaring an annual "Jell-O Week.""Utah loves Jell-O – official," BBC News, Feb. 6, 2001 During the 2002 Winter Olympics in Salt Lake City, the souvenir pins included one depicting green Jell-O."There's green Jell-O on your lapel... Abundance of food pins are unique to Salt Lake Olympics" Deseret News, Feb 6, 2002
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, Jell-O's family-friendly reputation was slightly tarnished by Jell-O shots and Jell-O wrestling.
, there are more than 158 products sold under the Jell-O brand name with 300 million boxes of Jell-O gelatin sold in the United States each year.
Jell-O is  used as a substantial ingredient in a well-known dessert, a "Jell-O mold" the preparation of which requires a mold designed to hold gelatin, and the depositing of small quantities of chopped fruit, nuts, and other ingredients before it hardens to its typical form.  Fresh pineapple, papaya, kiwi, and ginger root cannot be used because they contain enzymes that prevent gelatin from "setting."

Jell-O shots

An alternative recipe calls for the addition of an alcoholic beverage to the mix, contributing approximately one third to one half of the liquid added after the gelatin has  dissolved in the boil. A serving of the resulting mixture is called a "Jell-O shot" at parties. The quantity and timing of the addition of the alcohol are vital aspects; it is not possible to make Jell-O shots with only alcohol:
Vodka or rum are used in Jell-O shots, but the shots can be made with almost any alcohol. It is important to adjust the proportions of alcohol and cold water to ensure that the mixture set when experimenting with different types of alcohol. The Jell-O shots can be served in shot glasses or small paper cups; using the paper cups makes it easier for the people to eat it, but shot glasses are more attractive. 
The alcohol in Jell-O shots is contained within the Jell-O, so the body absorbs it slower, causing people to underestimate how much alcohol they have consumed. Drinkers must monitor their intake because of this.com
The Jell-O shot was claimed to be invented by American singer-songwriter Tom Lehrer in the 1950s to circumvent restrictions on alcoholic beverages at the army base where he was stationed. April 19, 2000.

Manufacturing and tourism


At the museum, visitors can learn about the history of the dessert from its inception. Visitors starting on East Main Street, follow Jell-O Brick Road, whose stones are inscribed with the names of former factory employees. The museum offers looks at starting materials for Jell-O, such as sturgeon bladder and calves' hooves, and various molds.
The Jell-O plant in Mason City, Iowa, produces America's supply of ready to eat Jell-O gelatin dessert and pudding cups.

Advertising

Jack Benny's top-rated radio show did not break for commercials. Instead, announcer, Don Wilson incorporated speeches about Jell-O into the program at appropriate places, to Jack's feigned comic annoyance.  Lucille Ball's My Favorite Husband, the radio predecessor to TV's I Love Lucy, was another popular program sponsored by Jell-O for much of its 124-episode run.
Comedian Bill Cosby is associated with Jell-O and, more famously, Jell-O pudding and he appeared in many commercials promoting both. Shows like MAD TV, The Simpsons  and Saturday Night Live parody Cosby, using Jell-O references like "pudding pop".  In the 1960s, the cast of the sitcom Hogan's Heroes did a commercial with Carol Channing featuring Colonel Hogan, his men, Kommandant Klink and Sergeant Shultz having Jell-O and Dream Whip for dessert. Also, in the first few seasons of the first of Lucille Ball's two 1960s television series, The Lucy Show, cast members including Vivian Vance often did commercials for Jell-O.
In 1995, Jell-O carried the tagline "It's alive!" and had the phrase "J-E-L-L-OOOOOOO!".

In culture

In 1992, Ivette Bassa won the second ever Ig Nobel Prize in chemistry for inventing blue Jell-O.

Mormonism

Jell-O is especially popular among members of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, often referred to as "Mormons". The Mormon Corridor region, which has the highest Mormon populations, was nicknamed the "Jell-O Belt", Jell-O is often served with homemade cookies or cakes and water at LDS Church socials.  
The stereotype of Mormons loving Jell-O is  a recent one. Media reports in 1969 and 1988 on foods popular among Mormons or in Utah make no mention of Jell-O, and a 1988 article mentions Jell-O as a Lutheran tradition. The Cosby advertising campaign and the promotion of Jigglers was more popular in Utah than in other areas, in large part due to higher birth rates among Mormon populations. The stereotype was solidified in 1997 when Kraft foods released sales figures, revealing Salt Lake City to have the highest per-capita Jell-O consumption.
The Jell-O stereotype developed when the LDS church, led by Gordon B. Hinckley, more actively engaged with wider society, such as by giving interviews with the press. As many non-Mormons believed their religious practices strange, they similarly lumped the love of Jell-O as part of the odd aspects of being Mormon. Many speculative explanations of this stereotype attribute it to Mormons' refusal of alcohol and tobacco. Mormons embraced the stereotype of Jell-O consumption to assert their religious and cultural identity.

Current flavors

The following are the flavors of Jell-O products that are currently being produced:List of Current Jell-O Flavors

Gelatin

Pudding

Also available in a sugar free/low calorie product.

Available seasonally.

Only available as a prepared product.

Discontinued flavors



Gallery

File:Original Jell-O Factory Le Roy NY Aug 10.jpg|Original Jell-O Factory, Le Roy NY, August 2010
File:Original Jell-O Factory Historic Marker Le Roy NY Aug 10.JPG|Original Jell-O Factory Historic Marker, Le Roy NY, August 2010






