[[Quentin Blake]]

CATEGORIES: 1932 births, Living people, Children's book illustrators, English illustrators, English cartoonists, English children's writers, Hans Christian Andersen Award for Illustration winners, Kate Greenaway Medal winners, Punch (magazine) cartoonists, Willy Wonka, Writers who illustrated their own writing, Academics of the Royal College of Art, Alumni of Downing College, Cambridge, Alumni of Chelsea College of Art & Design, Alumni of the Royal College of Art, Alumni of the University of the Arts, Fellows of Chartered Society of Designers, Chevaliers of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres, Commanders of the Order of the British Empire, Knights Bachelor, Stamp designers, People from Sidcup, People educated at Chislehurst and Sidcup Grammar School, British Children's Laureate, 20th-century English writers, 21st-century English writers

Sir Quentin Saxby Blake, CBE, FCSD, RDI (born 16 December 1932) is an English cartoonist, illustrator and children's writer. He may be known best for illustrating books written by Roald Dahl. For his lasting contribution as a children's illustrator he won the biennial, international Hans Christian Andersen Award in 2002, the highest recognition available to creators of children's books. From 1999 to 2001 he was the inaugural British Children's Laureate.

Education

Blake was born in 1932 in Sidcup, Kent, and was evacuated to the West Country during the war. He went to Chislehurst and Sidcup Grammar School, where his English teacher, J H Walsh, influenced his ambition to become involved in literature. His first published drawing was for the satirical magazine Punch, at the age of 16. He read English Literature at Downing College, Cambridge from 1953 to 1956, received his postgraduate teaching diploma from the University of London, and later studied at the Chelsea School of Art. He gained another teaching diploma at the Institute of Education before working at the Royal College of Art for over twenty years; he was head of the Illustration department from 1978 to 1986.

Career

Blake illustrated The Wonderful Button by Evan Hunter, published by Abelard-Schuman in 1961.[ref]
"The wonderful button" (first edition). Library of Congress Catalog Record. Retrieved 2012-08-27.[/ref]
Blake gained a reputation as a reliable and humorous illustrator of more than 300 children's books, including some written by Joan Aiken, Elizabeth Bowen, Roald Dahl, Nils-Olof Franzén, William Steig, and Dr. Seuss —the first Seuss book that "Seuss" did not illustrate himself, Great Day for Up! (1974). 
As of 2006, Blake is the author or illustrator of 323 books of which he wrote 35 himself and Dahl wrote 18. He recently illustrated David Walliams's first and second books, The Boy in the Dress and Mr Stink. He has also done fine illustrations for several Folio Society Limited Editions, eg Don Quixote, Candide and in 2013, 50 Fables of LaFontaine.

Other activities

In the 1970s Blake was an occasional presenter of the BBC children's story-telling programme Jackanory, when he would illustrate the stories on a canvas as he was telling them.
In 1993 he designed the five British Christmas issue postage stamps featuring episodes from A Christmas Carol by Charles Dickens
Quentin Blake is patron of the Blake Society, Downing College's arts and humanities society. He is also a patron of "The Big Draw"The Campaign for Drawing. thebigdraw.uk. which aims to get people drawing throughout the United Kingdom, and of The Nightingale Project, These projects are detailed in Blake's 2012 book Quentin Blake: Beyond the Page, which describes how, in his seventies, his work has increasingly appeared outside the pages of books, in public places such as hospitals, theatre foyers, galleries and museums.
In 2007 he designed a huge mural on fabric, suspended over and thus disguising a ramshackle building immediately opposite an entrance to St Pancras railway station. The rendering of an "imaginary welcoming committee" greets passengers arriving on the Eurostar high-speed railway."Cover-up! Quentin Blake drafted in to hide 'unsightly' buildings". Richard Osley. The Independent. 21 October 2007.
Blake is also the designer of 'Ben', the 'logo' of the shop chain, Ben's Cookies.
Quentin Blake is a supporter and Ambassador for the indigenous rights NGO, Survival International. In 2009, he said, "For me, Survival is important for two reasons; one is that I think it's right that we should give help and support to people who are threatened by the rapacious industrial society we have created; and the other that, more generally, it gives an important signal about how we all ought to be looking after the world. Its message is the most fundamental of any charity I'm connected with.""2010 Annual Report". Survival International.
Selected works==  
These 35 books were both written and illustrated by Blake."Bibliography: A complete searchable bibliography of books illustrated or authored and illustrated by Quentin Blake". Quentin Blake : Books : Bibliography (quentinblake. Archived 2012-01-16 (without search function). Retrieved 2013-09-28."Books by Quentin Blake" (incomplete; no list). Quentin Blake.

As illustrator

Blake has illustrated a score of books by Roald Dahl.
He also illustrated the British edition of Agaton Sax, a Swedish-language series of comedy detective novels by Nils-Olof Franzén (originally illustrated by Åke Lewerth, 1955 to 1978).

Honours and awards

Blake was the inaugural British Children's Laureate (1999–2001) and he received the biennial Hans Christian Andersen Award from the International Board on Books for Young People for his career contribution to children's literature in 2002. He was appointed Commander of the Order of the British Empire (CBE) in the 2005 New Year Honours for his services to children's literature. In France he was made a Knight of the Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in 2002 and elevated to Officer in 2007.
For Mister Magnolia, which he also wrote, Blake won the 1980 Kate Greenaway Medal from the Library Association, recognising the year's best children's book illustration by a British subject. For the 50th anniversary of the Medal (1955–2005), a panel of experts named it one of the top ten winning works, which composed the ballot for a public election of the nation's favourite. He was also a highly commended Greenaway runner-up for Zagazoo (1998), which he wrote, and for Sad Book (2004) by Michael Rosen.
He won the Kurt Maschler Award, or the Emil, for All Join In (Jonathan Cape, 1990), which he wrote and illustrated. The award from Maschler Publications and Booktrust annually recognised one British "work of imagination for children, in which text and illustration are integrated so that each enhances and balances the other."
Blake was awarded the Prince Philip Designers' Prize in 2011.
He received the Eleanor Farjeon Award in November 2012. The an annual award administered by Children's Book Circle recognises outstanding commitment and contribution to the world of British children's books."Blake wins Eleanor Farjeon Award". Charlotte Williams. The Bookseller (thebookseller. 16 November 2012. Retrieved 2013-01-01.
Blake was knighted in the 2013 New Year Honours for his services to illustration.



Notes






