[[Mark Dayton]]

CATEGORIES: 1947 births, American businesspeople, American Presbyterians, Democratic Party state governors of the United States, Democratic Party United States Senators, Governors of Minnesota, Living people, Minnesota Democrats, People from Minneapolis, Minnesota, Rockefeller family, Dudley–Winthrop family, State Auditors of Minnesota, State cabinet secretaries of Minnesota, United States Senators from Minnesota, Yale University alumni

Mark Brandt Dayton (born January 26, 1947) is an American politician and the current and 40th Governor of Minnesota, serving since 2011. He was previously a United States Senator for Minnesota from 2001 to 2007, and the Minnesota State Auditor from 1991 to 1995. He is a member of the Minnesota Democratic–Farmer–Labor Party (DFL), which affiliates with the national Democratic Party.
A native of Minnesota, Dayton is the great-grandson of businessman George Dayton, the founder of  Dayton's, a department store that later became the Target Corporation. He embarked on a career in teaching and social work in New York City and Boston after graduating from Yale University in 1969. During the 1970s, he served as a legislative aide to U.S. Senator Walter Mondale and Minnesota Governor Rudy Perpich. In 1978, Dayton was appointed the Minnesota Economic Development Commissioner and married Alida Rockefeller Messinger, a member of the Rockefeller family.
Dayton gained national attention in 1982 during his unsuccessful U.S. Senate campaign against Republican Party incumbent David Durenberger. He defeated former U.S. Senator Eugene McCarthy in the Democratic primary, and the general election became the one of the most expensive in state history. Dayton campaigned as a populist in opposition to Reaganomics and famously promised "to close tax loopholes for the rich and the corporations—and if you think that includes the Daytons, you're right." After his defeat, Dayton returned to the Perpich administration until his election as Minnesota State Auditor in 1990.
In 1998, Dayton ran an unsuccessful campaign for Governor, losing the Democratic nomination to Hubert Humphrey III. In 2000, he was elected to the U.S. Senate after defeating Republican incumbent Rod Grams. As Senator, Dayton voted against the authorization for war in Iraq, and became the first Senator to introduce legislation creating a cabinet-level United States Department of Peace. In 2006, he chose not to seek reelection, citing his disillusionment with Washington D.C. and fundraising.
In 2010, Dayton defeated Republican Tom Emmer to become Governor of Minnesota despite national success for the Republican Party, including in the Minnesota legislature. His major legislative initiatives as Governor include the construction of Vikings Stadium for the Minnesota Vikings of the  National Football League (NFL) in Minneapolis, and the legalization of same-sex marriage.csmonitor.com/USA/Justice/2013/0513/Minnesota-governor-expected-to-sign-same-sex-marriage-bill-video

Background and education

Mark Brandt Dayton was born in Minneapolis, Minnesota. He is the eldest of four children of Bruce Bliss Dayton and Gwendolen May Brandt.startribune.html Through his father, he is a great-grandson of businessman George Dayton, the founder of the Dayton's department store chain, which later became the Target Corporation. Dayton grew up in Long Lake, Minnesota and graduated from the The Blake School in Minneapolis, where he was an All-State ice-hockey goaltender as a senior.startribune.html?page=2&c=y
Dayton attended Yale University, where he played varsity hockey until an accident on the ice slit his throat. During his tenure at Yale, he joined the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, alongside President George W. Bush, and received his B.A. in psychology,  cum laude, in 1969. After college, Dayton worked as teacher in the Lower East Side of New York City from 1969 to 1971, and then as the chief financial officer of a social service agency in Boston, Massachusetts from 1971 to 1975.

Early political career

Dayton first became politically active in the 1960s. He protested the Vietnam War in April 1970 at one of Minnesota's major antiwar protests against Honeywell, where he was maced by police.startribune.html?page=3&c=y Dayton's father served on the Honeywell board of directors and the two had a strained relationship after the incident.
From 1975 to 1976 he was a legislative aide to Senator Walter Mondale, prior to Mondale's election to Vice President of the United States. From 1977 to 1978, Dayton served as an aide to Minnesota Governor Rudy Perpich.
In 1978, he was appointed by Rudy Perpich to head the Department of Economic Development and then the Department of Energy and Economic Development.startribune.html?page=4&c=y

Minnesota State Auditor

Dayton was elected as Minnesota State Auditor in 1990 and served to 1995. After one term, Dayton sought the Democratic nomination for Governor in 1998, but was defeated by Skip Humphrey.

U.S. Senate

Elections

Dayton first ran for the United States Senate in 1982, but lost to Republican incumbent David Durenberger. He was elected to the Senate in 2000, defeating Republican incumbent Rod Grams. Dayton self-financed his 2000 campaign with $12 million.

Tenure

While in the Senate, Dayton donated his salary to fund bus trips for seniors to buy cheaper prescription drugs in Canada.startribune.html?page=5&c=y He generally voted with his fellow Democrats.
On February 9, 2005, he announced that he would not run for reelection, stating, "Everything I've worked for, and everything I believe in, depends upon this Senate seat remaining in the Democratic caucus in 2007. I do not believe that I am the best candidate to lead the DFL Party to victory next year." He also cited his dislike of fundraising and political campaigns. Dayton was succeeded in the Senate by Amy Klobuchar, another DFLer.
On September 22, 2005, the 44th anniversary of the day President John F. Kennedy signed the Peace Corps into law, Dayton became the first U.S. Senator to introduce legislation creating a cabinet-level Department of Peace. At the same time, similar legislation was introduced in the House by Congressman Dennis Kucinich.
In April 2006, Dayton was rated one of America's "Five Worst Senators"
In September 2006, Dayton requested a review of the Rogers, Minnesota tornadoAssociated Press, "Dayton Calls for Rogers tornado investigation", Star Tribune, September 19, 2006 to determine whether the National Weather Service had acted properly and the deaths of victims were unavoidable.gov, NWS Service Assessment of September 16, 2006 Rogers, MN Tornado. Retrieved 2010-06-20.

Committee assignments

Dayton v. Hanson

In the 2003 lawsuit Office of Senator Mark Dayton v. Brad Hanson questioned the possibility of the wrongful termination of Brad Hanson. Brad Hanson worked as State Office Manager for Dayton; and when Hanson took medical leave for a heart problem and Senator Dayton fired him shortly thereafter. Hanson sued under the Congressional Accountability Act of 1995, claiming that Dayton had discriminated against him because of a perceived disability, though Dayton argued that he was immunized from the suit by the "Speech or Debate Clause" of the United States Constitution.

Governor of Minnesota

Elections

On January 16, 2009, Dayton announced his candidacy for Governor of Minnesota.) Dayton was later endorsed by the Minnesota DFL to earn his party's nomination for governor.com, August 21, 2010.
In the general election on November 2, 2010, Dayton led his Republican opponent, Tom Emmer, at the close of balloting by just under 9,000 votes. The margin of victory was small enough to trigger an automatic recount under state law. Analysts generally thought it unlikely that Dayton's lead would be overturned.
Minnesota Independence Party candidate Tom Horner received 11.9% of the vote, by splitting the vote.

Tenure

Dayton took the oath of office to become Governor of Minnesota on January 3, 2011; former Vice President and Senator Walter Mondale served as Master of Ceremony at the inauguration. The first Democrat to serve as Governor in 20 years, Dayton succeeded Republican Governor Tim Pawlenty. On January 5, Governor Dayton signed two Executive Orders allowing the Minnesota Departments of Commerce and Health to apply for federal health-care grants, and provide $1.2 billion in federal funds toward an Early Option for a statewide Medicaid Opt-In program; these Executive Orders reversed the previous administration's ban on federal funding for the state's health-care system.
On July 1, 2011, the Minnesota government went into a shutdown as a result of an impasse during budget negotiations between Dayton and the Republican led legislature.
Dayton led an effort to have a new stadium constructed for the Minnesota Vikings. In May 2011, after efforts to have the stadium financed by Hennepin County failed, Ramsey County officials announced they had reached an agreement with the Minnesota Vikings to be the team's local partner for a new stadium, subject to approval by the Minnesota Legislature and to approval of a sales tax by the Ramsey County Board. In May 2012, the proposal to build the stadium on the Metrodome site was passed by the Minnesota Legislature and soon afterwards signed into law by Dayton;2012 Minn. Laws Ch. 299  On May 25, the proposal was officially finalized after receiving the approval of the Minneapolis City Council.Finally: Vikings stadium approved by SenateStadium gets final sign-off
In the legislative session that ended in May 2013, Dayton pushed for, and won, a $2.1 billion tax increase, mostly on the wealthy and cigarettes. He also signed a bill legalizing gay marriage in Minnesota, created free, statewide, all-day kindergarten and financed expansions of the Mayo Clinic, 3M and Mall of America. Dayton's Minnesota Poll approval rating climbs to 57% In the spring 2014 session, Dayton came under fire from supporters and foes alike for opposing the legalization of medical marijuana, which polls showed 65% of Minnesotans support.mpp.pdf One supporter, the mother of a child with severe epilepsy, alleged Dayton told her in a meeting that he would not legalize the drug but she could buy the drug illegally instead. Dayton denied saying that.twincities. Paul mother and her child whose severe seizures could be cured by medical marijuana.myfoxtwincities.com/story/25146583/medical-marijuana-new-tv-ad-turns-up-heat-on-dayton

Political positions

Dayton received 100% ratings from the AFL-CIO, National Association for the Advancement of Colored People, National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League, and the liberal group Americans for Democratic Action.

Healthcare

Dayton supports health-care coverage for all Americans, with increased state and federal spending on health care.
In July 2000, Dayton answered an election questionnaire saying he would expand Medicare prescription-drug coverage.

Medical Marijuana

Until 2013, Dayton opposed the legalization of medical cannabis and drug policy reform, adopting the same position as his Republican predecessor Tim Pawlenty. The Marijuana Policy Project called Dayton "no more favorable" to drug policy reform than the last Republican governor.citypages.php Dayton was reported to have become more favorable to the legalization of medical cannabis in 2014, but advocates for medical marijuana called the position "smoke and mirrors," and claimed he was deliberately stalling progress on a bill to legalize medical marijuana that would otherwise have enough votes to pass.myfoxtwincities. When Dayton posed a $2 million study on medical marijuana with the Mayo Clinic instead of signing a bill to legalize medical marijuana, advocates "bashed" Dayton for not allowing suffering patients to have access to the drug.startribune.html City Pages reported that the Governor could lose the vote of the many supporters of medical marijuana, 65% of Minnesotans, to the 3/5 of Republican candidates for governor in 2014 who "strike a more liberal tone on marijuana reform" than the Democratic incumbent.citypages.php

Same-sex marriage

With Senator Joe Lieberman and Representative Barney Frank, Dayton introduced legislation to the Governmental Affairs Committee to extend domestic partners of federal employees all benefits available and obligations imposed upon a spouse of an employee.
Dayton voted against a constitutional ban of same-sex marriage in June 2006, and supported civil marriage equality in his gubernatorial platform.
On May 14, 2013, Governor Dayton signed into law a bill passed by the Minnesota House and Senate to legalize same-sex marriage in the state.

Iraq war

In October 2002, Dayton voted against the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq. He followed up three years later by introducing Senate Bill 1756 to create a cabinet-level Department of Peace a week after Dennis Kucinich introduced a similar bill in the House. The bill never emerged from the  Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs.

Personal life

Dayton married Alida Ferry Rockefeller, youngest sister of U.S. Senator John Davison "Jay" Rockefeller IV, in 1978; they divorced in 1986. Dayton and his second wife, Janice Haarstick, divorced in 1999. Dayton has two sons, Eric and Andrew, from his first marriage. Despite his wealth, he lives modestly.
Dayton is a recovering alcoholic and has been treated for mild depression. Stassen-Berger and Baird Helgeson, 'People have a right to know,' Dayton says, Star Tribune, December 27, 2009 He revealed this information on his own initiative, saying he felt "people have the right to know." In December 2012, Dayton underwent vertebral fusion surgery at Mayo Clinic to treat his spinal stenosis.
On June 25, 2013, Dayton had to cancel an appearance due to a muscle tear.

Electoral history

Footnotes



Further reading



|-
|-
|-
|-
|-
|-
|-

|-


