[[Brecon]]

CATEGORIES: Towns in Powys, Welsh county towns, Market towns in Wales, Brecon, Towns with cathedrals in the United Kingdom, River Usk, Post towns in the LD postcode area

Brecon (.  Historically in Brecknockshire, it was the historic county's county town; although its role as such was eclipsed with the formation of Powys, it remains an important local centre. Brecon is the third largest town in Powys (after Newtown after Ystradgynlais). It is situated to the north of the Brecon Beacons mountain  range, within the Brecon Beacons National Park.

History

Early history

In Roman Britain Y Gaer, Brecon (Cicucium) was established as a Roman cavalry base for the conquest of Roman Wales and Brecon was first established as a military base.
Gerald of Wales came and made some speeches to recruit men to go the Crusades in 1188. J.L
After the Dark Ages the original Welsh name of the kingdom in whose territory Brecon stands was (in modern orthography) "Brycheiniog", which was later anglicised to Brecknockshire or Breconshire, and probably derives from the personal name of the Irish Brychan, the eponymous founder of the kingdom. The English name of Brecon town may also be derived from Brychan.
The Welsh name, Aberhonddu, means "mouth of the Honddu". It is derived from the River Honddu, which meets the River Usk near the town centre, a short distance away from the River Tarell which enters the Usk a few hundred metres upstream.
Before the building of the bridge over the Usk, Brecon was one of the few places where the river could be forded.

Norman control

The confluence of the Honddu and the River Usk made for a valuable defensive position for the Norman castle

Town walls

Brecon's town walls were originally constructed by Humphrey de Bohun after 1240.. Brecon's walls were largely destroyed during the English Civil War. Today only fragments survive, including some earthworks and parts of one of the gatehouses; these are protected as scheduled monuments.

Priory and cathedral

About 250 m north of the castle stands Brecon Cathedral, a fairly modest building compared to many cathedrals. The role of cathedral is a fairly recent one, and was bestowed upon the church in 1923 with the formation of the Diocese of Swansea and Brecon from what was previously the archdeaconry of Brecon — a part of the Diocese of St David's.

St. Mary's Church

Saint Mary's Church began as a chapel of ease to the priory but most of the building is dated to later medieval times.  The West Tower, some .

St. David's Church, Llanfaes

The Church of St. David, referred to locally as Llanfaes Church, was probably founded in the early sixteenth century. The first Parish Priest, Maurice Thomas, was installed there by John Blaxton, Archdeacon of Brecon in 1555. The name is derived from the Welsh - Llandewi yn y Maes - which translates as St. David's in the Field. It is probable that the site and the name of the present Church were chosen because of the close proximity of a fresh water well called Ffynnon Dewi (David's Well) which was situated approximately 150 metres south of the church. It is believed that St. David drank from this well during his pilgrimage around Wales and it is also believed that at that time, there was probably some form of religious activity on or near the site on which the church now stands. St.David's Church - Full history

Plough Lane Chapel, Lion Street

Plough Lane Chapel, also known as Plough United Reformed Church, is a Grade II* listed building. The present building dates back to 1841 and was re-modelled by Owen Morris Roberts and is considered to be one of the finest chapel interiors in Wales.

Present-day Brecon

Today Brecon is a thriving community and is popular as a holiday destination, being on the northern edge of the Brecon Beacons National Park, affording among the best views of the Brecon Beacons themselves, a range of hills, including Pen y Fan, the highest point in southern Britain at .
The latest Powys County Council (2011) estimate of the population of the town is 8,020.

Military town

The east end of town also has two military establishments:
Approximately .

Cattle market

The west end of Brecon has a small industrial area, and recent years have seen the cattle market moved from the centre of the town to this area, with markets held several times a week.

Education

Brecon has many primary schools, with a secondary school and further education college (Coleg Powys) on the northern edge of the town. Due to Brecon being within a rural area, bus trips of over an hour are not uncommon for pupils making their way to school. The town is also home to Christ College, the oldest school in Wales, a private boarding and day school with a strong academic, sporting and musical tradition.

Transport

Brecon is located near where the east-west A40 (Monmouth-Carmarthen-Fishguard) meets the north-south A470 (Cardiff-Merthyr Tydfil-Llandudno). The nearest airport is Cardiff Airport.

Monmouthshire and Brecon Canal

The Monmouthshire and Brecon Canal runs for  between Brecon and Pontnewydd, Cwmbran. It then continues to Newport, the towpath being the line of communication and the canal being disjointed by obstructions and road crossings. The canal was built between 1797 and 1812 to link Brecon with Newport and the Severn Estuary. The canal in Brecon was redeveloped in the 1990s and is now the site of two mooring basins and the Theatr Brycheiniog.

Usk bridge

The bridge carries the B4601 across the River Usk. A plaque on a house wall adjacent to the eastern end of the bridge records that the present bridge was built in 1563 to replace a medieval bridge destroyed by floods in 1535. It was repaired in 1772 and widened in 1794 by Thomas Edwards, the son of William Edwards of Eglwysilan. It had stone parapets until the 1970s when the present deck was superimposed on the old structure. The bridge was painted by J.M.W. Turner c.1769.

Former railways

The Neath and Brecon Railway reached Brecon in 1867, terminating at Free Street. By this point, Brecon already had two other railway stations:

Hereford, Hay and Brecon Railway

The Hereford, Hay and Brecon Railway was opened gradually towards Brecon.  The section of line between Hereford and Moorhampton opened for goods traffic on 24 October 1862, with the section to Eardisley following on 30 June 1863. Further extensions of the line reached Hay-on-Wye on 11 July 1864 and Three Cocks Junction on 1 September 1864. Passenger train service from the HH&BR's Moorfields station in Hereford to Eardisley commenced on 30 June 1863  
The Midland Railway Company (MR) took over the HH&BR from 1 October 1869, leasing the line by an Act of 30 July 1874 and absorbing the HH&BR in 1876.  The MR was absorbed into the London, Midland and Scottish Railway (LMSR) on 1 January 1923.
Passenger services to Merthyr ended in 1958, Neath in October 1962 and Newport in December 1962. In 1962 the important line to Hereford closed.  Therefore, Brecon lost all its train services before the The Reshaping of British Railways report (often referred to as the Beeching Axe) was implemented.

Town twinning

Points of interest

Notable people

Culture

Brecon hosted the National Eisteddfod in 1889.
August sees the annual Brecon Jazz Festival. Concerts are held in both open air and indoor venues, including the town's market hall and the 400-seat Theatr Brycheiniog, which opened in 1997.
October sees the annual 4-day weekend Brecon Baroque Music Festival, organised by leading violinist Rachel Podger.



Bibliography




