[[Javier Saviola]]

CATEGORIES: 1981 births, Living people, Naturalised citizens of Spain, Sportspeople from Buenos Aires, Argentine footballers, Association football forwards, Primera División Argentina players, River Plate footballers, La Liga footballers, FC Barcelona footballers, Sevilla FC footballers, Real Madrid C.F. players, Málaga CF footballers, Ligue 1 players, AS Monaco FC players, Primeira Liga players, S.L. Benfica footballers, Superleague Greece players, Olympiacos F.C. players, Argentina under-20 international footballers, Argentina international footballers, 2006 FIFA World Cup players, 2005 FIFA Confederations Cup players, 2004 Copa América players, Olympic footballers of Argentina, Footballers at the 2004 Summer Olympics, Olympic gold medalists for Argentina, Olympic medalists in football, Argentine expatriate footballers, Argentine expatriate sportspeople in Spain, Expatriate footballers in Spain, Expatriate footballers in France, Expatriate footballers in Monaco, Expatriate footballers in Portugal, Expatriate footballers in Greece, FIFA 100, South American Footballer of the Year winners

Javier Pedro Saviola Fernández (born 11 December 1981) is an Argentine professional footballer who plays for Olympiacos F.C. in the Superleague Greece, as a striker.
Known for his speed and his ability to score from almost any attacking position in the field, he represented both FC Barcelona and Real Madrid, and was named as the youngest player, on Pelé's FIFA 100 list of the 125 greatest living footballers. Due to his ancestry he also holds Spanish nationality since 2004, and he amassed La Liga totals of 196 games and 70 goals over the course of eight seasons.
An Argentine international for seven years, Saviola represented the country at the 2006 World Cup and the 2004 Copa América. He also won a gold medal at the 2004 Olympics.

Club career

River Plate

Nicknamed El Conejo (The Rabbit),El 'Mono' Burgos bautizó a Saviola como el 'Conejo' ('Mono' Burgos dubbed Saviola 'Conejo'); El Mundo Deportivo, 22 July 2001  Buenos Aires-born Saviola made his debut for Club Atlético River Plate at the age of 16, and went on to be a prolific goalscorer for the club.Interview with Javier Saviola; The Argentina Independent, 10 October 2008
He helped River to the 1999 Apertura and 2000 Clausura championships, and earned the 1999 South American Footballer of the Year award. Still only 18, he gained a reputation as a phenomenal prospect.

Barcelona

In 2001, aged 19, Saviola moved abroad to play for FC Barcelona in a £15 million transfer. Under coach Carles Rexach, he scored 17 goals in his first season, finishing joint-fourth top scorer in La Liga.
Saviola's second year at the club did not start well, as he only scored two goals in the first half of the season. When van Gaal was fired and Radomir Antić became the new Barcelona manager, he went on to net 11 goals in the latter half of the campaign; at the start of the following season Frank Rijkaard was appointed as new manager, and the player scored 14 times in the league alone, but was deemed surplus at the club as longtime offensive partner Patrick Kluivert.
Saviola was sent on loan in the summer of 2004, moving to AS Monaco FC in Ligue 1. As he did not fit into Rijkaard's plans he was again loaned out the following year, this time to Spanish club Sevilla FC, in order to replace Real Madrid-bound Júlio Baptista; with his new club he won his first title in Europe, conquering the UEFA Cup — he also scored nine times in the league, good enough for fifth.
Saviola returned to Barcelona for the 2006–07 season,Saviola seguirá en el Barça aunque Rijkaard no cuenta con él (Saviola to continue in Barça even though Rijkaard does not want him); El Mundo, 31 August 2006 Sublime Saviola sinks Alavés; UEFA.com, 17 January 2007

Real Madrid

On 10 July 2007 Real Madrid signed Saviola after his Barcelona contract expired, on a three-year deal.com, 18 June 2007 Although on a financially lucrative contract, he endured a difficult time at Real, being mainly restricted to cup matches and sporadic appearances (mainly as a substitute) in the league and the UEFA Champions League.
The arrival of Klaas-Jan Huntelaar limited Saviola's opportunities even more, and he finished his Real Madrid spell with five goals in 28 overall appearances.Saviola: "Voy a dar la vuelta a esta situación" (Saviola: "I am going to turn things around"); Marca, 7 April 2008 

Benfica

On 26 June 2009, S.L. Benfica and Real Madrid agreed on a €5 million deal that would see Saviola play in Portugal for the next three years, with an option for one more; a €30 million clause was added. He scored his first goal for the club on a penalty in a friendly match against FC Sion and, on 16 July, netted twice to send his team into the Guadiana Trophy finals.
On 22 October 2009 Saviola scored two goals for Benfica, guiding them to a 5–0 victory over Everton for the UEFA Europa League (he would also score in the club's 2–0 win in Liverpool in the second match),Europa League: Everton humbled, Fulham denied; ESPN Soccernet, 22 October 2009 adding another brace four days later as the Encarnados hammered C.D. Nacional 6–1 in the domestic league.Unstoppable Benfica crush Nacional; PortuGOAL, 26 October 2009
On 6 December Saviola scored through a chip shot against Académica de Coimbra, in a 4–0 home win.C. Porto at home;Saviola fires Benfica to victory in classico; PortuGOAL, 20 December 2009 during the victorious campaign, he formed a deadly offensive partnership with Paraguayan Óscar Cardozo, with the pair combining for more than 50 goals overall.
On 3 January 2010, after receiving the Portuguese Liga Player of the Month award, Saviola scored another winning goal against Nacional, again being the game's only scorer in an away defeat of Rio Ave FC, netting in the 46th minute. He netted his 19th goal overall in a 3–1 home triumph against F.C. Paços de Ferreira on 7 March,Liedson hits four for Sporting; Benfica go three points clear at table top; PortuGOAL, 7 March 2010 and the Encarnados were eventually crowned league champions after a five-year wait.

Málaga

In the last hours of the 2012–13 summer transfer window, Saviola agreed on a move to Málaga CF.
On 15 September 2012, Saviola scored once and provided one assist in a 3−1 home win against Levante UD. He continued with his streak the following game, Málaga's first-ever in the Champions League group stage, netting in a 3–0 home win over FC Zenit Saint Petersburg.com, 18 September 2012

Olympiacos

On 25 July 2013, Saviola signed a two-year contract with Greek champions Olympiacos FC.C. at home. On 10 December he netted a brace – and also missed a penalty – in a 3–1 success over R.S.C. Anderlecht also at the Karaiskakis Stadium for the group stage's last round, which helped the Piraeus outfit to the second position and the subsequent qualification, at the expense of former side Benfica.

International career

Saviola starred in the 2001 edition of the FIFA U-20 World Cup, held in Argentina. He was top scorer and was voted player of the tournament, as the national team won the competition; with 11 goals in seven games, he became the record goal-scorer in the tournament's history.
Two years later, Saviola played in the 2004 Olympic Games and won the gold medal. Under coach Marcelo Bielsa he was given few playing opportunities for the senior team but, after the former's resignation in 2004, new manager José Pekerman, who also worked with him at youth level, turned the tide in the player's favour.
Saviola was called up to represent Argentina at the 2006 World Cup – Luciano Figueroa and Luciano Galletti were also in contention for a place on the roster, but his excellent form for Sevilla secured his place in the squad. He scored against Côte d'Ivoire in the country's opening game, and made two assists in the 6–0 victory over Serbia and Montenegro also in the group phase.
Saviola retired from international football on 5 December 2009, although not yet 28. He stated that he felt his career as an Argentina player had come to an end, and that he wanted to concentrate on club football. 

International goals

Argentina's goal tally first

Honours

Club

International

Individual

Statistics

Club



International






