[[Grimsby]]

CATEGORIES: Grimsby, Populated places established in the 9th century, Towns in Lincolnshire, Ports and harbours of Lincolnshire, Ports and harbours of the Humber, Port cities and towns of the North Sea, Populated coastal places in Lincolnshire, Fishing communities in England, Post towns in the DN postcode area

Grimsby (or archaically Great Grimsby) is a large town and seaport situated on the South Bank of the Humber Estuary close to where it reaches the North Sea. The town was traditionally in the ceremonial county of Lincolnshire, until it was absorbed into the new county of Humberside in 1974. Since the abolition of Humberside in 1996 the town has served as the administrative centre of the North East Lincolnshire unitary authority.

Geography

The town was previously titled "Great Grimsby" to distinguish it from Little Grimsby, a village about 14 miles (22 km) to the south, near Louth. People from Grimsby are called Grimbarians.
The town has a population of 87,574. Eleven thousand of its residents live in the village of Scartho, which was absorbed into Grimsby before laws on the green belt were passed. All three areas come under the jurisdiction of the same unitary authority, North East Lincolnshire. It is close to the main terminus of the A180, which ends in Cleethorpes. 22 January is Great Grimsby Day.
The River Freshney rises to the west of the town, towards the A46. The A46 terminates near Grimsby in Cleethorpes at the junction with the A16 just north of Oasis Academy Wintringham.

History

There is some evidence of a small town of Roman workers sited in the area in the second century. Located on the Haven, which flowed into the Humber, Grimsby would have provided an ideal location for ships to shelter from approaching storms. It was also well situated to exploit the rich fishing grounds in the North Sea.

Vikings

According to legend, Grimsby was first founded by Grim, a Danish fisherman.
The settlement of Grimsby being established by Danes sometime in the 9th century AD. The name Grimsby originates from Grim's by, derived from the name Grim, the Danish Viking, and the suffix -by being the Old Norse word for village. The legendary founding of Grimsby is described in Lay of Havelock the Dane. This legend of the founding of Grimsby is completely unsupported.
In Norse mythology, 'Grim' (Mask) and 'Grimnir' (Masked One) are names adopted by the deity Odin (Anglo-Saxon 'Woden') when travelling incognito amongst mortals, as in the short poem known as 'Grimnir's Sayings' (Grimnismal) in the Poetic Edda. The Odinic name 'Grimr/Grim' occurs in many English placenames within the historical Danelaw and elsewhere in Britain, examples being the numerous earthworks named Grimsdyke., p. 88 Every other British placename containing the element Grim- is explained as a reference to Woden/Odin (e.g. Grimsbury, Grimspound, Grime's Graves, Grimsditch, Grimsworne), Grimsby is unlikely to have a different derivation.
Grimsby is listed in the Domesday Book as having a population of around 200, a priest, a mill and a ferry (probably to take people across the Humber, to Hull).
It also appears in the Orkneyinga Saga in this Dróttkvætt stanza by the Viking Rǫgnvald Kali:

During the 12th century, Grimsby developed into a fishing and trading port, at one point ranking twelfth in importance to the Crown in terms of tax revenue. The town was granted its charter by King John in 1201 The first mayor was installed in 1202.
Grimsby does not have town walls. It was too small and was protected by the marshy land around it. However, the town did have a ditch. In medieval times, Grimsby had two parish churches, St Mary's and St James'. Only St James', now known as Grimsby Minster, remains. St James' shares with Lincoln Cathedral the folk tale of an Imp who played tricks in the church and was turned into stone by an angel (see Lincoln Imp).
In the mid-14th century it benefited from the generosity of Edmund de Grimsby, a local man who became a senior Crown official and judge in Ireland.
In the 15th century, The Haven began to silt up, preventing ships in the Humber from docking. As a result, Grimsby entered a long period of decline which lasted until the late 18th century. In 1801, the population of Grimsby numbered 1,524 , around the same size that it had been in the Middle Ages.

Fishing and maritime industry

The Great Grimsby Haven Company was formed by Act of Parliament in May 1796 (the Grimsby Haven Act) for the purpose of "widening, deepening, enlarging, altering and improving the Haven of the Town and Port of Great Grimsby". In the early 19th century, the town grew rapidly. Grimsby's port boomed, importing iron, timber, wheat, hemp and flax. New docks were necessary to cope with the expansion. The Grimsby Docks Act of 1845 allowed the necessary building works. 
The Dock Tower was completed in 1851, followed by the Royal Dock in 1852. No.1 Fish Dock was completed in 1856, followed by No.2 Fish Dock in 1877. Alexandra Dock and Union Dock followed in 1879. During this period, the fishing fleet was greatly expanded. In a rare reversal of the usual trends, large numbers of fishermen from the South-East and Devon travelled North to join the Grimsby fleet. Over 40% of these newcomers came from Barking in East London, and other Thames-side towns.
The arrival of the railway in 1848 made it far easier to transport goods to and from the port. Coal mined in the South Yorkshire coal fields was brought by rail and exported through Grimsby. Rail links direct to London and the Billingsgate Fish Market allowed for fresh 'Grimsby Fish' to gain renown nationwide. The first true fish dock opened in Grimsby in 1856 and from then on, Grimsby was at the forefront of the development of the fishing industry. In 1857 there were 22 vessels in Grimsby. Six years later there were 112. The demand for fish in Grimsby grew to such an extent that, at its peak in the 1950s, Grimsby laid claim to the title of 'the largest fishing port in the world'."Grimsby", Enjoy England
Following the pressures placed on the industry during the Cod Wars, many Grimsby firms decided to cease trawling operations from the town. The sudden demise of the Grimsby fishing industry brought an end to a way of life and community that had lasted for generations. Huge numbers of men became redundant, highly skilled in jobs that no longer existed, and struggled to find work ashore. As seen in the case of Ross Group, some firms concentrated on other expanding industries within the town, such as food processing. Grimsby's trawling days are remembered through the artefacts and permanent exhibits at the town's Fishing Heritage Centre. The preserved 1950s trawler, Ross Tiger, is located here. Few fishing vessels still operate from Grimsby's once thriving docks, although the town maintains a substantial fish market, of European importance.
The population of Grimsby grew from 75,000 in 1901 to 92,000 by 1931. Given the effects of the Great Depression and the restructuring of the fishing industry, employment declined. The population was fairly stable for the rest of the 20th century.nelincs.uk/council/populationstatistics/census_population_figures_for_settlements_1931-2001.htm
Since the mid-1980s, the former Humber ferry, PS Lincoln Castle, was moored in Alexandra Dock. She was used during this time as a pub\restaurant. Although her design and status as Britain's last coal-fired paddle steamer was unique, the ship was no longer profitable and was broken up in 2010.

Second World War

The Royal Dock was used as the UK's largest base for minesweepers to patrol the North Sea. The Admiralty requisitioned numerous trawlers to serve as minesweepers for the Royal Naval Patrol Service. In many cases, their crew were ex-trawlermen as well as men from the Royal Naval Reserve and Royal Navy volunteers. Trawlers would use the winches and warps used in fishing operations to tow a paravane with a cutting jaw through the water in what was known as a 'sweep' to bring mines to the surface and allow for their removal.
− The dangers faced by the 'Patrol Service' ensured that it lost more vessels than any other branch of the Royal Navy during the Second World War with 2385 lives lost.thisisgrimsby.co.html to ensure that the bravery and sacrifice of their comrades is never forgotten.
HMS Grimsby is a Sandown class minehunter (commissioned in 1999) currently in service in the Royal Navy.
On 14 June 1943, an early morning air raid by the Luftwaffe saw several 1,000 kg bombs, 6,000 incendiary bombs and more than 3,000 Butterfly Bombs fall in the Grimsby area. That night 99 of the 196 killed by WWII bombing raids in Grimsby and Cleethorpes lost their lives and 184 people were seriously injured. The Butterfly Bombs, which littered the area, hampered fire-fighting crews attempting to reach locations damaged by the incendiary bombs and the search for them continued for a month after the raid.

Governance

Since 1977 Austin Mitchell (Labour) has been the Member of Parliament for the Great Grimsby constituency. The constituency of Great Grimsby is generally considered a Labour stronghold although Austin Mitchell only narrowly held the seat in the 1983 and 2010 general elections, both times with a majority under 800.Great Grimsby (UK Parliament constituency)#Elections in the 1980sGreat Grimsby (UK Parliament constituency)#Elections in the 2010s

Great Grimsby formed an ancient Borough in the North Riding of Lindsey.Vision of Britain – Grimsby MB/CB (historic map) In 1889 a County Council was created for Lindsey, but Great Grimsby was outside its area of control and formed an independent County Borough in 1891. The Borough expanded to absorb the adjacent hamlet of Wellow (1889), also the neighbouring parishes of Clee-with-Weelsby (1889), Little Coates (1928), Scartho (1928), Weelsby (1928) and Great Coates (1968). It had its own police force until 1967 when it merged with the Lincolnshire force.A History of the Lincolnshire Branch – Chapter One – The First Ten Years
In 1974, the County Borough was abolished and Great Grimsby was reconstituted (with the same boundaries) as the Grimsby non-metropolitan district in the new county of Humberside by the Local Government Act 1972. The district was renamed Great Grimsby in 1979. Local government in the area came under the review of the Local Government Commission for England and Humberside was abolished in 1996. The former area of the Great Grimsby district merged with that of Cleethorpes to form the unitary authority of North East Lincolnshire. During 2007, in the struggle for identity, it was suggested that the district could be renamed to something like Great Grimsby and Cleethorpes to give a stronger indication of the towns the district consists of. This did not meet with favourable comment among local residents, and the Council Leader dropped the idea a year later.North East Lincolnshire Council – Council to consult on possible name change
Council Wards
North East Lincolnshire Council has eight Council Wards within the area of Grimsby.

Economy

Grimsby, Immingham and Cleethorpes, together form the economic area known as Greater Grimsby.thisisgrimsby.co.html The main sectors of the Greater Grimsby economy are food and drink; ports and logistics; renewable energy; chemicals and process industries and digital media.

Food industry

Grimsby is indelibly linked with the sea fishing industry, which once gave the town much of its wealth. At its peak in the 1950s, it was the largest and busiest fishing port in the world. The town still has the largest fish market in the UK, but most of what is sold is now brought overland from other ports or Iceland via containerisation. Of the 18,000 tonnes of fresh fish sold in Grimsby fish market in 2012, almost 13,000 tonnes, mainly cod and haddock came from Iceland.
Today, Greater Grimsby is home to around 500 food-related companies, giving it one of the largest concentrations of food manufacturing, research, storage and distribution in Europe. The local council has promoted the city as Europe's Food Town for nearly twenty years.[ref]North East Lincolnshire Council, "Regeneration Strategy 2006–2022"

Grimsby is recognised as the main centre of the UK fish-processing industry, 70% of the UK's fish processing industry is located there. In recent years, this expertise has led to diversification into all forms of frozen and chilled foods. The town is one of the largest centres of fish processing in Europe. More than 100 local companies are involved in fresh and frozen fish production, the largest of which is the Findus Group (see Lion Capital LLP), comprising Young's Seafood and Findus. Its corporate headquarters are in the town. Young's is a major employer in the area, with some 2,500 people based at its headquarters. From this base, Young's has a global sourcing operation supplying 60 species from 30 countries."Youngs Seafood", website
Media interest has surrounded Traditional Grimsby smoked fish, which was awarded a Protected Geographical Indication (PGI) by the European Union. This award safeguards the unique and specialist process of traditional fish smoking developed in the town. The traditional process relies on a natural method of slow smoking, as opposed to the more widely used mechanical method. Producers who want to brand their product as "Traditional Grimsby smoked fish" must adhere to strict quality standards laid down by the Grimsby Traditional Fish Smokers Group. As a regional food, it has been commended in 2010 by the celebrity chefs Rick Stein and Mitch Tonks and Jim Fitzpatrick, the Minister for Food and the Environment.Grimsby Traditional Fish Smokers Group
Other major seafood companies include the Icelandic-owned Coldwater Seafood, The £5.6 million Humber Seafood Institute[ref]
[/ref] opened in 2008 and is the first of its kind in the UK. Backed by Yorkshire Forward, North East Lincolnshire Council, and the European Regional Development Fund, the HSI is managed by the local council. Tenants include the Seafish Industry Authority and Grimsby Institute and University Centre. Greater Grimsby is a European centre of excellence in the production of chilled prepared meals, and the area has the largest concentration of cold-storage facilities in Europe.

Ports

The Port of Grimsby and Immingham is the UK's largest port by tonnage.lloydslist.htm;jsessionid=209CE0EABAC613A470AF18362940C606 Its prime deep-water location on the Humber Estuary, one of Europe's busiest trade routes, gives companies direct access to mainland Europe and beyond.

Retail

The award-winning Freshney Place Shopping CentreRoSPA Silver Award in the heart of the town boasts over 70 stores including Marks and Spencer, House of Fraser and BHS. It was originally constructed between 1967 and 1971 in a joint venture between the old Grimsby Borough Council and developers Hammerson's UK Ltd. and was known as the Riverhead Centre (so named as the development was adjacent to where the two local rivers, the Freshney and the Haven, meet). Victoria Street is the main shopping street.
The Riverhead Centre development caused some controversy at the time as it followed the 1960s trend of replacing old architecture with new; in this case it involved the wholesale demolition of much of the old town centre including the historic Bull Ring (which is now where Wilkinson's, the Halifax Bank and the St James Hotel are based) and streets going back many centuries including Flottergate (located at the present day entrance to Freshney Place between British Home Stores and the market), Brewery Street (located at the present day entrance to Freshney Place between the branch of Barclays Bank and the offices of the Cheltenham and Gloucester) and East St Mary's Gate (no trace remains). During this reconstruction the ornate Victorian branch of the Midland Bank was demolished and rebuilt into a contemporary design that was incorporated into the new shopping centre. In 1985 Marks and Spencer purchased the local department store Lawsons and Stockdale whose frontage ran along Victoria Street; like the Midland branch this was demolished and a new store, linked to the centre, was constructed.
In 1990 the council agreed to sell the area around the shopping centre, used for surface car parking, to Hammerson's UK Ltd. The development owner and Humberside County Council, the highway authority at that time, agreed to the sale of the area of Baxtergate, the road which ran to the rear of the shopping centre, between the shopping centre and the surface car park. Baxtergate was relocated alongside the River Freshney and became phase one of the Peaks Parkway. Hammerson's UK Ltd began a £100 million redevelopment of the site which saw it double in size. The centre was also covered in a glass roof and (where the new extension was built) two multi-storey car parks were constructed at each end of the centre, effectively privatising, roofing and enclosing the old Top Town area of Grimsby. Servicing to the stores was made available from a first floor service area, accessible even by large vehicles, using a ramp at the western end. The ramp also provided access to the car park on the roof of the indoor market which is operated by the local council. In recognition of the design of the new facilities, Freshney Place won a commendation in the Refurbishment Category of the 1993 BCSC awards.bdp.pdf
Other developments near the town centre include a new Tesco Extra (the second in the area), the Victoria Mills Retail Park which is home to several chain stores including Next and a B&Q Depot off the Peaks Parkway A16.
Unlike many other towns that have shopping facilities on their outskirts, these (and other similar developments) can be found in and around Grimsby's town centre, making shopping far easier for pedestrians and public transport users, reflecting Grimsby's relatively cheap central commercial land. Other major retailers include the supermarket chains Tesco, Marks & Spencers, Sainsbury's, Asda on Holles Street and Morrisons. The Morrisons store is located just outside the town boundary, in the parish of Laceby, and is peculiarly known as Morrisons Cleethorpes. This is an anomaly arising from when the area was part of the now defunct Cleethorpes Borough. Most major supermarkets in the town have expanded somewhat in the last few years, including a massive extension built at Asda, and more recently another floor was built at Tesco at Hewitts Circus (although this store is technically in the neighbouring conurbation, Cleethorpes).
There are also a number of local, independent specialist stores and the Abbeygate Centre (off Bethlehem Street) is where many are located. Once the head office of local brewers Hewitt Brothers it was renovated in the mid-1980s and is home to a number of restaurants and designer clothing stores. The town also has two markets, one next to Freshney Place and the other in Freeman Street (B1213), itself once a dominant shopping area in the town with close connections to the docks but one that has sadly struggled since the late 1970s.
In March 2007, Henry Boot properties announced a new £30 million shopping development adjacent to the existing Freshney Place site. The project will create  of retail space and 290 car parking places on land between the River Freshney and Sainsbury's, presently occupied by the former Travis Perkins builders' merchants. As of November 2011 no work has commenced on the proposed development.
A further retail development is planned alongside the planned new stadium for Grimsby Town FC at Great Coates adjacent to the A180, scheduled for completion in mid-2010. As of November 2011 no work has commenced on the proposed development.
Such is the quality of shopping in the area that bus services are run to bring in shoppers from across the county of Lincolnshire, especially from smaller towns such as Louth,

Flood sirens

The Environment Agency has awarded Sheffield-based telemetry company CSE Seprol a contract to supply flood warning devices for risk areas in East Anglia. The 18 sirens, at various locations around the flood risk area of Grimsby and Cleethorpes, should reach 25,500 households to warn them of portending floods. The sirens will only be sounded in the event of the Environment Agency issuing a severe flood warning for tidal flooding or if there is a likelihood of the sea defences being breached. The sirens make a variety of sounds, from the traditional wailing sound to a voice message.

Notable places of interest and landmarks

Grimsby is the site of a Blue Cross Animal Hospital, one of only four in the country, the other three being situated in London. The Grimsby hospital was previously in Cleethorpe Road, but in 2005 it moved to a new building called 'Coco Markus House' in the town's Nelson Street.

Education

There are numerous primary schools in Grimsby. Secondary schools in Grimsby include Havelock Academy, Oasis Academy Wintringham and Ormiston Maritime Academy. Independent schools in the area include St James' School.
Franklin College is a sixth form college located in Grimsby, while the Grimsby Institute offers further and higher education courses mostly for vocational courses, the Institute achieves respectable examination results at all levels of adult education. The Institute has over recent years attracted a sizeable number of Chinese students to study business studies courses.

Entertainment

Aside from the nightclubs in nearby Cleethorpes, the town centre has undergone a renaissance in the last decade.
Musical entertainment is found at the Grimsby Auditorium, built in 1995, on Cromwell Road in Yarborough near Grimsby Leisure Centre. The smaller Caxton Theatre is on Cleethorpe Road (A180) in East Marsh near the docks. The Caxton Theatre provides entertainment by adults and youths in theatre. A notable theatre company in the area is the Class Act Theatre Company run by local playwright David Wrightam..
North East Lincolnshire Council has installed a Wi-Fi network covering Victoria Street in central Grimsby. The service provides access to the Internet for the general public on a yearly subscription.

Transport

Buses

Grimsby's bus service is provided by Stagecoach which took over the original Grimsby-Cleethorpes Transport in 1993. Grimsby-Cleethorpes Transport had been formed in 1957, with the merger of the previously separate Grimsby and Cleethorpes transport (GCT) undertakings. Stagecoach had all the buses resprayed to their standard livery to replace the buses previous colour-scheme of orange and white. Prior to this, the buses were painted blue and white until 1981, when the colours were changed to caramel and cream. The orange and white livery was introduced in 1987. Until 1982 GCT ran a mixture of crewed and one-person operated services.  However, in that year the job of conductor was abolished and the company changed entirely to driver-only services.
In 2005, Stagecoach bought out Lincolnshire Road Car, who provided buses to Killingholme, Louth, Barton-upon-Humber and the Willows Estate. The company is now known as Stagecoach in Lincolnshire. Joint ticketing was allowed with Stagecoach Grimsby-Cleethorpes from May 2006. 
From September 2006, a new fleet of low-floor single-decker was introduced, making the fleet an unprecedented 85% low-floor. 

Railways

Grimsby also has rail links via Grimsby Town railway station and Grimsby Docks railway station. There is a level crossing in the centre of the town across Wellowgate. TransPennine Express provide direct trains to Manchester Airport via Doncaster and Sheffield whilst Northern Rail operate services to Barton-upon-Humber (for buses to Hull) and a Saturday only service to Sheffield via. Retford. Lincoln and Newark are served by East Midlands Trains services which can go on to Nottingham on Sunday in the Summer months. The service to Cleethorpes runs at least hourly during the day, along a single track, passing stations at Grimsby Docks and New Clee.

Former trams

Grimsby was home to two tramway networks: the Grimsby District Light Railway and the Grimsby & Immingham Electric Railway. The Grimsby Electric was a normal gauge tramway opened in 1912 between Corporation Bridge at Grimsby and Immingham. There was no physical connection with the railway system. The tramway served the town with a passenger service between Grimsby and Immingham until closure in 1961. It is claimed that once this was controlled by the Corporation, they were more interested in supporting the motorbus service, now number 45.
The Grimsby Light Railway opened in 1881 using horse-drawn trams. In 1901, these were replaced with electric tramways.  This system closed in 1937. The depot continues to be used by Stagecoach, though the old Grimsby Tramways livery is still visible on the front of the building.
Operating in the area until the 1950s was a network of electrically operated trolley buses which received their power from overhead power lines. 

Airport

 west of Grimsby is Humberside Airport, which mainly caters for charter holidays, and is popular for general aviation, with five flying clubs based there.

Redevelopment and regeneration

Greater Grimsby is undergoing a radical transformation as part of Yorkshire Forward's Renaissance Towns Programme. The town faces the challenges of a post-industrial economy that has struggled to recover from the cod wars. The East Marsh ward of the town is the second most deprived in the country, according to the government's official analysis. Employment minister Mark Hoban singled out the situation Grimsby faced as "clearly a challenge" in 2013 after quarterly unemployment figures for the region rose again.

Media

The Grimsby Telegraph, with an audited circulation of 40,533 copies (January–June 2004), has the highest circulation of a local newspaper in Grimsby and the surrounding area since it is the only daily newspaper. Its headquarters are on Cleethorpe Road next to the A180. The local radio stations are BBC Radio Humberside (which has a studio on Victoria Street manned by Lara King), Lincs FM, Viking FM and the exclusively North East Lincolnshire-based Compass FM. The transmitter for Compass FM and EMAP Humberside (Lincs FM DAB) is on top of a block of flats in East Marsh. Terrestrial television coverage based in the area are the BBC who share the radio facilities on Victoria Street and ITV Yorkshire who have a news unit based in Immingham. Channel 7 Television is a satellite and cable-based station which has studios in Immingham and the Grimsby Institute.

Grimsby in the media

Sport

Football

The football team is Grimsby Town F.C., nicknamed 'The Mariners', who play in the Football Conference. Their ground is Blundell Park in Cleethorpes. Due to the club's football grounds being in the neighbouring town it is often joked by locals that it is the only British club that plays away every game. It is the oldest professional football team in the county of Lincolnshire (indeed one of the oldest in the country being formed in 1878 as Grimsby Pelham with a home ground on land off Ainslie Street, Grimsby).
During the 1930s they played in the English First Division, the then highest level of the domestic game in England. They also appeared in two FA Cup semi-finals in this decade, in 1936 (against Arsenal) and 1939 (against Wolverhampton Wanderers). The latter semi-final was held at Old Trafford, Manchester, and the attendance (76,962) is still a record for that stadium.
Grimsby Town were relegated on 7 May 2010 to the Football Conference, losing their proud status as a league club.
They also reached an FA Cup quarter-final 1987 and in 1998 won the Auto Windscreens Shield and the second division play-off final. Notable former managers include Bill Shankly and Lawrie McMenemy.
Blundell Park has the oldest stand in English professional football, the Main Stand. It was first opened in 1899 although only the present-day foundations date from this time. There have been plans to relocate the club to a new stadium, including the one in 2012 to move to land at the side of the Peaks Parkway in Grimsby.
Grimsby Borough F.C. is a football club established in 2003 and based in Grimsby. They are members of the Northern Counties East League Division One.

Other sports

An ice hockey club has been based in Grimsby since 1936.  The current club has teams playing at different levels throughout the English Ice Hockey Association structure, all under the name of the Grimsby Red Wings. In 2009 the club added a Sledge Hockey team to ensure that it was able to offer a fully inclusive sport to the NE Lincolnshire area.
The area has an amateur rugby union side, the Grimsby RUFC, and an amateur cricket side, the Grimsby Town Cricket Club, both of which attract reasonable levels of support.
Tennis teams from local clubs have been successful in various inter-County competitions with the Men's Team from Grimsby Tennis Centre winning the Lincolnshire Doubles League again in 2005. Tennis players from the town represent the County on a regular basis at all age levels.
Grimsby Tennis Centre underwent a major redevelopment of facilities in 2005 and is now entirely accessible to the disabled.
The town had one of the largest table tennis leagues in the countryGrimsby & District Table Tennis League with over 120 teams competing during the 1970s, but, like the game of squash, the sport has declined in the town during recent years.

Notable people

Grimbarians (natives of Grimsby) were mainly born at the former Grimsby Maternity Hospital in Second Avenue, Nunsthorpe, Grimsby. Many Grimbarians were born at the now defunct Croft Baker Maternity Hospital in nearby Cleethorpes. Those born and/or brought up in the area include:
People with a connection to the town

Twin cities

Grimsby's twin cities include:
As a port with extensive trading ties to Continental Europe, the Nordic nations and Baltic Europe,
The people of Norway send a tree to the town of Grimsby every Christmas since the end of the Second World War. The Norwegian city of Trondheim sent a tree for 40 years until 2003, since then the tree has been donated by the northern Norwegian town of Sortland, and placed in the town's Riverhead Square. During redevelopment of Riverhead Square the tree was placed in the Old Market Place in 2013.








