[[Matthew Boulton]]

CATEGORIES: 1728 births, 1809 deaths, 18th-century engineers, 18th-century English people, English engineers, English business theorists, People of the Industrial Revolution, High Sheriffs of Staffordshire, People from Birmingham, West Midlands, Members of the Lunar Society, English inventors, Fellows of the Royal Society, Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Burials in Birmingham, West Midlands

Matthew Boulton ; 3 September 1728 – 17 August 1809) was an English manufacturer and business partner of Scottish engineer James Watt.  In the final quarter of the 18th century, the partnership installed hundreds of Boulton & Watt steam engines, which were a great advance on the state of the art, making possible the mechanisation of factories and mills.  Boulton applied modern techniques to the minting of coins, striking millions of pieces for Britain and other countries, and supplying the Royal Mint with up-to-date equipment.
Born in Birmingham, he was the son of a Birmingham manufacturer of small metal products who died when Boulton was 31.  By then Boulton had managed the business for several years, and thereafter expanded it considerably, consolidating operations at the Soho Manufactory, built by him near Birmingham.  At Soho, he adopted the latest techniques, branching into silver plate, ormolu and other decorative arts. He became associated with James Watt when Watt's business partner, John Roebuck, was unable to pay a debt to Boulton, who accepted Roebuck's share of Watt's patent as settlement. He then successfully lobbied Parliament to extend Watt's patent for an additional 17 years, enabling the firm to market Watt's steam engine. The firm installed hundreds of Boulton & Watt steam engines in Britain and abroad, initially in mines and then in factories.
Boulton was a key member of the Lunar Society, a group of Birmingham-area men prominent in the arts, sciences, and theology.  Members included Watt, Erasmus Darwin, Josiah Wedgwood and Joseph Priestley.  The Society met each month near the full moon.  Members of the Society have been given credit for developing concepts and techniques in science, agriculture, manufacturing, mining, and transport that laid the groundwork for the Industrial Revolution.
Boulton founded the Soho Mint, to which he soon adapted steam power.  He sought to improve the poor state of Britain's coinage, and after several years of effort obtained a contract in 1797 to produce the first British copper coinage in a quarter century.  His "cartwheel" pieces were well-designed and difficult to counterfeit, and included the first striking of the large copper British penny, which continued to be coined until decimalisation in 1971.  He retired in 1800, though continuing to run his mint, and died in 1809.  His image appears alongside James Watt on the Bank of England's new Series F £50 note.

Background

Birmingham had long been a centre of the ironworking industry. In the early 18th century the town entered a period of expansion as iron working became easier and cheaper with the transition (beginning in 1709) from charcoal to coke as a means of smelting iron.
Boulton was a descendant of families from around Lichfield, his great-great-great-great grandfather, Rev. Zachary Babington, having been Chancellor of Lichfield.

Early and family life

The elder Boulton's business prospered after young Matthew's birth, and the family moved to the Snow Hill area of Birmingham, then a well-to-do neighbourhood of new houses.  As the local grammar school was in disrepair Boulton was sent to an academy in Deritend, on the other side of Birmingham.
On 3 March 1749 Boulton married Mary Robinson, a distant cousin and the daughter of a successful mercer, and wealthy in her own right.  They lived briefly with the bride's mother in Lichfield, and then moved to Birmingham where the elder Matthew Boulton made his son a partner at the age of 21.
The Boultons had three daughters in the early 1750s, but all died in infancy.
The union was opposed by Anne's brother Luke, who feared Boulton would control (and possibly dissipate) much of the Robinson family fortune.  In 1764 Luke Robinson died, and his estate passed to his sister Anne and thus into Matthew Boulton's control.
The Boultons had two children, Matthew Robinson Boulton and Anne Boulton. Matthew Robinson in turn had six children with two wives. His eldest son Matthew Piers Watt Boulton, broadly educated and also a man of science, gained some fame posthumously for his invention of the important aeronautical flight control, the aileron. As his father before him, he also had two wives and six children.) Genealogy Data Page 3 (Family Pages), PeterBarker.com website, retrieved 30 April 2013.

Innovator

Expansion of the business

After the death of his father in 1759, Boulton took full control of the family toymaking business.  He spent much of his time in London and elsewhere, promoting his wares.  He arranged for a friend to present a sword to Prince Edward, and the gift so interested the Prince's older brother, George, Prince of Wales, the future King George III, that he ordered one for himself.
With capital accumulated from his two marriages and his inheritance from his father, Boulton sought a larger site to expand his business.  In 1761 he leased 
The 
Among the products Boulton sought to make in his new facility were sterling silver plate for those able to afford it, and Sheffield plate, silver-plated copper, for those less well off.  Boulton and his father had long made small silver items, but there is no record of large items in either silver or Sheffield plate being made in Birmingham before Boulton did so.
As part of Boulton's efforts to market to the wealthy, he started to sell vases decorated with ormolu, previously a French speciality.  Ormolu was milled gold (from the French or moulu) amalgamated with mercury, and applied to the item, which was then heated to drive off the mercury, leaving the gold decoration.  
Fothergill and others searched Europe for designs for these creations.
Among Boulton's most successful products were mounts for small Wedgwood products such as plaques, cameo brooches and buttons in the distinctive ceramics, notably jasper ware, for which Wedgwood's firm remains well known. The mounts of these articles, many of which have survived, were made of ormolu or cut steel, which had a jewel-like gleam. Boulton and Wedgwood were friends, alternately co-operating and competing, and Wedgwood wrote of Boulton, "It doubles my courage to have the first Manufacturer in England to encounter with—The match likes me well—I like the Man, I like his spirit."
In the 1770s Boulton introduced an insurance system for his workers that served as the model for later schemes, allowing his workers compensation in the event of injury or illness. The first of its kind in any large establishment, employees paid one-sixtieth of their wages into the Soho Friendly Society, membership in which was mandatory.
Not all of Boulton's innovations proved successful. Together with painter Francis Eginton,
 
File:ormoluteaurn.JPG|Ormolu tea urn by Boulton & Fothergill
File:Sheffieldplatebeertankard.jpg|Boulton & Fothergill Sheffield plate beer tankard, late 1760s

Partnership with Watt

Boulton's Soho site proved to have insufficient hydropower for his needs, especially in the summer when the millstream's flow was greatly reduced.  He realised that using a steam engine either to pump water back up to the millpond or to drive equipment directly would help to provide the necessary power.
After receiving the patent, Watt did little to develop the engine into a marketable invention, turning to other work. In 1772, Watt's partner, Dr. John Roebuck, ran into financial difficulties, and Boulton, to whom he owed £1,200, accepted his two-thirds share in Watt's patent as satisfaction of the debt.  Boulton's partner Fothergill refused to have any part in the speculation, and accepted cash for his share.
Boulton boasted about Watt's talents, leading to an employment offer from the Russian government, which Boulton had to persuade Watt to turn down.
In 1776 the partnership erected two engines, one for Wilkinson and one at a mine in Tipton in the Black Country.  Both engines were successfully installed, leading to favourable publicity for the partnership.
The county of Cornwall was a major market for the firm's engines.  It was mineral-rich and had many mines.  However, the special problems for mining there, including local rivalries and high prices for coal, which had to be imported from Wales, forced Watt
The pumping engine for use in mines was a great success. In 1782 the firm sought to modify Watt's invention so that the engine had a rotary motion, making it suitable for use in mills and factories. On a 1781 visit to Wales Boulton had seen a powerful copper-rolling mill driven by water, and when told it was often inoperable in the summer due to drought suggested that a steam engine would remedy that defect.  Boulton wrote to Watt urging the modification of the engine, warning that they were reaching the limits of the pumping engine market: "There is no other Cornwall to be found, and the most likely line for increasing the consumption of our engines is the application of them to mills, which is certainly an extensive field."
Between 1775 and 1800 the firm produced approximately 450 engines. It did not let other manufacturers produce engines with separate condensers, and approximately 1,000 Newcomen engines, less efficient but cheaper and not subject to the restrictions of Watt's patent, were produced in Britain during that time.  The development of an efficient steam engine allowed large-scale industry to be developed, and the industrial city, such as Manchester became, to exist.

Involvement with coinage

By 1786, two-thirds of the coins in circulation in Britain were counterfeit, and the Royal Mint responded by shutting itself down, worsening the situation. Few of the silver coins being passed were genuine.  The resultant gap was filled with copper tokens that approximated the size of the halfpenny, struck on behalf of merchants.  Boulton struck millions of these merchant pieces. On the rare occasions when the Royal Mint did strike coins, they were relatively crude, with quality control nonexistent.
Boulton had turned his attention to coinage in the mid-1780s; they were just another small metal product like those he manufactured. He also had shares in several Cornish copper mines, and had a large personal stock of copper, purchased when the mines were unable to dispose of it elsewhere.  In 1788 he established the Soho Mint as part of his industrial plant.  The mint included eight steam-driven presses, each striking between 70 and 84 coins per minute.  The firm had little immediate success getting a license to strike British coins, but was soon engaged in striking coins for the British East India Company for use in India.
The coin crisis in Britain continued.  In a letter to the Master of the Mint, Lord Hawkesbury (whose son would become Prime Minister as Earl of Liverpool) on 14 April 1789, Boulton wrote:
 
 In the course of my journeys, I observe that I receive upon an average two-thirds counterfeit halfpence for change at toll-gates, etc. and I believe the evil is daily increasing, as the spurious money is carried into circulation by the lowest class of manufacturers, who pay with it the principal part of the wages of the poor people they employ.  They purchase from the subterraneous coiners 36 shillings'-worth of copper (in nominal value) for 20 shillings, so that the profit derived from the cheating is very large.

Boulton offered to strike new coins at a cost "not exceeding half the expense which the common copper coin hath always cost at his Majesty's Mint".  He wrote to his friend, Sir Joseph Banks, describing the advantages of his coinage presses:
 
 It will coin much faster, with greater ease, with fewer persons, for less expense, and more beautiful than any other machinery ever used for coining ... Can lay the pieces or blanks upon the die quite true and without care or practice and as fast as wanted.  Can work night and day without fatigue by two setts of boys.  The machine keeps an account of the number of pieces struck which cannot be altered from the truth by any of the persons employed.  The apparatus strikes an inscription upon the edge with the same blow that strikes the two faces.  It strikes the ground

Boulton spent much time in London lobbying for a contract to strike British coins, but in June 1790 the Pitt Government postponed a decision on recoinage indefinitely.—Mint Director Elias Boudinot found them to be "perfect and beautifully polished". The high-technology Soho Mint gained increasing and somewhat unwelcome attention: rivals attempted industrial espionage, while lobbying for Boulton's mint to be shut down.
The national financial crisis reached its nadir in February 1797, when the Bank of England stopped redeeming its bills for gold.  In an effort to get more money into circulation, the Government adopted a plan to issue large quantities of copper coins, and Lord Hawkesbury summoned Boulton to London on 3 March 1797, informing him of the Government's plan.  Four days later, Boulton attended a meeting of the Privy Council, and was awarded a contract at the end of the month.
The cartwheel twopenny coin was not struck again; much of the mintage was melted down in 1800 when the price of copper increased
Watt, in his eulogy after Boulton's death in 1809, stated:
 
 In short, had Mr. Boulton done nothing more in the world than he has accomplished in improving the coinage, his name would deserve to be immortalised; and if it be considered that this was done in the midst of various other important avocations, and at enormous expense,— for which, at the time, he could have had no certainty of an adequate return,—we shall be at a loss whether most to admire his ingenuity, his perseverance, or his munificence. He has conducted the whole more like a sovereign than a private manufacturer; and the love of fame has always been to him a greater stimulus than the love of gain. Yet it is to be hoped that, even in the latter point of view, the enterprise answered its purpose.

Activities and views

Scientific studies and the Lunar Society

Boulton never had any formal schooling in science. His associate and fellow Lunar Society member James Keir eulogised him after his death:
 
 Mr.  is proof of how much scientific knowledge may be acquired without much regular study, by means of a quick & just apprehension, much practical application, and nice mechanical feelings. He had very correct notions of the several branches of natural philosophy, was master of every metallic art & possessed all the chemistry that had any relations to the object of his various manufactures.  Electricity and astronomy were at one time among his favourite amusements.

From an early age, Boulton had interested himself in the scientific advances of his times.  He discarded theories that electricity was a manifestation of the human soul, writing "we know tis matter & tis wrong to call it Spirit".
Despite time constraints imposed on him by the expansion of his business, Boulton continued his "philosophical" work (as scientific experimentation was then called).
The Birmingham enthusiasts, including Boulton, Whitehurst, Keir, Darwin, Watt (after his move to Birmingham), potter Josiah Wedgwood and clergyman and chemist Joseph Priestley began to meet informally in the late 1750s.  This evolved into a monthly meeting near the full moon, providing light to journey home afterwards, a pattern common for clubs in Britain at the time.
While not a formal member of the Lunar Society, Sir Joseph Banks was active in it.  In 1768 Banks sailed with Captain James Cook to the South Pacific, and took with him green glass earrings made at Soho to give to the natives. In 1776 Captain Cook ordered an instrument from Boulton, most likely for use in navigation. Boulton generally preferred not to take on lengthy projects, and he warned Cook that its completion might take years.  In June 1776 Cook left on the voyage on which he was killed almost three years later, and Boulton's records show no further mention of the instrument.
In addition to the scientific discussions and experiments conducted by the group, Boulton had a business relationship with some of the members.  Watt and Boulton were partners for a quarter century.  Boulton purchased vases from Wedgwood's pottery to be decorated with ormolu, and contemplated a partnership with him.
In 1785 both Boulton and Watt were elected as Fellows of the Royal Society.  According to Whitehurst, who wrote to congratulate Boulton, not a single vote was cast against him.
Though Boulton hoped his activities for the Lunar Society would "prevent the decline of a Society which I hope will be lasting",  Historian Jenny Uglow wrote of the lasting impact of the Society:
 
 The Lunar Society ... members have been called the fathers of the Industrial Revolution ... he importance of this particular Society stems from its pioneering work in experimental chemistry, physics, engineering, and medicine, combined with leadership in manufacturing and commerce, and with political and social ideals.  Its members were brilliant representatives of the informal scientific web which cut across class, blending the inherited skills of craftsmen with the theoretical advances of scholars, a key factor in Britain's leap ahead of the rest of Europe.

Community work

Boulton was widely involved in civic activities in Birmingham.  His friend Dr John Ash had long sought to build a hospital in the town.  A great fan of the music of Handel, Boulton conceived of the idea to hold a music festival in Birmingham to raise funds for the hospital.  The festival took place in September 1768, the first of a series stretching well into the twentieth century.
Boulton helped found the New Street Theatre in 1774, and later wrote that having a theatre encouraged well-to-do visitors to come to Birmingham, and to spend more money than they would have otherwise.
Concerned about the level of crime in Birmingham, Boulton complained, "The streets are infested from Noon Day to midnight with prostitutes."
Besides seeking to improve local life, Boulton took an interest in world affairs.  Initially sympathetic to the cause of the rebellious American colonists, Boulton changed his view once he realised that an independent America might be a threat to British trade, and in 1775 organised a petition urging the government to take a hard line with the Americans—though when the revolution proved successful, he resumed trade with the former colonies.

Family and later life, death, and memorials

When Boulton was widowed in 1783 he was left with the care of his two teenage children.  Neither his son Matthew Robinson Boulton nor his daughter Anne enjoyed robust health; the younger Matthew was often ill and was a poor student who was shuttled from school to school until he joined his father's business in 1790; Anne suffered from a diseased leg that prevented her from enjoying a full life.  Despite his lengthy absences on business, Boulton cared deeply for his family.  He wrote to his wife in January 1780,
 
 Nothing could in the least palliate this long, this cold, this very distant separation from my dearest wife and children but the certain knowledge that I am preparing for their ease, happiness and prosperity, and when that is the prise, I know no hardships that I would not encounter with, to obtain it.

With the expiry of the patent in 1800 both Boulton and Watt retired from the partnership, each turning over his role to his namesake son. The two sons made changes, quickly ending public tours of the Soho Manufactory in which the elder Boulton had taken pride throughout his time in Soho.
Boulton helped deal with the shortage of silver, persuading the Government to let him overstrike the Bank of England's large stock of Spanish dollars with an English design.  The Bank had attempted to circulate the dollars by countermarking the coins on the side showing the Spanish king with a small image of George III, but the public was reluctant to accept them, in part due to counterfeiting. This attempt inspired the couplet, "The Bank to make their Spanish Dollars pass/Stamped the head of a fool on the neck of an ass." Boulton obliterated the old design in his restriking. Though Boulton was not as successful in defeating counterfeiters as he hoped (high quality fakes arrived at the Bank's offices within days of the issuance),
By early 1809 he was seriously ill. He was buried in the graveyard of St. Mary's Church, Handsworth, in Birmingham – the church was later extended over the site of his grave. Inside the church, on the north wall of the sanctuary, is a large marble monument to him, commissioned by his son, sculpted by the sculptor John Flaxman. It includes a marble bust of Boulton, set in a circular opening above two putti, one holding an engraving of the Soho Manufactory.
Boulton is recognised by several memorials and other commemorations in and around Birmingham.  Soho House, his home from 1766 until his death, is now a museum, as is his first workshop, Sarehole Mill. The Soho archives are at the Birmingham City Archives. He is recognised by three blue plaques, at his Steelhouse Lane birthplace, at Soho House and at Sarehole Mill. A gilded bronze statue of Boulton, Watt and Murdoch (1956) by William Bloye stands outside the old Register Office on Broad Street in central Birmingham. Matthew Boulton College was named in his honour in 1957. The two-hundredth anniversary of his death, in 2009, resulted in a number of tributes.  Birmingham City Council promoted "a year long festival celebrating the life, work and legacy of Matthew Boulton".
On 29 May 2009 the Bank of England announced that Boulton and Watt would appear on a new £50 note. The design is the first to feature a dual portrait on a Bank of England note, and presents the two industrialists side by side with images of a steam engine and Boulton's Soho Manufactory. Quotes attributed to each of the men are inscribed on the note: "I sell here, sir, what all the world desires to have—POWER" (Boulton) and "I can think of nothing else but this machine" (Watt). In September 2011 it was announced that the notes would enter circulation on 2 November.
In March 2009, Boulton was honoured with the issue of a Royal Mail postage stamp.

Notes

Explanatory notes
Citations



  | first = Andrew
  | last = Jim
  | editor-last = Mason
  | editor-first = Shena
  | contribution = The Soho Steam Engine Business
  | pages = 63–70
  | year = 2009
  | title = Matthew Boulton: Selling What All the World Desires
