[[Tramadol]]

CATEGORIES: Amines, Cyclohexanols, Euphoriants, Mu-opioid agonists, Norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, 5-HT2C antagonists, Prodrugs, Phenol ethers

Tramadol (marketed as the hydrochloride salt by Janssen Pharmaceutica as Ultram in the United States, Ralivia by Biovail in Canada and many other companies throughout the world) is a centrally-acting atypical opioid analgesic with additional serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake-inhibiting effects used to treat moderate to moderately severe pain. It was launched and marketed as Tramal by the German pharmaceutical company Grünenthal GmbH in 1977 in West Germany, even though it would take another 20 years for it to be launched in English-speaking countries such as the UK, US and Australia.
Tramadol is marketed as a racemic mixture of both R and S stereoisomers. This is because the two isomers complement each other's analgesic activity. It is often combined with paracetamol as this is known to improve the efficacy of tramadol in relieving pain. Tramadol is an atypical opioid because it is a serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor of and, by itself, a fairly weak μ-opioid receptor agonist.
Despite the original belief that tramadol was a purely synthetic opioid it has been recently found in a South African tree.

Medical uses

Tramadol is used primarily to treat moderate-severe pain, both acute and chronic.
Available dosage forms include capsules, tablets, including extended release formulations and injections.

Investigational uses

Use in special populations

=Pregnancy and lactation=

Its use in pregnancy is generally advised against as it may cause some reversible withdrawal effects in the newborn. Despite this a small prospective study in France found that while there was an increased risk of miscarriages there were no major malformations reported in the newborn. Its use during lactation is also generally advised against but a small trial found that infants breastfed by mothers taking tramadol were exposed to about 2.88% of the dose the mothers were taking and despite this there was no evidence of this dose having a harmful effect on the newborn.

=Labour and delivery=

Its use as an analgesic during labour is generally advised against due to its long-onset of action (one hour). The ratio of the mean concentration of the drug in the foetus compared to that of the mother when it is given intramuscularly for labour pains has been estimated to be 94.

=Children=

Its use in children is generally advised against, although it may be done under the supervision of a specialist.

=Elderly=

There is an increased risk of opioid-related adverse effects such as respiratory depression, falls, cognitive impairment and sedation.

=Liver and kidney failure=

It is advised that the drug be used with caution in those with liver or kidney failure, due to the high dependence of the drug on the liver and kidneys for metabolism to O-desmethyltramadol and elimination, respectively.

Adverse effects

Summary 
The most common adverse effects of tramadol include nausea, dizziness, dry mouth, indigestion, abdominal pain, vertigo, vomiting, constipation, drowsiness and headache. Compared to other opioids respiratory depression and constipation is considered less of a problem with tramadol.
Adverse effects by incidence 
Note: Serious adverse effects are in 'bold'. 
Very common (>10% frequency) adverse effects include:
Common (1–10% frequency) adverse effects include:
Uncommon (0.1-1% incidence) adverse effects include:
Rare (0.01–0.1% incidence) adverse effects include:
There are suggestions that chronic opioid administration may induce a state of immune tolerance,Bryant et al. 1988 and Rouveix 1992 cited by 

Interactions

Its serotonergic effects enable it to interact, potentially fatally, with other serotonergics such as antidepressants (such as monoamine oxidase inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, serotonin-norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors, noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressants, serotonin antagonist and reuptake inhibitors, etc.), certain analgesics (such as pethidine (meperidine), tapentadol, oxycodone, dextromethorphan and fentanyl), certain anxiolytics (such as the SSRIs and buspirone), certain antibiotics (namely, linezolid and isoniazid), certain herbs (e.g. St. John's wort, syrian rue, passiflora, etc.), certain recreational drugs (e.g. MDMA), phentermine, lithium, methylene blue and numerous other therapeutic agents. As it is a substrate of CYP3A4 and CYP2D6, hence any agents with the ability to inhibit or induce these enzymes will likely interact with tramadol.

Contraindications

Its use is advised against in people lacking any CYP2D6 enzymes (which accounts for about 6-10% of Caucasians and 1-2% of Asians) as they are crucial to the therapeutic effects of tramadol, by means of enabling tramadol's metabolism to O-desmethyltramadol.

Overdosage

Fatalities with tramadol overdose have been reported and are increasing in frequency in Northern Ireland; the majority of these overdoses involve other drugs including alcohol. Recognised risk factors for tramadol overdose include depression, male gender, addiction and seizures. Naloxone only partially reverses the toxic effects of tramadol overdose and may increase the risk of seizures.

Physical dependence and withdrawal

Long-term use of high doses of tramadol may be associated with physical dependence and a withdrawal syndrome.

Psychological dependence and recreational use

Because of the possibility of convulsions at high doses for some users, recreational use can be very dangerous.

Detection in biological fluids

Tramadol and O-desmethyltramadol may be quantified in blood, plasma or serum to monitor for abuse, confirm a diagnosis of poisoning or assist in the forensic investigation of a traffic or other criminal violation or a sudden death. Most commercial opiate immunoassay screening tests do not cross-react significantly with tramadol or its major metabolites, so chromatographic techniques must be used to detect and quantitate these substances. The concentrations of O-desmethyltramadol in the blood or plasma of a person who has taken tramadol are generally 10–20% those of the parent drug. (2011) Disposition of Toxic Drugs and Chemicals in Man, 9th edition, Biomedical Publications, Seal Beach, CA, pp. 1712–1715, ISBN 0-9626523-8-7.

Chemistry

Synthesis and stereoisomerism

150px|(1R,2R)-Tramadol   150px|(1S,2S)-Tramadol
(1R,2R)-Tramadol     (1S,2S)-Tramadol
150px|(1R,2S)-Tramadol   150px|(1S,2R)-Tramadol
(1R,2S)-Tramadol     (1S,2R)-Tramadol
The chemical synthesis of tramadol is described in the literature. ed. (2000) 2 volumes, Thieme-Verlag Stuttgart (Germany), p. 2085 bis 2086, ISBN 978-1-58890-031-9; since 2003 online with biannual actualizations. Tramadol 2-(dimethylaminomethyl)-1-(3-methoxyphenyl)cyclohexanol has two stereogenic centers at the cyclohexane ring. Thus, 2-(dimethylaminomethyl)-1-(3-methoxyphenyl)cyclohexanol may exist in four different configurational forms:
The synthetic pathway leads to the racemate (1:1 mixture) of (1R,2R)-isomer and the (1S,2S)-isomer as the main products. Minor amounts of the racemic mixture of the (1R,2S)-isomer and the (1S,2R)-isomer are formed as well. The isolation of the (1R,2R)-isomer and the (1S,2S)-isomer from the diastereomeric minor racemate and (1S,2R)-isomer is realized by the recrystallization of the hydrochlorides.
The drug tramadol is a racemate of the hydrochlorides of the (1R,2R)-(+)- and the (1S,2S)-(–)-enantiomers.
The resolution of the racemate / (1S,2S)-(–)-isomer was described

Mechanism of action

Tramadol acts as a μ-opioid receptor agonist,
Tramadol has inhibitory actions on the 5-HT2C receptor. Antagonism of 5-HT2C could be partially responsible for tramadol's reducing effect on depressive and obsessive-compulsive symptoms in patients with pain and co-morbid neurological illnesses. 5-HT2C blockade may also account for its lowering of the seizure threshold, as 5-HT2C knockout mice display significantly increased vulnerability to epileptic seizures, sometimes resulting in spontaneous death. However, the reduction of seizure threshold could be attributed to tramadol's putative inhibition of GABA-A receptors at high doses.

Pharmacokinetics

Tramadol undergoes hepatic metabolism via the cytochrome P450 isozyme CYP2B6, CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, being O- and N-demethylated to five different metabolites. Of these, O-desmethyltramadol is the most significant since it has 200 times the μ-affinity of (+)-tramadol, and furthermore has an elimination half-life of nine hours, compared with six hours for tramadol itself. As with codeine, in the 6% of the population that have reduced CYP2D6 activity (hence reducing metabolism), there is therefore a reduced analgesic effect. Those with decreased CYP2D6 activity will experience less analgesia. Phase II hepatic metabolism renders the metabolites water-soluble, which are excreted by the kidneys. Thus, reduced doses may be used in renal and hepatic impairment.
Its volume of distribution is approximately, 306 L after oral administration and 203 L after parenteral administration.

Society and culture

Legal status

The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) approved tramadol in March 1995 and an extended-release (ER) formulation in September 2005.
In November 2013, the United States Drug Enforcement Administration initiated classification of Tramadol as a schedule IV controlled substance, pending a review process.deadiversion.gov/fed_regs/rules/2013/fr1104. DEA-351: Schedules of Controlled Substances: Placement of Tramadol Into Schedule IV Several states, including Arkansas, Kentucky, Illinois, Mississippi, New York, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Tennessee, West Virginia, Wyoming and the U.S. military have classified Tramadol as a schedule IV controlled substance under state law. Drug Enforcement Administration (February 2011)Tennessee News: Tramadol and Carisoprodol Now Classified Schedule IV – News – National Association of Boards of Pharmacy® (NABP®). Nabp. Retrieved on 2012-12-26.
Thus, tramadol is classified as a Schedule 4 in the US, Schedule 4 in Australia rather than as a Schedule 8 Controlled Drug like opioids.
Sweden, as of May 2008, has chosen to classify tramadol as a controlled substance in the same way as codeine and dextropropoxyphene. This means that the substance is a scheduled drug. But unlike codeine and dextropropoxyphene, a normal prescription can be used at this time.

Brand names

Grünenthal GmbH, which still owns the patent on tramadol, has cross-licensed the drug to pharmaceutical companies internationally. Thus, tramadol is marketed under many trade names around the world, including:

Veterinary medicine

Tramadol may be used to treat post-operative, injury-related, and chronic (e.g., cancer-related) pain in dogs and cats as well as rabbits, coatis, many small mammals including rats and flying squirrels, guinea pigs, ferrets, and raccoons.

Pin cushion tree

In 2013, researchers discovered that tramadol is also produced naturally in relatively high concentrations (1%+) in the roots of the African pin cushion tree (Nauclea latifolia).








